Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


SI. 


THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 


^   '.V 


.  » 


It. 


«  • 


^' 


THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 


PRINTKD  BT  MITBRA.Y  AND  OIBB, 


FOB 


T.  k  T.  CLARK,  EDINBURGH. 


LONDON,      ....      HAMILTON,  ADAMS,  AND  CO. 
DUBLIN,      ....      JOHN  BOBEBTBON  AND  CO. 
NEW  YOBK,      .      .      .      C.  8CBIBNEB  AND  CO^ 


THE 


TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE; 


OR, 


PASSAGES   OUT  OF  THE   GOSPELS 


EXHIBITING   THE   TWELVE   DISCIPLES   OF   JESUS   UHDEB 

DISCIPLINE   FOB  TEE   APOSTLESHIP. 


BY    THE 

REV.   ALEXANDER  BALMAIN  BRUCE, 

BROVOHTY  FKRBT. 


EDINBURGH: 

T.     &     T.     CLAEK,    38,    GEOEGE    STEEET. 

1871. 


/o/.  ^    ^4^^ 


ainf  Tj5  'Iiyo-oS  ^av. 


PREFACE. 


THE  subject  of  this  book  has  occupied  my  thoughts  more 
or  less  since  the  commencement  of  my  ministry,  twelve 
years  ago.  Turning  up  a  manuscript  volume  of  jottings  for 
the  pulpit  in  my  possession,  I  find  its  title-page  is  as  follows : 
"  Brief  notes  of  sermons  on  Christ's  intercourse  with  the 
twelve  disciples,  preached  in  Cardross,  begun  September 
1861."  These  notes  were  the  rude  beginnings  of  this  work; 
yet  not  the  rudest,  for  in  the  previous  year  I  had  made  the 
same  passages  from  the  Gospels  the  subjects  of  lessons  in  a 
catechumens'  class.  I  was  led  to  transfer  these  lessons  from 
the  class  to  the  pulpit  in  the  following  way.  During  an 
autumnal  holiday,  spent  in  the  country -quarters  of  dear 
Mends,  to  whom  I  have  many  reasons  to  be  grateful,  I  was, 
in  such  a  distempered  condition  of  body,  that  all  thought 
and  feeling  were  dead,  and  I  dreaded  the  prospect  of  return- 
ing to  pastoral  duty,  being  sensible  of  mental  vacuity.  At 
length  my  perplexities  shaped  themselves  into  a  prayer  that- 
I  might  be  led  into  green  pastures,  as  the  old  ones  were  all 
nibbled  bare.  Shortly  after  my  thoughts  reverted  to  the 
lessons  given  to  the  catechumens'  class,  and  I  at  once  re- 
solved to  make  these  the  subject  of  a  course  of  lectures. 

The  studies  on  which  I  entered  in  pursuance  of  this 
resolution,  proved  to  be  green  pastures  to  myself  at  least. 
After  the  course  was  finished,  the  subject  still  lingered  in 
my  mind,  and  I  felt  constrained  by  an  absorbing  interest 
to  extend  the  jottings  I  had  made;  not  without  an  idea 


yi  PBEFACE. 

that  the  theme  was  one  capable  of  being  made  interesting 
and  instructive  to  a  wider  public.  Years  passed,  and  I  con- 
tinued to  cherish  the  day-dream,  with  an  increasing  sense  of 
the  importance  of  a  subject  which  had  been  generally  over- 
looked, but  also  with  a  deepening  sense  of  the  imperfections 
of  my  endeavour.  Yet,  while  dreaming,  I  was  not  idle ;  for 
much  of  what  now  appears  has  been  written  several  times. 
The  wine  has  been  frequently  emptied  from  vessel  to  vessel, 
losing  in  the  process  the  pungency  which,  when  new,  made 
it  somewhat  unpalatable,  and  gaining,  I  trust,  some  measure 
of  purity  and  mellowness. 

Perhaps  it  might  have  been  well  had  I  delayed  still  longer 
before  publishing  these  essays.  But  it  was  the  voice  of  the 
stem  prophet  Death  that  brought  me  to  decision.  In  the 
dose  of  last  year  the  Preacher  came,  and  cried  in  commanding 
tone.  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  all  thy 
might.  In  one  brief  fortnight  I  followed  to  the  grave  three 
beloved  relatives:  my  aged  godly  father,  my  son,  and  my 
brother's  wife.  When  all  the  mournful  duties  of  that  sad 
season  were  over,  I  felt  impelled  to  proceed  at  once  with  the 
publication  of  this  work,  and  forthwith  set  myself  to  prepare 
it  for  the  press ;  thankful  to  find  escape  from  sorrow  in  hard 
work,  and  obtaining  the  requisite  leisure  in  consequence  of 
the  fever  which  carried  off  my  child  making  me  for  a  time 
as  a  leper,  separated  from  the  congregation  of  the  Lord. 

Though  the  work  now  given  to  the  public  does  not  profess 
to  be  an  exhaustive  abstract  treatise  on  any  theological  topic, 
it  is  hoped  that  it  contains  some  useful  materials  on  several 
important  themes.  Among  the  subjects  to  which  the  contents 
relate,  may  be  specified  the  personal  characteristics  of  the 
disciples,  Christian  ethics,  apologetics,  the  doctrine  of  Chris- 
tian experience,  and  the  doctrine  of  the  atonement.  On 
this  last  topic  I  have  given,  in  several  chapters,  as  occasion 
offered,  the  results  of  much  thought  and  laborious  reading, 
like  the  disciples,  I  have  been  slow  to  learn  the  meaning 


FBEFA015.  vii 

of  Christ's  death;  and  if  lany  one  think  I  haTd  something 
to  leam  yet,  I  am  not  careful  to  deny  it:  for  I  am  very 
sensible,  in  connection  with  that  great  prions  theme,  of 
the  truth  of  Paul's  sayings,  "  Now  we  see  through  a  glass, 
iv  cuviyfuiTi*'  and  "  now  I  know  in  part." 

Readers  may  discern  in  the  following  pages,  here  and  there, 
evidence  that  the  materials  have  done  duty  in  the  pnlpit 
before  passing  through  the  press.  The  form  of  thought  some- 
times presupposes  an  audience,  and  I  have  constantly  endea- 
voured to  lay  the  subject  imder  discussion  alongside  the  age 
in  which  we  live.  I  do  not  think  these  will  be  deemed  grave 
faults.  As  regards  the  former,  the  public  is  but  a  larger 
audience ;  and  as  to  the  latter,  all  thoughtful  men  know  that 
the  great  need  of  the  present  time  is  to  make  a  new  start 
in  Christian  belief  and  practice ;  and  they  would  not  thank 
any  one  for  writing  a  book  on  Christianity  as  taught  by  Jesus 
Christ  to  His  disciples,  without  applying  it  as  a  plumb-line 
to  the  Christianity  of  the  nineteenth  century,  to  see  how  far  * 
it  is  ofT  the  perpendicular. 

I  pray  God,  that  what  has  been  to  me  a  labour  of  love, 

and  a  source  of  much  pleasure  and  profit,  may  be  in  some 

smaU  measure  useful  to  fellow-Christians,  and  serviceable  to 

the  faitL 

A.  B.  B. 

Brouohtt  Fsrbt,  April  1871. 


TA^T  rgf  P^SSA^  J20M  JSE 

PIBCTBtED  DP  TinF  "STQEK. 


au-i 


3t-: 


^♦— -i. 


s-^:*- 


*^ 


.  3-j 


joriL  J-^IZ, 


-* 


xxrzo.  !€,  17. 
JLEtm.  35-36. 


a.  1^17, 
a.  l*-2t. 


37 


tiLi-a; 


5* 

4$ 
41 

i« 
i» 


*«• 


4BR 
4» 


3-t. 


»«     Ti.  17- 

^es*    rzL 
♦W    TIE-  4-15, 
4»    ix-  1-li 
4iiS    it  15-17, 
ix-  3$-2£. 


fil* 

« 
41 

s» 

lf4 
ITX^ 

1R4 


1-n. 

15-911 


XST.  §-34. 


1-37, 
1-4. 


ix.51^S«. 
X-  17-«i. 
1.11.54, 
xil-11, 
li.  J7-I1, 
xn.  4l~t&. 
xaxL  lf«17, 

XJT, 


XTSi.  1^ 


»     » 


541 

lie 

41 
SI 

r» 

54|k 
19 
«S 

57 

ta  it  15-14^ 


M2 

SI 
S71 


1» 
4*1 


4M 

41S 


\%^% 


lS-17, 


4M 

417 

442 

4SS 

4tt.4SS 

.  4SS 

.  SOS 

4n,sii 
.  si« 

.  SS8 


.  SM 


CONTENTS. 


BIOINNINOS, 


CHAPTER  I. 


PA«B 
1 


FI8HSB8  or  KES, 


CHAPTER  II. 


11 


MATTHKW  THE  PUBLICAN, 


CHAPTER  III. 


20 


THX  TWKLYX, 


CHAPTER  IV. 


80 


HKAKINO  AKS  fiZKCKOy 


CHAPTER  V. 


41 


TBACH  VB  TO  FEAT, 


CHAPTER  VI. 


51 


CHAPTER  VII. 


LB880N8  IN  HOLT  LIYINO, 
aBO.  L  FASTING,     • 

n.   BITUAL  ABLT7TION8, 
ni.   SABBATH  OBSXRYANOX, 


69 

69 
79 
88 


k 


CHAPTER  Tin. 


FiMT  Atmrrra  at  Trxsrnojsu, 
nc,  h  THE  M  umov, 
n.  THE  RfffrEtcriom, 


PA4 


f9 


CHAPTER  IX 


Acsinii, 

•EC.  I*  TVE  MnUCLE, 

II,  THEirrmtM, 

III.  THE  flEBMOir, 
IT.   THE1IIITI90, 


ISO 
liO 

ISS 
1S7 
146 


CHAPTER  X 


THE  IXATElf  07  THE  FHASMEES  AXD  SADDUCEES^ 


157 


CHAPTER  XL 


dmEEKT  OPIiriON  and  ETERNAL  TBOlBy 


164 


CHAPTER  XXL 

OBOVBy  «  •  •  • 

sEo.  I.  nmrr  anvounormknt  ot  Christ's  death, 

II.  aUWS-BEARINO  THE  LAW  07  DISCIPLESHIP, 


173 
173 
181 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


THE  TRAKSFIOURATIONy    . 


191 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

DI800T7RSE  ON  HVMILITT,  ..... 

8X0.  I.   AS  THIS  LITTLE  CHILD,         .... 

IL   CHURCH  DISCIPLINE,  .... 

III.   FOROIYINO  INJT7RIE8,  .... 

IT.   THte  TEMPLE  TAX  :  AN  ILLlTSTRATIOir  07  TSB  flXRMON, 

y.  THE  mriRDIOTED  EXORCIST :  ANOTHER  XLLU8TBATI0N, 


200 
200 
209 
217 
223 
231 


CONTENTS. 


XI 


CHAPTER   XV. 

THE  son  OF  THUNDEB,  OB  VIRE  tBOJi  SEAYEK, 


TAOM 

241 


CHAPTEB  XVI. 

IK  fKKmAi  •  •  •  •  • 

8EC.  I.   COUNSELS  OF  PEEFBCTION,  . 

II.   THE  BEWA&D8  OF  SELF -SACRIFICE, 
IIL  THE  FIBST  LAST,  AND  THE  LAST  FIB8T, 


251 
251 

262 
272 


CHAPTER  XVII. 


THE  SONS  OF  ZEBEDEE  AOAfff, 


282 


.       •     .  PHAPTEB  XVIII. 

THE  ANOINTINa  IN  BiTHAKT, 


SOO 


CHAPTER  ZIX. 


SIB,  WE  WOITLD  SEE  JEdUS, 


CHAPTER  XX. 


O  JERUSALEM,  JEBUSAUEM  t       .    . 


•  .*r- 


i  •    /     ■ 


889 


CHAPTER  XXI. 


THE  MAiTEE  SEBYINO,      . 

aia  L   THE  WASHING, 

II.   THE  EZPLAITATION, 


842 

842 

851 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


nr  M EMOEIAM, 


«>9 


CHAPTEB  XXIII. 


JXJPAB  ISOABIOT, 


871 


asjcri  vsmasEm,  .uni 


t 


382 


415 

415 
439 
443 


ETPKAm, 455 

CHAPTKE  XXTIL 


4«9 


L    ^  ^TT  THX  Z'SCITLB  FDl  HWK,  WSM^  ASH  lUBK.     .  4tt9 

n.    CCPTZD  AS  VEEAT,  .....  476 

QL  rms  A3rD  joss.  ......  4S5 

CHAPTEl  XXTIIL 

UBaT(HB)» 493 

'.  I.   TOO  GOOD  XXWS  TO  BX  TETX.  ....  493 

IL   THS  ITX»  OF  THE  r2^EZ5TA2nviS«  ^^3CXC^  .  S&I 

m.   THS  DOUBT  or  THOMAS^       .....  511 


CHAPTEB  XXIX. 

r3^SX-«HKrHZXD«  ADXOXISSKZS     .  .  .  «  .  519 

L    PASTOEAL  DCTT,      ......  519 

IL    PAiTOE  PA^TOErX,  .>  ...  528 


CHAPTER  XXX. 

VOWIft  FBOX  05  HIGH,     ....«.«  538 


CHAPTER  XXXL 
WAimG»  •.....,.       549 


THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 


CHAPTEE    I. 

BEGINNINGS. 
John  i.  20-61. 

THE  section  of  the  gospel  history  above  indicated,  possesses 
the  interest  peculiar  to  the  beginnings  of  all  things  that 
have  grown  to  greatness.  Here  are  exhibited  to  our  view  the 
infant  church  in  its  cradle,  the  petty  sources  of  the  Eiver  of 
life,  the  earliest  blossoms  of  Christian  faith,  the  humble  origin 
of  the  mighty  empire  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

AU  beginnings  are  more  or  less  obscure  in  appearance, 
but  none  were  ever  more  obscure  than  those  of  Christianity. 
What  an  insignificant  event  in  the  history  of  the  church,  not 
to  say  of  the  world,  this  first  meeting  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth 
with  five  humble  men,  Andrew,  Peter,  Philip,  Nathanael,  and 
another  unnamed!  It  actually  seems  abnost  too  trivial  to 
find  a  place  even  in  the  evangelic  narrative.  For  we  have 
here  to  do  not  with  any  formal  solemn  call  to  the  great  office 
of  the  apostleship,  or  even  with  the  commencement  of  an  un- 
interrupted discipleship,  but  at  the  utmost  with  the  begin- 
nings of  an  acquaintance  with  and  of  faith  in  Jesus,  on  the 
part  of  certain  individuals  who  subsequently  became  constant 
attendants  on  His  person,  and  ultimately  apostles  of  His' 
religion.  Accordingly  we  find  no  mention  made  in  the  three 
first  Gospels  of  the  events  here  recorded.  ^ 

Far  from  being  surprised  at  the  silence  of  the  synoptical 
evangelists,  one  is  rather  tempted  to  wonder  how  it  came  to 
pass  that  John,  the  author  of  the  fourth  Gosjpel,  after  the 
lapse  of  so  many  years^  thought  it  worth  whilerto  relate  inci- 

A 


— Ai 


>"T    rsmijL 


^  • 


'ca*    « .*r^.  ^_'"'i;-    J*  ^4^    -    -   - 


BEGDHONGS.  3 

them  in  the  breast  of  the  aged  apostle  by  whom  they  are 
lecordeA  It  would  not^  however,  be  creditable  either  to  our 
intelligence  or  to  our  piety  if  we  could  peruse  this  page  of 
the  evangelic  history  unmoved,  as  if  it  were  utterly  devoid  of 
interest  We  should  address  ourselves  to  the  study  of  the 
simple  story  with  somewhat  of  the  feeling  with  which  men 
make  pilgrimages  to  sacred  places ;  for  indeed  the  ground  is 
holy. 

The  scene  of  the  occurrences  in  which  we  are  concerned 
was  in  the  region  of  Peraea,  on  the  banks  of  the  Jordan,  at  the 
lower  part  of  its  course.     The  persons  who  make  their  appear- 
ance on  the  scene  were  all  natives  of  Galilee,  and  their  pre- 
sence here  is  due  to  the  fame  of  the  remarkable  man  whose 
office  it  was  to  be  the  forerunner  of  the  Christ     John,  sur- 
named  the  Baptist,  who  had  spent  his  youth  in  the  desert  as 
a  hermit,  living  on  locusts  and  wild  honey,  and  clad  in  a 
garment  of  camel's  hair,  had  come  forth  &om  his  retreat  and 
appeared  among  men  as  a  prophet  of  God.     The  burden  of 
Ins  prophecy  was,  "  Bepent,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at 
hand."      In   a   short   time   many  were  attracted   from   all 
quarters  to  see  and  hear  him.     Of  those  who  flocked  to  his 
preaching,  the  greater  number  went  as  they  came ;  but  not 
a  few  were  deeply  impressed,  and,  confessing  their  sins,  imder- 
went  the  rite  of  baptism  in  the  waters  of  the  Jordan.     Of 
those  who  were  baptized,  a  select  number  formed  themselves 
into  a  circle  of  disciples  around  the  person  of  the  Baptist, 
among  whom  were  at  least  two,  and  most  probably  the  whole, 
of  the  five  men  mentioned  by  the  evangelist     Previous  con- 
verse with  the  Baptist  had  awakened  in  these  disciples  a 
desire  to  see  Jesus,  and  prepared  them  for  believing  in  Him. 
In  his  communications  to  the  people  aroimd  him,  John  made 
frequent  allusions  to  One  who  should  come  after  himself.    He 
spoke  of  this  coming  One  in  language  fitted  to  awaken  great 
expectations.     He  called  himseK,  with  reference  to  the  coming 
One,  a  mere  voice  in  the  wilderness,  crying,  "  Prepare  ye  the 
way  of  the  Lord."     At  another  time  he  said,  "  I  baptize  with 
water ;  but  there  standeth  one  among  you  whom  ye  know  not : 
He  it  is  who,  coming  after  me,  is  preferred  before  me,  whose 
shoe's  latchet  I  am  not  worthy  to  unloose."     This  great  One 


4  THE  TRAINIKG  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

was  none  other  than  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of  God,  the  King 
of  IsraeL 

Such  discourses  were  likely  to  result,  and  by  the  man  of 
God  who  uttered  them  they  were  intended  to  result,  in  the 
disciples  of  the  Baptist  leaving  him  and  going  over  to  Jesus. 
And  we  see  here  the  process  of  transition  actually  commenc- 
ing. We  do  not  affirm  that  the  persons  here  named  finally 
quitted  the  Baptist's  company  at  this  time,  to  become  hence- 
forth regular  followers  of  Jesus.  But  an  acquaintance  now 
begins  which  will  end  in  that.  The  bride  is  introduced  to 
the  Bridegroom,  and  the  marriage  will  come  in  due  season ; 
not  to  the  chagrin  but  to  the  joy  of  the  Bridegroom's  friend.^ 

How  easily  and  artlessly  does  the  mystic  bride,  as  repre- 
sented by  these  five  disciples,  become  acquainted  with  her 
heavenly  Bridegroom !  The  account  of  their  meeting  is 
idyllic  in  its  simplicity,  and  would  only  be  spoiled  by  a  com- 
mentary. There  is  no  need  of  formal  introduction :  they  all 
introduce  each  other.  Even  John  and  Andrew  were  not  for- 
mally introduced  to  Jesus  by  the  Baptist ;  they  rather  intro- 
duced themselves.  The  exclamation  of  the  desert  prophet  on 
seeing  Jesus,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away 
the  sin  of  the  world !"  repeated  next  day  in  an  abbreviated 
form,  was  the  involuntary  utterance  of  one  absorbed  in  his 
own  thoughts,  rather  than  the  deliberate  speech  of  one  who 
was  directing  his  disciples  to  leave  himseK  and  go  over  to 
Him  of  whom  he  spake.  The  two  disciples,  on  the  other 
hand,  in  going  away  after  the  personage  whose  presence  had 
been  so  impressively  announced,  were  not  obeying  an  order 
given  by  their  old  master,  but  were  simply  following  the 
dictates  of  feelings  which  had  been  awakened  in  their  breasts 
by  all  they  had  heard  him  say  of  Jesus,  both  on  the  present 
and  on  former  occasions.  They  needed  no  injunction  to  seek 
the  acquaintance  of  one  in  whom  they  felt  so  keenly  inte- 
rested :  all  they  needed  was  to  know  that  this  was  He.  They 
were  as  anxious  to  see  the  Messianic  King  as  the  world  is  to 
see  the  face  of  a  secular  prince. 

It  is  natural  that  we  should  scan  the  evangelic  narrative 
for  indications  of  character  with  reference  to  those  who,  in 

1  John  iii  29. 


BEGINNINGS.  5 

the  way  so  qoaintlj  described^  for  the  first  time  met  Jesus. 
Little  is  said  of  the  five  disciples,  but  there  is  enough  to  show 
that  they  were  all  pious  men.  What  they  found  in  their  new 
friend  indicates  what  they  wanted  to  find.  They  evidently 
belonged  to  the  select  band  who  waited  for  the  consolation  of 
Israel,  and  anxiously  looked  for  Him  who  should  fulfil  God's 
promises  and  realize  the  hopes  of  all  devout  souls.  Besides 
this  general  indication  of  character  supplied  in  their  common 
confession  of  faith,  a  few  facts  are  stated  respecting  these 
first  believers  in  Jesus  tending  to  make  us  a  little  better 
acquainted  with  thent  Two  of  them  certainly,  all  of  them 
probably,  had  been  disciples  of  the  Baptist  This  fact  is 
decisive  as  to  their  moral  earnestness.  From  such  a  quarter 
none  but  spiritually  earnest  men  were  likely  to  come.  For 
if  the  followers  of  John  were  at  all  like  himself,  they  were 
men  who  hungered  and  thirsted  after  real  righteousness,  being 
sick  of  the  righteousnesses  then  in  vogue  ;  they  said  Amen  in 
their  hearts  to  the  preacher's  withering  exposure  of  the  hoUow- 
ness  of  current  religious  profession  and  of  the  worthlessness 
of  fashionable  good  works,  and  sighed  for  a  sanctity  other 
than  that  of  pharisaic  superstition  and  ostentation ;  their  con- 
sciences acknowledged  the  truth  of  the  prophetic  oracle,  "  We 
are  all  as  an  unclean  thing,  and  all  our  righteousnesses  are  as 
filthy  rags ;  and  we  aU  do  fade  as  a  leaf,  and  our  iniquities 
like  the  wind  have  taken  us  away;"  and  they  prayed  fer- 
vently for  the  reviving  of  true  religion,  for  the  coming  of  the 
divine  kingdom,  for  the  advent  of  the  Messianic  King  with 
fan  in  His  hand  to  separate  chaff  from  wheat,  and  to  put 
right  all  things  which  were  wrong.  Such,  without  doubt, 
were  the  sentiments  of  those  who  had  the  honour  to  be  the 
first  disciples  of  Christ 

Simon,  best  known  of  all  the  twelve  imder  the  name  of 
Peter,  is  introduced  to  us  here,  through  the  prophetic  insight 
of  Jesus,  on  the  good  side  of  his  character  as  the  man  of  rock. 
When  this  disciple  was  brought  by  his  brother  Andrew  into 
the  presence  of  his  future  Master,  Jesus,  we  are  told,  "  beheld 
him  and  said.  Thou  art  Simon  the  son  of  Jona :  thou  shalt 
be  called  Cephas  " — Cephas  meaning  in  Syriac,  as  the  evan- 
gelist explains,  the   same  which  Petros  signifies  in  Greek. 


6  THB  TRAININO  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

The  penetrating  glance  of  Christ  discerned  in  this  disciple 
latent  capacities  of  faith  and  devotion,  the  rudiments  of  ulti- 
mate strength  and  power. 

What  manner  of  man  Philip  was,  the  evangelist  does  not 
directly  tell  us,  but  merely  whence  he  came.  From  the 
present  passage,  and  from  other  notices  in  the  Gospels,  the 
conclusion  has  been  drawn,  that  he  was  characteristically  de- 
liberate, slow  in  arriving  at  decision ;  and  for  proof  of  this 
view,  reference  has  been  made  to  the  ''  phlegmatic  circumstan- 
tiality"^ with  which  he  described  to  Nathanael  the  person  of 
Him  with  whom  he  had  just  become  acquainted.'  But  these 
words  of  Philip,  and  all  that  we  elsewhere  read  of  him,  rather 
suggest  to  us  the  idea  of  the  earnest  inquirer  after  truth,  who 
has  thoroughly  searched  the  Scriptures  and  made  himseK 
acquainted  with  the  Messiah  of  promise  and  prophecy,  and 
to  whom  the  knowledge  of  God  is  the  «wm/m/wm  bonum.  In 
the  solicitude  manifested  by  this  disciple  to  win  his  friend 
Nathanael  over  to  the  same  faith  we  recognise  that  generous 
sympathetic  spirit,  characteristic  of  earnest  inquirers,  which 
forwards  revealed  itself  in  him  when  he  became  the  bearer 
of  the  request  of  devout  Greeks  for  permission  to  see  Jesus.^ 

The  notices  concerning  Nathanael,  Philip's  acquaintance, 
are  more  detailed  and  more  interesting  than  in  the  case  of 
any  other  of  the  five ;  and  it  is  not  a  little  surprising  that 
we  should  be  told  so  much  in  this  place  about  one,  concerning 
whom  we  otherwise  know  almost  nothing.  It  is  even  not 
.quite  certain  that  he  belonged  to  the  circle  of  the  twelve, 
though  the  probability  is,  that  he  is  to  be  identified  with  the 
Bartholomew  of  the  synoptical  catalogues, — ^his  full  name  in 
that  case  being  Nathanael  the  son  of  Tolmai  It  is  strongly 
in  favour  of  this  supposition,  that  the  name  Bartholomew 
comes  immediately  after  Philip  in  the  lists  of  the  apostles.^ 
Be  this  as  it  may^  we  know  on  the  best  authority  that  Na- 
thanael was  a  man  of  great  moral  excellence.  No  sooner  had 
Jesus  seen  him  than  He  exclaimed,  ''  Behold  an  Israelite 
indeed,  in  whom  is   no   guile  I"      The  words   suggest  the 

1  Luthardt,  Das  Johan.  Evang.  I  102.  *  Ver.  45.  *  John  xii.  22. 

^  Ewald  lays  stress  on  this  in  proof  of  the  identity  of  the  two,  Oeschkhte 
Chrirtut,  p.  827.    In  Acts  L  18  Thomas  oomes  between  PhiHn  and  Bartholomew. 


BEGDnOKGa  7 

idea  of  one  wliode  heart  was  pure ;  in  whom  was  no  double- 
mindedness,  impure  motive,  pride,  or  unholy  passion :  a  man 
of  gentle  meditative  spirit,  in  whose  mind  heaven  lay  reflected 
like  the  blue  sky  in  a  still  lake  on  a  calm  summer  day.  He 
was  a  man  much  addicted  to  habits  of  devotion :  he  had 
been  engaged  in  spiritual  exercises  under  cover  of  a  fig-tree 
just  before  he  met  with  Jesus.  So  we  are  justified  in  con- 
dudiDg,  from  the  deep  impression  made  on  his  mind  by  the 
words  of  Jesus,  "  Before  that  Philip  called  thee,  when  thou 
wast  under  the  fig-tree,  I  saw  thee."  Nathanael  appears  to 
have  understood  these  words  as  meaning,  "I  sa^y^  into  thy 
heart,  and  knew  how  thou  wast  occupied,  and  therefore  I 
pronounced  thee  an  Israelite  indeed."  He  accepted  the 
statement  made  to  him  by  Jesus  as  an  evidence  of  preter- 
natural knowledge,  and  therefore  he  forthwith  made  the 
confession,  "  Eabbi !  Thou  art  the  Son  of  Grod ;  Thou  art  the 
King  of  Israel," — ^the  King  of  that  sacred  commonwealth 
whereof  you  say  I  am  a  citizen. 

It  is  remarkable  that  this  man,  so  highly  endowed  with  the 
moral  dispositions  necessary  for  seeing  Grod,  should  have  been 
the  only  one  of  all  the  five  disciples  who  manifested  any  hesi- 
tancy about  receiving  Jesus  as  the  Christ.  When  Philip  told 
him  that  he  had  found  the  Messiah  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  he 
asked  incredulously,  ''  Can  there  any  good  thing  come  out  of 
Nazareth  ?"  One  hardly  expects  such  prejudice  in  one  so  meek 
and  amiable ;  and  yet,  on  reflection,  we  perceive  it  to  be  quite 
characteristic  Kathanaers  prejudice  against  Nazareth  sprung 
not  from  pride,  as  in  the  case  of  the  people  of  Judsea  who  de- 
spised the  Gralileans  in  general,  but  from  humility.  He  was  a 
Galilean  himself,  and  as  much  an  object  of  Jewish  contempt 
as  were  the  Nazarenes.  His  inward  thought  was,  "  Surely  the 
Messiah  can  never  come  from  among  a  poor  despised  people 
such  as  we  are — ^from  Nazareth  or  any  other  Galilean  town  or 
village  I "  ^  He  timidly  allowed  his  mind  to  be  biassed  by  a 
current  opioien  originating  in  feelings  with  which  he  had  no 

^  Stanley  thinks  Nathanael  meant  to  single  out  Nazareth  from  the  rest  of 
Ckdilee  mm  of  specially  bad  notoriety.  In  that  case  the  argument  would  be 
a  forHoiri:  Can  any  good  come  out  of  Galilee,  and  specially  from  Nazareth, 
mfamoos  eren  there  f— iSmot  and  PaUHmef  p.  866. 


8  THE  TRAINIKG  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

sympathy ;  a  fault  common  to  men  whose  piety,  though  pure 
and  sincere,  defers  too  much  to  human  authority,  and  who 
thus  become  the  slaves  of  sentiments  utterly  unworthy  of 
them. 

The  case  of  Nathanael  simply  reminds  us  of  a  fact  with 
which  everyday  experience  tends  to  make  us  familiar;  viz. 
that  good-hearted,  pious  men  are  liable  to  imjust,  ungenerous, 
illiberal  prejudices  as  well  as  persons  of  less  pure  character, 
insomuch  that  even  the  most  amiable  and  saintly  may  not  be 
regarded  as  oracles  without  serious  risk.  And  the  suspicious 
utterance  of  this  disciple  stands  recorded  at  the  very  beginning 
of  the  gospel  as  a  warning  to  all  Israelites  indeed,  which 
history  has  proved  to  be  much  needed,  and,  alas !  too  little 
heeded.  It  says  to  such,  "  Beware  that  ye  be  not  too  confident 
in  your  judgments  of  others.  When  with  assurance,  impa- 
tience, or  even  indignation,  ye  ask,  in  reference  to  any  parti- 
cular church,  sect,  party,  or  individual,  '  Can  any  good  thing 
come  from  such  a  quarter  ? '  remember  that  a  similar  question 
was  asked  concerning  the  place  whence  Jesus  Christ  came. 
'  Be  not  forgetful  to  entertain  strangers,  for  thereby  some  have 
entertained  angels  unawares/  " 

While  Nathanael  was  not  free  from  prejudices,  he  showed  his 
guilelessness  in  being  willing  to  have  them  removed.  He  came 
and  saw.  This  openness  to  conviction  is  the  mark  of  moral 
integrity.  The  guileless  man  dogmatizes  not,  but  investi- 
gates, and  therefore  always  comes  right  in  the  end.  The  man 
of  bad,  dishonest  heart,  on  the  contrary,  does  not  come  and 
see.  Deeming  it  his  interest  to  remain  in  his  present  mind, 
he  studiously  avoids  looking  at  aught  which  does  not  tend  to 
confirm  his  foregone  conclusions.  He  may,  indeed,  profess  a 
desire  for  inquiry,  like  certain  Israelites  of  whom  we  read  in 
this  same  Gospel,  of  another  stamp  than  Nathanael,  but  sharing 
with  him  the  prejudice  against  Galilee.  "  Search  and  look," 
said  these  Israelites  not  without  guile,  in  reply  to  the  ingenuous 
question  of  the  honest  but  timid  Nicodemus :  "  Doth  our  law 
judge  any  man  before  it  hear  him,  and  know  what  he  doeth  ? " 
"Search  and  look,"  said  they,  appealing  to  observation  and 
inviting  inquiry ;  but  they  added  :  "  For  out  of  Galilee  ariseth 
no  prophet^" — a  dictum  which  at  once  prohibited  inquiry  in 


BEGINNINGS.  V^ 

effect,  and  intimated  that  it  was  unnecessary.  ''  Search  and 
look ;  but  we  tell  you  beforehand  you  cannot  arrive  at  any 
other  conclusion  than  ours ;  nay,  we  warn  you  you  had  better 
not."  * 

Such  were  the  characters  of  the  men  who  first  believed  in 
Jesus.  What,  we  next  ask,  was  the  amount  and  value  of  their 
belief  ?  On  first  view  the  faith  of  the  five  disciples,  leaving 
out  of  account  the  brief  hesitation  of  Nathanael,  seems  unnatu- 
rally sudden  and  mature.  They  believe  in  Jesus  on  a  moment's 
notice,  and  they  express  their  faith  in  terms  which  seem 
appropriate  only  to  advanced  Christian  intelligence.  In  the 
present  section  of  John's  Gospel  we  find  Jesus  called  not 
merely  the  Christ,  the  Messiah,  the  King  of  Israel,  but  the 
Son  of  God  and  the  Lamb  of  God, — names  expressive  of  the 
cardinal  doctrines  of  Christianity,  the  Incarnation  and  the 
Atonement. 

The  haste  and  maturity  which  seem  to  characterize  the  faith 
of  the  five  disciples  are  only  superficial  appearances.  As  to 
the  former:  these  men  believed  that  Messiah  was  to  come 
some  time ;  and  they  wished  much  it  might  be  then,  for  they 
felt  He  was  greatly  needed  They  were  men  who  waited  for 
the  consolation  of  Israel,  and  they  were  prepared  at  any 
moment  to  witness  the  advent  of  the  Comforter.  Then  the 
Baptist  had  told  them  that  the  Christ  was  come,  and  that  He 
was  to  be  found  in  the  person  of  Him  whom  he  had  baptized, 
and  whose  baptism  had  been  accompanied  with  such  remarkable 
signs  from  heaven ;  and  what  the  Baptist  said  they  implicitly 
believed  Finally,  the  impression  produced  on  their  minds 
by  the  bearing  of  Jesus  when  they  met,  tended  to  confirm 
John's  testimony,  being  altogether  worthy  of  the  Christ 

The  appearance  of  maturity  in  the  faith  of  the  five  brethren 
is  equally  superficial  As  to  the  name  Lamb  of  God,  it  was 
given  to  Jesus  by  John,  not  by  them.  It  was,  so  to  speak, 
the  baptismal  name  which  the  preacher  of  repentance  had 
learned  by  reflection,  or  by  special  revelation,  to  give  to  the 
Christ  What  the  name  signified  he  but  dimly  comprehended, 
the  very  repetition  of  it  showing  him  to  be  but  a  learner 
striving  to  get  up  his  lesson ;  and  we  know  that  what  John 

^  John  viL  45-52. 


10  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

understood  only  in  part,  the  men  whom  he  introduced  to  the 
acquaintance  of  Jesus,  now  and  for  long  after,  imderstood  not 
at  alL 

The  title  Son  of  God  waa  given  to  Jesus  by  one  of  the  five 
disciples  as  well  as  by  the  Baptist;  a  title  which  even  the  apostles 
in  after  years  found  sufficient  to  express  their  mature  belief 
respecting  the  Person  of  their  Lord.  But  it  does  not  follow 
that  the  name  was  used  by  them  at  the  b^inning  with  the 
same  fulness  of  meaning  as  at  the  end.  It  was  a  name  which 
could  be  used  in  a  sense  coining  far  short  of  that  which  it  is 
capable  of  convejdng,  and  which  it  did  convey  in  apostolic 
preaching, — ^merely  as  one  of  the  Old  Testament  titles  of 
Messiah,  a  synonym  for  Christ.  It  was  doubtless  in  this 
rudimentary  sense  that  Nathanael  applied  the  designation  to 
Him,  whom  he  also  called  the  King  of  IsraeL 

The  faith  of  these  brethren  was,  therefore,  just  such  as  we 
should  expect  in  beginners.  In  substance  it  amounted  to  this, 
that  they  recognised  in  Jesus  the  Divine  Prophet,  King,  Son 
of  Old  Testament  prophecy;  and  its  value  lay  not  in  its 
maturity  or  accuracy,  but  in  this,  that  however  imperfect,  it 
brought  them  into  contact  and  close  fellowship  with  Him,  in 
whose  company  they  were  to  see  greater  things  than  when 
they  first  believed,  one  truth  after  another  assuming  its  place 
in  the  firmament  of  their  minds,  like  the  stars  appearing  in 
the  evening  sky  as  daylight  fades  away. 


CHAPTEE    11. 

FISHEBS   OF  MEN. 
Matt.  iv.  18-22  ;  Mabk  i.  16-20  ;  Luke  v.  1-11. 

THE  twelve  arrived  at  their  final  intimate  relation  to 
Jesus  only  by  degrees :  three  stages  in  the  history  of 
their  fellowship  with  Him  being  distinguishable.  In  the  first 
stage  they  were  simply  believers  in  Him  as  the  Christ,  and 
His  occasional  companions  at  convenient,  particidarly  festive, 
occasions.  Of  this  earliest  stage  in  the  intercourse  of  the 
disciples  with  their  Master,  we  have  some  memorials  in  the 
four  first  chapters  of  John's  Gospel,  which  tell  how  some  of 
them  first  became  acquainted  with  Jesus,  and  represent  them 
as  accompanying  Him  at  a  marriage  in  Cana,^  at  a  passover 
in  Jerusalem,*  on  a  visit  to  the  scene  of  the  Baptist's  ministry,' 
and  on  the  return  journey  through  Samaria  from  the  south  to 
Galilee.* 

In  the  second  stage,  fellowship  with  Christ  assumed  the 
form  of  an  uninterrupted  attendance  on  His  person,  involving 
entire,  or  at  least  habitual  abandonment  of  secular  occupa- 
tions.* The  present  narratives  bring  under  our  view  certain  of 
the  disciples  entering  on  this  second  stage  of  discipleship. 
Of  the  four  persons  here  named,  we  recognise  three,  Peter, 
Andrew,  and  John,  as  old  acquaintances,  who  have  already 
passed  through  the  first  stage  of  discipleship.  One  of  them, 
James  the  brother  of  John,  we  meet  with  for  the  first  time  ; 
a  fact  which  gruggests  the  remark,  that  in  some  cases  the  first 
and  second  stages  may  have  been  blended  together, — pro- 

»  Jolui  ii.  1.  «  John  iL  13,  17,  22.  •  John  iii.  22. 

*  John  iv.  1-27,  81,  48-45. 

*  Entire  in  Matthew's  case,  of  course  ;  in  the  case  of  the  fishers,  not  neces- 
lariljso. 


1 2  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

fessions  of  faith  in  Jesus  as  the  Christ  being  immediately 
followed  by  the  renunciation  of  secular  callings,  for  the  purpose 
of  joining  His  company.  Such  cases,  however,  were  probably 
exceptional  and  few. 

The  twelve  entered  on  the  last  and  highest  stage  of  dis- 
cipleship  when  they  were  chosen  by  their  Master  from  the 
mass  of  His  followers,  and  formed  into  a  select  band,  to  be 
trained  for  the  great  work  of  the  apOstleship.  This  important 
event  probably  did  not  take  place  till  all  the  members  of  the 
apostolic  circle  had  been  for  some  time  about  the  person  of 
Jesus. 

From  the  evangelic  records  it  appears  that  Jesus  began  at 
a  very  early  period  of  His  ministry  to  gather  round  Him  a 
company  of  disciples,  with  a  view  to  the  preparation  of  an 
agency  for  carrying  on  the  work  of  the  divine  kingdom. 
The  two  pairs  of  brothers  received  their  call  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  first  Galilean  ministry,  in  which  the  first  act  was 
the  selection  of  Capernaum  by  the  sea-side  as  the  centre  of 
operations  and  ordinary  place  of  abode.  And  when  we  think 
what  they  were  called  imto,  we  see  that  the  call  could  not 
come  too  soon.  The  twelve  were  to  be  Christ's  witnesses  in 
the  world  after  He  HimseK  had  left  it ;  it  was  to  be  their 
peculiar  duty  to  give  to  the  world  a  faithful  record  of  their 
Master's  words  and  deeds,  a  just  image  of  His  character,  a 
true  reflection  of  His  spirit  This  service  obviously  could  be 
rendered  only  by  persons  who  had  been,  as  nearly  as  possible, 
eye-witnesses  and  servants  of  the  Incarnate  Word  from  the 
beginning.  While,  therefore,  except  in  the  cases  of  Peter, 
James,  John,  Andrew,  and  Matthew,  we  have  no  particulars 
in  the  Gospels  respecting  the  calls  of  those  who  afterwards 
became  apostles,  we  must  assume  that  they  all  occurred  in  the 
first  year  of  the  Saviour's  public  ministry. 

That  these  calls  were  given  with  conscious  reference  to  an 
ulterior  end,  even  the  apostleship,  appears  from  the  remark- 
able terms  in  which  the  earliest  of  them  was  expressed. 
"  Follow  me,"  said  Jesus  to  the  fishermen  of  Bethsaida,  "  and 
I  will  make  you  fishers  of  men."  These  words  (whose  origi- 
nality stamps  them  as  a  genuine  saying  of  Jesus)  show  that  the 
great  Founder  of  the  faith  desired  not  only  to  have  disciples, 


FISHERS  OF  MEN.  1 3 

but  to  have  about  Him  men  whom  He  might  train  to  make 
disciples  of  others :  to  cast  the  net  of  divine  truth  into  the 
sea  of  the  world,  and  to  land  on  the  shores  of  the  divine 
kingdom  a  great  multitude  of  believing  souls.  Both  from 
His  words  and  from  His  actions  we  can  see  that  He  attached 
supreme  importance  to  that  part  of  His  work  which  consisted 
in  training  the  twelve.  In  the  intercessory  prayer/  e.^..  He 
speaks  of  the  training  He  had  given  these  men  as  if  it  had 
been  the  principal  part  of  His  own  earthly  ministry.  Such, 
in  one  sense,  it  really  was.  The  careful,  painstaking  educa- 
tion of  the  disciples  secured  that  the  Teacher's  influence  on 
the  world  should  be  permanent ;  that  His  kingdom  should  be 
founded  on  the  rock  of  deep  and  indestructible  convictions  in 
the  minds  of  the  few,  not  on  the  shifting  sands  of  superficial 
evanescent  impressions  on  the  minds  of  the  many.  E^ard- 
ing  that  kingdom,  as  our  Lord  Himself  has  taught  us  in  one 
of  His  parables  to  do,^  as  a  thing  introduced  into  the  world 
like  a  seed  cast  into  the  ground  and  left  to  grow  according  to 
natural  laws,  we  may  say  that,  but  for  the  twelve,  the  doc- 
trine, the  works,  and  the  image  of  Jesus  might  have  perished 
from  human  remembrance,  nothing  remaining  but  a  vague 
mythical  tradition,  of  no  historical  value,  and  of  little  practical 
influence. 

Those  on  whom  so  much  depended,  it  plainly  behoved  to 
possess  very  extraordinary  qualifications.  The  mirrors  must 
be  finely  polished  that  are  designed  to  reflect  the  image  of 
Christ !  The  apostles  of  the  Christian  religion  must  be  men 
of  rare  spiritual  endowment.  It  is  a  catholic  religion,  intended 
for  all  nations ;  therefore  its  apostles  must  be  free  from  Jewish 
narrowness,  and  have  sympathies  wide  as  the  world.  It  is  a 
spiritual  religion,  destined  ere  long  to  antiquate  Jewish  cere- 
monialism ;  therefore  its  apostles  must  be  emancipated  in 
conscience  from  the  yoke  of  ordinances.  It  is  a  religion,  once 
more,  which  is  to  proclaim  the  Cross,  previously  an  instrument 
of  cruelty  and  badge  q£  infamy,  as  the  hope  of  the  world's 
redemption,  and  the  symbol  of  all  that  is  noble  and  heroic  in 
conduct ;  therefore  its  heralds  must  be  superior  to  aU  conven- 
tional notions  of  human  and  divine  dignity,  capable  of  glory- 

1  John  xrii  6.  *  Mark  iy.  26. 


14  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

ing  in  the  cross  of  Christ,  and  willing  to  bear  a  cross  them- 
selves. The  apostolic  character,  in  short,  must  combine  free- 
dom of  conscience,  enlargement  of  heart,  enlightenment  of 
mind,  and  all  in  the  superlative  degrea 

The  humble  fishermen  of  Galilee  had  much  to  learn  before 
they  could  satisfy  these  high  requirements ;  so  much,  that  the 
time  of  their  apprenticeship  for  their  apostolic  work,  even 
reckoning  it  from  the  very  commencement  of  Christ's  ministry, 
seems  all  too  short  They  were  indeed  godly  men,  who  had 
already  shown  the  sincerity  of  their  piety  by  forsaking  all  for 
their  Master's  sake.  But  at  the  time  of  their  call  they  were 
exceedingly  ignorant,  narrow-minded,  superstitious,  full  of 
Jewish  prejudices,  misconceptions,  and  animosities.  They  had 
much  to  unlearn  of  what  was  bad,  as  well  as  much  to  learn 
of  what  was  good,  and  they  were  slow  both  to  learn  and  to 
unlearn.  Old  beliefs  already  in  possession  of  their  minds 
made  the  commimication  of  new  religious  ideas  a  difficult 
task.  Men  of  good  honest  heart,  the  soil  of  their  spiritual 
nature  was  fitted  to  produce  an  abundant  harvest ;  but  it  was 
stiff,  and  needed  much  laborious  tillage  before  it  would  yield 
its  fruit.  Then,  once  more,  they  were  poor  men,  of  humble 
birth,  low  station,  mean  occupations,  who  had  never  felt  the 
stimulating  influence  of  a  liberal  education,  or  of  social  inter- 
course with  persons  of  cultivated  minds. 

We  shall  meet  with  abimdant  evidence  of  the  crude  spiritual 
condition  of  the  twelve,  even  long  after  the  period  when  they 
were  called  to  follow  Jesus,  as  we  proceed  with  the  studies 
on  which  we  have  entered.  Meantime  we  may  discover  signi- 
ficant indications  of  the  religious  immaturity  of  at  least  one 
of  the  disciples, — Simon,  son  of  Jonas, — in  Luke's  account  of 
the  incidents  connected  with  his  caU.  Pressed  by  the  multi- 
tude who  had  assembled  on  the  shore  of  the  lake  to  hear  Him 
preach,  Jesus,  we  read,  entered  into  a  ship  (one  of  two  lying 
near  at  hand),  which  happened  to  be  Simon's,  and  requesting 
him  to  thrust  out  a  little  from  the  land,  sat  down,  and  taught 
the  people  from  the  vessel.  Having  finished  speaking,  Jesus 
said  unto  the  owner  of  the  boat,  "  Launch  out  into  the  deep, 
and  let  down  your  nets  for  a  draught"  Their  previous  efforts 
to  catch  fish  had  been  unsuccessful ;  but  Simon  and  his  brother 


nsHEBS  OF  MEN.  15 

did  as  Jesus  directed,  and  were  rewarded  by  an  extraordinary 
take,  which  appeared  to  them  and  their  fishing  companions, 
James  and  John,  nothing  short  of  miraculous.  Simon,  the 
most  impressible  and  the  most  demonstrative  of  the  four,  gave 
utterance  to  his  feelings  of  astonishment  by  characteristic 
words  and  gestures.  He  fell  down  at  Jesus'  knees,  saying, 
"  Depart  from  me,  for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  0  Lord ! " 

This  exclamation  opens  a  window  into  the  inner  man  of 
him  who  uttered  it,  through  which  we  can  see  his  spiritual 
state.  We  observe  in  Peter  at  this  time  that  mixture  of  good 
and  evil,  of  grace  and  nature,  which  so  frequently  reappears 
in  his  character  in  the  subsequent  history.  Among  the  good 
elements  discernible  are  reverential  awe  in  presence  of  Divine 
Power,  a  prompt  calling  to  mind  of  sin  betraying  tenderness 
of  conscience,  and  an  unfeigned  seK-humiliation  on  account  of 
unmerited  favour.  Valuable  features  of  character  these ;  but 
they  did  not  exist  in  Peter  without  alloy.  Along  with  them 
were  associated  superstitious  dread  of  the  supernatural,  and  a 
slavish  fear  of  Grod.  The  presence  of  the  former  element  is 
implied  in  the  reassuring  esliortation  addressed  to  the  disciple 
by  Jesus,  "  Fear  not ;  from  henceforth  thou  shalt  catch  men." 
Slavish  fear  of  God  is  even  more  manifest  in  his  own  words, 
"  Depart  firom  me,  0  Lord."  Powerfully  impressed  with  the 
superhuman  knowledge  revealed  in  connection  with  the  great 
draught  of  fishes,  he  regards  Jesus  for  the  moment  as  a  super- 
natural being,  and  as  such  dreads  Him  as  one  whom  it  is  not 
safe  to  be  near,  especially  for  a  poor  sinful  mortal  like  him- 
self This  state  of  mind  shows  how  utterly  unfit  Peter  is,  as 
yet,  to  be  an  apostle  of  a  gospel  which  magnifies  the  grace  of 
(Jod  even  to  the  chief  of  sinners.  BUs  piety,  sufl&ciently 
strong  and  decided,  is  not  of  a  Christian  type ;  it  is  legal,  one 
might  almost  say  pagan,  in  spirit 

The  truth  of  the  statement  just  made  may  be  rendered  more 
apparent  by  a  contrast  supplied  in  another  incident  from  the 
history  of  Peter,  which  occurred  towards  the  close  of  his  dis- 
dple-life.  It  was  another  fishing  scene  on  the  same  waters, 
very  like,  and  also  very  unlike,  that  here  recorded  by  Luke. 
On  that  occasion  Peter  and  his  brethren,  by  direction  of  a 
stranger  dimly  descried  on  the  shore  in  the  grey  morning. 


1 6  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE.        ^ . 

caught,  as  now,  a  great  multitude  of  fishes.  The  unusually 
large  draught,  taken  after  a  whole  night's  toil  to  no  purpose, 
reminded  John  of  what  had  happened  years  before,  at  that 
ever-memorable  period  when  he  and  his  brethren  were  called* 
to  be  fishers  of  men,  and  suggested  to  him  the  thought  that 
the  stranger  on  the  shore  must  be  the  risen  Jesus.  The 
beloved  disciple  communicated  his  discovery  to  his  friend. 
And  mark  the  difference  between  Peter's  behaviour  then  and 
now.  He  shrinks  not  this  time  in  fear  from  the  presence  of 
the  Lord.  He  has  very  good  reason  to  do  so ;  for  the  con- 
fession, "  I  am  a  sinful  man,"  would  now  in  his  mouth  be  no 
pious  commonplace,  but  the  feeble  inadequate  acknowledg- 
ment of  heinous  guilt  recently  contracted.  Yet  he  has  no 
thought  of  avoiding  or  fleeing  from  Him  whom  he  has  per- 
sonally and  grievously  injured.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  recorded, 
that  "  when  Simon  Peter  heard  that  it  was  the  Lord,  he  girt 
his  fisher's  coat  unto  him,  and  did  cast  himseK  into  the  sea  ;"^ 
his  intent  being  to  swim  to  the  land  and  embrace  his  beloved 
Master.  That  plimge  into  the  waters  reveals  a  piety  now  well 
purged  of  superstition,  and  a  faith  in  pardoning  grace  victo- 
rious over  guilty  fear.  Peter  now  dreads  neither  divine  power 
nor  divine  holiness.  He  can  witness  a  miracle  with  sobriety 
and  composure,  knowing,  from  long  experience,  that  the  wonder- 
working power  of  Jesus  was  ever  exercised  in  intimate  alliance 
with  wisdom  and  love,  as  a  beneficent  agent  employed  to  pro- 
mote the  temporal  and  spiritual  well-being  of  men.  And 
while  conscious  of  being  a  grievous  offender,  he  fully  expects 
to  receive  a  gracious  reception  from  his  injured  Master,  because 
he  has  ever  found  Him  one  who  overcame  evil  with  good,  and 
forgave  not  once  or  seven  times,  but  seventy  times  seven.  He 
has  thus  in  both  respects  made  a  great  advance  since  the  time 
he  excledmed  in  superstitious  terror,  "  Depart  from  me,  for 
I  am  a  sinful  man,  0  Lord  ! " 

With  aU  their  imperfections,  which  were  both  numerous 
and  great,  these  humble  fishermen  of  (ralilee  had,  at  the  very 
outset  of  their  career,  one  grand  distinguishing  virtue,  which, 
though  it  may  coexist  with  many  defects,  is  the  certain  fore- 
runner of  ultimate  high  attainment     They  were  animated  by 

» John  X3d.  1-7. 


t. 


FISHEBS  OF  MEN.  17 


"^  a  devotion  to  Jesus  and  to  the  divine  kingdom  which  made 
them  capable  of  any  sacrifice.  Believing  Him  who  bade  them 
follow  Him  to  be  the  Christ,  come  to  set  up  God's  kingdom 
te.  earthy  they  ^  straightway"  left  their  nets  and  joined  His 
company,  to  be  thenceforth  His  constant  companions  in  aU 
His  wanderings.  The  act  was  acknowledged  by  Jesus  Him- 
self to  be  meritorious ;  and  we  cannot,  without  injustice,  seek 
to  disparage  it,  by  ascribing  it  to  idleness,  discontent,  or  ambi- 
tion as  its  motive.  The  Gospel  narrative  shows  that  the  four 
brethren  were  not  idle,  but  hard-working,  industrious  men. 
Neither  were  they  discontented,  if  for  no  other  reason  than  that 
they  had  no  cause  for  discontent  The  family  of  James  and 
John  at  least  seems  to  have  been  in  circumstances  of  comfort ; 
for  Mark  relates  that,  when  called  by  Jesus,  they  left  their 
{Either  Zebedee  in  the  ship  with  ihe  hired  servants,  and  went 
after  Him.  But  ambition,  had  it  no  place  among  their  mo- 
tives ?  Well,  we  must  admit  that  the  twelve,  and  specially 
James  and  John,  were  by  no  means  free  from  ambitious  pas- 
sions, as  we  shall  see  hereafter.  But  to  whatever  extent  am- 
bition may  have  influenced  their  conduct  at  a  later  period,  it 
was  not  the  motive  which  determined  them  to  leave  their  nets. 
Ambition  needs  a  temptation  :  it  does  not  join  a  cause  which 
is  obscure  and  struggling,  and  whose  success  is  doubtful ;  it 
strikes  in  when  success  is  assured,  and  when  the  movement 
it  patronizes  is  on  the  eve  of  its  glorification.  The  cause  of 
Jesus  had  not  got  to  that  stage  yet. 

One  charge  only  can  be  brought  against  those  men,  and  it 
can  be  brought  with  truth,  and  without  doing  their  memory 
any  harm.  They  were  erUhusiasts :  their  hearts  were  fired,  and, 
as  an  imbelieving  world  might  say,  their  heads  were  turned, 
by  a  dream  about  a  divine  kingdom  to  be  set  up  in  Israel, 
with  Jesus  of  Nazareth  for  its  king.  That  dream  possessed 
them  and  imperiously  ruled  over  their  minds,  and  shaped  their 
destinies,  compelling  them,  like  Abraham,  to  leave  their  kin- 
dred and  their  country,  and  go  forth  on  what  might  well 
appear  beforehand  to  be  a  fooFs  errand.  Well  for  the  world 
that  they  were  possessed  by  the  idea  of  the  Elingdom !  For  it 
was  no  fool's  errand  on  which  they  went  forth,  leaving  their 
nets  behind     The  kingdom  they  sought  turned  out  to  be  as 

B 


1 8  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

real  aa  the  land  of  Canaan,  though  not  such  altogether  as  they 
had  imagined.  The  fishermen  of  GalUee  did  become  fishers 
of  men  on  a  most  extensive  scale,  and,  by  the  help  of  God, 
gathered  many  souls  into  the  church  of  such  as  should  be 
saved.  In  a  sense  they  are  casting  their  nets  into  the  sea  of 
the  world  stiU,  and,  by  their  testimony  to  Jesus  in  Gospel 
and  Epistle,  are  bringing  multitudes  to  become  disciples  of 
Him  among  whose  first  followers  they  had  the  happiness  to 
be  numbered. 

The  four,  the  twelve,  forsook  all  and  followed  their  Master. 
Did  the  "  all"  in  any  case  include  wife  and  children  ?  It  did 
in  at  least  one  instance — that  of  Peter ;  for  the  Gospels  tell 
how  Peter's  mother-in-law  was  healed  of  a  fever  by  the  mira- 
culous power  of  Christ.^  From  a  passage  in  Paul's  first  epistle 
to  the  Corinthian  church,  it  appears  that  Peter  was  not  the 
only  one  among  the  apostles  who  was  married.*  From  the 
same  passage  we  further  learn,  that  forsaking  of  wives  for 
Christ's  sake  did  not  mean  literal  desertion.  Peter  the  apostle 
led  his  wife  about  with  him,  and  Peter  the  disciple  may  some- 
times have  done  the  same.  The  likelihood  is  that  the  married 
disciples,  like  married  soldiers,  took  their  wives  with  them  or 
left  them  at  home,  as  circumstances  might  require  or  admit. 
Women,  even  married  women,  did  sometimes  follow  Jesus ; 
and  the  wife  of  Simon,  or  of  any  other  married  disciple,  may 
occasionally  have  been  among  the  number.  At  an  advanced 
period  in  the  history,  we  find  the  mother  of  James  and  John 
in  Christ's  company  far  from  home ;  and  where  mothers  were, 
wives,  if  they  wished,  might  also  be.  The  infant  church,  in 
its  original  nomadic  or  itinerant  state,  seems  to  have  been  a 
motley  band  of  pilgrims,  in  which  all  sorts  of  people  as  to 
sex,  social  position,  and  moral  character  were  united,  the  bond 
of  union  being  ardent  attachment  to  the  person  of  Jesus. 

This  church  itinerant  was  not  a  regularly  organized  society, 
of  which  it  was  necessary  to  be  a  constant  member  in  order 
to  true  discipleship.  Except  in  the  case  of  the  twelve,  fol- 
lowing Jesus  from  place  to  place  was  optional,  not  compulsory ; 
and  in  most  cases  it  was  probably  also  only  occasional  It  was 
the  natural  consequence  of  faith,  when  the  object  of  faith,  the 

*  Matt  viii.  14 ;  Mark  L  29-31 ;  Luke  iv.  38,  39.  «  1  Cor.  ix.  5. 


FISHERS  OF  MEN.  19 

centre  of  the  circle,  was  HimseK  in  motion.  Believers  would 
naturally  desire  to  see  as  many  of  Christ's  works  and  hear  as 
many  of  His  words  as  possible.  When  the  object  of  faith  left 
the  earth,  and  His  presence  became  spiritual,  all  occasion  for 
such  nomadic  discipleship  was  done  away.  To  be  present 
with  Him  thereafter,  men  needed  only  to  forsake  their  8in$, 


CHAPTEE  HI 

MATTHEW   THE   PUBLICAN. 
Matt.  ix.  9-13 ;  Makk  ii.  15-17 ;  Lukk  v.  27-82. 

THE  call  of  Matthew  signally  iUustrates  a  very  prominent 
feature  in  the  public  action  of  Jesus,  viz.  His  utter 
disregard  of  the  maxims  of  worldly  wisdom.  A  publican 
disciple,  much  more  a  publican  apostle,  could  not  fail  to  be  a 
stumblingblock  to  Jewish  prejudice,  and  therefore  to  be,  for 
the  time  at  least,  a  source  of  weakness  rather  than  of  strength. 
Yet,  while  perfectly  aware  of  this  fact,  Jesus  invited  to  the 
intimate  fellowship  of  disciplehood  one  who  had  pursued  the 
occupation  of  a  tax-gatherer,  and  at  a  later  period  selected 
him  to  be  one  of  the  twelve.  His  procedure  in  this  case  is  all 
the  more  remarkable  when  contrasted  with  the  manner  in 
which  He  treated  others  having  outward  advantages  to  recom- 
mend them  to  favourable  notice,  and  who  showed  their  readi- 
ness to  follow  by  volunteering  to  become  disciples ;  of  whom 
we  have  a  sample  in  the  scribe  that  came  and  said,  "  Master, 
I  will  foUow  Thee  whithersoever  Thou  goest."^  This  man, 
whose  social  position  and  professional  attainments  seemed  to 
point  him  out  as  a  very  desirable  acquisition,  the  "  Master" 
deliberately  scared  away  by  a  gloomy  picture  of  His  own  desti- 
tute condition,  saying  "  The  foxes  have  holes,  and  the  birds  of 
the  air  have  nests,  but  the  Son  of  man  hath  not  where  to  lay 
His  head." 

The  eye  of  Jesus  was  single  as  well  as  omniscient :  He 
looked  on  the  heart,  and  had  respect  solely  to  spiritual  fitness. 
He  had  no  faith  in  any  discipleship  based  on  misapprehen- 
sions and  by-ends ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  He  had  no  fear  of 

1  Matt.  viii.  18-20. 


MATTHEW  THE  PUBLICAN.  21 

the  drawbacks  ariBing  out  of  the  external  connections  or  past 
history  of  true  believers,  but  was  entirely  indiflTerent  to  men's 
antecedents.  Confident  in  the  power  of  truth.  He  chose  the 
base  things  of  the  world  in  preference  to  things  held  in  esteem, 
assured  that  they  would  conquer  at  the  last  Aware  that 
both  He  and  His  disciples  would  be  despised  and  rejected  of 
men  for  a  season.  He  went  calmly  on  His  way,  choosing  for 
His  companions  and  agents  "  whom  He  would,"  undisturbed 
by  the  gainsaying  of  His  generation — ^like  one  who  knew  that 
His  work  concerned  all  nations  and  all  time. 

The  publican  disciple  bears  two  names  in  the  Gospel  history. 
In  the  first  Grospel,  from  his  own  hand,  he  is  called  Matthew, 
while  in  the  second  and  thi}xi  Grospels  he  is  called  Levi  That 
the  same  person  is  intended,  may,  we  think,  be  regarded  as 
a  matter  of  certainty.*  It  is  hardly  conceivable  that  two 
publicans  should  have  been  called  to  be  disciples  at  the  same 
place  and  time,  and  with  all  accompanying  circumstances,  and 
these  so  remarkable,  precisely  similar.  We  need  not  be  sur- 
prised that  the  identity  has  not  been  notified,  as  the  fact  of  the 
two  names  belonging  to  one  individual  would  be  so  familiar 
to  the  first  readers  of  the  Glospels  as  to  make  such  a  piece  of 
information  superfluous. 

It  is  probable  that  Levi  was  the  name  of  this  disciple  before 
the  time  of  his  call,  and  that  Matthew  was  his  name  as  a  dis- 
ciple,-the  new  name  thus  becoming  a  symbol  and  memorial 
of  the  more  important  change  in  heart  and  life.  Similar  em- 
blematic changes  of  name  were  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the 
beginning  of  the  gospeL  Simon  son  of  Jonas  was  trans- 
formed into  Peter,  Saul  of  Tarsus  became  Paul,  and  Joses 
the  Cypriot  got  from  the  apostles  the  beautiful  Christian 
name  of  Barnabas  (son  of  consolation  or  prophecy), — ^by  his 
philanthropy,  and  magnanimity,  and  spiritual  wisdom,  well  de- 
served. 

Matthew  seems  to  have  been  employed  as  a  collector  of 
revenue  at  the  time  when  he  was  called,  in  the  town  of  Caper- 
naum, which  Jesus  had  adopted  as  His  place  of  abode.     For  it 

^  Ew&ld  (ChristuSf  pp.  864,  397)  denies  the  identity,  and  asserts  that  Levi  was 
not  one  of  the  twelve ;  yet  he  admits  the  far  less  certain  identity  of  Nathanael 
and  Bartholomew. 


22  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

was  while  Jesus  was  at  home  "  in  His  own  city,"  ^  as  Caper- 
naum came  to  be  called,  that  the  palsied  man  was  brought  to 
Him  to  be  healed ;  and  from  all  the  evangelists^  we  learn  that 
it  was  on  his  way  out  from  the  house  where  that  miracle  was 
wrought  that  He  saw  Matthew,  and  spoke  to  him  the  word, 
"  Follow  me/'  The  inference  to  be  drawn  from  these  facts  is 
plain,  and  it  is  also  important,  as  helping  to  explain  the  ap- 
parent abruptness  of  the  call,  and  the  promptitude  with  which 
it  was  responded  to.  Jesus  and  His  new  disciple  being  fellow- 
townsmen,  had  opportunities  of  seeing  each  other  before. 

The  time  of  Matthew's  call  cannot  be  precisely  determined, 
but  there  is  good  reason  for  placing  it  before  the  Sermon  on 
the  Mount,  of  which  Matthew's  Gospel  contains  the  most  com- 
plete report.  The  fact  just  stated  is  of  itseK  strong  evidence 
in  favour  of  this  chronological  arrangement,  for  so  full  an 
account  of  the  sermon  was  not  likely  to  emanate  from  one 
who  did  not  hear  it.  An  examination  of  the  third  Grospel  con- 
verts probability  into  certainty.  Luke  prefixes  to  his  abbre- 
viated account  of  the  sermon  a  notice  of  the  constitution  of 
the  apostolic  society,  and  represents  Jesus  as  proceeding  "  with 
them"* — the  twelve,  whose  names  he  has  just  given — ^to  the 
scene  where  the  sermon  was  delivered.  Of  course  the  act  of 
constitution  must  have  been  preceded  by  the  separate  acts  of 
calling,  and  by  Matthew's  call  in  particular,  which  accord- 
ingly is  related  by  the  third  evangelist  in  an  earlier  part  of 
his  Gospel.*  It  is  true  the  position  of  the  call  in  Luke's 
narrative  in  itself  proves  nothing,  as  Matthew  relates  Ids  own 
call  after  the  sermon;  and  as,  moreover,  neither  one  nor 
other  systematically  adheres  to  the  chronological  principle  of 
arrangement  in  the  construction  of  his  story.  We  base  our 
conclusion  on  the  assumption,  that  when  any  of  the  evan- 
gelists professes  to  give  the  order  of  eequence,  his  statement 
may  be  relied  on ;  and  on  the  observations,  that  Luke  does 
manifestly  commit  himself  to  a  chronological  datum  in  making 
the  ordination  of  the  twelve  antecedent  to  the  preaching  of 
the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  and  that  Matthew's  arrangement 

^  Matt  ix.  1. 

«  Matt  ix.  9 ;  Mark  il  18  ;  Luke  v.  27. 

•  Luke  Ti.  lS-17.  *  Luke  y.  27. 


MATTHEW  THE  PUBLICAN.  23 

in  the  early  part  of  his  Gospel  is  as  manifestly  unchrono- 
logical,  his  matter  being  massed  on  a  topical  principle, — ch. 
v.-vii  showing  Jesus  as  a  great  teacher ;  ch.  viiL  and  ix.  as  a 
worker  of  miracles ;  and  ch.  x.  as  a  master,  choosing,  instruct- 
ing, and  sending  forth  on  an  evangelistic  mission  the  twelve 
disciples. 

Passing  from  these  subordinate  points  to  the  call  itself,  we 
observe  that  the  narratives  of  the  event  are  very  brief  and 
fragmentary.  There  is  no  intimation  of  any  previous  acquaint- 
ance, such  as  might  prepare  Matthew  to  comply  with  the 
invitation  addressed  to  him  by  Jesus.  It  is  not  to  be  inferred, 
however,  that  no  such  acquaintance  existed,  as  we  can  see 
from  the  case  of  the  four  fishermen,  whose  call  is  narrated 
with  equal  abruptness  in  the  synoptical  Gospels,  while  we 
know  from  John's  Gospel  that  three  of  them  at  least  were  pre- 
viously acquainted  with  Jesus.  The  truth  is,  that,  in  regard 
to  both  calls,  the  evangelists  concerned  themselves  only  about 
the  crisis,  passing  over  in  silence  all  preparatory  stages,  and 
not  deeming  it  necessary  to  inform  intelligent  readers  that,  of 
course,  neither  the  publican  nor  any  other  disciple  blindly 
followed  one  of  whom  he  knew  nothing,  merely  because  asked 
or  conmianded  to  follow.  The  fact  already  ascertained,  that 
Matthew,  while  a  publican,  resided  in  Capernaum,  makes  it 
absolutely  certain  that  he  knew  of  Jesus  before  he  was  called. 
No  man  could  live  in  that  town  in  those  days  without  hearing 
of  "mighty  works"  done  in  and  around  it.  Heaven  had  been 
opened  right  above  Capernaum,  in  view  of  all,  and  the  angels 
had  been  thronging  down  upon  the  Son  of  man.  Lepers  were 
cleansed  and  demoniacs  dispossessed ;  blind  men  received  their 
sight,  and  palsied  men  the  use  of  their  limbs ;  one  woman  was 
cured  of  a  chronic  malady,  and  another,  daughter  of  a  distin- 
guished citizen — Jaims,  ruler  of  the  synagogue — was  brought 
back  to  life  from  the  dead.  These  things  were  done  publicly, 
made  a  great  noise,  and  were  much  remarked  on.  The  evan- 
gelists relate  how  the  people  "  were  all  amazed,  insomuch  that 
they  questioned  among  themselves,  saying.  What  thing  is 
this  ?  what  new  doctrine  is  this  ?  for  with  authority  com- 
mandeth  he  even  the  imclean  spirits,  and  they  do  obey  him  f^ 

1  Mark  i  27. 


24  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

how  they  glorified  God,  saying,  "We  never  saw  it  on  this 
fashion,"^  or, "  We  have  seen  strange  things  to-day."*  Matthew 
himself  concludes  his  account  of  the  raising  of  Jairus'  daughter 
with  the  remark :  ''  The  fame  hereof  went  abroad  into  all  that 
land."^ 

We  do  not  aflBrm  that  all  these  miracles  were  wrought  be- 
fore the  time  of  the  publican's  call,  but  some  of  them  certainly 
were.  Comparing  one  Gospel  with  another,  to  determine  the 
historical  sequence,^  we  conclude  that  the  greatest  of  all  these 
mighty  works,  the  last  mentioned,  though  narrated  by  Matthew 
after  his  call,  really  occurred  before  it.  Think,  then,  what  a 
powerful  effect  that  marvellous  deed  would  have  in  preparing 
the  tax-gatherer  for  recognising,  in  the  solemnly  uttered  word, 
"  Follow  me,"  the  command  of  One  who  was  Lord  both  of  the 
dead  and  of  the  living,  and  for  yielding  to  His  bidding,  prompt, 
unhesitating  obedience ! 

In  crediting  Matthew  with  some  previous  knowledge  of 
Christ,  we  make  his  conversion  to  discipleship  appear  rea- 
sonable without  diminishing  its  moral  value.  It  was  not  a 
matter  of  course  that  he  should  become  a  follower  of  Jesus 
merely  because  he  had  heard  of,  or  even  seen.  His  wonderful 
works.  Miracles  of  themselves  could  make  no  man  a  be- 
liever, otherwise  all  the  people  of  Capernaum  should  have 
believed.  How  different  was  the  actual  fact,  we  learn  from 
the  complaints  afterwards  made  by  Jesus  concerning  those 
towns  along  the  shores  of  the  Lake  of  G^nnesareth,  wherein 
most  of  His  mighty  works  were  done,  and  of  Capemcmm  in 
particular.  Of  this  city  He  said  bitterly :  "  Thou  Capernaum, 
which  art  exalted  unto  heaven,  shalt  be  brought  down  to  hell ; 
for  if  the  mighty  works  which  have  been  done  ip.  thee  had 
been  doue  in  Sodom,  it  would  have  remained  until  this  day."* 
Christ's  complaint  against  the  inhabitants  of  these  favoured 
cities  was  that  they  did  not  repent.  They  wondered  suffi- 
ciently at  His  miracles,  and  talked  abundantly  of  them,  and 
ran  after  Him  to  see  more  works  of  the  same  kind,  and  enjoy 
anew  the  sensation  of  amazement;  but  after  a  while  they 

*  Mark  ii.  12.  «  Luke  y.  26.  •  Matt.  ix.  26. 

^  See  Ebrard,  Cfospel  History,  on  the  subject  of  sequence. 
»  Matt  ad.  23. 


MATTHEW  THE  PUBLICAN.  25 

relapsed  into  their  old  stupidity  and  listlessness,  and  remained 
morally  as  they  had  been  before  He  came  among  them. 

It  was  not  so  with  the  collector  of  customs.  He  not  merely 
wondered  and  talked,  but  he  "  repented."  Whether  he  had 
more  to  repent  of  than  his  neighbours  we  cannot  telL  It  is 
true  that  he  belonged  to  a  class  of  men  who,  seen  through  the 
coloured  medium  of  popular  prejudice,  were  all  bad  alike,  and 
many  of  whom  were  really  guilty  of  fraud  and  extortion; 
but  he  may  have  been  an  exception.  His  farewell  feast  shows 
that  he  possessed  means,  but  we  must  not  take  for  granted 
that  they  were  dishonestly  earned.  This  only  we  may  safely 
say,  that  if  the  publican  disciple  had  been  covetous,  the  spirit 
of  greed  was  now  exorcised ;  if  he  had  ever  been  guilty  of 
oppressing  the  poor,  he  was  now  sick  of  such  work.  He  had 
grown  weary  of  collecting  revenue  firom  a  reluctant  population, 
and  was  glad  to  follow  One  who  had  come  to  take  burdens  off 
instead  of  laying  them  on,  to  remit  debts  instead  of  exacting 
them  with  rigour.  And  so  it  came  to  pass  that  the  voice  of 
Jesus  acted  on  his  heart  like  a  speU :  "  He  left  all,  rose  up, 
and  followed  Him." 

This  great  decision,  according  to  the  account  of  aU  the  evan- 
geliste,  was  followed  shortly  after  by  a  feast  in  Matthew's 
house  at  which  Jesus  was  present^  From  Luke  we  learn  that 
this  entertainment  had  all  the  character  of  a  great  occasion, 
and  that  it  was  given  in  honour  of  Jesus.  The  honour,  how- 
ever, was  such  as  few  would  value,  for  the  other  guests  were 
peculiar.  "  There  was  a  great  company  of  publicans,  and  of 
others  that  sat  down  with  them;"^  and  among  the  "others" 
were  some  who  either  were  or  were  esteemed  in  a  superlative 
degree  •  sinners."* 

This  feast  was,  as  we  judge,  not  less  rich  in  moral  signifi- 
cance than  in  the  viands  set  on  the  board.  For  the  hos(^  him- 
self it  was,  without  doubt,  a  jubilee  feast  commemorative  of 
his  emancipation  from  drudgery  and  uncongenial  society  and 
ain,  or,  at  all  events,  temptation  to  sin,  and  of  his  entrance  on 
the  free,  blessed  life  of  fellowship  with  Jesus.     It  was  a  kind 

^  Matthew  says  modestly,  '*  in  the  house,"  ix.  10. 
«  Luke  V.  29. 
*  Matt.  ix.  10. 


26  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

of  poem,  saying  for  Matthew  what  Doddridge's  familiar  lines 
say  for  many  another,  perhaps  not  so  well : 

**  Oh  liappy  day,  that  fixed  my  choice 

On  Thee,  my  Saviour  and  my  God  ! 
Well  may  this  glowing  heart  rejoice. 

And  teU  its  raptures  all  abroad ! 
'Tis  done  ;  the  great  transaction's  done  : 

I  am  my  Lord's,  and  He  is  mine  ; 
He  drew  me,  and  I  followed  on, 

Glad  to  confess  the  voice  divine." 

The  feast  was  also,  as  already  said,  an  act  of  homage  to 
Jesus.  Matthew  made  his  splendid  feast  in  honour  of  his 
new  master,  as  Mary  of  Bethany  shed  her  precious  ointment. 
It  is  the  way  of  those  to  whom  much  grace  is  shown  and 
given,  to  manifest  their  grateful  love  in  deeds  bearing  the 
stamp  of  what  the  Greek  philosopher  called  magnificence,  and 
churls  call  extravagance ;  and  whoever  might  blame  such  acts 
of  devotion,  Jesus  always  accepted  them  with  pleasure.     . 

The  ex-publican*s  feast  seems  further  to  have  had  the  cha- 
racter of  a  farewell  entertainment  to  his  fellow-publicans.  He 
and  they  were  to  go  different  ways  henceforth,  and,  Christian- 
like,  he  would  part  with  his  old  comrades  in  peace. 

Once  more :  we  can  believe  that  Matthew  meant  his  feast  to 
be  the  means  of  introducing  his  friends  and  neighbours  to  the 
acquaintance  of  Jesus,  seeking  with  the  characteristic  zeal  of 
a  young  disciple  to  induce  others  to  take  the  step  which  he 
had  resolved  on  himseK,  or  at  least  hoping  that  some  sinners 
present  might  be  drawn  from  evil  ways  into  the  paths  of 
righteousness.  And  who  can  tell  but  it  was  at  this  very  fes- 
tive gathering,  or  on  some  similar  occasion,  that  the  gracious 
impressions  were  produced  whose  final  outcome  was  that  affect- 
ing display  of  gratitude  unutterable  at  that  other  feast  in 
Simoujfs  house,  to  which  neither  publicans  nor  pinners  were 
admitted  ? 

Matthew's  feast  was  thus,  looked  at  from  within,  a  very 
joyous,  innocent,  and  even  edifying  one.  But,  alas,  looked  at 
from  without,  like  stained  windows,  it  wore  a  different  aspect : 
it  was,  indeed,  nothing  short  of  scandalous.  Certain  Pharisees 
observed  the  company  assemble  or  disperse,  noted  their  cha- 
racter, and  made,  after  their  wont,  sinister  reflections.     Oppor- 


MATTHEW  THE  PUBUCAN.  27 

tunity  offering  itself,  they  asked  the  disciples  of  Jesus  the 
at  once  complimentary  and  censorious  question :  "  Why  eateth 
your  master  with  publicans  and  sinners  ?"  The  interrogants 
were  for  the  most  part  local  members  of  the  pharisaic  sect, 
for  Luke  calls  them  "  their  scribes  and  Pharisees,"^  which 
implies  that  Capernaum  was  important  enough  to  be  honoured 
with  the  presence  of  men  representing  that  religious  party. 
It  is  by  no  means  imlikely,  however,  that  among  the  un- 
friendly spectators  were  some  Pharisees  all  the  way  from 
Jerusalem,  the  seat  of  ecclesiastical  government,  already  on 
the  track  of  the  Prophet  of  Nazareth,  watching  His  doings,  as 
they  watched  those  of  the  Baptist  before  Him.  The  news  of 
Christ's  wondrous  works  soon  spread  over  aU  the  land,  and 
attracted  spectators  from  all  quarters — from  Decapolis,  Jeru- 
salem, Judaea,  and  Persea,  as  weU  as  Galilee  f  and  we  may  be 
sure  that  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  of  the  holy  city  were  not 
the  last  to  go  and  see,  for  we  must  own  they  performed  the 
duty  of  religious  espionage  with  exemplary  diligence. 

The  presence  of  ill-affected  men  belonging  to  the  pharisaic 
order  was  a  standing  feature  in  Christ's  public  ministry.  But 
it  never  disconcerted  Him.  He  went  calmly  on  His  way  doing 
His  work ;  and  when  His  conduct  was  called  in  question.  He 
was  ever  ready  with  a  conclusive  answer.  Among  the  most 
striking  of  His  answers  or  apologies  to  them  who  examined 
Him,  were  those  in  which  He  vindicated  HimseK  for  mixing 
with  publicans  and  sinners.  They  are  three  in  nimiber, 
spoken  on  as  many  occasions :  the  first  in  connection  with 
Matthew's  feast ;  the  second  in  the  house  of  Simon  the  Phari- 
see ;•  and  the  third  on  an  occasion  not  minutely  defined,  when 
certain  scribes  and  Pharisees  brought  against  Him  the  grave 
charge,  "  This  man  receiveth  sinners,  and  eateth  with  them."* 
These  apologies  for  loving  the  unloved  and  the  morally  im- 
lovely  are  full  of  truth  and  grace,  and  poetry  and  pathos,  and 
not  without  a  touch  of  quiet,  quaint  satire  directed  against 
the  sanctimonious  fault-finders.  The  first  may  be  distin- 
guished as  the  professional  argument^  and  is  to  this  effect: 
**  I  frequent  the  haunts  of  sinners  because  I  am  a  physiman, 

»  Luke  V.  80.  «  Matt.  iv.  25. 

'  Luke  yIL  86.  *  Luke  zy. 


28  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

and  they  are  sick  and  need  healing.  Where  should  a  phy- 
sician be  but  among  his  patients  ?  where  oftenest,  but  among 
those  most  grievously  aflBicted  ? "  The  second  argument  may 
be  described  as  the  political,  its  drift  being  this :  "  It  is  good 
policy  to  be  the  friend  of  sinners  who  have  much  to  be  for- 
given ;  for  when  they  are  restored  to  the  paths  of  virtue  and 
piety,  how  great  is  their  love!  See  that  penitent  woman, 
weeping  for  sorrow  and  also  for  joy,  and  bathing  her  Saviour's 
feet  with  her  tears.  Those  tears  are  refreshing  to  my  heart, 
as  a  spring  of  water  in  the  arid  desert  of  pharisaic  frigidity 
and  formalisnL"  The  third  argument  may  be  denominated 
the  argument  bom  natural  instinct,  and  runs  thus :  "  I  receive 
sinners,  and  eat  with  them,  and  seek  by  these  means  their 
moral  restoration,  for  the  same  reason  which  moves  the  shep- 
herd to  go  after  a  lost  sheep,  leaving  his  unstrayed  flock  in 
the  wilderness,  viz.  because  it  is  natural  to  seek  the  lost, 
and  to  have  more  joy  in  finding  things  lost  than  in  possessing 
things  which  never  have  been  lost.  Men  who  understand  not 
this  feeling  are  solitary  in  the  universe ;  for  angels  in  heaven, 
fathers,  housewives,  shepherds,  all  who  have  human  hearts  on 
earth,  understand  it  well,  and  act  on  it  every  day." 

In  all  these  reasonings  Jesus  argued  with  His  accusers  on 
their  own  premises,  accepting  their  estimate  of  themselves,  and 
of  the  class  with  whom  they  deemed  it  discreditable  to  asso- 
ciate, as  righteous  and  sinful  respectively.  But  He  took  care,  at 
the  same  time,  to  let  it  appear  that  His  judgment  concerning 
the  two  parties  did  not  coincide  with  that  of  His  interrogators. 
This  He  did  on  the  occasion  of  Matthew's  feast,  by  bidding 
them  go  study  the  text,  "  I  will  have  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice ;" 
meaning  by  the  quotation  to  insinuate,  that  while  very  re- 
ligious, the  Pharisees  were  also  very  inhuman,  fuU  of  pride, 
prejudice,  harshness,  and  hatred ;  and  to  proclaim  the  truth, 
that  this  character  was  in  Grod's  sight  far  more  detestable  than 
that  of  those  who  were  addicted  to  the  coarse  vices  of  the 
multitude,  not  to  speak  of  those  who  were  "  sinners"  mainly 
in  the  phto'isaic  imagination,  and  within  inverted  commas. 

Our  Lord's  last  words  to  the  persons  who  called  His  con- 
duct in  question  at  this  time  were  not  merely  apologetic,  but 
judicial     "  I  came  not,"  He  said,  "  to  call  the  righteous,  but 


MATTHEW  THE  PUBLICAN.  29 

sinners  ;"^  intimating  a  purpose  to  let  the  self-righteous  alone, 
and  to  call  to  repentance  and  to  the  joys  of  the  kingdom  those 
who  were  not  too  seK-satisfied  to  care  for  the  benefits  offered, 
and  to  whom  the  gospel  feast  would  be  a  real  entertainment. 
And  He  kept  His  word ;  and  so  the  last  became  first,  and  the 
first  last :  the  "  publicans  and  sinners  "  got  into  the  kingdom, 
and  the  "  righteous  "  were  shut  out. 

>  sff  fUT»9t$t9  seems  to  be  genuine  only  in  Luke,  and  the  words  express  only 
a  part  of  Christ's  meaning. 


CHAPTER    IV. 

THE   TWELVE. 
Matt.  x.  1-4  ;  Maek  hi.  lS-19  ;  Luke  vi.  12-16 ;  Acts  i.  13. 

THE  selection  by  Jesus  of  the  twelve  from  the  band  of 
disciples  who  had  gradually  gathered  around  His  person, 
is  an  important  landmark  in  the  Gospel  history.  It  divides 
the  ministry  of  our  Lord  into  two  portions,  nearly  equal 
probably  as  to  duration,  but  unequal  as  to  the  extent  and 
importance  of  the  work  done  in  each  respectively.  In  the 
earlier  period  Jesus  laboured  single-handed ;  His  miraculous 
deeds  were  confined  for  the  most  part  to  a  limited  area ;  and 
His  teaching  was  in  the  main  of  an  elementary  character. 
But  by  the  time  when  the  twelve  were  chosen,  the  work  of 
the  gospel  had  assumed  such  dimensions  as  to  require  organi- 
zation and  division  of  labour ;  and  the  teaching  of  Jeeus  was 
beginning  to  be  of  a  deeper  and  more  elaborate  nature,  and 
His  gracious  activities  were  taking  an  ever-widening  range. 

It  is  probable  that  the  selection  of  a  limited  number  to  be 
His  close  and  constant  companions  had  become  a  necessity  to 
Christ,  in  consequence  of  His  very  success  in  gaining  disciples. 
His  followers,  we  imagine,  had  grown  so  numerous  as  to  be 
an  incumbrance  and  an  impediment  to  His  movements,  espe- 
cially in  the  long  journeys  which  mark  the  later  period  of 
His  ministry.  It  was  impossible  that  all  who  believed  could 
continue  henceforth  to  follow  Him,  in  the  literal  sense, 
whithersoever  He  might  go :  the  greater  number  could  now 
only  be  occasional  followers.  But  it  was  His  wish  that  certain 
selected  men  should  be  with  Him  at  all  times  and  in  all 
places,  —  His  travelling  companions  in  all  His  wanderings, 
witnessing  all  His  work,  and  ministering  to  His  daily  needs. 
And  so,  in  the  quaint  words  of  Mark,  ''  Jesus  calleth  unto 


THE  TWELVE.  31 

Him  whom  He  would,  and  they  came  unto  Him.     And  He 
made  twelve,  that  they  should  be  with  Him."  * 

These  twelve,  however,  as  we  know,  were  to  be  something 
more  than  travelling  companions  or  menial  servants  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  They  were  to  be,  in  the  meantime, 
students  of  Christian  doctrine,  and  occasional  fellow-labourers 
in  the  work  of  the  kingdom,  and  eventually  Christ's  chosen 
trained  agents  for  propagating  the  faith  after  He  Himself  had 
left  the  earth.  From  the  time  of  their  being  chosen,  indeed, 
the  twelve  entered  on  a  regular  apprenticeship  for  the  great 
office  of  the  apostleship,  in  the  course  of  which  they  were  to 
learn,  in  the  privacy  of  an  intimate  daily  fellowship  with  their 
Master,  what  they  should  be,  do,  believe,  and  teach,  as  His 
witnesses  and  ambassadors  to  the  world.  Henceforth  the 
training  of  these  men  was  to  be  a  constant  and  prominent 
part  of  Christ's  personal  work.  He  was  to  make  it  His 
business  to  tell  them  in  darkness  what  they  should  afterwards 
speak  in  the  daylight,  and  to  whisper  in  their  ear  what  in 
after  years  they  should  preach  upon  the  house-tops.^ 

The  time  when  this  election  was  made,  though  not  abso- 
lutely determined,  is  fixed  relatively  to  certain  leading  events 
in  the  Gospel  history.  John  speaks  of  the  twelve  as  an  orga- 
nized company  at  the  period  of  the  feeding  of  the  five  thousand, 
and  of  the  discourse  on  the  bread  of  life  in  the  S3?Tiagogue  of 
Capernaum,  delivered  shortly  after  that  miracle.  From  this 
feet  we  learn  that  the  twelve  were  chosen  at  least  one  year 
before  the  crucifixion ;  for  the  miracle  of  the  feeding  took  place, 
according  to  the  fourth  evangelist,  shortly  before  a  passover 
season.'  From  the  words  spoken  by  Jesus  to  the  men  whom 
He  had  chosen,  in  justification  of  His  seeming  doubt  of  their 
fidelity  after  the  multitude  had  deserted  Him,  "  Have  not  I 
chosen  you  twelve,  and  one  of  you  is  a  devil  ?"  we  guess  that 
the  choice  was  then  not  quite  a  recent  event  The  twelve 
had  been  long  enough  together  to  give  the  false  disciple  oppor- 
tunity to  show  his  real  character. 

Turning  now  to  the  S3?Tioptical  evangelists,  we  find  them 
fixing  the  position  of  the  election  with  reference  to  two  other 
most  important  events.     Matthew  speaks  for  the  first  time  of 

1  Hark  iiL  18.  *  Matt.  x.  27.  ^  John  yi.  4. 


I 
* 


32  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

the  twelve  as  a  distinct  body,  in  connection  with  their  mission 
in  Galilee,  He  does  not,  however,  say  that  they  were  chosen 
immediately  before,  and  with  direct  reference  to,  that  mission. 
He  speaks  rather  as  if  the  apostolic  fraternity  had  been  pre- 
viously in  existence,  his  words  being,  "  When  He  had  called 
unto  Him  Hjs  twelve  disciples."  Luke,  on  the  other  hand,  gives 
a  formal  record  of  the  election,  as  a  preface  to  his  account  of 
the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  so  speaking  as  to  create  the  im- 
pression that  the  one  event  immediately  preceded  the  other.^ 
Finally,  Mark's  narrative  confirms  the  view  suggested  by 
these  observations  on  Matthew  and  Luke,  viz.  that  the  twelve 
were  called  just  before  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  was  delivered, 
and  some  considerable  time  before  they  were  sent  forth  on 
their  preaching  and  healing  mission.  There  we  read :  "  Jesus 
goeth  up  into  the  mountain  (to  Spo^)^  and  calleth  unto  Him 
whom  He  would," — the  ascent  referred  to  evidently  being 
that  which  Jesus  made  just  before  preaching  His  great  dis- 
course. Mark  continues :  ''  And  He  ordained  twelve,  that  they 
should  be  with  Him,  and  that  He  might  send  them  forth  to 
preach,  and  to  have  power  to  heal  sicknesses  and  to  cast  out 
devils."  Here  allusion  is  made  to  an  intention  on  Christ's 
part  to  send  forth  His  disciples  on  a  mission,  but  the  intention 
is  not  represented  as  immediately  realized.  Nor  can  it  be 
said  that  immediate  realization  is  implied,  though  not  ex- 
pressed ;  for  the  evangelist  gives  an  account  of  the  mission  as 
actually  carried  out  several  chapters  further  on  in  his  (Jospel, 
commencing  with  the  words,  "  And  He  calleth  unto  Him  the 
twelve,  and  began  to  send  them  forth."  * 

It  may  be  regarded,  then,  as  ascertained,  that  the  calling  of 
the  twelve  was  a  prelude  to  the  preaching  of  the  great  sermon 
on  the  kingdom,  in  the  founding  of  which  they  were  after- 
wards to  take  so  distinguished  a  part.  At  what  precise  period 
in  the  ministry  of  our  Lord  the  sermon  itself  is  to  be  placed," 
we  cannot  so  confidently  determine.    Our  opinion,  however,  is, 

^  Luke  yi.  13  compared  with  17,  where  note  that  Luke  represents  the  name 
"apostle"  as  originating  with  Christ:  "whom  also  He  named  apostles" 
(ver.  13). 

'  This  expression  is  used  by  all  the  Synoptics.  It  seems  to  signify  a  mountain 
district  rather  than  a  particular  hilL 

3  Mark  vi.  7. 


THE  TWELVE.  33 

that  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  was  delivered  towards  the  close 
of  Christ's  first  lengthened  ministry  in  Galilee,  during  the 
tame  which  intervened  between  the  two  visits  to  Jerusalem 
on  festive  occasious,  mentioned  in  the  second  and  fifth  chap- 
ters of  John's  GospeL* 

The  number  of  the  apostolic  company  is  significant^  and 
was  doubtless  a  matter  of  choice,  not  less  than  was  the  com- 
position of  the  selected  band.  A  larger,  number  of  eligible 
men  could  easily  have  been  found  in  a  circle  of  disciples, 
which  afterwards  supplied  not  fewer  than  seventy  auxiliaries 
for  evangelistic  work;  and  a  smaller  number  might  have 
served  all  the  present  or  prospective  purposes  of  the  apostle- 
ship.  The  number  twelve  was  recommended  by  obvious  sym- 
bolic  reasons.  It  happOy  expressed  in  figures  what  Jesus 
claimed  to  be,  and  what  He  had  come  to  do,  and  thus  fur- 
nished a  support  to  the  faith  and  a  stimulus  to  the  devotion 
of  His  followers.  It  significantly  hinted  that  Jesus  was  the 
divine  Messianic  King  of  Israel,  come  to  set  up  the  kingdom 
whose  advent  was  foretold  by  prophets  in  glowing  language, 
suggested  by  the  palmy  days  of  Israelis  history,  when  the 
theocratic  community  existed  in  its  integrity,  and  all  the 
tribes  of  the  chosen  nation  were  united  under  the  royal  house 
of  David.  That  the  number  twelve  was  designed  to  bear 
such  a  mystic  meaning,  we  know  from  Chrises  own  words  to 
the  apostles  on  a  later  occasion,  when,  describing  to  them  the 
rewards  awaiting  them  in  the  kingdom  for  past  services  and 
sacrifices,  He  said,  "Verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  ye  which 
have  foUowed  me,  in  the  regeneration,  when  the  Son  of  man 
shall  sit  in  the  throne  of  His  glory,  ye  also  shall  sit  upon 
twelve  thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  IsraeL"  * 

It  is  possible  that  the  apostles  were  only  too  well  aware 
of  the  mystic  significance  of  their  number,  and  found  in  it 
an  encouragement  for  the  fond  delusive  hope,  that  the  coming 
kingdom  should  be  not  only  a  spiritual  realization  of  the  pro- 
mises, but  a  literal  restoration  of  Israel  to  political  integrity 
and  independence.  The  risk  of  such  misapprehension  was 
one  of  the  drawbacks  connected  with  the  particular  number 

'  So  Ebiard,  Oo9p,  Hist.    Ewald  places  the  election  after  the  feast  of  John  y. 
>  liatt  zix.  28. 

C 


34  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

twelve ;  but  it  was  not  deemed  by  Jesus  a  sufficient  reason 
for  fixing  on  another.  His  method  of  procedure  in  this,  as  in 
all  things,  was  to  abide  by  that  which  in  itself  was  true  and 
right,  and  then  to  correct  misapprehensions  as  they  arose. 

From  the  number  of  the  apostolic  band,  we  pass  now  to 
the  persons  composing  it.  Seven  of  the  twelve — the  first 
seven  in  the  catalogues  of  Mark  and  Luke,  assuming  the 
identity  of  Bartholomew  and  Nathanael — are  persons  already 
known  to  us.  With  two  of  the  remaining  five — the  first  and 
the  last — ^we  shall  become  well  acquainted  as  we  proceed  in 
the  history.  Thomas  called  Didymus,  or  the  Twin,  will  come 
before  us  as  a  man  of  warm  heart  but  melancholy  tempera- 
ment, ready  to  die  with  his  Lord,  but  slow  to  believe  in  His 
resurrection.  Judas  Iscariot  is  known  to  all  the  world  as  the 
Traitor.  He  appears  for  the  first  time,  in  these  catalogues  of 
the  apostles,  with  the  infamous  title  branded  on  his  brow, 
"  Judas  Iscariot,  who  also  betrayed  Him."  The  presence  of 
a  man  capable  of  treachery  among  the  elect  disciples .  is  a 
mystery  which  we  shall  not  now  attempt  to  penetrate.  We 
merely  make  this  historical  remark  about  Judas  here,  that  he 
seems  to  have  been  the  only  one  among  the  twelve  who  was 
not  a  Galilean.  He  is  sumamed,  from  his  native  place  appa- 
rently, the  man  of  Kerioth;  and  from  the  book  of  Joshua 
We  learn  that  there  was  a  town  of  that  name  in  the  southern 
border  of  the  tribe  of  Judah.* 

The  three  names  which  remain  are  exceedingly  obscure. 
On  grounds  familiar  to  Bible  scholars,  it  has  often  been 
attempted  to  identify  James  of  Alphseus  with  James  the 
brother  or  kinsman  of  the  Lord.  The  next  on  the  lists  of 
Matthew  and  Mark  has  been  supposed  by  many  to  have  been 
a  brother  of  this  James,  and  therefore  another  brother  of 
Jesus.  This  opinion  is  based  on  the  fact,  that  in  place  of 
the  Lebbaeus  or  Thaddaeus  of  the  two  first  Gospels,  we  find  in 
Luke's  catalogues  the  name  Judas  '*  of  James."  The  ellipsis 
in  this  designation  has  been  filled  up  with  the  word  brother, 

^  Josh.  XY.  24.  See  Renan,  Vie  de  Jeaus,  p.  153.  Ewald  (Christtu,  p.  898) 
thinks  Kerioth  is  Kartah,  in  the  tribe  of  2^bultm  (Josh.  xxL  34).  If  Judas  was 
a  Judsan,  he  may  have  become  a  disciple  at  the  time  of  Christ's  visit  to  the 
Jordan,  mentioned  in  John  iii  22. 


THE  TWELVE.  35 

and  it  is  assumed  that  the  James  alluded  to  is  James  the  son 
of  Alphaeus.  However  tempting  these  results  may  be,  we 
must  decline  to  regard  them  as  ascertained,  and  content  our- 
selves with  stating  that  among  the  twelve  was  a  second  James, 
besides  the  brother  of  John  and  son  of  Zebedee,  and  also  a 
second  Judas,  who  appears  again  as  an  interlocutor  in  the 
farewell  conversation  between  Jesus  and  His  disciples  on  the 
night  before  His  crucifixion,  carefully  distinguished  by  the 
evangelist  from  the  traitor  by  the  parenthetical  remark  ''  not 
Iscariot"  ^  This  Judas,  being  the  same  with  LebbaBus  Thad- 
dasua,  has  been  called  the  three-named  disciple.^ 

The  disciple  whom  we  have  reserved  to  the  last  place,  Uke 
the  one  who  stands  at  the  head  of  all  the  lists,  was  a  Simon. 
This  second  Simon  is  as  obscure  as  the  first  is  celebrated,  for 
he  is  nowhere  mentioned  in  the  Gospel  history,  except  in  the 
catalogues ;  yet,  little  known  as  he  is,  the  epithet  attached  to 
his  name  conveys  a  piece  of  curious  and  interesting  informa- 
tion. He  is  called  the  Kananite  (not  Ganaanite),  which  is  a 
political,  not  a  geographical  designation,  as  appears  from  the 
Greek  word  substituted  in  the  place  of  this  Hebrew  one  by 
Luke,  who  calls  the  disciple  we  now  speak  of  Simon  Zelotes ; 
that  is,  in  English,  Simon  the  Zealot.  This  epithet  Zelotes 
connects  Simon  immistakeably  with  the  famous  party  which 
rose  in  rebellion  under  Judas  in  the  days  of  the  taxing,^  some 
twenty  years  before  Christ's  ministry  began,  when  Judaea  and 
Samaria  were  brought  under  the  direct  government  of  Eome, 
and  a  census  of  the  population  was  taken  with  a  view  to  sub- 
sequent taxation.  How  singular  a  phenomenon  is  this  ex- 
zealot  among  the  disciples  of  Jesus !  No  two  men  could  differ 
more  widely  in  their  spirit,  ends,  and  means,  than  Judas  of 
Galilee  and  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  The  one  was  a  political  mal- 
content; the  other  would  have  the  conquered  bow  to  the 
yoke,  and  give  to  Csesar  Csesar's  due.  The  former  aimed  at 
restoring  the  kingdom  to  Israel,  adopting  for  his  watchword, 

^  John  xiy.  22. 

'  Ewald  (CkristuSf  p.  S99)  thinks  LebbeeuB  and  Judas  different  persons,  and 
soppoeea  that  the  former  had  died  in  Christ's  lifetime,  and  that  Judas  had  been 
chosen  in  his  place. 

»  Acts  T.  87. 


36  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

"  We  have  no  Lord  or  Master  but  God ; "  the  ktter  aimed  at 
founding  a  kingdom  not  national,  but  universal,  not  "  of  this 
world,"  but  purely  spiritual  The  means  employed  by  the 
two  actors  were  as  divers^  as  their  ends.  One  had  recourse 
to  the  carnal  weapons  of  war,  the  sword  and  the  dagger ;  the 
other  relied  solely  on  the  gentle  but  omnipotent  force  of  truth. 

What  led  Simon  to  leave  Judas  for  Jesus  we  know  not ; 
but  he  made  a  happy  exchange  for  himself,  as  the  party  he 
forsook  were  destined  in  after  years  to  bring  ruin  on  them- 
selves and  on  their  country  by  their  fanatical,  reckless,  and 
unavailing  patriotism.  Though  the  insurrection  of  Judas  was 
crushed,  the  fire  of  discontent  still  smouldered  in  the  breasts 
of  his  adherents ;  and  at  length  it  burst  out  into  the  blaze  of 
a  new  rebellion,  which  brought  on  a  death-struggle  with  the 
gigantic  power  of  Eome,  and  ended  in  the  destruction  of  the 
Jewish  capital,  and  the  dispersion  of  the  Jewish  people. 

The  choice  of  this  disciple  to  be  an  apostle  suppUes  another 
illustration  of  Christ's  disregard  of  prudential  wisdom.  An 
ex-zealot  was  not  a  safe  man  to  make  an  apostle  of,  for  he 
might  be  the  means  of  rendering  Jesus  and  His  followers 
objects  of  political  suspicion.  But  the  Author  of  our  faith 
was  willing  to  take  the  risk.  He  expected  to  gain  many  dis- 
ciples fix)m  the  dangerous  classes  as  well  as  from  the  despised, 
and  He  would  have  them,  too,  represented  among  the  twelve. 

It  gives  one  a  pleasant  surprise  to  think  of  Simon  the 
zealot  and  Matthew  the  publican,  men  coming  from  so  op- 
posite quarters,  meeting  together  in  close  fellowship  in  the 
little  band  of  twelve.  In  the  persons  of  these  two  disciples 
extremes  meet — the  tax-gatherer  and  the  tax-hater :  the  un- 
patriotic Jew,  who  degraded  himself  by  becoming  a  servant  of 
the  alien  ruler ;  and  the  Jewish  patriot,  who  chafed  under  the 
foreign  yoke,  and  sighed  for  emancipation.  This  union  of 
opposites  was  not  accidental,  but  was  designed  by  Jesus  as  a 
prophecy  of  the  future.  He  wished  the  twelve  to  be  the 
church  in  miniature  or  germ ;  and  therefore  He  chose  them  so 
as  to  intimate  that,  as  among  them  distinctions  of  publican  and 
zealot  were  unknown,  so  in  the  church  of  the  future  there  should 
be  neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  circumcision  nor  uncircumcision,  bond 
nor  free,  but  only  Christ, — all  to  each,  and  in  each  of  the  alL 


THE  TWELVE.  37 

These  were  the  names  of  the  twelve  as  given  in  the  cata- 
lognes.  As  to  the  order  in  which  they  are  arranged,  on  closely 
inspecting  the  lists,  we  observe  that  they  contain  three  groups 
of  four,  in  each  of  which  the  same  names  are  always  found, 
though  the  order  of  arrangement  varies.  The  first  group 
includes  those  best  known,  the  second  the  next  best,  and  the 
third  those  least  known  of  all,  or,  in  the  case  of  the  traitor, 
known  only  too  welL  Peter,  the  most  prominent  character 
among  the  twelve,  stands  at  the  head  of  all  the  lists,  and 
Judas  Iscariot  at  the  foot,  carefully  designated,  as  already 
observed,  the  traitor.  The  apostolic  roll,  taking  the  order 
given  in  Matthew,  and  borrowing  characteristic  epithets  from 
the  Gospel  history  at  large,  is  as  follows : — 

FIRST  GROUP. 

Simon  Peter,         ....  The  man  of  rock. 

Andrew, Peter's  brother. 

James  uid  )  (Sons  of  Zebedee,  and  sons  of 

John,         ) (        thunder. 

SEC50ND  GROUP. 

Philip^ The  earnest  inquirer. 

Bartholomew,  or  Nathanael, .        .    The  guileless  Israelite. 

Thomas, The  melancholy. 

Matthew, The  publican  (so  called  by 

himself  only). 

THIRD  GROUP. 

James  (the  son)  of  Alplueus,  .  (James  the  Less  ?  Mark  xy.  40.) 

Lebbeus,  Thaddaeus,  Judas  of  James,  The  three-named  disciple. 

Simon, The  Zealot. 

Judas,  the  man  of  Eerioth,    .  The  traitor. 

Such  were  the  men  whom  Jesus  chose  to  be  with  Him 
while  He  was  on  this  earth,  and  to  carry  on  His  work  after 
He  left  it.  Such  were  the  men  whom  the  church  celebrates 
as  the  "glorious  company  of  the  apostles.**  The  praise  is 
merited ;  but  the  glory  of  the  twelve  was  not  of  this  world. 
In  a  worldly  point  of  view  they  were  a  very  insignificant 
company  indeed, — ^a  band  of  poor  illiterate  Galilean  provin- 
cials,  utterly  devoid  of  social  consequence,  not  likely  to  be 
chosen  by  one  having  supreme  regard  to  prudential  considera- 


38  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

tions.  Why  did  Jesus  choose  such  men  ?  Was  He  guided 
by  feelings  of  antagonism  to  those  possessing  social  advantages, 
or  of  partiality  for  men  of  His  own  class  ?  No ;  His  choice 
was  made  in  true  wisdom.  K  He  chose  Galileans  mainly,  it 
was  not  from  provincial  prejudice  against  those  of  the  south ; 
if,  as  some  think,  He  chose  two  or  even  four*  of  His  own 
kindred,  it  was  not  from  nepotism ;  if  He  chose  rude,  unlearned, 
humble  men,  it  was  not  because  He  was  animated  by  any 
petty  jealousy  of  knowledge,  culture,  or  good  birth.  If  any 
rabbi,  rich  man,  or  ruler  had  been  willing  to  yield  himself 
unreservedly  to  the  service  of  the  kingdom,  no  objection 
would  have  been  taken  to  him  on  account  of  his  acquirements, 
possessions,  or  titles.  The  case  of  Saul  of  Tarsus,  the  pupil  of 
Gamaliel,  proves  the  truth  of  this  statement.  Even  Gamaliel 
himself  would  not  have  been  objected  to,  could  he  have  stooped 
to  become  a  disciple  of  the  unlearned  Nazarena  But,  alas ! 
neither  he  nor  any  of  his  order  would  condescend  so  far,  and 
therefore  the  despised  One  did  not  get  an  opportunity  of 
showing  His  willingness  to  accept  as  disciples  and  choose  for 
apostles  such  as  they  were. 

The  truth  is,  that  Jesus  was  obliged  to  be  content  with 
fishermen,  and  publicans,  and  quondam  zealots,  for  apostles. 
They  were  the  best  that  could  be  had.  Those  who  deemed 
themselves  better  were  too  proud  to  become  disciples,  and 
thereby  they  excluded  themselves  from  what  all  the  world 
now  sees  to  be  the  high  honour  of  being  the  chosen  princes  of 
the  kingdom.  The  civil  and  religious  aristocracy  boasted  of 
their  unbelief^  The  citizens  of  Jerusalem  did  feel  for  a 
moment  interested  in  the  zealous  youth  who  had  purged  the 
temple  with  a  whip  of  small  cords ;  but  their  faith  was  super- 
ficial, and  their  attitude  patronizing,  and  therefore  Jesus  did 
not  commit  Himself  unto  them,  because  He  knew  what  was 
in  them.*  A  few  of  good  position  were  sincere  sympathizers, 
but  they  were  not  so  decided  in  their  attachment  as  to  be 
eligible  for  apostles.  Nicodemus  was  barely  able  to  speak 
a  timid  apologetic  word  in  Christ's  behalf,  and  Joseph  of 

^  Matthew  or  Levi,  being  a  son  of  Alpheos,  has  been  supposed  to  be  a  brother 
of  James,  and  Simon  the  Zealot  to  be  the  Simon  mentioned  in  Matt.  ziiL  56. 
*  John  vii.  48.  »  John  iL  28-25. 


THE  TWELVa  39 

Arimathea  was  a  disciple  *'  secretly/'  for  fear  of  the  Jews. 
These  were  hardly  the  persons  to  send  forth  as  missionaries  of 
the  cross — men  so  fettered  by  social  ties  and  party  connec- 
tions, and  so  enslaved  by  the  fear  of  man.  The  apostles  of 
Christianity  must  be  made  of  sterner  stuff. 

And  so  Jesus  was  obliged  to  fall  back  on  the  rustic,  but 
simple,  sincere,  and  energetic  men  of  Galilee.  And  He  was 
quite  content  with  His  choice,  and  devoutly  thanked  His 
Father  for  giving  Him  even  such  as  they.  Learning,  rank, 
wealth,  refinement,  freely  given  up  to  His  service.  He  would 
not  have  despised ;  but  He  preferred  devoted  men  who  had 
none  of  these  advantages,  to  undevoted  men  who  had  them 
alL  And  with  good  reason ;  for  it  mattered  little,  except  in 
the  eyes  of  contemporary  prejudice,  what  the  social  position 
or  even  the  previous  history  of  the  twelve  had  been,  provided 
they  were  spiritually  qualified  for  the  work  to  which  they 
were  called.  What  tells  ultimately  is,  not  what  is  with- 
out a  man,  but  what  is  within.  John  Bunyan  was  a  man  of 
low  birth,  low  occupation,  and,  up  till  his  coDiversion,  of  low 
habits ;  but  he  was  by  nature  a  man  of  genius,  and  by  grace 
a  man  of  God,  and  he  would  have  made — ^he  was,  in  fact — a 
most  effective  apostle. 

But  it  may  be  objected  that  all  the  twelve  were  by  no 
means  gifted  like  Bunyan ;  some  of  them,  if  one  may  judge 
from  the  obscurity  which  envelopes  their  names,  and  the 
silence  of  history  regarding  them,  having  been  undistinguished 
•ither  by  high  endowment  or  by  a  great  career,  and  in  fact, 
to  speak  plainly,  all  but  useless.  As  this  objection  virtually 
impugns  the  wisdom  of  Christ's  choice,  it  is  necessary  to 
examine  how  far  it  is  according  to  truth.  We  submit  the 
following  considerations  with  this  view : — 

1.  That  some  of  the  apostles  were  comparatively  obscure, 
inferior  men,  cannot  be  denied;  but  even  the  obscurest  of 
them  may  have  been  most  usefill  as  witnesses  for  Him  with 
whom  they  had  companied  from  the  beginning.  It  does  not 
take  a  great  man  to  make  a  good  witness,  and  to  be  witnesses 
of  Christian  facts  was  the  main  business  of  the  apostles. 
That  even  the  humblest  of  them  rendered  important  service 
in  that  capacity  we  need  not  doubt,  though  nothing  is  said  of 


\ 


% 


40  THB  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELYE. 

them  in  the  apostolic  annals.  It  was  not  to  be  expected  that 
a  history  so  fragmentary  and  so  brief  as  that  given  by  Luke 
should  mention  any  but  the  principal  actors,  especially  when 
we  reflect  how  few  of  the  characters  that  appear  on  the  stage 
at  any  particular  crisis  in  human  affairs  are  prominently 
noticed  even  in  histories  which  go  elaborately  into  detaiL 
The  purpose  of  history  is  served  by  recording  the  words  and 
deeds  of  the  I'epresentative  men,  and  many  are  allowed^  to 
drop  into  oblivion  who  did  nobly  in  their  day.  The  less  dis- 
tinguished members  of  the  apostolic  band  are  entitled  to  the 
benefit  of  this  reflection. 

2.  Three  eminent  men,  or  even  two  (Peter  and  John),  out 
of  twelve,  is  a  good  proportion;  there  being  few  societies  in 
which  superior  excellence  bears  such  a  high  ratio  to  respect- 
able mediocrity.  Perhaps  the  number  of  pillars  was  as  great 
as  was  desirable.  Far  from  regretting  that  all  were  not  Peters 
cuid  Johns,  it  is  rather  a  matter  to  be  thankful  for,  that  there 
were  diversities  of  gifts  among  the  first  preachers  of  the 
gospel  As  a  general  rule,  it  is  not  good  when  all  are  leaders. 
Little  men  are  needed  as  well  as  great  m^n;  fbr  human 
nature  is  one-sided,  and  little  men  have  their  peculiar  virtues 
and  gifts,  and  can  do  some  things  better  than  their  more 
celebrated  brethren. 

3.  We  must  remember  how  little  we  know  concerning  any 
of  the  apostles.  It  is  the  fashion  of  biographers  in  our  day, 
writing  for  a  morbidly  or  idly  curious  public,  to  enter  into 
the  minutest  particulars  of  outward  event  or  personal  pecu- 
liarity regarding  their  heroes.  Of  this  fond  idolatrous  minute- 
ness there  is  no  trace  in  the  evangelic  histories.  The  writers 
of  the  Gospels  were  not  afficted  with  the  biographic  mania. 
Moreover,  the  apostles  were  not  their  theme.  Christ  was 
their  hero ;  and  their  sole  desire  was  to  tell  what  they  knew 
of  Him.  They  gazed  stedfastly  at  the  Sun  of  righteousness, 
and  in  His  effulgence  they  lost  sight  of  the  attendant  stars. 
Whether  they  were  stars  of  the  first  magnitude,  or  of  the 
second,  or  of  the  third,  made  little  difference. 


».♦ 


CHAPTER  V. 


HEARING  AND   SEBINO. 


9 

LmuE  I.  1-4 ;  Matt.  xin.  16,  17 ;  Luke  x.  28,  24 ;  Matt,  t.-tii.  ;  Litkb 
VI.  17-49 ;  Matt.  ziii.  1-52  et  paralL ;  Matt.  yiii.  16,  17;  Makk  iy. 
sa,  34. 

IN  the  training  of  the  twelve  for  the  work  of  the  apostle- 
ship,  hearing  and  seeing  the  words  and  works  of  Christ 
necessarily  occupied  an  important  place.  Eye  and  ear  witness- 
ing of  the  facts  of  an  unparalleled  life  was  an  indispensable 
preparation  for  future  witness-bearing.  The  apostles  could 
secure  credence  for  their  wondrous  tale  only  by  being  able  to 
preface  it  with  the  protestation :  "  That  which  we  have  seen 
and  heard,  declare  we  unto  you."  None  would  believe  their 
report,  save  those  who,  at  the  very  least,  were  satisfied  that  it 
emanated  from  men  who  had  been  with  Jesus.  Hence  the 
third  evangelist,  himself  not  an  apostle,  but  only  a  companion 
of  apostles,  presents  His  Gospel  with  all  confidence  to  his  friend 
Theophilus  as  a  genuine  history,  and  no  mere  collection  of 
fables,  because  its  contents  were  attested  by  men  who  "  from 
the  b^inning  were  eye-witnesses  and  ministers  of  the  word." 

In  the  early  period  of  their  discipleship,  hearing  and  seeing 
seem  to  have  been  the  main  occupation  of  the  twelve.  They 
were  then  like  children  bom  into  a  new  world, -whose  first 
and  by  no  means  least  important  course  of  lessons  consists  in 
the  use  of  their  senses  in  observing  the  wonderful  objects  by 
which  they  are  surrounded. 

The  things  which  the  twelve  saw  and  heard  were  wonder- 
ful enough.  The  great  Actor  in  the  stupendous  drama  was 
careful  to  impress  on  His  followers  the  magnitude  of  their 
privilege.  "  Blessed,"  said  He  to  them  on  one  occasion,  "  are 
the  eyes  which  see  the  things  that  ye  see :  for  I  teU  you» 


42  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

that  many  prophets  and  kings  have  desired  to  see  those 
things  which  ye  see,  and  have  not  seen  them ;  and  to  hear 
those  things  which  ye  hear,  and  have  not  heard  them."  *  Yet 
certain  generations  of  Israel  had  seen  very  remarkable  things : 
one  had  seen  the  wonders  of  the  Exodus,  and  the  sub- 
limities connected  with  the  lawgiving  at  Sinai ;  another,  the 
miracles  wrought  by  Elijah  and  Elisha ;  and  successive  gene- 
rations had  been  privileged  to  listen  to  the  not  less  wonderful 
oracles  gf  God,  spoken  by  David,  Solomon,  Isaiah,  and  the 
rest  of  the  prophets.  But  the  things  witnessed  by  the  twelve 
eclipsed  the  wonders  of  aU  bygone  ages ;  for  a  greater  than 
Moses,  or  Elijah,  or  David,  or  Solomon,  or  Isaiah,  was  here, 
and  the  promise  to  Nathanael  was  being  fulfilled.  Heaven 
had  been  opened,  and  the  angels  of  God— the  spirits  of  wisdom, 
and  power,  and  love — ^were  ascending  and  descending  on  the 
Son  of  man. 

We  mean  here  to  make  a  rapid  survey  of  the  mirahUia 
which  it  was  the  peculiar  privilege  of  the  twelve  to  see  and 
hear,  more  or  less  during  the  whole  period  of  their  disciple- 
ship,  and  specially  just  after  their  election.  These  may  be 
comprehended  under  two  heads :  the  Doctrine  of  the  Kingdom ; 
and  the  Philanthropic  Work  of  the  Kingdom. 

1.  Before  the  ministry  of  Jesus  commenced.  His  fore- 
runner had  appeared  in  the  wilderness  of  Judsea^  preaching, 
and  saying,  "Eepent  ye,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at 
hand ; "  and  some  time  after  their  election,  the  twelve  dis- 
ciples were  sent  forth  among  the  towns  and  villages  of  Galilee 
to  repeat  the  Baptist's  message.  But  Jesus  Himself  did  some- 
thing more  than  proclaim  tJie  advent  of  the  kingdom.  He 
expounded  the  nature  of  the  divine  kingdom,  described  the 
character  of  its  citizens,  and  discriminated  between  genuine 
and  spurious  members  of  the  holy  commonwealth.  This  He 
did  partly  in  what  is  familiarly  called  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount,  preached  shortly  after  the  election  of  the  apostles ; 
and  partly  in  certain  parables  uttered  about  the  same  period.^ 

»  Luke  X.  23,  24. 

'  That  the  election  of  the  twelve  preceded  the  utterance  of  the  parables  is 
plain  from  Mark  iv.  10,  "  They  that  were  about  Him  vfUh  the  twdot  asked  of 
Him  the  parable."  , 


HEARING  AND  SEEING.  43 

In  the  great  discourse  delivered  on  the  mountain-top,  the 
qualifications  for  citizenship  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  were 
set  forth,  first  positively,  and  then  comparatively.  The  posi- 
tive truth  was  summed  up  in  seven  golden  sentences  called 
the  Beatitudes,  in  which  the  felicity  of  the  kingdom  was 
represented  as  altogether  independent  of  the  outward  con- 
ditions with  which  worldly  happiness  iB  associated.  The 
blessed,  according  to  the  preacher,  were  the  poor,  the  mourn- 
ful, the  hungerers  after  righteousness,  the  meek,  the  merciful, 
the  pure  in  heart,  the  peaceable,  the  sufferers  for  righteousness* 
sake.  Such  were  blessed  themselves,  and  a  source  of  bless- 
ii^  to  the  human  race :  the  salt  of  the  earth,  the  light  of  the 
world  raised  above  others  in  spirit  and  character,  to  draw 
them  upwards,  and  lead  them  to  glorify  God. 

Next,  with  more  detail,  Jesus  exhibited  the  righteousness 
of  the  kingdom,  and  of  its  true  citizens,  in  contrast  to  that 
which  prevailed.  **  Except  your  righteousness,"  He  went  on  to 
say  with  solemn  emphasis,  **  shall  exceed  the  righteousness  of 
the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  ye  shall  in  no  case  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  heaven ;"  and  then  He  illustrated  and  enforced 
the  general  proposition  by  a  detailed  description  of  the 
^  counterfeit  in  its  moral  and  religious  aspects  :  in  its  mode  of 
interpreting  the  moral  law,  and  its  manner  of  performing  the 
duties  of  piety,  such  as  prayer,  alms,  and  fasting.  In  the  one 
aq)ect  He  characterized  pharisaic  righteousness  as  superficial 
and  technical ;  in  the  other  as  ostentatious,  self-complacent, 
and  oensorioua  In  contrast  thereto.  He  described  the  ethics 
of  the  kingdom  as  a  pure  stream  of  life,  having  charity  for  its 
fountainhead ;  a  morality  of  the  heart,  not  merely  of  outward 
conduct ;  a  morality  also  broad  and  catholic,  overleaping  all 
arbitrary  barriers  erected  by  legal  pedantry  and  natural 
selfishness.  The  religion  of  the  kingdom  He  set  forth  as 
humble,  retiring,  devoted  in  singleness  of  heart  to  God  and 
things  supernal ;  having  faith  in  God  as  a  benignant  gracious 
Father  for  its  root,  and  contentment,  cheerfulness,  and  freedom 
from  secular  cares  for  its  fruits ;  and,  finally,  as  reserved  in 
ito  bearing  towards  the  profane,  yet  averse  to  severity  in 
judging;  yea,  to  judging  at  all,  leaving  men  to  be  judged 
by  God. 


44  THE  TRAINING  OF  THB  TWELVE. 

The  discourse,  of  which  we  have  given  a  hasty  outline, 
made  a  powerful  impression  on  the  audience.  "  The  people," 
we  read, "  were  astonished  at  BBs  doctrine ;  for  He  taught  them 
as  one  having  authority  (the  authority  of  wisdom  and  truth), 
and  not  as  the  scribes,"  who  had  merely  the  authority  of 
office.  It  is  not  probable  that  either  the  multitude  or  the 
twelve  understood  the  sermon ;  for  it  was  both  deep  and  lofty, 
ajid  their  minds  were  preoccupied  with  very  diflfejent  ideas 
of  the  coming  kingdom.  Yet  the  drift  of  all  that  had  been 
said  was  clear  and  simple.  The  kingdom  whereof  Jesus  was 
both  King  and  Lawgiver  was  not  to  be  a  kingdom  of  this 
world :  it  was  not  to  be  here  or  there  in  space,  but  within 
the  heart  of  man  ;  it  was  not  to  be  the  monopoly  of  any  class 
or  nation,  but  open  to  all  possessed  of  the  requisite  spiritual 
endowments. 

The  weighty  truths  thus  taught  first  in  the  didactic  form 
of  an  ethical  discourse,  Jesus  sought  at  other  times  to  popu- 
larize by  means  of  parahles.  In  the  course  of  BKs  ministry 
He  uttered  many  parabolic  sayings,  the  parable  being  with 
Him  a  favourite  form  of  instruction.  Of  the  thirty  parables 
preserved  in  the  Gospels,  the  larger  number  were  of  an  oc- 
casional character,  and  are  best  understood  when  viewed  in 
connection  with  the  circumstances  which  called  them  forth. 
But  there  is  a  special  group  of  eight  which  appear  to  have 
been  spoken  about  the  same  time,  and  to  have  been  designed 
to  serve  one  object,  viz.  to  exhibit  in  simple  pictures  the  out- 
standing features  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  in  its  nature  and 
progress,  and  in  its  relations  to  diverse  classes  of  men.  One 
of  these,  the  parable  of  the  sower,  shows  the  different  reception 
given  to  the  word  of  the  kingdom  by  various  classes  of  hearers, 
and  the  varied  issues  in  their  life.  Two — ^the  parables  of  the 
tares  and  of  the  net  cast  into  the  sea — describe  the  mixture  of 
good  and  evil  that  should  exist  in  the  kingdom  till  the  end, 
when  the  grand  final  separation  would  take  place.  Another 
pair  of  short  parables — those  of  the  treasure  hid  in  a  field 
and  of  the  precious  pearl — set  forth  the  incomparable  import- 
ance of  the  kingdom,  and  of  citizenship  therein.  Other  two 
— the  grain  of  mustard  seed,  and  the  leaven  hid  in  three 
measures  of  meal — explain  how  the  kingdom  advances  from 


HEABING  AND  SEEING.  45 

small  b^mnings  to  a  great  ending.  An  eighth  parable,  found 
in  Mark's  Gospel  only,  teaches  that  growth  in  the  divine 
kingdom  proceeds  by  stages,  analogous  to  the  blade,  the  ear, 
and  the  full  com  in  the  ear,  in  the  growth  of  grain.^ 

These  parables,  or  the  greater  number  of  them,  were  spoken 
in  the  hearing  of  a  miscellaneous  audience ;  and  from  a  reply 
of  Jesus  to  a  question  put  by  the  disciples,  it  might  appear 
that  they  were  intended  mainly  for  the  ignorant  populace. 
The  question  was,  "Why  speakest  Thou  unto  them  in  paraldes  ? " 
and  the  reply,  "  Because  it  is  given  unto  you  to  know  the 
mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but  to  them  it  is  not 
given  ;"  which  seems  to  imply,  that  in  the  case  of  the  twelve, 
such  elementary  views  of  truth — such  children's  sermons,  so 
to  speak — ^migbt  be  dispensed  with.  Jesus  meant  no  more, 
however,  than  that  for  them  the  parables  were  not  so  important 
as  for  common  hearers,  being  only  one  of  several  means  of 
grace  through  which  they  were  to  become  eventually  scribes 
instructed  in  the  kingdom,  acquainted  with  all  its  mysteries, 
and  able,  like  a  wise  householder,  to  bring  out  of  their 
treasures  things  new  and  old  ;^  while  for  the  multitude  the 
parables  were  indispensable,  as  affording  their  only  chance  of 
getting  a  little  glimpse  into  the  mysteries  of  the  Idngdom. 

That  the  twelve  were  not  above  parables  yet,  appears  from 
the  fact  that  they  asked  and  received  explanations  of  them  in 
private  from  their  Master :  of  all,  probably,  though  the  inter- 
pretations of  two  only,  the  parables  of  the  sower  and  the  tares, 
are  preserved  in  the  Gospels.'  They  were  still  only  children : 
the  parables  were  pretty  pictures  to  them,  but  of  what  they 
could  not  telL  Even  after  they  had  received  private  exposi- 
tions of  their  meaning,  they  were  probably  not  much  wiser 
than  before,  though  they  professed  to  be  satisfied.*  Their 
profession  was  doubtless  sincere :  they  spake  as  they  felt ; 
but  they  spake  as  children,  they  understood  as  children,  they 
thought  as  children,  and  they  had  much  to  learn  yet  of  these 
divine  mysteries. 

When  the  children  had  grown  to  spiritual  manhood,  and 
fidly  understood  these  mysteries,  they  highly  valued  the  hap- 
piness they  had  enjoyed  in  former  years,  in  being  privileged 

1  Mark  iv.  26.         '  Matt  ziii  52.         *  Mark  iy.  84.         «  Matt  ziii  61. 


46  THE  TBAINIKG  OF  THB  TWELVK 

to  hear  the  parables  of  Jesus.  We  have  an  interesting  me- 
morial of  the  deep  impression  produced  on  their  minds  by 
these  simple  pictures  of  the  kingdom^  in  the  reflection  with 
which  the  first  evangelist  closes  his  account  of  Christ's  para- 
bolic teaching.  ''  All  these  things/'  he  remarks,  "  spake  Jesus 
imto  the  multitude  in  parables,  .  .  .  that  it  might  be  fulfilled 
which  was  spoken  by  the  prophet,  saying,  I  will  open  my 
mouth  in  parables,  I  will  utter  things  which  have  been  kept 
secret  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,"  ^  The  quotation 
(from  the  seventy-eighth  Psalm)  significantly  diverges  both 
from  the  Hebrew  original  and  from  the  Septuagint  version.* 
Matthew  has  consciously  adapted  the  words,  so  as  to  express 
the  absolute  originality  of  the  teaching  in  which  he  found 
their  fulfilment.  While  the  Psalmist  uttered  dark  sayings 
from  the  ancient  times  of  Israel's  history,  Jesus  in  the  parables 
had  spoken  things  that  had  been  hidden  from  the  creation. 
Nor  was  this  an  exaggeration  on  the  part  of  the  evangelist. 
Even  the  use  of  the  parable  as  a  vehicle  of  instruction  was* 
all  but  new,  and  the  truths  expressed  in  the  parables  were 
altogether  new.  They  were  indeed  the  eternal  verities  of  the 
divine  kingdom,  but  tiU  the  days  of  Jesus  they  had  remained 
unannounced.  Earthly  things  had  always  been  fit  to  emblem 
forth  heavenly  things ;  but,  till  the  great  Teacher  appeared, 
no  one  had  ever  thought  of  linking  them  together,  so  that  the 
one  should  become  a  mirror  of  the  other,  revealing  the  deep 
things  of  God  to  the  common  eye :  even  as  no  one  before 
Isaac  Newton  had  thought  of  connecting  the  fall  of  an  apple 
with  the  revolutign  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  though  apples  had 
fallen  to  the  ground  from  the  creation  of  the  world. 

2.  The  things  which  the  disciples  had  the  happiness  to  see 
were,  if  possible,  stiU  more  marvellous  than  those  which  they 
heard  in  Christ's  company.  They  were  eye-witnesses  of  the 
events  which  Jesus  bade  the  messengers  of  John  report  to 
their  master  in  prison  as  unquestionable  evidence  that  He  was 
the  Christ  who  should  come."    In  their  presence,  as  spectators, 

'  Matt.  xiiL  84,  85. 

•  lptul§fMu   »iMfUfAft.%v»  it^i  Mmrafi§Xnt  »i^/MV  (Matt.) ;  DTp^JtD  rfTn  HITBK 

(Hebrew)  ;  ^fiyltfiai  o'^a^Xn^r*  Ji^*  »fx^t  (Sept.). 
'  Matt  xL  2. 


HEABINO  AND  SEEING.  47 

blind  men  received  their  sights  lame  .men  walked,  lepers  were 
cleansed,  the  deaf  recovered  hearing,  dead  persons  were  raised 
to  life  again.  The  performance  of  such  wonderful  works  was 
for  a  time  Christ's  daily  occupation.  He  went  about  in  Galilee 
and  other  districts,  "  doing  good,  and  healing  all  that  were 
oppressed  of  the  devil"  ^  The  "  miracles,"  recorded  in  detail 
in  the  Gospels,  give  no  idea  whatever  of  the  extent  to  which 
these  wondrous  operations  were  carried  on.  The  leper  cleansed 
on  the  descent  &om  the  mountain,  when  the  great  sermon  was 
preached,  the  palsied  servant  of  the  Roman  centurion  re- 
stored to  health  and  strength,  Peter's  mother-in-law  cured  of 
a  fever,  the  demoniac  dispossessed  in  the  synagogue  of  Caper- 
naum, the  widow's  son  brought  back  to  life  while  he  was 
being  carried  out  to  burial, — these,  and  the  like,  are  but  a  few 
samples  selected  out  of  an  innumerable  multitude  of  deeds 
not  less  remarkable,  whether  regarded  as  mere  miracles  or  as 
acts  of  kindness.  The  truth  of  this  statement  appears  from 
paragraphs  of  frequent  recurrence  in  the  Gospels,  which  relate 
not  individual  miracles,  but  an  indefinite  nimiber  of  them 
taken  en  masse.  Of  such  paragraphs  take  as  an  example  the 
following,  cursorily  rehearsing  the  works  done  by  Jesus  at  the 
close  of  a  busy  day :  "  And  at  even,  when  the  sun  did  set, 
they  brought  imto  Him  all  that  were  diseased,  and  them  that 
were  possessed  with  devils ;  and  all  the  city  was  gathered 
together  at  the  door.  And  He  healed  many  that  were  sick 
of  divers  diseases,  and  cast  out  many  devils."^  This  was  what 
happened  on  a  single  Sabbath  evening  in  Capernaum,  shortly 
after  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  was  preached ;  and  such 
scenes  appear  to  have  been  common  at  this  time :  for  we  read 
a  little  further  on  in  the  same  Gospel,  that ''  Jesus  spake  unto 
His  disciples,  that  a  small  ship  should  wait  on  Him  because 
of  the  multitude,  lest  they  should  throng  Him ;  for  He  had 
healed  many ;  insomuch  that  they  pressed  upon  Him  for  to 
touch  Him,  as  many  as  had  plagues."'  And  yet  again  Mark 
tells  how  **  they  went  into  an  house,  and  the  multitude 
cometh  together  again,  so  that  they  could  not  so  much  as  eat 
bread."* 

The  infer^ice  suggested  by  such  passages  as  to  the  vast 

^ActszLSa.         *HftrkL  32-^4.         *  Mark  iiL  9.        «  Mark iiL  19,  20. 


'..■»' 


% 


48  '   ^*    tHE  TBAINING  01^  THB  TWTSLtE. 

extent  of  Chnsf  s  labours  among  the  suffering,  14  borne  out  by 
the  impressions  these  made  on  the  minds  boflji  of  friends  and 
fees.  The  ill-afi'ected  were  so  struck  by  what  they  saw,  that 
they  foimd  it  necessary  to  get  up  a  theory  to  accoimt  for  the 
mighty  influence  exerted  by  Jesus  in  curing  physical,  and 
,  especially  psychical  maladies.  "  This  fellow,"  they  said,  "  doth 
not  cast  out  devils  but  by  Beelzebub  the  prince  of  devils."  It 
was  a  lame  theory,  as  Jesus  showed  ;  but  it  was  at  least  conclu- 
sive evidence  that  devils  were  cast  out,  and  in  great  numbers. 

The  thoughts  of  the  well-affected  concerning  the  works  of 
Jesus  were  various,  but  all  which  have  been  recorded  involve 
a  testimony  to  His  vast  activity  and  extraordinary  zeal.  Some, 
apparently  relatives,  deemed  Him  mad,  fancying  that  enthu- 
siasm had  disturbed  His  mind,  and  compassionately  sought  to 
save  Him  from  doing  Himself  harm,  through  excessive  solici- 
tude to  do  good  to  others.^  The  sentiments  of  the  people  who 
received  benefit  were  more  devout.  "  They  marvelled,  and 
glorified  God,  which  had  given  such  power  unto  men ; "  ^  and 
they  were  naturally  not  inclined  to  criticise  an  "  enthusiasm 
of  himianity"  whereof  they  were  themselves  the  objects. 

The  contemporaneous  impressions  of  the  twelve  concerning 
their  Master's  deeds  are  not  recorded ;  but  of  their  subsequent 
reflections  as  apostles  we  have  an  interesting  sample  in  the 
observations  appended  by  the  first  evangelist  to  his  account 
of  the  transactions  of  that  Sabbath  evening  in  Capernaum 
already  alluded  to.  The  devout  Matthew,  according  to  his 
custom,  saw  in  these  wondrous  works  Old  Testament  Scripture 
fulfilled ;  and  the  passage  whose  fulfilment  he  foimd  therein 
was  that  touching  oracle  of  Isaiah,  "  Surely  He  hath  borne 
our  griefs  and  carried  our  sorrows ; "  which,  departing  from 
the  Septuagint,  he  made  apt  to  his  purpose  by  rendering,- 
"  Himself  took  our  infirmities  and  bore  our  sicknesses."*  The 
Greek  translators  interpreted  the  text  as  refei-ring  to  men's 
spiritual  maladies — their  sins  ;*  but  Matthew  deemed  it  neither 
a  misapplication  nor  a  degradation  of  the  words  to  find  in  them 
a  prophecy  of  Messiah's  deep  sympathy  with  such  as  suffered 
from  any  disease,  whether   spiritual   or   mental,  or  merely 

1  Mark  iii.  21.  «  Matt  ix.  8. 

'  Matt  viiL  17.  *  •Zrtt  rks  kf^ifrMs  fifimf  fifu. 


*r    mABnifr  AND  SEEING.  *^'  49 


1* 


physical  fi4;  kaew  not  how  be3;ter  to  -express  the  intense 
compassioh  <tf  ids  Losd  towards  all  sufferers,  than  by  lepre- 
senting  Him  in  prophetic  language  as  taking  their  sicknessc^ 
on  Himself  Nor  did  he  wrong  the  prophet's  thought  by  this 
application  of  it.  He  but  laid  the  foimdation  of  an  ^  fortiori 
inference  to  a  still  more  intense  sympathy  on  the  Saviour's 
part  with  the  spiritually  diseased.  For  surely  He  who  so 
cared  for  men's  bodies,  would  care  yet  more  for  their  souls. 
Surely  it  might  safely  be  anticipated,  that  He  who  was  so  con- 
spicuous as  a  healer  of  bodily  disease,  would  become  yet  more 
£Eunous  as  a  Saviour  from  sin. 

The  works  which  the  twelve  were  privileged  to  see  were 
verily  worth  seeing,  and  altogether  worthy  of  the  Messianic 
King  They  served  to  demonstrate  that  the  King  and  the 
kingdom  were  not  only  coming,  but  come ;  for  what  could 
more  certainly  betoken  their  presence,  than  mercy  dropping 
like  the  "  gentle  rain  from  heaven  upon  the  place  beneath  ? " 
John,  indeed,  seems  to  have  thought  otherwise,  when  he  sent 
to  inquire  at  Jesus  if  He  were  the  Christ  who  was  to  come. 
He  desiderated,  we  imagine,  a  work  of  judgment  on  the  im- 
penitent as  a  more  reliable  proof  of  Messiah's  advent  than 
these  miracles  of  mercy.  The  prophetic  infirmity  of  queru- 
louaness  and  the  prison  air  had  got  the  better  of  his  judgment 
and  his  heart,  and  he  was  in  the  truculent  humour  of  Jonah, 
who  was  displeased  with  God,  not  because  He  was  too  stern, 
but  rather  because  He  was  too  gracious,  too  ready  to  forgive. 

The  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  incapable  now  of 
being  offended  with  these  works  of  our  Lord  on  accoimt  of  their 
mercifulness.  The  offence  in  our  day  lies  in  a  different 
direction.  Men  stimible  at  the  miraculousness  of  the  things 
seen  by  the  disciples  and  recorded  by  the  evangelists.  Mercy, 
say  they,  is  God-like,  but  miracles  are  impossible ;  and  they 
think  they  do  well  to  be  sceptical.  Yet  ought  they  not 
rather  to  say:  Mercy  is  God-like,  therefore  such  works  as 
those  wrought  by  Jesus  were  matters  of  course  ?  So  they 
appeared  to  the  writers  of  the  Gospels.  What  they  wondered 
at  was  not  the  supematuralness  of  Christ's  healing  operations, 
but  the  unfathomable  depth  of  divine  compassion  which  they 
revealed.     There  is  no  trace  of  the  love  of  the  marvellous 

D 


\> 


50  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

either  in  the  Gospels  or  in  the  Epistles.  The  disciples  may 
have  .experienced  such  a  feeling  when  the  era  of  wonders  first 
burst  on  their  astonished  view ;'  but  they  had  lost  it  entirely 
by  the  time  the  New  Testament  books  began  to  be  writtea^ 
They  had  seen  too  many  miracles  while  with  Jesus,  to  be 
excited  about  them.  Their  sense  of  wonder  had  been  dead- 
ened by  being  sated.  -  But  though  they  ceased  to  marvel  at 
the  power  of  their  Lord,  they  never  ceased  to  wonder  at 
His  grace.  The  love  of  Christ  remained  for  them  throughout 
life  a  thing  passing  knowledge;  and  the.  longer  they  lived, 
the  more  cordially  did  they  acknowledge  the  truth  of  their 
Master's  words :  '*  Blessed  are  the  eyes  which  see  the  things 
that  ye  see." 

^  Isaac  Taylor,  in  The  MestorcUUm  of  Belief,  founds  on  this  fact  an  argument 
fo  the  reality  of  micgcles,  contending  that  th^  calm,  matter-of-fact  tone  in  which 
miracles  are  spoken  of  in  the  Epistle^  can  be  accounted  for  only  by  their  being 
a  great  outstanding  fact  of  that  age  (vide  pp.  128-211). 


CHAPTEE  VL 

« 

TEACH   US   TO   PRAY. 
Matt.  vi.  6-18 ;  Luke  xi.  1-18 ;  Luke  xviii.  1-5. 

IT  would  have  been  matter  for  surprise,  if,  among  the  mani- 
fold subjects  on  which  Jesus  gave  instruction  to  His 
disciples,  prayer  had  not  occupied  a  prominent  place.  Prayer 
is  a  necessity  of  spiritual  life,  and  all  who  earnestly  try  to 
pray  soon  feel  the  need  of  teaching  how  to  do  it.  And  what 
theme  more  likely  to  engage  the  thoughts  of  a  Master  who 
was  HimseK  emphatically  a  m^n  of  prayer,  spending  occa- 
sionally whole  nights  in  prayerful  communion  with  His 
heavenly  Father  ?  ^ 

We  find,  accordingly,  that  prayer  was  a  subject  on  which 
Jesus  often  spoke  in  the  hearing  of  His  disciples.  In  the 
Sermon  on  the  Moimt,  for  example,  he  devoted  a  paragraph  to 
that  topic,  in  which  He  cautioned  His  hearers  against  pharisaic 
ostentation  and  heathenish  repetition,  and  recited  a  form  of 
devotion  as  a  model  of  simplicity,  comprehensiveness,  and 
brevity.*  At  other  times  He  directed  attention  to  the  neces- 
sity, in  order  to  acceptable  and  prevailing  prayer,  of  persever- 
ance,* concord,*  strong  faith,*  and  large  expectation.^ 

The  passage  cited  from  the  eleventh  chapter  of  Luke's 
Grospel  gives  an  account  of  what  may  be  regarded  as  the  most 
complete  and  comprehensive  of  all  the  lessons  communicated 
by  Jesus  to  His  disciples  on  the  important  subject  to  which  it 
relates.  The  circumstances  in  which  this  lesson  was  given  are 
interesting.  The  lesson  on  prayer  was  itself  an  answer  to 
pra^A    A  disciple,  in  all  probability  one  of  the  twelve,^  after 

1  Mark  L  35  ;  Luke  vi.  12  ;  Matt  xiv.  23.  «  Matt.  vL  5-13. 

»  Luke  xi  1-18,  xviii  1-5.  *  Matt,  xviii.  19.  »  Matt  xxi.  22. 

•  John  xvi  28,  24. 

'  The  twelve  are  not  named  ;  but  the  lesson  must,  from  its  nature,  have  been 
given  to  a  close  circle  of  disciples. 


52  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

hearing  Jesus  pray,  made  the  request :  "  Lord,  teach  us  to 
pray,  as  John  also  taught  his  disciples."^  The  request  and  its 
occasion  taken  together  convey  to  us  incidentally  two  pieces 
of  information.  From  the  latter  we  learn  that  Jesus,  besides 
praying  much  alone,  also  prayed  in  company  with  BKs  dis- 
ciples ;  practising  family  prayer  as  the  head  of  a  household, 
as  well  as  secret  prayer  in  personal  fellowship  with  Gk)d  His 
Father.  From  the  former  we  learn  that  the  social  prayers 
of  Jesus  were  most  impressive.  Disciples  hearing  them 
were  made  painfully  conscious  of  their  own  incapacity,  and 
after  the  Amen  were  ready  instinctively  to  proflfer  the  re- 
quest, "  Lord,  teach  us  to  pray,"  as  if  ashamed  any  more  to 
attempt  the  exercise  in  their  own  feeble,  vague,  stammering 
words. 

When  this  lesson  was  given  we  know  not,  for  Luke  intro- 
duces his  narrative  of  it  in  the  most  indefinite  manner,  with- 
out noting  either  time  or  place.  The  reference  to  John,  in 
the  past  tense,  might  seem  to  indicate  a  date  subsequent  to 
his  death ;  but  the  mode  of  expression  would  be  sufficiently 
explained  by  the  supposition  that  the  disciple  who  made  the 
request  had  previously  been  a  disciple  of  the  Baptist.^  Nor 
can  any  certain  inference  be  drawn  from  the  contents  of  the 
lesson.  It  is  a  lesson  which  might  have  been  given  to  the 
twelve  at  any  time  during  their  disciplehood,  so  far  as  their 
spiritual  necessities  were  concerned.  It  is  a  lesson  for  chil- 
dren, for  spiritual  minors,  for  Christians  in  the  crude  stage  of 
the  divine  life,  afflicted  with  confusion  of  mind,  dumbness, 
dejection,  imable  to  pray  for  want  of  clear  thought,  apt  words, 
and  above  all,  of  faith,  that  knows  how  to  wait  in  hope  ;  and  it 
meets  the  wants  of  such  by  suggesting  topics,  supplying  forms 
of  language,  and  furnishing  their  weak  faith  with  the  props 
of  cogent  arguments  for  perseverance.  Now  such  was  the 
state  of  the  twelve  during  all  the  time  they  were  with  Jesus ; 
till  He  ascended  to  heaven,  and  power  descended  from 
heaven  on  them,  bringing  with  it  a  loosed  tongue  and  an 
enlarged  heart.  During  the  whole  period  of  their  disciple- 
ship  they  needed  prompting  in  prayer,  such  as  a  mother  gives 

^  The  request  in  that  case  might  be  paraphrased :  "  Lord,  teach  (Thou  also)  us 
to  pray,  as  John  taught  us  when  we  were  his  discipleB." 


TEACH  US  TO  PRA.T.  53 

her  child,  and  exhortations  to  perseverance  in  the  habit  of 
praying,  even  as  do  the  humblest  followers  of  Christ.  Far 
firom  being  exempt  from  such  infirmities,  the  twelve  may  even 
have  experienced  them  in  a  superlative  degree.  The  heights 
ooirespond  to  the  depths  in  religious  experience.  Men  who 
are  destined  to  be  apostles  must,  as  disciples,  know  more  than 
most  of  the  chaotic,  speechless  condition,  and  of  the  great, 
irksome,  but  most  salutary  business  of  waiting  on  God  for 
light,  and  truth,  and  grace,  earnestly  desired  but  long  with- 
held 

« 

It  was  well  for  the  church  that  her  first  ministers  needed 
this  lesson  on  prayer ;  for  the  time  comes  in  the  case  of  most, 
if  not  all,  who  are  spiritually  earnest,  when  its  teaching  is 
veiy  seasonabla  In  the  spring  of  the  divine  life,  the  beauti- 
M  blossom  time  of  piety,  Christians  may  be  able  to  pray 
with  fluency  and  fervour,  unembarrassed  by  want  of  words, 
thoughts,  and  feelings  of  a  sort.  But  that  happy  stage  soon 
passes,  and  is  succeeded  by  one  in  which  prayer  often  be- 
comes a  helpless  straggle,  an  inarticulate  groan,  a  silent,  dis- 
tressed, despondent  wilting  on  God,  on  the  part  of  men  who 
are  tempted  to  doubt  whether  God  be  indeed  the  hearer  of  , 
prayer,  whether  prayer  be  not  altogether  idle  and  useless.  The 
three  wants  contemplated  and  provided  for  in  this  lesson — ^the 
want  of  ideas,  of  words,  and  of  faith — are  as  common  as  they 
are  grievoua  How  long  it  takes  most  to  fill  even  the  simple 
petitions  of  the  Lord's  prayer  with  definite  meanings !  the 
second  petition,  e.g,,  "  Thy  kingdom  come,"  which  can  be  pre- 
sented with  perfect  intelligence  only  by  such  as  have  formed 
for  themselves  a  dear  conception  of  the  ideal  spiritual  re- 
public or  commonwealth.  How  difficult,  and  therefore  how 
rare,  to  find  out  acceptable  words  for  precious  thoughts  slowly 
reached !  How  many,  who  have  never  got  anything  on  which 
their  hearts  were  set  without  needing  to  ask  for  it  often,  and 
to  wait  for  it  long  (no  uncommon  experience),  have  been 
tempted  by  the  delay  to  give  up  asking  in  despair !  And  no 
wonder ;  for  delay  is  hard  to  bear  in  all  cases,  especially,  in 
connection  with  spiritual  blessings,  which  are  in  fact,  and  are 
by  Christ  here  assumed  to  be,  the  principal  object  of  a  Chris- 
tian man's  desires.     Devout  souls  would  not  be  utterly  con- 


54  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

founded  by  delay,  or  even  refusal,  in  connection  with  mere 
temporal  goods ;  for  they  know  that  such  things  as  health, 
wealth,  wife,  children,  home,  position,  are  not  unconditionally 
good,  and  that  it  may  be  well  sometimes  not  to  obtain  them, 
or  not  easily  and  too  soon.  But  it  is  most  confounding  to 
desire  with  all  one's  heart  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  yet  seem  to 
be  denied  the  priceless  boon ;  to  pray  for  light,  and  to  get 
instead  deeper  darkness  ;  for  faith,  and  to  be  tormented  with 
doubts  which  shake  cherished  convictions  to  their  foundations ; 
for  sanctity,  and  to  have  the  mud  of  corruption  stirred  up  by 
temptation  from  the  bottom  of  the  well  of  eternal  life  in  the 
heart.  Yet  all  this,  as  every  experienced  Christian  knows, 
is  part  of  the  discipline  through  which  scholars  in  Christ's 
school  have  to  pass  ere  the  desire  of  their  heart  be  fulfilled.^ 

The  lesson  on  prayer  taught  by  Christ,  in  answer  to  request, 
consists  of  two  parts,  in  one  of  which  thoughts  and  words  are 
put  into  the  mouths  of  immature  disciples,  while  the  other 
provides  aids  to  faith  in  God  as  the  answerer  of  prayer. 
There  is  first  a  form  of  prayer,  and  then  an  argument  enforc- 
ing perseverance  in  prayer. 

The  form  of  prayer  commonly  called  the  Lord's  prayer, 
which  appears  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  as  a  sample  of 
the  right  kind  of  prayer,  is  given  here  as  a  summary  of  the 
general  heads  under  which  all  special  petitions  may  be  com- 
prehended. We  may  call  this  form  the  alphabet  of  all  possible 
prayer.  It  embraces  the  elements  of  all  spiritual  desire, 
summed  up  in  a  few  choice  sentences,  for  the  benefit  of  those 
who  may  not  be  able  to  bring  their  struggling  aspirations  to 
birth  in  articulate  language.  It  contains  in  aU  six  petitions, 
of  which  three — the  first  three,  as  was  meet — prefer  to  God's 
flglory,  and  the  remaining  three  to  man's  good.  We  are  taught  to 
pray,  first  for  the  advent  of  the  divine  kingdom,  in  the  form 
of  universal  reverence  for  the  divine  name,  and  universal 
obedience  to  the  divine  will ;  and  then,  in  the  second  place, 
for  daily  bread,  pardon,  and  protection  from  evil  for  ourselves. 

'  Readers  may  be  reminded   here  of  tke  weU-known  hymn  of  Newton, 
beginning: 

"  I  asked  the  Lord  that  I  might  grow 
In  faith,  and  love,  and  every  grace. " 


TEACH  US  TO  PRAY.  55 

The  whole  is  addressed  to  God  as  Father,  and  is  supposed  to 
proceed  from  such  as  realize  their  fellowship  one  with  another 
as  members  of  a  divine  family,  and  therefore  say,  "Our 
Father."  The  prayer  does  not  end,  as  our  prayers  now  com- 
monly do,  with  the  formula,  "  for  Christ's  sake ; "  nor  could 
it,  consistently  with  the  supposition  that  it  proceeded  from 
Jesus.  No  prayer  given  by  Him  for  the  present  use  of  His 
disciples,  before  His  death,  could  have  such  an  ending,  because 
the  plea  it  contains  was  not  intelligible  to  them  previous  to 
that  event  The  twelve  did  not  yet  know  what  Christ's  sake 
(saehe)  meant,  nor  would  they  till  after  their  Lord  had  ascended, 
and  the  Spirit  had  descended,  and  revealed  to  them  the  true 
meaning  of  the  facts  of  Christ's  earthly  history.  Hence  we 
find  Jesus,  on  the  eve  of  EUs  passion,  telling  His  disciples 
that  up  to  that  time  they  had  asked  nothing  in  ELis  name, 
and  representing  the  use  of  His  name  as  a  plea  to  be 
heard,  as  one  of  the  privileges  awaiting  them  in  the  future. 
*  Hitherto,"  He  said,  "  have  ye  asked  nothing  in  my  name ; 
ask,  and  ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  full"^  And 
in  another  part  of  His  discourse :  "  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask 
in  my  name,  that  will  I  do,  that  the  Father  may  be  glorified 
in  the  Son."  * 

To  what  extent  the  disciples  afterwards  made  use  of  this 
beautifully  simple  yet  profoundly  significant  form,  we  do  not 
know ;  but  it  may  be  assumed  that  they  were  in  the  habit  of 
lepeating  it,  as  the  disciples  of  the  Baptist  might  repeat  the 
forms  taught  them  by  their  master.  There  is,  however,  no 
reason  to  think  that  the  "  Lord's  prayer,"  though  of  permanent 
value  as  a  part  of  Christ's  teaching,  was  designed  to  be  a 
stereotyped  binding  method  of  addressing  the  Father  in  heaven. 
It  was  meant  to  be  an  aid  to  inexperienced  disciples,  not  a 
role  imposed  upon  apostles.'  Even  after  they  had  attained  to 
spiritual  maturity,  the  twelve  might  use  this  form  if  they 
pleased,  and  possibly  they  did  occasionally  use  it ;  but  Jesus 
expected  that,  by  the  time  they  came  to  be  teachers  in  the 

^  Jolm  zyi  24.  ^  John  xiy.  13. 

*  Jeremy  Taylor,  in  his  Apology  /or  Authorized  and  Set  Forms  of  Liturgy, 
makes  no  distinction  l)etween  disciples  and  apostles.  When  the  distinction  is 
attended  to,  much  of  his  argument  falls  to  the  ground.     Vid,  §§  86-112. 


56  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

church,  they  should  have  outgrown  the  need  of  it  as  an  aid 
to  devotion.  Filled  with  the  Spirit,  enlarged  in  heart,  mature 
in  spiritual  understanding,  they  should  then  he  able  to  pray 
as  their  Lord  had  prayed  when  He  was  with  them ;  and 
while  the  six  petitions  of  the  model  prayer  would  still  enter 
into  all  their  supplications  at  the  throne  of  grace,  they  would 
do  so  only  as  the  alphabet  of  a  language  enters  into  the  most 
extended  and  eloquent  utterances  of  a  speaker,  who  never 
thinks  of  the  letters  of  which  the  words  he  utters  are 
composed. 

In  maintaining  the  provisional,  pro  tempore  character  of 
the  Lord's  prayer,  so  far  as  the  twelve  were  concerned,  we  lay 
no  stress  on  the  fact  already  adverted  to,  that  it  does  not 
end  with  the  phrase,  "  for  Cluist's  sake."  That  defect  could 
easily  be  supplied  afterwards  mentally  or  orally,  and  therefore 
was  no  valid  reason  for  disuse.  The  same  rema]:k  applies  to 
our  use  of  the  prayer  in  question.  To  allow  this  form  to 
fall  into  desuetude  merely  because  the  customary  concluding 
plea  is  wanting,  is  as  foolish  on  one  side  as  the  frequent 
repetition  of  it  is  on  the  other.  The  Lord's  prayer  is  neither 
a  piece  of  Deism  imworthy  of  a  Christian,  nor  a  magic  charm 
like  the  "  Paternoster"  of  Eoman  Catholic  devotion.  The  most 
advanced  believer  will  often  find  relief  and  rest  to  his  spirit  in 
falling  back  on  its  simple,  sublime  sentences,  while  mentally 
realizing  the  manifold  particulars  which  each  of  them  includes ; 
and  he  is  but  a  tyro  in  the  art  of  praying,  and  in  the  divine 
life  generally,  whose  devotions  consist  exclusively,  or  even 
mainly,  in  repeating  the  words  which  Jesus  put  into  the 
mouths  of  immature  disciples. 

The  view  now  advocated  regarding  the  purpose  of  the  Lord's 
prayer  is  in  harmony  with  the  spirit  of  Christ's  whole  teaching. 
Liturgical  forms  and  religious  methodism  in  general  were  much 
more  congenial  to  the  strict  ascetic  school  of  the  Baptist  than 
to  the  free  school  of  Jesus.  Our  Lord  evidently  attached 
little  importance  to  forms  of  prayer,  any  more  than  to  fixed 
periodic  fasts,  else  He  would  not  have  waited  till  He  was 
aaked  for  a  form,  but  would  have  made  systematic  provision 
for  the  wants  of  BKs  followers,  even  as  the  Baptist  did,  by,  so 
to  speak,  compiling  a  book  of  devotion  or  composing  a  liturgy. 


•^ 


TEACH  US  TO  PRAY.  5  7 

It  is  evident  even  from  the  present  instructions  on  the  subject 
of  praying,  that  Jesus  considered  the  form  He  supplied  of  quite 
subordinate  importance :  a  mere  temporary  remedy  for  a  minor 
evil,#the  want  of  utterance,  till  the  greater  evil,  the  want  of 
Mth,  should  be  cured ;  for  the  larger  portion  of  the  lesson  is 
devoted  to  the  purpose  of  supplying  an  antidote  to  unbelie£ 

From  the  design  of  the  Lord's  prayer  as  now  explained,  we 
may  determine  the  proper  place  and  use  of  all  fixed  forms  of 
devotion.  Liturgical  forms  are  for  private  rather  than  for 
public  use ;  for  tibose  who  are  in  the  dimib,  arid  stage  of  the 
spiritual  life,  rather  than  for  those  who  have  attained  the  power 
and  utterance  of  spiritual  maturity.  To  the  private  use  of 
such  forms  by  persons  who  desire  to  pray,  yet  cannot  do  it, 
no  reasonable  objection  can  be  taken.  Advantage  justifies  use. 
The  less  experienced  Christian  may  ask  the  more  experienced 
to  teach  him  to  pray ;  and  the  more  experienced  may  reply, 
**  After  this  manner  pray  ye."  If  we  may  read  and  repeat  the 
sacred  songs  of  Christian  poets  to  find  expression  for  emotions 
which  are  common  to  us  and  them,  but  which  we  cannot,  like 
them,  adequately  express,  why  may  we  not  read  and  repeat 
the  prayer  of  the  saints  for  a  similar  purpose  ?  The  superficial, 
who  have  not  earnestness  and  sincerity  enough  to  know  what 
it  is  to  stammer,  may  despise  such  aids  as  suited  only  for 
children ;  and  those  who  are  yet  in  the  first  flush  of  religious 
fervour  may  turn  away  from  written  forms  as  cold  and  dead, 
however  classical  Well,  let  all  do  without  such  aids  who 
can;  only  the  time  may  come,  even  for  the  fervent,  when, 
forsaken  of  emotion,  deficient  in  experience,  discouraged  by 
fiedlure,  disappointed  in  ardent  youthful  hopes,  tormented  by 
speculative  doubts  conceruing  the  utility  and  the  reasonable- 
ness of  prayer  coming  over  the  soul  like  chiU  east  winds  in 
the  winter  of  its  religious  history,  they  may  be  very  glad  to 
read  over  forms  of  devotion  which,  by  their  simplicity  and 
dignity,  serve  to  inspire  a  sense  of  reality,  and  to  produce  a 
soothing,  sedative  effect  on  their  diseased,  restless  spirits.  For 
all  in  such  a  plight,  we  plead  that  they  shall  not  be  required 
to  remain  prayerless,  because  they  cannot  for  the  time  pray 
without  book. 

When  we  pass  from  the  closet  to  the  church,  the  case  is 


58  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

altered.  There  we  should  find  pastors  capable  of  doing,  each 
one  for  his  fellow-worshippers,  what  Christ  did  for  His  dis- 
ciples, and  of  praying  with  the  freedom  and  force  to  which 
the  disciples  themselves  afterwards  attained.  It  may  be 
asserted,  indeed,  that  this,  though  the  desirable,  is  not  the 
actual  state  of  matters.  A  recent  writer,  in  advocating  the 
introduction  of  written  forms  of  prayer  into  the  Presbyterian 
Church,  says :  "  I  feel  persuaded  that  a  verbatim  report  of  all 
the  public  prayers  uttered  in  Scotland  any  one  Sunday  in  the 
year  would  settle  the  question  for  ever  in  the  mind  of  every 
person  who  was  capable  of  forming  a  rational  judgment  on 
such  a  matter."  ^  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  this  is  an  exaggerated 
view  of  existing  ministerial  incapacity ;  but  even  granting  its 
accuracy,  it  is  a  question  whether  the  remedy  proposed  would 
not  be  worse  than  the  evU,  and  the  gain  in  propriety  more 
than  counterbalanced  by  a  loss  in  the  more  important  quality 
of  fervour.  This  much  we  may  say,  even  if  not  disposed  to 
take  up  high  ground  of  principle  in  opposition  to  liturgical 
forms,  but  rather  to  concur  in  the  moderate  sentiments  of 
Richard  Baxter,  when  he  says :  "  I  cannot  be  of  their  opinion 
who  think  God  will  not  accept  him  that  prayeth  by  the 
common  Prayer-book,  and  that  such  forms  are  a  self-invented 
worship  which  God  rejecteth ;  nor  yet  can  I  be  of  their  mind 
that  say  the  like  of  extemporary  prayers."  ^  In  Baxter's  time 
religious  controversy  ran  very  high,  and  opposed  views  were 
stated  in  extreme  form.  The  Churchman  derided  the  extem- 
pore eflfusions  of  the  Puritan ;  the  Puritan  went  so  far  in  his 
opposition  to  liturgical  prayer,  as  even  to  maintain  that  the 
Lord's  prayer  itself  should  never  be  repeated.  Baxter,  not 
being  a  partisan,  but  a  lover  of  truth,  sympathized  with  neither 
party,  but  regarded  the  question  at  issue  as  one  of  policy 
rather  than  of  principle,  to  be  settled  not  by  abstract  reasoning, 
but  by  a  calm  consideration  of  what  on  the  whole  was  most 
conducive  to  edification ;  in  which  point  of  view  his  judgment 
and  his  practice  were  both  on  the  side  of  extempore  prayer. 

Looking  at  the  question,  with  Baxter,  as  one  of  policy,  we 
are  fully  persuaded  that  the  existing  practice  of  Presbyterian 

*  The  Rrform  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  by  Robert  Lee,  D.D.,  p.  76. 
'  Baxter's  Life,  firom  his  own  original  MS.,  lib.  L  part  i.  §  213. 


TEACH  US  TO  PKAY.  59 

and  other  churclies  can  be  justified  on  such  good  grounds  as 
should  make  them  contented,  to  say  the  least,  with  their  own 
way,  and  indisposed  to  imitate  those  whose  way  is  different 
in  this  matter.  The  ministers  of  religion,  like  the  apostles, 
ought  to  be  able  to  dispense  with  liturgical  forms ;  and  the 
best  way  to  secure  that  they  shall  possess  such  ability,  is  to 
throw  them  on  their  own  resources,  and  on  God,  and  so  convert 
the  ideal  into  a  requirement  applicable  to  all,  making  no  pro- 
vision for  exceptions.  The  full  benefit  of  a  system  cannot  be 
reached  unless  it  is  rigidly  enforced ;  and  while  such  enforce- 
ment may  involve  occasional  disadvantages,  the  relaxation  of 
the  rule  would  produce  far  greater  damage  to  the  church. 
Allowance  made  for  timidity,  inexperience,  or  extraordinary 
incapacity,  would  be  abused  by  the  indolent  and  the  careless ; 
and  many  would  remain  permanently  in  a  state  similar  to 
that  of  the  disciples,  who,  if  compelled  to  stir  up  the  gift  of 
God  which  is  in  them,  or  to  seek  earnestly  gifts  and  graces 
not  possessed,  might  ere  long  attain  to  apostolic  freedom  and 
power  I 

The  same  remarks  might  be  applied  to  preaching.  In  indi- 
vidual instances,  congregations  might  benefit  by  the  preacher 
being  allowed  to  use  foreign  materials  of  instruction ;  but 
under  such  a  permission,  how  many  would  content  themselves 
with  reading  sermons  out  of  books,  or  from  manuscripts  pui*- 
cbased  at  so  much  per  dozen,  who,  under  a  system  aiming  at 
turning  to  the  utmost  account  individual  talent,  and  therefore 
requiring  all  teachers  of  truth  to  give  their  hearers  the  benefit 
of  their  own  thoughts,  would  through  practice  attain  to  a  fair 
measure  of  preaching  power. 

On  the  whole,  therefore,  the  Presbjrterian  Church  has  every 
reason  to  be  satisfied  with  its  existing  system  of  public 
worship.  The  aim  and  effect  of  the  liturgical  system  is  to 
make  the  mass  of  worshippers  as  independent  as  possible  of 
the  individual  minister ;  the  aim  and  effect  of  our  system  is 
to  make  individual  ministers  as  valuable  as  possible  to  the 
worshippers,  for  their  instruction  and  edification.  The  one 
system  may  secure  a  uniform  solemnity  and  decency ;  but  the 
other  system  tends  to  secure  the  more  important  qualities  of 
fervour,  energy,  and  life ;  and  we  believe,  whatever  fastidious 


60  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

critics  may  allege,  it  does  in  the  main  secure  them.  At  lowest^ 
the  non-liturgical  method  secures  that  the  worship  of  the 
church  shall  be  a  true  reflection  of  her  life,  and  therefore, 
however  beggarly,  at  least  sincere.  Men  who  preach  their 
own  sermons,  and  pray  their  own  prayers,  are  more  likely  to 
preach  and  pray  as  they  believe  and  live,  than  those  who 
merely  read  compositions  provided  tp  their  hand. 

The  second  peirt  of  this  lesson  on  prayer  is  intended  to 
convey  the  same  moral  as  that  which  is  prefixed  to  the  parable 
of  the  unjust  judge, — **  that  men  ought  always  to  pray,  and 
not  to  faint."  The  supposed  cause  of  fainting  is  also  the 
s^me,  even  delay  on  the  part  of  God  in  answering  our 
prayers.  This  is  not,  indeed,  made  so  obvious  in  the  earlier 
lesson  as  in  the  later.  The  parable  of  the  ungenerous 
neighbour  is  not  adapted  to  convey  the  idea  of  long  delay ; 
for  the  favour  asked,  if  granted  at  all,  must  be  granted  in  a 
very  few  minutes.  But  the  lapse  of  time  between  the  pre- 
senting and  the  granting  of  our  requests  is  implied  and 
presupposed  as  a  matter  of  course.  It  is  by  delay  that  God 
seems  to  say  to  us  what  the  ungenerous  neighbour  said  to  lus 
friend,  and  that  we  are  tempted  to  think  that  we  pray  to  no 
purpose. 

Both  the  parables  spoken  by  Christ  to  inculcate  perseverance 
in  pmyer  seek  to  effect  their  purpose  by  showing  the  power 
of  importunity  in  the  most  unpromising  circumstances.  The 
characters  appealed  to  are  both  bad — one  is  ungenerous,  and 
the  other  unjust ;  and  from  neither  is  anything  to  be  gained, 
except  by  working  on  his  selfishness.  And  the  point  of  the 
parable  in  either  case  is,  that  importunity  has  a  power  of 
annoyance,  which  enables  it  to  gain  its  object. 

It  is  important  again  to  observe  what  is  supposed  to  be  the 
leading  subject  of  prayer  in  connection  with  the  argument 
now  to  be  considered.  The  thing  upon  which  Christ  assumes 
His  disciples  to  have  set  their  hearts  is  personal  sanctification.^ 
This  appears  from  the  concluding  sentence  of  the  discourse : 
**  How  much  more  shall  your  heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  them  that  ask  Him !"     Jesus  takes  for  granted  that 

^  The  sfupposed  subject  of  prayer  in  Luke  zyiiL  is  the  general  interest  of  the 
divine  kingdom  on  the  earth. 


TEACH  US  TO  PRAT.  61 

the  peisons  to  whom  He  addresses  Himself  here  seek  first  the 
kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness.  Therefore,  though  He 
inserted  a  petition  for  daily  bread  in  the  form  of  prayer,  He 
drops  that  object  out  of  view  in  the  latter  part  of  His  dis- 
course ;  both  because  it  is  by  hypothesis  not  the  chief  object 
of  desire,  and  also  because,  for  all  who  truly  give  God's 
kingdom  the  first  place  in  their  regards,  food  and  raiment  are 
thrown  into  the  bargain. 

To  such  as  do  not  desire  the  Holy  Spirit  above  all  things, 
Jesus  has  nothing  to  say.  He  does  not  encourage  them  to 
hope  that  they  shall  receive  anything  of  the  Lord ;  least  of 
all,  the  righteousness  of  the  kingdom,  personal  sanctification. 
He  regards  the  prayers  of  a  double-minded  man,  who  has  two 
chief  ends  in  view,  as  a  hollow  mockery : — ^mere  words,  which 
never  reach  Heaven's  ear. 

The  supposed  cause  of  fainting  being  delay,  and  the  sup- 
posed object  of  desire  being  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  spiritual 
situation  contemplated  in  the  argument  is  definitely  deter- 
mined. The  Teacher^s  aim  is  to  succour  and  encourage  those 
who  feel  that  the  work  of  grace  goes  slowly  on  within  them, 
and  wonder  why  it  does  so,  and  sadly  sigh  because  it  does  so. 
Such  we  conceive  to  have  been  the  state  of  the  twelve  when 
ibis  lesson  was  given  them.  They  had  been  made  painfully 
conscious  of  incapacity  to  perform  aright  their  devotional 
duties,  and  they  took  that  incapacity  to  be  an  index  of  their 
general  spiritual  condition,  and  were  much  depressed  in  con- 
sequence. 

The  argument  by  which  Jesus  sought  to  inspire  His  dis- 
conraged  disciples  with  hope  and  confidence  as  to  the  ultimate 
fulfilment  of  their  desires,  is  characterized  by  boldness,  geni- 
ality, wisdom,  and  logical  force.  Its  boldness  is  evinced  in 
the  choice  of  illustrations.  Jesus  has  such  confidence  in  the 
goodness  of  His  cause,  that  He  states  the  case  as  disadvan- 
tageously  for  Himself  as  possible,  by  selecting  for  illustration 
not  good  samples  of  men,  but  persons  rather  below  than  above 
the  ordinary  standard  of  human  virtue.  A  man  who^  on 
being  applied  to  at  any  hour  of  the  night  by  a  neighbour  for 
help  in  a  real  emergency,  such  as  that  supposed  in  the  parable, 
or  in  a  case  of  sudden  sickness,  should  put  him  off  with  such 


62  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWBLVK 

an  answer  as  this,  "  Trouble  me  not,  the  door  is  now  shnt, 
»nd  my  chUdren  are  with  me  in  bed :  I  cannot  rise  and  give 
thee,"  would  justly  incur  the  contempt  of  his  acquaintances, 
and  become  a  byword  among  them  for  aU  that  is  imgenerous 
and  heartless.  The  same  readiness  to  take  an  extreme  case 
is  observable  in  the  second  argument,  drawn  from  the  conduct 
of  fathers  towards  their  children.  "  If  a  son  shall  ask  bread 
of  any  of  you" — so  it  begins.  Jesus  does  not  care  what 
father  may  be  selected ;  He  is  willing  to  take  any  one  they 
please ;  He  wiU  take  the  very  worst  as  readily  as  the  best ; 
nay,  more  readily,  for  the  argument  turns  not  on  the  good- 
ness of  the  parent,  but  rather  on  his  want  of  goodness,  as  it 
aims  to  show  that  no  special  goodness  is  required  to  keep 
aU  parents  from  doing  what  would  l?e  an  outrage  on  natural 
aflfection,  and  revolting  to  the  feelings  of  aU.  mankind. 

The  genial,  kindly  character  of  the  argument  is  manifest, 
from  the  insight  and  sympathy  displayed  therein.  Jesus 
divines  what  hard  thoughts  men  think  of  Gk)d  under  the 
burden  of  unfulfilled  desire ;  how  they  doubt  His  goodness, 
and  deem  Him  indiflPerent,  heartless,  unjust  He  shows  His 
intimate  knowledge  of  their  secret  imaginations  by  the  cases  He 
puts  ;  for  the  unkind  friend  and  unnatural  father,  and  we  may 
add,  the  unjust  judge,  6ire  pictures  not  indeed  of  what  God  is, 
or  of  what  He  would  have  us  believe  God  to  be,  but  certainly 
of  what  even  pious  men  sometimes  think  Him  to  be.^  And 
He  can  not  only  divine,  but  sympathize.  He  does  not,  like 
Job's  friends,  find  fault  with  those  who  harbour  doubting  and 
apparently  profane  thoughts,  nor  chide  them  for  impatience, 
distrust,  and  despondency.  He  deals  with  them  as  men 
compassed  with  infirmity,  and  needing  sympathy,  counsel,  and 
help.  And  in  supplying  these.  He  comes  down  to  their  level 
of  feeling,  and  tries  to  show  that,  even  if  things  were  as  they 
seem,  there  is  no  cause  for  despair.  .He  argues  from  their 
own  thoughts  of  God,  that  they  should  still  hope  in  Him. 
"  Suppose,"  He  says  in  effect, "  God  to  be  what  you  fancy,  indif- 
ferent and  heaitless,  stiU  pray  on  :  see,  in  the  case  I  put,  what 
perseverance  can  effect.  Ask  as  the  man  who  wanted  loaves 
asked,  and  ye  also  shall  receive  from  Him  who  seems  at  present 

^  See  the  book  of  Job,  poMim^  and  Ps.  IxziiL,  IxxviL,  etc. 


TEACH  US  TO  PRAY.  63 

deaf  to  your  petitions.  Appearances,  I  grant,  may  be  very 
unfavonrable,  but  they  cannot  be  more  so  in  your  case  than 
in  that  of  the  petitioner  in  the  parable ;  and  yet  you  observe 
how  he  fared,  through  not  being  too  easily  disheartened" 

Jesus  succours  the  tempted  in  this  argument  with  such  deep 
fellow-feeling  as  among  other  men  is  attainable  only  by  those 
who  have  themselves  experienced  temptation.  Can  He,  too, 
have  been  tempted  like  as  we  are  with  doubts  concerning  the 
hearing  of  His  prayers?  Yes;  here,  as  in  so  many  other 
respects,  He  was  like  unto  His  brethren.  He  had  to  live  by 
faith  as  other  men,  and  He  knew  what  it  was  to  wait ;  and  in 
the  days  of  His  flesh,  when  He  was  passing  through  His  cur- 
riculum of  temptation  and  suffering,  He  prayed  as  one  whose 
patience  was  sorely  tried,  even  with  strong  crying  and  tears. 

Jesus  displays  His  wisdom  in  dealing  with  the  doubts  of 
His  disciples,  by  avoiding  all  elaborate  explanations  of  the 
causes  or  reasons  of  delay  in  the  answering  of  prayer,  and 
using  only  arguments  adapted  to  the  capacity  of  persons  weak 
in  faith  and  in  spiritual  understanding.  He  does  not  attempt 
to  show  why  sanctification  is  a  slow,  tedious  work,  not  a 
momentary  act :  why  the  Spirit  is  given  gradually  and  in 
limited  measure,  not  at  once  and  without  measure.  He 
simply  urges  His  hearers  to  persevere  in  seeking  the  Holy 
Spirit,  assuring  them,  in  spite  of  trying  delay,  their  desires 
will  be  fulfilled  in  the  end.  He  teaches  them  no  philosophy 
of  waiting  on  God,  but  only  tells  them  that  they  shall  not 
wait  in  vain. 

This  method  the  Teacher  followed  not  from  necessity,  but 
from  choica  For  though  no  attempt  was  made  at  explaining 
divine  delays  in  providence  and  grace,  it  was  not  because  ex- 
planation was  impossible.  There  were  many  things  which 
Christ  might  have  said  to  His  disciples  at  this  time,  if  they 
could  have  borne  them ;  some  of  which  they  afterwards  said 
themselves,  when  the  Spirit  of  Truth  had  come,  and  guided 
them  into  all  truth,  and  made  them  acquainted  with  the  secret 
of  God's  way.  He  might  have  pointed  out  to  them,  e.g,,  that 
the  delays  of  which  they  complained  were  according  to  the 
analogy  of  nature,  in  which  gradual  growth  is  the  imiversal 
law ;  that  time  was  needed  for  the  production  of  the  ripe 


64  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

firuits  of  the  Spirit,  just  in  the  same  way  as  for  the  production 
of  the  ripe  fruits  of  the  field  or  of  the  orchard ;  that  it  was 
not  to  be  wondered  at  if  the  spiritual  ifruits  were  peculiariy 
slow  in  ripening,  as  it  was  a  law  of  growth,  that  the  higher  the 
product  in  the  scale  of  being,  the  slower  the  process  by  which 
it  is  produced  ;^  that  a  momentary  sanctification,  though  not 
impossible,  would  be  as  much  a  miracle  in  the  sense  of  a 
departure  from  law,  as  was  the  immediate  transformation  of 
water  into  wine  at  the  marriage  in  Gana ;  that  if  instantaneous 
sanctification  were  the  rule  instead  of  the  rare  exception,  the 
kingdom  of  grace  would  become  too  like  the  imaginary  worlds 
of  children's  dreams,  in  which  trees,  fruits,  and  palaces  spring 
into  being  full-grown,  ripe,  and  furnished,  in  a  moment  as  by 
enchantment,  and  too  unlike  the  real  actual  world  with  which 
men  are  conversant,  in  which  delay,  growth,  and  fixed  law  are 
invariable  characteristics. 

Jesus  might  further  have  sought  to  reconcile  His  disciples 
to  delay  by  descanting  on  the  virtue  of  patience.  Much 
could  be  said  on  that  topic.  It  could  be  shown  that  a 
character  cannot  be  perfect  in  which  the  virtue  of  patience  has 
no  place,  and  that  the  gradual  method  of  sanctification  is  best 
adapted  for  its  development,  as  aflfording  abundant  scope  for 
its  exercise.  It  might  be  pointed  out  how  much  the  ultimate 
enjoyment  of  any  good  thing  is  enhanced  by  its  having  to 
be  waited  for ;  how  in  proportion  to  the  trial  is  the  triumph 
of  faith ;  how,  in  the  quaint  words  of  one  who  was  taught 
wisdom  in  this  matter  by  his  own  experience,  and  by  the  times 
in  which  he  lived,  *'  It  is  fit  we  see  and  feel  the  shaping  and 
sewing  of  every  piece  of  the  wedding  garment,  and  the  framing 
and  moulding  and  fitting  of  the  crown  of  glory  for  the  head 
of  the  citizen  of  heaven ;"  how  "  the  repeated  sense  and 
frequent  experience  of  grace  in  the  ups  and  downs  in  the  way, 
the  falls  and  risings  again  of  the  traveller,  the  revolutions  and 
changes  of  the  spiritual  condition,  the  new  moon,  the  darkened 
moon,  the  full  moon  in  the  Spirit's  ebbing  and  flowing,  raiseth 
in  the  heart  of  saints  on  their  way  to  the  country  a  sweet 
smell  of  the  fairest  rose  and  lily  of   Sharon ;"    how,  "  as 

*  This  idea  is  well  worked  out  in  a  sermon  by  H.  W.  Beecher  on  "Waiting 
for  the  Lord."    Sermotu,  voL  i. 


TEACH  US  TO  PRAT.  65 

trayellers  at  night  talk  of  their  foul  ways,  and  of  the  praises 
of  their  guide,  and  battle  being  ended,  soldiers  number  their 
wounds,  extol  the  valour,  skill,  and  courage  of  their  leader 
and  captain,"  so ''  it  is  meet  that  the  glorified  soldiers  may  take 
loads  of  experience  of  free  grace  to  heaven  with  them,  and 
there  speak  of  their  way  and  their  country,  and  the  praises  of 
Him  that  hath  redeemed  them  out  of  all  nations,  tongues,  and 
languages."^ 

Such  considerations,  however  just,  would  have  been  wasted 
on  men  in  the  spiritual  condition  of  the  disciples.  Children 
have  no  sympathy  with  growth  in  any  world,  whether  of 
nature  or  of  graca  Nothing  pleases  them  but  that  an  acorn 
should  become  an  oak  at  once,  and  that  immediately  after 
the  blossom  should  come  the  ripe  fruit  Then  it  is  idle  to 
speak  of  the  uses  of  patience  to  the  inexperienced ;  for  the 
moral  value  of  the  discipline  of  trial  cannot  be  appreciated 
till  the  trial  is  past  Therefore,  as  before  stated,  Jesus 
abstained  entirely  from  reflections  of  the  kind  suggested,  and 
adopted  a  simple,  popular  style  of  reasoning,  which  even  a 
duld  could  understand. 

The  reasoning  of  Jesus,  while  very  simple,  is  very  cogent 
and  oondusiva  The  first  argumcAt — that  contained  in  the 
parable  of  the  ungenerous  neighbour — is  fitted  to  inspire  hope 
in  God  even  in  the  darkest  hour,  when  He  appears  indiffe- 
rent to  our  cry,  or  positively  unwilling  to  help ;  and  so  to 
induce  us  to  persevere  in  asking.  "  As  the  man  who  wanted 
the  loaves  knocked  on  louder  and  louder,  with  an  impor- 
tonity  that  knew  no  shame  '  and  would  take  no  refusal,  and 
thereby  gained  his  object,  the  selfish  friend  being  glad  at  last 
to  get  up  and  serve  him  out  of  sheer  regard  to  his  own  com- 
fort, it  being  simply  impossible  to  sleep  with  such  a  noise ; 
90  (such  is  the  drift  of  the  argument),  so  continue  thou  knock- 
ing at  the  door  of  heaven,  and  thou  shalt  obtain  thy  desire  if 
it  were  only  to  be  rid  of  thee.  See  in  this  parable  what  a 
power  importunity  has,  even  at  a  most  unpromising  time — 
midnight — and  with  a  most  unpromising  person,  who  prefers 
his  own  comfort  to  a  neighbour's  good :  ask,  therefore,  persist- 

1  Somnel  Rntherford,  Trial  and  Triumph  of  FaWi^  Sermon  xriii. 
*  The  Greek  word  is  kftultm*  =  shamelessness. 

E 


66  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVK 

ently,  and  it  shall  be  given  unto  you  also ;  seek,  and  ye  shall 
find  ;  knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you." 

At  one  point,  indeed,  this  most  pathetic  and  sympathetic 
argument  seems  to  be  weak.  The  petitioner  in  the  parable 
had  the  selfish  friend  in  his  power,  by  being  able  to  annoy 
him  and  keep  him  from  sleeping.  Now  the  tried  desponding 
disciple  whom  Jesus  would  comfort  may  rejoin :  "  What 
power  have  I  to  annoy  God,  who  dwelleth  on  high,  far  be- 
yond my  reach,  in  imperturbable  felicity  ?  *  Oh  that  I  knew 
where  I  might  find  Him,  that  I  might  come  even  to  His  seat ! 
But,  behold,  I  go  forward,  but  He  is  not  there ;  and  backward, 
but  I  cannot  perceive  Him :  on  the  left  hand,  where  He  doth 
work,  but  I  cannot  behold  Him  :  He  hideth  Himself  on  the 
right  hand,  that  I  cannot  see  Him.*" 

The  objection  is  one  which  can  hardly  fail  to  occur  to  the 
subtle  spirit  of  despondency,  and  it  must  be  admitted  that  it 
is  not  frivolous.  There  is  really  a  failure  of  the  analogy  at 
this  point  We  can  annoy  a  man,  like  the  ungenerous  neigh- 
bour in  bed,  or  the  unjust  judge,  but  we  cannot  annoy  Gk)d. 
The  parable  does  not  suggest  the  true  explanation  of  divine 
delay,  or  of  the  ultimate  success  of  importunity.  It  merely 
proves,  by  a  homely  instance,  that  delay,  apparent  refusal, 
from  whatever  cause  it  may  arise,  is  not  necessarily  final,  and 
therefore  can  be  no  good  reason  for  giving  up  asking. 

This  is  a  real  if  not  a  great  service  rendered.  But  the 
doubting  disciple,  besides  discovering  with  characteristic  acute- 
ness  what  the  parable  fails  to  prove,  may  not  be  able  to  ex- 
tract any  comfort  from  what  it  does  prove.  What  is  he  to 
do  then  ?  Fall  back  on  the  strong  asseveration  with  which 
Jesus  follows  up  the  parable :  "  And  /  say  unto  yoiu"  Here, 
0  doubter,  thou  hast  an  oracular  dictum  from  One  who  can 
speak  with  authority ;  One  who  has  been  in  the  bosom  of  the 
eternal  God,  and  has  come  forth  to  reveal  His  inmost  heart  to 
men  groping  in  the  darkness  of  nature  after  Him,  if  haply  they 
might  find  Him.  When  He  addresses  us  in  such  emphatic, 
solemn  terms  as  these,  "  I  say  unto  you.  Ask,  and  it  shall  be 
given  you ;  seek,  and  ye  shall  find ;  knock,  and  it  shall  be 
opened  unto  you,*'  we  may  take  the  matter  on  His  word,  at 
least  jpTo  tempore.     Even  philosophers  who  doubt  the  reason- 


TEACH  US  TO  PRAY.  67 

ableness  of  prayer,  because  of  the  constancy  of  nature's  kws  and 
the  unchangeableness  of  divine  purposes,  might,  without  com- 
promising tJbieir  dignity,  take  Christ's  word  for  it  that  prayer 
is  not  vain,  until  they  arrive  at  greater  certainty  on  the 
subject  than  they  can  at  present  pretend  to.  They  may,  if 
they  choose,  despise  the  parable  as  childish,  or  as  conveying 
crude  anthropopathic  ideas  of  the  Divine  Being,  but  they  can- 
not despise  the  deliberate  declarations  of  One  whom  even  they 
i^ard  as  the  wisest  and  best  of  men. 

The  second  argument  employed  by  Jesus  to  urge  persever- 
ance in  prayer  is  of  the  nature  of  a  reductio  ad  ahsurdum, 
ending  with  a  conclusion  h  fortiori,  *'  K,"  it  is  reasoned, 
"  God  refused  to  hear  His  children's  prayers,  or,  worse  still,  if 
He  mocked  them  by  giving  them  something  bearing  a  super- 
ficial resemblance  to  the  things  asked,  only  to  cause  bitter 
disappointment  when  the  deception  was  discovered,  then  were 
He  not  only  as  bad  as,  but  far  worse  than,  even  the  most 
depraved  of  mankind.  For,  take  fathers  at  random^  which  of 
them,  if  a  son  were  to  ask  bread,  would  give  him  a  stone  ?  or 
if  he  asked  a  fish,  would  give  him  a  serpent  ?  or  if  he  asked 
an  egg,  would  offer  him  a  scorpion  ?  The  very  supposition  is 
monstrous.  Human  nature  is  largely  vitiated  by  moral  evil : 
there  is,  in  particular,  an  evil  spirit  of  selfishness  in  the  heart 
which  comes  into  conflict  with  the  generous  affections,  and  leads 
men  ofttimes  to  do  base  and  unnatural  things.  But  men  taken 
at  the  average  are  not  diabolic ;  and  nothing  short  of  a  diabolic 
spirit  of  mischief  could  prompt  a  father  to  mock  a  child's 
misery,  or  deliberately  to  give  him  things  fraught  with  deadly 
harm.  If,  then,  earthly  parents,  though  evil  in  many  of  their 
dispositions,  give  good,  and,  so  far  as  they  know,  only  good 
gifts  to  their  children,  and  would  shrink  with  horror  from  any 
other  mode  of  treatment,  is  it  to  be  credited  that  the  Divine 
Being,  that  Providence,  can  do  what  only  devils  would  think 
of  doing  ?  On  the  contrary,  what  is  only  barely  possible  for 
man,  is  for  God  altogether  impossible ;  and  what  aU  but 
monsters  of  iniqxdty  will  not  fail  to  do,  God  will  do  much 
mora  He  will  most  surely  give  good  gifts,  and  only  good 
gifts,  to  His  asking  children ;  most  especially  will  He  give 
His  best  gift,  which  His  true  children  desire  above  all  things. 


68  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

even  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  enlightener  and  the  sanctifier. 
Therefore  again  I  say  unto  you :  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive ; 
seek,  and  ye  shall  find ;  knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened." 

Yet  it  is  implied  in  the  very  fact  that  Christ  puts  such 
cases  as  a  stone  given  for  bread,  a  serpent  for  a  fish,  or  a 
scorpion  for  an  egg,  that  God  seems  at  least  sometimes  so  to 
treat  His  children.  The  time  came  when  the  twelve  thought 
they  had  been  so  treated  in  reference  to  the  very  subject 
in  which  they  were  most  deeply  interested,  after  their  own 
personal  sanctification,  viz.  the  restoration  of  the  kingdom  to 
IsraeL  But  their  experience  illustrates  the  general  truth,  that 
when  the  Hearer  of  prayer  seems  to  deal  unnaturally  with  His 
servants,  it  is  because  they  have  made  a  mistake  about  the 
nature  of  good,  and  have  not  known  what  they  asked.  They 
have  asked  for  a  stone,  thinking  it  bread,  and  hence  the  true 
bread  seems  a  stone ;  for  a  shadow,  thinking  it  a  substance, 
and  hence  the  substance  seems  a  shadow.  The  kingdom  for 
which  the  twelve  prayed  was  a  shadow,  hence  their  dis- 
appointment and  despair  when  Jesus  was  put  to  death :  the 
egg  of  hope,  which  their  fond  imagination  had  been  hatching, 
brought  forth  the  scorpion  of  the  cross,  and  they  fancied  that 
God  had  mocked  and  deceived  them.  But  they  lived  to  see 
that  God  was  true  and  good,  and  that  they  had  deceived 
themselves,  and  that  all  which  Christ  had  told  them  had  been 
fulfilled.  And  all  who  wait  on  God  ultimately  make  a  simi- 
lar discovery,  and  unite  in  testifying  that  "  the  Lord  is  good 
unto  them  that  wait  for  Him,  to  the  soul  that  seeketh  Him." 

For  these  reasons  should  all  men  pray,  and  not  faint 
Prayer  is  rational,  even  if  the  Divine  Being  were  like  men  in 
the  average,  not  indisposed  to  do  good,  when  self-interest  does  not 
stand  in  the  way, — the  creed  of  heathenism.     It  is  still  more 
manifestly  rational  if,  as  Christ  taught  and  Christians  believe, 
Grod  be  better  than  the  best  of  men — the  one  supremely  good 
Being — ^the  Father  in  heaven.     Only  in  either  of  two  cases 
would  prayer  really  be  irrational :  if  God  were  no  living  being 
at  all, — the  creed  of  atheists,  with  whom  Christ  holds  no  argu- 
ment ;  or  if  He  were  a  being  capable  of  doing  things  firom 
which  even  bad  men  would  start  back  in  horror,  t.e.  a  being  of 
diabolic  nature, — the  creed,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  of  no  human  being. 


CHAPTER  VIL 

LESSONS   IN  HOLT   LIVING. 

Section  l — Fasting. 

Matt.  ix.  14-17 ;  Mabk  n.  16-22 ;  Luxs  y.  88-89. 

"VTTE  have  learnt  in  the  last  chapter  how  Jesus  taught  His 

f  T  disciples  to  pray,  and  we  are  now  to  learn  in  the 
present  chapter  how  He  taught  them  to  live. 

Christ's  ratio  viveridi  was  characteristically  simple;  its 
main  features  being  a  disregard  of  minute  mechanical  rules, 
and  a  habit  of  falling  back  in  all  things  on  the  great  principles 
of  moraUty  and  piety. 

The  practical  carrying  out  of  this  rule  of  life  led  to  con- 
siderable divergence  from  prevailing  custom.  In  three  re- 
spects especially,  according  to  the  Gk)spel  records,  were  our 
Lord  and  EUs  disciples  chargeable,  and  actually  charged,  with 
the  ofifence  of  nonconformity.  They  departed  from  existing 
practice  in  the  matters  of  fasting,  ceremonial  purifications  as 
prescribed  by  the  elders,  and  Sabbath  sanctification.  The 
first  diey  neglected  for  the  most  part,  the  second  altogether  ; 
the  third  they  did  not  neglect,  but  their  mode  of  observing 
the  weekly  rest  was  in  spirit  totally,  and  in  detail  widely, 
diverse  from  that  which  was  in  vogue. 

These  divergences  from  established  custom  are  historically 
interesting,  as  the  small  beginnings  of  a  greiat  moral  and  reli- 
gious revolution.  For  in  teaching  His  disciples  these  new 
habits,  Jesus  was  inaugurating  a  process  of  spiritual  emanci- 
pation which  was  to  issue  in  the  complete  deliverance  of  the 
apostles,  and  through  them  of  the  Christian  church,  from  the 
burdensome  yoke  of  Mosaic  ordinances,  and  from  the  still 
more  galling  bondage  of  a  "vain  conversation  received  by 
tradition  from  the  fathers." 


70  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

The  divergences  in  question  have  much  biographical  in- 
terest also  in  connection  with  the  religious  experience  of  the 
twelve.  For  it  is  a  solemn  crisis  in  any  man's  life  when  he 
first  departs  in  the  most  minute  particulars  from  the  religious 
opinions  and  practices  of  his  age.  The.  first  steps  in  the  pro- 
cess of  change  are  generally  the  most  difficult,  the  most 
perilous,  and  the  most  decisive.  In  these  respects,  learning 
spiritual  freedom  is  like  learning  to  swim.  Every  expert  in 
the  aquatic  art  remembers  the  troubles  he  experienced  in 
connection  with  his  first  attempts  :  how  hard  he  found  it  to 
make  arms  and  legs  keep  stroke ;  how  he  floundered  and 
plunged ;  how  fearful  he  was,  lest  he  should  go  beyond  his 
depth  and  sink  to  the  bottom.  At  these  early  fears  he  may 
now  smile,  yet  were  they  not  altogether  groundless  ;  for  the 
tyro  does  run  some  risk  of  drowning,  though  the  bathing- 
place  be  but  a  small  pool  or  dam  built  by  schoolboys  on  a 
bum  flowing  through  an  inland  dell,  remote  from  broad  rivers 
and  the  great  sea. 

It  is  well  both  for  young  swimmers  and  for  apprentices  in 
religious  freedom,  that  they  make  their  first  essays  in  the 
company  of  an  experienced  friend,  who  can  rescue  them  should 
they  be  in  danger.  Such  a  friend  the  twelve  had  in  Christ, 
whose  presence  was  not  only  a  safeguard  against  all  inward 
spiritual  risks,  but  a  shield  from  all  assaults  which  might 
come  upon  them  from  without.  Such  assaults  were  to  be 
expected.  Nonconformity  invariably  gives  ofiFence  to  many, 
and  exposes  the  ofiFending  party  to  interrogation  at  least,  and 
often  to  something  more  serious.  Custom  is  a  god  to  the 
multitude,  and  no  one  can  withhold  homage  from  the  idol 
with  impunity.  The  twelve  accordingly  did  in  fact  incur  the 
usual  penalties  connected  with  singularity.  Their  conduct 
was  called  in  question,  and  censured,  in  every  instance  of 
departure  from  use  and  wont  Had  they  been  left  to  them- 
selves, they  would  have  made  a  poor  defence  of  the  actions 
impugned ;  for  they  did  not  understand  the  principles  on 
which  the  new  practice  was  based,  but  simply  did  as  they 
were  directed.  But  in  Jesus  they  had  a  friend  who  did 
understand  those  principles,  and  who  was  ever  ready  to  assign 
good  reasons  for  all  He  did  Himself,  and  for  all  He  taught 


LESSONS  IN  HOLY  LIVING  :   FASTING.  71 

His  followers  to  do.  The  reasons  with  which  He  defended 
the  twelve  against  the  upholders  of  prevailing  usage  were 
specially  good  and  telling;  and  they  constitute,  taken  to- 
gether, an  apology  for  nonconformity  not  less  remarkable  than 
that  which  He  made  for  graciously  receiving  publicans  and 
sinners,  consisting,  like  it,  of  three  lines  of  defence,  corre- 
sponding to  the  charges  which  had  to  be  met.  That  apology 
we  propose  to  consider  in  the  present  chapter  under  three 
divisions,  in  the  first  of  which  we  take  up  the  subject  of 
fajsting. 

From  Matthew's  account  we  learn  that  the  conduct  of 
Christ's  disciples  in  neglecting  fasting  was  animadverted  on 
by  the  disciples  of  John  the  Baptist.  "  Then,"  we  read, 
**  came  to  Him  the  disciples  of  John" — those,  that  is,  who  hap- 
pened to  be  in  the  neighbourhood — ''  saying.  Why  do  we  and 
the  Pharisees  fast  oft,  but  Thy  disciples  fast  not  ? "  ^  From 
this  question  we  learn  incidentally,  that  in  the  matter  of  fast- 
ing the  school  of  the  Baptist  and  the  sect  of  the  Pharisees 
were  agreed  in  their  general  practice.  It  was  a  case  of  ex- 
tremes meeting ;  for  no  two  religious  parties  could  be  more 
remote  in  some  respects  than  the  two  just  named.  But  the 
difference  lay  rather  in  the  motives  than  in  the  external  acts 
of  their  religious  life.  Both  did  the  same  things — fasted, 
practised  ceremonial  ablutions,  made  many  prayers— only  they 
did  them  with  a  different  mind.  John  and  his  disciples  per- 
formed dieir  religious  duties  in  simplicity,  godly  sincerity, 
and  moral  earnestness ;  the  Pharisees,  as  a  class,  did  all 
their  works  ostentatiously,  hypocritically,  and  as  matters  of 
mechanical  routine. 

From  the  same  question  we  further  learn  that  the  disciples 
ol  John,  as  well  as  the  Pharisees,  were  very  zealous  in  the 
practice  of  fasting.  They  feisted  oft,  mvxk  (irvKvh,  Luke; 
«-oXAA,  Matthew).  This  statement  we  otherwise  know  to  be 
strictly  true  of  such  Pharisees  as  made  great  pretensions  to 
piety.  Besides  the  annual  fast  on  the  great  day  of  atone- 
ment appointed  by  the  law  of  Moses,  and  the  four  fasts  which 
had  become  customary  in  the  time  of  the  prophet  Zechariah, 

^  Matt  ix.  14.     From  Mark  and  Luke  it  might  be  inferred  that  some  Phari- 
were  joint-interrogators ;  but  it  ia  not  asserted,  neither  is  it  likely. 


72  THE  TBAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

in  the  fourth,  fifth,  seventh,  and  tenth  months  of  the  Jewish 
year,  the  stricter  sort  of  Jews  fasted  twice  every  week,  viz. 
on  Mondays  and  Thursdays.^  This  bi-weekly  fast  is  alluded 
'  to  in  the  parable  of  the  Pharisee  and  the  publican.'  It  is  not 
to  be  assumed,  of  course,  that  the  practice  of  the  Baptist's 
disciples  coincided  in  this  respect  with  that  of  the  strictest 
sect  of  the  pharisaic  party.  Their  system  of  fasting  may  have 
been  organized  on  an  independent  plan,  involving  different 
arrangements  as  to  times  and  occasions. .  The  one  fact  known, 
which  rests  on  the  certain  basis  of  their  own  testimony,  is 
that,  like  the  Pharisees,  John's  disciples  fasted  often,  if  not 
on  precisely  the  same  days  and  for  the  same  reasons. 

It  does  not  clearly  appear  what  feelings  prompted  the 
question  put  by  John's  disciples  to  Jesus.  It  is  not  impos- 
sible that  party  spirit  was  at  work,  for  rivalry  and  jealousy 
were  not  imknown  even  in  the  environment  of  the  fore- 
runner.* In  that  case,  the  reference  to  pharisaic  practice 
might  be  explained  by  a  desire  to  overwhelm  the  disciples  of 
Jesus  by  numbers,  and  put  them,  as  it  were,  in  a  hopeless 
nunority  on  the  question.  It  is  more  likely,  however,  that 
the  uppermost  feeling  in  the  mind  of  the  interrogators  was 
one  of  surprise,  that  in  respect  of  fasting  they  should  approach 
nearer  to  a  sect  whose  adherents  were  stigmatized  by  their 
own  master  as  a  "  generation  of  vipers,"  than  to  the  foUoTOrs 
of  One  for  whom  that  master  cherished  and  expressed  the 
deepest  veneration.  In  that  case,  the  object  of  the  question 
was  to  obtain  information  and  instruction.  It  accords  with 
this  view  that  the  query  was  addressed  to  Jesus.  Had  dis- 
putation been  aimed  at,  the  questioners  would  have  applied 
to  the  disciples. 

If  John's  followers  came  seeking  instruction,  they  were  act 
disappointed.  Jesus  made  a  reply  to  their  question,  remark- 
able at  once  for  originality,  point,  and  pathos,  setting  forth  in 
lively  parabolic  style  the  great  principles  by  which  the  con- 
duct of  His  disciples  could  be  vindicated,  and  by  which  He 
desired  the  conduct  of  all  who  bore  His  name  to  be  regulated. 
Would  that  the  church  thoroughly  understood  and  habitually 

^  See  Buxtorf,  de  Synagoga  Judaica,  c.  xxx. ;  also  Zech.  viii.  19. 
'  Luke  xviii.  12.  >  John  iiL  26. 


LESSONS  IN  HOLY  LIVINO :   FASTING.  73 

acted  on  the  deep  truths  to  which  her  Lord  at  this  time  gave 
utterance  L 

Of  this  reply  it  is  to  be  observed,  in  the  first  place,  that  it  is 
of  a  purely  defensive  character.  Jesus  does  not  blame  John's 
disciples  for  fasting,  but  contents  Himself  with  defending  His 
own  disciples  for  abstaining  from  fasting.  He  does  not  feel 
called  on  to  disparage  the  one  party  in  order  to  justify  the 
other,  but  takes  up  the  position  of  one  who  virtually  says : 
*  To  fast  may  be  right  for  you,  0  ye  followers  of  John ;  not 
to  fast  is  equally  right  for  my  followers."  How  grateful  to 
Christ's  feelings  it  must  have  been,  that  He  could  assume  this 
tolerant  attitude  on  a  question  in  which  the  name  of  John 
was  mixed  up !  For  He  had  a  deep  respect  for  the  forerunner 
and  his  work,  and  ever  spake  of  >iiTn  in  most  generous  terms 
of  appreciation;  now  calling  him  a  burning  and  a  shining 
lamp,^  and  at  another  time  declaring  him  not  only  a  prophet, 
but  something  more.^  And  we  may  remark  in  passing,  that  John 
reciprocated  these  kindly  feelings,  and  had  no  sympathy  with 
the  petty  jealousies  in  which  his  disciples  sometimes  indulged. 
The  two  great  ones,  both  of  them  censured  for  difl'erent  rea- 
sons by  their  degenerate  contemporaries,  ever  spoke  of  each 
other  to  their  disciples  and  to  the  public  in  terms  of  afiec- 
tionate  respect ;  the  lesser  light  magnanimously  confessing  his 
infiBriority,  the  greater  magnifying  the  worth  of  His  humble  fel- 
low-servant What  a  refreshing  contrast  have  we  here  to  the 
mean  passions  of  envy,  prejudice,  and  detraction  so  prevalent 
in  other  quarters,  under  whose  malign  influence  men,  of  whom 
better  things  might  have  been  expected,  spoke  of  John  as  a 
madman,  and  of  Jesus  as  immoral  and  profane  ! ' 

Passing  from  the  manner  to  the  matter  of  the  reply,  we 
notice  that,  for  the  purpose  of  vindicating  His  disciples,  Jesus 
availed  Himself  of  a  metaphor  suggested  by  certain  memor- 
able words  uttered  concerning  Himself  at  an  earlier  period 
by  the  master  of  those  who  now  examined  Him.  To  certain 
disciples  who  complained  that  men  were  leaving  him  and 
going  to  Jesus,  John  had  said  in  effect :  "  Jesus  is  the  Bride- 
groom, I  am  but  the  Bridegroom's  friend ;  therefore  it  is  right 
that  men  should  leave  me  and  join  Jesus."*    Jesus  now  takes 

» John  r.  86.        «  Matt  xi  7-16.        »  Matt  xi  16,  19.        *  John  iii  29. 


74  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

• 

up  the  Baptist's  words,  and  turns  them  to  account  for  the 
purpose  of  defending  the  way  of  life  pursued  by  His  disciples. 
His  reply,  freely  paraphrased,  is  to  this  effect :  "  I  am  the 
Bridegroom,  as  your  master  said ;  it  is  right  that  the  children 
of  the  bride-chamber  come  to  me ;  and  it  is  also  right  that, 
when  they  have  come,  they  should  adapt  their  mode  of  life  to 
their  altered  circumstances.  Therefore  they  do  well  not  to 
fast,  for  fasting  is  the  expression  of  sadness,  and  how  should 
they  be  sad  in  my  company  ?  As  well  might  men  be  sad  at 
a  marriage  festival  The  days  wUl  come  when  the  children 
of  the  bride-chamber  shall  be  sad,  for  the  Bridegroom  will  not 
always  be  with  them ;  and  at  the  dark  hour  of  His  departure 
it  will  be  natural  and  seasonable  for  them  to  fast,  for  then 
they  shall  be  in  a  fasting  mood — ^weeping,  lamenting,  sorrow- 
ful, and  disconsolate." 

The  principle  underlying  this  graphic  representation  is.  that 
fasting  should  not  be  a  matter  of  fixed  mechanical  rule,  but 
should  have  reference  to  the  state  of  mind ;  or  more  definitely, 
that  men  should  fast  when  they  are  sad,  or  in  a  state  of  mind 
akin  to  sadness — absorbed,  preoccupied — as  at  some  great 
solemn  crisis  in  the  life  of  an  individual  or  a  community, 
such  as  that  in  the  history  of  Peter,  when  he  was  exercised 
on  the  great  question  of  the  admission  of  the  Gentiles  to 
the  church,  or  such  as  that  in  the  history  of  the  Christian 
community  at  Antioch,  when  they  were  about  to  ordain  the 
first  missionaries  to  the  heathen  world.  Christ's  doctrine, 
clearly  and  distinctly  indicated  here,  is  that  fasting  in  any 
other  circumstances  is  forced,  unnatural,  unreal ;  a  thing 
which  men  may  be  made  to  do  as  a  matter  of  form,  but  which 
they  do  not  with  their  heart  and  souL  "  Can  ye  make  the 
children  of  the  bride-chamber  fast  while  the  bridegroom  is  with 
them  ? "  ^  He  asked,  virtually  asserting  that  it  was  impossible. 

By  this  rule  the  disciples  of  our  Lord  were  justified,  and 
yet  John's  were  not  condemned.  It  was  natural  for  them  to 
fast,  for  they  were  mournful,  melancholy,  imsatisfied.  They 
had  not  found  Him  who  was  the  Desire  of  all  nations,  the 
Hope  of  the  future,  the  Bridegroom  of  the  souL  They  only 
knew  that  all  was  wrong ;  and  in  their  querulous,  despairing 

'  Luke  v.  84:  /u^  %vfti^%  .  .  .  wtnttu  yfirriviiy. 


LESSOKS  IN  HOLY  LIVING  :   FASTING.  75 

mood,  they  took  pleasure  in  fasting,  and  wearing  coarse 
laiinent,  and  frequenting  lonely,  desolate  regions,  living  as 
hermits,  a  practical  protest  against  an  ungodly  age.  Men  in 
such  a  mood  could  not  do  otherwise  than  fast ;  though  whether 
they  did  well  to  continue  in  that  mood  after  the  Bridegroom 
had  come,  and  had  been  announced  to  them  as  such  by  their 
own  master,  is  another  matter.  Their  grief  was  wilful,  idle, 
causeless,  when  He  had  appeared  who  was  to  take  away  the 
sin  of  the  world. 

Jesus  had  yet  more  to  say  in  reply  to  the  questions  ad- 
dressed to  Him.  Things  new  and  unusual  need  manifold 
apology,  and  therefore  to  the  beautiful  similitude  of  the 
children  of  the  bride-chamber  He  added  two  other  equally 
suggestive  parables :  those,  viz.,  of  the  new  patch  on  the  old 
garment,  and  tjie  new  vnne  in  old  bottles.  The  design  of  these 
parables  is  much  the  same  with  that  of  the  first  part  of 
His  reply,  viz.  to  enforce  the  law  of  congruity  in  relation 
to  fasting  and  similar  matters ;  that  is,  to  show  that  in  all 
voluntary  religious  service,  where  we  are  free  to  regulate  our 
own  conduct,  the  outward  act  should  be  made  to  correspond 
with  the  inward  condition  of  mind,  and  that  no  attempt 
should  be  made  to  force  particular  acts  or  habits  on  men  with- 
out reference  to  that  correspondence.  "  In  natural  things," 
Jesus  would  say,  "we  observe  this  law  of  congruity.  No 
man  putteth  a  piece  of  unfulled  cloth^  on  an  old  garment 
Neither  do  men  put  new  wine  into  old  skins,  and  that  not 
merely  out  of  regard  to  propriety,  but  to  avoid  bad  conse- 
quences. For  if  the  rule  of  congruity  be  neglected,  the  patched 
garment  will  be  torn  by  the  contraction  of  the  new  cloth  ;*  and 
the  old  skin  bottles  will  burst  imder  the  fermenting  force  of 
the  new  liquor,  and  the  wine  will  be  spilled  and  lost" 

The  old  cloth  and  old  bottles  in  these  metaphors  represent 
old  ascetic  fashions  in  religion ;  the  new  cloth  and  the  new 


>  ICatt.  ix.  16,  fd»»ot  iyfd^tif, 

•  Lake  v.  86  gives  the  thought  a  different  turn.  The  cloth  is  merely  new 
(mumv),  and  two  objections  to  patching  are  hinted  at.  First,  good  cloth  is 
wasted  in  patching,  which  would  haye  been  better  employed  in  making  a 
new  garment  Second,  the  patchwork  is  unseemly  and  unsatisfactory.  The 
dd  and  the  new  don't  agree  {tv  rv/«f  mn7). 


76  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

wine  represent  the  new  joyful  life  in  Christ,  not  possessed 
by  those  who  tenaciously  adhered  to  the  old  fashions.  The 
parables  were  applied  primarily  to  Christ's  own  age,  but  they 
admit  of  application  to  all  transition  epochs ;  indeed,  they  find 
new  illustration  in  almost  every  generation. 

The  force  of  these  homely  parables  as  arguments  in  vindi- 
cation of  departure  &om  current  usage  in  matters  of  religion, 
may  be  evaded  in  either  of  two  ways.  First,  their  relevancy 
may  be  denied ;  ie,  it  may  be  denied  that  religious  belie&  are 
of  such  a  nature  as  to  demand  congenial  modes  of  expression, 
with  penalties  if  the  demand  is  not  complied  with.  This 
position  is  usually  assumed  virtually  or  openly  by  the  patrons 
of  use  and  wont.  Conservative  minds  have  for  the  most  part 
a  very  inadequate  conception  of  the  vital  force  of  belie£ 
Their  own  belief,  their  spiritual  life  altogether,  is  often  a  feeble 
thing,  and  they  imagine  tameness  or  pliancy  must  be  an  attri- 
bute  of  other  men's  faith  also.  Nothing  but  dire  experience 
will  convince  them  that  they  are  mistaken;  and  when  the 
proof  comes  in  the  shape  of  an  irrepressible  revolutionary 
outburst,  they  are  stupefied  with  amazement.  Such  men  learn 
nothing  fix)m  the  history  of  previous  generations ;  for  they 
persist  in  thinking  that  their  own  case  will  be  an  exception. 
Hence  the  vis  inertuB  of  established  custom  evermore  insists 
on  adherence  to  what  is  old,  till  the  new  wine  proves  its 
power  by  producing  an  explosion  needlessly  wasteful,  by  which 
both  wine  and  bottles  often  perish,  and  energies  which  might 
have  quietly  wrought  out  a  beneficent  reformation  are  perverted 
into  blind  powers  of  indiscriminate  destruction. 

Or,  in  the  second  place,  the  relevancy  of  these  metaphors 
being  admitted  in  general  terms,  it  may  be  denied  that  a  new 
wine  (to  borrow  the  form  of  expression  from  the  second,  more 
suggestive  metaphor)  has  come  into  existence.  This  was  vir- 
tually the  attitude  assumed  by  the  Pharisees  towards  Christ. 
"  What  have  you  brought,"  they  asked  Him  in  effect,  "  to 
your  disciples,  that  they  cannot  live  as  others  do,  but  must 
needs  invent  new  religious  habits  for  themselves  ?  This  new 
life  of  which  you  boast  is  either  a  vain  pretence,  or  an  illegi- 
timate, spurious  thing,  not  worthy  of  toleration,  and  the  waste 
of  which  would  be  no  matter  for  regret"     Similar  was  the 


LESSONS  IN  HOLY  LIVINa:   FASTING.  77 

atdtade  assumed  towards  Luther  by  the  opponents  of  the  Be- 
formation.  They  said  to  him  in  effect :  "  If  this  new  revelation 
of  yours,  that  sinners  are  justified  by  faith  alone,  were  true,  we 
admit  that  it  would  involve  very  considerable  modification  in 
religious  opinion,  and  many  alterations  in  religious  practice. 
But  we  deny  the  truth  of  your  doctrine,  we  regard  the  peace 
and  comfort  you  find  in  it  as  a  hallucination ;  and  therefore  we 
insist  that  you  return  to  the  time-honoured  faith,  and  then  you 
will  have  no  difficulty  in  acquiescing  in  the  long-established 
practice."  The  same  thing  happens  to  a  greater  or  less  extent 
every  generation ;  for  new  wine  is  always  in  course  of  being 
produced  by  the  eternal  vine  of  truth,  demanding  in  some 
particulars  of  belief  and  practice  new  bottles  for  its  preserva- 
tion, and  receiving  for  answer  an  order  to  be  content  with 
the  old  ones. 

Without  going  the  length  of  denunciation  or  direct  attempt 
at  suppression,  those  who  stand  by  the  old  often  oppose  the 
new  by  the  milder  method  of  disparagement.  They  eulogize 
Uie  venerable  past,  and  contrast  it  with  the  present,  to  the 
disadvantage  of  the  latter.  "  The  old  wine,"  say  they,  "  is 
vastly  superior  to  the  new  wine  :  how  mellow,  mild,  fragrant^ 
wholesome,  the  one  !  how  harsh  and  fiery  the  other  !"  Those 
who  say  so  are  not  the  worst  of  men :  they  are  often  the  best ; 
the  men  of  taste  and  feeling,  the  gentle,  the  reverent,  and  the 
good,  who  are  themselves  excellent  samples  of  the  old  vintage. 
Their  opposition  forms  by  far  the  most  formidable  obstacle  to 
the  public  recognition  and  toleration  of  what  is  new  in  religious 
life ;  for  it  naturally  creates  a  strong  prejudice  against  any 
cause  when  the' saintly  disapprove  of  it 

Observe,  then,  how  Christ  answers  the  honest  admirers  of 
the  old  wine.  He  concedes  the  point :  He  admits  that  their 
preference  is  natural  "  No  man,"  Luke  represents  Him  as 
saying,  in  the  conclusion  of  His  reply  to  the  disciples  of  the 
Baptist,  *  no  man  also,  having  drunk  old  wine,  straightway 
desireth  the  new ;  for  he  saith,  The  old  is  better."  This  strik- 
ing sentiment  exhibits  rare  candour  in  stating  the  case  of 
opponents,  and  not  less  rare  modesty  and  tact  in  stating  the 
case  of  frienda  It  is  as  if  Jesus  had  said  :  "  I  do  not  wonder 
that  you  love  the  old  wine  of  Jewish  piety,  fruit  of  a  very 


78  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVR 

ancient  vintage ;  or  even  that  you  dote  upon  the  very  bottles 
which  contain  it,  covered  over  with  the  dust  and  cobwebs  of 
ages.  But  what  then  ?  Do  men  object  to  the  existence  of 
new  wine,  or  refuse  to  have  it  in  their  possession,  because 
the  old  is  superior  in  flavour  ?  No  ;  they  drink  the  old,  but 
they  carefully  preserve  the  new,  knowing  that  the  old  will  get 
exhausted,  and  that  the  new,  however  harsh,  will  mend  with 
age,  and  may  ultimately  be  superior  even  in  flavour  to  that 
which  is  in  present  use.  Even  so  should  you  deal  with  the 
new  wine  of  my  kingdom.  You  may  not  straightway  desire 
it,  because  it  is  strange  and  novel ;  but  surely  you  might  act 
more  wisely  with  it  than  merely  to  spurn  it,  or  spill  and 
destroy  it !" 

Oh  that  patrons  of  old  ways  imderstood  Christ's  wisdom, 
and  that  patrons  of  new  ways  sympathized  with  His  charity  ! 
A  celebrated  historian  has  remarked  :  "  It  must  make  a  man 
wretched,  if,  when  on  the  threshold  of  old  age,  he  looks  on  the 
rising  generation  with  uneasiness,  and  does  not  rather  rejoice 
in  beholding  it ;  and  yet  this  is  very  common  with  old  men. 
Fabius  would  rather  have  seen  Hannibal  unconquered,  than 
see  his  own  fame  obscured  by  Scipio."^  There  are  always  too 
many  Fabii  in  the  world,  who  are  annoyed  because  things  will 
not  remain  stationary,  and  because  new  ways  and  new  men 
are  ever  rising  up  to  take  the  place  of  the  old. 

How  rare,  on  the  other  hand,  is  Christ's  charity  among  the 
advocates  of  progress  !  .  Those  who  affect  freedom  despise  the 
stricter  sort  as  fanatics  and  bigots,  and  drive  on  changes  with- 
out regard  to  their  scruples,  and  without  any  appreciation  of 
the  excellent  qualities  of  the  "  old  wine."  When  wUl  young 
men  and  old  men,  liberals  and  conservatives,  broad  Christians 
and  narrow,  learn  to  bear  with  one  another ;  yea,  to  recognise 
each  in  the  other  the  necessary  complement  of  his  own  one- 
sidedness  ? 

'  Niebuhr,  Lectures  on  Roman  Hietoryt  voL  ii.  pp.  77,  78. 


LESSONS  IN  HOLT  LIVINO:   RITUAL  ABLT7TI0NS.  79 


Section  n. — Ritual  AUutions. 

Matt.  xv.  1-20 ;  Maak  vii.  1-23  ;  Luke  xi.  87-41. 

The  happy  free  society  of  Jesus,  which  kept  bridal  high-tide 
when  others  fasted,  was  in  this  further  respect  singular  in  its 
manners,  that  its  members  took  their  meals  unconcerned  about 
existing  usages  of  purification.    They  ate  bread  with  "  defiled, 
that  is  to  say,  with  imwashen  hands.''    Such  was  their  custom, 
it  may  be  assumed,  from  the  beginning,  though  the  practice 
does  not  appear  to  have  become  the  subject  of  animadversion 
till  an  advanced  period  in  the  ministry  of  our  Lord,^  at  least 
in  a  way  that  gave  rise  to  incidents  worthy  of  notice  in  the 
Grospel  records.     Even  at  the  marriage  in  Cana,  where  were 
set  six  water-pots  of  stone  for  the  purposes  of  purifying, 
Christ  and  His  disciples  are  to  be  conceived  as  distinguished 
from  the  other  guests  by  a  certain  inattention  to  ritual  ablu- 
tions.    This  we  infer  from  the  reasons  by  which  the  neglect 
was  defended  when  it  was  impugned,  which  virtually  take  up 
the  position,  that  the  practice  condemned  was  not  only  lawful, 
but  incumbent, — a  positive  duty  in  the  actual  circumstances 
of  Jewish  society,  and  therefore,  of  course,  a  duty  which  could 
at  no  time  be  neglected  by  those  who  desired  to  please  God 
rather  than  men.     But  indeed  it  needs  no  proof  that  one  of 
such  grave  earnest  spirit  as  Jesus  could  never  have  paid  any 
regard  to  the  trifling  regulations  about  washing  before  eating, 
invented  by  the  "  eldera" 

These  regulations  were  no  trifles  in  the  eyes  of  the  Phari- 
sees ;  and  therefore  we  are  not  surprised  to  learn,  that  the 
indifference  with  which  they  were  treated  by  Jesus  and  the 
twelve  provoked  the  censure  of  that  zealous  sect  of  religionists 
on  at  least  two  occasions,  both  adverted  to  in  the  Gospel  nar- 
rativea  On  one  of  these  occasions,  certain  Pharisees  and 
scribes,  who  had  followed  Christ  from  Jerusalem  to  the  north, 
seeing  some  of  His  disciples  eat  without  previously  going 
through  the  customary  ceremonial  ablutions,  came  to  Him,  and 
asked,  "  Why  walk  not  thy  disciples  according  to  the  tradi- 

1  Dnring  the  last  stay  in  Galilee,  within  six  months  of  the  cracifixion. 


y 


f 


80  ■^'        VHE  TBAININQ  OF  THE  TWELVE. 


11 


tions  of  tte  elders,  but  eat  bread  with  imwashen  hands  ?"^ 
In  the  other  instance,  Jesus  Himself  was  the  direct  object  of 
oensure.  *  A  certain  Pharisee,"  Luke  relates,  "  besought  Jesus 
to  dine  with  him ;  and  He  went  in,  and  sat  (directly)  down 
to  meat :  and  when  the  Pharisee  saw  it,  he  marvelled  that  He 
had  not  first  washed  before  dinner."  *  Whether  the  host  ex- 
pressed his  surprise  by  words  or  by  looks  only,  is  not  stated ; 
but  it  was  observed  by  his  guest,  and  was  made  an  occasion 
for  exposing  the  vices  of  the  pharisaic  character.  *  Now," 
said  the  accused,  in  holy  zeal  for  true  purity,  "  now  do  ye 
Pharisees  make  clean  the  outside  of  the  cup  and  platter,  but 
your  inward  part  is  full  of  ravening  and  wickedness.  Ye  fools, 
did  not  He  that  made  that  which  is  without,  make  that  which 
is  within  also  ?  But  rather  give  alms  of  such  things  as  ye 
have ;  and,  behold,  all  things  are  clean  unto  you."^  That  is  to 
say,  the  offending  guest  charged  His  scandalized  host,  and  the 
sect  he  belonged  to,  with  sacrificing  inward  to  outward  purity ; 
and  at  the  same  time  taught  the  important  truth,  that  to  the 
pure  all  things  are  pure,  and  showed  the  way  by  which  inward 
real  purity  was  to  be  reached,  viz.  by  the  practice  of  that  sadly 
neglected  virtue,  humanity  or  charity. 

The  Lord's  reply  in  the  other  encounter  with  pharisaic 
adversaries  on  the  subject  of  washings  was  similar  in  its  prin- 
ciple, but  different  in  form.  He  told  the  zealots  for  purifica- 
tions, without  periphrasis,  that  they  were  guilty  of  the  grave 
offence  of  sacrificing  the  commandments  of  God  to  the  com- 
mandments of  men, — to  these  pet  traditions  of  the  elders. 
The  statement  was  no  libel,  but  a  simple  melancholy  fact, 
though  its  truth  does  not  quite  lie  on  the  surface.  This  we 
hope  to  show  in  the  following  remarks ;  but  before  we  proceed 
to  that  task,  we  must  force  ourselves,  however  reluctantly,  to 
acquire  a  little  better  acquaintance  with  the  miserable  seni- 
lities,  whose  neglect  once  seemed  so  heinous  a  sin  to  persons 
deeming  themselves  holy. 

The  aim  of  the  rabbinical  prescriptions  respecting  washings 
was  not  physical  cleanliness,  but  something  thought  to  be  far 
higher  and  more  sacred.     Their  object  was  to   secure,  not 

1  Mark  vii.  1,  2,  5.  «  Luke  xi.  87. 

s  Luke  xi.  39-41.    Vide^  for  a  simUar  passage,  Matt  zxiiL  25,  26. 


•v^^- 


•   LESSONS  IN  HOLT  LIVING :   SITUAL  AHtUTlOya       "-     M 

t 

physical,  but  ceremonial  purity ;  that  &,  to  cleanse  tifie  persoa 
from  snch  impurity  as  might  be  contracted  by  contact  with  a 
Gentile,  or  with  a  Jew  in  a  ceremonially  unclean  stafe,  or  with 
an  nndean  animal,  or  with  a  dead  body  or  any  part  thereofl 
To  the  regulations  in  the  law  of  Moses  respecting  such  un- 
deanness,  the  rabbis  added  a  vast  number  of  additional  rules 
on  their  own  responsibility,  in  a  self-willed  zeal  for  the  scru- 
pulous observance  of  the  Mosaic  precepts.  They  issued  iJmr 
commandments,  as  the  Church  of  Home  has  iasned  hers,  under 
the  pretext  that  they  were  necessary  as  means  towards  the 
great  end  of  fulfilling  strictly  the  commandments  of  Grod. 

The  burdens  laid  on  men's  shoulders  by  the  scribes  on  this 
plausible  ground  were,  by  all  accounts,  indeed  most  grievous. 
Not  content  with  purifications  prescribed  in  the  law  for  un- 
deanness  actually  contracted,  they  made  provision  for  merely 
possible  cases.  If  a  man  did  not  remain  at  home  all  day,  but 
went  out  to  market,  he  must  wash  his  hands  on  his  return, 
because  it  was  possible  that  he  might  have  toudhed  some  person 
or  thing  ceremonially  unclean.  Great  care,  it  appears,  had 
also  to  be  taken  that  the  water  used  in  the  process  of  ablution 
was  itself  perfectly  pure ;  and  it  was  necessary  even  to  apply 
the  water  in  a  particular  manner  to  the  hands,  in  order  to  secure 
the  desired  result  Without  travelling  beyond  the  sacred 
record,  we  find,  in  the  items  of  information  suppUed  by  Mark 
respecting  prevailing  Jewish  customs  of  purification,  enough 
to  show  to  what  ridiculous  lengths  this  momentous  business 
of  washing  was  carried  ''  Many  other  things,"  remarks  he 
quaintly,  and  not  without  a  touch  of  quiet  satire,  '*  there  be 
which  they  have  received  to  hold,  as  the  washing  of  cups  and 
pots,  brazen  vessels,  and  of  tables.''  ^  AH  things,  in  short,  used 
in  connection  with  food — in  cooking  it,  or  in  placing  it  on  the 
table — ^had  to  be  washed,  not  merely  as  people  might  wash 
them  now  to  remove  actual  impurity,  but  to  deliver  them  fix)m 
the  more  serious  uncleanness  which  they  might  possibly  have 
contracted  since  last  used,  by  touching  soine  person  or  thing 
not  technically  clean.  A  kind  and  measure  of  purity,  in  fact, 
were  aimed  at  incompatible  with  life  in  this  world.  The 
very  air  of  heaven  was  not  clean  enough  for  the  doting  patrons 

^  Mark  viL  4. 
P 


82  THE  TBAmma  of  the  twelve, 

of  patristic  traditions ;  for,  not  to  speak  of  other  more  real 
sources  of  contamination,  the  breeze,  in  blowing  over  GerUUe 
lands  to  the  sacred  land  of  Jewry,  had  contracted  defilement 
which  made  it  tmfit  to  pass  into  ritaalistic  lungs  till  it  had 
been  sifted  by  a  respirator  possessing  the  magic  power  to 
cleanse  it  from  its  pollution. 

The  extravagant  fanatical  zieal  of  the  Jews  in  these  matters 
is  illustrated  in  the  Talmud  by  stories  which,  although  belong- 
ing to  a  later  age,  may  be  regarded  as  a  faithfulireflection  of 
the  spirit  which  animated  the  Pharisees  in  thdMime  of  our 
Lord.  Of  these  stories  the  following  is  a  sample:  ''Babbi 
Akiba  was  thrown  by  the  Christians  into  prison,  and  Babbi 
Joshua  brought  him  every  day  as  much  water  as  sufficed  both 
for  washing  and  for  drinking.  But  on  one  occasion  it  hap- 
pened that  the  keeper  of  the  prison  got  the  water  to  take  in, 
and  spilled  the  half  of  it  Akiba  saw  that  there  was  too  little 
water,  but  nevertheless  said.  Give  me  the  water  for  my  hands. 
His  brother  rabbi  replied.  My  master,  you  have  not  enough  for 
drinking.  But  Akiba  replied.  He  who  eats  with  unwashed 
hands  perpetrates  a  crime  that  ought  to  be  punished  with  death. 
Better  for  me  to  die  of  thirst,  than  to  transgress  the  traditions 
of  my  ancestors."  ^  Babbi  Akiba  would  rather  break  the  sixth 
commandment,  and  be  guilty  of  self-murder,  than  depart  from 
the  least  pimctilio  of  a  fantastic  ceremonialism ;  illustrating 
the  truth  of  the  declaration  made  by  Christ  in  Hid  reply  to 
the  Pharisees,  which  we  now  proceed  to  consider. 

It  was  not  to  be  expected  that,  in  defending  ELis  disciples 
from  the  frivolous  charge  of  neglecting  the  washing  of  hands, 
Jesus  would  show  much  respect  for  their  accusers.  Accord- 
ingly, we  observe  a  marked  difference  between  the  tone  of  His 
reply  in  the  present  case,  and  that  of  His  answer  to  John's 
disciples.  Towards  them  the  attitude  assumed  was  respect- 
fully defensive  and  apologetic ;  towards  the  present  interro- 
gants  the  attitude  assumed  is  offensive  and  denunciatory.  To 
John's  disciples  Jesus  said,  "  Fasting  is  right  for  you  ;  not  to 
fast  is  equally  right  for  my  disciples."     To  the  Pharisees  He 

^  Buxtorf,  De  Syn.  Jud.  pp.  286-7.  This  author  quotes  the  following  saying 
of  another  rabbi :  Qui  illotis  manibus  panem  comedit,  idem  est  ac  si  soorto 
accubaret  (p.  236). 


LESSONS  IS  HOLY  LIVING  :   RITUAL  ABLUTIONS.  83 

replies  by  a  retort  which  at  once  condemns  their  conduct^  and 
justifies  the  behaviour  which  they  challenged  "  Why,"  asked 
they,  **  do  thy  disciples  transgress  the  traditions  of  the  elders  ?" 
"  Why,"  asked  He  in  answer,  *'  do  ye  also  transgress  the  com- 
mandments of  Ghxl  by  your  traditions?"  as  if  to  say:  ''It 
becomes  not  you  to  judge ;  you,  who  see  the  imaginary  mote 
in  the  eye  of  a  brother,  have  a  beam  in  your  own." 

This  spirited  answer  was  something  more  than  a  mere 
retort  or  et  tu  quoque  argument  Under  an  interrogative  form 
it  enunciated  a  great  principle,  viz.  that  the  scrupulous  observ- 
ance of  human  traditions  in  matters  of  practice  leads  by  a  sure 
path  to  a  corresponding  negligence  and  unscrupulousness  in 
reference  to  the  eternal  laws  of  Grod.  Hence  Christ's  defence 
of  His  disciples  was  in  substance  this :  ^  I  and  my  followers 
despise  and  n^lect  those  customs,  because  we  desire  to  keep 
the  moral  law.  Those  washings,  indeed,  may  not  seem  seriously 
to  conflict  with  the  great  matters  of  the  law,  but  to  be  at 
worst  only  trifling  and  contemptibla  But  the  case  is  not  so. 
To  treat  trifles  as  serious  matters,  as  matters  of  conscience, 
which  ye  do,  is  degrading  and  demoralizing.  No  man  can  do 
that  without  being  or  becoming  a  moral  imbecile,  or  a  hypo- 
crite :  either  one  who  is  incapable  of  discerning  between  what 
is  vital  and  what  not  in  morals ;  or  one  who  finds  his  interest 
in  getting  trifles,  such  as  washing  of  hands,  or  paying  tithe  of 
herbs,  to  be  accepted  as  the  important  matters,  and  the  truly 
great  things  of  the  law — justice,  mercy,  and  faith — quietly 
poshed  aside  as  if  they  were  of  no  moment  whatever." 

The  whole  history  of  religion  proves  the  truth  of  these 
views.  A  ceremony  and  tradition  ridden  time  is  infallibly  a 
nKNrally  corrupt  time.  Hypocrites  ostensibly  zealots,  secretly 
atheists ;  profligates  taking  out  their  revenge  in  licentiousness 
for  having  been  compelled,  by  tyrannous  custom  or  intolerant 
ecclesiastical  authorities,  to  conform  outwardly  to  practices 
for  which  they  have  no  respect ;  priests  of  the  type  of  the 
sons  of  Eli,  gluttonous,  covetous,  wanton :  such  are  the  black 
omens  of  an  age  in  which  ceremonies  are  everything,  and 
godliness  and  virtue  nothing.  Eitualistic  practices,  artificial 
duties  of  all  kinds,  whether  originating  with  Jewish  rabbis 
or  with  doctors  of  the  Christian  church,  are  utterly  to  be 


84  THE  TRAINING  ,0F  THE  TWELVE. 

abjured.  Eecommended  by  their  zealous  advocates,  often  sin- 
cerely, as  eminently  fitted  to  promote  the  culture  of  morality 
and  piety,  they  ever  prove,  in  the  long  run,  fatal  to  both. 
Well  are  they  called  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  "dead 
works."  They  are  not  only  dead,  but  death-producing ;  for, 
like  all  dead  things,  they  tend  to  putrefy,  and  to  breed  a 
spiritual  pestilence  which  sweeps  thousands  of  souls  into  per- 
ditioa  If  they  have  any  life  at  all,  it  is  life  feeding  on 
death,  the  life  of  fungi  growing  on  dead  trees ;  if  they  have 
any  beauty,  it  is  the  beauty  of  decay,  of  autumnal  leaves  sere 
and  yellow,  when  the  sap  is  descending  down  to  the  earth, 
and  the  woods  are  about  to  pass  into  their  winter  state  of 
nakedness  and  desolation.  Bitualism  at  its  best  is  but  the 
shortlived  after-summer  of  the  spiritual  year :  very  fascinat- 
ing it  may  be ;  but  when  it  cometh,  be  sure  winter  is  at  the 
doors.  "  We  all  do  fade  as  a  leaf,  and  our  iniquities,  like  the 
wind,  have  taken  us  away." 

Having  brought  a  grave  counter-charge  against  the  Phari- 
sees, that  of  sacrificing  morality  to  ceremonies,  the  command- 
ments of  God  to  the  traditions  of  men,  Jesus  proceeded  forth- 
with to  substantiate  it  by  a  striking  example  and  a  Scripture 
quotation.  The  example  selected  was  the  evasion  of  the 
duties  arising  out  of  the  fifth  commandment,  under  pretence 
of  a  previous  religious  obligation.  Gk)d  said,  "Honour  thy 
father  and  mother,"  and  attached  to  a  breach  of  the  com- 
mandment the  penalty  of  death.  The  Jewish  scribes  said, 
"  Call  a  thing  Corhan,  and  you  will  be  exempt  from  all  obliga- 
tion to  give  it  away,  even  for  the  purpose  of  assisting  needy 
parents."  The  word  Corban  in  the  Mosaic  law  signifies  a  gift 
or  offering  to  God,  of  any  kind,  bloody  or  bloodless,  presented 
on  any  occasion,  as  in  the  fulfilment  of  a  vow.*  In  rabbinical 
dialect,  it  signified  a  thing  devoted  to  sacred  purposes,  and 
therefore  not  available  for  private  or  secular  use.  The  tra- 
ditional doctrine  on  the  subject  of  Corban  was  mischievous 
in  two  ways.  It  encouraged  men  to  make  religion  an  excuse 
for  neglecting  morality,  and  it  opened  a  wide  door  to  knavery 
and  hypocrisy.  It  taught  that  a  man  might  not  only  by  a 
vow  deny  hiniself  the  use  of  things  lawful,  but  that  he  might, 

^  Num.  vi.  14. 


LESSONS  IN  HOLY  LIVING  :    RITUAL  ABLUTIONS.  8  5 

by  devoting  a  thing  to  (Jod,  relieve  himself  of  all  obligation 
to  give  to  others  what,  but  for  the  vow,  it  would  have  been 
his  duty  to  give  them.  Then,  according  to  the  pernicious 
system  of  the  rabbis,  it  was  not  necessary  really  to  give  the 
thing  to  Grod,  in  order  to  be  free  of  obligation  to  give  it  to 
man.  It  was  enough  to  call  it  Corban.  Only  pronounce 
that  magic  word  over  anything,  and  forthwith  it  was  sealed 
over  to  God,  and  sacred  from  the  use  of  others  at  least,  if  not 
from  your  own  usa  Thus  self-willed  zeal  for  the  honour  of 
Grod  led  to  the  dishonouring  of  God,  by  taking  His  name  in 
vain ;  and  practices  which  at  best  were  chargeable  with  setting 
the  first  table  of  the  law  over  against  the  second,  proved 
eventually  to  be  destructive  of  both  tables.  They  made  the 
whole  law  of  (Jod  of  none  effect  by  their  traditions.  The 
diaannulliTig  of  the  fifth  commandment  was  but  a  sample  of 
the  mischief  the  zealots  for  the  conmiandments  of  men  had 
wrought ;  as  is  implied  in  Christ's  concluding  words,  "  Many 
such  like  things  do  ye."  ^ 

The  Scripture  quotation  *  made  by  our  Lord  in  replying  to 
the  Pharisees  was  not  less  apt  than  the  example  was 'illus- 
trative as  pointing  out  their  characteristic  vices,  hypocrisy 
and  superstition.  They  were  near  to  God  with  their  mouth, 
they  honoured  Him  with  their  Ups,  but  they  were  far  from 
Him  in  their  hearts.  Their  religion  was  all  on  the  outside. 
They  scrupulously  washed  their  hands  and  their  cups,  but 
they  took  no  care  to  cleanse  their  polluted  souls.  Then,  in 
the  second  place,  their  fear  of  God  was  taught  by  the  precept 
of  men«  Human  prescriptions  and  traditions  were  their 
guide  in  religion,  which  they  followed  blindly,  heedless  how 
fjAr  these  commandments  of  men  might  lead  them  from  the 
paths  of  righteousness  and  true  godliness. 

The  prophetic  word  quoted  by  Jesus  was  quick,  powerful, 
sharp,  searching,  and  conclusive.  Nothing  more  was  needed 
to  confound  the  Pharisees,  and  nothing  more  was  said  to  them 
at  this  time.  The  sacred  oracle  was  the  fitting  conclusion  of 
an  unanswerable  argument  against  the  patrons  of  tradition. 
But  Jesus  had  compassion  on  the  poor  multitude  who  were 
being  misled  to  their  ruin  by  their  blind  spiritual  guides,  and 
1  Mark  viL  18.  '  Isa.  zxix.  13. 


86  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

therefore  He  took  the  opportunity  of  addressing  a  word  to 
those  who  stood  around  on  the  subject  of  dispute.  What 
He  had  to  say  to  them,  He  expressed  in  the  terse,  pointed 
form  of  a  proverb :  "  Hear  and  understand :  not  that  which 
goeth  into  the  mouth  defileth  a  man ;  but  that  which  cometh 
out  of  the  mouth,  this  defileth  a  man.''  This  was  a  riddle  to 
be  solved,  a  secret  of  wisdom  to  be  searched  out,  a  lesson  in 
religion  to  be  conned.  Its  meaning,  though  probably  under- 
stood by  few  at  the  moment,  was  very  plain.  It  was  simply 
this :  "  Pay  most  attention  to  the  cleansing  of  the  heart,  not, 
like  the  Pharisees,  to  the  cleansing  of  the  handa  When  the 
heart  is  pure,  all  is  pure ;  when  the  heart  is  impure,  all  out- 
ward purification  is  vain.  The  defilement  to  be  dreaded  is 
not  that  from  meat  ceremonially  unclean,  but  that  which 
springs  from  a  carnal  mind,  the  defilement  of  evil  thoughts, 
evil  passion?,  evil  habits." 

This  passing  word  to  the  bystanders  became  the  subject  of 
a  subsequent  conversation  between  Jesus  and  His  disciples, 
in  which  He  took  occasion  to  justify  Himself  for  uttering  it, 
and  explained  to  them  its  meaning.  The  Pharisees  had  heard 
the  remark,  and  were  naturally  offended  by  it,  as  tending  to 
weaken  their  authority  over  the  popular  conscience.  The 
twelve  observed  their  displeasure,  perhaps  they  overheard 
their  comments ;  and  fearing  evil  consequences,  they  came 
and  informed  their  Master,  probably  with  a  tone  which  im- 
plied a  secret  regret  that  the  speaker  had  not  been  less  out- 
spoken. Be  that  as  it  may,  Jesus  gave  them  to  understand 
that  it  was  not  a  case  for  forbearance,  compromise,  or  timid, 
time-serving,  prudential  policy ;  the  ritualistic  tendency  being 
an  evil  plant  which  must  be  uprooted,  no  matter  with  what 
offence  to  its  patrons.  He  pled,  in  defence  of  His  plainness 
of  speech.  His  concern  for  the  souls  of  the  ignorant  people 
whose  guides  the  Pharisees  claimed  to  be.  "  Let  them  alone, 
what  would  foUow  ?  Why,  the  blind  leaders  and  the  blindly 
led  would  faU  together  into  the  ditch.  Therefore  if  the 
leaders  be  so  hopelessly  wedded  to  their  errors  that  they 
cannot  be  turned  from  them,  let  us  at  least  tiy  to  save  their 
comparatively  ignorant  victims." 

The  explanation  of  the  proverbial  word  si>oken  to  the 


LESSONS  IN  HOLY  LIVING  :    EITUAL  ABLUTIONS.  8  7 

people,  Jesus  gave  to  His  disciples  by  request  of  Peter.^  It 
needs  no  detailed  comment  It  is  rudely  plain  and  particular^ 
because  addressed  to  rudely  ignorant  hearers.  It  says  over 
again,  in  the  strongest  possible  language,  that  to  eat  with  un- 
washen  hands  defileth  not  a  man,  because  nothing  entering 
the  mouth  can  come  near  the  soul ;  that  the  defilement  to  be 
dreaded,  the  only  defilement  worth  speaking  of,  is  that  of  an 
evil,  unrenewed  heart,  out  of  which  proceed  thoughts,  words, 
and  acts  which  are  offences  against  the  holy,  pure  law  of 
God. 

We  conclude  this  section  with  a  remark  of  a  general  kind. 
We  observe  that  our  Lord  is  here  silent  concemitig  the  cere- 
monial law  of  Moses  (to  which  the  traditions  of  the  elders 
were  a  supplement),  and  speaks  only  of  the  commandments 
of  Ghxl,  i,e,  the  precepts  of  the  decalogue.  The  fact  is  sig- 
nificant, as  showing  in  what  direction  He  had  come  to 
destroy,  and  in  what  to  falfiL  Ceremonialism  was  to  be 
abolished,  and  the  eternal  laws  of  morality  were  to  become 
all  in  alL  Men's  consciences  were  to  be  delivered  from  the 
burden  of  outward  positive  ordinances,  that  they  might  be  free 
to  serve  the  living  Gkni,  by  keeping  His  ten  words,  or  the  one 
royal  law  of  lova  And  it  is  the  duty  of  the  church  to  stand 
fjB^t  in  the  liberty  Christ  designed  and  purchased  for  her. 
She  should  be  jealous  of  all  human  traditions,  out  of  holy  zeal 
for  the  divine  wiU ;  shunning  superstition  on  the  one  side,  and 
the  licentious  freedom  of  godless  libertinism  on  the  other. 
CbnsVa  tme  followers  wish  to  be  free,  but  not  to  do  as  they 
like ;  rather  to  do  what  Grod  requires  of  them.  So  minded, 
they  reject  unceremoniously  all  human  authority  in  religion, 
thereby  separating  themselves  from  the  devotees  to  tradition ; 
and  at  the  same  time,  as  God's  servants,  they  reverence  His 
word  and  His  law,  thereby  putting  a  wide  gulf  between  them 
and  the  lawless  and  disobedient,  who  side  with  movements  of 
religious  reform,  not  in  order  to  get  something  better  in  the 
place  of  what  is  rejected,  but  to  get  rid  of  all  moral  restraint 
in  matters  human  or  divine. 

1  liatt  XT.  17-20 ;  Mark  vii  18-28. 


88  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 


Section  iil — Sabbath  Observance, 

Matt.  xii.  1-14  ;  Mark  ii.  2S-iii.  1-6  ;  Lxtke  vi.  1-11,  xiii.  10-16, 

xrvr.  1-6 ;  John  v.  1-18,  ix.  13-17. 

In  no  part  of  their  conduct  were  Jesus  and  His  disciples 
more  frequently  found  fault  with  than  in  respect  to  their 
mode  of  observing  the  SabbatL  Six  distinct  instances  of 
oflfence  given  or  taken  on  this  score  are  recorded  in  the  Grospel 
history ;  in  five  of  which  Jesus  Himself  was  the  oflfender, 
while  in  the  remaining  instance  His  disciples  were  at  least 
the  ostensible  objects  of  censure. 

The  offences  of  Jesus  were  aU  of  one  sort :  His  crime  was, 
that  on  the  Sabbath-day  He  wrought  works  of  healing  on  the 
persons  of  men  afflicted  respectively  with  paky,  a  withered 
hand,  blindness,  dropsy,  and  on  the  body  of  a  poor  woman 
"  bowed  together  "  by  an  infirmity  of  eighteen  years'  standing. 
The  offence  of  the  disciples,  on  the  other  hand,  was  that, 
while  walking  along  a  way  which  lay  through  a  corn-field, 
they  stepped  aside  and  plucked  some  ears  of  grain  for  the 
purpose  of  satisfying  their  hunger.  This  was  not  theft,  for  it 
was  permitted  by  the  law  of  Moses  ;^  but  nevertheless  it  was, 
in  the  judgment  of  the  Pharisees,  Sabbatti-breaking.  It  was 
contrary  to  the  command,  "  Thou  shalt  not  work ;"  for  to 
pluck  some  ears  was  reaping  on  a  small  scale,  and  to  rub 
them  was  a  species  of  threshing  ! 

These  offences,  deemed  so  grave  when  committed,  seem 
very  small  at  this  distance.  AU  the  transgressions  of  the 
Sabbath  law  charged  against  Jesus  were  works  of  mercy ;  and 
the  one  transgression  of  the  disciples  was  for  them  a  work  of 
necessity,  and  the  toleration  of  it  was  for  others  a  duty  of 
mercy,  so  that  in  condemning  them  the  Pharisees  had  forgotten 
that  divine  word  :  "  I  will  lutve  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice."  It 
is,  indeed,  hard  for  us  now  to  conceive  how  any  one  could  be 
serious  in  regarding  such  actions  as  breaches  of  the  Sabbath, 
especially  the  harmless  act  of  the  twelva  There  is  a  slight 
show  of  plausibility  in  the  objection  taken  by  the  ruler  of  the 
synagogue  to  miracxdous  cures  wrought  on  the  seventh  day : 

1  Deut.  zxiii.  24,  25. 


LESSONS  IK  HOLT  LIVING :   SABBAtH  OBSERVANCE.  89 

"  There  are  six  dajrs'on  which  men  ought  to  work ;  in  them 
therefore  come  and  be  healed,  and  not  on  the  Sabbath-^ay/'^ 
The  remark  was  specially  plausible  with  reference  to  the  case 
which  had  provoked  the  ire  of  the  dignitary  of  the  synagogue. 
A  woman  who  had  been  a  sufferer  for  eighteen  years  might 
surely  bear  her  trouble  one  day  more,  and  come  and  be  healed 
on  the  morrow !  But  on  what  pretence  could  the  disciples 
be  blamed  as  Sabbath-breakers,  for  helping  themselves  to  a 
few  ears  of  com  ?  To  call  such  an  act  working  was  too 
ridiculous.  Men  who  foimd  a  Sabbatic  offence  here  must  have 
been  very  anxious  to  catch  the  disciples  of  Jesus  in  a  faidt. 

On  the  outlook  for  faults  we  have  no  doubt  the  Pharisees 
were ;  and  yet  we  must  admit  that,  in  condemning  the  act 
referred  to,  they  were  acting  faithfully  in  accordance  with 
their  theoretical  views  and  habitual  tendencies.  Their  judg- 
ment on  the  conduct  of  the  twelve  was  in  keeping  with  their 
traditions  concerning  washings,  and  their  tithing  of  mint  and 
other  garden  herbs,  and  their  straining  of  gnats  out  of  their 
wine-cup.  Their  habit,  in  all  things,  was  to  degrade  God's 
law  by  framing  innumerable  petty  rules  for  its  better  observ- 
ance^ which,  instead  of  securing  that  end,  only  made  tiie  law 
appear  base  and  contemptible.  In  no  case  was  this  miserable 
micrology  carried  greater  lengths  than  in  connection  with  the 
fourth  commandment.  With  a  most  perverse  ingenuity,  the 
most  insignificant  actions  were  brought  within  the  scope  of 
tie  prohibition  against  labour.  Even  in  the  case  put  by  our 
Lord,  that  of  an  animal  fallen  into  a  pit,  it  was  deemed  lawful 
to  lift  it  out — so  at  least  those  learned  in  rabbinical  lore  tell 
ns— only  when  to  leave  it  there  till  Sabbath  was  past  would 
involve  risk  to  life.  When  delay  was  not  dangerous,  the  rule 
was  to  give  the  beast  food  sufficient  for  the  day ;  and  if  there 
was  water  in  the  bottom  of  the  pit,  to  place  straw  and  bolsters 
below  it,  that  it  might  not  be  drowned.^ 

Yet,  with  aU  their  strictness  in  abstaining  from  everything 

'  Luke  xiii.  14. 

'  Baxtorf,  De  8yn.  Jud,  pp.  352-6.  The  same  author  states  that  it  was  a 
hfeach  of  the  law  to  let  a  cock  wear  a  piece  of  ribbon  round  its  leg  on  Sabbath : 
it  was  making  it  bear  something.  It  was  also  forbidden  to  walk  through  a 
stream  on  stilts,  because,  though  the  stilts  appear  to  bear  you,  you  really  cany 
the  stilts.    These  were  probably  later  refinements. 


90  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

bearing  the  faintest  resemblance  to  iw^rk,  the  Jews  were 
curiously  lax  in  another  direction.  While  scrupulously  ob- 
serving the  law  which  prohibited  the  cooking  of  food  on 
Sabbath/  they  did  not  make  the  holy  day  by  any  means  a 
day  of  fasting.  On  the  contrary,  they  considered  it  their  duty 
to  make  the  Sabbath  a  day  of  feasting  and  good  cheer.^  In 
fact,  it  was  at  a  Sabbath  feast,  given  by  a  chief  man  among 
the  Pharisees,  that  one  of  the  Sabbath  miracles  was  wrought, 
for  which  Jesus  was  put  upon  His  defence.*  At  this  feast 
were  numerous  guests,  Jesus  Himself  being  one, — invited,  it  is 
to  be  feared,  with  no  friendly  feelings,  but  rather  in  the  hope 
of  finding  something  against  Him  concerning  the  Sabbatic  law. 
"  It  came  to  pass,"  we  read  in  Luke,  "  as  He  (Jesus)  went  into 
the  house  of  one  of  the  chief  Pharisees  to  eat  bread  on  the 
Sabbath-day,  that  they  watched  Him."  They  set  a  trap,  and 
hoped  to  catch  in  it  Him  whom  they  hated  wittiout  cause ; 
and  they  got  for  their  pains  such  searching,  himibling  table- 
talk  as  they  had  probably  never  heard  before.*  This  habit  of 
feasting,  in  the  days  of  Augustine,  had  grown  to  a  great 
abuse,  as  appears  from  the  description  he  gives  of  the  mode 
in  which  contemporary  Jews  celebrated  their  weekly  holiday. 
"  To-day,"  he  writes,  "  is  the  Sabbath,  which  the  Jews  at  the 
present  time  keep  in  loose  luxurious  ease,  for  they  occupy 
their  leisure  in  frivolity ;  and  whereas  God  commanded  a 
Sabbath,  they  spend  it  in  those  things  which  God  forbids. 
Our  rest  is  from  evil  works,  theirs  is  from  good  works,  for  it  is 
better  to  plough  than  to  dance.  They  rest  from  good  work, 
they  rest  not  from  idle  work"* 

From  the  folly  and  pedantry  of  scribes  and  Pharisees  we 
gladly  turn  to  the  wisdom  of  Jesus,  as  revealed  in  the  ani- 
mated, deep,  and  yet  sublimely  simple  replies  made  by  Him 
to  the  various  charges  of  Sabbath-breaking  brought  against 
Himself  and  His  disciples.  Before  considering  these  replies 
in  detail,  we  premise  one  general  remark  concerning  them  alL 
In  none  of  these  apologies  or  defences  does  Jesus  call  in  ques- 

1  Ex.  xvi.  28. 

'  They  appealed,  in  justification  of  this  practice,  to  Neh«  viiL  10. 
»  Luke  xiv.  1.  *  Luke  xiv.  7-24. 

'  EnarrcUio  in  Paahnum  xcL  (xciL)  2. 


LESSONS  IN  HOLY  LIVING  :   SABBATH  OBSERVANCE.  9 1 

tion  tlie  obligation  of  the  Sabbath  law.  On  that  point  He  had 
no  quarrel  with  His  accusers.  His  argument  in  this  instance 
is  entirely  different  fix)m  the  line  of  defence  adopted  in  refer- 
ence to  fasting  and  purifications.  In  regard  to  fasting,  the 
position  He  took  up  was :  Fasting  is  a  voluntary  matter,  and 
men  may  fast  or  not  as  they  are  disposed.  In  regard  to  puri- 
fication His  position  was :  Ceremonial  ablutions  at  best  are  of 
secondary  moment,  being  mere  types  of  inward  purity ;  and  as 
practised  now,  lead  inevitably  to  the  utter  ignoring  of  spiritual 
purity,  and  therefore  must  be  neglected  by  all  who  are  con- 
cerned for  the  great  interests  of  morality.  But  in  reference 
to  the  allied  breaches  of  the  Sabbath,  the  position  Jesus  took 
up  was  this :  These  acts  which  you  condemn  are  not  trans- 
gressions of  the  law,  rightly  apprehended,  in  its  spirit  and 
principla  The  importance  of  the  law  was  conceded,  but  the 
phaiisaiii  interpretation  of  its  meaning  was  rejected.  An 
appeal  was  made  from  their  pedantic  code  of  regulations  about 
Sabbath  observance  to  the  grand  design  and  principle  of  the 
law ;  and  the  right  was  asserted  to  examine  all  rules  in  the 
light  of  the  principle,  and  to  reject  or  disregard  those  in 
which  the  principle  had  either  been  mistakenly  applied,  or,  as 
was  for  the  most  part  the  case  with  the  Pharisees,  lost  sight 
of  altogether. 

The  key  to  all  Christ's  teaching  on  the  Sabbath,  therefore, 
lies  in  His  conception  of  the  original  design  of  that  divine 
institation.  This  conception  we  find  expressed  with  epigram- 
miUic  point  and  conciseness,  in  contrast  to  the  pharisaic  idea 
of  the  Sabbath,  in  words  uttered  by  Jesus  on  the  occasion 
when  He  was  defending  His  disciples.  "  The  Sabbath,"  said 
He,  "was  made  for  man,  and  not  man  for  the  Sabbath." 
In  other  words.  His  doctrine  was  this :  The  Sabbath  was 
meant  to  be  a  hoon  to  man,  not  a  harden ;  it  was  not  a  day 
taken  from  man  by  God  in  an  exactiog  spirit,  but  a  day  given 
by  Gkxi  in  mercy  to  man — God*s  holiday  to  His  subjects ;  all 
legislation  enforcing  its  observance  having  for  its  end  to  en- 
sure that  all  should  really  get  the  benefit  of  the  boon — ^that  no 
man  should  rob  himself,  and  still  less  his  fellow-creatures,  of 
the  gracious  boon. 

This  difference  between  Christ's  mode  of  conceiving  of  the 


92  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

Sabbath,  and  the  pharisaic,  involves  of  necessity  a  correspond- 
ing difference  in  the  spirit  and  the  details  of  its  observance. 
TaJie  Christ's  view,  and  your  principle  becomes :  That  is  the 
best  way  of  observing  the  Sabbath  which  is  most  conducive 
to  man's  physical  and  spiritual  well-being,— in  other  words, 
which  is  best  for  his  body  and  for  his  soul ;  and  in  the  light 
of  this  principle,  you  will  keep  the  holy  day  in  a  spirit  of 
intelligent  joy  and  thankfulness  to  God  the  Creator  for  His 
gracious  consideration  towards  His  creatures.  Take  the  phari- 
saic view,  and  your  principle  of  observance  becomes :  He 
best  keeps  the  Sabbath  who  goes  greatest  lengths  in  mere 
abstinence  from  anything  that  can  be  construed  into  labour, 
irrespective  of  the  effect  of  this  abstinence  either  on  lus  own 
weU-being  or  on  that  of  others.  In  short,  we  land  in  the  sUly, 
senseless  minuteness  of  a  rabbinical  legislation,  which  sees 
in  such  an  act  as  that  of  the  disciples  plucking  and  rubbing 
the  ears  of  com,  or  that  of  the  healed  man  who  carried  his 
bed  home  on  his  shoulders,^  or  that  of  one  who  should  walk 
a  greater  distance  than  two  thousand  cubits  or  three-fourths 
of  a  mile^  on  a  Sabbath,  a  heinous  offence  against  the  fourth 
commandment  and  its  Author. 

A  Sabbath  observance  regulated  by  the  principle  that  the 
institution  was  made  for  man's  good,  obviously  involves  two 
great  general  uses :  rest  for  the  body,  and  worship  as  the 
solace  of  the  spirit  We  should  rest  from  servile  labour  on 
the  divinely  given  holiday,  and  we  should  lift  up  our  hearts 
in  devout  thought  to  Him  who  made  all  things  at  the  first ; 
who  "  worketh  hitherto,"  preserving  the  creation  in  being  and 
well-being,  and  whose  tender  compassion  towards  sinful  men 
is  great,  passing  knowledge.  These  things  are  both  necessary 
to  man's  true  good,  and  therefore  must  enter  as  essential 
elements  of  a  worthy  Sabbath  observanca 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Sabbath  being  made  for  man, 
the  two  general  requirements  of  rest  and  worship  may  not  be 

1  John  V.  10. 

'  This  was  the  limit  of  a  Sabbath-day  journey  according  to  the  scribes.  It 
was  fixed  by  the  distance  between  the  wall  of  a  Levitical  city  and  the  out- 
side  bounds^  of  its  suburb.  See  Num.  xxxy.  5  ;  and  Buztor^  De  Syn,  Jud, 
c.  zvL 


LESSONS  IN  HOLY  LIVING  :    SABBATH  OBSERVANCE.  93 

80  pressed  that  they  shall  become  hostile  to  man's  well-being, 
and  in  effect  self-destructive,  or  mutually  destructive.  The 
rule,  "  Thou  shalt  rest,"  must  not  be  so  applied  as  to  exclude 
aU  action  and  all  work ;  for  absolute  inaction  is  not  rest,  and 
entire  abstinence  from  work  of  every  description  would  often- 
times be  detrimental  both  to  private  and  to  pubUc  weU-being. 
Boom  must  be  left  for  acts  of  **  necessity  and  mercy ;"  and 
too  peremptory  as  well  as  too  minute  legislation  as  to  what 
are  and  what  are  not  acts  of  either  description  must  be  avoided, 
as  these  may  vary  for  different  persons,  times,  and  circum- 
stances ;  and  men  may  honestly  differ  in  opinion  in  such 
details  who  are  perfectly  loyal  to  the  great  broad  principles  of 
Sabbath  sanctification.  in  like  manner,  the  rule,  ''  Thou  shalt 
worship,"  must  not  be  so  enforced  as  to  make  religious  duties 
irksome  and  burdensome — a  meve  mechanical,  legal  service ; 
or  so  as  to  involve  the  sacrifice  of  the  other  great  practical  end 
of  the  Sabbath,  viz.  rest  to  the  animal  nature  of  man.  Nor 
may  men  dictate  to  each  other  as  to  the  means  of  worship  any 
more  than  as  to  the  amount ;  for  one  may  find  helps  to  devotion 
in  means  which  to  another  woidd  prove  a  hindrance  and  a 
distraction. 

It  was  only  in  regard  to  cessation  from  work  that  pharisaic 
legislation  and  practice  anent  Sabbath  observance  were  carried 
to  superstitious  and  vexatious  excess.  The  Sabbatic  mania 
was  a  monomania  ;  those  affected  thereby  being  mad  simply 
on  one  point,  the  stringent  enforcement  of  rest.  Hence  the 
peculiar  character  of  all  the  charges  brought  against  Christ 
and  His  disciples,  and  also  of  His  replies.  The  offences  com- 
mitted were  all  works  deemed  unlawful ;  and  the  defences  all 
went  to  show  that  the  works  done  were  not  contrary  to  law, 
when  the  law  was  interpreted  in  the  light  of  the  principle 
that  the  Sabbath  was  made  for  man.  They  were  works  of 
necessity  or  of  mercy,  and  therefore  lawful  on  the  Sabbath- 
day. 

Jesus  drew  His  proofs  of  this  position  from  three  sources : 
Scripture  history,  the  every-day  practice  of  the  Pharisees 
themselves,  and  the  providence  of  God.  In  defence  of  His 
disciples.  He  referred  to  the  case  of  David  eating  the  shew- 
bread  when  he  fled  to  the  house  of  God  from  the  court  of 


94  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

King  Saul/  and  to  the  constant  practice  of  the  priesta  in  doing 
work  for  the  service  of  the  temple  on  Sabbath-days,  sach  as 
ofifering  double  bumU)ffering8.  and  removing  the  stale  shew- 
bread  from  the  holy  place,  and  replacing  it  by  hot  loaves. 
David's  case  proved  the  general  principle  that  necessity  has 
no  law;  hunger  justifying  his  act,  as  it  should  also  have 
justified  the  act  of  the  disciples  even  in  pharisaic  eyes.  The 
practice  of  the  priests  showed  that  work  merely  as  work  is  not 
contrary  to  the  law  of  the  Sabbath,  some  works  being  not  only 
lawful,  but  incumbent  on  that  day. 

The  argument  drawn  by  Jesus  from  common  practice  was 
well  fitted  to  silence  captious  critics,  and  to  suggest  the  prin- 
ciple by  which  His  own  conduct  could  be  defended.  It  was 
to  this  effect :  "  You  would  lift  an  ox  or  an  ass  out  of  a  pit 
on  Sabbath,  would  you  not  ?  Why  ?  To  save  life  ?  Why 
then  shoidd  not  I  heal  a  sick  person  for  the  same  reason  ?  Or 
is  a  beast's  life  of  more  importance  than  that  of  a  human 
being  ?  Or  again :  would  you  scruple  to  loose  your  ox  or 
your  ass  from  the  stall  on  the  day  of  rest,  and  lead  him  away 
to  watering  ?*  K  not,  why  object  to  me  when  on  the  Sabbath- 
day  I  release  a  poor  human  victim  from  a  bondage  of  eighteen 
years'  duration,  that  she  may  draw  water  out  of  the  wells  of 
salvation  V*  The  argument  is  irresistible,  the  conclusion  in- 
evitable :  that  it  is  lawful,  dutifid,  most  seasonable,  to  do  weU 
on  the  Sabbath-day.  How  blind  they  must  have  been  to 
whom  so  obvious  a  proposition  needed  to  be  proved !  how 
oblivious  of  the  fact  that  love  is  the  foundation  and  fulfilment 
of  all  law,  and  that  therefore  no  particular  precept  could  ever 
be  meant  to  suspend  the  operation  of  that  divine  principle  ! 

The  argument  from  providence  used  by  Jesus  on  another 
occasion  ^  was  designed  to  serve  the  same  purpose  with  the 
others,  viz.  to  show  the  lawfulness  of  certain  kinds  of  work 
on  the  day  of  rest.  "  My  Father  worketh  hitherto,"  said  He 
to  His  accusers,  "  and  I  work."  The  Son  claimed  the  right 
to  work  becavse  and  as  the  Father  worked,  on  all  days  of  the 

^  1  Sam.  zxi.  6.  This  occurred  on  Sabbath,  for  the  old  shew-bread  was  re- 
placed by  new  on  that  day  (hot  loaves  baked  on  Sabbath).  But  this  is  not  the 
point  insisted  on  by  Christ 

«  Luke  xUi.  14,  16.  »  John  v.  17. 


LESSONS  IN  HOLT  LIVING  :    SABBATH  OBSERVANCE.  95 

week.  The  Father  worked  incessantly  for  beneficent,  con- 
servative ends^  most  holily,  wisely,  and  powerfully  preserving 
and  governing  all  His  creatures  and  all  their  actions  ;  keeping 
the  planets  in  their  orbits  ;  causing  the  sun  to  rise  and  shine, 
and  the  winds  to  circulate  in  their  courses,  and  the  tides  to 
ebb  and  flow  on  the  seventh  day  as  on  aU  the.  other  six.  So 
Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  claimed  the  right  to  work,  and 
did  work :  saving,  restoring,  healing ;  as  far  as  might  be 
bringing  fallen  nature  back  to  its  pristine  state,  when  God  the 
Creator  pronounced  all  things  good,  and  rested,  satisfied  with 
the  world  He  had  brought  into  being.  Such  works  of  bene- 
ficence, by  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  may  always  be  done  on  the 
Sabbath-day :  works  of  humanity,  like  those  of  the  physician, 
or  of  the  teacher  of  neglected  children,  or  of  the  philanthropist 
going  his  rounds  among  the  poor  and  needy,  or  of  the  Christian 
minister  preaching  the  gospel  of  peace,  and  many  others,  of 
which  men  filled  with  love  will  readily  bethink  themselves, 
bat  whereof  too  many,  in  the  coldness  of  their  heart,  do  not 
so  much  as  dream.  Against  such  works  there  is  no  law,  save 
that  of  churlish,  ungenial,  pharisaic  custom. 

One  other  saying  our  Lord  uttered  on  the  present  subject, 
which  carries  great  weight  for  Christians,  though  it  can  have 
had  no  apologetic  value  in  the  opinion  of  the  Pharisees,  but 
must  rather  have  appeared  an  aggravation  of  the  offence  it 
was  meant  to  excuse.  We  refer  to  the  word,  "  The  Son  of 
man  is  Lord  even  of  the  Sabbath-day,"  uttered  by  Jesus  on  the 
occasion  when  He  defended  His  disciples  against  the  charge 
of  Sabbath-breaking.  This  statement,  remarkable,  like  the 
claim  made  at  the  same  time  to  be  greater  than  the  temple, 
as  an  .assertion  of  superhuman  dignity  on  the  part  of  the  meek 
and  lowly  One,  was  not  meant  as  a  pretension  to  the  right  to 
bseak  the  law  of  rest  without  cause,  or  to  abrogate  it  alto- 
gether. This  is  evident  from  Mark's  accoimt,^  where  the  words 
come  in  as  an  inference  from  the  proposition  that  the  Sabbath 
was  made  for  man ;  which  could  not  logically  be  made  the 
foundation  for  a  repeal  of  the  statute,  seeing  it  is  the  most 
powerful  argument  for  the  perpetuity  of  the  weekly  rest.  Had 
the  Sabbath  been  a  mere  burdensome  restriction  imposed  on 

1  Mark  ii  27,  28. 


9^6  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

men,  we  should  have  expected  its  abrogation  from  Him  who 
came  to  redeem  men  &om  all  sorts  of  bondage.  But  was  the 
Sabbath  made  for  man — ^for  man's  good  ?  Then  should  we 
expect  Christ's  function  to  be  not  that  of  a  repealer,  but  that 
of  a  universal  philanthropic  legislator,  making  what  had  pre- 
viously  been  the  peculiar  privilege  of  Israel  a  common  bless- 
ing to  all  mankind.  For  the  Father  sent  His  Son  into  the 
world  to  deliver  men  indeed  from  the  yoke  of  ordinances,  but 
not  to  cancel  any  of  His  gifts,  which  are  all  **  without  repent- 
ance," and  once  given  can  never  be  withdrawn. 

What,  then,  does  the  lordship  of  Christ  over  the  Sabbath 
signify  ?  Simply  this :  that  an  institution  which  is  of  the 
nature  of  a  boon  to  man,  properly  falls  imder  the  control  of 
Him  who  is  the  King  of  grace,  and  the  administrator  of 
divine  mercy.  He  is  the  best  judge  how  such  an  institution 
should  be  observed ;  and  He  has  a  right  to  see  that  it  shall 
not  be  perverted  from  a  boon  into  a  burden,  and  so  put  in 
antagonism  to  the  royal  imperial  law  of  love.  The  Son  of 
man  hath  authority  to  cancel  aU  regulations  tending  in  this 
direction  emanating  from  men,  and  even  all  bye-laws  of  the 
Mosaic  code  savouring  of  legal  rigour,  and  tending  to  veil  the 
beneficent  design  of  the  fourth  commandment  of  the  deca- 
logue.^ He  may,  in  the  exercise  of  His  mediatorial  preroga- 
tive, give  the  old  institution  a  new  name,  alter  the  day  of  its 
celebration,  so  as  to  invest  it  with  distinctively  Christian  asso- 
ciations congenial  to  the  hearts  of  believers,  and  make  it  in  all 

'  The  position  of  the  Sabbath  in  the  decalogne  (where  nothing  is  placed  which 
was  of  merely  Jewish  concern,  and  which  was  not  of  fundamental  importance) 
is  a  presumption  of  perpetuity  for  every  candid  mind.  The  much  disputed 
question  of  the  ethical  nature  of  the  Sabbath  law  is  not  of  so  great  moment  as 
has  been  imagined.  Moral  or  not,  the  weekly  rest  is  to  all  men,  and  at  all 
times,  of  vital  importance  ;  therefore  practically,  if  not  philosophicaUy,  of 
ethical  value.  The  fourth  commandment  certainly  differs  from  the  others  in  this 
respect,  that  it  is  not  written  on  the  natural  conscience.  The  utmost  length 
reason  could  go,  would  be  to  determine  that  rest  is  needful.  Whether  rest 
should  be  periodical  or  at  irregular  intervals,  on  the  seventh  day  or  on  the  tenth, 
as  in  revolutionary  France,  with  its  mania  for  the  decimal  system,  the  light  of 
nature  could  not  teach.  But  the  decalogue  settles  that  point,  and  settles  it  for 
ever,  for  all  who  believe  in  the  divine  origin  of  the  Mosaic  legislation.  The 
fourth  commandment  is  a  revelation  for  all  time  of  Grod's  mind  on  the  univer- 
sally  important  question  of  the  proper  relation  between  labour  and  rest. 


LESS0H8  IK  HOLT  LIVIK6 :   SABBATH  OBSERVANCE.  97 

the  details  of  its  observance  subservient  to  the  great  ends  of 
His  incarnation. 

To  such  effect  did  the  Son  of  man  claim  to  be  Lord  of  the 
Sabbath-day ;  and  His  claim,  so  understood,  was  acknowledged 
by  the  church,  when,  following  the  traces  of  apostolic  usage,  she 
changed  the  weekly  rest  from  the  seventh  day  to  the  first,^ 
that  it  might  commemorate  the  joyful  event  of  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  Saviour,  which  lay  nearer  the  heart  of  a  believer 
than  the  old  event  of  the  creation,  and  called  the  first  day  by 
His  name.  Dies  JDomintcus,  the  Lord's  day  That  claim  all 
Christians  acknowledge  who,  looking  at  the  day  in  the  light  of 
Grod's  original  design,  and  of  Christ's  teaching,  example,  and 
work,  so  observe  it  as  to  keep  the  golden  mean  between  the  two 
extzemes  of  pharisaic  rigour  and  of  Sadducaic  laxity ;  recog- 
nising on  the  one  hand  the  beneficent  ends  served  by  the  insti- 
tution, and  doing  their  utmost  to  secure  that  these  ends  shall 
be  fiilly  realized  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  avoiding  the  petty 
scrupulosity  of  a  cheerless  legalism,  which  causes  many,  espe- 
cially among  the  young,  to  stumble  at  the  law,  as  a  statute 
of  unreasonable  arbitrary  restriction ;  avoiding  also  the  bad 
pharisaic  habit  of  indulging  in  over-confident  judgments  on 
difficult  points  of  detail,  and  on  the  conduct  of  those  who  in 
such  points  do  not  think  and  act  as  they  do  themselves. 

We  must  not  dose  this  chapter,  in  which  we  have  been 

'  How  this  change  was  brought  abont  we  do  not  weU  know.  Probably  it  was 
aooomplished  by  degrees,  and  without  full  consciousness  of  the  transition  which 
was  being  made,  or  of  its  import.  From  the  beginning  believers  seem  to  have 
met  for  worship  on  the  first  day  of  the  week  ;  but  there  is  no  evidence  that 
thej  rested  entirely  from  work  on  that  day.  In  many  cases  they  could  not  have 
done  so  if  they  wished,  e.^.  in  the  case  of  slaves  of  heathen  masters.  Hence, 
probably,  we  may  account  for  the  church  in  Troas  meeting  in  the  evening,  and 
worshipping  till  midnight.  The  likelihood  is,  that  the  first  Christians  rested 
on  the  seventh  day  as  Jews,  and  as  Christians  worshipped  on  the  morning  or 
evening  of  the  first  day,  before  or  after  their  daily  toiL  In  course  of  time,  as 
Jewish  believers  became  more  weaned  from  Judaism,  and  Gentile  worshippers 
multiplied,  to  as  to  have  a  preponderating  influence  on  the  customs  of  the 
ehnrch,  the  seventh-day  rest  would  disappear,  and  the  first-day  rest,  the  Lord's 
day,  would  take  its  place.  To  prevent  misapprehension,  it  is  necessary  to  explain 
that  the  seventh  day  continued  to  be  observed  as  a  fast-day  or  a  festival,  with 
religionB  services,  long  after  it  had  ceased  to  be  regarded  as  a  day  on  which  men 
ongiht  entirely  to  rest  from  laboor.  Vid,  on  this,  Bingham,  Originea  Ecclesiastics, 
B.  zx.  c  m. 


98  THB  TBAINING  OF  THE  TWELVR 

studying  the  lessons  in  holy  living  given  by  our  Lord  to  His 
disciples,  without  adding  a  reflection  applicable  to  all  the  three. 
By  these  lessons  the  twelve  were  taught  a  virtu©  very  neces- 
sary for  the  apostles  of  a  religion  in  many  respects  new :  the 
power  to  bear  isolation  and  its  consequences.  When  Peter 
and  John  appeared  before  the  Sanhednm,  the  rulers  marvelled 
at  their  boldness,  till  they  recognised  in  them  companions  of 
Jesus  the  Nazarene.  They  seem  to  have  imagined  that  His 
followers  were  fit  for  anything  requiring  audacity.  They  were 
right  The  apostles  had  strong  nerves,  and  were  not  easily 
daunted  ;  and  the  lessons  which  we  have  been  considering  help 
us  to  understand  whence  they  got  their  rare  moral  courage. 
They  had  been  accustomed  for  years  to  stand  alone,  and  to 
disregard  the  fashion  of  the  world ;  till  at  length  they  could  do 
what  was  right,  heedless  of  human  criticism,  without  effort, 
almost  without  thought.. 


CHAPTER    VIIL 

FIRST  ATTEMPTS  AT  EVANGELISM. 

Section  i. — The  Mission, 

Matt.  x.  ;  Mask  yi.  7-13,  80-32 ;  Luke  ix.  1-11. 

THE  twelve  are  now  to  come  before  us  as  active  agents  in 
advancing  the  kingdom  of  God.  Having  been  for 
some  time  in  Christ's  company,  witnessing  His  miraculous 
works,  hearing  His  doctrine  concerning  the  kingdom,  and 
learning  how  to  pray  and  how  to  live,  they  are  at  length  sent 
forth  to  evangelize  the  towns  and  villages  of  their  native 
province,  and  to  heal  the  sick  in  their  Master's  name,  and  by 
His  power.  This  mission  of  the  disciples  as  evangelists  or 
miniature  apostles  was  partly,  without  doubt,  an  educational 
experiment  for  their  own  benefit ;  but  its  direct  design  was  to 
meet  the  spiritual  necessities  of  the  people,  whose  neglected 
condition  lay  heavy  on  Christ's  heart.  The  compassionate 
Son  of  man,  in  the  course  of  His  wanderings,  had  observed 
how  the  masses  of  the  population  were,  like  a  shepherdless 
flock  of  sheep,  scattered  and  torn  ;^  and  it  was  His  desire  that 
aU  should  know  that  a  good  Shepherd  had  come  to  care  for 
the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel  The  multitudes  were 
ready  enough  to  welcome  the  good  news ;  the  diflSculty  was 
to  meet  the  pressing  demand  of  the  hour.  The  harvest,  the 
grain  ready  for  reaping,  was  plenteous,  but  the  labourers 
were  few.' 

In  connection  with  this  mission,  these  things  call  for  special 
notice :  The  sphere  assigned  for  the  work,  tiie  nature  of  the 
work,  the  instructions  for  carrying  it  on,  the  results  of  the 

1  U»»Xfti90i,  Matt  iz.  86,  the  reading  preferred  by  critics  =  flayed,  harassed. 
The  idea  suggested  is  that  of  sheep  whose  fleeces  are  torn  by  thorns. 
*  Matt  iz.  87. 


100 


THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 


mission,  and  the  return  of  the  missionaries.  These  points  we 
shall  consider  in  their  order,  except  that,  for  convenience,  we 
shall  reserve  Christ's  instructions  to  His  disciples  for  the  last 
place,  and  give  them  a  section  to  themselves. 

1.  The  sphere  of  the  mission,  as  described  in  general  terms, 
was  the  whole  land  of  Israel  "  Go,"  said.  Jesus  to  the  twelve, 
"  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel ;"  and  further  on,  in 
Matthew's  narrative.  He  speaks  to  them  as  if  the  plan  of  the 
mission  involved  a  visit  to  all  the  cities  of  Israel^  Prac- 
tically, however,  the  operations  of  the  disciples  seem  to  have 
been  restricted  to  their  native  province  of  jGlalilee ;  and  even 
within  its  narrow  limits  to  have  been  carried  on  rather  among 
the  villages  and  hamlets,  than  in  considerable  towns  or  cities 
like  Tiberias.  The  former  of  these  statements  is  supported 
by  the  fact  that  the  doings  of  the  disciples  attracted  the 
attention  of  Herod  the  tetrarch  of  Galilee,'  which  implies 
that  they  took  place  in  his  neighbourhood ; '  while  the  latter 
is  proved  by  the  words  of  the  third  evangelist  in  giving  a 
summary  account  of  the  mission :  "  They  departed  and  went 
through  the  villages  (towns,  Eng.  Ver.),  preaching  the  gospel, 
and  healing  everywhere."  * 

While  the  apprentice  missionaries  were  permitted  by  their 
instructions  to  go  to  any  of  the  lost  sheep  of  Israel,  to  all  if 
practicable,  they  were  expressly  forbidden  to  extend  their 
labours  beyond  these  limits.  They  were  not  to  go  into  the 
way  of  the  .Gentiles,  nor  enter  into  any  city  or  town  of  the 
Samaritans.^  This  prohibition  arose  in  part  out  of  the  general 
plan  which  Christ  had  formed  for  founding  the  kingdom  of 
God  on  the  eartL  His  ultimate  aim  was  the  conquest  of  the 
world ;  but  in  order  to  that.  He  deemed  it  necessary  first  to 
secure  a  strong  base  of  operations  in  the  Holy  Land  and 
among  the  chosen  people.  Therefore  He  ever  regarded  Him- 
self  personally  as  a  Messenger  of  God  to  the  Jewish  nation. 
seriously  giving  that  as  a  reason  why  He  should  not  work 
among  the  heathen,^  and  departing  occasionally  from  the  rule 
only  in  order  to  supply  in  His  own  ministry  prophetic  intima. 


1  Matt  X.  6,  28. 

'  Herod  resided  at  Tiberias. 

•  Matt.  z.  6. 


'  Mark  vi.  14  ;  Luke  iz.  7. 
^  Luke  iz.  6 — mmrk  rks  xmfmt, 
•  Matt  ZY.  24. 


FIRST  ATTElfPTS  AT  EVANGELISM  :   THE  MISSION.         101 

tions  of  an  approaching  time,  when  Jew  and  Samaritan  and 
Gentile  should  be  united  on  equal  terms  in  one  divine 
commonwealtL^ 

But  the  principal  reason  of  the  prohibition  lay  in  the 
present  spiritual  condition  of  the  disciples  themselves.  The 
time  would  come  when  Jesus  might  say  to  His  chosen  ones, 
**  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every 
creature ; "  '  but  that  time  was  not  yet  The  twelve,  at  the 
period  of  their  first  trial  mission,  were  not  fit  to  preach  the 
gospel,  or  to  do  good  works,  either  among  Samaritans  or  Gen- 
tiles. Their  hearts  were  too  narrow,  their  prejudices  too 
strong;  there  was  too  much  of  the  Jew,  too  little  of  the 
Christian,  in  their  character.  For  the  catholic  work  of  the 
apoetleship  they  needed  a  new  divine  illumination,  and  a 
copious  baptism  with  the  benignant  spirit  of  love.  Suppose 
these  raw  evangelists  had  gone  into  a  Samaritan  village,  what 
would  have  happened  ?  In  all  probability  they  would  have 
been  drawn  into  disputes  on  the  religious  differences^between 
Samaritans  and  Jews,  in  which  of  course  they  woidd  have 
lost  their  temper ;  so  that,  instead  of  seeking  the  salvation  of 
the  people  among  whom  they  had  come,  they  would  rather  be 
in  a  mood  to  call  down  fire  from  heaven  to  consiune  them,  as 
they  actually  proposed  to  do  at  a  subsequent  period.' 

2.  The  work  entrusted  to  the  twelve  was  in  one  depart- 
ment very  extensive,  and  in  the  other  very  limited.  They 
were  endowed  with  unlimited  powers  of  healing,  but  their 
commission  was  very  restricted  so  far  as  preaching  was  con- 
cerned. In  regard  to  the  former  their  instructions  were: 
"  Heal  the  sick,  cleanse  the  lepers,  raise  the  dead,  cast  out 
devils :  fiieely  ye  have  received,  freely  give ; "  in  regard  to 
the  latter :  ''  As  ye  go,  preach,  saying,  The  kingdom  of  heaven 
is  at  hand."  ^  The  commission  in  the  one  case  seems  too  wide, 
in  the  other  too  narrow ;  but  in  both  the  wisdom  of  Jesus  is 
apparent  to  a  deeper  consideration.  In  so  far  as  miraculous 
works  were  concerned  there  was  no  need  for  restriction,  unless 
it  were  to  avoid  the  risk  of  producing  elation  and  vanity  in 
those  who  wielded  such  wonderful  power ;  a  risk  which  was 
certainly  not  imaginary,  but  which  could  be  remedied  when  it 

>  John  XT.  7-2i.       *MarkxYL15.        SLakeiz.6i.        «Mattx.7, 8. 


102  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

assumed  tangible  form.  All  the  miracles  wrought  by  the 
twelve  were  really  wrought  by  Jesus  Himself,  their  sole 
function  consisting  in  making  a  believing  use  of  His  name. 
This  seems  to  have  been  perfectly  imderstood  by  all ;  for  the 
works  done  by  the  apostles  did  not  lead  the  people  of  Galilee 
to  wonder  who  they  were,  but  only  who  and  what  He  was  in 
whose  name  all  these  things  were  done.^  Therefore,  it  being 
Christ's  will  that  such  miracles  should  be  wrought  through 
the  instrumentality  of  His  disciples,  it  was  just  as  easy  for 
them  to  do  the  greatest  works  as  to  do  the  smaller ;  if,  indeed, 
there  be  any  sense  in  speaking  of  degrees  of  difficulty  in  con- 
nection with  miracles,  which  is  more  than  doubtful 

As  regards  the  preaching,  on  the  other  hand,  there  was  not 
only  reason,  but  necessity,  for  restriction.  The  disciples  could 
do  no  more  than  proclaim  the  fact  that  the  kingdom  was  at 
hand,  and  bid  men  everywhere  repent,  by  way  of  a  prepara- 
tion for  its  advent.  This  was  really  all  they  knew  them- 
selves. They  did  not  as  yet  understand,  in  the  least  degree, 
the  doctrine  of  the  cross ;  they  did  not  even  know  the  nature 
of  the  kingdom.  They  had,  indeed,  heard  their  Master  dis- 
course profoundly  thereon,  but  they  had  not  comprehended 
His  words.  Their  ideas  respecting  the  coming  kingdom  were 
nearly  as  crude  and  carnal  as  were  those  of  other  Jews,  who 
looked  for  the  restoration  of  Israel's  political  independence 
and  temporal  prosperity  as  in  the  glorious  days  of  old.  In 
one  point  only  were  they  in  advance  of  current  notions. 
They  had  learned  from  John  and  from  Jesus  that  repentance 
was  necessary  in  order  to  citizenship  in  this  kingdom.  In  all 
other  respects  they  and  their  hearers  were  pretty  much  on  a 
level 

Far  from  wondering  that  the  preaching  programme  of  the 
disciples  was  so  limited,  we  are  rather  tempted  to  wonder 
how  Christ  could  trust  them  to  open  their  mouths  at  all,  even 
on  the  one  topic  of  the  kingdom.  Was  there  not  a  danger 
that  men  with  such  crude  ideas  might  foster  delusive  hopes, 
and  give  rise  to  political  excitement  ?  Nay,  may  we  not  dis- 
cover actual  traces  of  such  excitement  in  the  notice  taken  of 
their  movements  at  Herod's  court,  and  in  the  proposal  of  the 

^  Mark  vi.  14,  '*  His  name  was  spread  abroad  "  (^«»v*»  lyinr*). 


FntST  ATTEMPTS  AT  EVANGELISM  :   THE  MISSION.         103 

multitude  not  long  afber^  to  take  Jesus  by  force  to  make  Him 
a  king?^ 

Doubtless  there  was  danger  in  this  direction ;  and  there- 
fore, while  He  could  not,  to  avoid  it,  leave  the  poor  perishing 
people  uncaied  for,  Jesus  took  all  possible  precautions  to 
obviate  mischief  as  far  as  might  be,  by  in  effect  prohibiting 
His  messengers  from  entering  into  detail  on  the  subject  of 
the  kingdom,  and  by  putting  a  sound  form  of  words  into 
their  mouths.  They  were  instructed  to  announce  the  king- 
dom as  a  kingdom  of  heaven;  a  thing  which  some  might 
deem  a  lovely  vision,  but  which  all  worldly  men  would  guess 
to  be  quite  another  thing  from  what  they  desired.  A  king- 
dom of  heaven !  What  was  that  to  them  ?  What  they 
wanted  was  a  kingdom  of  earth,  in  which  they  might  live 
peaceably  and  happily  imder  just  government,  and,  above  all, 
with  plenty  to  eat  and  drink.  A  kingdom  of  heaven !  That 
was  only  for  such  as  had  no  earthly  hope ;  a  refuge  from 
despair,  a  melancholy  consolation  in  absence  of  any  better 
comfort  Even  so,  ye  worldlings !  Only  for  such  as  ye  deem 
miserable  was  the  message  meant  To  the  poor  the  kingdom 
was  to  be  preached.  To  the  labouring  and  heavy  laden  was 
the  invitation  "  Come  to  me  "  addressed,  and  the  promise  of 
rest  made ;  of  rest  from  ambition  and  discontent,  and  schem- 
ing, parking  care,  in  the  blessed  hope  of  the  supernal  and  the 
eternal 

3.  The  impression  produced  by  the  labours  of  the  twelve 
seems  to  have  been  very  considerable.  The  fame  of  their 
doings,  as  already  remarked,  reached  the  ears  of  Herod,  and 
great  crowds  appear  to  have  accompanied  them  as  they  moved 
from  place  to  place.  On  their  return,  e.g.  from  the  mission  to 
rejoin  the  company  of  their  Master,  they  were  thronged  by 
an  eager,  admiring  multitude  who  had  witnessed  or  expe- 
rienced the  benefits  of  their  work;  so  that  it  was  neces- 
sary for  them  to  withdraw  into  a  desert  place  in  order  to 
obtain  a  quiet  interval  of  rest  "There  were  many,"  the 
second  evangelist  informs  us,  "  coming  and  going,  and  they 
had  no  time  so  much  as  to  eat  And  they  departed  unto  a 
desert  place  by  ship  privately."*    Even  in  the  desert  solitudes 

>  John  TL  15.  *  Mark  yL  31,  82. 


104  THE  TRAINING  OF  THS  TWILYE. 

on  the  eastern  shore  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee  they  failed  to 
secure  the  desired  privacy.  "  The  people  saw  them  departing, 
and  ran  afoot  thither  (round  the  end  of  the  sea)  out  of  all 
cities,  and  outwent  them,  and  came  together  unto  Him."^ 

In  quality,  the  results  of  the  mission  appear  to  have  been 
much  less  satisfactory  than  in  their  extent  The  religious  im- 
pressions produced  seem  to  have  been  in  a  great  measure  super- 
ficial and  evanescent  There  were  many  blossoms,  so  to  speak, 
on  the  apple  tree  in  the  spring-tide  of  this  Gralilean  revival ; 
but  only  a  comparatively  small  number  of  them  set  in  fruit, 
while  of  these  a  still  smaller  number  ever  reached  the  stage 
of  ripe  fruit  This  we  learn  from  what  took  place  shortly 
after,  in  connection  with  Christ's  discourse  on  the  bread  of 
life  in  the  synagogue  of  Capernaum.  Then  the  same  men 
who,  after  the  miraculous  feeding  in  the  desert,  would  have 
made  Christ  a  king,  deserted  Him  in  a  body,  scandalized  by 
His  mysterious  doctrine ;  and  those  who  did  this  were,  for  the 
most  part,  just  the  men  who  had  listened  to  the  twelve  while 
they  preached  repentance.^ 

Such  an  issue  to  a  benevolent  undertaking  must  have  been 
deeply  disappointing  to  the  heart  of  Jesus.  Tet  it  is  remark- 
able that  the  comparative  abortiveness  of  the  first  evangelistic 
movement  did  not  prevent  Him  from  repeating  the  experi- 
ment some  time  after  on  a  still  more  extensive  scale.  *'  After 
these  things,"  writes  the  third  evangelist^  "  the  Lord  appointed 
other  seventy  also,  and  sent  them  two  and  two  before  His 
face,  into  every  city  and  place  whither  He  Himself  would 
come."  '  The  motive  of  this  second  mission  was  the  same  as 
in  the  case  of  the  first,  as  were  also  the  instructions  to  the 
missionaries.  Jesus  still  felt  deep  compassion  for  the  perish- 
ing multitude,  and,  hoping  against  hope,  made  a  new  attempt 
to  save  the  lost  sheep.  He  would  have  all  men  caUed  at 
least  to  the  fellowship  of  the  kingdom,  even  though  few 
should  be  chosen  to  it  And  when  the  immediate  results 
were  promising  He  was  gratified,  albeit  knowing,  from  past 
experience  as  well  as  by  divine  insight,  that  the  faith  and 
repentance  of  many  were  only  too  likely  to  be  evanescent 

>  Mark  tl  88.  *  Compare  Mark  yi.  80-85  with  John  yi.  22-25. 

s  Luke  z.  1. 


FIRST  ATTEMPTS  AT  EVANGELISM  :   THE  MISSION.         105 

as  the  early  dew.  When  the  seventy  returned  from  their 
mission,  and  reported  their  great  success,  He  hailed  it  as  an 
omen  of  the  downfall  of  Satan's  kingdom ;  and,  rejoicing  in 
spirit,  gave  thanks  to  the  Supreme  Buler  in  heaven  and  eaxth, 
His  Father,  that  while  the  things  of  the  kingdom  were  hid 
from  the  wise  and  the  prudent,  the  people  of  intelligence 
and  discretion,  they  were  by  His  grace  revealed  unto  babes — 
the  mde,  the  poor,  the  ignorant.^ 

The  reference  in  the  thanksgiving  prayer  of .  Jesus  to  the 
^wise  andpnident"  suggests  the  thought  that  these  evan- 
gelistic efforts  were  r^arded  with  disfavour  by  the  refined, 
£E»tidious  classes  of  Jewish  religious  society.  This  is  in  itself 
probabla  There  are  always  men  in  the  church,  intelligent^ 
wise,  and  even  good,  to  whom  popular  religious  movements 
are  distasteful  The  noise,  the  excitement,  t^e  extravagances, 
the  delusions,  the  misdirection  of  zeal,  the  rudeness  of  the 
agents,  the  instability  of  the  converts, — all  these  things  offend 
them.  The  same  class  of  minds  would  have  taken  offence 
at  the  evangelistic  work  of  the  twelve  and  the  seventy,  for 
imdoubtedly  it  was  accompanied  with  the  same  drawbacks. 
The  agents  were  ignorant ;  they  had  few  ideas  in  their  heads ; 
they  imderstood  little  of  divine  truth ;  their  sole  qualification 
was,  that  they  were  earnest  and  could  preach  repentance  welL 
Doubtless,  also,  there  was  plenty  of  noise  and  excitement 
among  the  multitudes  who  heard  them  preach ;  and  we  cer- 
tainly know  that  their  zeal  was  both  ill-informed  and  short- 
lived. These  things,  in  fact,  are  standing  features  of  all  popular 
movementa  Jonathan  Edwards,  speaking  with  reference  to 
the  "  revival "  of  religion  which  took  place  in  America  in  his 
day,  says  truly:  ''A  great  deal  of  noise  and  tumidt,  con- 
fusion and  uproar,  darkness  mixed  with  light,  and  evil  with 
good,  is  always  to  be  expected  in  the  beginning  of  something 
▼eiy  glorious  in  the  state  of  things  in  human  society  or  the 
diurch  of  Grod.  After  nature  has  long  been  shut  up  in  a 
cold,  dead  state,  when  the  sun  returns  in  the  spring,  there  is, 
together  with  the  increase  of  the  light  and  heat  of  the  sun, 
very  tempestuous  weather  before  all  is  settled,  calm,  and 
serene,  and  all  nature  rejoices  in  its  bloom  and  beauty."  ' 

^  Lnkfl  z.  17-21.  *  ThoughU  <m  the  Revival,  Part  L  sec  iii 


106  THE  TBAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

None  of  the  "  wise  and  prudent"  knew  half  so  well  as  Jesns 
what  evil  would  be  mixed  with  the  good  in  the  work  of  the 
kingdom.  But  He  was  not  so  easily  oflfended  as  they.  The 
Friend  of  sinners  was  ever  like  Himself.  He  83nnpathized 
with  the  multitude,  and  could  not,  like  the  Pharisees,  con- 
tentedly resign  them  to  a  permanent  condition  of  ignorance 
and  depravity.  He  rejoiced  greatly  over  even  one  lost  sheep 
restored ;  and  He  was,  one  might  say,  overjoyed,  when  not 
one,  but  a  whole  flock,  even  legan  to  return  to  the  fold.  It 
pleased  Him  to  see  men  repenting  even  for  a  season,  and 
pressing  into  the  kingdom  even  rudely  and  violently :  for 
His  love  was  strong ;  and  where  strong  love  is,  even  wisdom 
and  refinement  will  not  be  fastidious. 

Before  passing  from  this  topic,  let  us  observe  that  there  is 
another  class  of  Christians,  quite  distinct  from  the  wise  and 
prudent,  in  whose  eyes  such  evangelistic  labours  as  those  of 
the  twelve  stand  in  no  need  of  vindication.  Their  tendency, 
on  the  contrary,  is  to  regard  such  labours  as  the  whole  work 
of  the  kingdom.  Revival  of  religion  among  the  n^lected 
masses  is  for  them  the  sum  of  all  good-doing.  Of  the  more 
stUl,  less  observable  work  of  instruction  going  on  in  the 
church  they  take  no  account.  Where  there  is  no  obvious 
excitement,  the  church  in  their  view  is  dead,  and  her  ministry 
inefficient  Such  need  to  be  reminded  that  there  were  two 
religious  movements  going  on  in  the  days  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
One  consisted  in  rousing  the  mass  out  of  the  stupor  of  in- 
difference ;  the  other  consisted  in  the  careful,  exact  training 
of  men  already  in  earnest,  in  the  principles  and  truths  of  the 
divine  kingdom.  Of  the  one  movement  the  disciples,  that 
is,  both  the  twelve  and  the  seventy,  were  the  agents ;  of  the 
other  movement  they  were  the  subjects.  And  the  latter 
movement,  though  less  noticeable,  and  much  more  limited  in 
extent,  was  by  far  more  .important  than  the  former ;  for  it 
was  destined  to  bring  forth  fruit  that  would  remain :  to  tell 
not  merely  on  the  present  time,  but  on  the  whole  history  of 
the  world.  The  deep  truths  which  the  great  Teacher  was 
now  quietly  and  unobservedly,  as  in  the  dark,  instilling  into 
the  minds  of  a  select  band,  the  recipients  of  His  confidential 
teaching  would  speak  in  the  broad  daylight  ere  long ;  and  the 


FIKST  ATTEMPTS  AT  EVANGELISM:   THE  MISSION.         107 

sound  of  their  voice  would  not  stop  till  it  had  gone  through 
all  the  earth.  It  would  have  been  a  poor  outlook  for  the  king- 
dom of  heaven  if  Christ  had  neglected  this  work,  and  given 
Himself  up  entirely  to  vague  evangelism  among  the  masses. 

4.  When  the  twelve  had  finished  their  mission,  they  re- 
tamed  and  told  their  Master  all  that  they  had  done  and 
taught  Of  their  report,  or  of  His  remarks  thereon,  no  de- 
tails are  recorded.  Such  details  we  do  find,  however,  in 
connection  with  the  later  mission  of  the  seventy.  **  The 
seventy,"  we  read,  "returned  again  with  joy,  sajring,  Lord, 
even  the  devils  are  subject  irnto  us  through  Thy  nama"^ 
The  same  evangelist  firom  whom  these  words  are  quoted  in- 
forms us  that,  after  congratulating  the  disciples  on  their 
success,  and  expressing  His  own  satisfaction  with  the  facts 
reported,  Jesus  spoke  to  them  the  warning  word :  "  Notwith- 
standing in  this  rejoice  not,  that  the  spirits  are  subject  imto 
you;  but  rather  rejoice  because  your  names  are  written  in 
Heaven.**  *     It  was  a  timely  caution  against  elation  and  vanity. 

It  is  very  probable  that  a  similar  word  of  caution  was  ad- 
dressed to  the  twelve  also  after  their  return.  Such  a  word 
would  certainly  not  have  been  unseasonable  in  their  case. 
They  had  been  engaged  in  the  same  exciting  work,  they  had 
widded  the  same  miraculous  powers,  they  had  been  equally 
successful,  they  were  equally  immature  in  character,  and 
therefore  it  was  equally  difficult  for  them  to  bear  success.  It 
is  most  probable,  therefore,  that  when  Jesus  said  to  them  on 
their  return,  "  Come  ye  yourselves  apart  into  a  desert  place, 
and  rest  awhile,"  *  He  was  not  caring  for  their  bodies  alone, 
but  was  prudently  seeking  to  provide  repose  for  their  heated 
minds  as  well  as  for  their  jaded  frames. 

The  admonition  to  the  seventy  is  a  word  in  season  to  all 
who  are  very  zealous  in  the  work  of  evangelism,  especially 
such  as  are  crude  in  knowledge  and  graca  It  hints  at  the 
possibility  of  their  own  spiritual  health  being  injured  by  their 
very  zeal  in  seeking  the  salvation  of  others.  This  may  happen 
in  many  ways.  Success  may  make  them  vain,  and  they  may 
heffn  to  sacnrifidSe  unto  their  own  net  They  may  fall  under 
the  donunion  of  the  devil,  through  their  very  joy  that  he  is 

>  Luke  z.  17.  '  Luke  x.  20.  *  Mark  tL  81. 


108  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

subject  unto  them.  They  may  despise  those  who  have  been 
less  successful,  or  denounce  them  as  deficient  in  zeaL  The 
eminent  divine  already  quoted  gives  a  lamentable  account  of 
the  pride,  presumption,  arrogance,  conceit,  and  censoriousness 
which  characterized  many  of  the  more  active  promoters  of 
religious  revival  in  his  day.^  Once  more,  they  may  fall  into 
carnal  security  respecting  their  own  spiritual  state,  deeming  it 
impossible  that  anything  can  go  wrong  with  those  who  are  so 
devoted,  and  whom  God  has  so  greatly  owned.  A  dangerous 
mistake ;  for,  observe,  Judas  took  part  in  this  Galilean  mission, 
and,  for  aught  we  know  to  the  contrary,  was  as  successful  as 
his  feUow-disciples  in  casting  out  devils.  Graceless  m6n  may 
for  a  season  be  employed  as  agents  in  promoting  the  work  of 
grace  in  the  hearts  of  others.  Usefulness  does  not  necessarily 
imply  goodness,  according  to  the  teaching  of  Christ  Himsel£ 
'*  Many,"  He  declares  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mounts  "  will  say 
unto  me  on  that  day.  Lord,  Lord,  have  we  not  prophesied  in 
Thy  name,  and  in  Thy  name  have  cast  out  devils,  and  in  Thy 
name  done  many  wonderful  works  V*  And  mark  the  answer 
which  He  says  He  will  give  such.  It  is  not :  I  call  in  ques- 
tion the  correctness  of  your  statement ;  that  is  tacitly  ad- 
mitted. It  is :  "I  never  knew  you ;  depart  from  me,  ye  that 
work  iniquity."  * 

These  solemn  words  suggest  the  need  of  watchfulness  and 
self-examination ;  but  they  are  not  designed  to  discourage  or 
discountenance  zeaL  We  must  not  interpret  them  as  if  they 
meant :  "  Never  mind  doing  good,  only  be  good ;"  or,  "  Care 
not  for  the  salvation  of  others :  look  to  your  own  salvation." 
Jesus  Christ  did  not  teach  a  listless  or  a  selfish  religion.  He 
inculcated  on  His  disciples  a  large-hearted  generous  concern 
for  the  spiritual  well-being  of  men.  To  foster  such  a  spirit 
He  sent  the  twelve  on  this  trial  mission,  even  when  they  were 
comparatively  unfitted  for  the  work,  and  notwithstanding  the 
risk  of  spiritual  harm  to  which  it  exposed  them.  At  all  hazards 
He  would  have  His  apostles  be  filled  with  enthusiasm  for  the 
advancement  of  the  kingdom ;  only  taking  due  care,  when  the 

*  Thoughts  on  BevivcU,  Part  iv. 

*  Matt.  yii.  22.  See,  for  views  similar  to  those  aboye  stated,  Edwards'  JUaughU 
on  Revival,  Part  ii  sec.  ii. 


FIBST  ATTEICPTS  AT  EVANGELISM  :   THE  mSTBUCTIOKS.    109 

vices  to  wUch  yonxig  enthusiasts  are  liable  began  to  appear, 
to  check  them  by  a  warning  word  and  a  timely  retreat  into 
solitada 


Section  n. — The  Instructions. 

The  instractions  given  by  Jesus  to  the  twelve  in  sending 
them  forth  on  their  first  mission  are  obviously  divisible  into 
two  parts.  The  first,  shorter  part,  common  to  the  narratives 
of  all  the  three  first  evangelists,  relates  to  the  present ;  the 
second  and  much  the  longer  part,  peculiar  to  Matthew's  nar- 
rative, relates  mainly  to  the  distant  future.  In  the  former, 
Christ  tells  His  disciples  what  to  do  now,  in  their  apprentice 
apostleship ;  in  the  latter,  what  they  must  do  and  endure 
when  they  have  become  apostles  on  the  great  scale,  preaching 
the  gospel,  not  to  Jews  only,  but  to  all  nations. 

It  has  been  doubted  whether  the  discourse  included  in  the 
second  part  of  the  apostolic  or  missionary  instructions,  as  given 
by  Matthew,  was  really  uttered  by  Jesus  on  this  occasion. 
Stress  has  been  laid  by  those  who  take  the  negative  view  of 
tins  question,  on  the  facts  that  the  first  evangelist  alone  gives 
the  discourse  in  connection  with  the  trial  mission,  and  that 
the  larger  portion  of  its  contents  are  given  by  the  other  evan- 
gelists in  other  connections.  Seference  has  also  been  made, 
in  support  of  this  view,  to  the  statement  made  by  Jesus  to  His 
disciples,  in  His  farewell  address  to  them  before  the  cruci- 
fixion, that  He  had  not  till  then  spoken  to  them  of  coming 
persecutions,  and  for  this  reason,  that  while  He  was  with  them 
it  was  unnecessary.^  Finally,  it  has  been  deemed  unlikely 
that  Jesus  would  frighten  His  inexperienced  disciples,  by 
alluding  to  dangers  not  imminent  at  the  time  of  their  mission 
in  Galilee. 

These  doubts,  though  plausible,  vanish  on  deeper  conside- 
lation.  It  was  natural  that  Jesus  shoidd  signalize  the  first 
missionary  enterprise  of  the  twelve  chosen  men  by  some  such 
disoonise  as  Matthew  records,  setting  forth  the  duties,  perils, 
encouragements,  and  rewards  of  the  apostolic  vocation.  It 
was  His  way,  on  solemn  occasions,  to  speak  as  a  prophet,  who 

'  John  zyL  4. 


110  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

in  the  present  saw  the  future^  and  from  small  beginnings 
looked  forward  to  great  ultimate  issues.  And  this  Galilean 
mission,  though  humble  and  limited  compared  with'  the  great 
undertaking  of  after  years,  was  really  a  solemn  event  It  was 
the  beginning  of  that  vast  work  for  which  the  twelve  had  been 
chosen,  which  embraced  the  world  in  its  scope,  and  aimed  at 
setting  up  on  the  earth  the  kingdom  of  God:  If  the  Sermon 
on  the  Mount  was  appropriately  delivered  on  the  occasion  when 
the  apostolic  company  was  formed^  tins  discourse  on  the  apos- 
tolic vocation  was  not  less  appropriate  when  the  members  of 
that  company  first  put  their  hands  to  the  work  unto  which  they 
had  been  called. 

Even  the  allusions  to  distant  dangers  contained  in  that  dis- 
oourse  appear  on  reflection  natural  and  seasonable,  and  calcu- 
lated to  reassure  rather  than  to  frighten  the  disciples.  It  must 
be  remembered  that  the  execution  of  the  Baptist  had  recently 
occurred,  and  that  the  twelve  were  about  to  commence  their 
missionary  labours  within  the  dominions  of  the  tyrant  by  whose 
command  the  barbarous  murder  had  been  committed.  Doubt- 
less these  humble  men  who  were  to  take  up  and  repeat  the 
Baptist's  message,  "  Eepent,"  ran  no  present  risk  of  his  fate ; 
but  it  was  natural  that  they  should  fear,  and  it  was  also  natural 
that  their  Master  shoidd  think  of  their  future,  when  such  fears 
would  be  anything  but  imaginary ;  and  on  both  accounts  it 
was  seasonable  to  say  to  them  in  efiPect :  Dangers  are  coming, 
but  fear  not. 

Such,  in  substance,  is  the  burthen  of  the  second  part  of 
Christ's  instructions  to  the  twelve.  Of  the  first  part,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  burthen  is.  Care  not  These  two  words,  Care 
not.  Fear  not,  are  the  soul  and  marrow  of  all  that  was  said  by 
way  of  prelude  to  the  first  missionary  enterprise,  and  we  may 
add,  to  all  which  might  follow.  For  here  Jesus  speaks  to  all 
ages  and  to  all  times,  teUing  the  church  in  what  spirit  all  her 
missionary  enterprises  must  be  undertaken  and  carried  on,  that 
they  may  have  His  blessing. 

1.  The  duty  of  entering  on  their  mission  without  careful- 
ness, relying  on  Providence  for  the  necessaries  of  life,  was 
inculcated  on  the  twelve  by  their  Master  in  very  strong  and 
lively  terms.    They  were  instructed  to  procure  nothing  for  the 


FIB8T  ATTEMPTS  AT  EVANGELISM  :   THE  IKSTBUCTIONS.    Ill 

journey,  but  just  to  go  as  they  wera  They  must  provide 
neither  gold  nor  silver,  nor  even  so  much  as  brass  coin  in  their 
purses,  no  scrip  or  wallet  to  carry  food,  no  change  of  raiment ; 
not  even  sandals  for  their  feet,  or  a  staff  for  their  hands.  If 
they  had  the  last-mentioned  articles,  good  and  well ;  if  not, 
they  could  do  without  them.  They  might  go  on  their  errand 
of  love  barefooted,  and  without  the  aid  even  of  a  staff  to  help 
them  on  their  weary  way,  having  their  feet  shod  only  with 
the  preparation  of  the  gospel  of  peace,  and  leaning  their 
weight  upon  God's  words  of  pix)mise,  "  As  thy  days,  so  shall 
thy  strength  be."  ^ 

In  these  directions  for  the  way,  it  is  the  spirit,  and  not 
the  mere  letter,  which  is  of  intrinsic  and  permanent  value. 
The  truth  of  this  statement  is  evident  from  the  very  varia- 
tions of  the  evangelists  in  reporting  Christ's  words.  One,  for 
example  (Mark),  makes  Him  say  to  His  disciples  in  effect : 
"  If  you  have  a  staff  in  your  hand^  and  sandals  on  your  feet, 
and  one  coat  on  your  back,  let  that  suffice."  Another  (Matthew) 
represents  Jesus>  as  saying  :  "  Provide  nothing  for  this  journey, 
neither  coat,  shoes,  nor  staff.*'  ^  In  spirit  the  two  versions 
come  to  the  same  thing ;  but  if  we  insist  on  the  letter  of  the 
injunctions  with  legal  strictness,  there  is  an  obvious  contradic- 
tion between  them.  What  Jesus  meant  to  say,  in  whatever 
form  of  language  He  expressed  Himself,  was  this :  60  at  once, 
and  go  as  you  are,  and  trouble  not  yourselves  about  food  or 
raiment,  or  any  bodily  want ;  trust  in  God  for  these. 

So  understood)  the  words  of  our  Lord  are  of  permanent 
validity,  and  to  be  kept  in  mind  by  all  who  would  serve  Him 
in  His  kingdom.  And  though  the  circumstances  of  the  church 
have  greatly  altered  since  these  words  were  first  spoken,  they 
have  not  been  lost  sight  of  Many  a  minister  and  missionary 
has  obeyed  those  instructions  almost  in  their  letter,  and  many 
more  have  kept  them  in  their  spirit  Nay,  has  not  every  poor 
student  fulfilled  these  injunctions,  who  has  gone  forth  from  the 
humble  roof  of  his  parents  to  be  trained  for  the  ministry  of 
the  gospel,  without  money  in  his  pocket  either  to  buy  food  or 

^  Dent.  xzxiiL  25. 

*  The  first  erangelist  may  be  reconciled  with  the  second,  by  laying  stress  on 
the  word  *'  proYide"  {f^  »r«nir#0.    See  Alford,  in  loco. 


■  *^ 

112  THE  TBAINSfG  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

to  pay  fees,  only  with  simple  faith  and  yoathful  hope  in  his 
heart ;  knowing  as  little  how  he  is  to  find  his  way  to  the  pas- 
toral office  as  Abraham  knew  how  to  find  his  way  to  the  pio- 
mised  land  when  h^  left  his  native  abode,  but,  with  Abraham, 
trusting  that  He  who  said  to  him,  ''Leaye  thy  £Ekth6l^tf  house,** 
will  be  his  guide,  his  shield,  and  his  provider  ?  And  if  those 
who  thus  started  on  their  career  do  at  length  arrive  at  a  wealthy 
place,  in  which  their  wante  are  abundantly  suppU^  what  is 
that  but  an  endorsement  by  Providence  of  the  law  enunciated 
by  the  Master :  "  The  workman  is  worthy  of  his  meat  ? "  ^ 

The  directions  given  to  the  twelve,  with  respect  to  tem- 
poralities, in  connection  with  their  first  mission,  were  meant 
to  be  an  education  for  their  future  work.  On  entering  on  the 
duties  of  the  apostolate,  they  should  have  to  live  literally  by 
faith,  and  Jesus  mercifully  sought  to  inure  them  to  the  habit 
while  He  was  with  them  on  earth.  Therefore,  in  sending  them 
out  to  preach  in  Galilee,  He  said  to  them  in  effect :  "  Go  and 
learn  to  seek  the  kingdom  of  God  with  a  single  heart,  uncon- 
cerned about  food  or  raiment ;  for  till  ye  can  do  that  ye  are 
not  fit  to  be  my  apostles."  They  had  indeed  been  learning 
to  do  that  ever  since  they  began  to  follow  Him;  for  those 
who  belonged  to  His  company  Uterally  lived  from  day  to  day, 
taking  no  thought  for  the  morrow.  But  there  was  a  difference 
between  their  past  state  and  that  on  which  they  weire  about 
to  enter.  Hitherto  Jesus  had  been  with  them ;  now  they 
were  to  be  left  for  a  season  to  themselves.  Hitherto  they 
had  been  like  young  children  in  a  family  under  the  care  of 
their  parents,  or  like  young  birds  in  a  nest  sheltered  by  their 
mother's  wing,  and  needing  only  to  open  their  mouths  wide  in 
order  to  get  them  fiUed.  Now  they  were  to  become  like  boys 
leaving  their  father's  house  to  serve  an  apprenticeship,  or  like 
fledglings  leaving  the  warm  nest  in  which  they  were  nursed, 
to  exercise  their  wings  and  seek  food  for  themselves. 

While  requiring  BQs  disciples  to  walk  by  faith,  Jesus  gave 
their  faith  something  to  rest  on,  by  encouraging  them  to  hope 
that  what  they  provided  not  for  themselves  Gkxi  would  pro- 
vide for  them  through  the  instrumentality  of  His  people.  "  Into 
whatsoever  city  or  town  ye  shall  enter,  inquire  who  in  it  is 

^  Matt  z.  10. 


FQtST  ATTEMPTS  AT  EVANGEUaM :   THE  INSTBUCTIONa    113 

worthy,  and  there  abide  till  ye  go  Ihence."^  He  took  for 
granted,  we  observe,  that  there  would  always  be  found  at  every 
place  at  least  one  good  man  with  a  warm  heart,  who  would 
welcome  the  messengers  of  the  kingdom  to  his  house  and  table 
for  the  p«re  love  of  God  and  of  the  truth.  Surely  no  imrea- 
8onaU#  assumption.  It  were  a  wretched  hamlet,  not  to  say 
town,  tlhat  had  not  a  single  worthy  person  in  it.  Even  wicked 
Sodom  had  a  Lot  within  its  walls  who  could  entertain  angels 
Tuiawares. 

To  ensure  good  treatment  for  His  servants  in  all  ages  wher- 
ever the  gospel  might  be  preached,  Jesus  made  it  known  that 
He  put  a  high  premium  on  all  acts  of  kindness  done  towards 
them.  This  advertisement  we  find  at  the  close  of  the  address 
delivered  to  the  twelve  at  this  time :  "  He  that  receiveth  you," 
He  said  to  them,  "  receiveth  me ;  and  he  that  receiveth  me, 
receiveth  Him  that  sent  me.  He  that  receiveth  a  prophet  in 
the  name  of  a  prophet,  shall  receive  a  prophet's  reward ;  and 
he  that  receiveth  a  righteous  man  in  the  name  of  a  righteous 
man,  shall  receive  a  righteous  man's  reward"  And  then, 
with  increased  pathos  and  solemnity.  He  added :  "  Whosoever 
shall  give  to  drink  unto  one  of  these  little  ones  a  cup  of  cold 
water  only  in  the  name  of  a  disciple,  verily  I  say  unto  you, 
he  shall  in  no  wise  lose  his  reward"*  How  easy  to  go  forth 
into  Galilee,  yea,  into  all  the  world,  serving  such  a  sympathetic 
Master  on  such  terms  ! 

But  while  thus  encouraging  the  young  evangelists,  Jesus 
did  not  allow  them  to  go  away  with  the  idea  that  all  things 
would  be  pleasant  in  their  experience.  He  gave  them  to 
understand  that  they  should  be  ill  received  as  well  as  kindly 
received  They  should  meet  with  churls  who  would  refuse 
them  hospitality,  and  with  stupid,  careless  people  who  would 
reject  their  message ;  but  even  in  such  cases.  He  assured  them, 
they  should  not  be  without  consolation.  K  their  peaceful 
salutation  were  not  reciprocated,  they  should  at  all  events  get 
the  benefit  of  their  own  spirit  of  good-will :  their  peace  would 
return  to  themselves.  K  their  words  were  not  welcomed  by 
any  to  whom  they  preached,  they  should  at  least  be  free  from 
blame ;  they  might  shake  off  the  dust  from  their  feet,  and  say  : 

1  Katt  z.  11.  *  Matt  x.  40-42. 

H 


I* 


114  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

"  Your  blood  be  upon  your  own  heads,  we  are  dean ;  we  leave 
you  to  your  doom,  and  go  elsewhere."^  Solemn  words,  not  to 
be  uttered,  as  they  are  too  apt  to  be,  especially  by  young  and 
inexperienced  disciples,  in  pride,  impatience,  or  anger,  but 
humbly,  calmly,  deliberately,  as  a  part  of  Grod's  message  to  men. 
When  uttered  in  any  other  spirit,  it  is  a  sign  that  the  preacher 
has  been  as  much  to  blame  as  the  hearer  for  the  rejection  of  his 
message.  Few  have  any  right  to  utter  such  words  at  all ;  for  it 
requires  rare  preaching,  indeed,  to  make  the  fault  of  unbeliev- 
ing hearers  so  great,  that  it  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  Sodom 
and  Gromorrha  in  the  day  of  judgment  than  for  them.  But 
such  preaching  has  been.  Christ's  own  preaching  was  such,  and 
hence  the  fearful  doom  He  pronounced  on  those  who  rejected 
His  words.  Such  also  the  preaching  of  the  apostles  was  to  be ; 
and  therefore,  to  uphold  their  authority,  Jesus  solenmly  de- 
clared that  the  penalty  for  despising  their  word  would  be  not 
less  than  for  neglecting  His  own.* 

2.  The  remaining  instructions,  referring  to  the  future  rather 
than  to  the  present,  while  much  more  copious,  do  not  call  for 
lengthened  explanation.  The  burthen  of  them  all,  as  we  have 
said,  is  "  Fear  not."  This  exhortation,  like  the  re&ain  of  a 
song,  is  repeated  again  and  again  in  the  course  of  the  address.' 
From  that  fact,  the  twelve  might  have  inferred  that  their  future 
lot  was  to  be  of  a  kind  fitted  to  inspire  fear.  But  Jesus  did 
not  leave  them  to  learn  this  by  inference ;  He  told  them  -pf  it 
plainly.  "  Behold,"  He  said,  with  the  whole  history  of  the 
church  in  His  view,  "  Behold,  I  send  you  forth  as  sheep  in  the 
midst  of  wolves."  Then  He  went  on  to  explain  in  detail,  and 
with  appalling  vividness,  the  various  forms  of  danger  which 
awaited  the  messengers  of  truth ;  how  they  should  be  delivered 
up  to  councils,  scourged  in  synagogues,  brought  before  gover- 
nors and  kings  (like  Felix,  and  Festus,  and  Herod),  and  hated 
of  all  for  His  name's  sake.^  He  explained  to  them,  at  the 
same  time,  that  this  strange  treatment  was  inevitable  in  the 
nature  of  things,  being  the  necessary  consequence  of  divine 
truth  acting  in  the  world  like  a  chemical  solvent,  and  sepa- 
rating men  into  parties,  according  to  the  spirit  which  ruled 

1  Matt.  X.  18,  14.  «  Matt.  x.  15. 

>  Matt.  z.  26,  28,  81.  «  Matt  x.  16,  17, 18. 


FIB8T  ATTEUFTS  AT  EVANGELISM :  THE  mSTBUCTIONS.  115 

in  them.  The  tmih  would  divide  even  membera  of  the  same 
fEimily,  and  make  them  bitterly  hostile  to  each  other  ;^  and  how- 
ever deplorable  the  result  might  be,  it  was  one  for  which  there 
was  no  remedy.  OflTences  must  come :  "  Think  not,"  He  said 
to  His  disciples,  horrified  at  the  dark  picture,  and  perhaps 
secretly  hoping  that  their  Master  had  painted  it  in  too  sombre 
colours,  "  Think  not  that  I  am  come  to  send  peace  on  earth : 
I  came  not  to  send  peace,  but  a  sword.  For  I  am  come  to  set 
a  man  at  variance  against  his  father,  and  the  daughter  against 
her  mother,  and  the  daughter-in-law  against  her  mother-in-law. 
And  a  man's  foes  shall  be  they  of  his  own  household."^ 

Amid  such  dangers,  two  virtues  are  specially  needful : 
caution  and  fidelity ;  the  one,  that  God's  servants  may  not  be 
cut  oflF  prematurely  or  unnecessarily,  the  other,  that  while  they 
live,  they  may  really  do  Grod's  work,  and  fight  for  the  truth. 
In  such  times  Christ's  disciples  must  not  fear,  but  be  brave 
and  true ;  and  yet,  while  fearless,  they  must  not  be  foolhardy. 
These  qualities  it  is  not  easy  to  combine ;  for  conscientious 
men  are  apt  to  be  rash,  and  prudent  men  are  apt  to  be  unfaith- 
foL  Yet  the  combination  is  not  impossible,  else  it  would  not 
be  required,  as  it  is  in  this  discourse.  For  it  was  just  the  im- 
portance of  cultivating  the  apptirently  incompatible  virtues  of 
caution  and  fidelity  that  Jesus  meant  to  teach  by  the  remark- 
able proverb-precept :  "  Be  wise  as  serpents,  harmless  as 
dovea"  '  The  serpent  is  the  emblem  of  cunning,  the  dove  of 
simplicity.  No  creatures  can  be  more  unlike ;  yet  Jesus  re- 
quires of  His  disciples  to  be  at  once  serpents  in  cautiousness, 
and  doves  in  simplicity  of  aim  and  purity  of  heart.  Happy 
they  who  can  be  both ;  but  if  we  cannot,  let  us  at  least  be 
dovea.  The  dove  must  come  before  the  serpent  in  our  esteem, 
and  in  the  development  of  our  character.  This  order  is  ob- 
servable in  the  history  of  all  true  disciples.  They  begin  with 
spotless  sincerity;  and  after  being  betrayed  by  a  generous 
enthusiasm  into  some  acts  of  rashness,  they  learn  betimes  the 
serpent's  virtuea  K  we  invert  the  order,  as  too  many  do,  and 
begin  by  being  prudent  and  judicious  to  admiration,  the  effect 
will  be,  that  the  higher  virtue  will  not  only  be  postponed, 
but  sacrificed.     The  dove  will  be  devoured  by  the  serpent ; 

>  Katt  z.  21.  *  Matt  x.  34-86.  *  Matt  x.  16. 


116  THE  TRAINING  OP  THE  TWELVE. 

the  cause  of  truth  and  righteousness  will  be  betrayed  out  of  a 
base  regard  to  self-preservation  and  worldly  advantage.    • 

On  hearing  a  general  maxim  of  morals  announced,  one 
naturally  wishes  to  know  how  it  applies  to  particular  casea 
Christ  met  this  wish  in  connection  with  the  deep,  pregnant 
maxim,  "  Be  wise  as  serpents,  harmless  as  doves,"  by  giving 
examples  of  its  applicatioiL  The  first  case  supposed  is  that 
of  the  messengers  of  truth  being  brought  up  before  civil  or 
ecclesiastical  tribunals  to  answer  for  themselves.  Here  the 
dictate  of  wisdom  is,  "  Beware  of  men."  ^  "  Do  not  be  so 
simple  as  to  imagine  all  men  good,  honest,  fair,  tolerant.  Be- 
member  there  are  wolves  in  the  world : — men  full  of  malice, 
falsehood,  and  unscrupulousness,  capable  of  inventing  the  most 
atrocious  charges  against  you,  and  of  supporting  them  by  the 
most  unblushing  mendacity.  Keep  out  of  their  clutches  if 
you  can ;  and  when  you  fall  into  their  hands,  expect  neither 
candour,  justice,  nor  generosity."  But  how  are  such  men  to 
be  answered  ?  Must  craft  be  met  with  craft,  lies  with  lies  ? 
No :  here  is  the  place  for  the  simplicity  of  the  dove.  Cunning 
and  craft  boot  not  at  such  an  hour ;  safety  lies  in  trusting  to 
Heaven's  guidance,  and  telling  the  truth.  "  When  they  deliver 
you  up,  take  no  thought  how  or  what  ye  shall  speak  ;  for  it 
shall  be  given  you  in  that  same  hour  what  ye  shall  speak ; 
for  it  is  not  ye  that  speak,  but  the  Spirit  of  your  Father 
which  speaketh  in  you."^  The  counsel  given  to  the  apostles 
has  been  justified  by  experience.  What  a  noble  book  the 
speeches  uttered  by  confessors  of  the  truth  under  the  inspira- 
tion of  the  Divine  Spirit,  collected  together,  would  make  ! 

Jesus  next  puts  the  case  of  the  heralds  of  His  gospel  being 
exposed  to  popular  persecutions,  and  shows  the  bearing  of  the 
maxim  upon  it  likewise.  Such  persecutions,  as  distinct  from 
judicial  proceedings,  were  common  in  apostolic  experience ; 
and  they  are  a  matter  of  course  in  all  critical  eras.  The  igno- 
rant, superstitious  populace,  filled  with  prejudice  and  passion, 
and  instigated  by  designing  men,  play  the  part  of  obstructives 
to  the  cause  of  truth,  mobbing,  mocking,  and  assaulting  the 
messengers  of  God.  How,  then,  are  the  subjects  of  this  ill- 
treatment  to  act  ?     On  the  one  hand,  they  are  to  show  the 

1  Matt  X.  17.  *  Matt  z.  19,  20. 


FIBST  ATTEMPTS  AT  EVANGELISM :   THE  INSTRUCTIONS.    117 

wisdom  of  the  serpent,  by  ayoiding  the  storm  of  popular  ill- 
will  when  it  arises ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  they  are  to  exhi- 
bit the  simplicity  of  the  dove,  by  giving  the  utmost  publicity 
to  their  message,  though  conscious  of  the  risk  they  run.  "When 
they  persecute  you  in  this  city,  flee  ye  into  another ;"  ^  yet, 
undaunted  by  clamour,  calumny,  and  violence,  ''  what  I  tell 
you  in  darkness,  that  speak  ye  in  light ;  what  ye  hear  in  the 
ear,  that  preach  ye  upon  the  house-tops."  ^ 

To  each  of  these  injunctions  a  reason  is  annexed.  Flight 
is  justified  by  the  remark,  "  Verily  I  say  imto  you,  ye  shall 
not  have  gone  over  the  cities  of  Israel  till  the  Son  of  man  be 
Gome."*  The  coining  alluded  to  is  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem, 
and  the  dispersion  of  the  Jewish  nation ;  and  the  meaning  is, 
that  the  apostles  would  barely  have  time,  before  the  catastrophe 
came,  to  go  over  all  the  land,  warning  the  people  to  save 
themselves  from  the  doom  of  an  untoward  generation,  so  that 
they  could  not  well  afford  to  tarry  in  any  locality  after  its 
inhabitants  had  heard  and  rejected  the  message.  The  souls 
of  all  were  alike  precious ;  and  if  one  city  did  not  receive 
the  word,  perhaps  another  would.^ 

The  reason  annexed  to  the  injunction  to  give  the  utmost 
publicity  to  the  truth,  in  spite  of  all  possible  dangers,  is :  "  The 
disciple  is  not  above  his  master,  nor  the  servant  above  his 
lord."  *  That  is  to  say :  To  be  evil  entreated  by  the  ignorant 
and  violent  multitude  is  hard  to  bear,  but  not  harder  for  you 
than  for  me,  who  already,  as  ye  know,  have  had  experience 
of  popular  malice  at  Nazareth,  and  am  destined,  as  ye  know 
not,  to  have  yet  more  bitter  experience  of  it  at  Jerusalem. 
Therefore  see  that  ye  hide  not  your  light  imder  a  bushel,  to 
esci^  the  rage  of  wolfish  men. 

The  disciples  are  supposed,  lastly,  to  be  in  peril  not  merely 
of  trial,  mocking,  and  violence,  but  even  of  their  life,  and  are 
instructed  how  to  act  in  that  extremity.  Here  also  the  maxim, 
•  Wise  as  serpents,  harmless  as  doves,"  comes  into  play  in  both 
its  parts.     In  this  case  the  wisdom  of  the  serpent  lies  in 

* 

>  Matt  X.  28.  «  Matt.  x.  27.  *  Matt.  x.  23. 

^  Fknl  and  Bainabas  acted  on  this  principle  at  Antioch  of  Pisidia.    Acts 
ziiL  46. 
«  Katt  z.  24»  25. 


118  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

knowing  what  to  fear.  Jesus  leminds  His  disciples  that  there 
are  two  kinds  of  deaths^  one  caused  by  the  sword,  the  other 
by  nnfaithfidness  to  duty ;  and  tells  them  in  effect,  that  while 
both  are  evils  to  be  avoided,  if  possible,  yet  if  a  choice  must 
be  made,  the  latter  death  is  most  to  be  dreaded.  "  Fear  not," 
He  said, ''  them  which  kill  the  body,  but  are  not  able  to  kill 
the  soul ;  but  rather  fear  him  who  is  able  to  destroy  both  soul 
and  body  in  hell," — the  tempter,  that  is,  who,  when  one  is  in 
danger,  whispers :  Save  thyseK  at  any  sacrifice  of  principle  or 
conscience.^ 

The  simplicity  of  the  dove  in  presence  of  the  extreme  peril 
consists  in  child-like  trust  in  the  watchful  providence  of  the 
Father  in  heaven.  Such  trust  Jesus  exhorted  His  disciples 
to  cherish  in  charmingly  simple  and  pathetic  language.  He 
told  them  that  God  cared  even  for  sparrows,  and  reminded 
them  that,  however  insignificant  they  might  seem  to  them- 
selves, they  were  at  least  of  more  value  than  many  sparrows, 
not  to  say  than  two,  whose  money  value  was  just  one  farthing. 
If  God  neglected  not  even  a  pair  of  sparrows,  but  provided 
for  them  a  place  in  His  world  where  they  might  build  their 
nest  and  safely  bring  forth  their  young,  would  He  not  care 
for  them  as  they  went  forth  two  and  two  preaching  the  doc- 
trine of  the  kingdom?  Yea!  He  would;  the  very  hairs  of 
their  head  were  nimibered.  Therefore  they  might  go  forth 
without  fear,  trusting  their  lives  to  His  care;  remembering 
also  that,  at  worst,  death  was  no  great  evil,  seeing  that  for  the 
faithful  was  reserved  a  crown  of  life,  and,  for  those  who  con- 
fessed the  Son  of  man,  the  honour  of  being  confessed  by  Hiin 
in  turn  before  His  Father  in  heaven.' 

Such  were  the  instructions  of  the  Lord  Jesus  to  the  twelve 
when  He  sent  them  forth  to  preach  and  to  heaL  Bare,  unex- 
ampled discourse,  strange  to  the  ears  of  us  modems,  who  can 
hardly  imagine  such  stem  requirements  being  seriously  made, 
not  to  say  exactly  complied  with.  Beaderl  hast  thou  ever 
looked  up  at   Mont  Blanc   from    Courmayeur,  Chamounix, 

^  Matt.  X.  28.  It  has  been  much  disputed  who  is  referred  to  here — God  or 
Satan.  It  may  be  either  :  God  as  Judge  ;  Satan  as  tempter.  We  prefer  the 
latter. 

*  Matt  z.  82,  d3. 


FIBST  ATTEMPTS  AT  EYAN6ELISH  :   THE  INSTBUCTIOKS.    119 

or  St  Glervais  ?  Such  is  our  attitude  towards  this  first  mis- 
sionaiy  sermon.  It  is  a  mountain  at  which  we  gaze  in 
wonder  from  a  position  far  below,  hardly  dreaming  of  climb- 
ing to  its  summit  Some,  however^  have  made  the  arduous 
ascent ;  and  among  these  the  first  place  of  honour  must  be 
assigned  to  the  Twelve  Apostles. 


ft  . 


CHAPTER    IX. 

A  CBISIS. 

■ 

Section  l — The  Miracle. 

John  vi.  1-15  ;  Matt.  xrv.  18-21 ;  Mark  vi.  83-44 ;  Litkk  ix.  11-17. 

THE  sixth  chapter  of  John's  Gospel  is  full  of  maxvek. 
It  teUs  of  a  great  miracle,  a  great  enthusiasm^  a  great 
storm,  a  great  sermon,  a  great  apostasy,  and  a  great  trial  of 
faith  and  fidelity  endured  by  the  twelve.  It  contains,  indeed, 
the  history  of  an  important  crisis  in  the  ministry  of  Jesus 
and  the  religious  experience  of  His  disciples, — a  crisis  in  many 
respects  foreshadowing  the  great  final  one,  which  happened 
little  more  than  a  year  afterwards,^  when  a  more  famous 
miracle  still  was  followed  by  a  greater  popularity,  to  be  suc- 
ceeded in  turn  by  a  more  complete  desertion,  and  to  end 
in  the  crucifixion,  by  which  the  riddle  of  the  Capernaum  dis- 
course was  solved,  and  its  prophecy  fulfilled. 

The  facts  recorded  by  John  in  this  chapter  of  his  Gospel 
may  all  be  comprehended  under  these  four  heads :  the  miracle 
in  the  wilderness,  the  storm  on  the  lake,  the  sermon  in  the 
synagogue,  and  the  subsequent  sifting  of  Christ's  disciplea 
These,  in  their  order,  we  propose  to  consider  in  four  distinct 
sections. 

The  scene  of  the  miracle  was  on  the  eastern  shore  of  the 
Gralilean  Sea.  Luke  fixes  the  precise  locality,  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  a  city  called  Bethsaida.'  This,  of  course,  could 
not  be  the  Bethsaida  on  the  western  shore,  the  city  of  Andrew 
and  Peter.  But  there  was,  it  appears,  another  city  of  the 
same  name  at  the  north-eastern  extremity  of  the  lake,  called, 

^  John  vi  4 :  *'  The  passover,  a  feast  of  the  Jews,  was  nigh." 
'  Lake  ix.  10. 


A  CRISIS:   THE  MIRACLE.  121 

by  way  of  distinction,  Bethsaida  Juliaa^  The  site  of  this 
city,  we  are  informed  by  an  eye-witness,  "is  discernible  on 
the  lower  slope  of  the  hill  which  overhangs  the  rich  plain  at 
the  mouth  of  the  Jordan"  (that  is,  at  the  place  where  the 
waters  of  the  Upper  Jordan  join  the  Sea  of  Galilee).  "  The 
*  desert  place/ "  the  same  author  goes  on  to  say,  by  way  of 
proving  the  suitableness  of  the  locality  to  be  the  scene  of  this 
miiade,  "  was  either  the  green  table-land  which  lies  half-way 
up  the  hill  immediately  above  Bethsaida,  or  else  in  the  parts 
of  the  plain  not  cultivated  by  the  hand  of  man  would  be 
found  the  *  much  green  grass,'  still  fresh  in  the  spring  of  the 
year  when  this  event  occurred,  before  it  had  faded  away  in 
the  summer  sun :  the  tall  grass  which,  broken  down  by  the 
feet  of  the  thousands  then  gathered  together,  would  make,  as 
it  were, '  couches '  for  them  to  recline  upon." ' 

To  this  place  Jesus  and  the  twelve  had  retired  after  the 
return  of  the  latter  from  their  mission,  seeking  rest  and 
privacy.  But  what  they  sought  they  did  not  find.  Their 
movements  were  observed,  and  the  people  flocked  along  the 
shore  toward  the  place  whither  they  had  sailed,  running  all 
the  way,  as  if  fearful  that  they  might  escape,  and  so  arriving 
at  the  landing-place  before  them.^  The  multitude  which 
thus  gathered  around  Jesus  was  very  great.  All  the  evange- 
lists agree  in  stating  it  at  five  thousand ;  and  as  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  people  at  the  miraculous  repast  in  groups  of 
himdreds  and  fifties  ^  made  it  easy  to  ascertain  their  number, 
we  must  accept  this  statement  not  as  a  rough  estimate,  but 
as  an  exact  calculation. 

Such  an  immense  assemblage  testifies  to  the  presence  of  a 
great  excitement  among  the  populations  living  by  the  shore  of 
the  Sea  of  Galilee.  A  fervid  enthusiasm,  a  hero-worship  whereof 
Jesus  was  the  object,  was  at  work  in  their  minds.  Jesus  was 
the  idol  of  the  hour :  they  could  not  endure  His  absence ;  they 
could  not  see  enough  of  His  work,  nor  hear  enough  of  His 
teaching.     The  infection  seems  to  have  spread  as  far  south  as 

'  Balmilt  by  Philip  the  tetrarch,  and  referred  to  by  Josephus. 

•  Stanley,  Sinai  and  PcUestine,  p.  882.     The  "desert  place "  is  spoken  of  in 
Loke  ix.  10,  the  "  much  green  grass  "  in  Mark  yi  39  and  John  vi.  10  combined. 

*  Mark  tI  83.  ^  Mark  yL  40. 


122  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

Tiberias ;  for  John  relates  that  boats  came  from  that  city  *'  to 
the  place  where  they  did  eat  bread."  ^  Those  who  were  in  these 
boats  came  too  late  to  witness  the  mirade  and  share  in  the 
feast,  but  this  does  not  prove  that  their  errand  was  not  the 
same  as  that  of  the  rest ;  for,  owing  to  their  greater  distance 
from  the  scene,  the  news  would  be  longer  in  reaching  them, 
and  it  would  take  them  longer  to  go  thither. 

The  great  miracle  wrought  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Beth- 
saida  Julias  consisted  in  the  feeding  of  this  vast  assemblage 
of  human  beings  with  the  utterly  inadequate  means  of  "  five 
barley  loaves  and  two  small  fishes."  *  It  was  truly  a  stupen- 
dous transaction,  of  which  we  can  form  no  conception ;  but  no 
event  in  the  Gospel  history  is  iliore  satisfactorily  attested.  All 
the  evangelists  relate  the  miracle  with  much  minuteness,  with 
little  even  apparent  discrepancy,  and  with  such  graphic  detail 
as  none  but  eye-witnesses  could  have  supplied.  Even  John, 
who  records  so  few  of  Christ's  miracles,  describes  this  one 
with  as  careful  a  hand  as  any  of  his  brother  evangelists,  albeit 
introducing  it  into  his  narrative  merely  as  a  preface  to  the 
sermon  on  the  Bread  of  life  found  in  his  Gospel  only. 

This  wonderful  work,  so  imexceptionably  attested,  seems 
open  to  exception  on  another  groimd.  It  appears  to  be  a 
miracle  without  a  suf&cient  reason.  It  cannot  be  said  to  have 
been  urgently  called  fot  by  the  necessities  of  the  multitude 
Doubtless  they  were  hungry,  and  had  brought  no  victuals  with 
them  to  supply  their  bodily  wants.  But  the  miracle  was 
wrought  on  the  afternoon  of  the  day  on  which  they  left  their 
homes,  and  most  of  them  might  have  returned  within  a  few 
hours.  It  would,  indeed,  have  been  somewhat  hard  to  have 
imdertaken  such  a  journey  at  the  end  of  the  day  without 
food ;  but  the  hardship,  even  if  necessary,  was  far  within  the 
limits  of  human  endurance.  But  it  was  not  necessary;  for 
food  could  have  been  got  on  the  way,  without  going  far,  in  the 
neighbouring  towns  and  viQages,  so  that  to  disperse  them  as 
they  were  would  have  involved  no  considerable  inconvenience. 
This  is  evident  from  the  terras  in  which  the  disciples  made 
the  suggestion  that  the  multitude  should  be  sent  away.  We 
read:  "When  the  day  began  to  wear  away,  then  came  the 

^  John  yL  23.  '  John  vi  9. 


A  CBISIS:   THZ  MTRkCLE.  123 

twelve,  and  said  unto  Him,  Send  the  multitude  away,  that 
they  may  go  into  the  towns  and  country  round  about,  and 
lodge  and  get  victuals."  ^ 

In  these  respects  there  is  an  obvious  difference  between  the 
/hrst  miraculous  feeding,  and  the  second,  which  occurred  at  a 
somewhat  later  period  at  the  south-eastern  extremity  of  the 
laka  On  that  occasion,  the  people  who  had  assembled  around 
Jesus  had  been  three  days  in  the  wilderness  without  aught  to 
eat,  and  there  were  no  facilities  for  procuring  food,  so  that 
the  miracle  was  demanded  by  considerations  of  humanity.' 
Accordingly  we  find  that  compassion  is  assigned  as  the  motive 
for  that  miracle :  ''  Jesus  called  His  disciples  unto  Him,  and 
saith  unto  them,  I  have  compassion  on  the  multitude,  because 
they  have  now  been  with  me  three  days,  and  have  nothing  to 
eat ;  and  if  I  send  them  away  fasting  to  their  own  houses,  they 
will  feint  by  the  way :  for  divers  of  them  came  from  far."  * 

If  our  object  were  merely  to  get  rid  of  the  difficulty  of 
asfligning  a  sufficient  motive  for  the  great  miracle  of  feeding, 
we  might  content  ourselves  with  saying  that  Jesus  did  not 
need  any  very  urgent  occasion  to  induce  Him  to  use  His  power 
for  the  benefit  of  others.  For  His  own  benefit  He  would  not 
use  it  in  case  even  of  extreme  need,  not  even  after  a  fast  of 
forty  days.  But  when  the  wM-ieing  (not  to  say  the  hdng)  of 
others  was  concerned.  He  dispensed  miraculous  blessings  with 
a  liberal  hand.  He  did  not  ask  Himself :  Is  this  a  grave 
enough  occasion  for  the  use  of  divine  power  ?  Is  this  man  ill 
enough  to  justify  a  miraculous  interference  with  the  laws  of 
nature,  by  healing  himi  Are  these  people  here  assembled 
hungry  enough  to  be  fed,  like  their  fathers  in  the  wilderness, 
with  bread  from  heaven  1 

But  we  do  not  insist  on  this,  because  we  believe  that  some- 
thing else  and  higher  was  aimed  at  in  this  miracle  than  to 
satisfy  physical  appetita  It  was  a  symbolic,  didactic,  critical 
miracle.  It  was  meant  to  teach,  and  also  to  test ;  to  supply 
a  text  for  the  subsequent  sermon,  and  a  touchstone  to  try 
the  character  of  those  who  had  followed  Jesus  with  such 
enthusiasm.  The  miraculous  feast  in  the  wilderness  was 
meant  to  say  to  the  multitude  just  what  our  sacramental  feast 

iLokeiz.12.  •  Mark  viiL  8,  4.  »  Mark  viii  !-». 


124  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

says  to  us:  "I,  Jesus  the  Son  of  God  Incarnate,  am  the 
bread  of  life.  What  this  bread  is  to  your  bodies,  I  myself  am 
to  your  souls."  And  the  communicants  in  that  feast  were  to 
be  tested  by  the  way  in  which  they  regarded  the  transaction. 
The  spiritual  would  see  in  it  a  sign  of  Christ's  divine  dignity, 
and  a  seal  of  His  saving  grace ;  the  carnal  would  rest  simply 
in  the  outward  fact  that  they  had  eaten  of  the  loaves  and  were 
filled,  and  would  take  occasion  from  what  had  happened  to 
indulge  in  high  hopes  of  temporal  felicity  under  the  benign 
reign  of  the  Prophet  and  King  who  had  made  His  appearance 
among  them. 

The  miracle  in  the  desert  was  in  this  view  not  merely  an 
act  of  mercy,  but  an  act  of  judgment.  Jesus  mercifully  fed  the 
hungry  multitude  in  order  that  He  might  sift  it,  and  separate 
the  true  from  the  spurious  disciples.  There  was  a  much  more 
urgent  demand  for  such  a  sifting,  than  for  food  to  satisfy  merely 
physical  cravings.  If  those  thousands  were  all  genuine  dis- 
ciples, it  was  well ;  but  if  not — if  the  greater  number  were 
following  Christ  under  misapprehension  —  the  sooner  that 
became  apparent  the  better.  To  allow  so  large  a  mixed 
multitude  to  follow  Himself  any  longer  without  sifting,  would 
have  been  on  Christ's  part  to  encourage  false  hopes,  and  to 
give  rise  to  serious  misapprehensions  as  to  the  nature  of  His 
kingdom  and  His  earthly  mission.  And  no  better  method  of 
separating  the  chaff  from  the  wheat  in  that  large  company  of 
professed  disciples  could  have  been  devised,  than  first  to  work 
a  miracle  which  would  bring  to  the  surface  the  latent  car- 
nality of  the  greater  number,  and  then  to  preach  a  sermon 
which  could  not  fail  to  be  oflfensive  to  the  carnal  mind. 

That  Jesus  freely  chose,  for  a  reason  of  His  own,  the 
miraculous  method  of  meeting  the  difficulty  that  had  arisen, 
appears  to  be  not  obscurely  hinted  at  in  the  Gospel  narratives. 
Consider,  for  example,  in  this  connection,  John's  note  of 
time,  "  The  passover,  a  feast  of  the  Jews,  was  nigh."  Is  this 
a  merely  chronological  statement  ?  We  think  not.  What 
further  purpose,  then,  is  it  intended  to  serve  ?  To  explain 
how  so  great  a  crowd  came  to  be  gathered  around  Jesus  ? — 
Such  an  explanation  was  not  required,  for  the  true  cause 
of  the  great  gathering  was  the  enthusiasm  which  had  been 


A  CRISIS  :   THE  MIRACLE.  125 

awakened  among  the  people  by  the  preaching  and  healing 
work  of  Jesus  and  the  twelve.  The  evangelist  refers  to  the 
approaching  passover,  it  would  seem,  not  to  explain  the  move- 
ment of  the  people,  but  rather  to  explain  the  acts  and  words  of 
his  Lord  about  to  be  related.  "  The  passover  was  nigh,  and" — 
so  may  we  bring  out  John's  meaning — "  Jesus  was  thinking  of 
it,  though  He  went  not  up  to  the  feast  that  season.  He  thought 
of  the  paschal  lamb,  and  how  He,  the  true  Paschal  Lamb, 
would  ere  long  be  slain  for  the  life  of  the  worid ;  and  He  gave 
expression  to  the  deep  thoughts  of  His  heart  in  the  sjrmbolic 
miracle  I  am  about  to  relate,  and  in  the  mystic  discourse  which 
followed."^ 

The  view  we  advocate  respecting  the  motive  of  the  miracle 
in  the  wilderness  seems  borne  out  also  by  the  tone  adopted  by 
Jesus  in  the  conversation  which  took  place  between  Himself 
and  the  twelve  as  to  how  the  wants  of  the  multitude  might  be 
supplied.  In  the  course  of  that  conversation,  of  which  frag- 
ments have  been  preserved  by  the  different  evangelists,  two 
suggestions  were  made  by  the  disciples.  One  was  to  dismiss 
the  multitude  that  they  might  procure  supplies  for  themselves ; 
the  other,  that  they  (the  disciples)  should  go  to  the  nearest 
town  (say  Bethsaida  Julias,  probably  not  far  ofif)  and  pur- 
chase as  much  bread  as  they  could  get  for  two  hundred  denarii, 
which  would  suffice  to  alleviate  hunger  at  least,  if  not  to  satisfy 
appetite.^  Both  these  proposals  were  feasible,  otherwise  they 
woidd  not  have  been  made ;  for  the  twelve  had  not  spoken 
thoughtlessly,  but  after  consideration,  as  appears  from  the  fact 
that  one  of  their  number,  Andrew,  had  already  ascertained  how 
much  provision  could  be  got  on  the  spot.  The  question  how 
the  multitude  could  be  provided  for  had  evidently  been  exer- 
cising the  minds  of  the  disciples,  and  the  two  proposals  were 
the  result  of  their  delibemtions.  Now,  what  we  wish  to  point 
out  is,  that  Jesus  does  not  appear  to  have  given  any  serious 
heed  to  these  proposals.  He  listened  to  them,  not  displeased 
to  see  the  generous  concern  of  His  disciples  for  the  hungry 

^  For  the  yiew  of  John  yi.  4  above  given,  see  Luthardt,  Das  Johan,  Evan- 
ffelium,  L  80,  iL  41. 

'  Hark  TL  87  ;  John  tL  7.  A  denarius  (Eng.  ver.  a  penny)  seems  to  have  been 
a  day's  wages  (Matt,  ix  9),  and  was  about  the  eighth  part  of  an  ounce  of  silver. 


126  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

people,  yet  with  the  air  of  one  who  meant  fix)in  the  first  to 
pursue  a  dififerent  line  of  action  from  any  they  might  suggest 
He  behaved  like  a  general  in  a  council  of  war  whose  own 
mind  is  made  up,  but  who  is  not  unwilling  to  hear  what  his 
subordinates  wiU  say.  This  is  no  mere  inference  of  ours, 
for  John  actually  explains  that  such  was  the  manner  in  which 
our  Lord  acted  on  the  occasion.  After  relating  that  Jesus 
addressed  to  Philip  the  question.  Whence  shall  we  buy  bread, 
that  these  may  eat  ?  he  adds  the  parenthetical  remark,  "  This 
He  said  to  prove  him,  for  He  Himself  knew  what  He  would 
do."^ 

Such,  then,  was  the  design  of  the  miracle :  what  now  was 
its  resxdt  ?  It  raised  the  swelling  tide  of  enthusiasm  to  its 
full  height,  and  induced  the  multitude  to  form  a  foolish  and 
dangerous  purpose — even  to  crown  the  wonder-working  Jesus, 
and  make  Him  their  king  instead  of  the  licentious  despot 
Herod.  They  said,  "This  is  of  a  truth  that  Prophet  that 
should  come  into  the  world;"  and  they  were  on  the  point 
of  coming  and  taking  Jesus  by  force  to  make  Him  a  king, 
insomuch  that  it  was  necessary  that  He  should  make  Hia 
escape  from  them,  and  depart  into  a  mountain  Himself  alone.^ 
Such  are  the  express  statements  of  the  fourth  Gospel,  and 
what  is  there  stated  is  obscurely  implied  in  the  narratives  of 
Matthew  and  Mark.  They  tell  how,  after  the  miracle  in  the 
desert,  Jesus  straightway  constrained  His  disciples  to  get  into 
a  ship  and  to  go  to  the  other  side.*  Why  such  haste,  and  why 
such  urgency  ?  Doubtless  it  was  late,  and  there  was  no  time 
to  lose,  if  they  wished  to  get  home  to  Capernaum  that  night. 
But  why  go  home  at  all,  when  the  people,  or  at  least  a  pcut  of 
them,  were  to  pass  the  night  in  the  wilderness  ?  Should  they 
not  mther  have  remained  with  them,  to  keep  them  in  heart 
and  take  a  charge  of  them  ?  Nay,  was  it  dutiful  in  disciples 
to  leave  their  Master  alone  in  such  a  situation  ?  Doubtless 
the  reluctance  of  the  twelve  to  depart  sprang  from  their  ask- 
ing themselves  these  very  questions  ;  and,  as  a  feeling  having 
such  an  origin  was  most  becoming,  the  constraint  put  on  them 

*  John  vi.  6. 

'  John  YL  14,  15.    The  prophet  meant  was  one  like  Moses  (Dent.  xviiL  15). 

>  Matt  xiv.  22  ;  Mark  yL  45. 


A  CRISIS  :   THE  MIRACLE.  127 

presupposes  the  existence  of  unusual  circumstances,  such  as 
those  recorded  by  John.  In  other  words,  the  most  natural  ex- 
planation of  the  fact  recorded  by  the  synoptical  evangelists  is, 
that  Jesus  wished  to  extricate  both  Himself  and  His  disciples 
from  the  foolish  enthusiasm  of  the  multitude,  and  for  that 
purpose  arranged  that  they  should  sail  away  in  the  dusk  across 
the  lake,  while  He  retired  into  the  solitude  of  the  mountains.^ 

"What  a  melancholy  result  of  a  hopeful  movement  have  we 
here !  The  kingdom  has  been  proclaimed,  and  the  good  news 
has  been  extensively  wfelcomed.  Jesus,  the  Messianic  King,  is 
become  the  object  of  most  ardent  devotion  to  an  enthusiastic 
population.  But^  alas !  their  ideas  of  the  kingdom  are  radically 
mistaken.  Acted  out,  they  would  mean  rebellion  and  ultimate 
ruin.  Therefore  it  is  necessary  that  Jesus  should  save  Himself 
from  His  own  Mends,  and  hide  Himself  from  His  own  followers. 
How  certainly  do  Satan's  tares  get  sown  among  God's  wheat ! 
How  easily  does  enthusiasm  run  into  folly  and  mischief ! 

The  result  of  the  miracle  did  not  take  Jesus  by  surprise. 
It  was  what  He  expected ;  nay,  in  a  sense,  it  was  what  He 
aimed  at.  It  was  time  that  the  thoughts  of  many  hearts 
should  be  revealed ;  and  the  certainty  that  the  miracle  would 
help  to  reveal  them  was  one  reason  at  least  for  its  being 
worked.  Jesus  furnished  for  the  people  a  table  in  the  wilder- . 
ness,  and  gave  them  of  the  com  of  heaven,  and  sent  them 
meat  to  the  fuU,^  that  He  might  prove  them  and  know  what 
•was  in  their  heart,' — whether  they  loved  Him  for  His  own 
sake,  or  only  for  the  sake  of  expected  worldly  advantage. 
That  many  followed  Him  from  by-ends  He  knew  beforehand, 
but  He  desired  to  bring  the  fact  home  to  their  own  consciences. 
The  miracle  put  that  in  His  power,  and  enabled  Him  to  say, 
without  fear  of  contradiction,  "  Ye  seek  me,  not  because  ye  saw 
the  miracles,  but  because  ye  did  eat  of  the  loaves  and  were 
filled."*  It  was  a  searching  word  which  might  well  put  all  His 
professed  followers,  not  only  then,  but  now,  on  self-examining 
thoughts,  and  lead  each  man  to  ask  himself.  Why  do  I  profess 
Christianity  ?  Is  it  from  sincere  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  as  the 
Son  of  God  and  Saviour  of  the  world,  or  from  thoughtless 

>  John  vi.  15,  16.  «  Ps.  IxxiU.  19,  24,  25. 

s  DeuL  viii  2.  «  John  vi  26. 


128  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

compliance  with  custom,  from  a  regard  to  reputation,  or  from 
considerations  of  worldly  advantage  ?  That  many  are  "  Chris- 
tians," now  as  then,  from  by-ends  is  certain.  Who  they  are, 
no  man  may  attempt  to  declare  ;  but  the  Lord  knows. 


Section  n. — The  Storm. 

Matt.  xiv.  24-33 ;  Mark  vi.  45-52 ;  John  vi.  16-21. 

"  In  perils  in  the  wilderness,  in  perils  in  the  sea,"  wrote 
Paul,  describing  the  varied  hardships  encountered  by  himself 
in  the  prosecution  of  his  great  work  as  the  apostle  of  the 
Gentiles.  Such  perils  meet  together  in  this  crisis  in  the  life 
of  Jesus.  He  has  just  saved  Himself  from  the  dangerous 
enthusiasm  manifested  by  the  thoughtless  multitude  after  the 
miraculous  repast  in  the  desert ;  and  now,  a  few  hours  later, 
a  still  greater  disaster  threatens  to  befall  Him.  His  twelve 
chosen  disciples,  whom  He  had  hurriedly  sent  off  in  a  boat, 
that  they  might  not  encourage  the  people  in  their  foolish 
project,  have  been  overtaken  in  a  storm  while  He  is  alone 
on  the  mountain  praying,  and  are  in  imminent  danger  of 
being  drowned.  His  contrivance  for  escaping  one  evil  has 
involved  Him  in  a  worse ;  and  it  seems  as  if ,  by  a  combina- 
tion of  mischances.  He  were  to  be  suddenly  deprived  of  all 
His  followers,  both  true  and  false,  at  once,  and  left  utterly 
alone,  as  in  the  last  great  crisis.  The  Messianic  King  watch- 
ing on  those  heights,  like  a  general  on  the  day  of  battle,  is 
indeed  hard  pressed,  and  the  battle  is  going  against  Him. 
But  the  Captain  of  salvation  is  equal  to  the  emergency ;  and 
however  sorely  perplexed  He  may  be  for  a  season,  He  will  be 
victorious  in  the  end. 

The  Sea  of  Galilee,  though  but  a  small  sheet  of  water, 
some  thirteen  miles  long  by  six  broad,  is  liable  to  be  visited 
by  sharp,  sudden  squalls,  probably  due  to  its  situation.  It 
lies  in  a  deep  hollow  of  volcanic  origin,  bounded  on  either 
side  by  steep  ranges  of  hills  rising  above  the  water-level  from 
one  to  two  thousand  feet.  The  difference  of  temperature  at 
the  top  and  bottom  of  these  hills  is  very  considerable.     Up 


A  CRISIS:   THE  STORM.  129 

on  the  table-lands  above,  the  air  is  cool  and  bracing ;  down  at 
the  margin  of  the  lake,  which  lies  seven  hundred  feet  below 
the  levd  of  the  ocean,  the  climate  is  tropical  The  storms 
caused  by  this  inequality  of  temperature  are  tropical  in  vio- 
lence. They  come  sweeping  down  the  ravines  upon  the 
water;  and  in  a  moment  the  lake,  calm  as  glass  before, 
becomes  from  end  to  end  white  with  foam,  whilst  the  waves 
rise  into  the  air  in  columns  of  spray.^ 

Two  such  storms  of  wind  were  encountered  by  the  twelve 
after  they  had  become  disciples,  probably  within  the  same 
year ;  the  one  with  which  we  are  concerned  at  present,  and  an 
eifflier  one  on  the  occasion  of  a  visit  to  Gadara.'  Both  hap- 
pened by  night,  and  both  were  exceedingly  violent.  In  the 
first  storm,  we  are  told,  the  ship  was  covered  with  the  waves, 
and  filled  almost  to  sinking,  so  that  the  disciples  feared  they 
should  perish.  The  second  storm  was  equally  violent,  and 
was  of  much  longer  duration  It  caught  the  twelve  ap- 
parently when  they  were  half-way  across,  and  after  the  grey 
of  dusk  had  deepened  into  the  darkness  of  night  From  that 
time  the  wind  blew  with  imabated  force  till  day-break,  in  the 
fourth  watch,  between  the  hours  of  three  and  six  in  the 
moroing.  Some  idea  of  the  fury  of  the  blast  may  be  gathered 
firom  the  fact  recorded,  that  even  then  they  were  still  little 
more  than  half-way  over  the  sea.  They  had  rowed  in  all  only 
a  distance  of  twenty-five  or  thirty  furlongs  ;*  the  whole  distance 
in  a  slanting  direction,  from  the  eastern  to  the  western  shore, 
being  probably  about  fifty.  During  all  those  weary  hours 
they  had  done  little  more,  pulling  with  all  their  might,  than 
hold  their  own  against  wind  and  waves. 

All  this  while  what  was  Jesus  doing  ?  In  the  first  storm 
He  had  been  with  His  disciples  in  the  ship,  sweetly  sleeping 
after  the  fatigues  of  the  day,  *'  rocked  in  cradle  of  the  impe- 
rious surge."  This  time  He  was  absent,  and  not  sleeping ; 
but  away  up  among  the  moimtains  alone,  watching  unto 
prayer.  For  He,  too,  had  His  own  struggle  on  that  tempes- 
tuous night ;  not  with  the  howling  winds,  but  with  sorrowful 

>  Stanley,  Sinai  and  PdUstme,  p.  380. 

*  Hatt  YiiL  28 ;  Mark  iv.  85  ;  Luke  yiii  22. 

*  John  vi  19. 

I 


130  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

thoughts.  That  night  He,  as  it  were,  rehearsed  the  agony  in 
Grethsemane,  and  with  earnest  prayer  and  absorbing  meditation 
studied  the  passion  sermon  which  He  preached  on  the  morrow. 
So  engrossed  was  His  mind  with  His  own  sad  thoughts,  that 
the  poor  disciples  were  for  a  season  as  if  forgotten ;  till  at 
length,  at  early  dawn,  looking  seawards,^  He  saw  them  toiling 
in  rowing  against  the  contrary  wind,  and  without  a  moment's 
further  delay  made  haste  to  their  rescue. 

This  storm  on  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  besides  being  important 
as  a  historical  fact,  possesses  also  the  significance  of  an 
emblem.  When  we  consider  the  time  at  which  it  occurred, 
it  is  impossible  not  to  connect  it  in  our  thoughts  with  the  un- 
toward events  of  the  next  day.  For  the  literal  storm  on  the 
water  was  succeeded  by  a  spiritual  storm  on  the  land,  equally 
sudden  and  violent,  and  not  less  perilous  to  the  souls  of  the 
twelve  than  the  other  had  been  to  their  bodies.  The  bark 
containing  the  precious  freight  of  Christ's  true  discipleship 
was  then  overtaken  by  a  sudden  gust  of  unpopularity,  coining 
down  on  it  like  a  squall  on  a  highland  loch,  and  all  but  up- 
setting it.  The  fickle  crowd  that  but  the  day  before  would 
have  made  Jesus  their  king,  turned  away  ahruptly  from  Him  in 
disappointment  and  disgust ;  and  it  was  not  without  an  effort, 
as  we  shall  see,^  that  the  twelve  maintained  their  stedfastnesa 
They  had  to  pull  hard  against  wind  and  waves,  that  they  might 
not  be  carried  headlong  to  ruin  by  the  tornado  of  apostasy. 

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  two  storms — on  the  lake 
and  on  the  shore — coming  so  close  one  on  the  other,  would 
become  associated  in  the  memory  of  the  apostles ;  and  that 
the  literal  storm  would  be  stereotyped  in  their  minds  as  an 
expressive  emblem  of  the  spiritual  one,  and  of  all  similar  trials 
of  faith.  The  incidents  of  that  fearful  night — the  watching, 
the  wet,  the  toil  without  result,  the  fatigue,  the  terror  and 
despair — would  abide  indelibly  in  their  recollection,  the  sym- 
bolic representation  of  all  the  perils  and  tribulations  through 
which  believers  must  pass  on  their  way  to  the  kingdom  of 
heaven ;  and  especially  of  those  that  come  upon  them  while 
they  are  yet  immature  in  the  faith. 

The  storm  on  the  lake  is  an  apt  emblem  of  the  inward 

^  Mark  vi  48.  *  See  Section  lY.  of  the  present  chapter. 


A  CRISIS:   THE  8T0SIC.  131 

trials  of  immature  disciples  in  three  respects  particularly. 
First,  because  it  took  place  by  night.  A  storm  is  a  serious 
thing  at  any  time,  but  darkness  adds  greatly  to  the  danger, 
and  still  more  to  the  terror.  Imagination  becomes  active,  and 
adds  visionary  to  real  evils.  Horrid  spectres  rise  to  view,  and 
the  very  deliverer,  as  he  approaches,  seems  to  a  disordered 
fancy  but  the  spirit  of  the  storm  coming  to  destroy. 

Storms  at  sea  may  happen  at  all  hours  of  the  day,  but  trials 
of  faith  happen  always  in  the  night.  The  task  appointed  to 
the  tried  soul  is  to  wait  patiendy  through  the  darkness  for 
the  dawn.  Were  there  no  darkness,  there  could  be  no  trial. 
In  the  light  we  walk  not  by  faith,  but  by  sights  without  diffi- 
culty. Had  the  twelve  understood  Christ's  discourse  in 
Capernaum,  the  apostasy  of  the  multitude  would  have  been 
less  of  a  temptation.  But  they  did  not  understand  it :  they 
were  in  the  dark  as  to  its  meaning  as  much  as  the  others,  and 
hence  the  solicitude  of  their  Master  lest  they  too  might  forsake 
Him.  So  with  all  whose  faith  is  being  tried.  They  fear  the 
Lord,  and  walk  in  darkness,  and  have  no  light ;  or  at  least 
want  light  in  the  quarter  whence  the  trial  comes.  And  as 
they  walk  in  the  dark,  they  are  liable,  like  the  disciples,  to 
see  ghosts,  and  be  tormented  with  imaginary  fears.  Every 
bosh  seems  a  thief  or  a  robber ;  and  ghastly  bugbears,  hideous 
hobgoblins,  *'  do  greatly  them  afifear,"  as  they  walk  forlorn 
through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death.  Blasphemous 
thoughts  of  Gk)d,  despairing  thoughts  of  themselves,  infest  their 
minda  Conscience  charges  them  with  horrible  offences,  and 
the  intellect  is  pretematurally  acute  in  interpreting  Scripture 
in  the  manner  most  unfavourable  to  their  prospects  of  salvation; 
yea,  it  may  be,  in  suggesting  doubts  whether  there  be  such  a 
thing  as  salvation,  whether  religion  be  not  a  dream,  and  re- 
velation a  delusion.  What  a  blessed  deliverance  when  the 
day  dawns,  and  the  shadows  flee  away  I  How  pleasant  to 
lock  back  on  such  passages  of  one's  life,  and  remember  God 
from  the  land  of  Jordan,  and  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  when  the 
waves  and  billows  went  over  us  ! 

A  second  point  in  the  symbolism  of  the  storm  is  the  absence 
of  Jesus.  In  the  first  storm  encountered  by  the  twelve,  Jesus 
was  present^  though  asleep ;  but  in  the  second  He  was  not 


132  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

with  them  at  aU,  sleeping  or  waking.  Now,  in  like  manner, 
the  absence  of  the  Lord  to  feeling  at  least  is  one  painful 
feature  of  inward  trials.  Christ  is  not  in  the  ship  while  the 
storm  rages  by  night,  and  we  toil  on  in  rowing  unaided,  as  we 
think,  by  His  grace,  uncheered  by  His  spiritual  presence.  It 
was  so  even  with  the  twelve  next  day  on  the  shore.  Their 
Master,  though  present  to  their  eyes,  had  vanished  out  of  sight 
to  their  understanding.  While  they  clung  to  Him  as  one  who 
had  the  words  of  eternal  life,  they  had  not  the  comfort  of 
comprehending  His  meaning.  They  were  faithful  to  Him  in 
spite  of  the  incomprehensibility  of  His  doctrine. 

When  Jesus  is  missed.  He  is  apt  to  be  reflected  on.  Dis- 
ciples are  prone  to  ask  (the  twelve,  no  doubt,  did  ask).  How 
can  He  leave  us  in  such  a  plight  ?  nay,  why  did  He  allow  us 
to  get  into  it  ?  Why  did  He  push  our  boat  oflf  into  the  sea, 
and  not  let  us  remain  with  Him  on  shore,  as  we  wished  ? 
Such  questions  always  admit  of  satisfactory  answer.  There 
were  good  reasons  for  the  arrangement  by  which  the  disciples 
were  required  to  sail  away  alone ;  and  there  are  equally  good 
reasons  for  all  analogous  experiences  in  the  spiritual  life.  It 
is  good  for  believers  that  Christ  should  go  away  for  a  season, 
and  that  they  should  know  what  it  is  to  battle  with  temptation, 
as  it  were,  single-handed.  This,  however,  they  never  see  till 
the  trial  is  past ;  and  hence  complaints,  doubting  questions, 
severe  reflections,  are  almost  invariably  indulged  in  at  a  season 
of  desertion.  However  much  the  Divine  Master  may  intend 
the  good  of  His  disciples  at  such  times,  He  must  be  content  to 
do  without  their  confidence,  and  to  bear  patiently  their  mis- 
understandings and  hard  thoughts.  And  He  is  content :  He 
does  what  is  right,  and  truBts  to  the  future  for  His  justification, 
when  the  children  shall  have  become  grown  men,  capable  of 
appreciating  the  discipline  to  which  they  have  been  subjected. 

The  third  respect  in  which  the  storm  has  symbolic  signifi- 
cance, is  the  arrestment  of  all  progress  while  it  lasted.  The 
disciples,  with  all  their  efforts,  made  no  headway  :  the  utmost 
they  effected  was  to  hold  their  own ;  their  toil  but  helped 
them  to  stand  still  in  midst  of  the  sea.  In  like  manner, 
there  is  an  absence  of  all  sensible  progress  in  the  divine  life 
in  seasons  of  spiritual  trial     The  tempest-tossed  seem  to 


A  CRISIS:   THE  STORM.  133 

Temain  throogliout  just  where  they  were :  that  at  best,  for 
often  there  is  back-going.^ 

This  standing  still  is  very  discouraging.  No  one  loves  to 
labour  hard,  and  all  in  vain.  But  the  tried  must  beware  of 
being  too  much  discouraged,  and  remember  that  if  they  do 
stand  still  at  such  a  season,  their  labour  is  not  in  vain.  It  is 
a  great  thing  to  hold  your  own  then.  Surely  it  was  better 
fSeur  to  stick  fast  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  than  to  be  driven,  back 
on  the  rocky  shore  !  K  the  disciples  did  not  get  nearer  the 
port  whither  they  were  bound  while  the  storm  lasted,  they  at 
all  events  escaped  shipwreck  and  drowning :  a  matter  surdy 
to  be  thankful  for  ! 

It  is  a  pious  commonplace,  that  there  is  no  standing  still 
in  the  divine  life,  and  that  if  one  is  not  going  forward  he  is 
going  backward.  This  saying  may  hold  good  in  fair  weather, 
but  it  does  not  apply  in  a  time  of  storm.  Then  to  stand 
Btdll  is  all  one  can  do  ;  nor  is  that  at  such  a  season  a  small 
thing,  but  everything.  Is  it  a  small  thing  to  weather  the 
tempest — to  keep  off  the  rocks,  the  sands,  and  the  breakers  ? 
Vex  not  the  soul  of  him  who  is  already  vexed  enough  by  the 
buffeting  winds,  by  retailing  wise  saws  about  progress  and 
backsliding,  indiscriminately  applied.  Play  not  the  part  of  a 
Job's  friend,  telling  the  tried  one  he  is  not  getting  any  nearer 
the  haven  with  all  his  efiTorts  (which  he  knows  too  well  him- 
self), and  drawing  hence  unfavourable  inferences  respecting  his 
spiritual  state.  Sather  remind  him  that  the  great  thing  for 
him  at  present  is  to  endure,  to  be  immoveable,  to  hold  fast  his 
moral  integrity  and  his  profession  of  faith,  and  to  keep  off  the 
dangerous  coast  of  immorality  and  infidelity  ;  and  for  his  en- 
couragement assure  him,  that  if  he  will  but  persevere  pulling  a 
little  longer  at  the  oar,  however  weary  his  arm,  God  will  come 
and  calm  the  wind,  when,  inspired  with  new  life  and  vigour, 
he  shall  move  with  great  speed,  and  forthwith  reach  the  land. 

The  storm  on  the  lake,  besides  being  an  apt  emblem  of  the 
trial  of  fjEuth,  was  for  the  twelve  an  important  lesson  in  faith, 
helping  to  prepare  them  for  the  future  which  awaited  them. 
The  temporary  absence  of  their  Master  was  a  preparation  for 
perpetual  absence.     The  miraculous  interposition  of  Jesus 

^  John  Yi  66. 


134  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

at  the  crisis  of  their  peril  was  fitted  to  impress  on  their  minds 
the  conviction,  that  even  after  He  had  ascended  He  would  still 
be  with  them  in  the  hour  of  danger.  From  the  ultimate  happy 
issue  of  a  plan  which  threatened  for  a  time  to  miscarry,  they 
might  further  learn  to  cherish  a  calm  confidence  in  the  govern- 
ment of  their  exalted  Lord,  even  in  midst  of  most  untoward 
events.  As  we  remarked  before,  they  probably  concluded, 
when  the  storm  came  on,  that  Jesus  had  made  a  mistake  in 
ordering  them  to  sail  away  across  the  lake  while  He  remained 
behind  to  dismiss  the  multitude.  The  event,  however,  rebuked 
this  hasty  judgment,  all  ending  happily.  Their  experience  in 
this  instance  was  fitted  to  teach  a  lesson  for  life :  not  rashly 
to  infer  mismanagement  or  neglect  on  Christ's  part  from  tem- 
porary mishaps,  but  to  have  firm  faith  in  His  wise  and  loving 
care  for  His  cause  and  people,  and  to  anticipate  a  happy  issue 
out  of  all  perplexities ;  yea,  to  glory  in  tribulation,  because  of 
the  great  deliverance  which  would  surely  follow. 

The  disciples  were  far  enough  from  possessing  such  strong 
faith  at  the  time  of  the  storm.  They  had  no  expectation  that 
Jesus  would  come  to  their  rescue ;  for  when  He  did  come,  they 
thought  He  was  a  spirit  flitting  over  the  water,  and  cried  out 
in  an  agony  of  superstitious  terror.  Here  also  we  note,  in 
passing,  a  curious  correspondence  between  the  incidents  of  this 
crisis  and  those  connected  with  the  final  one.  The  disciples 
had  then  as  little  expectation  of  seeing  their  Lord  return  from 
the  dead  as  they  had  now  of  seeing  Him  come  to  them  over 
the  sea;  and  therefore  His  reappearance  at  first  frightened 
rather  than  comforted  them.  "They  were  terrified  and 
aflFrighted,  and  supposed  that  they  had  seen  a  spirit."  ^  Good, 
unlocked  for  in  either  case,  was  turned  into  evil ;  and  what 
to  faith  would  have  been  a  source  of  intense  joy,  became, 
through  unbelief,  only  a  new  cause  of  alarm. 

The  fact  of  His  not  being  expected  seems  to  have  imposed 
on  Jesus  the  necessity  of  using  artifice  in  His  manner  of  ap- 
proaching His  storm-tossed  disciples.  Mark  relates  that  "  He 
would  have  passed  by  them,"*  affecting  strangeness,  as  we 
imderstand  it,  out  of  delicate  consideration  for  their  weakness. 
He  knew  what  He  would  be  taken  for  when  first  observed ; 

^  Luke  xxiv.  87.  •  Mark  yi  48. 


A  CRISIS:   THE  STORM.  135 

and  therefore  He  wished  to  attract  their  attention  at  a  safe 
distance,  fearing  lest,  by  appearing  among  them  at  once,  He 
might  drive  them  distracted.  He  found  it  needful  to  be  as 
cautious  in  announcing  His  advent  to  save,  as  men  are  wont 
to  be  in  communicating  evil  tidings :  first  appearing,  as  the 
spectre,  as  far  away  as  He  could  be  seen ;  then  revealing  Him- 
self by  His  familiar  voice  uttering  the  words  of  comfort,  "  It 
is  I ;  be  not  a&aid ; "  and  so  obtaining  at  length  a  willing 
reception  into  the  ship.^ 

The  effects  which  followed  the  admission  of  Jesus  into  the 
vessel  betrayed  the  twelve  into  a  new  manifestation  of  the 
weakness  of  their  faith.  "  The  wind  ceased :  and  they  were 
sore  amazed  in  themselves  beyond  measure,  and  wondered."  ^ 
They  ought  not  to  have  wondered  so  greatly,  after  what  had 
happened  once  before  on  these  same  waters,  and  especially 
after  such  a  miracle  as  had  been  wrought  in  the  wilderness  on 
the  previous  day.  But  the  storm  had  blown  all  thoughts  of 
such  things  out  of  their  mind,  and  driven  them  utterly  stupid. 
**  They  reflected  not  on  the  loaves  (nor  on  the  rebuking  of  the 
winds),  for  their  heart  was  hardened." ' 

But  the  most  interesting  revelation  of  the  mental  state  of 
the  disciples  at  the  time  when  Jesus  came  to  their  relief,  is 
to  be  found  in  the  episode  concerning  Peter  related  in  Matthew's 
GospeL  When  that  disciple  imderstood  that  the  supposed 
spectre  was  his  beloved  Master,  he  cried,  *'  Lord,  if  it  be  Thou, 
bid  me  come  unto  Thee  on  the  water ;  "*  and  on  receiving  per- 
mission, he  forthwith  stepped  out  of  the  ship  into  the  sea. 
This  was  not  faith,  but  simple  rashness.  It  was  the  reboimd 
of  an  impetuous,  headlong  nature,  from  one  extreme  of  utter 
despair,  to  the  opposite  extreme  of  extravagant,  reckless  joy. 
What  in  the  other  disciples  took  the  tame  form  of  a  willing- 
ness to  receive  Jesus  into  the  ship  after  they  were  satisfied  it 
was  He  who  walked  on  the  waters,*  took,  in  the  case  of  Peter, 
the  form  of  a  romantic,  adventurous  wish  to  go  out  to  Jesus 
where  He  was,  to  welcome  Him  back  among  them  again.  The 
proposal  was  altogether  like  the  man :  generous,  enthusiastic, 
and  well-meant,  but  inconsiderate. 

Uohnvi21.  «Markvi61.  »  Mark  vi  52. 

«  ]£itt  ziy.  28.  »  John  vi  21. 


136  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

Such  a  proposal,  of  course,  could  not  meet  with  Christ's 
approval,  and  yet  He  did  not  negative  it.  He  rather  thought 
good  to  humour  the  impulsive  disciple  so  far,  by  inviting  him 
to  come,  and  then  to  allow  him,  while  in  the  water,  to  feel 
his  own  weakness.  Thus  would  He  teadi  him  a  little  self- 
knowledge,  and,  if  possible,  save  him  from  the  effects  of  his 
rash,  seK-confident  temper.  But  Peter  was  not  to  be  made 
wise  by  one  lesson,  nor  even  by  several  He  would  go  on 
blundering  and  erring,  in  spite  of  rebuke  and  warning,  till  at 
length  he  fell  into  grievous  sin,  denying  the  Master  whom  he 
loved  so  weU.  The  denial  at  the  final  crisis  waa  just  what 
might  be  looked  for  from  one  who  so  behaved  at  the  minor 
crisis  preceding  it.  The  man  who  said,  "Bid  me  come  to 
Thee,"  was  just  the  man  to  say,  "  Lord,  I  am  ready  to  go  with 
Thee  both  into  prison  and  to  death."  He  who  was  so  cou- 
rageous on  deck,  and  so  timid  cunid  the  waves,  waa  the  one  of 
all  the  disciples  most  likely  to  talk  boldly  when  danger  was 
not  at  hand,  and  then  play  the  coward  when  the  hour  of  trial 
actually  arrived.  The  scene  on  the  lake  was  but  a  foreshadow- 
ing or  rehearsal  of  Peter's  fall 

And  yet  that  scene  showed  something  more  than  the  weak- 
ness of  that  disciple's  faith.  It  showed  abo  what  is  possible 
to  those  who  believe.  If  the  tendency  of  weak  faith  be  to 
sink,  the  triumph  of  strong  faith  is  to  walk  on  the  waves, 
glorying  in  tribulation,  and  counting  it  all  joy  when  exposed 
to  divers  temptations.  It  is  the  privilege  of  those  who  are 
weak  in  faith,  and  the  duty  of  all,,  mindful  of  human  frailty,  to 
pray,  "  Lead  us  not  into  temptation."  But  when  storms  come 
not  of  their  inviting,  and  when  their  ship  is  upset  in  midst  of 
the  sea,  then  may  Christians  trust  to  the  promise,  "  When  thou 
passest  through  the  waters,  I  wiU  be  with  thee  ; "  and  if  only 
they  have  faith,  they  shall  be  enabled  to  tread  the  rolling 
billows  as  if  walking  on  firm  land. 

'*  He  bids  me  come ;  Hia  voice  I  know, 
And  boldly  on  the  waters  go, 

And  brave  the  tempest's  shock. 
O'er  rude  temptations  now  I  bound  ; 
The  billows  yield  a  solid  ground, 
The  wave  is  firm  as  rock. " 


A  CBISIS:   THE  SERMON.  137 

SEcrriON  m. — The  Sermon. 

John  yi.  82-58. 

The  task  now  before  ns  is  to  study  that  memorable  address 
delivered  by  Jesns  in  the  synagogue  of  Capernaum  on  the 
bread  of  life,  which  gave  so  great  ofifence  at  the  time,  and 
which  has  ever  since  been  a  stone  of  stumbling,  a  subject  of 
controversy,  and  a  cause  of  division  in  the  visible  church, 
and,  80  fisir  as  one  can  judge  from  present  appearances,  will 
be  to  the  world's  end.  On  a  question  so  vexed  as  that  which 
relates  to  the  meaning  of  this  discourse,  one  might  well  shrink 
from  entering.  But  the  very  confusion  which  prevails  here 
points  it  out  as  our  plain  duty  to  disregard  the  din  of  con- 
flicting interpretations,  and,  humUy  praying  to  be  taught  of 
(xod,  to  search  for  and  set  forth  Christ's  own  mind. 

The  sermon  on  the  bread  of  life,  however  strangely  it 
sounds,  was  appropriate  both  in  matter  and  manner  to  the 
circomstances  in  which  it  was  delivered.  It  w{^  natural  and 
seasonable  that  Jesus  should  speak  to  the  people  of  the  meat 
that  endureth  imto  everlasting  life  after  miraculously  provid- 
ing perishable  food  to  supply  their  physical  wants.  It  was 
even  natural  and  seasonable  that  He  should  speak  of  this 
high  topic  in  the  startlii^,  apparently  gross,  harsh  style  which 
He  adapted  on  the  occasion.  The  form  of  thought  suited  the 
situation.  Passover  time  was  approaching,  when  the  paschal 
lamb  was  slain  and  eaten;  and  if  Jesus  desired  to  say  in 
effect,  without  saying  it  in  so  many  words,  "  I  am  the  true 
Paschal  Lamb,"  what  more  suitable  form  of  language  could 
He  employ  than  this:  ''The  bread  that  I  wiU  give  is  my 
flesh,  which  I  will  give  for  the  life  of  the  world  ? "  The  style 
was  also  adapted  to  the  peculiar  complexion  of  the  speaker's 
feelings  at  the  moment.  Jesus  was  in  a  sad,  austere  mood 
of  mind  when  He  preached  this  sermon.  The  foolish  enthu- 
siasm of  the  multitude  had  saddened  Him.  Their  wish  to 
force  a  crown  on  His  head  made  Him  think  of  His  cross ;  for 
He  knew  that  this  idolatrous  devotion  to  a  political  Messiah 
meant  death  sooner  or  later  to  one  who  declined  such  carnal 
homage.     He  spoke,  therefore,  in  the  synagogue  of  Caper* 


138  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

naum  with  Calvary  in  view,  setting  Himself  forth  aa  the  life 
of  the  world  in  terms  applicable  to  a  sacrificial  victim,  whose 
blood  is  shed,  and  whose  flesh  is  eaten  by  those  presenting 
the  offering ;  not  mincing  His  words,  but  saying  everything 
in  the  strongest  and  intensest  manner  possibla 

The  theme  of  this  memorable  address  was  very  naturally 
introduced  by  the  preceding  conversation  between  Jesus  and 
the  people  who  came  from  the  other  side  of  the  lake,  hoping 
to  find  Him  at  Capernaum,  His  usual  place  of  abode.^  To  their 
warm  inquiries  as  to  how  He  came  thither.  He  replied  by  a 
chilling  observation  concerning  the  true  motive  of  their  zeal, 
and  an  exhortation  to  set  their  hearts  on  a  higher  food  than 
that  which  perisheth.^  Understanding  the  exhortation  as  a 
counsel  to  cultivate  piety,  the  persons  to  whom  it  was  ad- 
dressed inquired  what  they  should  do  that  they  might  work 
the  works  of  Grod,  ie,  please  God.'  Jesus  replied  by  declar- 
ing that  the  great  testing  work  of  the  hour  was  to  receive 
Himself  as  one  whom  Ood  had  sent.^  This  led  to  a  demand 
on  their  part  for  evidence  in  support  of  this  high  claim  to  be 
the  divinely  missioned  Messiah.  The  miracle  just  wrought 
on  the  other  side  of  the  lake  was  great,  but  not  great  enough, 
they  thought,  to  justify  such  lofty  pretensions.  In  ancient 
times  a  whole  nation  had  been  fed  for  many  years  by  bread 
brought  down  from  heaven  by  Moses.  What  waa  the  recent 
miracle  compared  to  that  ?  He  must  show  a  sign  on  a  far 
grander  scale,  if  He  wished  them  to  believe  that  a  greater 
than  Moses  was  here.'^  Jesus  took  up  the  challenge,  and 
boldly  declared  that  the  manna,  wonderful  as  it  was,  was  not 
the  true  heavenly  bread.  There  was  another  bread,  of  which 
the  manna  was  but  the  type:  like  it,  coming  down  from 
heaven ;  ^  but  unlike  it,  giving  life  not  to  a  nation,  but  to  a 
world,  and  not  life  merely  for  a  few  short  years,  but  life  for 
eternity.  This  announcement,  like  the  similar  one  concerning 
the  wonderful  water  of  life,  made  to  the  woman  of  Samaria, 

'  John  yi  24.  Luthardt  very  properly  points  out  that  the  fact  of  the  people 
expecting  to  find  Jesus  in  Capernaum  implies  such  a  residence  there  as  the 
synoptical  Gospels  inform  us  o£    Daa  Joh,  Evang,  IL  50. 

«  Vers.  26,  27.  »  Ver.  28.  *  Ver.  29. 

^  Vers.  30,  81.     Moses  is  not  named,  but  he  is  in  their  thoughts. 

*  §  xara^ivrnff  Ycr.  38,  refers  to  ifrt,  not  the  speaker  directly. 


A  CBISIS:   THE  SERMON.  139 

provoked  desire  in  the  hearts  of  the  hearers,  and  they  ex- 
claimed, "Lord,  evermore  give  us  this  bread."  Then  said 
Jesus  unto  them,  "^  I  am  the  bread  of  life :  he  that  cometh 
unto  me  shall  never  hunger ;  and  he  that  believeth  on  me 
shall  never  thirst"  ^ 

In  these  words  Jesus  briefly  enunciated  the  doctrine  of  the 
true  bread,  which  He  expotmded  and  inculcated  in  His  memor- 
able Capernaum  discourse.  The  doctrine,  as  stated,  sets  forth 
what  the  true  bread  is,  what  it  does,  and  how  it  is  appropriated. 

1.  The  true  bread  is  He  who  here  speaks  of  it— Jesus 
Christ  "I  am  the  bread."  The  assertion  implies,  on  the 
speaker^s  part,  a  claim  to  have  descended  from  heaven;  for 
such  a  descent  is  one  of  the  properties  by  which  the  true 
bread  is  defined.'  Accordingly  we  find  Jesus,  in  the  sequel 
of  His  discourse,  expressly  asserting  that  He  had  come  down 
from  heaven.'  This  declaration,  understood  in  a  supernatural 
sense,  was  the  first  thing  in  His  discourse  with  which  His 
hearers  found  fault  ''The  Jews  then  murmured  at  Him, 
because  He  said,  I  am  the  bread  which  came  down  from 
heaven.  And  they  said.  Is  not  this  Jesus,  the  son  of  Joseph, 
whose  father  and  mother  we  know  ?  how  is  it  then  that  he 
saitb,  I  came  *  down  from  heaven?"^  It  was  natural  they 
ahonld  murmur,  if  they  did  not  know  or  believe  that  there 
was  anything  out  of  course  in  the  way  in  which  Jesus  came 
into  the  world.  For  such  language  as  He  here  employs 
could  not  be  used  without  blasphemy  by  a  mere  man  bom 
after  the  fashion  of  other  men.  It  is  language  proper  only 
in  the  mouth  of  a  Divine  Being  who,  for  a  purpose,  hath 
assumed  human  nature. 

In  setting  Himself  forth,  therefore,  as  the  bread  which 
came  down  from  heaven,  Jesus  virtually  taught  the  doctrine 
of  the  incarnation.  The  solemn  assertion,  "  I  am  the  bread 
of  life,"  is  equivalent  in  import  to  that  made  by  the  evan- 
gelist respecting  Him  who  spoke  these  words :  "  The  Word 
became  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us,  full  of  grace  and  truth."  ^ 

It  is,  however,  not  merely  as  incarnate  that  the  Son  of  Grod 
is  the  bread  of  eternal  Ufa     Bread  must  be  broken  in  order 

>  John  vi  82-S5.  •  Ver.  88.  •  Vers.  38,  61,  68,  62. 

«  Ten.  41,  42.  •  John  L  14. 


\ 


140  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

to  be  eaten.  The  Incarnate  One  must  die  as  a  sacrificial 
victim,  that  men  may  truly  feed  upon  Him.  The  Word  become 
flesh,  and  crucified  in  the  flesh,  is  the  life  of  the  world.  This 
special  truth  Jesus  went  on  to  declare,  after  having  stated 
the  general  truth,  that  the  heavenly  bread  was  to  be  foimd 
in  Himself.  "  The  bread,"  said  He,  "  that  I  will  give  is  my 
flesh,  (which  I  wiU  give)  for  the  life  of  the  world."  ^  The 
language  here  becomes  modified  to  suit  the  new  turn  of 
thought.  "  I  am  "  passes  into  "  I  wiU  give,"  and  ^'  bread  "  is 
transformed  into  "  flesh." 

Jesus  evidently  refers  here  to  His  death.  His  hearers  did 
not  so  imderstand  Him ;  but  we  can  have  no  doubt  on  the 
matter.  The  verb  "give,"  suggesting  a  sacrificial  act,  and 
the  future  tense  both  point  that  way.  In  words  dark  and 
mysterious  before  the  event,  clear  as  day  after  it,  the  speaker 
declares  the  great  truth,  that  His  death  is  to  be  the  life  of 
men ;  that  His  broken  body  and  shed  blood  are  to  be  as  meat 
and  drink  to  a  perishing  world,  conferring  on  all  who  shall 
partake  of  them  the  gift  of  immortality.  How  He  is  to  die, 
and  why  His  death  shall  possess  such  virtue.  He  doth  not 
here  explain.  The  Capemaimi  discourse  makes  no  mention  of 
the  cross ;  it  contains  no  theory  of  atonement,  it  speaks  not 
of  satisfaction,  substitution,  vicarious  suffering :  the  time  is 
not  come  for  such  details ;  it  simply  asserts  in  broad,  strong 
terms,  that  the  flesh  and  blood  of  the  incarnate  Son  of  God, 
severed  as  in  death,  are  the  source  of  eternal  lifa 

This  mention  by  Jesus  of  His  flesh  as  the  bread  from 
heaven  gave  rise  to  a  new  outburst  of  murmuring  among  His 
hearers.  "  They  strove  among  themselves,  saying.  How  can 
this  man  give  us  his  flesh  to  eat  ? "  *  Jesus  had  not  yet 
said  that  His  flesh  must  be  eaten,  but  they  took  for  granted 
that  such  was  His  meaning.  They  were  right ;  and  accord- 
ingly He  went  on  to  say,  with  the  greatest  solemnity  and 
emphasis,  that  they  miiist  even  eat  His  flesh  and  drink  'His 
blood.     Unless  they  did  that,  they  should  have  no  life  in 

^  John  vi.  51.  The  words  in  the  original,  represented  bj  those  within 
brackets,  are  of  donbtfal  authority  ;  bnt  the  sense  is  the  same  whether  they  be 
erased  or  retained.     The  first  ^«ir«  contains  the  idea. 

'  John  yi  52. 


A  CRISIS:   THE  SERMON.  141 

them ;  if  they  did  that,  they  should  have  life  in  all  its  ful- 
ness— ^life  eternal  both  in  body  and  in  soul.  For  His  flesh 
was  the  true  food,  and  BLis  blood  was  the  true  drink.  They 
who  partook  of  these  would  share  in  His  own  life.  He 
should  dwell  in  them,  incorporated  with  their  very  being ; 
and  they  should  dwell  in  Him  as  the  ground  of  their  being. 
They  should  live  as  secure  against  death  by  Him,  as  He 
lived  from  everlasting  to  everlasting  by  the  Father.  "  This, 
therefore,"  said  the  speaker,  reverting  in  conclusion  to  the 
proposition  with  which  He  started,  "  this  (even  my  flesh)  is 
that  bread  which  came  down  from  heaven;  not  as  your 
fkthers  did  eat  manna^  and  are  dead :  he  that  eateth  of  this 
bread  shaU  live  for  ever."  ^ 

A  third  expression  of  disapprobation  ensuing,  led  Jesus  to 
put  the  copestone  on  His  high  doctrine  of  the  bread  of  life, 
by  making  a  concluding  declaration,  which  must  have  ap- 
peared at  the  time  the  most  mysterious  and  imintelligible  of 
all :  that  the  bread  which  descended  from  heaven  must  ascend 
up  thither  again,  in  order  to  be  to  the  full  extent  the  bread  of 
everlasting  life.  Doth  this  ofifend  you  ?  asked  He  at  His 
hearers :  this  which  I  have  just  said  about  your  eating  my 
flesh  and  blood ;  what  will  ye  say  "  if  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of 
man  ascend  up  where  He  was  before  ? "  ^  The  question  was 
in  effect  an  afi&rmation,  and  it  was  also  a  prophetic  hint, 
that  only  after  He  had  left  the  world  would  He  become  on 
an  extensive  scale  and  conspicuously  a  source  of  life  to  men ; 
because  then  the  manna  of  grace  would  begin  to  descend  not 
only  on  the  wilderness  of  Israel,  but  on  all  the  barren  places 
of  the  earth ;  and  the  truth  in  Him,  the  doctrine  of  His  life, 
death,  azid  resurrection,  would  become  meat  indeed  and  drink 
indeed  unto  a  multitude,  not  of  murmuring  hearers,  but  of 
devout,  enlightened,  thankful  believers;  and  no  one  would 
need  any  longer  to  ask  for  a  sign,  when  he  could  find  in 
the  ^Christian  church,  continuing  stedfastly  in  the  apostles' 
doctrine  and  fellowship,  and  in  breaking  bread  and  in  prayers, 

^  Jolm  YL  5S-58.  In  yer.  55  the  reading  vibrates  between  mXtiiZt  and  IXnint, 
Vcr.  57, 1<A  TO  warifm,  means  literally  "on  account  of,"  but  **by"  gives  the 
practical  sense.     So  with  )/  «Vi. 

*  John  vi  61,  62. 


142  THE  TBAININQ  OP  THE  TWELVK 

the  best  evidence  that  He  had  spoken  truth  who  said, ''  I  am 
the  bread  of  life." 

2.  This,  then,  is  the  heavenly  bread :  even  the  God-man 
incarnate,  crucified,  and  glorified.  Let  us  now  consider  more 
attentively  the  marvellous  virtue  of  this  bread.  It  is  the 
bread  of  life.  It  is  the  office  of  all  bread  to  sustain  life,  but 
it  is  the  peculiarity  of  this  divine  bread  to  give  eternal  life. 
"  He  that  cometh  to  me,"  said  the  speaker,  ''  shall  never 
himger,  and  he  that  believeth  on  me  shall  never  thirst"^ 
With  reference  to  this  life-giving  power.  He  called  the  bread 
of  which  He  spake  "  living  bread,"  and  meat  indeed,  and  de- 
clared that  he  who  ate  thereof  should  not  die,  but  should 
live  for  ever.* 

In  commending  this  miraculous  bread  to  His  hearers,  Jesus, 
we  observe,  laid  special  stress  on  its  power  to  give  eternal  life 
even  to  the  body  of  man.  Four  times  over  He  dedared  in 
express  terms,  that  all  who  partook  of  this  bread  of  life  should 
be  raised  again  at  the  last  day.^  The  prominence  thus  given 
to  the  resurrection  of  the  body  is  due  in  part  to  the  fact^ 
that  throughout  His  discourse  Jesus  was  drawing  a  contrast 
between  the  manna  which  fed  the  Israelites  in  the  desert,  and 
the  true  bread  of  which  it  was  the  type.  The  contrast  was 
most  striking  just  at  this  point  The  manna  was  merely  a 
substitute  for  ordinary  food;  it  had  no  power  to  ward  off 
death :  the  generation  which  had  been  so  miraculously  sup- 
ported passed  away  from  the  earth,  like  all  other  generations 
of  mankind.  Therefore,  argued  Jesus,  it  could  not  be  the  true 
bread  from  heaven ;  for  the  true  bread  must  be  capable  of 
%4e8troying  death,  and  endowing  the  recipients  with  the  power 
of  an  endless  existence.  A  man  who  eats  thereof  must  not 
die;  or  dying,  must  rise  again.  "  Your  fathers  did  eat  manna  in 
the  wilderness,  and  are  dead.  This  is  the  bread  which  cometh 
down  from  heaven,  that  a  man  may  eat  thereof,  and  not  die.''^ 

But  the  prominence  given  to  the  resurrection  of  the  body 
is  due  mainly  to  its  intrinsic  importanca  For  if  the  dead 
rise  not,  then  is  our  faith  vain ;  and  the  bread  of  life  degene- 
rates into  a  mere  quack  nostrum,  pretending  to  virtues  which 

*  John  vL  36.  *  John  vL  61,  55,  50. 

>  John  yi.  89,  40,  44,  64.  «  John  yi  49,  60. 


A  CBISIS  :   THE  SERMON.  143 

it  does  not  possess.  True,  it  may  still  give  spiritual  life  to 
those  who  eat  thereof,  but  what  is  that  without  the  hope  of  a 
life  hereafter  ?  Not  much,  according  to  Paul,  who  says,  *'  If 
in  this  life  only  we  have  hope  in  Christ,  we  are  of  all  men 
most  miserable."  ^  Many,  indeed,  in  our  day  do  not  concur 
in  the  apostle's  judgment  They  think  that  the  doctrine  of 
the  life  everlasting  may  be  left  out  of  the  creed,  without  loss, 
nay,  even  with  positive  advantage,  to  the  Christian  faith.  The 
life  of  a  Christian  seems  to  them  so  much  nobler  when  all 
thought  of  future  reward  or  pimishment  is  dismissed  from  the 
mind.  How  grand,  to  pass  through  the  wilderness  of  this 
world  feeding  on  the  manna  supplied  in  the  high,  pure  teach- 
ing of  Jesus,  without  caring  whether  there  be  a  land  of 
Canaan  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan  !  Very  sublime  indeed  ! 
but  why,  in  that  case,  come  into  the  wilderness  at  all  ?  why 
not  remain  in  Egypt,  feeding  on  more  substantial  and  pala- 
table viands  ?  The  children  of  Israel  would'  not  have  left 
the  house  of  bondage  unless  they  had  hoped  to  reach  the  pro- 
mised land.  An  immortal  hope  is  equally  necessary  to  the 
Christian.  He  must  believe  in  a  world  to  come,  in  order  to 
Hve  above  the  present  evil  world  K  Christ  cannot  redeem 
the  body  &om  the  power  of  the  grave,  then  it  is  in  vain  that 
He  promises  to  redeem  us  from  guilt  and  sin.  The  bread  of 
life  is  xmworthy  of  the  name,  unless  it  hath  power  to  cope 
with  physical  as  well  as  with  moral  corruption. 

Hence  the  prominence  given  by  Jesus  in  this  discourse  to 
the  resurrection  of  the  body.  He  knew  that  here  lay  the 
crucial  experiment  by  which  the  value  and  virtue  of  the  bread 
He  offered  to  EUs  hearers  must  be  tested  ''  You  call  this 
bread  the  bread  of  life,  in  contrast  to  the  manna  of  ancient 
times : — do  you  mean  to  say  that,  like  the  tree  of  life  in  the 
garden  of  Eden,  it  will  confer  on  those  who  eat  thereof  the  gift 
of  a  blessed  immortality  ?"  "  Yes,  I  do,"  replied  the  Preacher 
in  effect  to  this  imaginary  question :  ''  this  bread  I  offer  you 
will  not  merely  quicken  the  soul  to  a  higher,  purer  life ;  it  will 
even  revivify  your  bodies,  and  make  the  corruptible  pu;b  on 
inconuption,  and  the  mortal  put  on  immortality." 

3.  And  how^  then,  is  this  wondrous  bread  to  be  appro- 

» 1  Cor.  xy.  19. 


144  THE  TIRAINIKG  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

priated,  that  one  may  experience  its  vitalizing  influences? 
Bread  of  course  is  eaten,  but  what  does  eating  in  this  case 
mean  ?  It  means,  in  one  word,  faith,  "  He  that  cometh  to  me 
shall  never  hunger,  and  he  that  believeth  in  me  shall  never 
thirst."^  Eating  Christ's  flesh  and  drinking  His  blood,  and  we 
may  add,  drinking  the  water  of  which  He  spake  to  the  woman 
by  the  well,  all  signify  believing  in  Him  as  He  is  offered  to  men 
in  the  gospel :  the  Son  of  Grod  manifested  in  the  flesh,  cruci- 
fied, raised  from  the  dead,  ascended  into  glory ;  the  Prophet, 
the  Priest,  the  King,  and  the  Mediator  between  Grod  and  maa 
Throughout  the  Capernaum  discourse,  eating  and  believing  are 
used  interchangeably  as  equivalents.  Thus,  in  one  sentence, 
we  find  Jesus  saying,  "Verily,  verily,  I  say  imto  you,  he  that 
believeth  on  me  hath  everlasting  life :  I  am  that  bread  of 
life  ;"*  and  shortly  after  remarking,  "  I  am  the  living  bread 
which  came  down  from  heaven  :  if  any  man  eat  of  this  bread, 
he  shall  live  for  ever."'  If  any  further  argument  were  neces- 
sary to  justify  the  identifying  of  eating  with  believing,  it 
might  be  found  in  the  instruction  given  by  the  Preacher  to  ffis 
hearers  before  He  began  to  speak  of  the  bread  of  life :  "  This 
is  the  work  of  God,  that  ye  believe  on  Him  whom  He  hath 
sent."*  That  aentence  furnishes  the  key  to  the  interpretation 
of  the  whole  subsequent  discourse.  "  Believe,"  said  Jesus, 
with  reference  to  the  foregoing  inquiry.  What  shall  we  do,  that 
we  might  work  the  works  of  God  ? — "  Believe,  and  thou  hast 
done  God's  work"  "  Believe,"  we  may  tmderstand  Him  as 
saying  with  reference  to  an  inquiry.  How  shall  we  eat  this 
bread  of  life  ? — "  Believe,  and  thou  hast  eaten." 

Believe,  and  thou  hast  eaten:  such  was  the  formula  in 
which  Augustine  expressed  his  view  of  Christ's  meaning  in  the 
Capernaum  discourse.*  The  saying  is  not  only  terse,  but  true, 
in  our  judgment ;  but  it  has  not  been  accepted  by  all  inter- 
preters. '  Many  hold  that  eating  and  faith  are  something 
distinct,  and  would  express  the  relation  between  them  thus : 
Believe,  and  thou  shalt  eat.  Even  Calvin  objected  to  the 
Augustinian  formula.  Distinguishing  his  own  views  from 
those  held  by  the  followers  of  Zwingle,  he  says :  '*  To  them  to 

»  John  vi.  $6.  «  Vers.  47,  48.  »  Ver.  61.  *  Ver.  29. 

'  Crede  et  manducastu 


A  CRISIS  :   THE  SERMON.  145 

eat  is  simply  to  believe.  I  say  that  Christ's  flesh  is  eaten 
in  believing,  because  it  is  made  ours  by  faith,  and  that  that 
eating  is  the  fruit  and  effect  of  faith.  Or  more  clearly :  To 
them  eating  is  faith,  to  me  it  seems  rather  to  follow  from 
fidth."^ 

The  distinction  taken  by  Calvin  between  eating  and  believ- 
ing seems  to  have  been  verbal  rather  than  real  With  many 
other  theologians,  however,  it  is  far  otherwise.  All  upholders 
of  the  magical  doctrines  of  transubstantiation  and  consubstan- 
tiation  contend  for  the  literal  interpretation  of  the  Capernaum 
discourse  even  in  its  strongest  statements.  Eating  Christ's 
flesh  and  drinking  His  blood  are,  for  such,  acts  of  the  mouth, 
accompanied  perhaps  with  acts  of  faith,  but  not  merely  acts  of 
Mth.  It  is  assumed  for  the  most  part  as  a  matter  of  course, 
that  the  discourse  recorded  in  the  sixth  chapter  of  John's 
Gospel  has  reference  to  the  sacrament  of  the  Supper,  and  that 
only  on  the  hypothesis  of  such  a  reference  can  the  peculiar 
phraseology  of  the  discourse  be  explained.  Christ  spoke  then 
of  eating  His  flesh  and  drinking  His  blood,  so  we  are  given 
to  understand,  because  He  had  in  His  mind  that  mystic  rite 
ere  long  to  be  instituted,  in  which  bread  and  wine  should  not 
merely  represent,  but  become,  the  constituent  elements  of  ELis 
cnicified  body. 

While  the  sermon  on  the  bread  of  life  continues  to  be 
mixed  up  with  sacramentarian  controversies,  agreement  in  its 
interpretation  is  altogether  hopeless.  Meantime,  till  a  better 
day  dawn  on  the  divided  and  distracted  church,  every  man 
must  endeavour  to  be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own  mind.  Three 
things  are  clear  to  our  mind.  First,  it  is  incorrect  to  say 
that  the  sermon  delivered  in  Capernaum  synagogue  refers  to 
tiie  sacrament  of  the  Supper.  The  true  state  of  the  case  is, 
that  both  refer  to  a  third  thing,  viz.  the  death  of  Christ,  and 
both  declare,  in  different  ways,  the  same  thing  concerning  it. 
The  sermon  says  in  symbolic  words  what  the  Supper  says  in 
a  S]rmbolic  act :  that  Christ  crucified  is  the  life  of  men,  the 
world's  hope  of  salvation.  The  sermon  says  more  than  this, 
for  it  speaks  of  Christ's  ascension  as  weU  as  of  His  death ; 
but  it  says  this  for  one  thing. 

^  Caly.  iMtUviio  iy.  xvii  5. 
K 


146  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

A  second  point  on  which  we  are  clear  is,  that  it  is  quite 
unnecessary  to  assume  a  mental  reference  by  anticipation  to 
the  Holy  Supper,  in  order  to  account  for  the  peculiarity  of 
Christ's  language  in  this  famous  discourse.  As  we  saw  at  the 
beginning,  the  whole  discourse  rose  naturally  out  of  the  pre- 
sent situation.  The  mention  by  the  people  of  the  manna 
naturally  led  Jesus  to  speak  of  the  bread  of  life ;  and  from 
the  bread  He  passed  on  as  naturally  to  speak  of  the  flesh  and 
the  blood,  because  He  could  not  really  be  bread  until  He  had 
become  flesh  and  blood  dissevered,  ie,  until  He  had  endured 
death.  AU  that  we  find  here  might  have  been  said,  in  tsuct, 
although  the  sacrament  of  the  Supper  had  never  existed. 

The  third  truth  which  shines  clear  as  a  star  to  our  eye  is.— 
that  through  faith  alone  we  may  attain  all  the  blessings  of 
salvation.  Sacraments  are  very  useful,  but  they  are  not  neces- 
sary. If  it  had  pleased  Christ  not  to  institute  them,  we  could 
have  got  to  heaven  notwithstanding.  Because  He  has  insti- 
tuted them,  it  is  our  duty  to  celebrate  them,  and  we  may 
expect  benefit  from  their  celebration.  But  the  benefit  we 
receive,  is  simply  an  aid  to  faith,  and  nothing  which  cannot 
be  received  by  faith.  Christians  eat  the  flesh  and  drink  the 
blood  of  the  Son  of  man  at  all  times,  not  merely  at  com- 
munion times,  simply  by  believing  in  Him.  They  eat  BUa 
flesh  and  drink  His  blood  at  His  table  in  the  same  sense  as 
at  other  times;  only  perchance  in  a  livelier  manner,  their 
hearts  being  stirred  up  to  devotion  by  remembrance  of  His 
dying .  love,  and  their  faith  aided  by  seeing,  handling,  and 
tasting  the  bread  and  the  wina 


Section  iv. — The  Sifting, 

John  vi.  66-71. 

The  sermon  on  the  bread  of  life  produced  decisive  eflTects. 
It  converted  popular  enthusiasm  for  Jesus  into  disgust ;  like  a 
fan,  it  separated  true  from  false  disciples ;  and  like  a  winnow- 
ing breeze,  it  blew  the  chaff  away,  leaving  a  small  residuum 
of  wheat  behind.  "  From  that  time  many  of  His  disciples 
went  back,  and  walked  no  more  with  Him," 


A  CBISIS  :   THE  SIFTING.  147 

This  result  did  not  take  Jesus  by  surprise.  He  expected 
it ;  in  a  sense  He  wished  it,  though  He  was  deeply  grieved  by 
it.  For  while  His  large,  loving  human  heart  yearned  for  the 
salvation  of  all,  and  desired  that  all  should  come  and  get  life. 
He  wanted  none  to  come  to  Him  imder  misapprehension,  or  to 
follow  Him  from  by-ends.  He  sought  disciples  God-given,^ 
Grod-drawn,*  God-taught,*  knowing  that  such  alone  would  con- 
tdnoe  in  His  word.^  He  was  aware  that  in  the  large  mass  of 
people  who  had  recently  followed  Him  were  many  disciples  of 
quite  another  description ;  and  He  was  not  tmwiUing  that  the 
mixed  multitude  should  be  sifted.  Therefore  He  preached 
that  mystic  discourse,  fitted  to  be  a  savour  of  life  or  of  death 
according  to  the  spiritual  state  of  the  hearer.  Therefore,  also, 
when  o£fence  was  taken  at  the  doctrine  taught,  He  plainly 
declared  the  true  cause,*  and  expressed  His  assurance  that 
only  those  whom  ELls  Father  taught  and  drew  would  or  could 
really  come  unto  Him*  These  things  He  said  not  with  a 
view  to  irritate,  but  He  deemed  it  right  to  say  them  though 
they  should  give  rise  to  irritation  ;  reckoning  that  true 
believers  would  take  all  in  good  part,  and  that  those  who 
took  umbrage  would  thereby  reveal  their  true  character. 

The  apostatizing  disciples  doubtless  thought  themselves  fully 
justified  in  withdrawing  from  the  society  of  Jesus.  They  turned 
their  back  on  Him,  we  fancy,  in  most  virtuous  indignation, 
saying  in  their  hearts,  nay,  probably  saying  aloud  to  one  an- 
other :  "  Who  ever  heard  the  like  of  that  ?  how  absurd !  how 
revolting !  The  man  who  can  speak  thus  is  either  a  fool,  or  is 
trying  to  make  fools  of  his  hearers.''  And  yet  the  hardness 
of  His  doctrine  waa  not  the  real  reason  which  led  so  many 
to  forsake  Him ;  it  was  simply  the  pretext,  the  most  plausible 
and  respectable  reason  that  they  could  assign  for  conduct 
springing  from  other  motives.  The  grand  ofifence  of  Jesus 
was  this :  He  was  not  the  man  they  had  taken  Him  for ;  He 
was  not  going  to  be  at  their  service  to  promote  the. ends  they 
had  in  view.  Whatever  He  meant  by  the  bread  of  life,  or 
by  eating  His  flesh,  it  was  plain  that  He  was  not  going  to 
be  a  bread-king,  making  it  His  business  to  furnish  supplies 

»  John  vi  87.  *  John  vi  44.  »  John  vi  46. 

*  John  Tiii  81.  »  John  vi  86,  87.  •  John  yi.  44. 


iV 


148  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

for  their  physical  appetites,  ushering  in  a  golden  age  of  idle- 
ness and  plenty.  That  ascertained,  it  was  all  over  with  Him 
so  far  as  they  were  concerned :  He  might  offer  His  heavenly 
food  to  whom  He  pleased  ;  they  wanted  none  of  it 

Deeply  affected  by  the  melancholy  sight  of  so  many  human 
beings  deliberately  preferring  material  good  to  eternal  life, 
Jesus  turned  to  the  twelve,  and  said,  "  Will  ye  also  go  away  ?" 
or  more  exactly,  "  You  do  not  wish  to  go  away  too,  do  you  ?"^ 
The  question  may  be  understood  as  a  virtual  expression  of 
confidence  in  the  persons  to  whpm  it  was  addressed,  and  as  an 
appeal  to  them  for  sympathy  at  a  discouraging  crisis.  And 
yet,  while  a  negative  answer  was  expected  to  the  question,  it 
was  not  expected  as  a  matter  of  course.  Jesus  was  not  with- 
out solicitude  concerning  the  fidelity  even  of  the  twelve.  He 
interrogated  them,  as  conscious  that  they  were  placed  in  try- 
ing circumstances,  and  that  if  they  did  not  actually  forsake 
Him  now,  as  at  the  great  final  crisis,  they  were  at  least 
tempted  to  be  offended  in  Him. 

A  little  reflection  suffices  to  satisfy  us  that  the  twelve  were 
indeed  placed  in  a  position  at  this  time  calculated  to  try 
their  faith  most  severely.  For  one  thing,  the  mere  feet  of 
their  Master  being  deserted  wholesale  by  the  crowd  of  g[iwn' 
dam  admirers  and  followers,  involved  for  the  chosen  band 
a  temptation  to  apostasy.  How  mighty  is  the  power  of 
sjrmpathy!  how  ready  are  we  all  to  follow  the  multitude, 
regardless  of  the  way  they  are  going !  £uid  how  much  moral 
courage  it  requires  to  stand  alone !  How  difficult  to  witness 
the  spectacle  of  thousands,  or  even  hundreds,  going  off  in 
sullen  disaffection,  without  feeling  an  impulse  to  imitate  their 
bad  example !  how  hard  to  keep  oneseK  from  being  carried 
along  with  the  powerful  tide  of  adverse  popular  opinion ! 
Especially  hard  it  must  have  been  for  the  twelve  to  resist  the 
tendency  to  apostatize,  if,  as  is  more  than  probable,  they 
sympathized  with  the  project  entertained  by  the  multitude 
when  their  enthusiasm  for  Jesus  was  at  full-tide.  K  it  would 
have  gratified  them  to  have  seen  their  beloved  Master  made 
king  by  popular  acclamation,  how  their  spirits  must  have 

^  John  yi.  67.    The  particle  fin  implies  that  a  negative  answer  is  looked  for. 
See  Winer,  NeuUst,  OrammaUk,  §  57 ;  Moulton's  Translation,  p.  641. 


A  CRISIS  :   THE  SIFTING.  149 

sunk  when  the  bubble  burst,  and  the  would-be  subjects  of  the 
Messianic  Prince  were  dispersed  like  an  idle  mob,  and  the 
kingdom  which  had  seemed  so  near  vanished  like  a  cloud- 
land  I 

Another  circumstance  tr3dng  to  the  faith  of  the  twelve,  was 
the  strange,  mysterious  character  of  their  Master's  discourse  in 
the  synagogue  of  Capernaum.  That  discourse  contained  hard, 
repulsive,  unintelligible  sayings  for  them  quite  as  much  as  for 
the  rest  of  the  audience.  Of  this  we  can  have  no  doubt, 
when  we  consider  the  repugnance  with  which  some  time  after- 
ward they  received  the  announcement  that  Jesus  was  destined 
to  be  put  to  death.^  If  they  objected  even  to  the  fact  of 
His  death,  how  could  they  understand  its  meaning,  espe- 
cially when  both  fact  and  meaning  were  spoken  of  in  such  a 
veiled  and  mystic  style  as  that  which  pervades  the  sermon 
on  the  bread  of  life?  While,  therefore,  they  believed  that 
their  Master  had  the  words  of  eternal  life,  and  perceived  that 
His  late  discourse  bore  on  that  high  theme,  it  may  be  regarded 
as  certain  that  the  twelve  did  not  understand  the  words 
spoken  any  more  than  the  multitude,  however  much  they 
might  try  to  do  so.  They  knew  not  what  connection  existed 
between  Christ's  flesh  and  eternal  life,  how  eating  that  flesh 
could  confer  any  benefit,  or  even  what  eating  it  might  meaa 
They  had  quite  lost  sight  of  the  Speaker  in  His  eagle  flight 
of  thought ;  and  they  must  have  looked  on  in  distress  as  the 
people  melted  away,  painfully  conscious  that  they  could  not 
altogether  blame  them. 

Yet,  however  greatly  tempted  to  forsake  their  Master,  the 
twelve  did  abide  faithfully  by  His  side.  They  did  come 
safely  through  the  spiritual  storm.  What  was  the  secret  of 
their  stedfastness  ?  what  were  the  anchors  that  preserved  them 
from  shipwreck  ?  These  questions  are  of  practical  interest  to 
all  who,  like  the  apostles  at  this  crisis,  are  tempted  to  apostasy 
by  evil  example  or  by  religious  doubt ;  by  the  fashion  of  the 
world  they  live  in,  whether  scientific  or  illiterate,  refined  or 
rustic ;  or  by  the  deep  things  of  Grod,  whether  these  be  the 
mysteries  of  providence,  the  mysteries  of  revelation,  or  the 
mysteries  of  religious  experience  :  we  may  say,  indeed,  to  all 

^  Matt  xyL  22. 


150  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVK 

genuine  Christians,  for  what  Christian  has  not  been  tempted 
in  one  or  other  of  these  ways  at  some  period  in  his  history  ? 

Sufficient  materials  for  answering  these  questions  are  sup- 
plied in  the  words  of  Simon  Peter's  response  to  Jesus.  As 
spokesman  for  the  whole  company,  that  disciple  promptly 
said  :  "  Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go  ?  Thou  hast  the  words  of 
eternal  life.  And  we  believe  and  know  that  Thou  art  that 
Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God;"'  or,  according  to  the 
reading  preferred  by  most  criticsy  "  that  Thou  art  the  Holy 
One  of  God."  * 

Three  anchors,  we  infer  from  these  words,  helped  the  twelve 
to  ride  out  the  storm :  Beligious  earnestness  or  sincerity ;  a 
dear  perception  of  the  alternatives  before  them  ;  and  implicit 
confidence  in  the  character,  and  attachment  to  the  person  of 
their  Master. 

1.  The  twelve,  as  a  body,  were  sincere  and  thoroughly  in 
earnest  in  religion.  Their  supreme  desire  was  to  know  "  the 
words  of  eternal  life,"  and  actually  to  gain  possession  of  that 
life.  Their  concern  was  not  about  the  meat  that  x)erisheth, 
Ijut  about  the  higher  heavenly  food  of  the  soul,  which  Christ 
had  in  vain  exhorted  the  majority  of  His  hearers  to  labour  for. 
As  yet  they  knew  not  clearly  wherein  that  food  consisted,  but 
according  to  their  light  they  sincerely  prayed,  "  Lord,  ever- 
more give  us  this  bread."  Hence  it  was  no  disappointment 
to  them  that  Jesus  declined  to  become  a  purveyor  of  mere 
material  food :  they  had  never  expected  or  wished  Him  to 
do  so ;  they  had  joined  His  company  with  entirely  different 
expectations.  A  certain  element  of  error  might  be  mingled 
with  truth  in  their  conceptions  of  His  Mission,  but  the 
gross  carnal  hopes  of  the  multitude  had  no  place  in  their 
breasts.  They  became  not  disciples  to  better  their  worldly 
circumstances,  but  to  obtain  a  portion  which  the  world  could 
neither  give  them  nor  take  from  them. 

What  we  have  now  stated  was  true  of  all  the  twelve  save 
one  ;  and  the  crisis  we  are  at  present  considering  is  memorable 

^  John  vi.  68,  69. 

'  See  Alford,  in  loc.  The  confession  of  Christ's  holiness  was  appropriate,  as 
meeting  an  implied  charge  of  having  uttered  language  shocking  to  the  moral 
feelings. 


A  CRISIS  :   THE  SUTING.  151 

for  this,  among  other  things,  that  it  was  the  first  occasion  on 
which  Jesus  gave  a  hint  that  there  was  a  false  disciple  among 
the  men  whom  He  had  chosen.  To  justify  Himself  for  ask- 
ing a  question  which  seemed  to  cast  a  doubt  upon  their 
fidelity,  he  replied  to  Peter's  protestation  by  the  startling 
remark :  "  Have  not  I  chosen  you  the  twelve,  and  one  of  you 
is  a  devil  ?  "^  as  if  to  say  :  "  It  is  painful  to  me  to  have  to 
use  this  language  of  suspicion,  but  I  have  good  cause  :  there 
is  one  among  you  who  has  had  thoughts  of  desertion,  and  who 
is  capable  even  of  treachery."  With  what  sadness  of  spirit 
must  He  have  made  such  an  intimation  at  this  crisis  !  To  be 
forsaken  by  the  fickle  crowd  of  shallow,  thoughtless  followers 
had  been  a  small  matter,  could  He  have  reckoned  all  the 
members  of  the  select  band  good  men  and  true  friends.  But 
to  have  an  enemy  in  one*s  own  house,  a  didbolus  capable  of 
playing  Satan's  part  in  one's  small  circle  of  intimate  com- 
panions :— it  was  hard  indeed  ! 

But  how  could  a  man  destined  to  be  a  traitor,  and  deserv- 
ing to  be  stigmatized  as  a  devil,  manage  to  pass  creditably 
through  the  present  crisis  ?  Does  not  the  fact  seem  to  imply 
that,  after  all,  it  is  possible  to  be  stedfast  without  being  sin^- 
minded  ?  Not  so  ;  the  only  legitimate  inference  is,  that  the 
cnsis  was  not  searching  enough  to  bring  out  the  true  chai;;^ter 
of  Judas.  Wait  till  you  see  the  end.  A  little  religion  will 
carry  a  man  through  many  trials,  but  there  is  an  experimmtv/m 
CTuds  which  nothing  but  sincerity  can  stand.  K  the  mind  be 
double,  or  the  heart  divided,  a  time  comes  that  compels  men  to 
act  according  to  the  motives  that  are  deepest  and  strongest  in 
them.  This  remark  applies  especially  to  creative,  revolutionary, 
or  transition  epochs.  In  quiet  times  a  hjrpocrite  may  pass 
respectably  through  this  world,  and  never  be  detected  till  he 
get  to  the  next,  whither  his  sins  follow  him  to  judgment.  But 
in  critical  eras  the  sins  of  the  double-minded  find  them  out 
in  this  life.  True,  even  then  some  double-minded  men  can 
stand  more  temptation  than  others,  and  are  not  to  be  bought 
80  cheaply  as  the  common  herd.  But  all  of  them  have  their 
price,  and  those  who  fall  less  easily  than  others  fall  in  the  end 
most  deeply  and  tragically. 

*  Jolrn  vL  70. 


152  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

Of  the  character  and  fall  of  Judas  we  shall  have  another 
opportunity  to  speak  Our  present  object  is  simply  to  point 
out  that  from  such  as  he  Jesus  did  not  expect  constancy.  By 
referring  to  that  disciple  as  He  did,  He  intimated  His  convic- 
tion that  no  one  in  whom  the  love  of  Grod  and  truth  was  not 
the  deepest  principle  of  his  being  would  continue  faithful  to 
the  end.  In  effect  He  inculcated  the  necessity,  in  order  to 
stedfastness  in  faith,  of  moral  integrity,  or  godly  sincerity. 

2.  The  second  anchor  by  which  the  disciples  were  kept 
from  shipwreck  at  this  season  was  a  clear  perception  of  the 
alternatives.  "  To  whom  shall  we  go  1 "  asked  Peter,  as  one 
who  saw  that,  for  men  having  in  view  the  aim  pursued  by 
himself  and  his  brethren,  there  was  no  course  open  but  to 
remain  where  they  were.  He  had  gone  over  rapidly  in  his 
mind  all  the  possible  alternatives,  and  this  was  the  conclusion 
at  which  he  had  arrived.  "  To  whom  shall  we  go — we  who 
seek  eternal  life  ?  John,  our  former  master,  is  dead ;  and 
even  were  he  alive,  he  would  send  us  back  to  Thee.  Or  shall 
we  go  to  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  ?  We  have  been  too  long 
with  Thee  for  that ;  for  Thou  hast  taught  us  the  superficiality, 
the  hypocrisy,  the  ostentatiousness,  the  essential  ungodliness 
of  their  religious  system.  Or  shall  we  follow  the  fickle  multi- 
tude .there,  and  relapse  into  stupidity  and  indifference  ?  It  is 
not  to  be  thought  of.  Or,  finally,  shall  we  go  to  the  Sad- 
ducees,  the  idolaters  of  the  material  and  the  temporal,  who 
say  there  is  no  resurrection,  neither  any  angels  or  spirits  ? 
God  forbid  !  That  were  to  renounce  a  hope  dearer  than  life, 
without  which  life  to  an  earnest  mind  were  a  riddle,  a  contra- 
diction, and  an  intolerable  burden." 

All  tempted  to  apostatize  will  find  it  profitable  in  like 
maimer  to  realize  the  alternatives.  Has  any  one,  e.g,,  been 
disappointed  in  his  religious  experience :  all  things  turning 
out  so  differently  to  what  he  had  expected  when  he  began  his 
spiritual  career;  sanctification  a  slow,  irksome  process;  the 
word  of  God,  at  first  sweet  in  the  mouth,  turned  to  bitterness 
in  the  inward  parts ;  the  bright  bloom  of  piety  replaced  by 
green,  unpalatable  fruit,  more  like  the  work  of  Satan  than  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  ?  *Tis  hard  enough  to  bear,  but  consider  if  it 
were  not  still  harder  to  return  to  folly !      Or  take  a  case 


A  CRISIS  :   THE  SIFnNG.  153 

analogous  to  that  of  the  twelve,  and  fitted  to  illustrate  their 
position, — that  of  one  tempted  by  dogmatic  diflSculties  to  re- 
nounce Christianity.  It  will  make  such  an  one  pause  when  he 
understands  that  the  alternatives  open  to  him  are  to  abide  with 
Christ,  or  to  become  an  atheist,  ignoring  God  and  the  world  to 
come ;  that  when  he  leaves  Christ,  he  must  go  to  school  to 
Hume,  Voltaire,  Comte,  Strauss,  Renan,  or  some  other  of  the 
great  masters  of  thoroughgoing  unbelief.  In  the  works  of  a 
well-known  German  author  is  a  dream,  which  portrays  with 
appalling  vividness  the  consequences  that  would  ensue  through- 
out the  universe  should  the  Creator  cease  to  exist.  The  dream 
was  invented,  so  the  gifted  writer  tells  us,  for  the  purpose  of 
frightening  those  who  discussed  the  being  of  God  as  coolly  as 
if  the  question  respected  the  existence  of  the  Kiaken  or  the 
imicom,  and  also  to  check  all  atheistic  thoughts  which  might 
arise  in  his  own  bosom.  "  If  ever,"  he  says, "  my  heart  should 
be  so  unhappy  and  deadened  as  to  have  all  those  feelings 
which  aflfirm  the  being  of  a  God  destroyed,  I  would  use  this 
dream  to  frighten  myself,  and  so  heal  my  heart,  and  restore 
its  lost  feelings."^  Such  benefit  as  Richter  expected  from 
the  perusal  of  his  own  dream,  would  any  one,  tempted  to  re- 
nounce Christianity,  derive  from  a  clear  perception  that  in 
ceasing  to  be  a  Christian  he  must  make  up  his  mind  to  accept 
a  creed  which  acknowledges  no  God,  no  soul,  no  hereafter. 

That  these  really  are  the  alternatives  before  us,  there  can 
be  no  doubt.*  We  do  not  assert  that  a  belief  in  a  Deity,  in 
the  existence  of  spirit,  and  in  a  future  world,  cannot  be  enter- 
tained, except  by  those  who  hold  the  catholic  faith  concerning 
Jesua  There  is  such  a  thing  as  Deism,  which  accepts  the 
moral  teaching  of  Christianity,  and  its. general  doctrine  about 
Grod  and  the  future  life,  yet  rejects  all  the  supernatural  facts 
and  mysterious  truths  of  our  holy  faith.  We  assert,  never- 
theless, that  the  ultimate  terminus  of  unbelief  in  Christ  as  the 
Son  of  God,  bom,  crucified,  and  risen  in  the  flesh,  is  atheism. 
All  paths  of  thought  leading  away  from  the  catholic  faith  tend 
thither  as  their  goal,  the  intermediate  stages  occupied  by  Deists 
and  Socinians  being  merely  temporary  halting-places  in  a 

1  Jean  Paul  Richter,  Siebenhds,  Rap.  yiii.    Erstes  BlomensttLck. 
*  See  Isaac  Taylor's  BestarcUion  o/Beli^,  p.  248. 


154  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

mental  pilgrimage  towards  the  apostles'  creed,  or  towards  the 
dismal  creed  of  the  secularists  and  the  Positive  philosophers. 
Christianity  pure  and  undiluted,  and  sheer  atheism,  are  the  two 
great  rival  creeds  presently  contending  for  sovereignty  over 
the  human  mind,  at  least  in  the  nominally  Christian  world  ; 
and  sooner  or  later  all  intermediate  parties  must  join  one  side 
or  the  other.  Logic,  like  a  stem  policeman,  says  to  them, 
*'  Move  on."  The  argument  used  by  the  midway  men,  the 
advocates  of  "  Christianity  independent  of  dogma,"  against  the 
catholic  faith,  may  be  used  with  equal  power  against  them- 
selves. They  complain  of  the  mysteriousness  of  our  super- 
natural dogmas  and  miraculous  facts,  and  desiderate  a  rational 
religion,  unencumbered  with  supematuralism  and  miracla  But 
they  forget  that  the  very  being  of  a  God  is  a  supernatural 
dogma;  and  that  the  Sodnian  Christ,  a  Perfect  Man,  is  a 
supernatural  or  miraculous  fact,  more  difficult  to  believe  in 
even  than  the  Christ  of  the  catholic  faith,  whose  sinlessness  is 
explained  by  the  presence  of  a  divine  nature,  while  the  sinless- 
ness of  the  Sociniem  Christ  has  neither  an  efficient  nor  a  final 
cause  of  existence. 

Those  who  turn  their  backs  on  the  eternal  Son,  must  under- 
stand, then,  that  they  are  on  their  way  to  a  creed  which  denies 
an  eternal  Father,  and  puts  in  His  place  an  unconscious,  im- 
personal soul  of  nature,  a  dead  central  force,  of  which  all  the 
forces  in  the  imiverse  are  manifestations,  or  an  \mknown,  un- 
knowable Cause,  remaining  to  be  postulated  after  the  series  of 
physical  causes  has  been  traced  as  far  back  as  science  can  go ; 
and  which  robs  mortal  man  of  the  hope  that  the  seed  sown 
in  the  churchyard  shall  one  day  be  reaped  in  the  harvest  of 
the  resurrection.  Many  are  imwOling  to  believe  this.  De- 
ceived by  the  consciousness  of  their  own  spirituality,  they 
flatter  themselves  that  Christianity  is  independent  of  the  creed, 
and  would  continue  to  exist  though  the  latter  were  discarded. 
But  this  is  a  hallucination.  As  well  might  you  imagine  that 
daylight  is  independent  of  the  sun,  because  the  atmosphere 
continues  to  be  illuminated  for  a  time  after  the  sun  has  set 
Your  so-called  Christianity  independent  of  dogmas  is  but  the 
evening  twilight  of  faith,  the  light  which  lingers  in  the  spi- 
ritual atmosphere  after  the  sun  of  truth  has  gone  down.     For 


^ 


A  CRISIS  :   THE  SIFTING.  155 

a  space  it  may  seem  as  clear  as  the  light  of  day,  but  ere  long 
it  must  fade  into  darkness. 

3.  The  third  anchor  whereby  the  twelve  were  enabled  to  ride 
out  the  storm,  was  confidence  in  the  character  of  their  Master. 
They  believed,  yea,  they  knew,  that  He  was  the  Holy  One  of 
God.  They  had  been  with  Jesus  long  enough  to  have  come 
to  very  decided  conclusions  respecting  Him.  They  had  seen 
Him  work  many  miracles ;  they  had  heard  Him  discourse  with 
marvellous  wisdom,  in  parable  and  sermon,  on  the  divine  king- 
dom ;  they  had  observed  His  wondrously  tender,  gracious  con- 
cern for  the  low  and  the  lost ;  they  had  been  present  at  His 
various  encounters  with  Pharisees,  and  had  noted  His  holy  ab- 
horrence of  their  falsehood,  pride,  vanity,  and  tyranny.  All  this 
blessed  fellowship  had  begotten^  a  confidence  in,  and  reverence 
for,  their  beloved  Master,  too  strong  to  be  shaken  by  a  single 
address,  containing  some  statements  of  an  incomprehensible 
character  couched  in  questionable  or  even  oflfensive  language. 
Their  intellect  might  be  perplexed,  but  their  heart  remained 
true  ;  and  hence,  while  others  who  knew  not  Jesus  weU  went 
off  in  disgust,  they  continued  by  His  side,  feeling  that  such  a 
friend  and  guide  was  not  to  be  parted  with  for  a  trifle. 

**  We  believe  and  know,"  said  Peter.  They  believed  because 
they  knew.  Such  implicit  confidence  as  the  twelve  had  in 
Jesus  is  possible  only  through  intimate  knowledge ;  for  one 
cannot  thus  trust  a  stranger.  All,  therefore,  who  desire  to  get 
the  benefit  of  this  trust,  must  be  willing  to  spend  time  and 
take  trouble  to  get  into  the  heart  of  the  Gospel  story,  and  of 
its  great  subject.  The  sure  anchorage  is  not  attainable  by 
a  listless,  random  reading  of  the  evangelic  narratives,  but  by 
a  close,  careful,  prayerful  study,  pursued  it  may  be  for  years. 
Those  who  grudge  the  trouble  are  in  imminent  danger  of  the 
fate  which  befell  the  ignorant  multitude,  being  liable  to  be 
thrown  into  panic  by  every  new  infidel  book,  or  to  be  scan- 
dalized by  every  strange  utterance  of  the  Object  of  faith. 

Does  any  one  ask  :  Is  Jesus  Christ  worthy  to  be  the  subject 
of  such  careful  inquiry,  or  the  object  of  such  implicit  con- 
fidence as  the  twelve  reposed  in  Him  ?  We  shall  leave  the 
prophets  of  imbelief  to  reply.  Our  modem  Balaams  all  confess 
that  Jesus  is  well  worth  knowing  and  loving :  that  He  is  at 


156  THE  TBACnifG  OF  THE  TWELVR 

least  tie  holiest  of  mem,  if  not  the  absolutely  Holy  One. 
They  cannot  curse  Wjh,  though  logic  and  philosophy  require 
this  service  at  their  hami&  They  are  constrained  to  bless 
tiitf  man  of  NazaxedL  They  are  spell-bound  by  the  Star  of 
Bethlehem^  as  was  the  Eastann  soothsayer  by  the  star  of  Jacob, 
and  are  foit!ed  ixi  ssr  in  effect :  '^  How  shall  I  curse  whom 
God  bach  not  cucsed^  or  how  shall  I  defy  whom  the  Lord  hath 
not  deiied  ■  Behold*  I  hare  xeeeived  commandment  to  bless ; 
and  He  hath  blessed^  and  I  cannot  reverse  it"  ^ 

Jesm^  Chii^,  who  b  thus  supremely  worth  knowing,  His 
enemies  themselves  being  judges^  can  even  at  this  date  be 
intimiiCely  known.  And  intimate  knowledge  of  Him,  being 
attainable,  should  be  sought  by  alL  It  is  a  precious  posses- 
sion. Xot  to  speak  of  itss  uses  for  eternity,  or  of  the  deep 
well  of  joy  that  it  causes  to  ^«ing  up  in  the  heart  of  the 
continued  believer  even  in  this  life^  think  only  of  the  aid  it 
affords  in  the  duky  of  trial,  when  the  mind  is  clouded  with 
doubts  and  the  doctrines  seem  unintelligible  and  irrational, 
and  long-cherished  convictions  are  rudely  ^laken !  Possess- 
ing such  knowledge  of  Christ  as  P^ter  and  his  brethren  had 
by  this  time  attained,  a  Christian  in  daj^mess  is  able  to  wait 
for  the  dawn,  and  to  eschew  the  mistake  of  those  who  kindle 
fires  of  unbelief,  superstition,  and  immorality  in  the  night, 
seeking  in  their  short-lived  glare  a  transient  comfort,  destined 
to  end  in  a  deeper  darkness.  EiK)wing  Christ  as  Peter  knew 
Him,  one  can  take  things  on  His  word,  even  when  they  exceed 
comprehension,  and  follow  Him  along  untrodden,  unexplored 
paths.  Those  who  do  this  have  their  reward.  The  storm- 
tossed  disciple  at  length  reaches  the  harbour  of  a  creed  which 
is  no  miserable  compromise  between  infidelity  and  scriptural 
Christianity,  but  embraces  aU  the  cardinal  facts  and  truths  of 
the  faith,  as  taught  by  Jesus  in  the  Capernaum  discourse,  £Uid 
as  afterwards  taught  by  the  men  who  passed  safely  through 
the  Capernaum  crisis. 

May  God  in  His  mercy  guide  aU  souls  now  out  in  the 
tempestuous  sea  of  doubt  into  that  haven  of  rest ! 

>  Kmn.  xziiL  8,  20. 


CHAPTEE  X. 

THE  LEA.VEN  OF  THE  PHARISEES  AND  SADDUCEES. 
Matt.  zvi.  1-12  ;  Mabk  yiii.  10-21. 

THIS  new  collision  between  Jesus  and  His  opponents  took 
place  shortly  after  a  second  miracle  of  feeding  similar 
to  that  performed  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Bethsaida  Julias. 
What  interval  of  time  elapsed  between  the  two  miracles  can- 
not be  ascertained  ;^  but  it  was  long  enough  to  admit  of  an 
extended  journey  on  the  part  of  our  Lord  and  His  disciples  to 
the  coasts  of  Tyre  and  Sidon,  the  scene  of  the  pathetic  meet- 
ing with  the  Syrophenician  woman,  and  round  from  thence 
through  the  region  of  the  ten  cities,  on  the  eastern  border  of 
the  Galilean  Lake.  It  was  long  enough  also  to  allow  the  cause 
and  the  fame  of  Jesus  to  recover  from  the  low  state  to  which 
they  sank  after  the  sifting  sermon  in  the  synagogue  of  Caper- 
naum. The  unpopular  One  had  again  become  popular,  so  that 
on  arriving  at  the  south-eastern  shore  of  the  lake  He  found 
Himself  attended  by  thousands,  so  intent  on  hearing  TTiTn 
preach,  and  experiencing  His  healing  power,  that  they  re- 
mained with  Him  three  days,  almost,  if  not  entirely,  without 
food,  thus  creating  a  necessity  for  the  second  miraculous 
repast 

After  the  miracle  on  the  south-eastern  shore,  Jesus,  we 
read,  sent  away  the  multitude ;  and  taking  ship,  came  into 
the  coasts  of  Magdala,  on  the  western  side  of  the  sea.^  It 
was  on  His  arrival  there  that  He  encountered  the  party  who 
came  seeking  of  Him  a  sign  from  heaven.    These  persons  had 

*  The  chronological  relation  of  the  events  recorded  in  Matt.  xv.  and  xvi.  to  the 
feast  of  tabernacles  spoken  of  in  John  vii.  is  an  important  question.  It  is  one, 
however,  on  which  the  learned  differ,  and  certainty  is  unattainable. 

»  Matt.  xy.  89. 


158  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

probably  beard  of  the  lecent  miiacle,  as  of  many  others 
wroi^ht  by  Him ;  but,  imwilling  to  accept  the  conclusion  to 
which  these  wondrous  works  plainly  led,  they  affected  to 
regard  them  as  insnfBdent  eTidence  of  His  Messiahship,  and 
demanded  still  more  nneqnirocal  proof  before  giving  in  their 
adherence  to  His  daim.  "  Show  ns  a  sign  from  heaven/'  said 
they ;  meaning  thereby,  somethii^  like  the  manna  brought 
down  from  heaven  by  Moses,  or  the  fire  called  down  by  Elijah, 
or  the  thunder  and  rain  called  down  by  Samuel ;  ^  it  being 
assumed  that  such  signs  could  be  wrought  only  by  the  power 
of  Grod,  whilst  the  signs  on  earth,  such  as  Jesus  supplied  in 
His  miracles  of  healing,  might  be  wrought  by  the  power  of 
the  devil ! '  It  was  a  demajid  of  a  sort  often  addressed  to 
Jesus  in  good  faith  or  in  bad;*  for  the  Jews  sought  after 
such  signs — ^miracles  of  a  singular  and  startling  character, 
fitted  to  gratify  a  superstitious  curiosity,  and  astonish  a 
wonder-loving  mind — ^miracles  that  were  merely  signs,  serving 
no  other  purpose  than  to  display  divine  power ;  like  the  rod 
of  Moses,  converted  into  a  serpent,  and  reconverted  into  its 
original  form 

These  demands  of  the  sign-seekers  Jesus  uniformly  met 
with  a  direct  refusal  He  would  not  condescend  to  work 
miracles  of  any  description  merely  as  certificates  of  His  own 
Messiahship,  or  to  furnish  food  for  a  superstitious  appetite, 
or  materials  of  amusement  to  sceptics.  He  knew  that  such 
as  remained  unbelievers  in  presence  of  His  ordinary  miracles, 
which  were  not  naked  signs,  but  also  works  of  beneficence, 
could  not  be  brought  to  faith  by  any  means ;  nay,  that  the 
more  evidence  they  got,  the  more  hardened  they  should 
become  in  unbelief  He  regarded  the  very  demand  for  these 
signs  as  the  indication  of  a  fixed  determination  not  to  believe 
in  Him,  even  if,  in  order  to  rid  themselves  of  the  disagree- 
able obligation,  it  should  be  necessary  to  put  Him  to  death. 
Therefore,  in  refusing  the  signs  sought  after.  He  was  wont 
to  accompany  the  refusal  with  a  word  of  rebuke  or  of  sad 
foreboding ;  as  when  He  said,  at  a  very  early  period  of  His 

^  See  Alford.    Stier  refers  to  the  apocryphal  books  to  explain  the  nature  of  the 
signs  demanded. 
*  Matt  xii  24  et  par.  >  John  iL  18,  yi  80  ;  Matt  xii  88. 


THE  LEATEN  OF  THE  PHARISEES  AND  SADDUCEES.  159 

ministry,  on  His  first  visit  to  Jerusalem,  after  His  baptism : 
"  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three  days  I  wiU  raise  it  up."  ^ 

On  the  present  occasion  the  soul  of  Jesus  was  much  per- 
turbed by  the  renewed  demands  of  the  sign-seekers.  "He 
sighed  deeply  in  His  spirit,"  knowing  full  well  what  these 
demands  meant,  with  respect  both  to  those  who  made  them 
and  to  Himself;  and  He  addressed  the  parties  who  came 
tempting  Him  in  excessively  severe  and  bitter  terms, — re- 
proaching them  with  spiritual  blindness,  calling  them  a 
wicked  and  jwlulterous  generation,  and  ironically  referring 
them  now,  as  He  had  once  done  before,*  to  the  sign  of  the 
prophet  Jonas.  He  told  them,  that  while  they  knew  the 
weather  signs,  and  understood  what  a  red  sky  in  the  morning 
cjr  evening  meant,  they  were  blind  to  the  manifest  signs  of 
the  times,  which  showed  at  once  that  the  Sun  of  righteousness 
Iiad  arisen,  and  that  a  dreadful  storm  of  judgment  was  coming 
on  apostate  Israel  for  her  iniquity.  He  applied  to  them,  and 
the  whole  generation  they  represented,  the  epithet  **  wicked," 
to  characterize  their  false-hearted,  malevolent,  and  spiteful 
behaviour  towards  Himself;  and  He  employed  the  term 
"  adulterous,"  to  describe  them,  in  relation  to  Grod,  as  guUty  of 
breaking  their  marriage  covenant,  pretending  great  love  and 
zeal  with  their  lip,  but  in  their  heart  and  life  turning  away 
fix>m  the  living  God  to  idols — ^forms,  ceremonies,  signs.  He 
gave  them  the  story  of  Jonah  the  prophet  for  a  sign,  in 
mystic  allusion  to  His  death ;  meaning  to  say>  that  one  of  the 
most  reliable  evidences  that  He  was  God's  servant  indeed,  was 
just  the  fact  that  He  was  rejected,  and  ignominiously  and  bar- 
barously treated  by  such  as  those  to  whom  He  spake :  that 
there  could  be  no  worse  sign  of  a  man  than  to  be  well  re- 
ceived by  them — that  he  could  be  no  true  Christ  who  was  so 
received. 

Having  thus  freely  uttered  His  mind,  Jesus  left  the  sign- 
seekers  ;  and  entering  into  the  ship  in  which  He  had  just 
crossed  from  the  other  side,  departed  again  to  the  same  eastern 
shore,  anxious  to  be  rid  of  their  unwelcome  presence.  On 
arriving  at  the  land.  He  made  the  encounter  which  had  just 
taken  place  the  subject  of  instruction  to  the  twelve.     "  Take 

Uohnu.19.  sMattxiLlO. 


160  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

heed/'  He  said  as  they  walked  along  the  Way,  "  and  IdfwaH^ 
of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees."  The 
word  was  spoken  abruptly,  as  the  utterance  of  0ae  waking 
out  of  a  reverie.  Jesus,  we  imagine,  had  been  Iwrod&ing  over 
what  had  occurred,  while  His  disciples  rowed  Him  across 
the  lake,  sadly  musing  on  prevailing  unbelief,  and  the  dark, 
lowering  weatJier-signs,  portentous  of  evil  to  Him  and  to  the 
whole  Jewish  people.  And  now,  recollecting  the  presenee  of 
the  disciples.  He  communicates  His  thoughts  to  them  in  the 
form  of  a  warning,  and  cautions  them  against  the  deadly  influ- 
ences of  an  evil  time,  as  a  parent  might  bid  his  child  beware 
of  a  poisonous  plant  whose  garish  flowers  attracted  its  eye. 

In  this  warning,  it  will  be  observed,  pharisaic  and  saddu- 
caic  tendencies  are  identified.  Jesus  speaks  not  of  two  leavens, 
but  of  one  common  to  both  sects,  as  if  they  were  two  species 
of  one  genus,  two  branches  from  one  stem.  And  such  indeed 
they  were.  Superficially,  the  two  parties  were  very  diverse. 
The  one  was  excessively  zealous,  the  other  was  "  moderate  " 
in  religion ;  the  one  was  strict,  the  other  easy  in  morals  ;  the 
one  was  exclusively  and  intensely  Jewish  in  feeling,  the  other 
was  open  to  the  influence  of  pagan  civilisation.  Each  party 
had  a  leaven  peculiar  to  itself:  that  of  the  Pharisees  being,  as 
Christ  was  wont  to  declare,  hypocrisy  ;^  that  of  the  Sadducees, 
an  engrossing  interest  in  merely  material  and  temporal  con- 
cerns, assuming  in  some  a  politiced  form,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
partisans  of  the  Herod  family,  called  in  the  Gospel  Herodians, 
in  others  wearing  the  guise  of  a  philosophy  which  denied  the 
existence  of  spirit  and  the  reality  of  the  future  life,  and  made 
that  denial  an  excuse  for  exclusive  devotion  to  the  interests  of 
time.  But  here,  as  elsewhere,  extremes  met.  Phariseeism, 
Sttdduceeism,  Herodianism,  though  distinguished  by  minor 
differences,  were  radically  one.  The  religionists,  the  philo- 
sophers, the  politicians,  were  aU  members  of  one  great  party, 
which  was  inveterately  hostile  to  the  divine  kingdom.  All 
alike  were  worldly-minded  (of  the  Pharisees  it  is  expressly 
remarked  that  they  were  covetous  ^  ;  aU  were  opposed  to 
Christ  for  fundamentally  the  same  reason,  viz.  because  He 
was  not  of  this  world ;  all  united  fraternally  at  this  time 
^  Luke  zii.  1.  *  Luke  xyL  li. 


tAb  leaven  of  the  phabisees  and  sadducees.       161 

Jp^  tlM|f  attempt  to  vex  Him  by  unbelieving,  imreasonable 
demandg ;  ^  and  they  all  had  a  hand  in  His  death  at  the 

It  thuil  appears  that,  to  be  a  Christian,  it  is  not  enough  to 
differ  superficially  from  either  Pharisees  or  Sadducees,  but 
that  it  is  necessary  to  differ  radically  from  both.  A  weighty 
taruth,  not  yet  well  understood  :  for  it  is  femcied  by  many  that 
orth9doxy  and  right  living  consist  in  going  to  the  opposite 
extreme  from  any  tendency  whose  evil  influence  is  apparent. 
To  avoid  pharisaic  strictness  and  superstition,  grown  odious, 
men  run  into  sadducaic  scepticism  and  licence ;  or,  frightened 
by  the  excesses  of  infidelity  and  secularity,  they  seek  salvation 
in  ritualism,  infallible  churches,  and  the  revival  of  mediaeval 
monkery.  Thus  the  two  tendencies  continue  ever  propagating 
each  other  on  the  principle  of  action  and  reaction ;  one  gene- 
ration or  school  going  aU  lengths  in  one  direction,  and  another 
making  a  point  of  being  as  unlike  its  predecessor  or  its  neigh- 
bour as  possible,  and  both  being  equally  far  from  the  truth. 

What  the  common  leaven  of  Phariseeism  and  Sadduceeism 
was,  Jesus  did  not  deem  it  necessary  to  state.  He  had  already 
indicated  its  nature  with  sufficient  plainness  in  His  severe 
reply  to  the  sign-seekers.  The  radical  vice  of  both  sects  was 
just  ungodliness:  blindness,  and  deadness  of  heart  to  the 
divine.  They  did  not  know  the  true  and  the  good  when  they 
saw  it ;  and  when  they  knew  it,  they  did  not  love  it.  All 
aroimd  them  were  the  evidences  that  the  King  and  the 
kingdom  of  grace  were  among  them ;  yet  here  were  they 
asking  for  arbitrary  outward  signs  that  He  who  spake  as 
never  man  spake,  and  worked  wonders  of  mercy  such  as  had 
never  before  been  witnessed,  was  no  impostor,  but  a  man  wise 
and  good,  a  prophet,  and  the  Son  of  God.  Verily  the  natural 
man,  religious  or  irreligious,  is  blind  and  dead  !  What  these 
seekers  after  a  sign  needed  was  not  a  new  sign,  but  a  new 
heart;  not  mere  evidence,  but  a  spirit  willing  to  obey  the 
truth. 

The  spirit  of  unbelief  which  ruled  in  Jewish  society  Jesus 
described  as  a  leaven,  with  special  reference  to  its  diffusive- 
ness ;  and  most  fitly,  for  it  passes  from  sire  to  son,  from  rich 

^  In  Mark  (yiii  15)  the  '*  leaven  of  Herod"  is  mentioned. 

L 


162  THE  TBAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

to  poor,  from  learned  to  unlearned,  till  a  whole  generation  has 
been  vitiated  by  its  malign  influence.  Such  was  the  state  of 
things  in  Israel  as  it  came  under  His  eye.  Spiritual  blind- 
ness and  deadness,  with  the  outward  symptom  of  the  inward 
malady— e  constant  craving  for  evidence — met  Him  on  every 
sid^e.  The  common  people,  the  leaders  of  society,  the  religious, 
the  sceptics,  the  courtiers,  and  the  rustics,  were  all  blind,  and 
yet  apparently  most  anxious  to  see ;  ever  renewing  the  demand, 
"  What  sign  showest  thou,  that  we  may  see  and  believe  thee  ? 
What  dost  thou  work  ?  " 

Vexed  an  hour  ago  by  the  sinister  movements  of  foes,  Jesus 
next  found  new  matter  for  annoyance  in  the  stupidity  of  friends. 
The  disciples  utterly,  even  ludicrously,  misunderstood  the 
warning  word  addressed  to  them.  In  conversation  by  them- 
selves, while  their  Master  walked  apart,  they  discussed  the 
question,  what  the  strange  words,  so  abruptly  and  earnestly 
spoken,  might  mean  ;  and  they  came  to  the  sapient  conclusion 
that  they  were  intended  to  caution  them  against  buying  bread 
from  parties  belonging  to  either  of  the  offensive  sects.  It  was 
an  absurd  mistake,  and  yet,  all  things  considered,  it  was  not 
so  very  unnatural :  for,  in  the  first  place,  as  already  remarked, 
Jesus  had  introduced  the  subject  very  abruptly ;  and,  secondly, 
some  time  had  elapsed  since  the  meeting  with  the  seekers 
of  a*  sign,  during  which  no  allusion  seems  to  have  been  made 
to  that  matter.  How  were  they  to  know  that  during  all  that 
time  their  Master's  thoughts  had  been  occupied  with  what 
took  place  on  the  western  shore  of  the  lake  ?  In  any  case, 
such  a  supposition  was  not  likely  to  occur  to  their  mind ;  for 
the  demand  for  a  sign  had  not  appeared  to  them  an  event  of 
much  consequence,  and  it  was  probably  forgotten  as  soon  as 
their  backs  were  turned  upon  the  men  who  jusuie  it  And  then, 
finally,  it  so  happened  that,  just  before  Jesus  began  to  speak, 
they  remembered  that  in  the  hurry  of  a  sudden  departure  they 
had  forgotten  to  provide  themselves  with  a  stock  of  provisions 
for  the  journey.  That  was  what  they  were  thinking  about 
when  ffc  began  to  say,  "  Take  heed,  and  beware  of  the  leaven 
of  the  Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees."  The  momentous  cir- 
cumstance that  they  had  with  them  but  one  loaf  was  causing 
them  so  much  concern,  that  when  they  heard  the  caution 


THE  LEAVEN  OF  THE  PHARISEES  AND  SADDUCEES.  163 

agaiiiBt  a  particular  kind  of  leaven,  they  jumped  at  once  to  the 
conclusion,  "  It  is  because  we  have  no  bread." 

Yet  the  misunderstanding  of  the  disciples,  though  simple 
and  natural  in  its  origin,  was  blameworthy.  They  could  not 
have  fallen  into  the  mistake  had  the  interest  they  took  in 
spiritual  and  temporal  things  respectively  been  proportional 
to  their  relative  importance.  They  had  treated  the  incident 
on  the  other  side  of  the  lake  too  lightly,  and  they  had  treated 
their  neglect  to  provide  bread  too  gravely.  They  should 
have  taken  more  to  heart  the  ominous  demand  for  a  sign, 
and  the  solemn  words  spoken  by  their  Master  in  reference 
thereto ;  and  they  should  not  have  been  troubled  about  the 
want  of  loaves  in  the  company  of  Him  who  had  twice  miracu- 
lously fed  the  hungry  multitude  in  the  desert.  Their  thought- 
lessness in  one  direction,  and  their  over-thoughtfulness  in 
another,  showed  that  food  and  raiment  occupied  a  larger  place 
in  their  minds  than  the  kingdom  of  God  and  its  interests. 
Had  they  possessed  more  faith  and  more  spirituality,  they 
would  not  have  exposed  themselves  to  the  reproachful  question 
of  their  Master :  "  How  is  it  that  ye  do  not  understand,  that 
I  spake  it  not  to  you  concerning  bread,  that  ye  should  beware 
of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees  ? "  ^ 

The  misunderstanding  thus  gently  yet  faithfully  rebuked, 
serves  to  demonstrate  how  vain  is  all  discourse  concerning 
divine  things  to  men  whose  minds  are  preoccupied  with  earthly 
cares.  Such  men  have  no  ears  for  the  lofty  lessons  of  spiritual 
wisdom;  they  hear  only  words  which  convey  not  the  ideas 
they  were  designed  to  express,  but  suggest  thoughts  of  the  most 
diverse  nature.  "  Leaven"  makes  them  think  of  loaves ;  and 
the  mention  of  "  synagogues,  magistrates,  and  powers"  brings 
up  to  their  recollection  legal  disputes  with  kinsfolk  concerning 
inheritances.^  Verily,  the  cares  of  life  are  thorns  which  choke 
the  word,  and  render  the  hearer  unfruitful. 

1  Matt.  xvi.  11.  «  Luke  xii  11-15. 


CHAPTER   XL 

CURRENT  OPINION  AND  ETERNAL  TRUTH. 
Matt.  zyi.  18-20  ;  Mabk  viii.  27-30  ;  Lxtke  ix.  18-21. 

FEOM  the  eastern  shore  of  the  lake  Jesus  directed  His 
course  northwards  along  the  banks  of  the  Upper  Jordan, 
passing  Bethsaida  Julias,  where,  as  Mark  informs  us,  He  re- 
stored eyesight  to  a  blind  man.  Pursuing  his  journey.  He 
arrived  at  length  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  town  of  some 
importance,  beautifully  situated  near  the  springs  of  the  Jordan, 
at  the  southern  base  of  Mount  Hermoa  This  was  Caesarea 
Philippi,  formerly  called  Paneas,  from  the  heathen  god  Pan, 
who  was  worshipped  by  the  Syrian  Greeks  in  the  limestone 
cavern  near  by,  in  which  Jordan's  fountains  bubble  forth  to 
light.  Its  present  name  was  given  to  it  by  Philip,  tetrarch  of 
Trachonitis,  in  honctUr  of  C«sar  Augustus ;  his  own  name 
being  appended  (Caesarea  Philip,  or  Philip's  Caesarea),  to 
distinguish  it  from  the  other  town  of  the  same  name  on  the 
Mediterranean  coast.  The  town  so  named  could  boast  of  a 
temple  of  white  marble,  built  by  Herod  the  Great  to  the  first 
Eoman  Emperor,  besides  villas  and  palaces,  built  by  Philip, 
Herod's  son,  in  whose  territories  it  lay,  and  who,  as  we  have 
just  stated,  gave  it  its  new  name. 

Away  in  that  remote  secluded  region,  Jesus  occupied  Him- 
self for  a  season  in  secret  prayer,  and  in  confidential  con- 
versations with  His  disciples  on  topics  of  deepest  interest. 
One  of  these  conversations  had  reference  to  His  own  Person. 
He  introduced  the  subject  by  asking  the  twelve  the  question, 
"  Whom  do  men  say  that  I,  the  Son  of  man,  am  ?"  This 
question  He  asked,  not  as  one  needing  to  be  informed,  still 
less  from  any  morbid  sensitiveness^  such  as  vain  men  feel 


CURRENT  OPINION  AND  ETERNAL  TRUTH.  165 

respecting  the  opinions  entertained  of  them  by  their  fellow- 
creatures.  He  desired  of  His  disciples  a  recital  of  current 
opinions,  merely  by  way  of  preface  to  a  profession  of  their 
own  faith  in  the  eternal  truth  concerning  Himself.  He  deemed 
it  good  to  draw  forth  from  them  such  a  profession  at  this  time, 
because  He  was  about  to  make  communications  to  them  on 
another  subject,  viz.  His  sufferings,  which  He  knew  would 
sorely  try  their  faith.  He  wished  them  to  be  fairly  committed 
to  the  doctrine  of  His  Messiahskip  before  proceeding  to  speak 
in  plain  terms  on  the  unwelcome  theme  of  His  death. 

From  the  reply  of  the  disciples,  it  appears  that  their  Master 
had  been  the  subject  of  much  talk  among  the  people.  This 
is  only  what  we  should  have  expected.  Jesus  was  a  very 
public  and  a  very  extraordinary  person,  and  to  be  much  talked 
about  is  one  of  the  inevitable  penalties  of  prominence.  The 
merits  and  the  claims  of  the  Son  of  man  were  accordingly 
fipeely  and  widely  canvassed  in  those  days,  with  gravity  or 
with  levity,  with  prejudice  or  with  candour,  with  decision  or 
with  indecision,  intelligently  or  ignorantly,  as  is  the  way  of 
men  in  all  ages.  As  they  mingled  with  the  people,  it  was  the 
lot  of  the  twelve  to  hear  many  opinions  concerning  their  Lord 
which  never  reached  His  ear  :  sometimes  kind  and  favourable, 
making  them  glad ;  at  other  times  unkind  and  unfavourable, 
making  them  sad. 

The  opinions  prevalent  among  the  masses  concerning  Jesus — 
for  it  was  with  reference  to  these  that  He  interrogated  His  dis- 
ciples ^ — seem  to  have  been  mainly  favourable.  All  agreed  in 
regarding  Him  as  a  prophet  of  the  highest  rank,  differing  only 
as  to  which  of  the  great  prophets  of  Israel  He  most  nearly 
resembled  or  personated.  Some  said  He  was  John  the  Baptist 
revived,  others  Elias,  while  others  again  identified  Him  with 
one  or  other  of  the  great  prophets,  as  Jeremiah  These  opinions 
are  explained  in  part  by  an  expectation  then  commonly  enter- 
tained, that  the  advent  of  the  Messiah  would  be  preceded  by 
the  return  of  one  of  the  prophets  by  whom  God  had  spoken 
to  the  fathers,  partly  by  the  perception  of  real  or  supposed 
resemblances  between  Jesus  and  this  or  that  prophet;  His 
tenderness  reminding  one  hearer  of  the  author  of  the  Lamen- 

^  Luke  ix.  18,  •/  /;^Xm. 


I 


166  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

tations,  His  sternness  in  denouncing  hypocrisy  and  tyranny 
reminding  another  of  the  prophet  of  fire,  while  perhaps  His 
paraboKc  discourses  led  a  third  to  think  of  Ezekiel  or  of  DanieL 

When  we  reflect  on  the  high  veneration  in  which  the  ancient 
prophets  were  held,  we  cannot  fail  to  see  that  these  diverse 
opinions  current  among  the  Jewish  people  concerning  Jesus 
imply  a  very  high  sense  of  His  greatness  and  excellence.  To 
us,  who  regard  Him  as  the  Sun,  while  the  prophets  were  at 
best  but  lamps  of  greater  or  less  brightness,  such  comparisons 
may  well  seem  not  only  inadequate,  but  dishonouring.  Yet 
we  must  not  despise  them,  as  the  testimonies  of  open-minded 
but  imperfectly  informed  contemporaries  to  the  worth  of  Him 
whom  we  worship  as  tiie  Lord.  Taken  separately,  they  show 
that  in  the  judgment  of  candid  observers  Jesus  was  a  man  of 
surpassing  greatness ;  taken  together,  they  show  the  many- 
sidedness  of  His  character,  and  its  superiority  to  that  of  any 
one  of  the  prophets ;  for  He  could  not  have  reminded  those 
who  witnessed  His  works,  and  heard  Him  preach,  of  all  the 
prophets  in  turn,  unless  He  had  comprehended  them  all  in 
His  one  person.  The  very  diversity  of  opinion  respecting 
Him,  therefore,  showed  that  a  greater  than  Elias,  or  Jeremiah, 
or  Ezekiel,  or  Daniel,  had  appeared. 

These  opinions,  valuable  still  as  testimonials  to  the  excel- 
lence of  Christ,  must  be  admitted  further  to  be  indicative,  so 
faj,  of  good  dispositions  on  the  part  of  those  who  cherished 
and  expressed  them.  At  a  time  when  those  who  deemed 
themselves  in  every  respect  immeasurably  superior  to  the 
multitude  could  find  no  better  names  for  the  Son  of  man  than 
Samaritan,  devil,  blasphemer,  glutton  and  drunkard,  companion 
of  publicans  and  sinners,  it  was  something  considerable  to 
believe  that  the  cfdumniated  One  was  a  prophet  as  worthy 
of  honour  as  any  of  those  whose  sepulchres  the  professors  of 
piety  carefully  varnished,  while  depreciating,  and  even  putting 
to  death,  their  living  successors.  The  multitude  who  held  this 
opinion  might  come  short  of  true  discipleship ;  but  they  were 
at  least  far  in  advance  of  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  who 
came  in  tempting  mood  to  ask  a  sign  from  heaven,  and  whom 
no  sign,  whether  in  heaven  or  in  earth,  would  conciliate  or 
convince. 


CURRENT  OPINION  AND  ETERNAL  TRUTH.  167 

How,  then,  did  Jesus  receive  the  report  of  BKs  disciples  ? 
Was  He  satisfied  with  these  favourable,  and  in  the  circum- 
stances really  gratifying,  opinions  current  among  the  people  ? 
He  was  not  He  was  not  content  to  be  put  on  a  level  with 
even  the  greatest  of  the  prophets.  He  did  not  indeed  express 
any  displeasure  against  those  who  assigned  Him  such  a  rank^ 
and  He  may  even  have  been  pleased  to  hear  that  public 
opinion  had  advanced  so  far  on  the  way  to  the  tnie  faith. . 
Nevertheless  He  declined  to  accept  the  position  accorded. 
The  meek  and  lowly  Son  of  man  claimed  to  be  something 
more  than  a  great  prophet  Therefore  He  turned  to  His 
chosen  disciples,  as  to  men  from  whom  He  expected  a  more 
satisfactory  statement  of  the  truth,  and  pointedly  asked  what 
they  thought  of  Him.  "  But  you — whom  say  ye  that  I 
am?" 

In  this  case,  as  in  many  others,  Simon  son  of  Jonas  an- 
swered for  the  company.  His  prompt,  definite,  memorable 
reply  to  his  Master's  question  was  this  :  "  Thou  art  the  Christ, 
the  Son  of  the  living  Grod." 

"With  this  view  of  His  person  Jesus  was  satisfied.  He  did 
not  charge  Peter  with  extravagance,  in  going  so  fax  beyond 
the  opinion  of  the  populace.  On  the  contrary.  He  entirely 
approved  of  what  the  ardent  disciple  had  said,  and  expressed 
His  satisfaction  in  no  cold  or  measured  terms.  Never,  perhaps, 
did  He  speak  in  more  animated  language,  or  with  greater 
appearance  of  deep  emotion.  He  solemnly  pronounced  Peter 
"  blessed  "  on  account  of  his  faith  ;  He  spake  for  the  first  time 
of  a  church  which  should  be  founded,  professing  Peter's  faith 
as  its  creed  ;  He  promised  that  disciple  great  power  in  that 
church,  as  if  grateful  to  him  for  being  the  first  to  put  the 
momentous  truth  into  words,  and  for  uttering  it  so  boldly 
amid  prevailing  imbelief,  and  crude,  defective  belief ;  and  He 
expressed,  in  the  strongest  possible  terms.  His  confidence  that 
the  church  yet  to  be  founded  would  stand  to  aU  ages  proof 
against  all  the  assaults  of  the  powers  of  darkness. 

Simon's  confession,  fairly  interpreted,  seems  to  contain  these 
two  propositions, — ^that  Jesus  was  the  Messiah,  and  that  He 
was  divine.  "  Thou  art  the  Christ,"  said  he  in  the  first  place, 
with  conscious  reference  to  the  reported  opinions  of  the  people, 


168  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

— "  Thou  art  the  Christ,"  and  not  merely  a  prophet  come  to 
prepare  Christ's  way.  Then  he  added :  "  the  Son  of  God,"  to 
explain  what  he  understood  by  the  tenn  Christ.  The  Messiah 
looked  for  by  the  Jews  in  general  was  merely  a  man,  though 
a  very  superior  one,  the  ideal  man  endowed  with  extraordinary 
gifts.  The  Christ  of  Peter^s  creed  was  more  than  man — a 
superhuman,  a  divine  being.  This  truth  he  sought  to  express 
in  the  second  part  of  his  confession.  He  called  Jesus  Son  of 
God,  with  obvious  reference  to  the  name  His  Master  had  just 
given  HimseK — Son  of  man.  "  Thou,"  he  meant  to  say,  "  art 
not  only  what  Thou  hast  now  called  Thyself,  and  what,  in 
lowliness  of  mind,  Thou  art  wont  to  call  Thyself — ^the  Son  of 
man ;  Thou  art  also  Son  of  Gk)d,  partaking  of  the  divine  nature 
not  less  really  than  of  the  human."  Finally,  he  prefixed  the 
epithet  "  living  "  to  the  divine  name,  to  express  his  conscious- 
ness that  he  was  making  a  very  momentous  declaration,  and 
to  give  that  declaration  a  solemn,  deliberate  character.  It 
was  as  if  he  said :  "  I  know  it  is  no  light  matter  to  call  any 
one,  even  Thee,  Son  of  G^d,  of  the  One  living  eternal  Jehovah. 
But  I  shrink  not  from  the  assertion,  however  bold,  startling, 
or  even  blasphemous  it  may  seem.  I  cannot  by  any  other 
expression  do  justice  to  aU  I  know  and  feel  concerning  Thee, 
or  convey  the  impression  left  on  my  mind  by  what  I  have 
witnessed  during  the  time  I  have  followed  Thee  as  a  disciple." 
That  the  famous  confession,  uttered  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Caesarea  Philippi,  really  contains  in  germ  ^  the  doctrine  of 
Christ's  divinity,  might  be  inferred  from  the  simple  fact  that 
Jesus  was  satisfied  with  it ;  for  He  certainly  claimed  to  be 
Son  of  God  in  a  sense  predicable  of  no  mere  man.  But  when 
we  consider  the  peculiar  terms  in  which  He  expressed  Him- 
self respecting  Peter's  faith,  we  are  still  further  confirmed  in 
this  conclusion.  "  Flesh  and  blood,"  said  He  to  the  disciple, 
"  hath  not  revealed  it  unto  thee,  but  my  Father  which  is  in 
heaven."  These  words  evidently  imply  that  the  person  ad- 
dressed had  said  something  very  extraordinary ;  something  he 
could  not  have  learned  from  the  traditional  established  belief 
of  his  generation  respecting  Messiah ;  something  new  even  for 
himself  and  his  fellow-disciples,  if  not  in  words,  at  least  in 

^  Of  conrse  all  that  was  implied  was  not  yet  present  to  Peter's  mind. 


CURRENT  OPINION  AND  ETERNAL  TRUTH.  169 

meaning/  to  which  he  could  not  have  attained  by  the  unaided 
eflfort  of  his  own  mind.  The  confession  is  virtually  represented 
as  an  inspiration,  a  revelation,  a  flash  of  light  from  heaven, — 
the  utterance  not  of  the  rude  fisherman,  but  of  the  Divine 
Spirit  speaking,  through  his  mouth,  a  truth  hitherto  hidden,  and 
yet  but  dimly  comprehended  by  him  to  whom  it  hath  been 
revealed.  All  this  agrees  well  with  the  supposition  that  the 
confession  contains  not  merely  an  acknowledgment  of  the 
Messiahship  of  Jesus  in  the  ordinary  sense,  but  a  proclamation 
of  the  true  doctrine  concerning  Messiah's  person — viz.  that 
He  was  a  divine  being  manifest  in  the  flesh. 

The  remaining  portion  of  our  Lord's  address  to  Simon  shows 
that  He  assigned  to  the  doctrine  confessed  by  that  disciple 
the  place  of  fimdamental  importance  in  the  Christian  faith. 
The  object  of  these  remarkable  statements  *  is  not  to  assert 
the  supremacy  of  Peter,  as  Eomanists  contend,  but  to  declare 
the  supremely  important  nature  of  the  truth  he  has  confessed. 
In  spite  of  all  difBculties  of  interpretation,  this  remains  clear 
and  certain  to  us.  Who  or  what  the  "  rock "  is,  we  deem 
doubtful ;  it  may  be  Peter,  or  it  may  be  his  confession  :  it  is 
a  point  on  which  scholars  equally  sound  in  the  faith,  and 
equally  innocent  of  all  sympathy  with  Popish  dogmas,  are 
divided  in  opinion,  and  on  which  it  would  ill  become  us  to 
dogmatize.  Of  this  only  we  are  sure,  that  not  Peter's  person, 
but  Peter's  faith,  is  the  fundamental  matter  in  Christ's  mind. 
When  He  says  to  that  disciple,  "  Thou  art  Petros,"  He  means, 
"  Thou  art  a  man  of  rock,  worthy  of  the  name  I  gave  thee  by 
anticipation  the  first  time  I  met  thee,  because  thou  hast  at 
length  got  thy  foot  planted  on  the  rock  of  the  eternal  trutL" 
He  speaks  of  the  church  that  is  to  be,  for  the  first  time,  in 
connection  with  Simon's  confession,  because  that  church  is  to 
consist  of  men  adopting  that  confession  as  their  own,  and 
acknowledging  Him  to  be  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.'  He 
aUudes  to  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  in  the  same 
connection,  because  none  but  those  who  homologate  the  doctrine 

^  The  words,  with  exception  of  the  epithet  "living,"  are  found  in  John  i.  49. 

•  Matt.  xvi.  18,  19. 

*  This  was  the  usnal  formula  by  which  converts  confessed  their  faith  in  the 
apostolic  age. 


170  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVK 

first  solemnly  enunciated  by  Simon  shall  be  admitted  within 
its  gates.  He  promises  Peter  the  power  of  the  keys,  not 
because  it  is  to  belong  to  him  alone,  or  to  him  more  than 
others,  but  by  way  of  honourable  mention,  in  recompense  for 
the  joy  he  has  given  his  Lord  by  the  superior  energy  and 
decision  of  his  faith.  He  is  grateful  to  Peter,  because  he 
has  believed  most  emphatically  that  He  came  out  from  Grod  ;^ 
and  He  shows  His  gratitude  by  promising  first  to  him  indi- 
viduaUy  a  power  which  He  afterwards  conferred  on  all  Hifl 
chosen  disciples.*  Finally,  if  it  be  true  that  Peter  is  here 
called  the  rock  on  which  the  church  shall  be  built,  this  is  to 
be  understood  in  the  same  way  as  the  promise  of  the  keys. 
Peter  is  called  the  foundation  of  the  church  only  in  the  same 
.  sense  as  all  the  apostles  are  called  the  foundation  by  the 
Apostle  Paul,^  viz.  as  the  first  preachers  of  the  true  faith  con- 
cerning Jesus  as  the  Christ  and  Son  of  God  ;  and 'if  the  man 
who  firsH.  professed  that  faith  be  honoured  by  being  called 
individually  the  rock,  that  only  shows  that  the  faiths  and  not 
the  man,  is  after  aU  the  true  foundation.  That  which  makes 
Simon  a  Petros,  a  rock-like  man,  fit  to  build  on,  is  the  real 
Petra  on  which  the  Ecclesia  is  to  be  built. 

After  these  remarks,  we  deem  it  superfluous  to  enter  mi- 
nutely into  the  question  to  what  the  term  "  rock"  refers  in  the 
sentence,  "  Thou  art  Peter,  and  on  this  rock  I  will  build  my 
church."  At  the  same  time,  we  must  say  that  it  is  by  no 
means  so  clear  to  us  that  the  rock  must  be  Peter,  and  can  be 
nothing  else,  as  it  is  the  fashion  of  modem  commentators  to 
assert.  To  the  rendering,  "  Thou  art  Petros,  a  man  of  rock  ; 
and  on  thee,  as  on  a  rock,  I  will  build  my  church,"  it  is  pos- 
sible, as  already  admitted,  to  assign  an  intelligible  scriptural 
meaning.  But  we  confess  our  preference  for  the  old  Protestant 
interpretation,  according  to  which  our  Lord's  words  to  His  dis- 
ciple should  be  thus  paraphrased :  "  Thou,  Simon  Barjonas,  art 
Petros,  a  man  of  rock,  worthy  of  thy  name  Peter,  because 
thou  hast  made  that  bold,  good  confession ;  and  on  the  truth 
thou  hast  now  confessed,  as  on  a  rock,  will  I  build  my  church ; 
and  so  long  as  it  abides  on  that  foundation,  it  will  stand  firm 
and  unassailable  against  aU  the  powers  of  helL"     So  render- 

>  John  xvi.  27.  >  Matt  xviu.  18  ;  John  xx.  28.        ,     »  Eph.  ii  20. 


CURRENT  OPINION  AND  ETERNAL  TRUTH.  I7l 

ing,  we  make  Jesus  say  not  only  what  He  really  thought,  but 
what  was  most  worthy  to  be  said  For  divine  truth  is  the 
sure  foundation.  Believers,  even  Peters,  may  fail,  and  prove 
anything  but  stable ;  but  truth  is  eternal,  and  faileth  never. 

We  cannot  pass  from  these  memorable  words  of  Christ, 
without  adverting,  with  a  certain  solemn  awe,  to  the  strange 
fate  which  has  befallen  them  in  the  history  of  the  churdi. 
This  text,  in  which  the  church's  Lord  declares  that  the  powers 
of  darkness  shall  not  prevail  against  her,  has  been  used  by 
these  powers  as  an  instrument  of  assault,  and  with  only  too 
much  success.  What  a  gigantic  system  of  spiritual  despotism 
and  blasphemous  assumption  has  been  built  on  these  two  sen- 
tences concerning  the  rock  and  the  keys  !  How  nearly,  by 
their  aid,  have  men  and  devils  turned  the  kingdom  of  Grod 
into  a  kingdom  of  Satan !  One  is  tempted  to  wish  that  Jesus, 
knowing  beforehand  what  was  to  happen,  had  so  framed  His 
words  as  to  obviate  the  mischief.  But  the  wish  were  vain. 
No  forms  of  expression,  however  carefully  selected,  could  pre- 
vent human  ignorance  from  falling  into  misconception,  or  hinder 
men  who  had  a  purpose  to  serve  from  finding  in  Scripture  what 
suited  that  purpose.  Nor  can  any  Christian,  on  reflection, 
think  it  desirable  that  the  Author  of  our  faith  had  adopted  a 
studied  prudential  style  of  speech,  intended  not  so  much  to 
give  faithful  expression  to  the  actual  thoughts  of  His  mind  and 
feelings  of  His  heart,  as  to  avoid  giving  occasion  of  stumbling 
to  honest  stupidity,  or  an  excuse  for  perversion  to  dishonest 
knavery.  The  spoken  word  in  that  case  had  been  no  longer 
a  true  reflection  of  the  Word  incarnate.  All  the  poetry  and 
passion  and  genuine  human  feeling,  which  form  the  charm  of 
Christ's  sayings,  would  have  been  lost,  and  nothing  would  have 
remained  but  prosaic  platitudes,  like  those  of  the  scribes  and 
of  theological  pedants.  No ;  let  us  have  the  precious  words  of 
our  Master  in  all  their  chaiucteristic  intensity  and  vehemence 
of  unqualified  assertion ;  and  if  prosaic  or  disingenuous  men 
will  manufacture  out  of  them  incredible  dogmas,  let  them 
answer  for  it.  Why  should  the  children  be  deprived  of  their 
bread,  and  only  the  dogs  be  cared  for  ? 

And  now,  changing  the  scene  from  Csesarea  Philippi  to 
Christendom,  and  the  time  from  the  first  to  the  nineteenth 


172  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

century,  what  do  we  find  ?  The  world  still  discussing  the 
question,  Who  is  this  Son  of  man  ?  and  propounding  the  most 
diverse  theories  concerning  Him.  Of  these  theories  we  cannot 
now  give  the  meagrest  account ;  but  we  simply  remark,  that 
the  view  in  favour  with  many  is  just  that  of  the  Jewish  mul- 
titude, viz.  that  the  Son  of  man  is  only  a  man,  but  a  very 
good  and  very  great  man.  This  is  now  the  opinion  not  of  the 
populace,  but  of  the  philosophers,  who  will  not  allow  Jesus  to 
be  more  than  man,  but  strenuously  maintain  that  He  is  the 
best  of  men.  It  is  well  they  go  so  far,  though  their  position 
is  by  no  means  unassailable,  inasmuch  as,  if  Jesus  be  not 
more  than  man,  it  is  difficult  to  resist  the  conclusion  that  He 
must  be  less  than  a  good  man.  It  is  well  that  they  are  dis- 
posed to  bless,  whose  speculative  views,  rigorously  carried  out, 
would  require  them  to  curse.  Yet  their  view  of  the  person 
of  Christ,  however  complimentary,  is  manifestly  one  with  which 
He  Himself  would  not  have  been  satisfied,  judging  from  the 
incident  at  Caesarea  Philippi,  which  is  no  myth,  but  bears  the 
unmistakeable  stamp  of  genuine  history.  Were  our  Lord  here 
on  earth  to-day.  He  would  turn  away  from  the  philosophers, 
in  quest  of  men  who  believe  as  Peter  believed,  and  with  some- 
what of  Peter's  emphasis  confess  His  divinity,  not  only  on  the 
authority  of  a  venerable  creed,  but  as  taught  by  the  Father  in 
heaven.  In  such  Christians  alone,  at  once  orthodox  and  ori- 
ginal in  their  faith,  would  His  heart  find  rest  In  such  Chris- 
tians, let  us  add,  as  distinct  not  only  from  the  philosophers, 
but  from  the  traditionally  orthodox,  lies  the  strength  of  the 
church  against  her  spiritual  foes  —  superstition,  unbelief, 
worldliness,  Satanic  malice.  For  it  is  not  mere  abstract 
orthodoxy  expressed  in  confessions  that  is  the  source  of  secu- 
rity and  stability.  It  is  truth  believed  by  living  souls. 
Orthodoxy  will  not  save  the  church  any  more  than  ecclesi- 
astical dignitaries — priests,  bishops,  cardinals,  popes.  The 
temple  which  endures  for  ever  is  founded  on  Christ,  the  Rock 
of  ages,  and  built  up  of  "  lively  stones." 


CHAPTER    XII. 

THE   CROSS. 

Section  i. — First  Announcement  of  Chrises  Death. 

Matt.  xvi.  21-28  ;  Mabk  yiii.  81-88  ;  Luke  dl  22*27. 

NOT  till  an  advanced  period  in  His  public  ministry — ^not, 
in  fact,  tiU  it  was  drawing  to  a  close — did  Jesus  speak 
in  plain,  unmistakeable  terms  of  His  death.  The  solemn  event 
was  foreknown  by  Him  from  the  first ;  and  He  betrayed  His 
consciousness  of  what  was  awaiting  Him  by  a  variety  of  oc- 
casional allusions.  These  earlier  utterances,  however,  were 
all  couched  in  mystic  language.  They  were  of  the  nature 
of  riddles,  whose  meaning  became  clear  after  the  event,  but 
which  before,  none  could  or  at  least  did  read.  Jesus  spake 
now  of  a  temple,  which,  if  destroyed.  He  should  raise  again  in 
three  days  ;^  at  another  time  of  a  lifting  up  of  the  Son  of 
man,  like  imto  that  of  the  brazen  serpent  in  the  wilderness  f 
and  on  yet  other  occasions,  of  a  sad  separation  of  the  bride- 
groom from  the  children  of  the  bride-chamber,'  of  the  giving 
of  His  flesh  for  the  life  of  the  world,*  and  of  a  sign  like  that 
of  the  prophet  Jonas,  which  should  be  given  in  His  own  per- 
son to  an  evil  and  adulterous  generation.* 

At  length,  after  the  conversation  in  Csesarea  Philippi,  Jesus 
changed  BQs  style  of  speaking  on  the  subject  of  His  sufferings ; 
substituting  for  dark,  hidden  allusions,  plain,  literal,  matter- 
of-fact  statements.*  This  change  was  naturally  adapted  to  the 
altered  circumstances  in  which  He  was  placed.     The  signs  of 

*  John  ii.  19.  •  John  iii.  14.  *  Matt.  ix.  15. 

*  John  vi.  *  Matt.  xvi.  4. 

'  *'  He  spake  that  saying  openly"  {iraffn^tf),  Mark  viii.  82. 


< 


174  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

the  times  were  growing  ominous ;  storm-clouds  were  gathering 
in  the  air ;  all  things  were  begin^iing  to  point  towards  Calvary. 
His  work  in  Galilee  and  the  provinces  was  nearly  done :  it 
remained  for  Him  to  bear  witness  to  the  truth  in  and  aroimd 
the  holy  city ;  and  from  the  present  mood  of  the  ecclesiastical 
authorities  and  the  leaders  of  religious  society,  as  manifested 
by  captious  question  and  unreasonable  demand/  and  a  constant 
espionage  on  His  movements,  it  was  not  difficult  to  foresee 
that  it  would  not  require  many  more  offences,  or  much  longer 
time,  to  ripen  dislike  and  jealousy  into  murderous  hatred. 
Such  plain  speaking,  therefore,  concerning  what  was  soon  to 
happen,  was  natural  and  seasonable.  Jesus  was  now  entering 
the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death ;  and  in  so  speaking,  He  was 
but  adapting  His  talk  to  the  situation. 

Plain-speaking  regarding  His  death  was  now  not  only 
natural  on  Christ's  part,  but  at  once  necessary  and  safe  in 
reference  to  His  disciples.  It  was  necessary,  in  order  that 
they  might  be  prepared  for .  the  approaching  event,  as  far  as 
that  was  possible  in  the  case  of  men  who,  to  the  last,  persisted 
in  hoping  that  the  issue  would  be  different  from  what  their 
Master  anticipated.  It  was  safe ;  for  now  the  subject  might 
be  spoken  of  plainly  without  serious  risk  to  tiieir  faith.  Be- 
fore the  disciples  were  established  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ's 
person,  the  doctrine  of  the  cross  might  have  scared  them  away 
altogether.  Premature  preaching  of  a  Christ  to  be  crucified 
might  have  made  them  unbelievers  in  the  fwndamental  truth 
that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  the  Christ  Therefore,  in  con- 
sideration of  their  weakness,  Jesus  maintained  a  certain  reserve 
respecting  His  sufferings,  till  their  faith  in  Him  as  the  Christ 
should  have  become  sufficiently  rooted  to  stand  the  strain  of  the 
storm  soon  to  be  raised  by  a  most  unexpected,  unwelcome,  and 
incomprehensible  annoimcement  Only  after  hearing  Peter's 
confession  was  He  satisfied  that  the  strength  necessary  for  en- 
during the  trial  had  been  attained. 

Wherefore,  "  from  that  time  forth  began  Jesus  to  show  unto 
His  disciples  how  that  He  must  go  unto  Jerusalem,  and  suffer 
many  things  of  the  elders  and  chief  priests  and  scribes,  and 
be  killed,  and  be  raised  again  the  third  day." 

^  Matt  zv.  1  sqq.,  zvi  1  sqq. 


THE  CROSS :   FIRST  ANNOUNCEMENT  OF  CHRIST'S  DEATH.     175 

Every  clause  in  this  solemn  announcement  demands  our 
reverent  scrutiny. 

Jesus  showed  unto  His  disciples : 

1.  "  That  He  must  go  unto  Jerusalem."  Yes !  there  the 
tragedy  must  be  enacted :  that  was  the  fitting  scene  for  the 
stupendous  events  that  were  about  to  take  place.  It  was 
dramatically  proper  that  the  Son  of  man  should  die  in  that 
holy,  unholy  city,  which  had  earned  a  most  unenviable  no- 
toriety as  the  murderess  of  the  prophets,  the  stoner  of  them 
whom  God  sent  unto  her.  "  It  cannot  be  *' — ^it  were  incon- 
gruous— "  that  a  prophet  perish  out  of  Jerusalem."  ^  It  was 
due  also  to  the  dignity  of  Jesus,  and  to  the  design  of  BQs 
death,  that  He  should  suffer  there.  Not  in  an  obscure  comer 
or  in  an  obscure  way  must  He  di6,  but  in  the  most  public 
place,  and  in  a  formal,  judicial  manner.  He  must  be  lifted 
up  in  view  of  the  whole  Jewish  nation,  so  that  all  might  see 
Him  whom  they  had  pierced,  and  by  whose  stripes  also  they 
might  yet  be  healed.  The  "  Lamb  of  God"  must  be  slain  in 
the  place  where  all  the  legal  sacrifices  were  offered 

2.  "And  suffer  many  things."  Too  many  to  enumerate, 
too  painful  to  speak  of  in  detail,  and  better  passed  over  in 
silence  for  •  the  present  The  .bare  fact  that  their  beloved 
Master  was  to  be  put  to  death,  without  any  accompanying 
indignities,  would  be  sufficiently  dreadful  to  the  disciples; 
and  Jesus  mercifully  drew  a  veil  over  much  that  was  present 
to  His  own  thoughts.  In  a  subsequent  conversation  on  the 
same  sad  theme,  when  His  passion  was  near  at  hand.  He 
drew  aside  the  veil  a  little,  and  showed  them  some  of  the 
"  many  things."  But  even  then  He  was  very  sparing  in  His 
allusions,  hinting  only  by  a  passing  word  that  He  should  be 
mocked,  and  scourged,  and  spit  upon.*  He  took  no  delight 
in  expatiating  on  such  harrowing  scenes.  He  was  willing  to 
bear  those  indignities,  but  He  cared  not  to  speak  of  them  more 
than  was  absolutely  necessary. 

3.  Jesus  next  told  His  disciples  that  He  should  suffer  those 
things  "  of  the  elders  and  chief  priests  and  scribes."  Not  of 
them  alone,  for  Gentile  rulers  and  the  people  of  Israel  were 
to  have  a  hand  in  evil-entreating  the  Son  of  man  as  well  as 

^  Luke  xiii.  83.  *  Mark  x.  34  ;  Luke  xviiL  82. 


17C        '  f    ^     «     IHE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWtLYK 

Jewish  ecdttiftstdcs.  But  the  pttties  named  were  to  be  the 
prime  mows  and  most  guilty  agents  in  the  nefaiions  trans- 
action. The  men  who  onght  to  have  taught  the  people  to 
recognise  in  Jesus  the  Lord's  Anointed,  would  hound  them 
on  to  cry,  **  Crucify  him,  crucify  him,"  and  by  importunities 
and  threats  urge  heathen  authorities  to  perpetaUe  a  crime 
fat  which  they  had  no  heart  Grey-haired  eUeis  sitting  in 
coxmcil  would  s(demnly  decide  that  He  was  wixthy  of  death ; 
high  pnests  would  ntter  orades,  that  one  man  mxxst  die 
for  the  people,  that  the  whole  nation  perish  nol;  scribes 
learned  in  the  law  would  use  their  It^al  knowledge  to  invent 
plausible  grounds  for  an  accusation  involving  capital  punish- 
ment Jesus  had  suffered  many  petty  annoyances  from  such 
persons  already ;  but  the  time  was  approaching  when  nothing 
would  satisfy  them  but  getting  the  object  of  their  dislike  cast 
forth  out  of  the  world  Alas  for  Israel,  when  her  wise  men, 
and  her  holy  men,  and  her  learned  men,  knew  of  no  better  use 
to  make  of  the  stone  chosen  of  God,  and  precious,  than  thus 
contemptuously  and  wantonly  to  fling  it  away ! 

4.  "And  be  lolled."  Yea;  and  for  blessed  ends  pre- 
ordained of  God  But  of  these  Jesus  speaks  not  now.  He 
simply  states,  in  general  terms,  the  fact,  in  this  first  lesson  on 
the  doctrine  of  the  cross.^  Anything  more  at  this  stage  had 
been  wasted  words.  To  what  purpose  speak  of  the  theology 
of  the  cross,  of  God's  great  design  in  the  death  which  was  to 
be  brought  about  by  man's  guilty  instrumentality,  to  disciples 
unwilling  to  receive  even  the  matter  of  fact?  The  rude 
shock  of  an  imwelcome  announcement  must  first  be  over, 
before  anything  can  be  profitably  said  on  these  higher  themes. 
Therefore  not  a  syllable  here  of  salvation  by  the  death  of  the 
Son  of  man  ;  of  Christ  crucified  for  man's  guilt  as  well  as  bi/ 
man's  guilt.  The  hard,  bare  fact  alone  is  stated;  theology 
being  reserved  for  another  season,  when  the  hearers  should  be 
in  a  fitter  frame  of  mind  for  receiving  instruction. 

5.  Finally,  Jesus  told  His  disciples  that  He  should  "be 
raised  again  the  third  day."     To  some  so  explicit  a  reference 

*  The  cross  is  not  even  named  here  ;  but  it  was  in  Christ's  thoughts,  as  the 
following  address  to  the  disciples  plainly  shows.  The /act,  without  the  mocUf  of 
death  was  enough  for  the  first  lesson. 


■*'"       "  \^. 


•'  * 


to  the  resurrectioft  at  this  eafcly  date  has  appeared  improbable.^     • 
To  us,  on  the  contwtty,  it  appears  eminently  seasonable.   When  ^ 
was  Jesus  more  likely  to  tell  His  disciples  that  He  would  rise         ** 
agaid  shortly  after  His  death,  than  just  on  the  occasion  when 
He  first  told  them  plainly  that  He  should  die  I     He  knew 
how  harsh  the  one  announcement  wotdd  be  to  the  feelings  of  • 
His  faithful  ones,  and  it  was  natural  that  He  should  add  the" 
other,  in  the  hopd  that  when  it  was  understood  that  His  death         ^ 
was  to  be  succeeded,  after  a  brief  interval  of  three  days,  by 
resurrection,   the  news  would  be  much  leap  haM  to  bear.* 
Accordingly,  after  uttering  the  dismal  words  "  be  killed,"  Ha, ' 
with  characteristic  tenderness,  hastened  to  say,  "  and  be  raised 
again  the  third  day;"  that,  having  torn,  He  might  heal,  and       ,^; 
having  smitten.  He  might  bind  up. 

The  grave  communications  made  by  Jesus  were  far  from 
welcome  to  His  disciples.  Neither  now  nor  at  any  subse- 
quent time  did  they  listen  to  the  forebodings  of  their  Lord 
with  resignation  even,  not  to  speak  of  cheerful  acquiescence 
or  spiritual  joy.  They  never  heard  Him  speak  of  His  death 
without  pain ;  and  their  only  comfort,  in  connection  with  such 
announcements  as  the  present,  seems  to  have  been  the  hope 
that  He  had  taken  too  gloomy  a  view  of  the  situation,  and 
that  His  apprehensions  would  turn  out  groundless.  They,  for 
their  part,  could  see  no  grounds  for  such  dark  anticipations,  and 
their  Messianic  ideas  did  not  dispose  them  to  be  on  the  out- 
look for  these.  They  had  not  the  slightest  conception  that  it 
behoved  the  Christ  to  suffer.  On  the  contrary,  a  crucified  Christ 
was  a  scandal  and  a  contradiction  to  them,  quite  as  much  as 
it  continued  to  be  to  the  majority  of  the  Jewish  people  after 
the  Lord  had  ascended  to  glory.  Hence,  the  more  firmly  they 
believed  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ,  the  more  confoimding  it  was 
to  be  told  that  He  must  be  put  to  death:  "  How,"  they  asked 
themselves,  "  can  these  things  be  ?  How  can  the  Son  of  Grod 
be  subject  to  such  indignities  ?  How  can  our  Master  be  the 
Christ,  as  we  firmly  beUeve,  come  to  set  up  the  divine  king- 

^  The  three  synoptical  evangelists  agree  in  adding  this  reference  to  the  resur- 
rection to  the  first  announcement  of  Christ's  death.  Their  agreement  in  the 
whole  of  this  announcement  is  very  striking,  yet  only  what  was  to  be  expected, 
considering  its  contents. 

M 


178  fHE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

dom,  and  to  be  crowned  its  King  with  glory  and  honour,  and 
yet  at  the  same  time  be  doomed  to  undergo  the  ignominious 
fate  of  a  criminal  execution  ?  *'  These  questions  the  twelve 
could  not  now,  nor  until  after  the  resurrection,  answer ;  nor 
is  this  wonderful,  for  if  flesh  and  blood  could  not  reveal  the 
doctrine  of  Christ's  person,  6till  less  could  it  reveal  the  doc- 
trine of  His  cross.  Not  without  a  very  special  illumination 
£K)m  heaven  could  they  understand  the  merest  elements  of 
that  doctrine,  and  see,  e.g.,  that  nothing  was  more  worthy  of 
,  the  Son  of  God  than  to  humble  Himself  and  become  subject 
unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross ;  that  the  glory  of  God 
consists  not  merely  in  being  the  highest,  but  in  this,  that 
being  high.  He  stoops  in  lowly  love  to  bear  the  burden  of  His 
own  sinful  creatures ;  that  nothing  could  more  directly  and 
certainly  conduce  to  the  establishment  of  the  divine  kingdom 
than  the  gracious  seK-humiliation  of  the  King;  that  only  by 
ascending  the  cross  could  Messiah  ascend  the  throne  of  His 
mediatorial  glory;  that  only  so  could  He  subdue  human 
hearts,  and  become  Lord  of  men's  afTections  as  well  as  of  their 
destinies.  Many  in  the  church  do  not  understand  these 
blessed  truths,  even  at  this  late  era :  what  wonder,  then,  if 
they  were  hid  for  a  season  from  the  eyes  of  the  first  disciples  ! 
Let  us  not  reproach  them  for  the  veil  that  was  on  their 
faces ;  let  us  rather  make  sure  that  the  same  veil  is  not  on 
our  own. 

On  this  occasion,  as  at  Csesarea  Philippi,  the  twelve  found 
a  most  eloquent  and  energetic  interpreter  of  their  sentiments 
in  Simon  Peter.  The  action  and  speech  of  that  disciple  at 
this  time  were  characteristic  in  the  highest  degrea  He  took 
Jesus,  we  are  told  (laid  hold  of  Him,  we  suppose,  by  His  hand 
or  His  garment),  and  began  to  rebuke  Him,  saying,  Be  it  far 
from  Thee,  Lord  ;  or  more  literally,  God  be  merciful  to  Thee : 
God  forbid !  this  shall  not  be  unto  Thee.  What  a  strange 
compound  of  good  and  evil  is  this  man!  His  language  is 
dictated  by  the  most  intense  afiPection  :  he  cannot  bear  the 
thought  of  any  harm  befalling  his  Lord ;  yet  how  irreverent 
and  disrespectful  he  is  towards  Him  whom  he  has  just  ac- 
knowledged to  be  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God ! 
How  he  overbears,  and  contradicts,  and  domineers,  and,  as  it 


THE  CBOSS  :   FIBST  ANNOUNCEMENT  OF  CHBIST'S  DEATH.     l79 

were,  tries  to  bully  his  Master  into  putting  away  from  His 
thoughts  those  gloomy  forebodings  of  coming  evil  I  Verily  he 
has  need  of  chastisement  to  teach  him  his  own  place,  and  to 
scourge  out  of  his  character  the  bad  elements  of  forwardness, 
and  undue  familiarity,  and  presumptuous  seK-wilL 

Happily  for  Peter,  he  had  a  Master  who,  in  His  faithful 
love,  spared  not  the  rod  when  it  was  needful  Jesus  judged 
that  it  was  needed  now,  and  therefore  He  administered  a  rebuke 
not  less  remarkable  for  severity  than  was  the  encomium  at 
Caesarea  Philippi  for  warm  unqualified  approbation,  and  curi- 
ously contrasting  with  that  encomium  in  the  terms  in  which 
it  was  expressed.  He  turned  round  on  His  oflfending  disciple, 
and  sternly  said :  ''  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan ;  thou  art  an 
oflfence  unto  me :  for  thou  savourest  not  the  things  that  be  of 
God,  but  those  that  be  of  men."  The  same  disciple  who  on 
the  former  occasion  had  spoken  by  inspiration  of  Heaven,  is 
here  represented  as  speaking  by  inspiration  of  mere  flesh  and 
blood — of  mere  natural  aflfection  for  his  Lord,  and  of  the 
animal  instinct  of  self-preservation ;  savouring  not  the  things 
of  God,  but  those  only  that  be  of  men.  He  whom  Christ  had 
pronounced  a  man  of  rock,  strong  in  faith,  and  fit  to  be  a 
foimdation-stone  in  the  spiritual  edifice,  is  here  called  an 
offence,  a  stumbling-stone  lying  in  his  Master's  patL  Peter, 
the  noble  confessor  of  that  fundamental  truth,  by  the  faith  of 
which  the  church  would  be  able  to  defy  the  gates  of  hell, 
appears  here  in  league  with  the  powers  of  darkness,  the  uncon- 
scious mouthpiece  of  Satan  the  tempter.  "  Get  thee  behind 
me,  Satan !"  What  a  downcome  for  him  who  but  yesterday 
got  that  promise  of  the  power  of  the  keys !  How  suddenly  has 
the  novice  church  dignitary,  too  probably  lifted  up  with  pride 
or  vanity,  fallen  into  the  condemnation  of  the  devil ! 

This  memorable  rebuke  seems  mercilessly  severe,  and  yet 
on  consideration  we  feel  it  was  nothing  more  than  what  was 
called  for.  Christ's  language  on  this  occasion  needs  no  apo- 
logy, such  as  might  be  drawn  from  supposed  excitement  of 
feeling,  or  from  a  consciousness  on  the  speaker's  part  that  the 
infirmity  of  His  own  sensient  nature  was  whispering  the  same 
suggestion  as  that  which  came  from  Peter's  lips.  Even  the 
hard  word  Satan,  which  is  the  sting  of  the  speech,  is  in  its 


1^4  TZZ  TL&3n3&  fir  TSK  rviLTi: 


prr^XL  vj  XBtA.     HoiZ  ^arrest  w  rrVuatriaFT"  "scs :  *  Sct« 

pR&cifpli^  and  teaekiKT !  F^!?  dhe  viidfr  sm  «{  SKme 
k  t/>  ^px  idf-mterese  HKOgzcaed  as  the  dacf  end  of 
S>&kD''s  tempCadMB  aim  ai  njduiig  worse  &■&  '^ssl. 
»  caIWi  the  Prince  of  tldi  voild,  tcqraae  flclf-iiiSBasSt  njes 
Uk;  vorid ;  be  is  called  tlie  accoser  of  the  lataLmiL  'bsssiae 
he  d^^^iJi  UJC  belieTe  that  eren  the  sons  erf*  God  Iviv  jBrriiitker 
nnotire.  He  ii  a  soepdc,  and  Ins  scepddan  fmffwg  im  descr- 
mined,  ft>jrafial  unbelief  in  the  leaKtr  ^  anr  chief  end  other 
Ukasn  that  of  perscnal  jMlTantage.  *  Doth  Joh^  or  eren  Jesns^ 
senre  God  for  nought  ?  Self-saezifioe,  suffering  for  liditHNis- 
neiw'  sake,  fidelity  to  truth  even  nnto  death : — it  is  all  romanoe 
and  yontfafdl  aentimentalism,  or  hypocrisy  and  hcdlov  cant 
TlMTe  is  absolntdy  no  sach  thii^  as  a  smrender  of  the  lower 
life  for  the  higher ;  all  men  axe  sdfish  at  heart,  and  have  their 
price :  some  may  hold  oat  longer  than  others,  bat  in  the  last 
extremity  every  man  will  prefer  his  own  thii^  to  the  things 
of  God  All  that  a  man  hath  wiU  he  give  for  his  life,  his 
moml  integrity  and  his  piety  not  excepted."  Sach  is  Satan's 
creed. 

The  suggestion  made  by  Peter,  as  the  anoonsdoas  tool  of 
the  spirit  of  evil,  is  identical  in  principle  with  that  made  by 
Satan  himself  to  Jesus  in  the  temptation  in  the  wilderness. 
The  tempter  said  then  in  effect :  "  K  thou  be  the  Son  of  Grod, 
use  thy  power  for  thine  own  behoof ;  thou  art  hungry,  t.g.^ 
make  br^td  for  thyself  out  of  the  stones.  K  thou  be  the  Son 
of  God,  presume  on  thy  privil^e  as  the  favourite  of  Heaven ; 
cast  thyself  down  from  this  elevation,  securely  counting  on 
protection  from  harm,  even  where  other  men  would  be  allowed 
to  suffer  the  consequences  of  their  foolhaidiness.  What 
better  use  canst  thou  make  of  thy  divine  powers  and  privil^es, 
than  to  promote  thine  own  advantage  and  glory  ? "  Peter's 
feeling  at  the  present  time  seems  to  have  been 'much  the  same : 
"  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  why  shouldst  thou  suffer  an 
ignominious  violent  death  ?  Thou  hast  power  to  save  thyseK 
from  such  a  fate ;  surely  thou  wilt  not  hesitate  to  use  it ! " 


THE  CROSS  :    CBOSS-BEARING  THE  LAW  OF  DISCIPLESHIP.    181 

The  attached  disciple,  in  fact,  was  an  unconscious  instrument 
employed  by  Satan  to  subject  Jesus  to  a  second  temptation, 
analogous  to  the  earlier  one  in  the  desert  of  Judea.  It  was 
the  god  of  this  world  that  was  at  work  in  both  cases ;  who, 
being  accustomed  to  find  men  only  too  ready  to  prefer  safety  to 
righteousness,  could  not  believe  that  he  should  find  nothing 
of  this  spirit  in  the  Son  of  Grod,  and  therefore  came  again  and 
again  seeking  an  open  point  in  His  armour  through  which  he 
might  shoot  his  fiery  darts  ;  not  renouncing  hope  till  his  in- 
tended victim  hung  on  the  cross,  apparently  conquered  by  the 
world,  but  in  reality  a  conqueror  both  of  the  world  and  of  its 
lord. 

The  severe  language  uttered  by  Jesus  on  this  occasion, 
when  regarded  as  addressed  to  a  dearly  beloved  disciple, 
shows  in  a  striking  manner  His  holy  abhorrence  of  every 
thing  savouring  of  self-seeking.  "  Save  thy§elf,"  counsels 
Simon ;  "  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan,"  replies  Simon's  Lord. 
Truly  Christ  was  not  one  who  pleased  Himself  Though  He 
were  a  Son,  yet  would  He  learn  obedience  by  the  things 
which  He  had  to  suffer.  And  by  this  mind  He  proved  Him- 
self to  be  the  Son,  and  won  from  His  Father  the  approving 
voice :  "  Thou  art  my  beloved  Son,  in  Thee  I  am  well  pleased," 
— Heaven's  reply  to  the  voice  from  hell  counselling  Him  to 
pursue  a  course  of  self-pleasing.  Persevering  in  this  mind, 
Jesus  was  at  length  lifted  up  on  the  cross,  and  so  became  the 
author  of  eternal  salvation  unto  all  them  that  obey  Him, 
Blessed  now  and  for  evermore  be  His  name,  who  so  humbled 
Himself,  and  became  obedient  imto  death  ! 


Section  n. — Cross-bearing  the  Law  of  Discipleship, 

Matt.  xvi.  24-28 ;  Mark  viii.  84-38  ;  Luke  ix.  23-27. 

After  one  hard  announcement  comes  another  not  less  hard. 
The  Lord  Jesus  has  told  His  disciples  that  He  must  one  day 
be  put  to  death ;  He  now  tells  them,  that  as  it  fares  with 
Him,  so  it  must  fare  with  them  also.  The  second  announce- 
ment was  naturally  occasioned  by  the  way  in  which  the  first 


182  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

had  been  received  Peter  had  said,  and  all  had  felt,  "  This 
shall  not  be  unto  Thee."  Jesus  replies  in  effect,  "  Say  you  so? 
I  tell  you  that  not  only  shall  I,  your  Master,  be  crucified, — 
for  such  will  be  the  manner  of  my  death,^  —  but  ye  too, 
faithfully  following  me,  shall  most  certainly  have  your  crosses 
to  bear.  '  If  any  man  will  come  after  me,  let  him  deny  him- 
self, and  take  up  his  cross,  and  follow  me.' " 

The  second  announcement  was  not,  like  the  first,  made  to 
the  twelve  only.  This  we  might  infer  from  the  terms  of  the 
announcement,  which  are  general,  even  if  we  had  not  been 
informed,  as  we  are  by  Mark  and  Luke,  that  before  making 
it  Jesus  called  the  people  unto  Him,  with  His  disciples,  and 
spake  in  the  hearing  of  them  all*  The  doctrine  here  taught, 
therefore,  is  for  all  Christians  in  all  ages :  not  for  apostles 
only,  but  for  the  humblest  disciples ;  not  for  priests  or 
preachers,  but  for  the  laity  as  well ;  not  for  monks  living 
in  cloisters,  but  for  men  living  and  working  in  the  outside 
world.  The  King  and  Head  of  the  church  here  proclaims  a 
universal  law  binding  on  all  His  subjects,  requiring  all  to 
bear  a  cross  in  fellowship  with  Himself. 

We  are  not  told  how  the  second  announcement  was  received 
by  those  who  heard  it,  and  particularly  by  the  twelve.  We 
€an  believe,  however,  that  to  Peter  and  his  brethren  it 
sounded  less  harsh  than  the  first,  and  seemed,  at  least  theo- 
retically, more  acceptable.  Common  experience  might  teach 
them  that  crosses,  however  unpleasant  to  flesh  and  blood,  were 
nevertheless  things  that  might  be  looked  for  in  the  lot  of 
mere  men.  But  what  had  Christ  the  Son  of  God  to  do  with 
crosses  ?  Ought  He  not  to  be  exempt  from  the  sufferings 
and  indignities  of  ordinary  mortals  ?  If  not,  of  what  avail 
was  His  divine  Sonship  ?  In  short,  the  difficulty  for  the 
twelve  was  probably  not  that  the  servant  should  be  no  better 
than  the  Master,  but  that  the  Master  should  be  no  better  than 
the  servant. 

Our  perplexity,  on  the  other  hand,  is  apt  to  be  just  the 
reverse  of  this.     Familiar  with  the  doctrine  that  Jesus  died 

^  The  cross,  though  not  mentioned,  was  evidently  in  Christ's  thoughts  when 
He  spake  of  His  death  at  this  time.     Vid.  last  chapter,  note,  p.  176. 
'  Mark  viii  84,  trf§¥mMXtrm/Mf$f  ro  •jj^x*? ;  Luke  ix.  28,  tx*yi  h  wfig  trdfTMs. 


THE  CROSS  :    CROSS-BEARING  THE  LAW  OF  DISCIPLESHIP.     183 

on  the  cross  in  our  room,  we  are  apt  to  wonder  what  occasion 
there  can  be  for  our  bearing  a  cross.  K  He  suflfered  for  us 
vicariously,  what  need,  we  are  ready  to  inquire,  for  suflfering 
on  our  part  likewise  ?  We  need  to  be  reminded  that  Christ's 
sufferings,  while  in  some  respects  peculiar,  are  in  other  respects 
common  to  Him  with  aU  in  whom  His  Spirit  abides ;  that 
while,  as  redemptive.  His  death  stands  alone,  as  suffering  for 
righteousness'  sake  it  is  but  the  highest  instance  of  a  univer- 
sal law,  according  to  which  all  who  live  a  true  godly  life 
must  suffer  hardship  in  a  false  evil  world.^  And  it  is  very 
observable  that  Jesus  took  a  most  effectual  method  of  keeping 
this  truth  prominently  before  the  mind  of  His  followers  in  all 
ages,  by  proclaiming  it  with  great  emphasis  on  the  first  occa- 
sion on  which  He  plainly  announced  that  He  Himself  was  to 
die.  Thereby  He  in  effect  declared  that  only  such  as  were 
willing  to  be  crucified  with  Him  should  be  saved  by  His 
death ;  nay,  that  willingness  to  bear  a  cross  was  indispensable 
to  the  right  understanding  of  the  doctrine  of  salvation  through  *'  * 
Him.  It  is  as  if  above  the  door  of  the  school  in  which  the 
mystery  of  redemption  was  to  be  taught.  He  had  inscribed 
the  legend :  Let  no  man  who  is  unwilling  to  deny  himself,  and 
take  up  his  cross,  enter  here. 

In  this  great  law  of  discipleship,  the  cross  signifies^  not 
merely  the  external  penalty  of  death,  but  aU  troubles  that 
come  on  those  who  earnestly  endeavour  to  live  as  Jesus  lived 
in  this  world,  and  in  consequence  of  that  endeavour.  Many 
and  various  are  the  affiictions  of  the  righteous,  differing  in 
kind  and  degree,  according  to  times  and  circumstances,  and 
the  callings  and  stations  of  individuals.  For  the  righteous 
One,  who  died  not  only  by  the  imjust,  but  for  them,  the 
appointed  cup  was  filled  with  all  possible  ingredients  of  shame 
and  pain,  mingled  together  in  the  highest  degree  of  bitterness. 
Not  a  few  of  His  most  honoured  servants  have  come  very 
near  their  Master  in  the  manner  and  measure  of  their  afflic- 
tions for  His  sake,  and  have  indeed  drunk  of  His  cup,  and 
been  baptized  with  His  bloody  baptism.      But  for  the  rank 

^  Plato  had  a  glimpse  of  this  law.     **  The  just,"  he  writes,  "  will  be  scourged, 
racked,  bound,  will  have  his  eyes  put  out,  and  after  suffering  many  ills  will  be  * 

crucified  "  (Jitm^xttitktvivetrmt), — JDe  Bqmbliaif  lib.  ii  •  - 


f 
r 


184  THE  TRAINnm  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

and  file  of  the  Christian  host  the  hardships  to  be  endured  are 
ordinarily  less  severe,  the  cross  to  be  borne  less  heavy.  For 
one  the  cross  may  be  the  calumnies  of  lying  lips, "  which  speak 
grievous  things  proudly  and  contemptuo.usly  against  the  right- 
eous ; "  for  another,  failure  to  attain  the  much-worshipped  idol 
success  in  life,  so  often  reached  by  unholy  means  not  available 
for  a  man  who  has  a  conscience  ;  for  a  third,  mere  isolation 
and  solitariness  of  spirit  amid  imcongenial,  unsympathetic 
neighbours,  not  minded  to  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly, 
and  not  loving  those  who  do  so  live. 

The  cross,  therefore,  is  not  the  same  for  alL  But  that 
there  is  a  cross  of  some  shape  for  all  true  disciples,  is  clearly 
implied  in  the  words :  "  If  any  one  will  come  after  me,  let  him 
deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  cross."  The  plain  meaning  of 
these  words  is,  that  there  is  no  following  Jesus  on  any  other 
terms.  A  doctrine  this,  which,  however  clearly  taught  in 
the  gospel,  spurious  Christians  are  imwilling  to  believe  and 
resolute  to  deny.  They  take  the  edge  oflf  their  Lord's  statement, 
by  explaining  that  it  applies  only  to  certain  critical  times, 
happily  very  diflferent  from  their  own  ;  or  that  if  it  has  some 
reference  to  fdl  times,  it  is  only  applicable  to  such  as  are  called 
to  play  a  prominent  part  in  public  affairs  as  leaders  of  opinion, 
pioneers  of  progress,  prophets  denoimcing  the  vices  of  the  age, 
and'  uttering  unwelcome  oracles, — a  proverbially  dangerous 
occupation,  as  the  Greek  poet  testified,  who  said:  "Apollo 
alone  should  prophesy,  for  he  fears  nobody."  ^  To  maintain, 
they  say,  that  all  who  would  live  devoutly  in  Christ  Jesus 
must  suffer  somehow,  is  to  take  too  gloomy  and  morose  a  view 
of  the  wickedness  of  the  world,  or  too  high  and  exacting  a 
view  of  the  Christian  life.  The  righteousness  which  in  ordi- 
nary times  involves  a  cross,  is  in  their  view  folly  and  fana- 
ticism. It  is  speaking  when  one  should  be  silent,  meddling 
in  matters  with  which  one  has  no  concern ;  in  a  word,  it  is 
being  righteous  over-mucL 

Such  thoughts  as  these,  expressed  or  imexpressed,  are  sure 
to  prevail  extensively  when  religious  profession  is  common. 
The  fact  that  fidelity  involves  a  cross,  as  also  the  fact  that 

Xfif  ftr^rtfiM  ig  iQ§t»if  «v)ir«.— EURIP.  PhcBMMOB,  958-9. 


THl  CROSS  :    CROSS-BEARING  THE  LAW  OF  DISCIPLESHIP.     185 

Christ  was  crucified  just  because  He  iras  righteous,  are  well 
understood  by  Christians  when  they  are  a  suffering  minority, 
as  in  primitive  ages.  But,  alas,  these  truths  are  sadly  lost 
sight  of  in  peaceful,  .prosperous  times !  Then  you  shall  find 
many  holding  most  sound  views  of  the  cross  Christ  bore  for 
them,  but  sadly  ignorant  concerning  the  cross  they  themselveis 
have  to  bear  in  fellowship  with  Christ  Of  tiiis  cross  tiiey 
are  determined  to  know  nothing. 

Some  who  have  come  to  no  such  godless  determination  may 
be  anxious  to  know  how  and  where  they  may  find  the  cross 
Jesus  calls  them  to  take  up.  To  whom  we  might  reply :  You 
need  not  to  go  to  the  world's  end  in  search  of  your  cross. 
Only  be  willing  to  go  after  Christ ;  give  thy  whole  heart  and 
soul  to  the  business  of  being  a  true  Christian,  and  thou  shalt 
find  thy  cross  very  near  at  hand,  in  thy  daily  life,  in  thy 
business,  in  thy  home,  yea,  in  thine  own  heart.  The  man 
who  would  walk  with  Christ  will  find  many  things  done  by 
others  which  he  may  not  do,  and  which  yet  he  is  strongly 
tempted  to  do ;  many  things  neglected  by  others  which  he  feels 
he  ought  to  do,  and  yet  is  afraid  to  do.  Crosses  will  become 
visible  on  every  side  within  the  sphere  of  ordinary  duties, 
without  entering ,  into  the  region  of  petty  scruples,  ascetic 
rigours,  or  imaginary  sins. 

Cross-bearing,  even  for  the  most  faithful,  is  irksome  to 
flesh  and  blood ;  it  demands  even  from  the  most  gracious 
men  a  strong  effort  of  will  Hence  the  exhortation  to  self- 
denial  in  connection  with  the  call  to  take  up  the  cross. 
Denying  of  self — a  holy  resolution  that  self  shall  not  be  our 
chief  end — that  personal  feelings,  interests,  and  enjoyments 
shall  be  made  subordinate  to  the  claims  of  truth,  Christ,  and 
the  gospel, — is  a  necessary  preliminary  to  the  uplifting  of  the 
cross,  as  well  as  the  necessary  condition  of  perseverance  in 
cross-bearing  from  day  to  day,^  and  to  the  end  of  life,  for  so 
long  will  the  business  last  If  we  abide  not  in  a  seK-denied 
mind,  we  shall  weary  of  our  burden,  and  throw  it  down. 
Happily,  on  the  other  hand,  abiding  in  this  mind,  we  find 
the  burden  getting  lighter ;  our  shoulders  liecome  so  accus- 
tomed to  the  load,  that  we  hardly  know  we  are  carrying  any. 

^  »«/  hfAifmt,  Lake  ix.  28,  reading  in  text,  rec» 


186  THE  TEAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

To  the  law  of  the  cross  Jesus  annexed  three  reasons 
designed  to  make  the  obeying  of  it  easier,  by  showing  disciples 
that,  in  rendering  obedience  to  the  stem  requirement,  they 
attend  to  their  own  true  interest.  Each  reason  is  introduced 
by  a  "  For." 

The  first  reason  is  this :  "  For  whosoever  will  save  his  life 
shall  lose  it ;  but  whosoever  wiU  lose  his  life  for  my  sake 
shall  find  it."  In  this  startling  paradox  the  word  "  life  "  is 
used  in  a  double  sense.  In  the  first  clause  of  each  member 
of  the  sentence  it  signifies  natural  life,  with  all  the  adjuncts 
that  make  it  pleasant  and  enjoyable ;  in  the  second,  it  means 
the  spiritual  life  of  a  renewed  souL  The  deep,  pr^nant  say- 
ing of  the  Lord  Jesus  may  therefore  be  thus  expanded  and 
paraphrased :  Whosoever  vnll  save,  i.e,  make  it  his  first  busi- 
ness to  save  or  preserve,  his  natural  life  and  worldly  well- 
being,  shall  lose  the  higher  life,  the  life  indeed ;  and  whosoever 
ia  willing  to  lose  his  natural  life  for  my  sake,  shall  find  the 
true  eternal  life.  According  to  this  maxim,  we  must  lose 
something  :  it  is  not  possible  to  live  without  sacrifice  of  some 
kind ;  the  only  question  being  what  shall  be  sacrificed, — the 
lower  or  the  higher  life,  animal  happiness  or  spiritual  blessed- 
ness. If  we  choose  the  higher,  we  must  be  prepared  to  deny 
ourselves  and  take  up  our  cross,  though  the  actual  amount'  of 
the  loss  we  are  called  on  to  bear  may  be  small ;  for  godliness 
is  profitable  imto  all  things,  having  promise  of  the  life  that  now 
is,  as  well  as  of  that  which  is  to  come.^  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
WB  choose  the  lower,  and  resolve  to  have  it  at  all  hazards,  we 
must  inevitably  lose  the  higher.  The  soul's  life,  and  all  the 
imperishable  goods  of  the  soul — ^righteousness,  godliness,  faith, 
love,  patience,  meekness  ^ — ^are  the  price  we  pay  for  worldly 
enjoyment. 

This  price  is  too  great.  That  is  what  Jesus  next  told 
His  hearers,  as  the  second  persuasive  to  cross-bearing.  "  For 
what,"  He  went  on  to  jwk,  "  is  a  man  profited  if  he  shall  gain 
the  whole  world,  and  lose  his  own  soul  ?  or  what  shall  a  man 
give  in  exchange  for  his  soul  ?  "  The  two  questions  set  forth 
the  incomparable  value  of  the  soul  on  both  sides  of  a  com- 
mercial ti*ansaction.     The  soul,  or  life,  in  the  true  sense  of 

1 1  Tim.  iy.  8.  «  1  Tim.  vL  11. 


THE  CROSS  :   CROSS-BEARING  THE  LAW  OF  DISCIPLESHIP.     187 

the  word/  is  too  dear  a  price  to  pay  even  for  the  whole  world, 
not  to  say  for  that  small  portion  of  it  which  falls  to  the  lot 
of  any  one  individual  He  who  gains  the  world  at  suoh  a 
cost  is  a  loser  by  the  bargain.  On  the  other  hand,  the  whole 
world  is  too  small,  yea,  an  utterly  inadequate  price,  to  pay 
for  the  ransom  of  the  soul  once  lost  What  shaU  a  man  give 
in  exchange  for  the  priceless  thing  he  has  foolishly  bartered 
away  ?  "  Wherewith  shall  I  come  before  the  Lord,  and  bow 
myself  before  the  high  God  ?  shall  I  come  before  Him  with 
bumt-oflferings,  with  calves  of  a  year  old  ?  Will  the  Lord  be^ 
pleased  with  thousands  of  rams,  or  with  ten  thousands  of 
rivers  of  oil  ?  shall  I  give  my  first-bom  for  my  transgression, 
the  fruit  of  my  body  for  the  sin  of  my  soul?"^  No!  O 
man ;  not  any  of  these  things,  nor  anything  else  thou  hast  to 
give ;  not  the  fruit  of  thy  merchandise,  not  ten  thousands  of 
pounds  sterling.  Thou  canst  not  buy  back  thy  soul,  which 
thou  hast  bartered  for  the  world,  with  all  that  thou  hast  of 
the  world.  The  redemption  of  the  soul  is  indeed  precious ; 
it  cannot  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  sin  by  corruptible 
things,  such  as  silver  and  gold:  the  attempt  to  purchase 
pardon  and  peace  and  life  that  way  can  only  make  thy  case 
more  hopeless,  and  add  to  thy  condemnation. 

The  appeal  contained  in  these  solemn  questions  comes 
home  with  irresistible  force  to  all  who  are  in  their  right  mind. 
Such  feel  that  no  outward  good  can  be  compared  in  value  to 
having  a  "  saved  soul,"  i.e,  being  a  forgiven,  renewed  Christian 
man.  AU,  however,  are  not  so  minded.  Multitudes  account 
their  souls  of  very  small  value  indeed.  Judas  sold  his  soul 
for  thirty  pieces  of  silver ;  and  not  a  few  who  probably  deem 
themselves  better  than  he  would  part  with  theirs  for  the  most 
paltry  worldly  advantage.  The  great  ambition  of  the  million 
is  to  be  happy  as  animals,  not  to  be  blessed  as  saved,  sancti- 
fied men.  "  Who  will  show  us  any  good  ? "  is  that  which 
the  many  say.  "  Give  us  health,  wealth,  houses,  lands, 
honours,  and  we  care  not  for  righteousness,  either  imputed  or 
personal,  peace  of  conscience,  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.     These 

*  The  word  rendered  "  soul "  in  Ter.  26  is  tlie'same  which  is  rendered  "life  " 
in  ver.  25  (^v^n).    The  two  meanings  are  blended  here. 

*  Micah  vi.  6. 


188  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

may  be  good  also  in  their  way,  and  if  one  could  have  them 
along  with  the  other,  without  trouble  or  sacrifice,  it  were 
perhaps  well;  but  we  cannot  consent,  for  their  sakes,  to 
deny  ourselves  any  pleasure,  or  voluntarily  endure  any  hard- 
ship." 

The  third  argument  in  favour  of  cross-bearing  is  drawn 
from  the  judgment  to  come,  "For  the  Son  of  man  shall 
come  in  the  glory  of  His  Father,  with  His  angels ;  and  then 
shall  He  reward  every  man  according  to  his  works."  These 
words  suggest  a  contrast  between  the  present  and  the  future 
state  of  the  speaker,  and  imply  a  promise  of  a  corresponding 
contrast  between  the  present  and  the  future  of  His  faithful 
followers.  Now  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  man,  destined  ere  many 
weeks  pass  to  be  crucified  at  Jerusalem.  At  the  end  of  the 
world  He  will  appear  invested  with  the  manifest  glory  of  a 
Divine  Being,  attended  with  a  mighty  host  of  ministering 
spirits;  His  reward  for  enduring  the  cross,  despising  the 
shame.  Then  will  He  reward  every  man  according  to  the 
tenor  of  his  present  life.  To  the  cross-bearers  He  will  grant 
a  crown  of  righteousness ;  to  the  cross-spumers  He  will  assign, 
as  their  due,  shame  and  everlasting  contempt. 

The  hope  set  before  disciples  here  is  one  which  maketh 
not  ashamed.  It  will  most  surely  be  realized.  As  certainly 
as  the  faithful  have  to  suflfer  now,  so  certainly  will  there  come 
a  time  when  they  shall  be  rewarded  with  eternal  glory.  It 
is  a  righteous  thing  in  God  to  grant  a  recompense  of  rest  and 
joy  in  a  world  to  come  unto  those  who  have  endured  tribula- 
tion for  His  sake  in  this  present  evil  world.  Under  His  just 
government  we  may  securely  argue  from  a  cross  to  a  crown ; 
much  more  securely  than  philosophers  have  argued  from  the 
moral  confvsion  of  this  world  to  a  state  hereafter,  in  which 
the  confusion  will  be  cleared  up,  and  moral  order  established. 
For,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  there  is  no  confusion 
even  here.  His  followers  do  not  suflfer  by  chance,  but  by  law. 
The  law  for  all  disciples  is :  Bear  the  cross  here,  and  you  shall 
wear  the  crown  hereafter.  From  experience  we  know  that 
one  part  of  this  law  does  not  fail,  for  the  cross  does  come  to 
all  the  truly  good ;  and  from  the  unfailing  certainty  with 
which  the  law  operates  in  that  part  which  comes  imder  our 


THE  CROSS  :    CROSS-BEARING  THE  LAW  OF  DISCIPLESHIP.     189 

observation,  we  may  predict  the  certainty  of  that  which  we 
see  not — the  future  recompense  proniised  to  the  faithful. 

The  hope  of  an  eternal  reward  is  not  only  a  reliable,  but 
a  worthy  motive  to  a  self-sacrificing  life.  Philosophers  afiPect- 
ing  transcendental  views  of  human  virtue  say  men  should  do 
what  is  right,  and  be  willing  even  to  die  for  the  right,  without 
either  hope  of  reward  or  fear  of  punishment.  Such  men,  it 
is  to  be  suspected,  preach  a  heroism  they  do  not  practise. 
Men  who  do  not  philosophize,  but  act,  have  always  an  eternal 
hope  in  their  view.  Christ,  the  greatest  and  purest  of  all 
heroes  by  common  consent,  cherished  such  a  hope ;  not  to 
speak  of  heathen  sages  like  Socrates,  whose  example  with 
some  may  have  even  more  weight.  Christians  need  not  be 
afraid  of  degenerating  into  moral  vulgarity  by  imitating  their 
Lord  in  this  respect.  There  is  no  vulgarity  or  impurity  in 
the  virtue  which  is  sustained  by  the  hope  of  eternal  life. 
That  hope  is  not  selfishness,  but  simply  seK-consistency.  It 
is  simply  believing  in  the  reality  of  the  kingdom  for  which 
you  labour  and  sufifer ;  involving,  of  course,  the  reality  of 
each  individual  Christian's  interest  therein,  your  own  not 
excepted.  And  such  faith  is  necessary  to  heroism.  For  who 
would  fight  and  suffer  for  a  dream  ?  What  patriot  would 
risk  his  life  for  his  country's  cause,  who  did  not  hope  for  the 
restoration  of  her  independence  ?  And  who  but  a  pedant 
would  say  that  the  purity  of  his  patriotism  was  sullied,  because 
his  hope  for  the  whole  nation  did  not  exclude  all  reference  to 
himself  as  an  individual  citizen  ?  Equally  necessary  is  it  that 
a  Christian  should  believe  in  the  king'dom  of  glory,  and 
equally  natural  and  proper  that  he  should  cherish  the  hope 
of  a  personal  share  in  its  honours  and  felicities.  Where  such 
faith  and  hope  are  not,  little  Christian  heroism  will  be  found. 
For,  as  an  ancient  Church  Father  said,  "  There  is  no  certain 
work  where  there  is  an  uncertain  reward."  ^  Men  cannot  be 
heroes  in  doubt  or  despair.  They  cannot  struggle  after  per- 
fection and  a  divine  kingdom,  sceptical  the  while  whether 
these  things  be  more  than  devout  imaginations,  unrealizable 

1  Nullum  opus  certmn  est  mercedis  incerts.  Tertulliani  de  Besurrectume 
Camis,  cap.  xxi.  See  also  Clark's  Ante-Nicene  Library :  Tertullian,  voL  ii. 
p.  251. 


{ 


190  THE  TBAUTING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

ideals.     In  such  a  mood  they  will  take  things  easy,  and  make 
secular  happiness  their  chief  concern. 

One  other  inducement  to  patient  bearing  of  the  cross  re- 
mains to  be  mentioned.  In  taking  up  their  cross  disciples  but 
foUov)  their  Master,  as  His  companions  in  tribulation.  This 
inflpiring  thought  turns  pain  into  pleasure,  and  shame  into 
glory,  for  the  true  disciple.  Hence  the  observable  contrast 
between  the  Old  Testament  saints  and  those  of  Christian 
ages  in  the  endurance  of  sufferings  for  righteousness'  sake. 
Before  Christ  came,  good  men  murmured  under  the  cross ; 
after  He  came,  men  of  the  same  moral  temperament  rejoiced 
when  placed  in  a  similar  situation.  Prophets  complained  in 
circumstances  amid  which  apostles  exulted  with  triumphant 
joy.  The  difference  is  marked,  and  it  was  due  to  this,  that 
the  apostles  lived  after  Jesus  had  been  lifted  up  on  the  cross. 
When  the  Master  had  suffered,  they  felt  that  it  were  un- 
seemly in  a  disciple  to  complain.  Nay,  they  had  no  thought 
of  complaining.  They  gladly  followed  the  Captain  of  salva- 
tion, who  had  been  perfected  through  suffering ;  too  happy  to 
suffer  with  Him  and  for  Him,  if  only  they  might  enjoy  the 
unspeakable  felicity  of  rejoicing  with  Him  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven. 


CHAPTER   XIII. 

THE   TRANSFIGURATION. 
Matt.  xvii.  1-13 ;  Mabk  ix.  2-18  ;  Luke  ix.  28-36. 

THE  transfiguration  is  one  of  those  passages  in  the 
Saviour's  earthly  history  which  an  expositor  is  tempted 
to  pass  over  in  reverent  silence.  For  such  silence  the  same 
apology  might  be  pled  which  is  so  kindly  made  in  the  Gospel 
narrative  for  Peter's  foolish  speech  concenung  the  three 
tabernacles :  "  He  wist  not  what  to  say."  Who  does  know 
what  to  say  any  more  than  he  ?  Who  is  able  fully  to  speak 
of  that  wondrous  night-scene  among  the  mountains/  during 
which  heaven  was  for  a  few  brief  moments  let  down  to  earth, 
and  the  mortal  body  of  Jesus  being  transfigured  shone  with 
celestial  brightness,  and  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  per- 
fect appeared  and  held  converse  with  Him  respecting  His 
approaching  passion,  and  a  voice  came  forth  from  the  excel- 
lent glory,  pronouncing  Him  to  be  God's  well-beloved  Son  ? 
It  is  too  high  for  us,  this  august  spectacle,  we  cannot  attain 
unto  it ;  its  grandeur  oppresses  and  stupefies ;  its  mystery 
surpasses  our  comprehension ;  its  glory  is  ineflfable.  Therefore, 
avoiding  all  speculation,  curious  questioning,  theological  dis- 
quisition, and  pretentious  word-picturing  in  connection  with  the 
remarkable  occurrence  here  recorded,  we  confine  ourselves  in 
this  chapter  to  the  humble  task  of  explaining  briefly  its  signi- 
ficance for  Jesus  HimseK,  and  its  lesson  for  His  disciples. 

The  "  transfiguration,"  to  be  understood,  must  be  viewed  in 
connection  with  the  annoimcement  made  by  Jesus  shortly 
before  it  happened,  concerning  His  death.  This  is  evident 
from  the  simple  fact,  that  the  three  evangelists  who  relate 
the  event  so  carefully  note  the  time  of  its  occurrence  \nth 

^  Of  Hermon?    The  traditional  scene  of  the  transfigoration  was  Mount  Tabor. 


192 ;  ..         THE  JJBUNING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

• 

reference  to  that  announcement,  and  the  conversation  which 
acoompanied  it  All  tell  how,  within  six  or  eight  days  there- 
after/ Jesus  took  three  of  His  disciples,  Peter,  James,  and 
John,  and  brought  them  into  an  high  mountain  apart,  and 
was  transfigured  before  them.  The  Oospel  historians  art  not 
wont  to  be  so  cai*eful  in  their  indications  of  time,  and  their 
minute  accuracy  here  signifies  in  eflfect :  "  While  the  foregoing 
communications  and  discourses  concerning  the  cross  were 
fresh  in  the  thoughts  of  all  the  parties,  the  wondrous  events 
we  are  now  to  relate  took  place."  The  relative  date,  in  fact, 
is  a  finger-post  pointing  back  to  the  conversation  on  the  pas- 
sion, and  sajdng :  "  If  you  desire  to  \mderstand  what  follows, 
remember  what  went  before." 

This  inference  from  the  note  of  time  given  by  all  the  evan- 
gelists is  fully  borne  out  by  a  statement  made  by  Luke  alone, 
respecting  the  subject  of  the  conversation  on  the  holy  mount 
between  Jesus  and  His  celestial  visitants.  *'  And,"  we  read, 
*'  behold,  there  talked  with  Him  two  men,  which  were  Moses 
and  Elias  ;  who  appeared  in  glory,  and  spake  of  His  decease, 
or  exodus,  which  He  should  accomplish  at  Jerusalem."*  That 
exit,  so  different  from  their  own  in  its  circumstances  and  con- 
sequences, was  the  theme  of  their  talk.  They  had  appeared 
to  Jesus  to  converse  with  Him  thereon ;  and  when  they  ceased 
speaking  concerning  it,  they  took  their  departure  for  the 
abodes  of  the  blessed.  How  long  the  conference  lasted  we 
know  not,  but  the  subject  was  sufficiently  suggestive  of  inte- 
resting topics  of  conversation.  There  was,  e.g,,  the  surprising 
contrast  between  the  death  of  Moses,  immediate  and  painless, 
while  his  eye  was  not  dim  nor  his  natural  force  abated,  and 
the  painful  and  ignominious  death  to  be  endured  by  Jesus. 
Then  there  was  the  not  less  remarkable  contrast  between  the 
manner  of  Elijah's  departure  from  the  earth — translated  to 
heaven  without  tasting  death  at  all,  making  a  triumphant  exit 
out  of  the  world  in  a  chariot  of  fire,  and  the  way  by  which 
Jesus  should  enter  into  glory — the  via  dolorosa  of  the  cross. 
Whence  this  privilege  of  exemption  from  death,  or  from  its 

1  fuf  hftifat  l|,  Matthew  and  Mark ;  iteii  n/Aiftu  Urit^  Luke.     The  two  ex- 
pressions may  easily  mean  the  same  period  of  time. 
^  Luke  iz.  31,  lA.iy«v  rnt  V^»i»f  mvr§v. 


THE  TRANSFIGUBATIOJI^  -,  fl^S 

bitterness,  granted  to  the  representatives  of  the  law  and  the 
prophets,  and  wherefore  denied  to  Him  who  was  the  end  both 
of  law  and  of  prophecy  ?  On  these  points,  and  others  of 
kindred  nature,  the  two  celestial  messengers,  enlightened  by 
the  cl#ar  light  of  heaven,  may  have  held  intelligent  aad  sym- 
pathetic converse  with  the  Son  of  man,  to  the  refreshment  of 
His  weary,  saddened,  solitary  soul 

The  same  evangelist  who  specifies  the  subject  of  conversa- 
tion on  the  holy  mount,  further  records  that,  previous  to  His 
transfiguration,  Jesus  had  been  engaged  in  prayer.  We  may 
therefore  see,  in  the  honour  and  glory  conferred  on  Him  there, 
the  Father's  answer  to  His  Son's  supplications ;  and  from  the 
nature  of  the  answer  we  may  infer  the  subject  of  prayer.  It 
was  the  same  as  afterwards  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane. 
The  cup  of  death  was  present  to  the  mind  of  Jesus  now,  as 
then ;  the  cross  was  visible  to  His  spiritual  eye ;  and  He  prayed 
for  nerve  to  drink,  for  courage  to  endure.  The  attendance 
of  the  three  confidential  disciples,  Peter,  James,  and  John, 
significantly  hints  at  the  similarity  of  the  two  occasions. 
The  Master  took  these  disciples  with  Him  into  the  mount,  as 
He  afterwards  took  them  into  the  garden,  that  He  might  not 
be  altogether  destitute  of  company  and  kindly  sympathy  as 
He  walked  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  and 
felt  the  horror  and  the  loneliness  of  the  situation. 

It  is  now  clear  how  we  must  view  the  transfiguration  scene 
in  relation  to  Jesus.  It  was  an  aid  to  faith  and  patience, 
specially  vouchsafed  to  the  meek  and  lowly  Son  of  man,  in 
answer  to  His  prayers,  to  cheer  Him  on  His  sorrowful  path 
towards  Jerusalem  and  Calvary.  Three  distinct  aids  to  His 
faith  were  supplied  in  the  experiences  of  that  wondrous  night 
The  first  was  a  foretaste  of  the  glory  with  which  He  should 
be  rewarded  after  His  passion,  for  His  voluntary  humiliation 
and  obedience  unto  death.  For  the  moment  He  was,  as  it 
were,  rapt  up  into  heaven,  where  He  had  been  before  He  came 
into  the  world ;  for  His  face  shone  like  the  sun,  and  His 
raiment  was  white  as  the  pure  untrodden  snow  on  the  high 
alpine  summits  of  Hermon.  "  Be  of  good  cheer,"  said  that 
sudden  flood  of  celestial  light :  "  the  suffering  will  soon  be 
past,  and  Thou  shalt  enter  into  Thine  eternal  joy !" 

N 


194  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

A  second  source  of  comfort  to  Jesus  in  the  experiences  on 
the  mount,  was  the  assuiance  that  the  mystery  of  the  cross 
was  understood  and  appreciated  by  saints  in  heaven,  if  not  by 
the  darkened  minds  of  sinful  men  on  earth.  He  greatly 
needed  such  comfort ;  for  among  the  men  then  living,  not 
excepting  His  chosen  disciples,  there  was  not  one  to  whom 
He  could  speak  on  that  theme  with  any  hope  of  eliciting  an 
intelligent  and  sympathetic  response.  Only  a  few  days  ago. 
He  had  ascertained  by  painful  experience  the  utter  incapacity 
of  the  twelve,  even  of  the  most  quick-witted  and  warm-hearted 
among  them,  to  comprehend  the  mystery  of  His  passion,  or 
even  to  believe  in  it  as  a  certain  fact.  Verily  the  Son  of  man 
was  most  lonely  as  He  passed  through  the  dark  valley !  the 
very  presence  of  stupid,  unsympathetic  companions  serving 
only  to  enhance  the  sense  of  solitariness.  When  He  wanted 
company  that  could  imderstand  His  passion  thoughts.  He  was 
obliged  to  hold  converse  with  spirits  of  just  men  made  per- 
fect ;  for,  as  far  as  mortal  men  were  concerned,  He  had  to  be 
content  to  finish  His  great  work  without  the  comfort  of  being 
imderstood  until  it  was  accomplished. 

The  talk  of  the  great  lawgiver  and  of  the  great  prophet  of 
Israel  on  the  subject  of  His  death  was  doubtless  a  real  solace 
to  the  spirit  of  Jesus.  We  know  how  He  comforted  Himself 
at  other  times  with  the  thought  of  being  understood  in  heaven, 
if  not  on  earth.  When  heartless  Pharisees  called  in  question 
His  conduct  in  receiving  sinners.  He  sought  at  once  His  de- 
fence and  His  consolation  in  the  blessed  fact  that  there  was 

• 

joy  in  heaven  at  least,  whatever  there  might  be  among  them, 
over  one  penitent  sinner,  more  than  over  ninety  and  nine  just 
persons  that  needed  no  repentance.  When  He  thought  how 
"  little  ones,"  the  weak  and  helpless,  were  despised  and  trampled 
under  foot  in  this  proud  inhimian  world,  He  reflected  with  un- 
speakable satisfaction  that  in  heaven  their  angels  did  always 
behold  the  face  of  His  Father ;  yea,  that  in  heaven  there  were 
angels  who  made  the  care  of  little  ones  their  special  business, 
and  were  therefore  fuUy  able  to  appreciate  the  doctrine  of 
humility  and  kindness  which  He  strove  to  inculcate  on  ambi- 
tious and  quarrelsome  disciples.  Surely,  then,  we  may  believe 
that  when  He  looked  forward  to  His  own  decease — the  crown- 


THE  TRANSFIGUEAnOHr.  195 

ing  evidence  of  His  love  for  sinners — ^it  was  a  comfort  to  His 
heart  to  think  :  "  Up  yonder  they  know  that  I  am  to  suflfer, 
and  comprehend  the  reason  why,  and  watch  with  eager  interest 
to  see  how  I  move  on  with  unfaltering  step,  with  my  face  sted- 
fastly  set  to  go  to  Jerusalem."  And  would  it  not  be  specially 
comforting  to  have  sensible  evidence  of  this,  in  an  actual  visit 
from  two  denizens  of  the  upper  world,  deputed  as  it  were  and 
commissioned  to  express  the  general  mind  of  the  whole  com- 
munity  of  glorified  saints,  who  imderstood  that  their  presence 
in  heaven  was  due  to  the  merits  of  that  sacrifice  which  He  was 
about  to  offer  up  in  His  own  person  on  the  hill  of  Calvary  ? 

A  third,  and  the  chief  solace  to  the  heart  of  Jesus,  was  the 
approving  voice  of  ffis  heavenly  Father :  "  This  is  my  beloved 
Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  That  voice,  uttered  then, 
meant :  "  Go  on  Thy  present  way,  self-devoted  to  death,  and 
shrinking  not  from  the  cross.  I  am  pleased  with  Thee,  be- 
cause Thou  pleasest  not  Thyself.  Pleased  with  Thee  at  all 
times,  I  am  most  emphatically  delighted  with  Thee  when,  in 
a  signal  manner,  as  lately  in  the  announcement  made  to  Thy 
disciples.  Thou  dost  show  it  to  be  Thy  fixed  purpose  to  save 
others,  and  not  to  save  ThyseK." 

This  voice  from  the  excellent  gloiy  was  one  of  three  uttered 
by  the  divine  Father  in  the  hearing  of  His  Son  during  His 
life  on  earth.  The  first  was  uttered  by  the  Jordan,  after  the 
baptism  of  Jesus,  and  was  the  same  as  the  present,  save  that 
it  was  spoken  to  Him,  not  concerning  Him,  to  others.  The 
last  was  uttered  at  Jerusalem  shortly  before  the  crucifixion, 
and  was  of  similar  import  with  the  two  preceding,  but  dif- 
ferent in  form.  The  soul  of  Jesus  being  troubled  with  the 
near  prospect  of  death.  He  prayed :  "  Father,  save  me  from 
this  hour ;  but  for  this  cause  came  I  unto  this  hour.  Father, 
glorify  Thy  name."  Then,  we  read,  came  there  a  voice  from 
heaven,  saying :  "  I  have  both  glorified  it  (by  Thy  life),  and 
will  glorify  it  again"  (more  signally  by  Thy  death).  All  three 
voices  served  one  end.  Elicited  at  crises  in  Christ's  history, 
when  He  manifested  in  peculiar  intensity  His  devotion  to  the 
work  for  which  He  had  come  into  the  world,  and  His  deter- 
mination to  finish  it,  however  irksome  the  task  might  be  to 
flesh  and  blood,  these  voices  expressed,  for  His  encourage- 


196  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

ment  and  strengthening,  the  complacency  with  which  His 
Father  regarded  His  self-humiliation  and  obedience  unto 
death.  At  His  baptism,  He,  so  to  speak,  confessed  the 
sins  of  the  whole  world ;  and  by  submitting  to  the  rite,  ex- 
pressed His  purpose  to  fulfil  aU  righteousness  as  the  Ee- 
deemer  from  sin.  Therefore  the  Father  then,  for  the  first  time, 
pronounced  Him  His  beloved  Son.  Shortly  before  the  trans- 
figuration. He  had  energetically  repelled  the  suggestion  of  an 
affectionate  disciple,  that  He  should  save  Himself  from  His 
anticipated  doom,  as  a  temptation  of  the  devil ;  therefore  the 
Father  renewed  the  declaration,  changing  the  second  person 
into  the  third,  for  the  sake  of  those  disciples  who  were  present, 
and  specially  of  Peter,  who  had  listened  to  the  voice  of  his 
own  heart  rather  than  to  his  Master's  words.  Finally,  a  few 
days  before  His  death.  He  overcame  a  temptation  of  the  same 
nature  as  that  to  which  Peter  had  subjected  Him,  springing 
this  time  out  of  the  sinless  infirmity  of  His  own  human 
nature.  Beginning  His  prayer  with  the  expression  of  a  wish 
to  be  saved  from  the  dark  hour.  He  ended  it  with  the  peti- 
tion, "  Glorify  Thy  name."  Therefore  the  Father  once  more 
repeated  the  expression  of  His  approval,  declaring  in  effect 
His  satisfaction  with  the  way  in  which  His  Son  had  glorified 
Hia  name  hitherto,  and  His  confidence  that  He  would  not  fail 
to  crown  His  career  of  obedience  by  a  God-glorifying  deatL 

Such  being  the  meaning  of  the  vision  on  the  moimt  for 
Jesus,  we  have  now  briefly  to  'consider  what  lesson  it  taught 
the  disciples  who  were  present,  and  through  them  their 
brethren  and  all  Christians. 

The  main  point  in  this  connection  is  the  injunction  ap- 
pended to  the  heavenly  voice :  "  Hear  Him."  This  command 
refers  specially  to  the  doctrine  of  the  cross  preached  by  Jesus 
to  the  twelve,  and  so  ill  received  by  them.  It  was  meant  to 
be  a  solemn,  deliberate  endorsement  of  all  that  He  had  said 
then  concerning  His  own  sufferings,  and  concerning  the  obU- 
gation  to  bear  their  cross  lying  on  all  His  followers.  Peter, 
James,  and  John  were,  as  it  were,  invited  to  recall  all  that 
had  fallen  from  their  Master's  lips  on  the  unwelcome  topic, 
and  assured  that  it  was  wholly  true  and  in  accordance  with 
the  divine  mind.     Nay,  as  these  disciples  had  received  the 


THE  TRANSnGURATION.  197 

doctrine  with  murmurs  of  disapprobation,  the  voice  from 
heaven  addressed  to  them  was  a  stem  word  of  rebuke,  which 
said :  "  Murmur  not,  but  devoutly  and  obediently  hear." 

This  rebuke  was  all  the  more  needful,  that  the  disciples 
had  just  shown  that  they  were  still  of  the  same  mind  as  they 
had  been  six  days  ago.  Peter  at  least  was  as  yet  in  no  cross- 
bearing  humour.  When,  on  wakening  up  to  clear  conscious- 
ness from  the  drowsy  fit  which  had  fallen  on  him,  that  disciple 
observed  the  two  strangers  in  the  act  of  departing,  he  ex- 
claimed :  "  Master,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  here,  and  let  us 
make  three  tabernacles ;  one  for  Thee,  and  one  for  Moses,  and 
one  for  Elias."  He  was  minded,  we  perceive,  to  enjoy  the 
felicities  of  heaven  without  any  preliminary  process  of  cross- 
bearing.  He  thought  to  himself :  "  How  much  better  to  abide 
up  here  with  the  saints,  than  down  below  amidst  unbelieving 
captious  Pharisees  and  miserable  himian  beings,  enduring  the 
contradiction  of  sinners,  and  battling  with  the  manifold  ills 
wherewith  the  earth  is  cursed !  Stay  here,  my  Master,  and 
you  may  bid  good-bye  to  all  those  dark  forebodings  of  coming 
sufferings,  and  will  be  beyond  the  reach  of  malevolent  priests, 
elders,  and  scribes.  Stay  here,  on  this  sun-lit,  heaven-kissed 
hill ;  go  no  more  down  into  the  depressing,  sombre  valley  of 
humiliation.  Farewell,  earth  and  the  cross :  welcome,  heaven 
and  the  crown !" 

We  do  not  forget,  while  thus  paraphrasing  Peter's  foolish 
speech,  that  when  he  uttered  it  he  was  dazed  with  sleep  and 
the  splendours  of  the  midnight  scene.  Yet,  when  due  allow- 
ance has  been  made  for  this,  it  remains  true  that  the  idle 
suggestion  was  an  index  of  the  disciple's  present  mind.  Peter 
was  drunken,  though  not  with  wine ;  but  what  men  say,  even 
when  drunken,  is  characteristic.  There  was  a  sober  meaning 
in  his  senseless  speech  about  the  tabernacle.  He  really 
meant  that  the  celestial  visitants  should  remain,  and  not  go 
away,  as  they  were  in  the  act  of  doing  when  he  spoke.^  This 
appears  from  the  conversation  which  took  place  between  Jesus 
and  the  three  disciples  while  descending  the  mountain.*  Peter 
and  his  two  companions  asked  their  Master :  "  Why  then  say 
the  scribes  that  Elias  must  first  come  ?"     The  question  re- 

I  Luke  ix.  33,  h  rf  }mx^f!Z*^m.  *  Matt  xvii.  9-18 ;  Mark  iz.  9-13. 


198  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

ferred,  we  think,  not  to  the  injunction  laid  on  the  disciples  by 
Jesus  just  before,  "  Tell  the  vision  to  no  man  until  the  Son 
of  man  be  risen  again  from  the  dead/'  but  rather  to  the  fugi- 
tive, fleeting  character  of  the  whole  scene  on  the  mountain. 
The  three  brethren  were  not  only  disappointed,  but  perplexed, 
that  the  two  celestials  had  been  so  like  angels  in  the  shortness 
of  their  stay  and  the  suddenness  of  their  departure.  They 
had  accepted  the  current  notion  about  the  advent  of  Elias 
before,  and  in  order  to,  the  restoration  of  the  kingdom ;  and 
they  fondly  hoped  that  this  was  he  come  at  last  in  company 
with  Moses,  heralding  the  approaching  glory,  as  the  advent 
of  swallows  from  tropical  climes  is  a  sign  that  summer  is 
nigh,  and  that  winter  with  its  storms  and  rigours  is  over  and 
gone.  In  truth,  while  their  Master  was  preaching  the  cross, 
they  had  been  dreaming  of  crowns,  "We  shall  find  them  con- 
tinuing so  to  dream  till  the  very  end, 

"  Hear  ye  Him  :" — this  voice  was  not  meant  for  the  three 
disciples  alone,  or  even  for  the  twelve,  but  for  all  professed 
followers  of  Christ  as  well  as  for  them.  It  says  to  every 
Christian :  "  Hear  Jesus,  and  strive  to  understand  Him  while 
He  speaks  of  the  mystery  of  His  sufferings  and  the  glory  that 
should  follow — those  themes  which  even  angels  desire  to  look 
into.  Hear  Him  when  He  proclaims  cross-bearing  as  a  duty 
incumbent  on  all  disciples,  and  listen  not  to  self-indulgent 
suggestions  of  flesh  and  blood,  or  the  temptations  of  Satan 
counselling  thee  to  make  self-interest  or  self-preservation 
thy  chief  end.  Hear  Him,  yet  again,  and  weaiy  not  of  the 
world,  nor  seek  to  lay  down  thy  burden  before  thy  time. 
Dream  not  of  tabernacles  where  thou  mayest  dwell  secure, 
like  a  hermit  in  the  wild,  having  no  share  in  all  that  is  done 
beneath  the  circuit  of  the  sun.  Do  thy  part  manfully,  and  in 
due  season  thou  shalt  have,  not  a  tent,  but  a  temple  to  dwell 
in :  an  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens." 

It  is  true,  indeed,  that  we  who  are  in  this  tabernacle  of  the 
body,  in  this  world  of  sorrow,  cannot  but  groan  now  and  then, 
being  burdened.  This  is  our  infirmity,  and  in  itself  it  is  not 
sinful ;  neither  is  it  wrong  to  heave  an  occasional  sigh,  and 
utter  a  passing  wish  that  the  time  of  cross-bearing  were  over. 
Even  the  holy  Jesus  felt  at  times  this  weariness  of  life.     An 


THE  TRANSFIGURATlbN.  199 

expression  of  sometMng  like  impatience  escaped  His  lips  at 
this  very  season.  When  He  came  down  from  the  mount  and 
learned  what  was  going  on  at  its  base,  He  exclaimed,  with 
reference  at  once  to  the  unbelief  of  the  scribes  who  were  pre- 
sent, to  the  weak  faith  of  the  disciples,  and  to  the  miseries  of 
mankind  suffering  the  consequences  of  the  curse :  "  0  faithless 
and  perverse  generation,  how  long  shall  I  be  with  you  ?  how 
long  shall  I  suffer  you  ?"  Even  the  loving  Redeemer  of  man 
felt  tempted  to  be  weary  in  well-doing — weary  of  encountering 
the  contradiction  of  sinners,  and  of  bearing  with  the  spiritual 
weakness  of  disciples.  Such  weariness  therefore,  as  a  momentary 
feeling,  is  not  necessarily  sinful :  it  may  rather  be  a  part  of 
our  cross.  But  it  must  not  be  indulged  in  or  yielded  to.  Jesus 
did  not  give  Himself  up  to  the  feeling.  Though  He  com- 
plained of  the  generation  amidst  which  He  lived.  He  did  not 
cease  from  His  labours  of  love  for  its  benefit  Having  re- 
lieved His  heart  by  this  utterance  of  a  reproachful  exclamation, 
He  gave  orders  that  the  poor  lunatic  should  be  brought  to 
Him  that  he  might  be  healed.  Then,  when  He  had  wrought 
this  new  miracle  of  mercy.  He  patiently  explained  to  His  own 
disciples  the  cause  of  their  impotence  to  cope  successfully  with 
the  maladies  of  men,  and  taught  them  how  they  might  attain 
the  power  of  casting  out  all  sorts  of  devils,  even  those  whose 
hold  of  their  victims  was  most  obstinate.^  So  He  continued 
labouring  in  helping  the  miserable  and  instructing  the  ignorant, 
till  the  hour  came  when  He  could  truly  say,  "  It  is  finished." 

>  Matt  xTii  19-21. 


CHAPTEE   XIV. 

DISCOUKSE    ON   HUMILITY. 

Section  i. — As  this  little  ChUd ! 

Matt,  xviii.  1-14 ;  Mark  ix.  33-37,  42-50  ;  Luke  ix.  46-48. 

FROM  the  Mount  of  TransJBguration  Jesus  and  the  twelve 
returned  through  Galilee  to  CapemaunL  On  this 
homeward  journey  the  Master  and  His  disciples  were  in  very 
different  moods  of  mind.  He  sadly  mused  on  His  cross ;  they 
vainly  dreamed  of  places  of  distinction  in  the  approaching 
kingdom.  The  diversity  of  spirit  revealed  itself  in  a  cor- 
responding diversity  of  conduct.  Jesus  for  the  second  time 
began  to  speak  on  the  way  of  His  coming  sufferings,  telling 
His  followers  how  the  Son  of  man  should  be  betrayed  into  the 
htmds  of  men,  and  how  they  should  kill  Him,  and  how  the 
third  day  He  should  be  raised  again.^  The  twelve,  on  the 
other  hand,  began  as  they  journeyed  to  dispute  among  them- 
selves who  should  be  the  greatest  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.* 
Strange,  humilating  contrast  exhibited  again  and  again  in  the 
evangelic  history ;  jealous,  angry  altercations  respecting  rank 
and  precedence,  on  the  part  of  the  disciples,  following  new 
commimications  respecting  His  passion  on  the  part  of  their 
Lord,  as  comic  follow  tragic  scenes  in  a  dramatic  representa- 
tion. 

This  unseemly  and  unseasonable  dispute  shows  clearly  what 
need  there  was  for  that  injunction  appended  to  the  voice  from 
heaven,  "  Hear  Him ; "  and  how  far  the  disciples  were  as  yet 
from  complying  therewith.  They  heard  Jesus  only  when  He 
spake  things  agreeable.     They  listened  with  pleasure  when 

»  Matt.  xvii.  22,  23 ;  Mark  ix.  30-32 ;  Luke  ix.  44,  45. 
'  Mark  ix.  33. 


DISCOURSE  ON  HUMILITY :   AS  THIS  LITTLE  CHILD  I        201 

He  assured  them  that  ere  long  they  should  see  the  Son  of 
man  come  in  His  kingdom ;  they  were  deaf  to  all  He  said 
concerning  the  suffering  which  must  precede  the  glory.  They 
forgot  the  cross,  after  a  momentary  fit  of  sorrow  when  their 
Lord  referred  to  it,  and  betook  themselves  to  dreaming  of  the 
crown ;  as  a  child  forgets  the  death  of  a  parent,  and  returns 
to  its  play.  "How  great,"  thought  they,  "shall  we  all  be 
when  the  kingdom  comes ! "  Then  by  an  easy  transition 
they  passed  from  idle  dreams  of  the  common  glory,  to  idle 
disputes  as  to  who  should  have  the  largest  share  therein ;  for 
vanity  and  jealousy  lie  very  near  each  other.  "  ShaU  we  all 
be  equally  distinguished  in  the  kingdom,  or  shall  one'  be 
higher  than  another?  Does  the  favour  shown  to  Peter, 
James,  and  John,  in  selecting  them  to  be  eye-witnesses  of  the 
prefigurement  of  the  coming  gloiy,  imply  a  corresponding 
precedence  in  the  kingdom  itself?"^  The  three  disciples 
probably  hoped  it  did ;  the  other  disciples  hoped  not,  and  so 
the  dispute  began.  It  was  nothing  that  they  should  all  be 
great  together ;  the  question  of  questions  was,  who  should  be 
the  greatest, — a  question  hard  to  settle  when  vanity  and  pre- 
sumption contend  on  one  side,  and  jealousy  and  envy  on  the 
other. 

Arrived  at  Capernaum,  Jesus  took  an  early  opportunity  of 
adverting  to  the  dispute  in  which  His  disciples  had  been 
engaged,  and  made  it  the  occasion  of  delivering  a  memorable 
discourse  on  humility  and  kindred  topics.  In  the  first  part 
of  that  discourse  He  made  use  of  a  child  present  in  the 
chamber  as  the  vehicle  of  instruction ;  so,  out  of  the  mouth 
of  a  babe  and  suckling,  perfecting  the  praise  of  a  lowly  mind. 
Sitting  in  the  midst  of  ambitious  disciples  with  the  little  one 
in  His  arms  for  a  text.  He  who  was  the  greatest  in  the  king- 
dom proceeded  to  set  forth  truths  mortifying  to  the  spirit  of 
pride,  but  sweeter  than  honey  to  the  taste  of  all  renewed  souls. 

The  first  lesson  taught  was  this :  To  be  great  in  the  king- 
dom, yea,  to  gain  admission  into  it  at  all,  it  is  necessary  to 

^  The  three  disciples  were  forbidden  to  tell  any  man  what  they  had  seen  on 
the  holy  mount.  The  prohibition  was  probably  not  meant  to  refer  to  their 
brethren.  If  it  did,  they  must  have  found  it  very  hard  to  keep  silent  about 
such  a  wondrous  scene. 


4 


202  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

become  like  a  little  chili  "  Except  ye  be  converted,  and 
become  as  little  children,  ye  shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  heaven.  Whosoever,  therefore,  shall  humble  himself  as 
this  little  child,  the  same  is  greatest  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven."  Such  was  Christ's  peremptory  answer  to  the  ques- 
tion disputed  by  the  twelve.  It  was  a  serious  answer  for 
them ;  for  it  impUed  that,  unless  they  got  rid  of  the  spirit 
which  gave  rise  to  their  dispute,  they  could  find  no  place  in 
the  kingdom,  far  less  be  great  therein.  It  is  a  serious  answer 
for  us  all  For  who  among  us  is  child-like  ?  Who  among 
us  is  truly  humble?  Nowhere  is  the  need  of  " conversion " 
va  human  character,  in  order  to  citizenship  in  the  divine 
kingdom,  more  apparent  than  here.  Pride  is  natural  to  man : 
the  spirit  of  unrenewed  human  nature  lusteth  to  ambition, 
jealousy,  and  envy.  The  objects  of  pride  are  manifold,  and 
vary  for  different  men:  for  one,  the  pole  up  which  pride 
creeps  is  wealth ;  for  another,  birth ;  for  a  third,  learning ;  for 
a  fourth,  moral  character;  for  a  fifth,  religion:  but  in  one 
form  or  another  the  evil  spirit  reveals  itself  in  all  who  are 
not  bom  from  above.  Nor  do  even  the  regenerate  all  at  once 
escape  its  malign  influence.  The  rudiments  of  the  child- 
nature  are  in  them  from  the  first,  but  perfect  child-likeness 
is  very  slowly  reached.  To  get  rid  of  pride,  ambition,  and 
vainglory,  is  indeed  the  great  struggle  of  the  new  life ;  and 
he  who  hath  by  Gted*s  grace  succeeded  in  humbling  himself 
to  be  like  a  child,  is  one  among  a  thousand — ^is,  in  fact,  one 
of  the  great  ones  of  the  kingdom. 

The  feature  of  child-nature  which  forms  the  special  point 
of  comparison  in  this  discourse  on  humility  is  its  unpreten- 
tiousness.  Early  childhood  knows  nothing  of  those  distinc- 
tions of  rank  which  are  the  offspring  of  human  pride,  and 
the  prizes  coveted  by  human  ambition.  A  king's  child  will 
play  without  scruple  with  a  beggar's,  thereby  unconsciously 
asserting  the  insignificance  of  the  things  in  which  men  differ, 
compared  with  the  things  that  are  common  to  all  What 
children  are  unconsciously,  that  Jesus  requires  His  disciples 
to  be  voluntarily  and  deliberately.  They  are  not  to  be  pre- 
tentious and  ambitious,  like  the  grown  children  of  the  world, 
but  meek  and  lowly  of  heart ;  disregarding  rank  and  distinc- 


DISCOURSE  ON  HUMILITY :   AS  THIS  LITTLE  CHILD  I        203 

tions,  thinking  not  of  their  place  in  the  kingdom,  but  giving 
themselves  up  in  simplicity  of  spirit  to  the  service  of  the 
King.  "  Not  my  will,  but  Thine ; "  "  Not  my  glory,  but  Thy 
glory ; "  "  Not  honour,  but  duty,"  are  the  appropriate  mottoes 
of  Christians. 

In  proportion  as  men  are  great  and  good,  they  are  humble 
in  the  sense  explained.  In  this  sense,  the  greatest  one  in  the 
kingdom,  the  King  Himself,  was  the  humblest  of  men.  Of 
humility  in  the  form  of  self-depreciation  or  seK-humiliation 
on  account  of  sin  He  could  know  nothing,  for  there  was  no 
defect  or  fault  in  His  character.  But  of  the  humility  which 
consists  in  self-forgetfulness  He  was  the  perfect  pattern.  We 
cannot  say  that  He  thought  little  of  Himself,  but  we  may  say 
that  He  thought  not  of  Himself  at  all :  He  thought  only  of 
the  Father's  glory  and  of  man's  good.  Considerations  of  per- 
sonal aggrandizement  had  no  place  among  His  motives.  He 
shrank  with  holy  abhorrence  from  all  who  were  influenced  by 
such  considerations,  no  character  appearing  so  utterly  detest- 
able in  His  eye  as  that  of  the  Pharisee,  whose  religion  was 
a  theatrical  exhibition,  always  presupposing  the  presence  of 
spectators,  and  who  loved  the  uppermost  rooms  at  feasts  and 
the  chief  seats  in  the  synagogues,  and  to  be  called  of  men 
Eabbi,  Eabbi.  For  Himself,  He  neither  desired  nor  received 
honour  from  men.  He  came  not  to  be  ministered  imto,  but 
to  minister:  He,  the  greatest,  humbled  Himself  to  be  the 
least — to  be  a  child  bom  in  a  stable  and  laid  in  a  manger ;  to 
be  a  man  of  sorrow  lightly  esteemed  by  the  world ;  yea,  to  be 
nailed  to  a  cross.  By  such  wondrous  self-humiliation  He 
showed  His  divine  greatness. 

The  higher  we  rise  in  the  kingdom,  the  more  we  shall  be 
like  Jesus  in  this  humbling  of  Himself.  Child-likeness  such 
as  He  exhibited  is  an  invariable  characteristic  of  spiritual 
advancement,  even  as  its  absence  is  the  mark  of  moral  little- 
ness. The  little  man,  even  when  well-intentioned,  is  ever 
consequential  and  scheming :  ever  thinking  of  himself,  his 
honour,  dignity,  reputation,  even  when  professedly  doing  good. 
He  always  studies  to  glorify  God  in  a  way  that  shall  at  the 
same  time  glorify  himself.  Frequently  above  the  love  of  gain, 
he  is  never  above  the  feeling  of  self-importance.     The  great 


204  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

ones  in  the  kingdom,  on  the  other  hand^  throw  themselves 
with  such  unreservedness  into  the  work  to  which  they  are 
called,  that  they  have  neither  time  nor  inclination  to  inquire 
what  place  they  shall  obtain  in  this  world  or  the  next 
Leaving  consequences  to  the  great  Governor  and  Lord,  and 
forgetful  of  self-interest,  they  give  their  whole  soul  to  their 
appointed  task ;  content  to  fill  a  little  space  or  a  large  one, 
as  God  shall  appoint,  and  so  He  may  be  glorified. 

Those  who  so  Uve  here  shaU  obtain  high  place  in  the  eternal 
kingdom.  For  be  it  observed,  Jesus  did  not  siunmarily  dis- 
miss the  question,  who  is  greatest  in  the  kingdom,  by  nega- 
tiving the  existence  of  distinctions  therein.  He  said  not  on 
this  occasion.  He  said  not  on  any  other, ''  It  ia  needless  to  ask 
who  is  the  greatest  in  the  kingdom :  there  is  no  such  thing 
as  a  distinction  of  greater  and  less  there."  On  the  contrary, 
it  is  implied  here,  and  it  is  asserted  elsewhere,  that  there  is 
such  a  thing.  According  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  the  supernal 
commonwealth  has  no  afl&nity-with  jealous  radicalism,  which 
demands  that  all  shall  be  equal.  There  are  grades  of  distinc- 
tion there  as  well  as  in  the  kingdoms  of  this  world.  The 
difference  between  the  divine  kingdom  and  all  others  lies  in 
the  principle  on  which  promotion  proceeds.  Here  the  proud 
and  the  ambitious  gain  the  post  of  honour ;  there,  honours  are 
conferred  on  the  himible  and  the  self-forgetfuL  He  that  on 
earth  was  willing  to  be  the  least  in  lowly  love,  will  be  the 
great  one  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

The  next  lesson  Jesus  taught  His  disciples  at  this  time  was 
the  duty  of  receiving  little  ones  ;  that  is,  not  merely  children 
in  the  literal  sense,  but  all  that  a  child  represents — the  weak, 
the  insignificant,  the  helpless.  The  child  which  He  held  in 
His  arms,  having  served  as  a  type  of  the  humble  in  spirit,  next 
became  a  type  of  the  himible  in  station,  influence,  and  import- 
ance ;  and  having  been  presented  to  the  disciples  in  the  former 
capacity  as  an  object  of  imitation,  was  commended  to  them  in 
the  latter  as  an  object  of  kind  treatment.  They  were  to 
receive  the  little  ones  graciously  and  lovingly,  careful  not  to 
offend  them  by  harsh,  heartless,  contemptuous  conduct.  All 
such  kindness  He,  Jesus,  would  receive  as  done  to  Himself. 

This  transition  of  thought  from  being  like  a  child  to  receiv- 


DISCOURSE  ON  HUMILITY  :    AS  THIS  LITTLE  CHILD  !        205 

ing  all  that  of  which  childhood  in  its  weakness  is  the  emhlem, 
was  perfectly  natural ;  for  there  is  a  close  connection  between 
the  selfish  struggle  to  be  great,  and  an  offensive  mode  of  acting 
towards  the  little.  Harshness  and  contemptuonsness  are  vices 
inseparable  from  an  ambitious  spirit.  An  ambitious  man  is 
not,  indeed,  necessarily  cruel  in  his  disposition,  and  capable  of 
cherishing  heartless  designs  in  cold  blood.  At  times,  when 
the  demon  that  possesses  him  is  quiescent,  the  idea  of  hurting 
a  child,  or  anything  that  a  child  represents,  may  appear  to 
him  revolting ;  and  he  might  resent  the  imputation  of  any 
such  design,  or  even  a  hint  at  the  possibility  of  his  harbouring 
it,  as  a  wanton  insult  "  Is  thy  servant  a  dog  ?"  asked  Hazael 
indignantly  at  Elisha,  when  the  prophet  described  to  him  his 
own  future  self,  setting  the  strongholds  of  Israel  on  fire,  slaying 
their  young  men  with  the  sword,  dashing  their  children  to  the 
earth,. and  ripping  up  their  women  with  child.  At  the  moment 
his  horror  of  these  crimes  was  quite  sincere,  and  yet  he  was 
guilty  of  them  all.  The  prophet  rightly  divined  his  character, 
and  read  his  future  career  of  splendid  wickedness  in  the  light 
of  it.  He  saw  that  he  was  ambitious,  and  all  the  rest  followed 
as  a  matter  of  course.  The  king  of  Syria,  his  master,  about 
whose  recovery  he  affected  solicitude,  he  would  first  put  to 
death  ;  and  once  on  the  throne,  the  same  ambition  that  made 
him  a  murderer  would  goad  him  on  to  schemes  of  conquest, 
in  the  prosecution  of  which  he  would  perpetrate  all  the 
barbarous  cruelties  in  which  oriental  tyrants  seemed  to  take 
fiendish  delight. 

The  crimes  of  ambition,  and  the  lamentations  with  which 
it  has  filled  the  earth,  are  a  moral  commonplace.  Well  might 
Jesus  exclaim,  as  the  havoc  already  wrought  and  yet  to  be 
wrought  by  the  lust  for  place  and  power  rose  in  vision  before 
His  eye  :  "  Woe  to  the  world  because  of  offences  I "  And  yet 
the  woe  is  not  all  on  the  side  of  the  wrong-sufferer.  Jesus 
gave  His  disciples  to  understand  that  there  was  a  greater  woe 
impending  over  the  wrong-doer.  "  But  woe,"  He  added,  (still 
more)  "  to  that  man  by  whom  the  offence  cometh  !"  Nor  did 
He  leave  His  hearers  in  the  dark  as  to  the  nature  of  the 
offender's  doom.  "  Whoso,"  He  declared,  in  language  which 
came  forth  from  ELis  lips  like  a  flame  of  righteous  indignation 


206  THE  TRAINING  OP  THE  TWELVE. 

at  thought  of  the  wrongs  inflicted  on  the  weak  and  the  help- 
less,— *^  Whoso  shall  oflfend  one  of  these  little  ones  which 
believe  in  me,  it  were  better  for  him  that  a  mill-stone  were 
hanged  about  his  neck,  and  that  he  were  drowned  in  the  depth 
of  the  sea."  "  It  were  better  for  him  " — or,  it  suits  him,  it 
is  what  he  deserves  ;  and  it  is  implied,  though  not  expressed, 
that  it  is  what  he  gets  when  divine  vengeance  at  length  over- 
takes him.  The  null-stone  is  no  idle  figure  of  speech,  but  an 
appropriate  emblem  of  the  ultimate  doom  of  the  proud.  He 
who  will  moimt  to  the  highest  place,  regardless  of  the  injuries 
he  may  inflict  on  little  ones,  shall  be  cast  down,  not  to  earth 
merely,  but  to  the  very  lowest  depths  of  the  ocean,  to  the  very 
abyss  of  hell,  with  a  heavy  weight  of  curses  suspended  on  his 
neck  to  sink  him  down,  and  keep  him  down,  so  that  he  shall 
rise  no  more.^     "  They  sank  as  lead  in  the  mighty  waters  !" 

Such  being  the  awful  doom  of  selfish  ambition,  it  were  wise 
in  the  high-minded  to  fear,  and  to  anticipate  Gted*s  judgment 
by  judging  themselves.  This  Jesus  counselled  His  disciples  to 
do,  by  repeating  His  weighty  saying  uttered  once  before  in  the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount,  concerning  the  cutting  oflf  offending 
members  of  the  body.^  At  first  view  that  saying  appears 
irrelevant  here,  because  the  subject  of  discourse  is  ofiences 
against  others,  not  offences  against  oneself.  But  its  relevancy 
becomes  evident  when  we  consider  that  all  offences  against  a 
brother  are  offences  against  ourselves.  That  is  the  very  point 
Christ  wishes  to  impress  on  His  disciples.  He  would  have 
them  understand  that  self-interest  dictates  scrupulous  care  in 
avoiding  offences  to  the  little  ones.  "  Rather  than  harm  one  of 
these,"  says  the  great  Teacher  in  effect, "  by  hand,  foot,  eye,  or 
tongue,  have  recourse  to  self-mutilation ;  for  he  that  sinneth 
against  even  the  least  in  the  kingdom,  sinneth  also  against  his 
own  souL" 

How  blessed  for  the  church  and  the  world  if  this  doctrine 
were  believed  and  acted  on,  and  all  regulated  their  conduct  by 
the  apostolic  maxim  :  "  Let  every  one  of  us  please  his  neigh- 
bour for  good  to  edification  ! " 

1  fi,u\9s  6vi»is,  stone  of  a  miU  turned  by  an  ass,  larger  tlian  one  belonging  to  a 
handmill,  selected  to  make  sure  that  the  wicked  shall  sink  to  rise  no  more. 
'  Matt  zviii.  8,  9  ;  compare  y.  29,  30. 


DISCOURSE  ON  HUMILITY  :   AS  THIS  LITTLE  CHILD  !        20 7 

One  thing  more  Jesus  taught  His  disciples  while  He  held 
the  child  in  His  arms,  viz.  that  those  who  injured  or  despised 
little  ones  were  entirely  out  of  harmony  with  the  mind  of 
Heaven.  "  Take  heed,"  said  He,  "  that  ye  despise  not  one  of 
these  little  ones ; "  and  then  He  proceeded  to  enforce  the 
warning  by  drawing  aside  the  veil,  and  showing  them  a 
momentary  glimpse  of  that  very  celestial  kingdom  in  which 
they  were  all  so  desirous  to  have  prominence.  "  Lo,  there  ! 
see  those  angels  standing  before  the  throne  of  God — these  be 
ministering  spirits  to  the  little  ones !  And  lo,  here  am  I,  the 
Son  of  God,  come  all  the  way  from  heaven  to  save  them  I 
And  behold  how  the  face  of  the  Father  in  heaven  smiles  on 
the  angels  and  on  me,  because  we  take  such  loving  interest 
in  them  ! "  How  eloquent  the  argument !  how  powerful  the 
appeal !  "  The  inhabitants  of  heaven,"  such  is  its  drift,  "  are 
loving  and  humble ;  ye  are  selfish  and  proud.  What  hope 
can  ye  cherish  of  admission  into  a  kingdom,  the  spirit  of 
which  is  so  utterly  diverse  from  that  by  which  ye  are  ani- 
mated ?  Nay,  are  ye  not  ashamed  of  yourselves  when  ye 
witness  this  glaring  contrast  between  the  lowliness  of  the 
celestials  and  the  pride  and  pretensions  of  puny  men  ?  Put 
away,  henceforth  and  for  ever,  vain,  ambitious  thoughts,  and 
let  the  meek  and  gentle  spirit  of  heaven  get  possession  of 
your  hearts." 

Two  things  in  the  beautiful  picture  of  the  upper  world 
drawn  here  by  Jesus  are  noteworthy.  One  is  the  intimation 
that  the  little  ones  have  each  their  guardian  angel  or  mini- 
stering  spirit  in  glory.  Of  this  piece  of  news  it  has  been 
quaintly  remarked  by  Henry  :  "  Christ  saith  it  to  us,  and  we 
may  take  it  upon  His  word  who  came  from  heaven  to  let  us  • 
know  what  is  done  there  by  the  world  of  angels."  The  other 
noticeable  matter  is  the  introduction  by  Jesus  of  a  reference 
to  His  work  as  the  Saviour  of  the  lost,  into  an  argument 
designed  to  enforce  care  for  the  little  ones.  The  reference  is 
not  an  irrelevance ;  it  is  of  the  nature  of  an  argument  h  for' 
tiori.  If  the  Son  of  man  cared  for  the  lost,  the  low,  the  morally 
degraded,  how  much  more  will  He  care  for  those  who  are 
merely  little  !  It  is  a  far  greater  effort  of  love  to  seek  the 
salvation  of  the  wicked  than  to  interest  oneself  in  the  weak  \ 


208  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVH. 

and  He  who  did  the  one  will  certainly  not  fail  to  do  the  other. 
He  who  came  to  die  for  sinners,  even  the  chief,  will  certainly 
not  despise  the  very  least  of  those  for  whom  He  died ;  nor 
will  He  suffer  any  one  to  do  so  with  impunity. 

The  saving  love  of  Christ,  as  set  forth  in  the  parable  of  the 
good  shepherd  going  after  the  straying  sheep,^  is  in  every 
respect  an  appropriate  topic  in  a  discourse  on  humility ;  for  that 
love  is,  in  the  first  place,  the  sublimest  example  of  humility. 
It  shows  that  there  was  not  only  no  pride  of  greatness  in  the 
Son  of  Grod,  but  also  no  pride  of  holiness.  He  could  not  only 
condescend  to  men  of  humble  estate,  but  could  even  become 
the  brother  of  the  vile :  one  with  them  in  sympathy  and  lot, 
that  they  might  become  one  with  Him  in  privilege  and 
character.  Then  that  love  believed  in  is  the  source  of  humility 
in  us.  To  it  we  owe  our  hope  of  admission  into  the  kingdom, 
whether  as  least  or  as  greatest  All  are  lost  ones,  to  begin 
with;  and  when  we  reflect  what  we  are  delivered  from  by 
Christ's  merit,  it  makes  us  humbly  thankful  for  the  rights  of 
citizenship  in  the  supernal  commonwealth,  even  though  we 
should  occupy  the  meanest  station  there. 

Finally,  faith  in  Christ's  redeeming  love  is  the  true  source 
of  that  charity  which  careth  for  the  weak  and  despiseth  not 
the  little.  No  one  who  rightly  appreciates  His  love  can 
deliberately  offend  or  heartlessly  contemn  any  brother,  how- 
ever insignificant,  for  whom  He  died.  He  will  coimt  the 
little  ones  dear  for  His  sake ;  he  will  feel  that  the  least  re- 
turn he  can  make  for  personal  salvation  is  to  behave  himself 
towards  them  with  meekness  and  gentleness.  He  will  be 
ready  to  deny  himseK  harmless  liberties,  rather  than  hurt  the 
tender  conscience  of  even  the  least  one  in  the  kingdom.  "  If 
meat,"  said  Paul,  "  make  my  brother  to  offend,  I  will  eat  no 
flesh  while  the  world  standeth."  ^  The  noble  sentiment  was 
inspired  by  the  consciousness  of  deep  personal  obligation  to 
the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ,  and  all  who  hq,ve  believed  in 
Christ  for  salvation  thoroughly  sympathize  with  it. 

1  Matt  xviik  12,  13.  «  1  Cor.  viii.  13. 


DISCOUKSE  ON  HUMniXY:   CHUBCH  DISCIPLINE.  209 


Section  ii. — CTmrch  Discipline. 

Matt,  xviii.  15-20. 

Having  duly  cautioned  His  hearers  against  offending  the  little 
ones,  Jesus  proceeded  (according  to  the  account  of  His  words 
in  the  (Jospel  of  Matthew)  to  tell  them  how  to  act  when  they 
were  not  the  givers,  but  the  receivers  or  the  judges,  of  ofiTences. 
In  this  part  of  His  discourse  He  had  in  view  the  future  rather 
than  the  present.  Contemplating  the  time  when  the  king- 
dom— that  is,  the  church — should  be  in  actual  existence  as  an 
organized  community,  with  the  twelve  exercising  in  it  authority 
as  apostles.  He  gives  directions  for  the  exercise  of  discipline, 
in  order  to  the  purity  and  weU-being  of  the  Christian  bro- 
therhood ;  ^  confers  on  the  twelve  collectively  what  He  had 
already  granted  to  Peter  singly — the  power  to  bind  and  loose, 
that  is,  to  inflict  and  remove  church  censures ; '  and  makes  a 
most  encouraging  promise  of  His  own  spiritual  presence,  and 
of  prevailing  power  with  His  heavenly  Father  in  prayer,  to  all 
assembled  in  His  name,  and  agreeing  together  in  the  objects 
of  their  desires.'  His  aim  throughout  is  to  ensure  beforehand 
that  the  community  to  be  called  after  His  name  shall  be 
indeed  a  holy,  loving,  united  society. 

The  rules  here  laid  down  for  the  guidance  of  the  apostles 
in  dealing  with  ofienders,  though  simple  and  plain,  have  given 
rise  to  much  debate  among  religious  controversialists  interested 
in  the  upholding  of  diverse  theories  of  church  government* 
Of  these  ecclesiastical  disputes  we  shall  say  nothing  here ;  nor 
do  we  deem  it  needful  to  offer  any  expository  comments  on 
our  Lord's  words,  save  a  sentence  of  explanation  on  the  phrase 
employed  by  Him  to  describe  the  state  of  excommunication : 
''  Let  him"  (that  is,  the  impenitent  brother  about  to  be  cast 
out  of  the  church)  "  be  unto  thee  as  an  heathen  man  and  a 
publican."  These  words,  luminous  without  doubt  at  the  time 
they  were  spoken,  are  not  quite  so  clear  to  us  now ;  but  yet 

>  Matt,  xviii.  15-17.  ^    «  Vcr.  18.  »  Vera.  19,  20. 

^  Persons  curious  concerning  these  controyersies  will  find  abundant  information 
in  GiUespie's  Aaron* s  Rod  Bloeaoming, 

0 


210  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

their  meaning  in  the  main  is  sufficiently  plain.  The  idea  is, 
that  the  persistently  impenitent  offender  is  to  become  at  length 
to  the  person  he  has  oflfended,  and  to  the  whole  church,  one 
with  whom  is  to  be  held  no  religious,  and  as  little  as  possible 
social  fellowship.  The  religious  aspect  of  excommimication 
is  pointed  at  by  the  expression  ''  as  an  heathen  man,"  and  the 
social  side  of  it  is  expressed  in  the  second  clause  of  the 
sentence,  "  and  a  publican."  Heathens  were  excluded  from 
the  temple,  and  had  no  part  in  Jewish  religious  rites.  Publicans 
were  not  excluded  from  the  temple,  so  far  as  we  know ;  but 
they  were  regarded  as  social  pariahs  by  all  Jews  affecting 
patriotism  and  religious  strictness.  This  indiscriminate  dislike 
of  the  whole  class  was  not  justifiable,  nor  is  any  approval  of 
it  implied  here.  Jesus  refers  to  it  simply  as  a  familiar  matter 
of  fact,  which  conveniently  and  clearly  conveyed  His  meaning 
to  the  effect :  *'  Let  the  impenitent  offender  be  to  you  what 
heathens  are  to  all  Jews  by  law — ^persons  with  whom  to  hold 
no  religious  fellowship ;  and  what  publicans  are  to  Pharisees 
by  inveterate  prejudice — persons  to  be  excluded  from  all  but 
merely  imavoidable  social  intercourse." 

Whatever  obscurity  may  attach  to  the  letter  of  the  rules 
for  the  management  of  discipline,  there  can  be  no  doubt  at  all 
08  to  the  loving,  holy  spirit  which  pervades  them. 

The  spirit  of  love  appears  in  the  conception  of  the  church 
which  underlies  these  rules.  The  church  is  viewed  as  a 
commonwealth,  in  which  the  concern  of  one  is  the  concern  of 
all,  and  vice  versa.  Hence  Jesus  does  not  specify  the  class 
of  offences  He  intends,  whether  private  and  personal  ones,  or 
such  as  are  of  the  nature  of  scandals,  that  is,  offences  against 
the  church  as  a  whole.  On  His  idea  of  a  church,  such  ex- 
planations were  imnecessary,  because  the  distinction  alluded 
to  in  great  part  ceases  to  exist  An  offence  against  the 
conscience  of  the  whole  community  is  an  offence  against  each 
individual  member,  because  he  is  jealous  for  the  honour  of  the 
body  of  believers  ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  an  offence  which  is 
in  the  first  place  private  and  personal,  becomes  one  in  which 
all  are  concerned,  so  soon  as  the  offended  party  has  failed  to 
bring  his  brother  to  confession  and  reconciliation.  A  chronic 
alienation  between  two  Christian  brethren  will  be  regarded. 


K 


DISCOURSE  ON  HUMILITY:    CHUBCH  DISCIPLINE.  211 

in  a  church  after  Christ's  mind,  as  a  scandal  not  to  be  tolerated, 
because  fraught  with  deadly  harm  to  the  spiritual  life  of  alL 

Very  congenial  also  to  the  spirit  of  charity  is  the  order  of 
proceeding  indicated  in  the  directions  given  by  Jesus.  First, 
strictly  private  dealing  on  the  part  of  the  offended  with  his 
offending  brother  is  prescribed ;  then,  after  such  dealing  has 
been  fairly  tried  and  has  failed,  but  not  tiQ  then,  third  parties 
are  to  be  brought  in  as  witnesses  and  assistants  in  the  work 
of  reconciliation  ;  and  finally,  and  only  as  a  last  resource,  the 
subject  of  quarrel  is  to  be  made  public,  and  brought  before  the 
whole  church.  This  method  of  procedure  is  obviously  most 
considerate  as  towaixis  the  offender.  It  makes  confession  as 
easy  to  him  as  possible,  by  sparing  him  the  shame  of  exposure. 
It  is  also  a  method  which  cannot  be  worked  out  without  the 
purest  and  holiest  motives  on  the  part  of  him  who  seeks 
redress.  It  leaves  no  room  for  the  reckless  talkativeness  of 
the  scandalmonger,  who  loves  to  divulge  evil  news,  and  speaks 
to  everybody  of  a  brother's  faults  rather  than  to  the  brother 
himself.  It  puts  a  bridle  on  the  passion  of  resentment,  by 
compelling  the  offended  one  to  go  through  a  patient  course  of 
dealing  with  his  brother  before  he  arrive  at  the  sad  issue  at 
which  anger  jumps  at  once,  viz.  total  estrangement.  It  gives 
no  encouragement  to  the  officious  and  over-zealous,  who  make 
themselves  busy  in  ferreting  out  offences ;  for  the  way  of 
such  is  not  to  begin  with  the  offender,  and  then  go  to  the 
church,  but  to  go  direct  to  the  church  with  severe  charges, 
based  probably  on  hearsay  information  gained  by  dishonour- 
able means. 

Characteristic  of  the  loving  spirit  of  Jesus,  the  Head  of  the 
church,  is  the  horror  with  which  He  contemplates,  and  would 
have  His  disciples  contemplate,  the  possibility  of  any  one,  once 
a  brother,  becoming  to  his  brethren  as  a  heathen  or  a  publican. 
This  appears  in  His  insisting  that  no  expedient  shall  be  left 
untried  to  avert  the  sad  catastrophe.  How  unlike  in  this 
respect  is  His  mind  to  that  of  the  world,  which  can  with 
perfect  equanimity  allow  vast  multitudes  of  fellow-men  to  be 
what  heathens  were  to  Jews,  and  publicans  to  Pharisees — 
persons  excluded  from  all  kindly  communion !  Nay,  may  we 
not  say,  how  unlike  the  mind  of  Jesus  in  this  matter  to  that 


212  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

of  many  even  in  the  church,  who  treat  brethren  in  the  same 
outward  fellowship  with  most  perfect  indifference,  and  have 
become  so  habituated  to  the  evil  practice,  that  they  regard  it 
without  compunction  as  a  quite  natural  and  right  state  of 
things! 

Such  heartless  indifferentism  implies  a  very  different  ideal 
of  the  church  from  that  cherished  by  its  Foimder.  Men  who 
do  not  regard  ecclesiastical  fellowship  as  imposing  any  obliga- 
tion to  love  their  Christian  brethren,  think,  consciously  or 
imconsciously,  of  the  church  as  if  it  were  a  hotel,  where  all 
kinds  of  people  meet  for  a  short  space,  sit  down  together  at 
the  same  table,  then  part,  neither  knowing  nor  caring  any- 
thing about  each  other ;  while,  in  truth,  it  is  rather  a  family, 
whose  members  are  all  brethren,  bound  to  love  each  other 
with  pure  heart  fervently.  Of  course  this  hotel  theory  involves 
as  a  necessary  consequence  the  disuse  of  discipline.  For, 
strange  as  the  idea  may  seem  to  many,  the  law  of  love  is  the 
basis  of  church  discipline.  It  is  because  I  am  bound  to  take 
every  member  of  the  church  to  my  arms  as  a  brother,  that  I 
am  not  only  entitled,  but  bound,  to  be  earnestly  concerned 
about  his  behaviour.  K  a  brother  in  Christ,  according  to 
ecclesiastical  standing,  may  say  to  me,  "  You  must  love  me 
with  all  your  heart,"  I  am  entitled  to  say  in  reply,  "  I  acknow- 
ledge the  obligation  in  the  abstract,  but  I  demand  of  you  in 
turn  that  you  shall  be  such  that  I  can  love  you  as  a  Christian, 
however  weak  and  imperfect;  and  I  feel  it  to  be  both  my 
right  and  my  duty  to  do  all  I  can  to  make  you  worthy  of 
such  brotherly  regard,  by  plain  dealing  with  you  anent  your 
offences.  I  am  willing  to  love  you,  but  I  cannot,  I  dare  not, 
be  on  friendly  terms  with  your  sins;  and  if  you  refuse  to 
part  with  these,  and  virtually  require  me  to  .be  a  partaker  in 
them  by  connivance,  then  our  brotherhood  is  at  an  end,  and  I 
am  free  from  my  obligations."  To  such  language  and  such  a 
style  of  thought  the  patron  of  the  hotel  theory  of  church 
fellowship  is  an  utter  stranger.  Disclaiming  the  obligation 
to  love  his  brethren,  he  at  the  same  time  renounces  the  right 
to  insist  on  Christian  virtue  as  an  indispensable  attribute  of 
church  membership,  and  declines  to  trouble  himself  about  the 
behaviour  of  any  member,  except  in  so  far  as  it  may  affect 


DISCOURSE  ON  HUMILITY:    CHURCH  DISCIPLINE.  213 

himself  personally.  All  may  think  and  act  as  they  please — 
be  infidels  or  believers,  sons  of  God  or  sons  of  Belial :  it  is  all 
one  to  him. 

Holy  severity  finds  a  place  in  these  directions,  as  well  as 
tender,  considerate  love.  Jesus  solemnly  sanctions  the  ex- 
communication of  an  impenitent  offender.  "  Let  him,"  saith 
He,  with  the  tone  of  a  judge  pronouncing  sentence  of  death, 
''  be  unto  thee  as  an  heathen  man  and  a  publican."  Then,  to 
invest  church  censures  righteously  administered  with  all  pos- 
sible solemnity  and  authority.  He  proceeds  to  declare  that 
they  carry  with  them  eternal  consequences;  adding  in  His 
most  emphatic  manner  the  awful  words, — awful  both  to  the 
sinner  cast  out,  and  to  those  who  are  responsible  for  his 
ejection :  "  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  Whatsoever  ye  shall  bind 
on  earth,  shall  be  boimd  in  heaven ;  and  whatsoever  ye  shall 
loose  on  earth,  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven."  The  words  may  be 
regarded  in  one  sense  as  a  caution  to  ecclesiastical  rulers  to 
beware  how  they  use  a  power  of  so  tremendous  a  character ; 
but  they  also  plainly  show  that  Christ  desired  His  church  on 
earth,  as  nearly  as  possible,  to  resemble  the  church  in  heaven : 
to  be  holy  in  her  membership,  and  not  an  indiscriminate 
congregation  of  righteous  and  unrighteous  men,  of  believers 
and  infidels,  of  Christians  and  reprobates ;  and  for  that  end 
committed  the  power  of  the  keys  to  those  who  bear  of&ce  in 
His  house,  authorizing  them  to  deliver  over  to  Satan's  thrall 
the  proud  stubborn  sinner  who  refuses  to  be  corrected,  and  to 
give  satisfaction  to  the  aggrieved  consciences  of  his  brethren. 

Such  rigour,  pitiless  in  appearance,  is  really  merciful  to  all 
parties.  It  is  merciful  to  the  faithful  members  of  the  church, 
because  it  removes  from  their  midst  a  mortifying  limb,  whose 
presence  imperils  the  life  of  the  whole  body.  Scandalous 
open  sin  cannot  be  tolerated  in  any  society,  without  general 
demoralization  ensuing ;  least  of  all  in  the  church,  which  is  a 
society  whose  very  raison  d!Ure  is  the  culture  of  Christian 
virtue.  But  the  apparently  pitiless  rigour  is  mercy  even 
towards  the  unfaithful  who  are  the  subjects  thereof.  For  to 
keep  scandalous  offenders  inside  the  communion  of  the  church, 
is  to  do  your  best  to  damn  their  souls,  and  to  exclude  them 
ultimately  &om  heaven.     On  the  other  hand,  to  deliver  them 


214  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

over  to  Satan  may  be,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  will  be,  but 
giving  them  a  foretaste  of  hell  now,  that  they  may  be  saved 
from  heU-fire  for  ever.  It  was  in  this  hope  that  Paul  in- 
sisted on  the  excommunication  of  the  incestuous  person  from 
the  Corinthian  church,  that  by  the  castigation  of  his  fleshly 
sin  ''  his  spirit  might  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus." 
It  is  this  hope  which  comforts  those  on  whom  the  disagreeable 
task  of  enforcing  church  censures  falls  in  the  discharge  of 
their  painful  duty.  They  can  cast  forth  evil-doers  from  the 
communion  of  saints  with  less  hesitation,  when  they  know 
that  as  publicans  and  sinners  the  excommunicated  are  nearer 
the  kingdom  of  Grod  than  they  were  as  church  members,  and 
when  they  consider  that  they  are  still  permitted  to  seek  the 
good  of  the  ungodly,  as  Christ  sought  the  good  of  all  the 
outcasts  of  His  day ;  that  it  is  still  in  their  power  to  pray  for 
them,  and  to  preach  to  them,  as  they  stand  in  the  outer  court 
of  the  Gentiles,  though  they  may  not  put  into  their  unholy 
hands  the  symbols  of  the  Saviour's  body  and  blood. 

Such  considerations,  indeed,  would  go  far  to  reconcile  those 
who  are  sincerely  concerned  for  the  spiritual  character  of  the 
church,  and  for  the  safety  of  individual  souls,  to  very  consider- 
able reductions  of  communion  rolla  There  cannot  be  a  doubt 
that,  if  church  discipline  were  upheld  with  the  efficiency  and 
vigour  contemplated  by  Christ,  such  reductions  would  take  place 
on  an  extensive  scale.  It  is  indeed  true  that  the  purging  pro- 
cess might  be  carried  to  excess,  and  with  very  injurious  effects. 
Tares  might  be  mistaken  for  wheat,  and  wheat  for  tares.  The 
church  might  be  turned  into  a  society  of  Pharisees,  thanking 
Gk)d  that  they  were  not  as  other  men,  or  as  the  poor  publicans 
who  stood  without,  hearing  and  praying,  but  not  communicat- 
ing ;  while  among  those  outside  the  communion  rails  might 
be  not  only  the  imworthy,  but  many  timid  ones  who  dared 
not  come  nigh,  but,  like  the  publican  of  the  parable,  could 
only  stand  afar  off,  crying,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me,  a  sinner," 
yet  all  the  while  were  justified  rather  than  the  others.  A 
system  tending  to  bring  about  such  results  is  one  extreme  to 
be  avoided.  But  there  is  another  yet  more  pernicious  extreme 
still  more  sedulously  to  be  shunned :  a  careless  laxity,  which 
allows  sheep  and  goats  to  be  huddled  together  in  one  fold,  the 


DISCOUESE  ON  HUMILITY  :   CHUBCH  DISCIPLINE.  215 

goats  being  thereby  encouraged  to  deem  themselves  sheep,  and 
deprived  of  the  greatest  benefit  they  can  enjoy — ^the  privilege 
of  being  spoken  to  plainly  as  "  unconverted  sinners." 

Such  unseemly  mixtures  of  the  godly  and  the  godless  are 
too  common  phenomena  in  these  days.  And  the  reason  is 
not  far  to  seek.  It  is  not  indifference  to  morality,  for  that  is 
not  generally  a  characteristic  of  the  church  in  our  time.  It 
is  the  desire  to  multiply  members.  The  various  religious 
bodies  value  members  still  more  than  morality  or  high-toned 
Christian  virtue,  and  they  fear  lest  by  discipline  they  may 
lose  one  or  two  names  from  their  communion  roll  Alas,  the 
fear  is  well  founded  !  Fugitives  from  discipline  are  always 
sure  of  an  open  door  and  a  hearty  welcome  in  some  quarter. 
This  is  one  of  the  many  curses  entailed  upon  us  by  that 
greatest  of  all  scandals,  religious  division.  One  who  has 
become,  or  is  in  danger  of  becoming,  as  a  heathen  man  and  a 
publican  to  one  ecclesiastical  body,  has  a  good  chance  of  be- 
coming a  saint  or  an  angel  in  another.  Sival  churches  play 
at  cross  purposes,  one  loosing  when  another  binds ;  so  doing 
their  utmost  to  make  all  spiritual  sentences  null  and  void 
both  in  earth  and  heaven,  and  to  rob  religion  of  all  dignity 
and  authority.  Well  may  libertines  pray  that  the  divisions 
of  the  church  may  continue,  for  while  these  last  they  fare 
weU  !  Far  otherwise  did  it  fare  with  the  like  of  them  in  the 
days  when  the  church  was  catholic  and  one;  when  sinners 
repenting  worked  their  way,  in  the  slow  course  of  years,  from 
the  locus  luge7Uium  outside  the  sanctuary,  through  the  hcus 
audieTUium  and  the  locus  suhstrcUorum,  to  the  locvs  fidelium : 
in  that  painful  manner  learning  what  an  evil  and  a  bitter 
thing  it  is  to  depart  from  the  living  God.^ 

The  promise  made  to  consent  in  prayer^  comes  in  appro- 
priately in  a  discourse  delivered  to  disciples  who  had  been 
disputing  who  should  be  the  greatest.  In  this  connection  the 
promise  means :  "  So  long  as  ye  are  divided  by  dissensions 
and  jealousies,  ye  shall  be  impotent  alike  with  men  and  with 
God;  in  your  ecclesiastical  procedure  as  church  rulers,  and 

'  See  Bingham's  Origines  EccUnasticcs  for  an  account  of  the  ancient  church 
discipline. 
»  Matt.  xviu.  19,  20. 


216  THE  TBAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

in  your  supplications  at  the  throne  of  grace.  But  if  ye  be 
uinited  in  mind  and  heart,  ye  shall  have  power  with  God,  and 
shall  prevail :  my  Father  will  grant  your  requests,  and  I 
myseK  will  be  in  the  midst  of  you." 

It  is  not  necessary  to  assume  any  very  dose  connection 
between  this  promise  and  the  subject  of  which  Jesus  had 
been  speaking  just  before.  In  this  familiar  discourse,  transi- 
tion is  made  from  one  topic  to  another  in  an  easy  conversa- 
tional manner,  care  being  taken  only  that  all  that  is  said  shall 
be  relevant  to  the  general  subject  in  hand.  The  meeting, 
supposed  to  be  convened  in  Christ's  name,  need  not  therefore 
be  one  of  church  officers  assembled  for  the  transaction  of 
ecclesiastical  business :  it  may  be  a  meeting,  in  a  church  or 
in  a  cottage,  purely  for  the  p^^ses  of  worSip.  The  promiBe 
avails  for  all  persons,  all  subjects  of  prayer,  all  places,  and  all 
thnes  ;  for  dl  txuly  bhrialiai  a«se  Jui  great  Ld  sxnaU. 

The  promise  avails  for  the  smallest  number  that  can  make 
a  meeting — even  for  two  or  three.  This  minimum  number 
is  condescended  on  for  the  purpose  of  expressing  in  the 
strongest  possible  manner  the  importance  of  brotherly  con- 
cord. Jesus  gives  us  to  understand  that  two  agreed  are  better, 
stronger,  than  twelve  or  a  thousand  divided  by  enmities  and 
ambitious  passions.  "  The  Lord,  when  He  would  commend 
unanimity  and  peace  to  His  disciples,  said,  '  If  two  of  you 
shall  agree  on  earth,*  etc.,  to  show  that  most  is  granted  not 
to  the  multitude,  but  to  the  concord  of  the  supplicants."  ^  It 
is  an  obvious  inference,  that  if  by  agreement  even  two  be 
strong,  then  a  multitude  really  imited  in  mind  would  be  pro- 
portionally stronger.  For  we  must  not  fancy  that  God  has 
any  particdity  for  a  little  meeting,  or  that  there  is  any  virtue 
in  a  small  number.  Little  strait  sects  are  apt  to  fall  into 
this  mistake,  and  to  imagine  that  Christ  had  them  specially 
in  His  eye  when  He  said  two  or  three,  and  that  the  kind 
of  agreement  by  which  they  are  distinguished — agreement  in 
whim  and  crotchet — is  what  He  desiderated.  Eidiculous 
caricature  of  the  Lord's  meaning!  The  agreement  He  re- 
quires of  His  disciples  is  not  entire  unanimity  in  opinion,  but 
consent  of  mind  and  heart  in  the  ends  they  aim  at>  and  in 

^  Cyprianus,  de  UnikUe  Ecduiat. 


DISCOURSE  ON  HUMILITY:   FORGIVING  INJURIES.  217 

unselfish  devotion  to  these  ends.  When  He  spake  of  two 
or  three,  He  did  not  contemplate,  as  the  desirable  state  of 
things,  the  body  of  His  church  split  up  into  innumerable 
fragments  by  religious  opinionativeness,  each  fragment  in  pro- 
portion to  its  minuteness  imagining  itself  sure  of  His  presence 
and  blessing.  He  did  not  wish  His  church  to  consist  of  a 
collection  of  clubs  having  no  intercommunion  with  each  other, 
any  more  than  He  desired  it  to  be  a  monster  hotel,  receiving 
and  harbouring  all  comers,  no  questions  being  asked.  He  made 
the  promise  now  under  consideration,  not  to  stimulate  secta- 
rianism, but  to  encourage  the  cultivation  of  virtues  which  have 
ever  been  too  rare  on  earth — brotherly-kindness,  meekness, 
charity.  The  thing  He  values,  in  a  word,  is  not  paucity  of 
numbers,  due  to  the  warU  of  charity,  but  union  of  hearts  in 
lowly  love  among  the  greatest  number  possible. 


Section  m. — Forgiving  Injuries. 

Matt,  xviii.  21-35. 

A  lesson  on  forgiveness  fitly  ended  the  solemn  discourse 
on  humility  delivered  in  the  hearing  of  disputatious  disciples. 
The  connection  of  thought  between  beginning  and  end  is  very 
real,  though  it  does  not  quite  lie  on  the  surface.  A  vin- 
dictive temper,  which  is  the  thing  here  condemned,  is  one  of 
the  vices  fostered  by  an  ambitious  spirit.  An  ambitious  man 
is  sure  to  be  the  receiver  of  many  offences,  real  or  imaginary. 
He  is  quick  to  take  offence,  and  slow  to  forgive  or  forget 
wrong.  Forgiving  injuries  is  not  in  his  way:  he  is  more 
in  his  element  when  he  lays  hold  of  his  debtor  by  the*  throat, 
and  with  rufSan  fierceness  demands  payment. 

The  concludii^  part  of  the  discourse  was  occasioned  by 
a  question  put  by  Peter,  the  usual  spokesman  of  the  twelve, 
who  came  to  Jesus  and  said :  "  Lord,  how  oft  shall  my  brother 
sin  against  me,  and  I  forgive  him  ?  till  seven  times  ? "  By 
what  precise  association  of  ideas  the  question  was  suggested 
to  Peter's  mind  we  know  not;  perhaps  he  did  not  know 
himself,  for  the  movements  of  the  mind  are  often  mysterious, 


218  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

and  in  impulsive  mercurial  natures  they  are  also  apt  to  be 
sudden.  Thoughts  shoot  into  consciousness  like  meteors  into 
the  upper  atmosphere;  and  suddenly  conceived,  are  as  abruptly 
uttered,  with  physical  gestures  accompanying,  indicating  the 
force  with  which  they  have  taken  possession  of  the  souL 
Suffice  it  to  say,  that  the  disciple's  query,  however  suggested, 
was  relevant  to  the  subject  in  hand,  and  had  latent  spiritual 
afBnities  with  all  that  Jesus  had  said  concerning  himiility 
and  the  giving  and  receiving  of  offences.  It  showed  on 
Peter^s  part  an  intelligent  attention  to  the  words  of  his 
Master,  and  a  conscientious  solicitude  to  conform  his  conduct 
to  those  heavenly  precepts  by  which  he  felt  for  the  moment 
subdued  and  softened. 

The  question  put  by  Peter  further  revealed  a  curious 
mixture  of  child-likeness  and  childishnesa  To  be  so  earnest 
about  the  duty  of  forgiving,  and  even  to  think  of  practising 
the  duty  so  often  as  seven  times  towards  the  same  offender, 
betrayed  the  true  child  of  the  kingdom ;  for  none  but  the 
graciously  minded  are  exercised  in  that  fashion.  But  to 
imagine  that  pardon  repeated  just  so  many  times  would  ex- 
haust obligation  and  amount  to  something  magnanimous  and 
divine,  was  very  simple.  Poor  Peter,  in  his  ingenuous  attempt 
at  the  magnanimous,  was  like  a  child  standing  on  tip-toe  to 
make  himself  as  tall  as  his  father,  or  climbing  to  the  top  of  a 
hillock  to  get  near  the  skies. 

The  reply  of  Jesus  to  His  honest  but  crude  disciple  was 
admirably  adapted  to  put  him  out  of  conceit  with  himself, 
and  to  make  him  feel  how  puny  and  petty  were  the  dimen- 
sions of  his  charity.  Echoing  the  thought  of  the  prophetic 
oracle,  it  teUs  those  who  would  be  like  God  that  they  must 
multiply  pardons :  ^  "  I  say  not  unto  thee,  UntU  seven  times ; 
but,  Untn  seventy  times  seven."  Alas  for  the  rarity  of  such 
charity  under  the  sun !  Christ's  thoughts  are  not  man's 
thoughts,  neither  are  His  ways  common  among  men.  As  the 
heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth,  so  are  His  thoughts  and 
ways  higher  than  those  current  in  this  world.  For  many, 
far  from  forgiving  times  without  number  a  brother  confessing 
his  fault,  do  not  forgive  even  so  much  as  once,  but  act  so  that 

1  Isa.  Iv.  7. 


^ 


DISCOURSE  ON  HtTBOLITY  :   FOBGIVING  INJURIES.  219 

we    can   recognise  their  portrait  drawn  to  the  life  in  the 
parable  of  the  unmerciful  servant. 

In  this  parable,  whose  minutest  details  are  firaught  with  in- 
struction, three  things  are  specially  noteworthy :  the  contrast 
between  the  two  debts;  the  corresponding  contrast  between 
the  two  creditors ;  and  the  doom  pronounced  on  those  who, 
being  forgiven  the  large  debt  owed  by  them,  refuse  to  forgive 
the  small  debt  owed  to  them. 

The  two  debts  are  respectively  ten  thousand  talents  and  a 
hundred  denarii,  being  to  each  other  in  the  proportion  of,  say, 
a  million  to  one.  The  enormous  disparity  is  intended  to 
represent  the  difference  between  the  shortcomings  of  all  men 
towards  God,  and  those  with  which  any  man  can  charge  a 
fellow-creature.  The  representation  is  confessed  to  be  just 
by  all  who  know  human  nature  and  their  own  hearts ;  and 
the  consciousness  of  its  truth  helps  them  greatly  to  be  gentle 
and  forbearing  towards  offenders.  Yet  the  parable  seems  to 
be  faulty  in  this,  that  it  makes  the  unmerciful  servant 
answerable  for  such  a  debt  as  it  seems  impossible  for  any 
man  to  run  up.  Who  ever  heard  of  a  private  debt  amounting 
in  British  money  to  millions  sterling  ?  The  difficulty  is  met 
by  the  suggestion,  that  the  debtor  is  a  person  of  high  rank, 
like  one  of  the  princes  whom  Darius  set  over  the  kingdom  of 
Persia,  or  a  provincial  governor  of  the  Eoman  Empire.  Such 
an  official  might  very  soon  make  himself  liable  for  the  huge 
sum  here  specified,  simply  by  retaining  for  his  own  benefit  the 
revenues  of  his  province,  as  they  passed  through  his  hands, 
instead  of  remitting  them  to  the  royal  treasury. 

That  it  was  some  such  unscrupulous  minister  of  state, 
guilty  of  the  crime  of  embezzlement,  whom  Jesus  had  in  His 
eye,  appears  all  but  certain  when  we  recollect  what  gave  rise 
to  the  discourse  of  which  this  pcurable  forms  the  conclusion. 
The  disciples  had  disputed  among  themselves  who  should  be 
greatest  in  the  kingdom,  each  one  being  ambitious  to  obtain 
the  place  of  distinction  for  himself  Here,  accordingly,  their 
Master  holds  up  to  their  view  the  conduct  of  a  great  one, 
concerned  not  about  the  faithful  discharge  of  his  duty,  but 
about  his  own  aggrandizement.  "  Behold,"  He  says  to  them 
in  effect,  "  what  men  who  wish  to  be  great  ones  do !     They 


220  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

rob  their  king  of  lis  revenue,  and  abuse  the  opportunities 
afforded  by  their  position  to  enrich  themselves ;  and  while 
scandalously  negligent  of  their  own  obligations,  they  are 
characteristically  exacting  towards  any  little  one  who  may 
happen  in  the  most  innocent  way,  not  by  fraud,  but  by  mis- 
fortune, to  have  become  their  debtor." 

Thus  understood,  the  parable  faithfully  represents  the  guilt 
and  criminality  of  those  at  least  who  are  animated  by  the 
spirit  of  pride,  and  deliberately  make  self-advancement  their 
chief  end :  a  class  by  no  means  small  in  number.  Such  men 
are  great  sinners,  whoever  may  be  little  ones.  They  not 
merely  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God,  the  true  chief  end  of 
man,  but  they  deliberately  rob  the  Supreme  of  His  due,  calling 
in  question  His  sovereignty,  denying  their  accountability  to 
Him  for  their  actions,  and  by  the  spirit  which  animates  them, 
saying  every  moment  of  their  Uves,  "Who  is  Lord  over  us?" 
It  is  impossible  to  overestimate  the  magnitude  of  their  guilt. 

The  contrast  between  the  two  creditors  is  not  less  striking 
than  that  between  the  two  debts.  The  king  forgives  the 
enormous  debt  of  his  unprincipled  satrap,  on  receiving  a  simple 
promise  to  pay;  the  foigiven  satrap  relentlessly  exacts  the 
petty  debt  of  some  three  pounds  sterling  from  the  poor  hap- 
less underling  who  owes  it,  stopping  his  ear  to  the  identical 
petition  for  delay  which  he  had  himself  successfully  presented 
to  his  sovereign  lord.  Here  also  the  colouring  of  the  parable 
appears  too  strong.  The  great  creditor  seems  lenient  to  excess : 
for  surely  such  a  crime  as  the  satrap  had  been  guilty  of  ought 
not  to  go  unpunished ;  and  surely  it  had  been  wise  to  attach 
little  weight  to  a  promise  of  future  payment  made  by  a  man 
who,  with  unboimded  extravagance,  had  already  squandered 
such  a  prodigious  sum,  so  that  he  had  nothing  to  pay  !  Then 
this  great  debtor,  in  his  character  as  small  creditor,  seems 
incredibly  inhuman ;  for  even  the  meanest,  most  greedy,  and 
grasping  churl,  not  to  speak  of  so  great  a  gentleman,  might 
well  be  ashamed  to  show  such  eagerness  about  so  trifling  a 
sum  as  to  seize  the  poor  wight  who  owed  it  by  the  throat 
and  drag  him  to  prison,  to  lie  there  till  he  paid  it. 

The  representation  is  doubtless  extreme,  and  yet  in  both 
parts  it  is  in  accordance  with  truth.     God  does  deal  with  His 


DISCOUESE  ON  HUMILITY  :   FORGIVING.  IN  JURIES.  221 

debtors  as  the  king  dealt  with  the  satrap.  He  is  slow  to 
anger,  and  of  great  kindness,  and  repenteth  Him  of  the  evil 
He  hath  threatened.  He  giveth  men  space  to  repent,  and  by 
providential  delays  accepts  promises  of  amendment,  though  He 
knoweth  full  well  that  they  will  be  broken,  and  that  those 
who  made  them  will  go  on  sinning  as  before.  So  He  dealt 
with  Pharaoh,  with  Israel,  with  Nineveh ;  so  He  deals  with 
all  whom  He  calls  to  account  by  remorse  of  conscience,  by  a 
visitation  of  sickness,  or  by  the  apprehension  of  death,  when, 
on  their  exclaiming,  in  a  passing  penitential  mood,  "  Lord, 
have  patience  with  me,  and  I  will  pay  Thee  all,"  He  grants 
their  petition,  knowing  that  when  the  danger  or  the  fit  of 
repentance  is  over,  the  promise  of  amendment  will  be  utterly 
forgotten.  Truly  was  it  written  of  old :  "  He  hath  not  dealt 
with  us  after  our  sins,  nor  rewarded  us  according  to  our 
iniquities." 

Nor  is  the  part  played  by  the  unmerciful  servant,  however 
infamous  and  inhuman,  altogether  unexampled ;  although  its 
comparative  rarity  is  implied  in  that  part  of  the  parabolic 
story  which  represents  the  fellow-servants  of  the  relentless  one 
as  shocked  and  grieved  at  his  conduct,  and  as  reporting  it  to 
the  common  master.  It  would  not  be  impossible  to  find 
originals  of  the  dark  picture  even  among  professors  of  the 
Christian  religion,  who  believe  in  the  forgiveness  of  sins 
through  the  blood  of  Jesus,  and  hope  to  experience  all  the 
benefits  of  divine  mercy  for  His  sake. 

It  is  by  such,  indeed,  that  the  crime  of  unmercifulness  is, 
in  the  parable,  supposed  to  be  committed.  The  exacting 
creditor  meets  his  debtor  just  as  he  himself  comes  out  from 
the  presence  of  the  king,  after  craving  and  receiving  remission 
of  his  own  debt.  This  feature  in  the  story  at  once  adapts  its 
lesson  specially  to  believers  in  the  gospel,  and  points  out  the 
enormity  of  their  guilt  All  such,  if  not  really  forgiven,  do  at 
least  consciously  live  imder  a  reign  of  grace,  in  which  God  is 
assuming  the  attitude  of  one  who  desires  all  to  be  reconciled 
unto  Himself,  and  for  that  end  proclaims  a  gratuitous  pardon 
to  all  who  will  receive  it  In  men  so  situated,  the  spirit  of 
unmercifulness  is  peculiarly  offensive.  Shameful  in  a  pagan — 
for  the  light  of  nature  teacheth  the  duty  of  being  merciful — 


{ 


222  THE  TRAQCING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

such  inhuman  rigour  as  is  here  portrayed,  in  a  Christian,  is 
utterly  abominable.  Think  of  it !  he  goes  out  from  the  pre- 
sence of  the  King  of  grace ;  rises  up  from  the  perusal  of  the 
blessed  gospel,  which  tells  of  One  who  received  publicans  and 
sinners,  even  the  chief ;  walks  forth  from  the  house  of  prayer 
where  the  precious  evangel  is  proclaimed,  yea,  from  the 
conununion  table,  which  commemorates  the  love  that  moved 
the  Son  of  God  to  pay  the  debt  of  sinners  ;  and  he  meets  a 
fellow-mortal  who  has  done  him  some  petty  wrong,  and  seizes 
hJTn  by  the  throat,  and  truculently  demands  reparation  on  pain 
of  imprisonment  or  something  worse,  if  it  be  not  forthcoming. 
May  not  the  most  gracious  Lord  righteously  say  to  such  an 
one :  *'  0  thou  wicked  servant !  I  forgave  thee  all  that  debt, 
because  thou  desiredst  me  :  shouldest  thou  not  also  have  had 
compassion  on  thy  fellow-servant,  even  as  I  had  pity  on  thee  V* 
What  can  the  miscreant  who  showed  no  mercy  expect,  but  to 
receive  judgment  without  mercy,  and  to  be  delivered  over  to 
the  tormentors,  to  be  kept  in  durance  and  put  to  the  rack, 
without  hope*of  release,  till  he  shall  have  paid  his  debt  to  the 
uttermost  farthing  ? 

This  very  doom  Jesus,  in  the  closing  sentences  of  His 
discourse,  solemnly  assured  His  disciples  awaited  all  who 
cherished  an  unforgiving  temper,  even  if  they  themselves 
should  be  the  guilty  parties.  "  So  likewise  shall  my  heavenly 
Father  do  also  imto  you,  if  ye  from  your  hearts  forgive  not 
every  one  his  brother  their  trespasses."  Stem  words  these, 
which  lay  down  a  rule  of  imiversal  application,  not  relaxable 
in  the  case  of  favoured  parties.  Were  partiality  admissible 
at  all,  such  as  the  twelve  would  surely  get  the  benefit  of  it ; 
but  as  if  to  intimate  that  in  this  matter  there  is  no  respect 
of  persons,  the  law  is  enunciated  with  direct,  emphatic  refer- 
ence to  them.  And  harsh  as  the  law  might  seem,  Jesus  is 
careful  to  indicate  His  cordial  approval  of  its  being  enforced 
with  Ehadamanthine  rigour.  For  that  purpose  He  calls  God, 
the  Judge,  by  the  endearing  name  "  My  heavenly  Father ; " 
as  if  to  say  :  "  The  great  God  and  King  does  not  seem  to  me 
unduly  stem  in  decreeing  such  penalties  against  the  imfor- 
giving.  I,  the  merciful,  tender-hearted  Son  of  man,  thoroughly 
sympathize  with  such  judicial  severity.    I  should  solemnly  say 


DISCOURSE  ON  HUMILITY:   THE  TEMPLE  TAX.  223 

Amen  to  that  doom  pronounced  even  against  you,  if  you 
behaved  so  as  to  deserve  it.  Think  not  that  because  ye  are 
my  chosen  companions,  therefore  violations  of  the  law  of  love 
by  you  will  be  winked  at.  On  the  contrary,  just  because  ye 
are  great  ones  in  the  kingdom,  so  far  as  privilege  goes,  will 
compliance  with  its  fundamental  laws  be  especially  expected 
of  you,  and  non-compliance  most  severely  punished.  To 
whom  much  is  given,  of  hiTn  shall  much  be  required.  See, 
then,  that  ye  forgive  every  one  his  brother  their  trespasses,  and 
that  ye  do  so  reaUy,  not  in  pretence,  even  from  yov/r  very  hearts*' 
By  such  severe  plainness  of  speech  did  Jesus  educate  His 
disciples  for  being  truly  great  ones  in  His  kingdom  :  great  not 
in  pride,  pretension,  and  presumption,  but  in  loyal  obedience 
to  the  behests  of  their  King,  and  particularly  to  this  law  of 
forgiveness,  on  which  He  insisted  in  His  teaching  so  earnestly 
and  so  frequently.^ 


Section  iv. — The  Temple  Tax :    an  Illustration  of  the  Sermon. 

Matt.  xvii.  24-27. 

This  story  is  a  nut  with  a  dry  hard  shell,  but  a  very  sweet 
kernel  Superficial  readers  may  see  in  it  nothing  more  than 
a  curious  anecdote  of  a  singular  fish  with  a  piece  of  money  in 
its  mouth  turning  up  opportunely  to  pay  a  tax,  related  by 
Matthew,  alone  of  the  evangelists,  not  because  of  its  intrinsic 
importance,  but  simply  because,  being  an  ex-taxgatherer,  he 
took  kindly  to  the  tale.  Devout  readers,  though  unwilling  to 
acknowledge  it,  may  be  secretly  scandalized  by  the  miracle 
related,  as  not  merely  a  departure  from  the  rule  which  Jesus 
observed  of  not  using  His  divine  power  to  help  Himself,  but 
as  something  very  like  a  piece  of  sport  on  His  part,  or  an 
expression  of  a  humorous  sense  of  incongruity,  reminding 
one  of  the  grotesque  figures  in  old  cathedrals,  in  the  carving 
of  which  the  builders  delighted  to  show  their  skill,  and  find 
for  themselves  amusement 

Breaking  the  shell  of  the  story,  we  discover  within,  as  its 

1  See  MaU.  vi.  U. 


224  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

kernel,  a  most  pathetic  exhibition  of  the  humiliation  and  self- 
hiuniliation  of  the  Son  of  man,  who  appears  exposed  to  the 
indignity  of  being  dunned  for  temple  dues,  and  so  oppressed 
with  poverty  that  He  cannot  pay  the  sum  demanded,  though 
its  amoimt  is  only  fifteenpence ;  yet  neither  pleading  poverty 
nor  insisting  on  exemption  on  the  score  of  privilege,  but 
quietly  meeting  the  claims  of  the  collectors  in  a  manner 
which,  if  sufficiently  strange,  as  we  admit,^  was  at  all  events 
singularly  meek  and  peaceable. 

The  present  incident  supplies,  in  truth,  an  admirable  illus- 
tration of  the  doctrine  taught  by  Jesus  in  the  discourse  on 
humility.  The  greatest  in  the  kingdom  here  exemplifies  by 
anticipation  the  lowliness  He  inculcated  on  His  disciples,  and 
shows  them  in  exercise  a  holy,  loving  solicitude  to  avoid 
giving  offence  not  only  to  the  little  ones  within  the  kingdom, 
but  even  to  those  without.  He  stands  not  on  His  dignity 
as  the  Son  of  God,  though  the  voice  from  heaven  uttered  on 
the  holy  mount  still  rings  in  His  ears,  but  consents  to  be 
treated  as  a  subject  or  a  stranger ;  desiring  to  live  peaceably 
with  men  whose  ways  He  does  not  love,  and  who  bear  Him 
no  good-will,  by  complying  with  their  wishes  in  all  things 
lawful 

We  regard  this  curious  scene  at  Capernaum  (with  the 
Mount  of  Transfiguration  in  the  distant  background !)  as  a 
historical  frontispiece  to  the  sermon  we  have  been  studying. 
We  are  justified  in  taking  this  view  of  it,  by  the  considera- 
tion that,  though  the  scene  occurred  before  the  sermon  was 
delivered,  it  happened  after  the  dispute  which  supplied  the 
preacher  with  a  text  The  disciples  fell  to  disputing  on  the 
way  home  from  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration,  while  the  visit 
of  the  taxgatherers  took  place  on  their  arrival  in  Capernaum. 
Of  course  Jesus  knew  of  the  dispute  at  the  time  of  the  visit, 
though  He  had  not  yet  expressly  adverted  to  it.  Is  it  too 
much  to  assume,  that  His  knowledge  of  what  had  been  going 

^  Jesus  did  work  miracles  ezpressiye  of  hmnonr,  not  in  levity,  but  in  holy  ear- 
nest Sucli  were  the  cursing  of  the  fig-tree  ;  the  healing  of  blindness  by  putting 
clay  on  the  eyes,  as  a  satire  on  the  blind  guides ;  and  the  present  one,  expressing 
a  sense  of  the  incongruity  between  the  outward  condition  and  the  intrinsic 
dignity  of  the  Son  of  God. 


DISCOURSE  ON  HUMILITY  :   THE  TEMPLE  TAX.  225 

on  by  the  way  influenced  His  conduct  in  the  affair  of  the 
tribute  money,  and  led  Him  to  make  it  the  occasion  for  teach- 
ing by  action  the  same  lesson  which  He  meant  to  take  an 
early  opportunity  of  inculcating  by  words  ? 

This  assumption,  so  far  from  being  unwarranted,  is,  we 
believe,  quite  necessary  in  order  to  make  Christ's  conduct  on 
this  occasion  intelligible.  Those  who  leave  out  of  account  the 
dispute  by  the  way  are  not  in  the  right  point  of  view  for 
seeing  the  incident  at  Capernaum  in  its  natural  light,  and 
they  fall  inevitably  into  misunderstandings.  They  are  forced, 
e.g.y  to  regard  Jesus  as  arguing  seriously  against  payment  of 
the  temple  tax,  as  something  not  l^ally  obligatory,  or  as  lying 
out  of  the  ordinary  course  of  His  humiliation  as  the  Son  of 
man.  Now  it  was  neither  one  nor  other  of  these  things. 
The  law  of  Moses  ordained  that  every  man  above  twenty 
years  should  pay  the  sum  of  half  a  shekel  as  an  atonement 
for  his  soul,  and  to  meet  the  expenses  connected  with  the 
service  of  the  tabernacle  rendered  to  God  for  the  common 
benefit  of  all  Israelites ;  and  Jesus,  as  a  Jew,  was  just  as  much 
under  obligation  to  comply  with  this  particular  law  as  with 
any  other.  Nor  was  there  any  peculiar  indignity  either  in 
kind  or  degree  involved  in  obeying  that  law.  Doubtless  it 
was  a  great  indignity  and  humiliation  to  the  Son  of  God  to  be 
paying  taxes  for  the  maintenance  of  His  own  Father^s  house ! 
All  that  He  said  to  Peter,  pointing  out  the  incongruity  of  such 
a  state  of  things,  was  sober  truth.  But  the  incongruity  does  not 
meet  us  here  alone ;  it  runs  through  the  whole  of  our  Lord's 
earthly  experience.  His  life,  in  aU  respects,  departed  from 
the  analogy  of  kings'  sons.  Though  He  were  a  Son,  yet 
learned  He  obedience ;  though  He  were  a  Son,  yet  came  He 
not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister  ;  though  He  were 
a  Son,  yet  became  He  subject  to  the  law,  not  merely  the 
moral  but  the  ceremonial,  and  was  circumcised,  and  took  part 
in  the  temple  worship,  and  frequented  the  sacred  feasts,  and 
offered  sacrifices,  though  these  were  aU  but  shadows  of  good 
things,  whereof  He  Himself  was  the  substance.  Surely,  in  a 
life  containing  so  many  indignities  and  incongruities — ^which 
was,  in  fact,  one  grand  indignity  from  beginning  to  end — ^it 
was  a  small  matter  to  be  obliged  to  pay  annually,  for  the 

p 


226  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

benefit  of  the  temple,  the  paltry  sum  of  fifteenpence  !  He 
who  with  marvellous  patience  went  through  all  the  rest,  could 
not  possibly  mean  to  stumble  and  scruple  at  so  trifling  a 
matter.  He  who  did  nothing  towards  destroying  the  temple 
and  putting  an  end  to  legal  worship  before  the  time,  could  not 
be  a  party  to  the  mean  policy  of  starving  out  its  officials,  or 
grudging  the  funds  necessary  to  keep  the  sacred  edifice  in 
good  repair.  He  might  say  openly  what  He  thought  of  exist- 
ing ecclesiastical  abuses,  but  He  would  do  no  more. 

The  truth  is>  that  the  words  spoken  by  Jesus  to  Simon  were 
not  intended  as  an  argument  against  paying  the  tax,  but  as  an 
explanation  of  what  was  meant  by  His  paying  it,  and  of  the 
motive  which  guided  Him  in  paying  it  They  were  a  lesson  for 
Simon,  and  through  him  for  the  twelve,  on  a  subject  wherein 
they  had  great  need  of  instruction ;  not  a  legal  defence  against 
the  demands  of  the  tax-gatherer.  But  for  that  dispute  by  the 
way,  Jesus  would  probably  have  taken  the  quietest  means  for 
getting  the  tax  paid,  as  a  matter  of  course,  without  making 
any  remarks  on  the  subject  That  He  had  already  acted  thus 
on  previous  occasions,  Peter's  prompt  affirmative  reply  to  the 
question  of  the  collectors  seems  to  imply.  The  disciple  S6dd 
'*  yes,"  as  knowing  what  his  Master  had  done  in  past  years,  and 
assuming  as  a  thing  of  course  that  His  practice  would  be  the 
same  now.  But  Jesus  did  not  deem  it,  in  present  circum- 
stances, expedient  to  let  His  disciples  regard  His  action  with 
respect  to  the  tax  as  a  mere  vulgar  matter  of  course;  He 
wanted  them  to  understand  and  reflect  on  the  moral  meaning 
and  the  Tnotive  of  His  action,  for  their  own  instruction  and 
guidance. 

On  these  two  points,  we  repeat,  Jesus  desired  to  arrest  the 
attention  of  Simon  and  the  rest  of  the  twelva  He  wished  them 
to  understand,  in  the  first  place,  that  for  Him  to  pay  the  temple 
dues  was  a  humiliation  and  an  incongruity,  similar  to  that  of 
a  king's  son  paying  a  tax  for  the  support  of  the  palace  and 
the  royal  household  ;  that  it  was  not  a  thing  of  course  that  He 
should  pay,  any  more  than  it  was  a  thing  of  course  that  He 
should  become  man,  and,  so  to  speak,  leave  His  royal  state 
behind  and  assimie  the  rank  of  a  peasant ;  that  it  was  an  act 
of  voluntary  hximiliation,  forming  one  item  in  the  course  of 


DISCOUESE  ON  HUMILITY:   THE  TEMPLE  TAX.  227 

humiliation  to  which  He  voluntarily  submitted,  beginning  with 
His  birth,  and  ending  with  His  death  and  burial  He  desired 
His  disciples  to  think  of  these  things  in  the  hope  that  medi- 
tation on  them  would  help  to  rebuke  the  pride,  pretension, 
and  self-assertion  which  had  given  rise  to  that  petty  dispute 
about  places  of  distinction.  He  would  say  to  them,  in  effect : 
"  Were  I,  like  you,  covetous  of  honours,  and  bent  on  asserting 
my  importance,  I  would  stand  on  my  dignity,  and  haughtily 
reply  to  these  collectors  of  tribute :  Why  trouble  ye  me  about 
temple  dues  ?  Know  ye  not  who  I  am  ?  I  am  the  Clmst,  the 
Son  of  the  living  God :  the  temple  is  my  Father's  house ;  and 
I,  His  Son,  am  free  from  aU  servile  obligations.  But,  note  ye 
well,  I  do  nothing  of  the  kind.  With  the  honours  heaped 
upon  me  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration  fresh  in  my  recol- 
lection, with  the  consciousness  of  who  I  am,  and  whence  I 
came,  and  whither  I  go,  abiding  deep  in  my  soul,  I  submit  to 
be  treated  as  a  mere  common  Jew,  suffering  my  honours  to 
fall  into  abeyance,  and  making  no  demands  for  a  recognition 
which  is  not  voluntarily  conceded.  The  world  knows  me  not ; 
and  while  it  knows  me  not,  I  am  content  that  it  should  do 
with  me,  as  with  John,  whatsoever  it  lists.  Did  the  rulers 
know  who  I  am,  they  would  be  ashamed  to  ask  of  me  temple 
dues  ;  but  since  they  do  not,  I  accept  and  bear  aU  the  indig- 
nities consequent  on  their  ignorance." 

All  this  Jesus  said  in  effect  to  His  disciples,  by  first  advert- 
ing to  the  grounds  on  which  a  refusal  to  pay  the  didrachmon 
might  plausibly  be  defended,  and  then  after  all  paying  it.  The 
manner  of  pajnnent  also  was  so  contrived  by  Him  as  to  rein- 
force the  lesson.  He  said  not  to  Simon  simply :  "  Go  and 
catch  fish,  that  with  the  proceeds  of  their  sale  we  may  satisfy 
our  creditors."  He  gave  him  directions  as  the  Lord  of  nature, 
to  whom  all  creatures  in  land  or  sea  were  subject,  and  all 
their  movements  familiar,  while  yet  so  humbled  as  to  need 
the  services  of  the  meanest  of  them.  By  drawing  on  His 
omniscience  in  giving  these  instructions  to  His  disciple^  He 
did,  in  a  manner,  what  He  never  did  either  before  or  after : 
viz.  wrought  a  miracle  for  His  own  behoof.  The  exception, 
however,  had  the  same  reason  as  the  rule,  and  therefore  proved 
the  rule.      Jesus  abstained  from  using  His  divine  feuMiltiea 


228  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

for  His  own  benefit,  that  He  might  not  impair  the  integrity  of 
His  humiliation ;  that  His  himian  life  might  be  a  real  bond 
fide  life  of  hardship,  unalleviated  by  the  presence  of  the  divine 
element  in  His  personality.  But  what  was  the  effect  of  the 
lightning-flash  of  divine  knowledge  emitted  by  Him  in  giving 
those  directions  to  Peter  ?  To  impair  the  integrity  of  His 
humiliation  ?  Nay,  but  only  to  make  it  glaringly  conspicuous. 
It  said  to  Simon,  and  to  us,  if  he  and  we  had  ears  to  hear : 
"  Behold  who  it  is  that  pays  this  tax,  and  that  is  reduced  to 
such  straits  in  order  to  pay  it !  'Tis  He  who  knoweth  aU  the 
fowls  of  the  mountain,  and  whatsoever  passeth  through  the 
paths  of  the  sea  ! " 

The  other  point  on  which  Jesus  desired  to  fix  the  attention 
of  His  disciples,  was  the  reason  which  moved  Him  to  adopt 
the  policy  of  submission  to  what  was  in  itself  an  indignity. 
That  reason  was  to  avoid  giving  offence  :  "  Notwithstanding, 
lest  we  should  offend  them."  This  was  not,  of  course,  the  only 
reason  of  His  conduct  in  this  case.  There  were  other  com- 
prehensive reasons  applicable  to  His  whole  experience  of 
humiliation,  and  to  this  small  item  therein  in  particular ;  a 
full  account  of  which  would  just  amount  to  an  answer  to  the 
great  question  put  by  Anselm  :  "  Cur  Deus  Homo ; "  Why  did 
God  become  man  ?  On  that  great  question  we  do  not  enter 
here,  however,  but  confine  ourselves  to  the  remark,  that  while 
the  reason  assigned  by  Jesus  to  Peter  for  his  payment  of  the 
temple  dues  was  by  no  means  the  only  one,  or  even  the  chief, 
it  was  the  reason  to  which,  for  the  disciples'  sake.  He  deemed 
it  expedient  just  then  to  give  prominence.  He  was  about  to 
discourse  to  them  largely  on  ther  subject  of  giving  and  receiv- 
ing offences ;  and  He  wished  them,  and  specially  their  foremost 
man,  first  of  all  to  observe  how  very  careful  He  Himself  was 
not  to  offend :  what  a  prominent  place  the  desire  to  avoid 
giving  offence  occupied  among  His  motives. 

Christ's  declared  reason  for  paying  the  tribute  is  strikingly 
expressive  of  His  lowliness  and  His  love.  Notice,  as  the  mark 
of  His  lowliness,  that  there  is  no  word  here  of  taking  offence. 
How  easily  and  plausibly  might  He  have  taken  up  the  posi- 
tion of  one  who  did  well  to  be  angry !  **  I  am  the  Christ, 
the  Son  of  God,"  He  might  have  said,  "  and  have  substan- 


DISCOUESE  ON  HUMILITY  :   THE  TEMPLE  TAX.  229 

tiated  my  claims  by  a  thousand,  miracles  in  word  and  deed, 
yet  they  wiKuUy  refuse  to  recognise  me ;  I  am  a  poor  home- 
less wanderer,  yet  they,  knowing  this,  demand  the  tribute,  as 
if  more  for  the  sake  of  annoying  and  insulting  me  than  of 
getting  the  money.  And  for  what  purpose  do  they  collect 
these  dues  ?  For  the  support  of  a  religious  establishment 
thoroughly  effete,  to  repair  an  edifice  doomed  to  destruction, 
to  maintain  a  priesthood  scandalously  deficient  in  the  cardinal 
virtues  of  integrity  and  truth,  and  whose  very  existence  is  a 
curse  to  the  land.  I  cannot  in  conscience  pay  a  didrachmon, 
no,  not  even  so  much  as  a  farthing,  for  any  such  objects." 

The  lowly  One  did  not  assume  this  attitude,  but  gave  what 
waa  Mked  without  complaint,  grudging,  or  railing ;  and  His 
conduct  conveys  lessons  for  Christians  in  all  ages,  and  in  our 
own  age  in  particular.  It  teaches  the  children  of  the  king- 
dom not  to  murmur  because  the  world  does  not  recognise 
their  status  and  dignity.  The  world  knew  not  when  He 
came,  even  God's  eternal  Son ;  what  wonder  if  it  recognise 
not  His  younger  brethren !  The  kingdom  of  heaven  itseK  is 
not  believed  in,  and  its  citizens  should  not  be  surprised  at 
any  want  of  respect  towards  them  individually.  The  mani- 
festation of  the  sons  of  God  is  one  of  the  things  for  which 
Christians  wait  in  hope.  For  the  present  they  are  not  the 
children,  but  the  strangers :  instead  of  exemption  from  bur- 
dens, they  should  rather  expect  oppression ;  and  they  should 
be  thankful  when  they  are  put  on  a  level  with  their  fellow- 
creatures,  and  get  the  benefit  of  a  law  of  toleration. 

Another  lesson  taught  by  the  conduct  of  Jesus  concerns* 
those  especially  who  consider  themselves  aggrieved  by  de- 
mands for  "church  rates"  and  "annuity  taxes."  These 
things  have  made  great  noise,  and  given  rise  to  no  little 
scandal,  in  our  day.  Many  offences  have  been  both  given 
and  taken  in  connection  therewith,  on  the  part  of  those  who 
have  pertinaciously  demanded  the  "tribute  money"  on  the 
one  hand,  and  also  on  the  part  of  those  who  as  pertinaciously 
have  refused  it  on  the  other.  Both  offenders  and  offended 
might  find  in  Christ's  discourse  on  humility  much  seasonable 
counsel;  but  the  lesson  embodied  in  the  present  incident 
concerns  specially  those  who  deem  themselves  the  injured 


230  THE  TBAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

party.  What,  then,  is  the  message  which  it  conveys  for  them  ? 
It  is  to  this  eflfect :  "  Ye  prize  freedom : — ^well,  freedom  is  good. 
Spiritual  freedom  is  a  priceless  treasure;  and  even  freedom 
finom  pecuniary  burdens,  i.e,  from  obligations  to  pay  money 
for  objects  with  which  ye  do  not  sympathize,  is  not  to  be 
despised,  and  may  be  sought  in  all  lawful  ways.  Let  all 
the  children  be  free,  if  possibla  But  bewjure  of  imagining 
that  it  is  necessary  for  conscience  sake  always  to  resist  in- 
dignities, and  to  fight  for  a  freedom  which  mainly  concerns 
the  purse.  It  is  not  a  mark  of  greatness  in  the  kingdom  to 
bluster  much  about  rights,  and  to  complain  loudly  of  eccle- 
siastical or  other  imposts.  The  higher  one  rises  in  spiritual 
dignity,  the  more  he  can  afford  to  endure  in  the  way  of 
indignity,  and  the  more  it  becomes  him  to  avoid  quarrelling 
about  trifles.  The  greatest  in  the  kingdom  paid  the  temple 
tax  for  Himself,  and  for  Peter,  an  apostle  elect  of  the  new 
dispensation,  which  was  destined  ultimately  to  supersede  the 
temple  and  its  worship.  They  had  greater  cause  to  dissent 
from  the  state  church  than  you  have.  But  they  did  not  strive, 
nor  cry,  nor  agitate,  but  quietly  submitted  to  the  temporary 
humiliation  of  upholding  an  effete  institution ;  habitually  spoke 
the  truth  which  would  ere  long  make  all  things  new,  and  left 
the  rest  to  time  and  the  providence  of  God.     So  do  ye." 

As  the  himiility  of  Jesus  was  shown  by  His  not  taking,  so 
His  love  was  manifested  by  His  solicitude  to  avoid  giving 
offence.  He  desired,  if  possible,  to  conciliate  persons  who 
for  the  most  part  had  treated  Him  all  along  as  a  heathen  and 
a  publican,  and  who  ere  long,  as  He  knew  weU,  would  treat 
Him  even  as  a  felon.  How  like  Himself  was  the  Son  of  man 
in  so  acting!  How  thoroughly  in  keeping  His  procedure 
here  with  His  whole  conduct  while  He  was  on  the  earth ! 
For  what  was  His  aim  in  coming  to  the  world,  what  His 
constant  endeavour  after  He  came,  but  to  cancel  offences,  and 
to  put  an  end  to  enmities — to  reconcile  sinful  men  to  God 
and  to  each  other  ?  For  these  ends  He  took  flesh ;  for  these 
ends  He  was  crucified.  His  earthly  life  was  all  of  a  piece — 
a  life  of  lowly  lova 

"Lest  we  should  offend,"  said  Jesus,  using  the  plural  to 
hint   that  He  meant   His   conduct  to  be  imitated  by  the 


DISCOUESE  ON  HUMILITY:   THE  INTEBDICTED  EXORCIST.    231 

twelve  and  by  all  His  followers.  How  happy  for  the  church 
and  the  world  were  this  done !  How  many  offences  might 
have  been  prevented,  had  the  conciliatory  spirit  of  the  Lord 
always  animated  those  called  by  His  name!  How  many 
offences  might  be  removed,  were  this  spirit  abundantly 
poured  out  on  Christians  of  all  denominations  now!  Did 
this  motive,  "  Notwithstanding,  lest  we  should  offend,**  bulk 
largely  in  all  minds,  what  breaches  might  be  healed,  what 
unions  might  come !  A  national  church  morally,  if  not  legally, 
established  in  unity  and  peace,  might  be  realized  in  Scotland 
in  the  present  generation.  Surely  a  consummation  devoutly 
to  be  wished  I  Let  us  wish  for  it ;  let  us  pray  for  it ;  let 
us  cherish  a  spirit  tending  to  make  it  possible. 


Section  v. — The  interdicted  Exorcist :  another  Illustration 

m 

of  the  Sermon, 

Mark  ix.  SS-41  ;  Lfkb  ix.  49,  50. 

The  discourses  of  our  Lord  were  not  continuous  unbroken 
addresses  on  formally  announced  themes,  such  as  we  are  wont 
to  hear,  but  rather  for  the  most  part  of  the  nature  of  Socratic 
dialogues,  in  which  He  was  the  principal  speaker.  His  dis- 
ciples contributing  their  part  in  the  form  of  a  question  asked, 
an  exclamation  uttered,  or  a  case  of  conscience  propoimded. 
In  the  discourse  or  dialogue  on  humility,  two  of  the  disciples 
acted  as  interlocutors,  viz.  Peter  and  John.  Towards  the 
close,  the  former  of  these  two  disciples,  as  we  saw,  asked  a 
question  concerning  the  forgiving  of  injuries ;  and  near  the 
commencement,  the  other  disciple,  John,  related  an  anecdote 
which  was  brought  up  to  his  recollection  by  the  doctrine  of 
his  Master,  respecting  receiving  little  ones  in  His  name,  and 
on  which  the  truth  therein  set  forth  seemed  to  have  a  bearing. 
The  facts  thus  brought  under  His  notice  led  Jesus  to  make 
reflections;  which  supply  an  interesting  illustration  of  the 
bearing  of  the  doctrine  He  was  inculcating  on  a  particular 
class  of  cases  or  questions.  These  reflections,  with  the  inci- 
dent to  which  they  relate,  now  solicit  attentioa 


232  THE  TBMNIKG  OF  THE  TWELYK 

The  story  told  by  John  was  to  the  eflfect  that  on  one 
occasion  he  and  his  brethren  had  found  a  man  unknown  to 
them  engaged  in  the  work  of  casting  out  devils,  and  had 
served  him  with  an  interdict,  because,  though  he  used  the 
name  of  Jesus  in  practising  exorcism,  he  did  not  follow  or 
identify  himself  with  them,  the  twelve.  At  ^hat  particular 
time  this  happened  is  not  stated ;  but  it  may  be  conjectured 
with  much  probability  that  the  incident  was  a  reminiscence 
of  the  Galilean  mission,  during  which  the  disciples  were 
separated  from  their  Master,  and  were  themselves  occupied 
in  healing  the  sick,  and  casting  out  evil  spirits,  and  in 
preaching  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom. 

John,  it  will  be  observed,  does  not  disclaim  joint  respon- 
sibility for  the  high-handed  proceeding  he  relates,  but  speaks 
as  if  the  twelve  had  acted  unanimously  in  the  matter.  It 
may  surprise  some  to  find  Mm,  the  apostle  of  love,  consenting 
to  so  uncharitable  a  deed;  but  such  surprise  is  founded  on 
superficial  views  of  his  character,  as  well  as  on  ignorance  of 
the  laws  of  spiritual  growth.  John  is  not  now  what  he  will 
be,  but  differs  &om  his  future  self,  as  much  as  an  orange 
in  its  second  year  differs  from  the  same  orange  in  its  third 
final  year  of  growth.  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  will  ultimately 
ripen  in  this  disciple  into  something  very  sweet  and  beau- 
tiful ;  but  meantime  it  is  green,  bitter,  and  fit  only  to  set  the 
teeth  on  edge.  Devoted  in  mind,  tender  and  intense  in  his 
attachment  to  Jesus,  scrupulously  conscientious  in  aU  his 
actions,  he  is  even  now;  but  he  is  also  bigoted,  intolerant, 
ambitious.  Already  he  has  played  the  part  of  a  high  church- 
man in  suppressing  the  nonconforming  exorcist;  ere  long 
we  shall  see  him  figuring,  together  with  his  bi-other,  as  a  per- 
secutor, proposing  to  call  down  fire  from  heaven  to  destroy 
the  enemies  of  his  Lord ;  and  yet  agaiu  we  shaU  find  him, 
along  with  the  same  brother  and  their  common  mother, 
engaged  in  an  ambitious  plot  to  secure  those  places  of  dis- 
tinction in  the  kingdom  about  which  all  the  twelve  have 
lately  been  wrangling. 

In  refusing  to  recognise  the  exorcist  as  a  fellow-worker, 
however  humble  as  a  brother,  the  disciples  proceeded  on  very 
narrow  and  precarious  grounds.     The  test  they  applied  was 


DISODUESE  ON  HUMILITY:   THE  INTEBDICTED  EXORCIST.     233 

purely  external  What  sort  of  man  the  person  interdicted 
might  be  they  did  not  inquire  ;  it  was  enough  that  he  was  not 
of  their  company  :  as  if  all  inside  that  charmed  circle — Judas, 
for  example — ^were  good ;  and  aU  outside,  not  excepting  a 
Nicodemus,  utterly  Christless  !  Two  good  things,  on  their 
own  showing,  could  be  said  of  him  whom  they  silenced :  he 
was  well  occupied,  and  he  seemed  to  have  a  most  devout 
regard  for  Jesus ;  for  he  cast  out  devils,  and  he  did  it  in 
Jesus'  name.  These  were  not  indeed  decisive  marks  of  dis- 
cipleship,  for  it  was  possible  that  a  man  might  practise  exorcism 
for  gain,  and  use  the  name  of  Christ  because  it  had  been 
proved  to  be  a  good  name  to  conjure  by ;  but  they  ought  to 
have  been  regarded  as  at  least  presumptive  evidence  in  favour 
of  one  in  whose  conduct  they  appeared.  Judging  by  the  facts, 
it  was  probable  that  the  silenced  exorcist  was  an  honest  and 
sincere  man,  whose  heart  had  been  impressed  by  the  ministry 
of  Jesus  and  His  disciples,  and  who  desired  to  imitate  their 
zeal  in  doing  good.  It  was  even  possible  that  he  was  more 
than  this — a  man  possessing  higher  spiritual  endowment  than 
his  censors,  some  provincial  prophet  as  yet  imknown  to  fame. 
How  preposterous,  in  view  of  such  a  possibility,  that  narrow 
outwMd  test,  "  Not  with  us !" 

As  an  illustration  of  what  this  way  of  judging  lands  in, 
one  little  fact  in  the  history  of  the  celebrated  Sir  Matthew 
Hale,  whose  Contemplations  are  familiar  to  aU  readers  of  devout 
literature,  is  instructive.  Bichard  Baxter  relates  that  the  good 
people  in  the  part  of  the  country  where  the  distinguished  judge 
resided,  after  his  retirement  from  the  judicial  bench,  did  not 
entertain  a  favourable  opinion  of  his  religious  character ;  their 
notion  being  that  he  was  certainly  a  very  moral  man,  but  not 
converted.  A  serious  conclusion  to  come  to  about  a  fellow- 
creature  !  and  one  is  curious  to  know  on  what  so  solemn  a 
judgment  was  based.  The  author  of  the  Saint*8  Rest  gives  us 
the  needful  information  on  this  momentous  point  The  pious 
folks  about  Acton,  he  tells  us,  ranked  the  ex-judge  among  the 
unconverted,  because  he  did  not  frequent  their  private  weekly 
prayer-meetings  !  It  was  the  old  story  of  the  twelve  and 
the  exorcist,  under  a  new  Puritanic  form.  Baxter,  it  is  need- 
less to  say,  did  not  sympathize  with  the  harsh,  uncharitable 


234  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

opinion  of  his  less  enlightened  brethren.  His  thoughts 
breathed  the  gentle,  benignant,  humble,  charitable  spirit  of 
Christian  maturity.  ''  I,"  he  adds,  after  relating  the  fact  above 
stated,  "  I  that  have  heard  and  read  his  serious  expressions  of 
the  concernments  of  eternity,  and  seen  his  love  to  aU  good 
men,  and  the  blamelessness  of  his  life,  thought  better  of  his 
piety  than  of  mine  own."^ 

In  silencing  the  exorcist,  the  twelve  were  probably  actuated 
by  a  mixture  of  motives — ^partly  by  jealousy,  and  partly  by 
conscientious  scruples.  They  disliked,  we  imagine,  the  idea 
of  any  one  using  Christ's  name  but  themselves,  desiring  a 
monopoly  of  the  power  conferred  by  that  name  to  cast  out 
evil  spirits ;  and  they  probably  thought  it  unlikely,  if  not 
impossible,  that  any  one  who  kept  aloof  &om  them  could  be 
sincerely  devoted  to  their  Master. 

In  so  far  as  the  disciples  acted  under  the  influence  of 
jealousy,  their  conduct  towards  the  exorcist  was  morally  of  a 
piece  with  their  recent  dispute  who  should  be  the  greatest 
The  same  spirit  of  pride  revealed  itseK  on  the  two  occasions, 
under  different  phases.  The  silencing  of  the  exorcist  was  a 
display  of  arrogance  analogous  to  that  of  High  Churchmen, 
who  claim  to  be  exclusively  the  church  of  Christ.  In  their 
dispute  among  themselves,  the  disciples  played  on  a  humble 
scale  the  game  of  ambitious,  self-seeking  ecclesiastics,  contend- 
ing for  seats  of  honour  and  power.  In  the  one  case  the  twelve 
said  in  effect  to  the  man  whom  they  found  casting  out  devils : 
We  are  the  sole  commissioned,  authorized  agents  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ ;  in  the  other  case  they  said  to  each  other  :  We 
are  all  members  of  the  kingdom,  and  servants  of  the  King ; 
but  I  deserve  to  have  a  higher  place  than  thou,  even  to  be  a 
prelate  sitting  on  a  throne. 

One  cannot  help  thinking  here  of  the  contrast  between  these 
foolish  weak  disciples,  with  their  professional  jealousies  and 
tiieir  vain  rivalries,  and  the  same  men  as  the  apostles  of  after 
days,  when  they  were  so  ready  to  welcome  assistance  from 
every  quarter  in  the  work  of  the  gospel,  feeling  that  the 
harvest  was  great,  and  the  labourers  all  too  few,  and  so  utterly 
free  from  all  ambitious  love  of  pre-eminence.     Men  of  High 

^  JReUquia  Baxieriafus,  part  iii  p.  47. 


DISCOURSE  ON  HUMILITY:   THE  INTERDICTED  EXORCIST.     235 

Church  proclivities  make  a  slight  mistake  when  they  prate  of 
apostolic  succession.  It  is  not  &om  the  apostles,  but  from  the 
disciples,  they  derive  their  descent  High-Churchism  is  not 
an  apostolic  virtue  ;  it  is  the  vice  of  tyros  in  Christ's  school, 
who  are  yet  largely  under  the  dominion  of  the  carnal  mind. 

In  so  far  as  the  intolerance  of  the  twelve  was  due  to  honest 
scrupulosity,  it  is  deserving  of  more  respectful  consideration. 
The  plea  of  conscience,  honestly  advanced,  must  always  be 
listened  to  with  serious  attention,  even  when  it  is  mistaken. 
We  say  "  honestly"  with  emphasis, because  we  cannot  forget  that 
there  is  much  scrupulosity  that  is  not  honest  Conscience  is 
often  used  as  a  stalking-horse  by  proud,  quarrelsome,  seK- 
willed  men,  to  promote  their  own  private  ends.  Pride,  says 
one,  speaking  of  doctrinal  disputes,  "  is  the  greatest  enemy  of 
moderation.  This  makes  men  stickle  for  their  opinions,  to 
make  them  fundamental  Proud  men,  having  deeply  studied 
some  additional  point  in  divinity,  will  strive  to  make  the  same 
necessary  to  salvation,  to  enhance  the  value  of  their  own 
worth  and  pains ;  and  it  must  needs  be  fundamental  in  religion, 
because  it  is  fundamental  to  their  reputation."  ^  These  shrewd 
remarks  hold  good  of  other  things  besides  doctrine.  Opinion- 
ative,  pragmatic  persons,  would  make  everything  in  religion 
fundamental  on  which  they  have  decided  views  ;  and  if  they 
could  get  their  own  way,  they  would  exclude  from  the  church 
aU  who  held  not  with  them  in  the  very  minutise  of  belief  and 
practice.  But  there  is  such  a  thing  also  as  honest  scrupu- 
losity, and  it  is  more  common  than  many  imagine.  There  is 
a  certain  tendency  to  intolerant  exaction,  and  to  severity  in 
judging,  in  the  unripe  stage  of  every  earnest  lifa  For  the 
conscience  of  a  young  disciple  is  like  a  fire  of  green  logs, 
which  smokes  first,  before  it  bums  with  a  clear  blaze.  And 
a  Christian  whose  conscience  is  in  this  state  must  be  treated 
as  we  treat  a  dull  fire  :  he  must  be  borne  with,  that  is,  till  his 
conscience  clear  itself  of  bitter,  cloudy  smoke,  and  become  a 
pure,  genial,  warm  flame  of  zeal  tempered  by  charity. 

That  the  scrupulosity  of  the  twelve  was  of  the  honest  kind, 
we  believe  for  this  reason,  that  they  were  willing  to  be  in- 
structed.   They  told  their  Master  what  they  had  done,  that  they 

^  Thomas  Fuller,  Holy  State,  B.  iii  c.  20. 


236  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

might  learn  from  Him  whether  it  was  right  or  wrong.  This  is 
not  the  way  of  men  whose  plea  of  conscience  is  a  pretext 

The  instruction  honestly  desired  by  the  disciples,  Jesus 
promptly  communicated  in  the  form  of  a  clear,  definite  judg- 
ment on  the  case,  with  a  reason  annexed.  "  Forbid  him  not," 
he  replied  to  John,  "  for  he  that  is  not  against  us  is  for  us."^ 

The  reason  assigned  for  this  counsel  of  tolerance  reminds 
us  of  another  maxim  uttered  by  Jesus  on  the  occasion  when 
the  Pharisees  brought  against  Him  the  blasphemous  charge 
of  casting  out  devils  by  aid  of  Beelzebub.*  The  two  sayings 
have  a  superficial  aspect  of  contradiction:  one  seeming  to 
say.  The  great  matter  is  not  to  be  decidedly  against ;  the 
other.  The  great  matter  is  to  be  decidedly  for.  But  they  are 
harmonized  by  a  truth  underlying  both — that  the  cardinal 
matter  in  spiritual  character  is  the  bias  of  the  heart  Here 
Jesus  says :  "  If  the  heart  of  a  man  be  with  me,  then,  though 
by  ignorance,  error,  isolation  from  those  who  are  avowedly  my 
friends,  he  may  seem  to  be  against  me,  he  is  really  for  me." 
In  the  other  case  He  meant  to  say :  "  If  a  man  be  not  in 
heart  with  me  (the  case  of  the  Pharisees),  then,  though  by 
his  orthodoxy  and  his  zeal  he  may  seem  to  be  on  God's  side, 
and  therefore  on  mine,  he  is  in  reality  against  me." 

To  the  words  just  commented  on,  Mark  adds  the  following, 
as  spoken  by  Jesus  at  this  time :  *'  There  is  no  man  that 
shaU  do  a  miracle  in  my  name  that  can  lightly  speak  evil  of 
me."  The  voice  of  wisdom  and  charity  united  is  audible 
here.  The  emphasis  is  on  the  word  ra')(p,  lightly  or  readily. 
This  word,  in  the  first  place,  involves  the  admission  that  the 
case  supposed  might  happen ;  an  admission  demanded  by 
historical  truth.  For  such  cases  did  actually  occur  in  after 
days.  Luke  tells,  e.g,,  of  certain  vagabond  Jews  (in  every  sense 
well  named),  who  took  upon  them  to  call  over  demoniacs  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  without  any  personal  faith  in  Him,  but 
simply  in  the  way  of  trade ;  being  vile  traffickers  in  exorcism 
for  whom  even  the  devils  expressed  their  contempt,  exclaiming, 
"  Jesus  I  know,  and  Paul  I  know,  but  who  are  ye  ?"  *  Our 
Lord  knowing  before  that  such  cases  would  happen,  and  being 
acquainted  with  the  depths  of  human  depravity,  could  not  do 

*  Markix.  89, 40  (Lukehas  "you"for  "us").      «  Matt,  xii  80.     » Acts xix.  13. 


i 


DISCOUESE  ON  HUMILITY:   THE  INTEBDICTED  EXORCIST.     237 

otherwise  than  admit  the  possibility  of  the  exorcist  referred 
to  by  John  being  animated  by  unworthy  motives.  But 
while  making  the  admission.  He  took  care  to  indicate  that,  in 
His  judgment,  the  case  supposed  was  very  improbable,  and 
that  it  was  very  unlikely  that  one  who  did  a  miracle  in  His 
name  would  speak  evil  of  ffim.  And  He  desired  His  dis- 
ciples to  be  on  their  guard  against  readily  and  lightly  believ- 
ing that  any  man  could  be  guQty  of  such  a  sin.  Till  strong 
reasons  for  thinking  otherwise  appeared.  He  would  have  them 
charitably  regard  the  outward  action  as  the  index  of  sincere 
faith  and  love  (which  they  might  the  more  easily  do  then, 
when  nothing  was  to  be  gained  by  the  use  or  profession  of 
Christ's  name,  but  the  displeasure  of  those  who  had  the  cha- 
racters and  lives  of  men  in  their  power). 

Such  were  the  wise,  gracious  words  spoken  by  Jesus  with 
reference  to  the  case  brought  up  for  judgment  by  John.  Is 
it  possible  to  extract  any  lessons  from  these  words  of  general 
application  to  the  church  in  all  ages,  or  specially  applicable 
to  our  own  age  in  particular  ?  It  is  a  question  on  which  one 
must  speak  with  diffidence ;  for  while  all  bow  to  the  judgment 
of  Jesus  on  the  conduct  of  His  disciples,  as  recorded  in  the 
Gospels,  there  is  much  difference  among  Christians  as  to  the 
inferences  to  be  drawn  therefrom,  in  reference  to  cases  in 
which  their  own  conduct  is  concerned.  The  foUowing  reflec- 
tions  may,  however,  safely  be  hazarded : — 

1.  Learn  from  the  discreet,  loving  words  of  the  great  Teacher 
to  beware  of  hasty  conclusions  concerning  men's  spiritual 
state,  based  on  merely  external  indications.  Say  not  with 
the  Church  of  Rome,  "  Out  of  our  communion  is  no  possibility 
of  salvation  or  of  goodness ; "  but  rather  admit  that  even  in 
that  corrupt  communion  may  be  many  building  on  the  true 
foundation,  though,  for  the  most  part,  with  very  combustible 
materials ;  nay,  that  Christ  may  have  not  a  few  Mends  outside 
the  pale  of  all  the  churches.  Ask  not  with  Nathanael,  "  Can 
any  good  thing  come  out  of  Nazareth  ? "  but  remember  that 
the  best  things  may  come  out  of  most  unexpected  quarters. 
Be  not  forgetful  to  entertain  strangers,  for  thereby  some  have 
entertained  angels  unawaies.  Bear  in  mind  that,  by  indulging 
in  the  cry,  "  Not  with  us,"  in  reference  to  trifles  and  crotchets. 


238  THE  I'RAININO  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

you  may  tempt  God,  while  giving  His  Holy  Spirit  to  those 
whom  you  unchurch,  to  withdraw  His  influences  from  you, 
for  your  pride,  exclusiveness,  and  self-will;  and  may  turn 
your  creed  into  a  prison,  in  which  you  shall  be  shut  out  from 
the  fellowship  of  saints,  and  doomed  to  experience  the  chagrin 
of  seeing  through  the  window-bars  of  your  cell  God's  people 
walking  at  large,  while  you  lie  immured  in  a  gaoL 

2.  In  view  of  that  verdict,  "  Forbid  him  not,"  one  must 
read,  with  a  sad,  sorrowful  heart,  many  pages  of  church  history, 
in  which  the  predominating  spirit  is  that  of  the  twelve  rather 
than  that  of  their  Master.  One  may  confidently  say,  that  had 
Christ's  mind  dwelt  more  in  those  called  by  His  name,  many 
things  in  that  history  would  have  been  different  '  Separatism, 
censoriousness,  intolerance  of  nonconformity,  persecution,  would 
not  have  been  so  rife ;  Conventicle  Acts  and  Five-mile  Acts 
would  not  have  disgraced  the  statute-book  of  the  English 
Parliament ;  Bradford  Gaol  would  not  have  had  the  honour  of 
receiving  the  illustrious  dreamer  of  the  PUgrirrCs  Progress  as  a 
prisoner ;  Baxter,  and  Livingston  of  Ancrum,  and  thousands 
more  like-minded,  by  whose  stirring  words  multitndes  had  been 
quickened  to  a  new  spiritual  life,  would  not  have  been  driven 
from  their  parishes  and  their  native  lands,  and  forbidden  imder 
heavy  penalties  to  preach  that  gospel  they  imderstood  and  loved 
so  well,  but  would  have  enjoyed  the  benefit  of  that  law  of  tole- 
ration which  they  purchased  so  dearly  for  us  their  children. 

3.  The  divided  state  of  the  church  has  ever  been  a  cause 
of  grief  to  good  men,  and  attempts  have  been  made  to  remedy 
the  evil  by  schemes  of  imion.  All  honest  endeavours  having 
in  view  the  healing  of  breaches,  which  since  the  days  of  the 
Beformation  have  multiplied  so  greatly  as  to  be  the  oppro- 
brium of  Protestantism,  deserve  our  warmest  sympathies  and 
most  earnest  prayers.  But  we  cannot  be  blind  to  the  fact, 
that  through  human  infirmity  such  projects  bxq  apt  to  mis- 
carry ;  it  being  extremely  difficult  to  get  a  whole  community, 
embracing  men  of  different  temperaments  and  in  different 
stages  of  Christian  growth,  to  take  the  same  view  of  the  terms 
of  fellowship.  What,  then,  is  the  duty  of  Christians  mean- 
while ?  We  may  learn  from  our  Lord's  judgment  in  the  case 
of  the  exorcist.     If  those  who  are  not  of  our  company  cannot 


DISCOURSE  ON  HUMrLITY:   THE  INTEBDICTED  EXORCIST.     239 

be  brought  to  enter  into  the  same  ecclesiastical  organization, 
let  us  still  recognise  them/rom  the  heart  as  feUow-disciples 
and  fellow -labourers,  and  avail  ourselves  of  all  lawful  or 
open  ways  of  showing  that  we  care  infinitely  more  for  those 
who  truly  love  Christ,  in  whatever,  church  they  be,  than 
for  those  who  axe  with  us  ecclesiasticaUy,  but  in  spirit  and 
life  are  not  with  Christ,  but  against  Him.  So  shall  we  have 
the  comfort  of  feeling  that,  though  separated  from  brethren 
beloved,  we  bxq  not  schismatical,  and  be  able  to  speak  of  the 
divided  state  of  the  church  as  a  thing  that  we  desire  not,  but 
merely  endure  because  we  cannot  help  it. 

Many  religious  people  are  at  fault  here.  There  are  Chris- 
tians not  a  few,  who  do  not  believe  in  these  two  articles  of 
the  Apostles*  Creed,  "  the  holy  catholic  church,"  and  "  the 
communion  of  saints."  They  care  little  or  nothing  for  those 
who  are  outside  the  pale  of  their  own  communion :  they  prac- 
tise brotherly-kindness  most  exemplarily,  but  they  have  no 
charity.  Their  church  is  their  club,  in  which  they  enjoy  the 
comfort  of  associating  with  a  select  number  of  persons,  whose 
opinions,  whims,  hobbies,  and  ecclesiastical  politics  entirely 
agree  with  their  own ;  everything  beyond  in  the  wide  wide 
world  being  regarded  with  cold  indifference,  if  not  with  pas- 
sionate aversion  or  abhorrence.  We  may  say,  indeed,  that  this 
tone  of  feeling  is  a  prevailing  characteristic  of  modem  reli- 
gious life.     The  religion  of  the  dub  is  the  order  of  the  day. 

Now  a  dub,  ecclesiastical  or  other,  is  a  very  pleasant  thing 
by  way  of  a  luxury;  but  it  ought  to  be  remembered  that, 
besides  the  club,  and  induding  all  the  clubs,  there  is  the  great 
Christian  commonwealth.  This  fact  will  have  to  be  more 
recognised  than  it  has  been,  if  church  life  is  not  to  become  a 
mere  imbecility.  To  save  us  from  this  doom,  one  of  two 
things  must  take  place.  Either  religious  people  must  over- 
come their  doting  fondness  for  the  mere  dub  fellowship  of 
denominationaUsm,  involving  absolute  uniformity  in  opinion 
and  practice ;  or  a  sort  of  Amphictyonic  council  must  be  set  on 
foot  as  a  counterpoise  to  sectarianism,  in  which  all  the  sects 
shall  find  a  common  meeting-place  for  the  discussion  of  great 
catholic  questions  bearing  on  morals,  missions,  education,  and 
the  defence  of  cardinal  truths.      Such  a  council  (utopian  it 


240  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 


•■*• 


will  be  deemed)  would  have  many  open  qnestions  in  its  con- 
stitutioiL  In  the  ancient  Amphictyonic  council  men  w^re 
not  known  as  Athenians  or  Spartans,  but  as  Greeks ;  and 
in  our  modem  Utopian  one  men  would  be  known  only  as 
Christians,  not  as  Episcopalians,  Presbyterians,  Independents, 
Churchmen,  and  Dissenters.  It  would  be  such  a  body,  in  fact, 
as  the  "  Evangelical  Alliance  "  of  recent  origin,  created  by  the 
craving  for  some  visible  expression  of  the  feeling  of  catholi- 
city ;  but  not,  like  it,  amateur,  seK-constituted,  and  patronized 
(to  a  certain  extent)  by  persons  alienated  from  all  existing 
ecclesiastical  organizations,  and  disposed  to  substitute  it  as  a 
new  church  in  their  place,  but  consisting  of  representatives 
belonging  to,  and  regularly  elected  and  empowered  by,  the 
diflferent  sections  of  the  church. 

One  remark  more  we  make  on  this  club  theory  of  church 
fellowship.  Worked  out,  it  secures  at  least  one  object.  It 
breaks  Christians  up  into  smaU  companies,  and  ensures  that 
they  shall  meet  in  twos  and  threes  I  Unhappily,  it  does  not 
at  the  same  time  procure  the  blessing  promised  to  the  two  or 
three.  The  Spirit  of  Jesus  dwells  not  in  coteries  of  seK- 
willed  opinionative  men,  but  in  the  great  commonwealth  of 
saints,  and  especially  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  love  the 
whole  body  more  than  any  part,  not  excepting  that  to  which 
they  themselves  belong ;  to  whom  the  Lord  and  Head  of  the 
church  fulfils  His  promise,  by  enriching  them  with  magnani- 
mous heroic  graces,  and  causing  them  to  rise  like  cedars  above 
the  general  level  of  contemporary  character,  and  endowing 
them  with  a  moral  power  which  exercises  an  ever-widening 
influence  long  after  the  strifes  of  their  age,  and  the  men  who 
delighted  in  them,  have  sunk  into  oblivion. 

4.  The  present  theme  should  lead  all  to  ask  themselves 
two  questions  :  Am  I  with  Christ,  or  merely  with  this  or  that 
religious  body  ?  and.  Am  I  growing  in  grace  ;  growing  out  of 
pride  into  humility,  out  of  exdusiveness  into  catholicity,  out  of 
censoriousness  into  charity  ?  John  grew  thus,  and  so  should 
alL  It  is  no  sin  to  be  austere  for  a  season,  for  fruit  must  be 
green  ere  it  be  ripe.  But  it  is  a  sin  to  remain  for  ever 
austere.  Alas,  how  many  do !  in  whose  case  God  looks  for 
grapes,  and  never  finds  anything  but  wild  grapes. 


CHAPTER   XV. 

THE  SONS  OF  THUNDER,  OR  FIRE  FROM  HEAVEN. 

Luke  ix.  61-56. 

THE  deUveiy  of  the  discourse  on  humility  appears  to  have 
been  the  closing  act  of  our  Lord's  ministry  in  Galilee ; 
for  immediately  after  finishing  their  accounts  of  the  discourse, 
the  two  first  evangelists  proceed  to  speak  of  what  we  have 
reason  to  regard  as  His  final  departure  from  His  native  pro- 
vince for  the  south.  "  It  came  to  pass,"  says  Matthew,  "  that 
when  Jesus  had  finished  these  sayings,  He  departed  from 
Galilee,  and  came  into  the  coasts  of  Judea."  ^  Of  this  journey 
neither  Matthew  nor  Mark  gives  any  details :  they  do  not  even 
mention  Christ's  visit  to  Jerusalem  at  the  feast  of  dedication 
in  winter  referred  to  by  John,*  from  which  we  know  that  the 
farewell  to  Galilee  took  place  at  least  some  four  months  before 
the  crucifixioa  The  journey,  however,  was  not  without  its 
interesting  incidents,  as  we  know  from  Luke,  who  has  pre- 
served several  of  them  in  his  GospeL 

Of  these  incidents,  that  recorded  in  the  passage  above  cited 
is  one.  For  the  words  with  which  the  evangelist  introduces 
his  narrative  obviously  allude  to  the  same  journey  from  Gali- 
lee to  the  south,  of  which  Matthew  and  Mark  speak  in  the 
passages  already  referred  to.  The  journey  through  Samaria 
adverted  to  here  by  Luke  occurred  "  when  the  time  was  come 
(or  rather  coming)'  that  He  (Jesus)  should  be  received  up,"  that 
is,  towards  the  close  of  His  life.  Then  the  peculiar  expression, 
"  He  stedfastly  set  BKs  face  to  go  to  Jerusalem,"  hints  not 
obscurely  at  a  final  transference  of  the  scene  of  Christ's  work 
from  the  north  to  the  south.  It  refers  not  merely  to  the 
geographical  direction  in  which  He  was  going,  but  also  and 

^  Matt  zix.  1,  2 ;  Mark  z.  1.        *  Jolrn  x.  22,  28.        *lfrf  wvfurXnfwHm, 

Q 


242  THE  TRAININO  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

chiefly  to  the  state  of  mind  in  which  He  journeyed  He  went 
towards  Jerusalem,  feeling  that  His  duty  lay  in  and  near  it 
henceforth,  as  a  victim  self-consecrated  to  death.  His  coun- 
tenance wearing  a  solemn,  earnest,  dignified  aspect,  expressive 
of  the  great  lofty  purpose  by  which  His  soul  was  animated. 

It  was  natural  that  Luke,  the  companion  of  Paul  and  evan- 
gelist to  the  Gentiles,  should  carefully  preserve  this  anecdote 
from  the  last  journey  of  Jesus  to  Judea  through  Samaria.  It 
served  admirably  the  purpose  he  kept  in  view  throughout  in 
compiling  his  Grospel — ^that,  viz.,  of  illustrating  the  catholicity 
of  the  Christian  dispensation ;  and  therefore  he  gathered  it  into 
his  basket,  that  it  might  not  be  lost  He  has  brought  it  in  at 
a  very  suitable  place,  just  after  the  anecdote  of  the  exorcist ; 
for,  not  to  speak  of  Uie  link  of  association  supplied  in  the 
name  of  John,  the  narrator  in  one  case  and  an  actor  in  the 
other,  this  incident,  like  the  one  recorded  immediately  before, 
exhibits  a  striking  contrast  between  the  harsh  spirit  of  the 
disciples,  and  the  gentle,  benignant  spirit  of  their  Master. 
That  contrast  forms  the  moral  interest  of  the  story. 

The  main  fact  in  the  story  was  this.  The  inhabitants  of  a 
certain  Samaritan  village  at  which  Jesus  and  His  travelling 
companions  arrived  at  the  dose  of  a  day's  journey  having 
declined,  on  being  requested,  to  give  them  quarters  for  the 
night,  James  and  John  came  tp  their  Master,  and  proposed 
that  the  offending  villagers  should  be  destroyed  by  fire  &om 
heaven. 

It  was  a  strange  proposal  to  come  from  men  who  had  been 
for  years  disciples  of  Jesus,  and  especially  from  one  who,  like 
John,  had  been  in  the  Master's  company  at  the  time  of  that 
meeting  with  the  woman  by  the  well,  and  heard  the  rapturous 
words  with  which  He  spoke  of  the  glorious  new  era  that  was 
dawning.^  It  shows  how  slow  the  best  are  to  learn  the 
heavenly  doctrine  and  practice  of  charity.  How  startling, 
again,  to  think  of  this  same  John,  a  year  or  two  after  the  date 
of  this  savage  suggestion,  going  down  &om  Jerusalem  and 
preaching  the  gospel  of  Jesus  the  crucified  in  "  many  of  the 
villages  of  the  Samaritans,"^  possibly  in  this  very  village 
which  he  desired  to  see  destroyed  ! 

1  John  iy.  '  Acts  Tiii. 


THE  SONS  OF  THUNDEB,  OB  FIBE  FBOM  HEAVEN.        243 

Such  are  the  contrasts  which  growth  in  grace  brings.  In 
the  green,  crude  stage  of  the  divine  life,  whose  characteristics 
are  opinionativeness,  censoriousness,  scrupulosity,  intolerance, 
blind  passionate  zeal,  John  would  play  the  part  of  a  mimic 
Elijah ;  in  his  spiritual  maturity,  after  the  summer  sun  of 
Pentecost  had  wrought  its  effects  in  his  soul,  and  sweetened 
all  its  acid  juices,  he  became  an  ardent  apostle  of  salvation,* 
and  exhibited  in  his  character  the  soft,  luscious  fruits  of  "  love, 
joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness,,goodness,  faith,  meekness, 
and  seK-controL"  Such  contrasts  in  the  same  character  at 
different  periods,  however  surprising,  are  perfectly  natural 
Amid  all  changes,  the  elements  of  the  moral  being  remain  the 
sama  The  juice  of  the  ripe  apple  is  the  same  that  was  in 
the  green  fruit,  plus  sun-light  and  sun-heat  The  zeal  of  the 
son  of  thunder  did  not  disappear  from  John's  nature  after  he 
became  an  apostle ;  it  only  became  tempered  by  the  light  of 
wisdom,  and  softened  by  the  heat  of  love.  He  did  not  even 
cease  to  hate,  and  become  an  indiscriminately  amiable  indi- 
vidual, whose  charity  made  no  distinction  between  good  and 
eviL  To  the  last  John  was  what  he  was  at  the  first,  an 
intense  hater  as  well  as  an  intense  lover.  But  in  his  later 
years  he  knew  better  what  to  hate, — the  objects  of  Ms  abhor- 
rence being  hypocrisy,  apostasy,  and  Laodicean  insincerity ;  ^ 
not,  as  of  old,  mere  ignorant  rudeness  and  clownish  incivility. 
He  could  distinguish  then  between  wickedness  and  weakness, 
malice  and  prejudice  ;  and  while  cherishing 'strong  antipathy 
towards  the  one,  he  felt  only  compassion  towards  the  other. 

To  some  it  may  seem  a  matter  of  wonder  how  a  man  capable 
of  entertaining  so  revolting  a  purpose  as  is  here  ascribed  to 
James  and  John,  could  ever  be  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved. 
To  understand  this,  it  must  be  remembered  that  Jesus,  im- 
like  most  men,  could  love  a  disciple  not  merely  for  what  he 
was,  but  for  what  he  should  become.  He  could  regard  with 
complacency  even  sour  grapes  in  their  season,  for  the  sake  of 
the  goodly  fruit  into  which  they  should  ripen.  Then,  further, 
we  must  not  forget  that  John,  even  when  possessed  by  the 
devU  of  resentment,  was  animated  by  a  purer  and  holier  spirit 

*  Vide  book  of  Bevelation,  commonly  regarded  as  the  latest  of  John's  writ- 
ings.   Beuss,  howeyer  {Theologie  Chretienne),  maintains  it  was  his  eariiest 


244  THE  TRAININO  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

Along  with  the  smoke  of  carnal  passion,  there  was  some  divine 
fire  in  his  heart.  He  loved  Jesus  as  intensely  as  he  hated 
the  Samaritans  ;  it  was  his  devoted  attachment  to  his  Master 
that  made  him  resent  their  incivility  so  keenly.  In  his  tender 
love  for  the  Bridegroom  of  his  soul,  he  was  beautiful  as  a 
mother  overflowing  with  aflfection  in  the  bosom  of  her  family ; 
though  in  his  hatred  he  was  terrible  as  the  same  mother  can 
be  in  her  enmity  against  her  family's  foes.  John's  nature,  in 
flBLct,  was  feminine  both  in  its  virtues  and  in  its  faults,  and,  like 
all  feminine  natures,  could  be  both  exquisitely  sweet  and 
exquisitely  bitter. 

Passing  now  fix)m  personal  remarks  on  John  himseK  to  the 
truculent  proposal  emanating  from  him  and  his  brother,  we 
must  beware  of  regarding  it  in  the  light  of  a  mere  extravagant 
ebullition  of  temper,  consequent  upon  a  refusal  of  hospitality. 
No  doubt  the  two  brethren  and  all  their  fellow-disciples  were 
annoyed  by  the  unexpected  incivility,  nor  can  one  wonder  if 
it  put  them  out  of  humour.  Weary  men  are  easily  irritated, 
and  it  was  not  pleasant  to  be  obliged  to  trudge  on  to  another 
village  after  the  fatigues  of  a  day's  journey.  But  we  have  too 
good  an  opinion  of  the  twelve,  to  fancy  any  of  them  capable 
of  revenging  rudeness  by  murder. 

The  savage  mood  of  James  and  John  is  not  even  thoroughly 
explained  by  the  recollection  that  the  churlish  villagers  were 
Samaritans,  and  that  they  were  Jews.  The  chronic  ill-will 
between  the  two  races  had  unquestionably  its  own  influence 
in  producing  ill-feeling  on  both  sides.  The  nationality  of  the 
travellers  was  one,  if  not  the  sole  reason,  why  the  villagers 
refused  them  quarters.  They  were  Galilean  Jews  going  south- 
wards to  Jerusalem,  and  that  was  enough.  Then  the  twelve, 
as  Jews,  were  just  as  ready  to  take  offence  as  the  Samaritan 
villagers  were  to  give  it.  The  powder  of  national  enmity  was 
stored  up  in  their  breasts ;  and  a  spark,  one  rude  word  or 
insolent  gesture,  was  enough  to  cause  an  explosioa  Though 
they  had  been  for  years  with  Jesus,  there  was  still  much  more 
of  the  old  Jewish  man  than  of  the  new  Christian  man  in  them. 
If  they  had  been  left  to  the  freedom  of  their  own  will,  they 
would  probably  have  avoided  the  Samaritan  territory  alto- 
gether, and,  like  the  rest  of  their  countrymen,  taken  a  roimd- 


THE  SONS  OF  THUNDER,  OR  FIRE  FROM  HEAVEN,    245 

about  way  to  Jerusalem,  by  crossing  to  the  eastward  of  the 
Jordaa 

Between  persons  so  afifected  towards  each  other  oflfences  are 
sure  to  arise.  When  Guelph  and  Ghibeline,  Orangemen  and 
Eibbonmen,  Cavalier  and  Koundhead,  meet,  it  does  not  take 
much  to  make  a  quarrel 

But  there  was  something  more  at  work  in  the  minds  of  the 
two  disciples  than  party  passion.  There  was  consdmce  in 
their  quarrel,  as  well  as  temper  and  hereditary  enmities.  This 
is  evident  both  from  the  deliberate  manner  in  which  they 
made  their  proposal  to  Jesus,  and  from  the  reason  by  which 
they  sought  to  justify  it.  They  came  to  their  Master,  and 
said,  "  Wilt  Thou  that  we  command  fire  to  come  down  fix)m 
heaven,  and  consume  them  V  entertaining  no  doubt  apparently 
of  obtaining  His  approval,  and  of  procuring  forthwith  the 
requisite  fire  from  heaven  for  the  execution  of  their  dire  intent. 
Then  they  quoted  the  precedent  of  Elijah,  who,  refusing  to  have 
any  dealings  with  the  idolatrous  king  of  Samaria,  caUed  down 
fire  from  heaven  to  consume  his  messengers,  as  a  signal  mark 
of  divine  displeasure.^ 

The  conscious  motive  by  which  James  and  John  were 
actuated  was  evidently  sincere,  though  ill-informed,  jealousy 
for  the  honour  of  their  Lord.  As  the  prophet  of  fire  was  in- 
dignant at  the  conduct  of  King  Ahaziah  in  sending  messengers 
to  the  god  of  Ekron,  Baalzebub  by  name,  to  inquire  whether 
he  should  recover  from  the  disease  with  which  he  was  afl^cted  ;* 
so  the  sons  of  thunder  were  indignant  because  inhabitants 
of  the  same  godless  territory  over  which  Ahaziah  ruled  had 
presumed  to  insult  their  revered  Master,  by  refusing  a  favour 
which  they  ought  to  have  been  only  too  proud  to  have  an 
opportunity  of  granting. 

The  two  brothers  evidently  thought  they  did  weU  to  be 
angry ;  and,  comparing  them  with  other  zealots  and  perae- 
cutors,  for  not  so  bad  reasons.  If  they  had  been  minded  to 
defend  their  conduct  after  it  was  condemned  by  Jesus,  which 

1  The  words  itt  not  *^xUt  W»tne%  are  a  donbtful  reading.  It  is  evident,  how- 
ever, that  the  two  disciples  must  have  had  Elias  in  mind  when  they  made  their 
proposaL 

>  2  Kings  i. 


246  THE  TRACnKG  OF  THE  TWELYE. 

they  do  not  seem  to  have  been,  they  might  have  made  a 
defence  by  no  means  destitute  of  plausibility.  For  consider 
who  these  Samaritans  were.  They  belonged  to  a  mongrel 
race,  sprung  from  heathen  Assyrians,  whose  presence  in  the 
land  was  a  humiliation,  and  from  base  d^enerate  Israelites 
imworthy  of  the  name.  Their  forefathers  had  been  the  bitter 
enemies  of  Judah  in  the  days  of  Nehemiah,  spitefully  obstruct- 
ing the  building  of  Zion's  walls,  instead  of  helping  the  exiles 
in  their  hour  of  need,  as  neighbours  ought  to  have  dona 
Then,  if  it  was  unfair  to  hold  the  present  generation  responsible 
for  the  sins  of  past  generations,  what  was  the  character  of  the 
Samaritans  then  living  ?  Were  they  not  blasphemous  heretics, 
who  rejected  all  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  save  the  five 
books  of  Moses  ?  Did  they  not  worship  at  the  site  of  the 
rival  temple  on  Grerizim,^  which  their  fathers  had  with  impious 
efi&x)ntery  erected  in  contempt  of  the  true  temple  of  Grod  in 
the  holy  city  ?  And  finally,  had  not  these  villagers  expressed 
their  sympathy  with  all  the  iniquities  of  their  people,  and 
repeated  them  all  in  one  act  by  doing  dishonour  to  Him  who 
was  greater  than  even  the  true  temple,  and  worthy  not  only 
to  receive  common  civility,  but  even  divine  worship  ? 

What  better  reasons  could  persecutors  give  for  all  the 
murders  which  they  have  perpetrated  in  the  name  of  religion  ? 
By  just  such  reasons,  indeed,  has  i)ersecution  ever  been  de- 
fended. Heresy,  hostility  to  the  cause  and  people  of  God, 
Old  Testament  precedents,  have  been  the  favourite  pleas  by 
which  the  professed  followers  of  Jesus  have  justified  them- 
selves when  acting  the  part  of  the  "  sons  of  thunder;"  calling 
down,  as  they  thought,  fire  fix>m  heaven,  but  in  reality  calling 
up  fire  from  hell,  to  consume  the  hapless  victims  of  their  blind 
and  heartless  zeaL 

Euthless  persecutors  and  furious  zealots  have  always  been 
confident,  like  the  two  disciples,  that  they  did  God  servica 
It  is  of  the  very  nature  of  zealotry  to  make  the  man  of  whom 
it  has  taken  possession  believe  that  the  Almighty  not  only 
approves,  but  shares  his  fierce  passions,  and  fancy  himself 
entrusted  with  a  carte  blanche  to  laimch  the  thunders  of  the 

'  The  temple  was  destroyed  a  hundred  years  before  Christ  by  Hyrcanus  the 
high  priest    Joseph.  Anti^  Jud,  ziiL  9.  1. 


THE  SONS  OF  THUNDER,  OB  FIBE  FROM  HEAVEN.        247 

Most  High  against  all  in  whom  his  small,  peering,  inhuman  eye 
can  discern  aught  not  approved  by  his  tjrrannic  conscience. 
What  a  world  were  this,  if  the  fiEict  were  so  indeed  I 

*'  Ereiy  pelting,  petty  officer 
Would  use  Gkxi's  heaven  for  thunder ;  nothing  but  thnnder.** 

Thank  God,  the  fact  is  not  so.  The  Almighty  does  thunder 
sometimes,  but  not  in  the  way  His  petty  officers  would  wisL 

"  MerciM  Heaven ! 
Thon  rather,  with  thy  sharp  and  salphnrons  bolt, 
Splitt'st  the  unwedgeable  and  gnarled  oak 
Than  the  soft  myrtle." 

Jesus  too,  all  gentle  as  He  was,  had  His  thunderbolts ;  but 
He  reserved  them  for  other  objects  than  poor  benighted,  pre- 
judiced Samaritans.  BAs  zeal  was  directed  against  great  sins, 
and  powerful,  privileged,  presumptuous  sinners ;  not  against 
little  sins,  or  poor,  obscure,  vulgar  Binners.  He  burst  into 
indignation  at  the  sight  of  His  Father's  house  turned  into  a 
den  of  thieves  by  those  who  ought  to  have  known  and  did 
know  better ;  He  only  felt  compassion  for  those  who,  like  the 
woman  by  the  well,  knew  not  what  they  worshipped,  and 
groped  after  God  in  semi-heathen  darkness.  His  spirit  was 
kindled  within  Him  at  the  spectacle  of  ostentatious  orthodoxy 
and  piety  allied  to  the  grossest  worldliness  ;  He  did  not,  like 
the  Pharisee,  blaze  up  in  sanctimonious  wrath  against  irreli- 
gious publicans,  who  might  do  no  worship  at  all,  or  who,  like 
the  heretical  Samaritans,  did  not  worship  in  the  right  place. 
Would  that  zeal  like  that  of  Jesus,  aiming  its  bolta  at  the 
proud  oak  and  sparing  the  himible  shrub,  were  more  common ! 
But  such  zeal  is  dangerous,  and  therefore  it  will  always  be 
rare. 

The  Lord,  in  whose  vindication  the  two  disciples  wished  to 
call  down  heaven's  destrojdng  fire,  lost  no  time  in  making 
known  His  utter  want  of  sympathy  with  the  monstrous  pro- 
posal He  turned  and  rebuked  them,  and  said,  '*  Ye  know 
not  what  manner  of  spirit  ye  are  of."^ 

The  remark  was  true  in  more  senses  than  one.     The  spirit 

1  Luke  ljl  65.  Or,  *'  Know  ye  ?"  Critical  students  of  the  New  Testament 
are  aware  that  the  words  are  not  found  in  some  Mss.  But  in  any  case  the  state- 
ment is  true,  and  might  have  been  made. 


248  THE  TBAININa  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

of  James  and  John  was,  in  the  first  place,  not  such  as  they 
fancied.  They  thought  themselves  actuiited  by  zeal  for  the 
glory  of  their  Lord,  and  so  they  were  in  part.  But  the  flame 
of  their  zeal  was  not  pure ;  it  was  mixed  up  with  the  bitter 
smoke  of  carnal  passions,  anger,  pride,  seK-wilL  Then,  again, 
their  spirit  was  not  such  as  became  the  apostles  of  the  gospel, 
the  heralds  of  a  new  era  of  grace.  They  were  chosen  to 
preach  a  message  of  mercy  to  every  creature,  even  to  the  chief 
of  sinners ;  to  teU  of  a  love  that  suflfered  not  itself  to  be  over- 
come of  evil,  but  sought  to  overcome  evil  with  good ;  to  found 
a  kingdom  composed  of  citizens  from  every  nation,  wherein 
should  be  neither  Jew  nor  Samaritan,  but  Christ  all  and  in 
alL  What  a  work  to  be  achieved  by  men  filled  with  the  fire- 
breathing  spirit  of  the  "  sons  of  thimder  I"  Obviously  a 
great  change  must  be  wrought  within  them,  to  fit  them  for  the 
high  vocation  wherewith  they  have  been  called. 

Finally,  the  spirit  of  James  and  John  was,  of  course,  not 
that  of  their  Master.  He  "  came  not  to  destroy  men's  lives,  but 
to  save  them."^  To  see  the  difference  between  the  mind  of  the 
d;LSciples  and  that  of  Jesus,  put  this  scene  side  by  side  with 
that  other  which  happened  on  Samaritan  ground — ^the  meeting 
by  the  well  We  know  what  we  have  seen  here :  what  see  we 
there  ?  The  Son  of  man,  as  a  Jew,  speaking  to  and  having 
dealings  with  a  Samaritan,  so  seeking  to  abolish  inveterate  and 
deep-seated  enmities  between  man  and  man ;  as  the  friend  of 
sinners,  seeking  to  restore  a  poor,  erring,  guilty  creature  to 
Grod  and  hoUness ;  as  the  Christ  annoimcing  the  close  of  an 
old  time,  in  which  the  worship  even  of  the  true  God  was 
ritualistic,  exclusive,  and  local,  and  the  advent  of  a  new  reli- 
gious era  characterized  by  the  attributes  of  spirituality,  imi- 
versality,  and  catholicity.  And  we  see  Jesus  rejoicing,  enthu- 
siastic in  His  work ;  deeming  it  BKs  very  meat  and  drink  to 
reveal  to  men  one  God  and  Father,  one  Saviour,  one  life,  for 
all  without  distinction ;  to  regenerate  individual  character, 
society,  and  religion ;  to  break  down  all  barriers  separating 
man  fix)m  God  and  from  his  fellow-men,  and  so  to  become 
the  great  Keconciler  and  Peacemaker.    Thinking  of  this  work 

'  The  words  quoted  are  regarded  by  critics  as  a  gloss  ;  but,  like  those  referred 
to  in  the  preyioos  note,  they  are  true  and  appropriate. 


^ 


THE  SONS  OF  THUNDER,  OB  FIRE  FROM  HEAVEN.    249 

86  exhibited  by  sample  in  the  conversion  of  the  woman  by 
the  well.  He  speaks  to  His  surprised  and  unsympathetic  dis- 
ciples as  one  who  perceives  on  the  eastern  horizon  the  first 
faint  streaks  of  light  heralding  the  advent  of  a  new  glorious 
day,  and  aU  around,  in  the  field  of  the  world,  yellow  crops  of 
grain  ripe  for  the  sickle.  "  It  is  coming  on  apace,"  He  says 
in  effect,  "  the  blessed,  long-expected  era,  after  a  long  night  of 
spiritual  darkness ;  the  new  world  is  about  to  begin :  lift  up 
your  eyes  and  look  on  the  fields  of  Gentile  lands,  and  see  how 
they  be  white  already  for  the  harvest !" 

At  the  time  of  the  meeting  by  the  well,  the  disciples  who 
were  with  Jesus  neither  understood  nor  sympathized  with  His 
high  thoughts  and  hopes.  The  bright  prospect  on  which  BKs 
eyes  were  riveted  was  not  within  their  horizon.  For  them, 
as  for  children,  the  world  was  still  small,  a  narrow  vaUey 
bounded  by  bilk  on  either  side ;  while  their  Master,  up  on  the 
mountain-top,  saw  many  valleys  beyond,  in  which  He  was 
interested,  and  out  of  which  He  believed  many  souk  would 
find  their  way  into  the  eternal  kingdom.^  For  the  disciples, 
God  was  yet  the  God  of  the  Jews  only ;  salvation  was  for  the 
Jews,  as  well  as  of  them :  they  knew  of  only  one  channel  of 
grace — Jewish  ordinances ;  only  one  way  to  heaven — that 
which  lay  through  Jerusalem. 

At  the  later  date,  to  which  the  present  scene  belongs,  the 
disciples,  instead  of  progressing,  seem  to  have  retrograded. 
Old  bad  feelings  seem  to  be  intensified,  instead  of  being 
replaced  by  new  and  better  ones.  They  are  now  not  merely 
out  of  sympathy  with,  but  in  direct  antagonism  to,  their  Lord's 
mind ;  not  merely  apathetic  or  sceptical  about  the  salvation 
of  Samaritans,  but  bent  on  their  destruction.  Aversion  and 
prejudice  have  grown  into  a  paroxysm  of  enmity. 

Yes,  even  so;  things  must  get  to  the  worst  before  they 
begin  to  mend.  There  will  be  no  improvement  till  the  Lamb 
shall  have  been  slain  to  take  away  sin,  to  abolish  enmities, 
and  to  make  of  twain  one  new  man.  It  is  the  knowledge  of 
that  which  makes  Jesus  set  His  face  so  stedfastly  towards 
Jerusalem.  He  is  eager  to  drink  the  cup  of  suffering,  and  to 
be  baptized  with  the  baptism  of  blood,  because  He  knows  that 

^  This  thought  is  suggested  by  a  passage  in  Richter's  FUgeliakre, 


250  THB  TBAININO  OF  THE  TWELYE. 

only  thereby  can  He  finish  the  work  whereof  He  spoke  in 
such  glowing  language  on  the  earlier  occasion  to  His  disciples. 
The  very  wrath  of  His  devoted  followers  against  the  Samari- 
tan villagers  makes  Him  quicken  His  pace  on  His  crossward 
way,  saying  to  Himself  sadly  as  He  advances,  **  Let  me  hasten 
on,  for  not  till  I  am  lifted  up  con  these  things  end.'' 


CHAPTER    XVL 

IN   PEBJSA. 

Section  l — CovmseU  of  Perfection. 

Matt.  nx.  1-26 ;  Mabk  z.  1-27 ;  Lxtke  zyni.  15-27. 

AFTER  His  final  departure  from  Galilee,  Jesus  found  for 
Himself  a  new  place  of  abode  and  scene  of  labour  for  the 
brief  remainder  of  BKs  life,  in  the  region  lying  to  the  eastward 
of  the  Jordan,  at  the  lower  end  of  its  course.  "  He  departed 
firom  Galilee,  and  came  into  the  coasts  of  Judsea  beyond 
Jordan."  ^  We  may  say  that  He  ended  His  ministry  where 
it  began,  healing  the  sick,  and  teaching  the  high  doctrines  of 
the  kingdom  in  the  place  which  witnessed  His  consecration 
by  baptism  to  His  sacred  work,  and  where  He  gained  His  first 
disciples.* 

This  visit  of  Jesus  to  Peraea  towards  the  dose  of  His  career 
is  a  fact  most  interesting  and  significant  in  itself,  apart  alto- 
gether from  its  accompanying  incidenta  It  was  evidently  so 
regarded  by  John,  who  not  less  carefully  than  the  two  first 
evangelists  records  the  fact  of  the  visit,  though,  unlike  them, 
he  gives  no  details  concerning  it  The  terms  in  which  he 
alludes  to  this  event  are  peculiar.  Having  briefly  explained 
how  Jesus  had  provoked  the  ill-will  of  the  Jews  in  Jerusalem 
at  the  feast  of  dedication,  he  goes  on  to  say :  "  Therefore  they 
sought  again  to  take  Him ;  but  He  escaped  out  of  their  hands, 
and  went  away  again  beyond  Jordan,  into  the  place  where  John 
ai  first  baptized*'^  The  word  "  again,"  and  the  reference  to  the 
Baptist,  are  indicative  of  reflection  and  recollection — ^windows 
letting  us  see  into  John's  heart.  He  is  thinking  with  emotion 
of  his  personal  experiences  connected  with  the  first  visit  of 

>  Matt.  xix.  1.  >  See  ch.  L  '  John  x.  40. 


252  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

Jesus  to  those  sacred  regions,  of  his  first  meeting  with  his 
beloved  Master,  and  of  the  mystic  name  given  to  Him  by  the 
Baptist,  "  the  Lamb  of  God,"  then  uncomprehended  by  the 
disciples,  now  on  the  eve  of  being  expoimded  by  events ;  and 
to  the  evangelist  writing  his  Gospel,  dear  as  day  in  the  bright 
light  of  the  cross. 

It  was  hardly  possible  that  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved 
could  do  other  than  think  of  the  first  visit  when  speaking  of 
the  second.  Even  the  multitude,  as  he  records,  reverted  men- 
tally to  the  earlier  occasion  while  following  Jesus  in  the  later. 
They  remembered  what  John,  His  forerunner,  had  said  of  One 
among  them  whom  they  knew  not,  and  who  yet  was  far  greater 
than  himseK ;  and  they  remarked  that  his  statements,  how- 
ever improbable  they  might  have  appeared  at  the  time,  had 
been  verified  by  events,  and  he  himseK  proved  to  be  a  true 
prophet  by  Christ's  miracles,  if  not  by  his  own.  "  John,"  said 
they  to  each  other,  "  did  no  miracle ;  but  all  things  that  John 
said  of  this  man  were  true."  ^ 

If  John  the  disciple,  and  even  the  common  people,  thought 
of  the  first  visit  of  Jesus  to  Persea  at  the  time  of  His  second, 
we  may  be  sure  that  Jesus  Himself  did  so  also.  He  had  His 
own  reasons,  doubt  it  not,  for  going  back  to  that  hallowed 
neighbourhood.  His  journey  to  the  Jordan  was  a  pilgrimage 
to  holy  ground,  on  wMch  He  could  not  set  His  foot  without 
profoimd  emotion.  For  there  lay  His  Bethel,  where  He  had 
made  a  solemn  baptismal  vow,  not,  as  Jacob,  to  give  a  tithe 
of  His  substance,  but  to  give  Himself,  body  and  soul,  a  sacri- 
fice to  His  Father,  in  life  and  in  death ;  there  the  Spirit  had 
descended  on  Him  like  a  dove ;  there  He  had  heard  a  celestial 
voice  of  approval  and  encouragement,  the  reward  of  His  entire 
self-surrender  to  His  Father's  holy  wilL  All  the  recollections 
of  the  place  were  heart-stirring,  recalling  solemn  obligations, 
inspiring  holy  hopes,  urging  Him  on  to  the  grand  consumma- 
tion of  His  life-work ;  charging  Him  by  His  baptism.  His  vows, 
the  descent  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  voice  from  heaven,  to  crown 
His  labours  of  love,  by  drinking  of  the  cup  of  suffering  and 
death  for  man's  redemption.  To  these  voices  of  the  past  He 
willingly  opened  His  ear.     He  wished  to  hear  them,  that  by 

^  John  X.  41. 


m  PERiKA:   COUNSELS  OF  PERFECTION.  253 

their  hallowed  tones  His  spirit  might  be  braced  and  solem- 
nized for  the  coming  agony. 

While  retiring  to  Persea  for  these  private  reasons,  that  He 
might  muse  on  the  past  and  the  future,  and  link  sacred 
memories  to  solenm  anticipations,  Jesus  did  not  by  any  means 
live  there  a  life  of  seclusion  and  solitary  meditation.  On  the 
contrary,  during  His  sojourn  in  that  neighbourhood.  He  was 
unusually  busy  healing  the  sick,  teaching  the  multitude 
"  as  He  was  wont "  (so  Mark  states,  with  a  mental  refer- 
ence to  the  past  ministry  in  Galilee),  answering  inquiries,  re- 
ceiving visits,  granting  favours.  "  Many  resorted  \mto  Him" 
there,  on  various  errands.  Pharisees  came,  askiAg  entangling 
questions  about  marriage  and  divorce,  hoping  to  catch  Him 
in  a  trap,  and  conmiit  Him  to  the  expression  of  an  opinion 
which  would  make  Him  unpopular  with  some  party  or  school, 
Hillel's  or  Shanmiai*s,^  it  did  not  matter  which.  A  yoimg 
ruler  came  with  more  honourable  intent,  to  inquire  how  he 
might  obtain  eternal  life.  Mothers  came  with  their  little  ones, 
beseeching  for  them  His  blessing,  thinking  it  worth  getting, 
and  not  fearing  denial ;  and  messengers  came  with  sorrowful 
tidings  from  friends,  who  looked  to  Him  as  their  comfort  in 
the  time  of  trouble. 

Though  busUy  occupied  among  the  thronging  crowd,  Jesus 
contrived  to  have  some  leisure  hours  with  His  chosen  disciples, 
during  which  He  taught  them  some  new  lessons  on  the  doc- 
trine of  the  divine  kingdom.  The  subject  of  these  lessons 
was  sacrifice  for  the  sake  of  the  kingdom, — a  theme  congenial 
to  the  place,  the  time,  the  situation,  and  the  mood  of  the 
Teacher.  The  external  occasion  suggesting  that  topic  was 
supplied  by  the  interviews  Jesus  had  had  with  the  Pharisees 
and  the  yoimg  ruler.  These  interviews  naturally  led  Him  to 
speak  to  His  disciples  on  the  subject  of  self-sacrifice  imder 
two  special  forms, — abstinence  from  marriage,  and  remmcia- 
tion  of  property, — ^though  He  did  not  confine  His  discourse 
to  these  points,  but  went  on  to  set  forth  the  rewards  of  self- 
sacrifice  in  any  form,  and  the  spirit  in  which  all  sacrifices 
must  be  performed,  in  order  to  possess  value  in  God's  sight. 

'  The  question  of  divorce  was  a  subject  of  dispute  between  these  two  schools, 
the  loose  and  the  strict  schools  of  morals  respectiyely. 


264  THE  TBAINma  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

The  Pharisees,  we  read,  "  came  untp  Him,  tempting  Him, 
and  saying,  Is  it  lawful  for  a  man  to  put  away  his  wife  for  every 
cause  V*  To  this  question  Jesus  replied,  by  laying  down  the 
primitive  principle,  that  divorce  was  justified  only  by  conjugal 
infidelity,  and  by  explaining,  that  anything  to  the  contrary 
in  the  law  of  Moses  was  simply  an  acconmiodation  to  the 
hardness  of  men's  hearts.  The  disciples  heard  this  reply,  and 
they  made  their  own  remarks  on  it  They  said  to  Jesus :  "  If 
the  case  of  the  man  be  so  with  his  wife,  it  is  not  good  to 
marry."  The  view  enimciated  by  their  Master,  which  took 
no  accoimt  of  incompatibility  of  temper,  involimtary  dislike, 
uncongeniality  of  habits,  dififerences  in  religion,  quarrels  among 
relatives,  as  pleas  for  separation,  seemed  very  stringent  even 
to  them ;  and  they  thought  that  a  man  would  do  well  to  con- 
sider what  he  was  about  before  committing  himself  to  a  life- 
long engagement  with  such  possibilities  before  him,  and  to  ask 
himself  whether  it  would  not  be  better,  on  the  whole,  to  steer 
dear  of  such  a  sea  of  troubles,  by  abstaining  from  wedlock 
altogether. 

The  impromptu  remark  of  the  disciples,  viewed  in  con- 
nection with  its  probable  motives,  was  not  a  very  wise  one ; 
yet  it  is  to  be  observed  that  Jesus  did  not  absolutely  disap- 
prove of  it  He  spoke  as  if  He  rather  sympathized  with  the 
feeling  in  favour  of  celibacy, — as  if  to  abstain  from  marriage 
were  the  better  and  wiser  way,  and  only  not  to  be  required  of 
men  because  for  the  majority  it  was  impracticable.  "  But  He 
said  unto  them.  All  men  cannot  receive  this  saying,  save  they 
to  whom  it  is  given."  Then  going  on  to  enumerate  the  cases 
in  which,  from  any  cause,  men  remained  unmarried.  He  spoke 
with  apparent  approbation  of  some  who  voluntarily,  and  from 
high  and  holy  motives,  denied  themselves  the  comfort  of 
family  relationships :  ''  There  be  eunuchs  which  have  made 
themselves  eunuchs  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven's  sake."  Such, 
He  finally  gave  His  disciples  to  imderstand,  were  to  be  imi- 
tated by  all  who  felt  called  and  able  to  do  so.  "  He  that 
is  able  to  receive  (this  high  virtue),  let  him  receive  it,"  He 
said,  hinting  that,  while  many  men  could  not  receive  it,  but 
could  more  easily  endure  all  possible  drawbacks  of  married  life, 
even  on  the  strictest  views  of  conjugal  obligation,  than  preserve 


m  PER£A:   C0T7KSELS  OF  FEBFECTION.  255 

perfect  chastity  in  an  umnaxried  state,  it  was  well  for  him  who 
could  make  himself  a  eunuch  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  as  he 
would  not  only  escape  much  trouble,  but  be  free  from  careful- 
ness, and  be  able  to  serve  the  kingdom  without  distraction. 

The  other  form  of  self-sacrifice — ^the  renunciation  of  pro- 
perty— became  the  subject  of  remark  between  Jesus  and  His 
disciples,  in  consequence  of  the  interview  with  the  young  man 
who  came  inquiring  about  eternal  life.  Jesus,  reading  the 
heart  of  this  anxious  inquirer,  and  perceiving  that  he  loved 
this  world's  goods  more  than  was  consistent  with  spiritual 
freedom  and  entire  singleness  of  mind,  had  concluded  His 
directions  to  him  by  giving  this  counsel :  "  If  thou  wilt  be 
perfect,  go  and  sell  that  thou  hast,  and  give  to  the* poor,  and 
then  thou  shalt  have  treasure  in  heaven :  and  come,  and 
foUow  me."  The  young  man  having  thereon  turned  away 
sorrowful,  because,  though  desiring  eternal  life,  he  was  un- 
willing to  obtain  it  at  such  a  price,  Jesus  proceeded  to  make 
his  case  a  subject  of  reflection  for  the  instruction  of  the 
twelve.  In  the  observations  He  made  He  did  not  expressly 
say  that  to  part  with  property  was  necessary  to  salvation,  but 
He  did  speak  in  a  manner  which  seemed  to  the  disciples 
almost  to  imply  that.  Looking  roimd  about,  He  remarked  to 
them  first,  "  How  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches  enter 
into  the  krogdom  of  Qod  V  The  disciples  being  astonished  at 
this  hard  saying.  He  softened  it  somewhat  by  altering  slightly 
the  form  of  expression.  "  Children,'*  He  said,  "  how  hard  is  it 
for  them  that  trust  in  riches  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
God ! "  hinting  that  the  thing  to  be  renoimced  in  order  to 
salvation,  was  not  money,  but  the  inordinate  love  of  it.  But 
then  He  added  a  third  reflection,  which,  by  its  austerity, 
more  than  cancelled  the  mildness  of  the  second.  ''It  is 
easier,''  He  declared,  "  for  a  camel  to  go  through  the  eye  of  a 
needle,  than  for  a  rich  man  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
God."  That  assertion,  literally  interpreted,  amounts  to  a 
declaration  that  the  salvation  of  a  rich  man  is  an  impossi- 
bility, and  seems  to  teach  by  plain  implication,  that  the  only 
way  for  a  rich  man  to  get  into  heaven  is  to  cease  to  be  rich, 
and  become  poor  by  a  voluntary  remmciation  of  property. 
Such  seems  to  have  been  the  impression  made  thereby  on  the 


256  THE  tlAINING  OF  1HE  TWELVE. 

minds  of  the  disciples ;  for  we  read  that  they  were  astonished 
above  measure,  and  said  among  themselves,  ''Who  then  can 
be  saved  V*^ 

It  is  an  inquiry  of  vital  moment,  what  our  Lord  teally 
meant  to  teach  on  the  subjects  of  marriage  and  money.  The 
question  concerns  not  merely  the  life  to  come,  but  the  whole 
character  of  our  present  life.  For  if  man's  life  on  earth  doth 
not  consist  wholly  in  possessions  and  family  relations,  these 
occupy  a  very  prominent  place  therein.  Family  relations  are 
essential  to  the  existence  of  society,  and  without  wealth  there 
could  be  no  civilisation.  Did  Jesus,  then,  frown  or  look 
down  on  these  things,  as  at  least  imfavourable  to,  if  not  in- 
compatible with,  the  interests  of  the  divine  kingdom  and  the 
aspirations  of  its  citizens  ? 

This  question  up  till  the  time  of  the  Eeformation  was  for 
the  most  part  answered  by  the  visible  church  in  the  affir- 
mative. From  a  very  early  period,  the  idea  began  to  be 
entertained  that  Jesus  meant  to  teach  the  intrinsic  supe- 
riority, in  point  of  Christian  virtue,  of  a  life  of  celibacy  and 
volimtary  poverty,  over  that  of  a  married  man  possessing 
property.  Abstinence  firom  marriage  and  remmciation  of 
earthly  possessions  came,  in  consequence,  to  be  regarded  as 
essential  requisites  for  high  Christian  attaioments.  They 
were  steps  of  the  ladder  by  which  Christians  rose  to  higher 
grades  of  grace  than  were  attainable  by  men  involved  in 
family  cares  and  ties,  and  in  the  entanglements  of  worldly 
substance.  They  were  not,  indeed,  necessary  to  salvation, — 
to  obtain  that  is  a  simple  admission  into  heaven, — but  they 
wei'e  necessary  to  obtain  an  abundant  entrance.  They  were 
trials  of  virtue  appointed  to  be  imdergone  by  candidates  for 
honours  in  the  city  of  God.  They  were  indispensable  con- 
ditions of  the  higher  degrees  of  spiritual  fruitfulness.  A 
married  or  rich  Christian  might  produce  thirty-fold,  but  only 
those  who  denied  themselves  the  enjoyments  of  wealth  and 
wedlock  could  bring  forth  sixty-fold  or  an  hundred-fold. 
While,  therefore,  these  virtues  of  abstinence  were  not  to  be 
demanded  of  all,  they  were  to  be  commended  as  "  counsels  of 
perfection  "  to  such  as,  not  content  to  be  commonplace  Chris- 

1  Mark  z.  23-27. 


s 
m  PER-fiA:   COTJWEtS  09  PMFECJTION.  257 

tians,  would  rise  to  the  keroic  pitch  of  excellence,  and,  despis- 
ing a  simple  admissicm  into  the  divine  kingdom,  wished  to 
occupy  first  places  there. 

This  style  of  thought  is  now  so  antiquated,  that  it  is  hard 
to  believe  it  ever  prevailed.  As  a  proof,  however,  that  it  is 
no  invention  of  ours,  take  two  brief  extracts  from  a  distin- 
guished bishop  and  martyr  of  the  third  century,  Cjrprian  of 
Carthage,  which  are  samples  of  much  of  the  same  kind  to  be 
foimd  in  the  early  Fathers  of  the  church.  The  one  quotation 
proclaims  the  superior  virtue  of  voluntary  vii^ginity  in  these 
terms :  "  Strait  and  narrow  is  the  way  which  leads  to  life, 
hard  and  arduous  is  the  path  (limes,  narrower  still  than  the 
narrow  way)  which  tends  to  glory.  Along  this  path  of  the 
way  go  the  martyrs,  go  virgins,  go  all  the  just.  For  the  first 
(d^ree  of  fruitfulness),  the  hundred-fold,  is  that  of  the  martyrs ; 
the  second,  the  sixty-fold,  is  yours  (ye  virgins).'*  ^  The  second 
extract,  while  ascribing,  like  the  first,  superior  merit  to  virgi- 
nity,  indicates  the  optional  character  of  that  high-class  virtue. 
Eeferring  to  the  words  of  Christ,  "  There  be  eunuchs  which 
have  made  themselves  eunuchs  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven's 
sake,"  Cyprian  says :  "  This  the  Lord  commands  not,  but 
exhorts ;  He  imposes  not  the  yoke  of  necessity,  diat  the  free 
choice  of  the  will  might  remain.  But  whereas  He  says  (John 
xiv.  2),  that  there  are  many  mansions  with  His  Father,  He 
here  points  out  the  lodging  quarters  of  the  better  mansion 
(melioris  hahitaculi  hospitia).  Seek  ye,  0  virgins,  those  better 
mansions.  Crucifying  {castrantes)  the  desires  of  the  fiesh, 
obtain  for  yourselves  the  reward  of  greater  grace  in  the  celes- 
tial abodes."  * 

Similar  views  were  entertained  in  those  early  ages  re- 
specting the  meaning  of  Christ's  words  to  the  young  man. 
The  inevitable  results  of  such  interpretations  in  due  course 
were  monastic  institutions  and  the  celibacy  of  the  clergy. 
The  direct  connection  between  an  ascetic  interpretation  of 
the  counsel  given  by  Jesus  to  the  rich  youth  who  inquired 
after  eternal  life,  and  the  rise  of  monasticism,  is  apparent  in 

*  Dt  Disciplind  et  HahUu  Virginum,  8ubjlnem  [Clark's  Ante-Nicene  Library, 
Cj/prian,  vol.  i.  p.  333]. 

*  Ex  eodem  libro. 

B 


258  THE  TBAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

the  history  of  Antony,  the  fkther  of  the  monastic  system. 
It  is  related  of  him,  that  going  into  the  chmx^  on  one  occa- 
sion when  the  gospel  concerning  the  rich  yoimg  man  was 
read  before  the  assembly,  he,  then  also  young,  took  the  words 
as  addressed  by  Heaven  to  himsell  Going  out  of  the  church, 
he  forthwith  proceeded  to  distribute  to  the  inhabitants  of  his 
native  village  his  large,  fertile,  and  beautiful  landed  estates 
which  he  inherited  from  his  fathers,  reserving  only  a  smaU 
X)ortion  of  his  property  for  the  benefit  of  his  sister.  Not 
long  after  he  gave  away  that  also,  and  placed  his  sister  to  be 
educated  with  a  society  of  pious  virgins,  and  settling  down 
near  his  paternal  mansion,  began  a  life  of  rigid  asceticism.^ 

The  ascetic  theory  of  Christian  virtue,  which  so  soon  began 
to  prevail  in  the  church,  has  been  fiilly  tested  by  time,  and 
proved  to  be  a  huge  and  mischievous  mistake.  The  verdict 
of  history  is  conclusive,  and  to  return  to  an  exploded  error,  as 
some  seem  disposed  to  do,  is  utter  foUy.  At  this  time  of  day, 
the  views  of  those  who  would  find  the  beau  ideal  of  Christian 
life  in  a  monk's  cell  appear  hardly  worthy  of  serious  refuta- 
tion. It  may,  however,  be  useful  briefly  to  indicate  the  leading 
errors  of  the  monkish  thec^y  of  morals ;  all  the  more  that,  in 
doing  this,  we  shall  at  the  same  time  be  explaining  the  true 
meaning  of  our  Lord's  words  to  His  discijdes. 

This  theory,  then,  is  in  the  first  place  based  on  an  erro- 
neous assumption — ^vi&,  that  abstinence  from  things  lawful 
is  intrinsically  a  higher  sort  of  virtue  than  temperance  in 
the  use  of  them.  This  is  not  true.  Abstinence  is  the  virtue 
of  the  weak,  temperance  is  the  virtue  of  the  strong.  Absti- 
nence is  certainly  the  safer  way  for  those  who  are  prone  to 
inordinate  affection,  but  it  purchases  safety  at  the  expense 
of  moral  culture ;  for  it  removes  us  from  those  temptations 
connected  with  family  relationships  and  earthly  possessions, 
through  which  character,  while  it  may  be  imperilled,  is  at  the 
same  time  developed  and  strengthened.  Abstinence  is  also 
inferior  to  temperance  in  healthiness  of  tone.  It  tends  in- 
evitably to  morbidity,  distortion,  exaggeration.  The  ascetic 
virtues  were  wont  to  be  called  by  their  admirers  angelic. 

*  Vita  S,  Antonii  (Athanasii).     See  also  Keander,  Church  History,  Clark's 
edition,  voL  iiL  p.  808. 


k 


IN  PER^A :   COUNSELS  OF  PERFECTION.  259 

They  are  certainly  angelic  in  the  negative  sense^  of  being 
unnatural  and  inhuman.  Ascetic  abstinence  is  the  ghost  or 
disembodied  spirit  of  morality,  while  temperance  is  its  soul, 
embodied  in  a  genuine  human  life  transacted  amid  earthly 
relations,  occupations,  and  enjoyments.  Abstinence  is  even 
inferior  to  temperance  in  respect  to  what  seems  its  strong 
point — self-sacrifice.  There  is  something  morally  sublime, 
doubtless,  in  the  spectacle  of  a  man  of  wealth,  birth,  high 
ofSce,  and  happy  domestic  condition,  leaving  rank,  riches, 
office,  wife,  children  behind,  and  going  away  to  the  deserte  of 
Sinai  and  i^ypt  to  spend  his  days  as  a  monk  or  anchoret.^ 
The  stem  resolution,  the  absolute  mastery  of  the  will  over 
the  natural  affections  exhibited  in  such  conduct,  is  very  im- 
posing. Yet  how  poor,  after  all,  is  such  a  character  compared 
with  Abraham,  the  father  of  the  fiEdthfal,  and  model  of  tem- 
perance and  singleness  of  mind;  who  could  use  the  world, 
of  which  he  had  a  large  portion,  without  abusing  it;  who 
kept  his  wealth  and  state,  and  yet  never  became  their  slave, 
and  was  ready  at  God's  command  to  part  with  his  friends  and 
his  native  land,  and  even  with  an  only  son !  So  to  live, 
serving  ourselves  heir  to  all  things,  yet  maintaining  unim- 
paired our  spiritual  freedom;  enjoying  life,  yet  ready  at 
the  call  of  duty  to  sacrifice  life's  dearest  enjoyments :  this  is 
true  Christian  virtue,  the  higher  Christian  life  for  those  who 
would  be  perfect.  Let  us  have  many  Abrahams  so  living 
among  our  men  of  wealth,  and  there  is  no  fear  of  the  church 
going  back  to  the  middle  ages.  Only  when  the  rich,  as  a 
class,  are  luxurious,  vain,  selfish,  and  pioud,  is  there  a  danger 
of  the  tenet  gaining  credence  among  the  serious,  that  there 
is  no  possibility  of  living  a  truly  Christian  life  except  by 
parting  with  property  altogether. 

The  ascetic  theory  is  also  founded  on  an  error  in  the 
interpretation  of  Cluist's  sayings.  These  do  not  assert  or 
imply  any  intrinsic  superiority  of  celibacy  and  voluntary 
poverty  over  the  conditions  to  which  they  are  opposed.  They 
only  imply,  that  in  certain  circumstances  the  unmarried  dis- 
possessed state  affords  peculiar  feicilities  for  attending  with- 

^  We  refer  to  Nilus  of  Constantinople.   See  Isaac  Taylor's  Loffie  in  Theology, 
p.  180. 


260  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

out  distraction  to  the  interests  of  the  divine  IdngdoiiL     This 
is  certainly  true.      It  is  less  easy  sometimes  to  be  single- 
minded  in  the  service  of  Christ  as  a  married  person  than  as 
an  unmarried,  as  a  rich  man  than  as  a  poor  map.     This  is 
especially  true  in  times  of  hardship  and  danger,  when  men 
must  either  not  be  on  Christ's  side  at  all,  or  be  prepared  to 
sacrifice  all  for  His  sake.     The  less  one  has  to  sacrifice  in 
such  a  case,  the  easier  it  is  for  him  to  bear  his  cross  and  play 
the  hero ;  and  he  may  be  pronounced  happy  at  such  a  crisis 
who  has  no  family  to  forsake,   and  no  worldly  concerns  to 
distract  him.     Personal  character  may  suffer  from  such  isola- 
tion :  it  may  lose  geniality,  tenderness,  and  grace,  and  con- 
tract something  of  inhuman  sternness,  but  the  particular  tasks 
required  will  be  more  likely  to  be  thoroughly  done.     On  this 
account,  it  may  be  said  with  truth  that  "  the  forlorn  hope  in 
battle,  as  well  as  in  the  cause  of  Christianity,  must  consist  of 
men  who  have  no  domestic  relations  to  divide  their  devotion, 
who  will  leave  no  wife  nor  children  to  mourn  over  their  loss."^ 
Tet  this  statement  cannot   be   taken  without  qualification. 
For  it  is  not  impossible  for  married  and  wealthy  Christians  to 
take  their  place  in  the  forlorn  hope :  many  have  done  so,  and 
those  who  do  are  the  greatest  heroes  of  all.     The  advantage 
is  not  necessarily  and  invariably  on  the  side  of  those  who  are 
disengaged  from  all  embarrassing  relationships  even  in  time  of 
war  ;  and  in  times  of  peace  it  is  all  on  the  other  side.    Monks, 
like  soldiers,  are  liable  to  frightful  degeneracy  and  corruption 
when  there  are  no  great  tasks  for  them  to  do.     Men  who  in 
emergencies  are  capable,  in  consequence  of  their  freedom  from 
all  domestic  and  secular  embarrassments,  of  rising  to  an  al- 
most superhuman  pitch  of  self-denial,  may  at  other  seasons 
sink  to  a  depth  of  self-indulgence  in  sloth  and  sensuality 
which  is  rarely  seen  in  those  who  enjoy  the  protecting  in- 
fluence of  family  ties  and  business  engagements.^ 

The  theory  under  consideration  is  guilty,  in  the  third  plaoe, 
of  an  error  in  logic.  On  the  assumption  that  abstinence  is 
necessarily  and  intrinsically  a  higher  virtue  than  temperance, 

*  Robertson  (Brighton).     Sermons,  Series  iii. :  On  Marriage  and  Celibacy. 
'  For  a  dark  picture  of  the  corraption  prevalent  among  the  monastics  in  early 
ages,  see  Isaac  Taylor's  Ancient  Christianity, 


i 


m  P£IL£A  :   COUNSELS  OF  PERFECTION.  261 

it  is  illogical  to  speak  of  it  as  opfeionaL  In  that  case,  our 
Lord  should  have  given  not  counsels,  but  commands.  For 
no  man  is  at  liberty  to  choose  whether  he  shall  be  a  good 
Christian  or  an  indififerent  one,  or  is  excused  from  practising 
certain  virtues  merely  because  they  are  difficult  It  is  abso- 
lutely incumbent  on  all  to  press  on  towards  perfection ;  and  if 
celibacy  and  poverty  be  necessary  to  perfection,  then  all  who 
profess  godliness  should  renoimce  wedlock  and  property.  The 
Church  of  Home,  consistently  with  her  theory  of  morals,  for- 
bids her  priests  to  marry.  But  why  stop  there  ?  Surely  what 
is  good  for  priests  is  good  for  people  as  wdL 

The  reason  why  the  prohibition  is  not  carried  further,  is  of 
course  that  the  laws  of  nature  and  the  requirements  of  society 
render  it  impracticable.  And  this  brings  us  to  the  last  objec- 
tion to  the  ascetic  theory,  viz.  that,  consistently  carried  out, 
it  lands  in  absurdity,  by  involving  the  destruction  of  society 
and  the  human  race.  A  theory  which  involves  such  con- 
sequences cannot  be  true.  For  the  kingdom  of  grace  and  the 
kingdom  of  nature  are  not  mutually  destructive.  One  Gk)d  is 
the  sovereign  of  both ;  and  all  things  belonging  to  the  lower 
kingdom — every  relation  of  life,  every  faculty,  passion,  and 
appetite  of  our  nature,  all  material  possessions — are  capable 
of  being  made  subservient  to  the  interests  of  the  higher  king- 
dom, and  of  contributing  to  our  growth  in  grace  and  holiness. 

The  grand  practical  difficulty  is  to  give  the  kingdom  of 
Grod  and  His  righteousness  their  due  place  of  supremacy,  and 
to  keep  all  other  things  in  strict  subordination.  The  object 
of  those  hard  sayings  uttered  by  Jesus  in  Persea  was  to  fix 
the  attention  of  the  disciples  and  of  all  on  that  difficulty. 
He  spoke  so  strongly,  that  men  compassed  by  the  cares  of 
family  and  the  comforts  of  wealth  might  duly  lay  to  heart 
their  danger ;  and  conscious  of  their  own  helplessness,  might 
seek  grace  &om  Qod  to  do  that  which,  though  difficult,  is  not 
impossible :  viz.,  while  married,  to  be  as  if  unmarried,  caring 
for  the  things  of  the  Lord ;  and  while  rich,  to  be  humble  in 
mind,  free  in  spirit,  and  devoted  in  heart  to  the  service  of 
Christ 

One  word  now  on  the  beautiful  incident  of  the  little  chil- 
dren brought  to  Jesus  to  get  His  blessing.     Who  can  believe 


262  THE  TBAIKIKG  OF  THE  TWELVE.  "" 

that  it  was  His  intention  to  teach   a   monkish  theory  of 
morals  after  reading  that  story?     How  opportunely  those 
mothers  came  to  Him,  seeking  a  blessing  for  their  little  ones, 
just  after  He  had  uttered  words  which  might  be  interpreted, 
and  were  actually  interpreted  in  after  ages,  as  a  disparagement 
of  family  relations  I     Their  visit  gave  Him  an  opportimity  of 
entering  His  protest  by  anticipation  against  such  a  miscon- 
struction of  His  teaching.     And  the  officious  interference  of 
the  twelve  to  keep  away  the  mothers  and  their  offspring  from 
their  Master's  person,  only  made  that  protest  all  the  more 
emphatic     The  disciples  seem  to  have  taken  firopi  the  words 
Jesus  had  just  spoken  concerning  abstaining  from  marriage 
for  the  sake  of  the  kingdom,  the  very  impression  out  of  which 
monasticism  sprang.     "What  does  He  care,"  thought  they, 
"  for  you  mothers  and  your  children  ?  His  whole  thoughts  are 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  where  they  neither  marry  nor  are 
given  in  marriage:  go  away,  and  don't  trouble  Him  at  this 
tima"    The  Lord  did  not  thank  His  disciples  for  thus  guarding 
His  person  from  intrusion  like  a  band  of  policemen.    **  He  was 
much  displeased,  and  said  irnto  them.  Suffer  the  little  chil- 
dren to  come  unto  me,  and  forbid  them  not :  for  of  such  is 
the  kingdom  of  God."  ^ 


Section  n. — The  JRewards  of  Self-sacrifice. 

Matt.  xnc.  27-80 ;  Maek  x.  28-81 ;  Luke  xviii.  28-80. 

The  remarks  of  Jesus  on  the  temptations  of  riches,  which 
seemed  so  discouraging  to  the  other  disciples,  had  a  different 
effect  on  the  mind  of  Peter.  They  led  him  to  think  with 
self-complacency  of  the  contrast  presented  by  the  conduct  of 
himself  and  his  brethren,  to  that  of  the  youth  who  came  in- 
quiring after  eternal  life.  "  We,"  thought  he  to  himself,  "  have 
done  what  the  yoimg  man  could  not  do, — ^what,  according  to 
the  statement  just  made  by  the  Master,  rich  men  find  very 

^  Mark  z.  14.  For  an  admirable  defence  of  the  anti-ascetic  interpretation  of 
Christ's  words  to  the  young  rich  man,  see  the  tract  of  Clement  of  Alexandria, 
Quia  dives  eaivetur. 


'  m  PEB^A:   THE  REWABDS  OF  SELF-SACBIFICE.  263 

hard  to  do :  we  have  left  all  to  follow  Jesus.  Surely  an  act 
so  diflficult  and  so  rare  must  be  very  meritorious."  With  his 
characteristic  frankness,  as  he  thought  so  he  spoke.  ''Be- 
hold/' said  he  with  a  touch  of  brag  in  his  tone  and  manner, 
"  we  have  forsaken  all,  and  followed  Thee :  what  shall  we  have 
therefore  ? " 

To  this  question  of  Peter,  Jesus  returned  a  reply  full  at  once 
of  encouragement  and  of  warning  for  the  twelve,  and  for  all, 
who  profess  to  be  servants  of  (Jod.  First,  with  reference  to 
the  subject-matter  of  Peter's  inquiry.  He  set  forth  in  glowing 
language  the  great  rewards  in  store  for  him  and  his  brethren ; 
and  not  for  them  only,  but  for  all  who  made  sacrifices  for  the 
kingdom.  Then,  with  reference  to  the  self-complacent  or 
calculating  spirit  which,  in  part  at  least,  had  prompted  the 
inquiry.  He  added  a  moral  reflection,  with  an  illustrative 
parable  appended,  conveying  the  idea  that  rewards  in  the 
kingdom  of  God  were  not  determined  merely  by  the  &LCt,  or 
even  by  the  amount,  of  sacrifica  Many  that  were  first  in 
these  respects,  might  be  last  in  real  merit,  for  lack  of  another 
element  which  formed  an  essential  ingredient  in  the  calcula- 
tion,  viz.  rigfU  motive ;  while  others  who  were  last  in  these 
respects  might  be  first  in  recompense,  in  virtue  of  the  spirit 
by  which  they  were  animated.  We  shall  consider  these  two 
parts  of  the  reply  in  succession.  Our  present  theme  is,  the 
remards  of  sdf'Sacrifice  in  the  divine  kingdom. 

The  first  thing  which  strikes  one  in  reference  to  these  re- 
wards, is  the  utter  disproportion  between  them  and  the  sacri- 
fices mada  The  twelve  had  forsaken  fishing-boats  and  nets, 
and  they  were  to .  be  rewarded  with  thrones ;  and  every  one 
that  forsakes  anything  for  the  kingdom,  no  matter  what  it 
may  be,  is  promised  an  himdred-fold  in  return,  in  this  present 
life,  of  the  very  thing  he  has  renoimced,  and  in  the  world  to 
come  life  everlasting. 

/  These  promises  strikingly  illustrate  the  generosity  of  the  v 
Master  whom  Christians  serve.  How  easy  it  would  have 
been  for  Jesus  to  depreciate  the  sacrifices  of  His  followers, 
and  even  to  turn  their  glorying  into  ridicule  I  "  You  have 
forsaken  all !  What  was  your  all  worth,  pray  ?  If  the  rich 
young  man  had  parted  with  his  possessions  as  I  counselled. 


264  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

he  might  have  had  Bomething  to  boast  of;  but  as  for  you 
poor  fishermen,  any  sfiwjrifices  you  have  made  are  hardly 
deserving  of  mention."  But  such  words  could  not  have  been 
uttered  by  Christ's  Ups.  It  was  never  His  way  to  despise 
things  small  in  outward  bulk,  or  to  disparage  services  rendered 
to  Himself,  as  if  with  a  view  to  diminish  His  own  obliga- 
tiona  He  rather  loved  to  make  Himself  a  debtor  to  His 
servants,  by  generously  exaggerating  the  value  of  their  good 
deeds,  and  promising  to  them,  as  their  Jit  recompense,  rewards 
immeasurably  exceeding  their  claims^  So  He  acted  in  the 
present  instance.  Though  the  ''  all "  of  the  disciples  was  a 
very  little  one.  He  still  remembered  that  it  was  their  all ;  and 
with  impassioned  earnestness,  with  a  "  verily  "  full  of  tender, 
grateful  feeling.  He  promised  them  thrones  aa  if  they  had 
been  fairly  earned ! 

These  great  and  precious  promises,  if  believed,  would  make 
sacrifices  easy.  Who  would  not  part  with  a  fiahing-boat  for 
a  throne  ?  and  what  merchant  would  stick  at  an  investment 
which  would  bring  a  return,  not  of  five  per  cent.,  or  even  of 
a  himdred  per  cent.,  but  of  a  hundred  to  one  ? 

The  promises  made  by  Jesus  have  one  other  excellent 
effect  when  duly  considered.  They  tend  to  humbla  Their 
very  magnitude  has  a  sobering  effect  on  the  mind.  'Not  even 
the  vainest  can  pretend  that  their  good  deeds  deserve  to  be 
rewarded  with  thrones,  and  their  sacrifices  to  be  recompensed 
an  hundred-fold.  At  this  rate,  all  must  be  content  to  be 
debtors  to  6od*s  grace,  and  all  talk  of  merit  is  out  of  the 
question.  That  is  one  reason  why  the  rewards  of  the  king- 
dom of  heaven  are  so  great.  God  bestows  His  gifts  so  as  at 
once  to  glorify  the  Giver  and  to  humble  the  receiver. 

Thus  far  of  the  rewards  in  generaL  Looking  now  more 
narrowly  at  those  specially  made  to  the  twelve,  we  remark 
that  on  the  surface  they  seem  fitted  to  awaken  or  foster  fake 
expectation.  Whatever  they  meant  in  reality,  there  can  be 
little  doubt  as  to  the  meaning  the  disciples  would  put  on 
them  at  the  time.  The  "  regeneration  "  and  the  "  thrones  "  of 
which  their  Master  spake  would  bring  before  their  imagination 
the  picture  of  a  kingdom  of  Israel  restored, — regenerated  in 
the  sense  in  which  we  now  speak  of  a  regenerated  Italy : — 


4 


IN  PERJBA:   THE  BEWARDS  OF  SELF-SACBIFICE.  265 

the  yoke  of  foreign  domination  thrown  off;  alienated  tribes 
reconciled  and  reunited  under  the  rule  of  Jesus,  proclaimed 
by  popular  enthusiasm  their  hero  King ;  and  themselves,  the 
men  who  had  first  believed  in  His  royal  pretensions  and 
shared  His  early  fortunes,  jewarded  for  their  fidelity  by  being 
made  provincial  govemws,  each  ruling  over  a  separate  tribe. 

These  romantic  ideas  were  never  to  be  realized ;  and  we 
naturally  ask  why  Jesus,  knowing  that,,  expressed  Himself  in 
language  fitted  to  encourage  such  baseless  fancies?  The 
answer  is,  that  He  could  not  accomplish  the  end  He  designed, 
which  was  to  inspire  His  disciples  with  hope,  without  express- 
ing His  promise  in  terms  which  involved  the  risk  of  illusion. 
Language  so  chosen  as  to  obviate  all  possibUity  of  miscon- 
ception would  have  had  no  inspiring  influence  whatever. 
The  promise,  to  have  any  charm,  must  be  like  a  rainbow, 
bright  in  its  hues,  and  solid  and  substantial  in  its  appearance. 
This  remark  applies  not  only  to  the  particidar  promise  now 
imder  consideration,  but  more  or  less  to  all  Grod's  promises  in 
Scripture  or  in  nature.  In  order  to  stimulate,  they  must  to 
a  certain  extent  deceive  us,  by  promising  that  which,  as  we 
conceive  it,  and  cannot  at  the  time  help  conceiving  it,  will 
never  be  realized.^  The  rainbow  is  painted  in  such  colours 
as  to  draw  us,  children  as  we  are,  irresistibly  on ;  and  then, 
having  served  that  end,  it  fades  away.  When  this  happens, 
we  are  ready  to  exclaim,  "  O  Lord,  Thou  hast  deceived  me ! " 
but  we  ultimately  find  that  we  are  not  cheated  out  of  our 
blessing,  though  it  comes  in  a  different  form  from  what  we 
expected.  6od*s  promises  are  never  delusive,  though  they 
may  be  illusive.  Such  was  the  experience  of  the  twelve  in 
connection  with  the  dazzling  promise  of  thrones.  They  did 
not  get  what  they  expected,  but  they  got  something  analogous, 
something  which  to  their  mature  spiritual  judgment  appeared 
far  greater  and  more  satisfying  than  that  on  which  they  had 
first  set  their  hearts. 

What,  then,  was  this  Somethiog  ?  A  real  glory,  honour, 
and  power  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  conferred  on  the  twelve  as 
the  reward  of  their  self-sacrifice,  partially  in  this  life,  per- 

^  See  a  striking  sermon  on  this  point  by  Bev.  F.  W.  Robertson,  in  third 
seriea  of  his  Sermons.    Subject — The  lUtmvenesa  qf  Life, 


I 


266     .  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

fectly  in  the  life  to  come.  In  so  far  as  the  promise  referred 
to  this  present  life,  it  signified,  we  presume,  the  judicial  legis- 
lative influence  of  the  companions  of  Jesus,  as  apostles  and 
founders  of  the  Chriistian  church.  The  twelve,  as  the  first 
preachers  of  the  gospel  trained  by  the  Lord  for  that  end, 
occupied  a  position  in  the  church  that  could  be  fiUed  by 
none  that  came  after  them.  The  keys  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  were  put  into  their  hands.  They  were  the  foundation 
stones  on  which  the  waUs  of  the  church  were  built  They 
sat,  so  to  speak,  on  episcopal  thrones,  judging,  guiding,  ruling 
the^  twelve  tribes  of  the  true  Israel  of  God,  the  holy  common- 
wealth embracing  all  who  professed  faith  in  Christ  Such  a 
sovereign  influence  the  twelve  apostles  exerted  in  their  life- 
time ;  yea,  they  continue  to  exert  it  stilL  Their  word  not 
only  was,  but  stiU  is,  law;  their  example  has  ever  been 
regarded  as  binding  on  aU  ages.  From  their  epistles,  as  the 
inspired  expositions  of  their  Master's  pregnant  sayings,  the 
church  has  derived  the  system  of  doctrine  embraced  in  her 
creed.  All  that  remains  of  their  writings  forms  part  of  the 
sacred  canon,  and  all  their  recorded  words  are  accounted  by 
believers  "  words  of  God."  Surely  here  is  power  and  autho- 
rity nothing  short  of  regal !  The  reality  of  sovereignty  is 
^  here,  though  the  trappings  of  royalty,  which  strike  the  vulgar 
eye,  are  wanting.  The  apostles  of  Jesus  were  princes  indeed, 
though  they  wore  no  princely  robes ;  and  they  were  destined 
to  exercise  a  more  extensive  sway  than  ever  fell  to  the  lot  of 
any  monarch  of  Israel,  not  to  speak  of  governors  of  single  tribes. 
The  promise  to  the  twelve  had  doubtless  a  reference  to 
their  position  in  the  church  in  heaven,  as  well  as  in  the 
church  on  earth.  What  they  will  be  in  the  eternal  kingdom 
we  know  not,  any  more  than  we  know  what  we  ourselves  shall 
be,  our  notions  of  heaven  altogether  being  very  hazy.  We 
believe,  however,  on  the  groimd  of  clear  Scripture  statements, 
that  men  will  not  be  on  a  dead  level  in  heaven  any  more 
than  on  earth.  Badicalism  is  not  the  law  of  the  supernal 
commonwealth,  even  as  it  is  not  the  law  in  any  well-ordered 
society  in  this  world.  The  kingdom  of  glory  will  be  but  the 
kingdom  of  grace  perfected,  the  regeneration  begun  here 
brought  to  its  final  and  complete  development     But  the 


IN  PERiEA:   THE  REWARDS  OF  SEU'-SACRIFICE.  267 

regeneration,  in  its  imperfect  state,  is  an  attempt  to  organize 
men  into  a  society  based  on  the  possession  of  spiritual  life, 
all  being  included  in  the  kingdom  who  are  new  creatures  in 
Christ  Jesus,  and  the  highest  place  being  assigned  to  those 
who  have  attained  the  highest  stature  as  spiritual  men.  This 
ideal  has  never  been  more  than  approximately  realized.  The 
"  visible  "  church,  the  product  of  the  attempt  to  realize  it,  is, 
and  ever  has  been,  a  most  disappointing  embodiment,  in  out- 
ward visible  shape,  of  the  ideal  city  of  God.  Ambition, 
selfishness,  worldly  wisdom,  courtly  arts,  have  too  often  pro- 
cured thrones  for  false  apostles,  who  never  forsook  anything 
for  Christ.  Therefore  we  still  look  forward  and  upward 
with  longing  eyes  for  the  true  city  of  God,  which  shall  as  far 
exceed  our  loftiest  conceptions  as  the  visible  church  comes 
short  of  them.  In  that  ideal  commonwealth  perfect  moral 
order  will  prevail.  Every  man  shall  be  in  his  own  true 
place  there ;  no  vile  men  shall  be  in  high  places,  no  noble 
souls  shall  be  doomed  to  obstruction,  obscurity,  and  neglect ; 
but  the  noblest  will  be  the  highest  and  first,  even  though 
now  they  be  the  lowest  and  last.  "  There  shall  be  true  glory, 
where  no  one  shall  be  praised  by  mistake  or  in  flattery ;  true 
honour,  which  shall  be  denied  to  no  one  worthy,  granted  to 
no  one  imworthy;  nor  shall  any  unworthy  one  ambitiously 
seek  it,  where  none  but  the  worthy  are  permitted  to  be."  ^ 

Among  the  noblest  in  the  supernal  commonwealth  will  be 
the  twelve  men  who  cast  in  their  lot  with  the  Son  of  man,, 
and  were  His  companions  in  His  wanderings  and  tempta- 
tions. There  will  probably  be  many  in  heaven  greater  than 
they  in  intellect  and  otherwise ;  but  the  greatest  will  most 
readily  concede  to  them  the  place  of  honour  as  the  first  to 
believe  in  Jesus,  the  personal  friends  of  the  Man  of  sorrow, 
and  the  chosen  vessels  who  carried  His  name  to  the  nations, 
and  in  a  sense  opened  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  who 
believe.^ 

Such  we  conceive  to  be  the  import  of  the  promise  made  to 

^  Angastini  de  CivUate  Dd,  xzii.  80. 

'  The  superior  rank  of  the  twelve  in  the  eternal  kingdom  is  recognised  in  the 
book  of  Revelation,  chap.  xxi.  14 :  "  The  walls  of  the  city  had  twelve  founda- 
tions^ and  in  them  the  names  of  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb." 


268  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVK 

the  apostles,  as  leaders  of  the  white-robed  band  of  martyrs  and 
confessors  who  suffer  for  Christ's  sake.  We  proceed  to  notice 
the  general  promise  made  to  all  the  faithful  indiscriminately. 
*'  There  is  no  man,"  so  it  runs  in  Mark,  "  that  hath  left  house, 
or  brethren,  or  sisters,  or  father,  or  mother,  or  wife,  or  children, 
or  lands,  for  my  sake  and  the  gospel's,  but  he  shall  receive 
an  hundred-fold  now  in  this  time,  houses,^  and  brethren,  and 
sisters,  and  mothers,  and  children,  and  lands,  with  persecu- 
tions, and  in  the  world  to  come  eternal  life  " 

This  promise  al^o,  like  the  special  one  to  the  twelve,  has  a 
twofold  reference.     Godliness  is  represented  as  profitable  for 
both  worlds.     In  the  world  to  come,  the  men  who  make  sacri- 
fices for  Christ  will  receive  eternal  life ;  in  the  present  they 
shall  receive,  along  with  persecutions,  an  hundred-fold  of  the 
very  things  which  have  been  sacrificed.     As  to  the  former  of 
these,  eternal  life,  it  is  to  be  understood  as  the  minimum  re- 
ward in  the  great  Hereafter.     All  the  faithful  will  get  that 
at  least.     What  a  maximum  is  that  minimum  !    How  blessed 
to  be  assured  on  the  word  of  Christ,  that  there  is  such  a 
thing  as  eternal  life  attainable  on  amy  terms !     We  may  well 
play  the  man  for  truth  and  conscience,  and  fight  the  good 
fight  of  faith,  when,  by  so  doing,  it  is  possible  for  us  to  gain 
such  a  prize.     A  hope  so  great  and  so  divine  may  trials 
well  endure.      To  win   the  crown  of  an  imperishable   life 
of  bliss,  we  should  not  deem  it  an  unreasonable  demand  on 
the  Lord's  part  that  we  be  faithful  even  unto  death.     Life 
sacrificed  on  these  terms  is  but  a  river  emptying  itseK  into 
the  ocean,  or  the  morning  star  losing  itself  in  the  perfect  light 
of  day.     Oh  that  we  could  lay  hold  firmly  of  the  blessed  hope 
set  before  us  here,  and  through  its  magic  influence  become 
transformed  into  moral  heroes  1    We  in  these  days  have  but  a 
faint  belief  in  the  life  to  come.     Our  eyes  are  dim,  and  we 
cannot  see  the  land  that  is  afar  oK    Some  of  us  have  become 
so  philosophical,  as  to  imagine  we  can  do  without  the  future 
reward  promised  by  Jesus,  and  play  the  hero  on  atheistical 
principles.    That  remains  to  be  seen.    The  annals  of  the  mar- 
tyrs teU  us  what  men  have  been  able  to  achieve  who  earnestly 
believed  in  the  life  everlasting.     Up  to  this  date  we  have  not 
heard  of  any  great  heroisms  enacted  or  sacrifices  made  by 


IN  VERJEX:   THE  REWARDS  OF  SELF-SACRIFICE.  269 

uvbelievers.     The  martyrology  of  scepticism  has  not  yet  been 
written. 

That  part  of  Christ's  promise  which  respects  hereafter  must 
be  taken  on  tanst ;  but  the  other  part,  which  concerns  the  pre- 
sent life,  admits  of  being  tested  by  observation.  The  question, 
therefore,  may  competently  be  put :  Is  it  true,  as  matter  of 
fact,  that  sacrifices  are  recompensed  by  an  hundred-fold — that 
is,  a  manifold^ — ^return  in  kind  in  this  world  ?  To  this  ques- 
tion we  may  reply,  first,  that  the  promise  will  be  found  to 
hold  good  with  the  regularity  of  a  law,  if  we  do  not  confine 
our  view  to  the  individual  life,  but  include  successive  genera- 
tions. When  providence  has  had  time  to  work  out  its  results, 
the  meek  do,  at  least  by  their  heirs  and  representatives,  inherit 
the  earth,  and  delight  themselves  in  the  abundance  of  peace. 
The  persecuted  cause  at  length  conquers  the  world's  homage, 
and  receives  from  it  such  rewards  as  it  can  bestow.  The 
words  of  the  prophet  are  then  fulfilled :  "  The  children  which 
thou  shalt  have,  after  thou  hast  lost  the  other  (by  persecutors' 
hands),  shall  say  again  in  thine  ears,  The  place  is  too  strait 
for  me:  give  place  to  me* that  I  may  dwell"*  And  again: 
"lift  up  thine  eyes  round  about,  and  see;  all  they  gather 
themselves  together,  they  come  to  thee :  thy  sons  shall  come 
from  far,  and  thy  daughters  shall  be  nursed  at  thy  side.  Then 
thou  shalt  see,  and  flow  together,  and  thine  heart  shall  throb 
and  swell ;  because  the  abundance  of  the  sea  shall  be  converted 
unto  thee,  the  wealth  of  the  Gtentiles  shall  come  tmto  thee. 
Thou  shalt  also  suck  the  milk  of  the  Gentiles,  and  shalt 
suck  the  breast  of  kings.  For  brass  I  will  bring  gold,  and  for 
iron  I  will  bring  silver,  and  for  wood  brass,  and  for  stones 
iron."^  These  prophetic  promises,  extravagant  though  they 
seem,  have  been  AilfiUed  again  and  again  in  the  history  of  the 
church :  in  the  early  ages,  under  Constautine,  after  the  fires 
of  persecution  kindled  by  pagan  zeal  for  hoary  superstitions 
and  idolatries  had  finally  died  out;*  in  Protestant  Britain, 

*  fl'tfXXao'XaWtfya,  Luke  xyiii  80.  '  Isa.  xlix.  20. 
»  Isa.  Ix.  4,  6,  16,  17. 

*  See  sennon  of  Paulinas  of  Tyre  at  the  consecration  of  his  church,  rebuilt, 
like  many  others,  after  the  last  persecution — the  churches  having  been  destroyed 
by  the  edict  of  Diocletian.    Euseb.  HUU  Eccl.  x.  4. 


272  THE  TRADONa  OP  THE  TWELVEL 

in  tears,  from  which  they  afterwards  reap  a  plentiful  harvest 
in  joy.  But  what  now  of  those  who  have  made  ho  sacrifices, 
who  have  received  no  wounds  in  battle  ?  If  this  has  pro- 
ceeded not  from  lack  of  will,  but  from  lack  of  opportunity, 
they  shall  get  a  share  of  the  rewards.  David's  law  has  its 
place  in  the  divine  kingdom:  ''As  his  part  is  that  goeth 
down  to  the  battle,  so  ^lall  his  part  be  that  tarrieth  by  the 
stuff:  they  shall  part  aHfce."  Only  all  must  see  to  it,  that 
they  remain  not  by  the  stuff  from  coweadice,  or  indolence  and 
self-indulgence.  They  who  act  thus,  declining  to  put  them- 
selves to  any  trouble,  to  run  any  risk,  or  even  so  much  as 
to  part  with  a  sinful  lust  for  the  kingdom  of  God,  cannot 
expect  to  find  a  place  therein  at  the  last. 


Section  iil — The  First  Last,  and  the  Last  First. 

Matt,  xdl  86,  xx.  1-26 ;  Mark  x.  81. 

Having  declared  the  rewards  of  self-sacrifioe,  Jesus  pro- 
ceeded to  show  the  risk  of  forfeiture  or  partial  loss  arising  out 
of  the  indulgence  of  unworthy  feelings,  whether  as  motives  to 
self-denying  acts,  or  as  self-complacent  reflections  on  such 
acts  already  performed.  "  But,"  He  said  in  a  warning  manner, 
as  if  with  upraised  finger,  *'  many  that  are  first  shall  be  last, 
and  the  last  shall  be  first"  Then,  to  explain  the  profound 
remark.  He  uttered  the  parable  preserved  in  Matthew's  Gospel 
only,  which  foUows  immediately  after. 

The  explanation  is  in  some  respects  more  dif&cult  than  the 
thing  to  be  explained,  and  has  given  rise  to  much  diverse 
interpretation.  And  yet  the  main  drift  of  this  parable  seems 
clear  enough.  It  is  not,  as  some  have  supposed,  designed  to 
teach  that  all  will  share  alike  in  the  eternal  kingdom,  which 
is  not  only  irrelevant  to  the  connection  of  thought,  but  untrue. 
Neither  is  the  parable  intended  to  proclaim  the  great  evan- 
gelic truth,  that  salvation  is  of  grace  and  not  of  merit,  though 
it  may  be  very  proper  in  preaching  to  take  occasion  to  dis- 
course on  that  fundamental  doctrine.  The  great  outstanding 
thought  set  forth  therein,  as  it  seems  to  us,  is  this,  that  in 


k 


m  PERiBA  :   FIBST  LAST  AND  LAST  FIRST.  273 

estimating  the  value  of  work,  the  divine  Lord  whom  all  serve 
takes  into  account  not  merely  quantity*  but  quality ;  that  is, 
the  spirit  in  which  the  work  is  done. 

The  correctness  of  this  view  is  apparent,  when  we  take  a 
comprehensive  survey  of  the  whole  teaching  of  Jesus  on  the 
important  subject  of  work  and  wages  in  the  divine  kingdom, 
from  which  it  appears  that  the  relation  between  the  two 
things  is  fixed  by  righteous  law,  caprice  being  entirely  ex- 
cluded ;  so  that  if  the  first  in  work  be  last  in  wages  in  any 
instances,  it  is  for  very  good  reasons. 

There  are,  in  all,  three  parables  in  the  Gospels  on  the  sub- 
ject referred  to,  each  setting  forth  a  distinct  idea,  and,  in  case 
our  interpretation  of  the  one  at  present  to  be  specially  con- 
sidered is  correct,  all  combined  presenting  an  exhaustive  view 
of  the  topic  to  which  they  relate.  They  are  the  parables  of 
the  Talents  ^  and  of  the  Pounds,*  and  the  one  before  us,  called 
by  way  of  distinction  "  the  Labourers  in  the  Vineyard." 

In  order  to  see  how  these  parables  are  at  once  distinct  and 
mutually  complementary,  it  is  necessary  to  keep  in  view  the 
principles  on  which  the  value  of  work  is  to  be  determined. 
Three  things  must  be  taken  into  account,  in  order  to  form 
a  just  estimate  of  men's  works ;  viz.  the  quantity  of  work 
done,  the  ability  of  the  worker,  and  the  motive.  Leaving 
out  of  view  meantime  the  motive :  when  the  ability  is  equal, 
quantity  determines  relative  merit ;  and  when  ability  varies, 
then  it  is  not  the  absolute  amount,  but  the  relation  of  the 
amount  to  the  ability,  that  ought  to  determine  value. 

The  parables  of  the  Pounds  and  of  the  Talents  are  designed 
to  illustrate  respectively  these  two  propositions.  Li  the 
former  parable,  the  ability  is  the  same  in  all — each  servant  re- 
ceiving one  pound ;  but  the  quantity  of  work  done  varies,  one 
servant  with  his  potmd  gaining  ten  pounds,  while  another  with 
the  same  amount  gains  only  fiva  Now,  by  the  above  rule, 
the  second  should  not  be  rewarded  as  the  first,  for  he  has  not 
done  what  he  might.  Accordingly,  in  the  parable  a  distinc- 
tion is  made,  both  in  the  rewards  given  to  the  two  servants, 
and  in  the  manner  in  which  they  are  respectively  addressed 
by  their  employer.     The  first  gets  ten  cities  to  govern,  and 

^  Matt.  xxY.  li-80.  >  Lake  xiz.  12-28. 

S 


274  THE  TBAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

these  words  of  commendation  in  addition :  "  Well,  thou  good 
servant ;  because  thou  hast  been  faithful  in  a  very  little,  have 
thou  authority  over  ten  citiea"  The  second,  on  the  other  hand, 
gets  only  five  cities,  and,  what  is  even  more  noticeable,  no 
praise.  His  master  says  to  him  drily,  "  Be  thou  also  over 
five  cities."  He  had  done  somewhat,  in  comparison  with 
idlers  even  something  considerable,  and  therefore  his  service 
is  acknowledged  and  proportionally  rewarded.  But  he  is  not 
pronounced  a  good  and  faithful  servant ;  and  the  eulogy  is 
withheld,  simply  because  it  was  not  deserved :  for  he  had  not 
done  what  he  could,  but  only  half  of  what  was  possible, 
taking  the  first  servant's  work  as  the  measure  of  possibiUty. 

In  the  parable  of  the  Talents  the  conditions  are  different. 
There  the  amount  of  work  done  varies,  as  in  the  parable  of  the 
Pounds ;  but  the  ability  varies  in  the  same  proportion,  so  that 
the  ratio  between  the  two  is  the  same  in  the  case  of  both 
servants  who  put  their  talents  to  use.  One  receives  five,  and 
gains  five ;  the  other  receives  two,  and  gains  two.  According 
to  our  rule,  these  two  should  be  equal  in  merit;  and  so 
they  are  represented  in  the  parable.  The  same  reward  is 
assigned  to  each,  and  both  are  commended  in  the  very  same 
terms ;  the  master's  words  in  either  case  being  :  "  WeU  done, 
good  and  faithful  servant ;  thou  hast  been  faithful  over  a 
few  things,  I  wiU  make  thee  ruler  over  many  things :  enter 
thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  lord." 

Thus  the  case  stands  when  we  take  into  account  only  the 
two  elements  of  ability  to  work,  and  the  amotmt  of  work 
done ;  or,  to  combine  both  into  one,  the  element  of  zeaL 
But  there  is  more  than  zeal  to  be  considered,  at  least  in  the 
kingdom  of  God.  In  this  world  men  axe  often  commended 
for  their  diligence,  irrespective  of  their  motives  ;  and  it  is  not 
always  necessary  even  to  be  zealous  in  order  to  gain  vulgar 
applause.  If  one  do  something  that  looks  large  and  liberal, 
men  will  praise  him  without  inquiring  whether  for  him  it 
was  a  great  thing,  a  heroic  act  involving  self-sacrifice,  or  only 
a  respectable  act,  not  necessarily  indicative  of  earnestness 
or  devotion.  But  in  God's  sight  many  bulky  things  axe 
very  little,  and  many  small  things  are  very  great.  The 
reason  is,  that  He  seeth  the  heart,  and  the  hidden  springs  of 


k 


IN  TEELMk :   FIBST  LAST  AND  LAST  FIBST.  275 

action  there,  and  judges  the  stream  by  the  fountain.  Quantity 
is  nothing  to  Him,  unless  there  be  zeal;  and  even  zeal  is 
nothing  to  Him,  unless  it  be  purged  from  all  vainglory  and 
self-seeking, — a  pure  spring  of  good  impulses ;  cleared  of  all 
smoke  of  carnal  passion — a  pure  flame  of  heaven-bom  devo- 
tion.    A  base  motive  vitiates  all 

To  emphasize  this  truth,  and  to  insist  on  the  necessity  of 
right  motives  and  emotions  in  connection  with  work  and 
sacrifices,  is  the  design  of  the  parable  spoken  by  Jesus  in 
Persea.  It  teaches  that  a  small  quantity  of  work  done  in  a 
right  spirit  is  of  greater  value  than  a  large  quantity  done  in 
a  wrong  spirit,  however  zealously  it  may  have  been  performed. 
One  hour^s  work  done  by  men  who  make  no  bargain  is  of 
greater  value  than  twelve  hours*  work  done  by  men  who  have 
borne  the  heat  and  burden  of  the  day,  but  who  regard  their 
doings  with  self-complacency.  Put  in  preceptive  form,  the 
lesson  of  the  parable  is  :  Work  not  as  hirelings  basely  calcu- 
lating, or  as  Pharisees  arrogantly  exacting,  the  wages  to  which 
you  deem  yourselves  entitled ;  work  humbly,  as  deeming 
yourselves  unprofitable  servants  at  best ;  generously,  as  men 
superior  to  selfish  calculations  of  advantage;  trustfully,  as 
men  who  confide  in  the  generosity  of  the  great  Employer, 
regarding  Him  as  one  from  whom  you  need  not  to  protect 
yourselves  by  making  beforehand  a  firm  and  fast  bargain. 

In  this  interpretation,  it  is  assumed  that  the  spirit  of  the 
first  and  of  the  last  to  enter  the  vineyard  was  respectively 
such  as  has  been  indicated ;  and  the  assumption  is  justified 
by  the  manner  in  which  the  parties  are  described.  In  what 
spirit  the  last  worked,  may  be  inferred  from  their  making  no 
bargain ;  and  the  temper  of  the  first  is  manifest  from  their 
own  words  at  the  end  of  the  day :  "  These  last,"  said  they, 
"  have  wrought  but  one  hour,  and  thou  hast  made  them  equal 
to  us,  which  have  borne  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day." 
This  is  the  language  of  envy,  jealousy,  and  self-esteem,  and  it 
is  in  keeping  with  the  conduct  of  these  labourers  at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  dajr's  work ;  for  they  entered  the  vineyard 
as  hirelings,  having  made  a  bargain^  agreeing  to  work  for  a 
stipulated  amount  of  wages. 

The  first  and  last,  then,  represent  two  classes  among  the 


276  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

professed  servants  of  Gk)d.  The  first  are  the  calculating  and 
self-complacent ;  the  last  are  the  humble,  the  self-forgetful,  the 
generous,  the  trustful  The  first  are  the  Jacobs,  plodding^ 
conscientious,  able  to  say  for  themselves,  "  Thus  I  was :  in 
the  day  the  drought  consumed  me,  and  the  frost  by  night,  and 
the  sleep  departed  from  mine  eyes ;"  yet  ever  studious  of 
their  own  interest,  taking  care  even  in  their  religion  to  make 
a  sure  bargain  for  themselves,  and  trusting  little  to  the  &ee 
grace  and  unfettered  generosity  of  the  great  Lord.  The  last 
are  Abraham-like  men,  not  in  the  lateness  of  their  service, 
but  in  the  magnanimity  of  their  faith,  entering  the  vineyard 
without  bargaining,  as  Abraham  left  his  father's  house,  know- 
ing not  whither  he  was  to  go,  but  knowing  only  that  God  had 
said,  "  Go  to  a  land  that  I  shall  show  thee."  The  first  are 
the  Simons,  righteous,  respectable,  exemplary,  .but  hard,  pro- 
saic, tmgenial ;  the  last  are  the  women  with  alabaster  boxes, 
who  for  long  have  been  idle,  aimless,  vicious,  wasteful  of  life, 
but  at  last,  with  bitter  tears  of  sorrow  over  an  unprofitable 
past,  begin  life  in  earnest,  and  endeavour  to  redeem  lost 
time  by  the  passionate  devotion  with  which  they  serve  their 
Lord  and  Saviour.  The  first,  once  more,  are  the  elder 
brothers  who  stay  at  home  in  their  father's  house,  and  never 
transgress  any  of  his  commandments,  and  have  no  mercy  on 
those  who  do;  the  last  are  the  prodigals,  who  leave  their 
father's  house  and  waste  their  substance  on  riotous  living, 
but  at  length  come  to  their  senses,  and  say,  "  I  will  arise,  and 
go  to  my  father ;"  and  having  met  him,  exclaim,  "  Father,  I 
have  sinned,  and  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son : 
make  me  as  one  of  thy  hired  servants." 

The  two  classes  diflTering  thus  in  character  are  treated  in 
the  parable  precisely  as  they  ought  to  be.  The  last  are  made 
first,  and  the  first  are  made  last.  The  last  are  paid  first,  to 
signify  the  pleasure  which  the  master  has  in  rewarding  them. 
They  are  also  paid  at  a  much  higher  rate ;  for,  receiving  the 
same  sum  for  one  houi^s  work  that  the  others  receive  for 
twelve,  they  are  paid  at  the  rate  of  twelve  pence  per  diem. 
They  are  treated,  in  fact,  as  the  prodigal  was,  for  whom  the 
father  made  a  feast ;  while  the  '*  first "  are  treated  as  the 
elder  brother,  whose  service  was  acknowledged,  but  who  had 


IN  PEILEA  :   FIRST  LAST  AND  LAST  FIRST.  277 

tx)  complain  that  liis  father  never  had  given  him  a  kid  to 
make  merry  with  his  Mends.  Those  who  deem  themselves 
tmworthy  to  be  anything  else  than  hired  servants,  and  most 
improfitable  in  that  capacity,  are  dealt  with  as  sons;  and 
those  who  deem  themselves  most  meritorious  are  treated  coldly 
and  distantly,  as  hired  servants. 

Eeverting  now  from  the  parable  to  the  apothegm  it  was 
designed  to  illustrate,  we  observe  that  the  d^radation  of  such 
as  are  first  in  ability,  zeal,  and  length  of  service,  to  the  last 
place  as  regards  the  reward,  is  represented  as  a  thing  likely 
to  happen  often.  "  Many  that  are  first  shall  be  last."  This 
statement  implies  that  self-esteem  is  a  sin  which  easily  besets 
men  situate.d  as  the  twelve,  ie.  men  who  have  made  sacrifices 
for  the  kingdom  of  God.  Now,  that  this  is  a  fact  observa- 
tion proves ;  and  it  further  teaches  us  that  there  are  certain 
circimistances  in  which  the  laborious  and  self-denjring  are 
specially  liable  to  fall  into  the  vice  of  self-righteousness.  It 
will  serve  to  illustrate  the  deep  and,  to  most  minds  on  first 
view,  obscure  sajdng  of  Jesus,  if  we  indicate  here  what  these 
circumstances  are. 

1.  Those  who  make  sacrifices  for  Christ's  sake  are  in 
danger  of  falling  into  a  self-righteous  mood  of  mind,  when 
the  spirit  of  self-denial  manifests  itself  in  rare  occasional  acts, 
rather  than  in  the  form  of  a  habit  In  this  case  Christians 
rise  at  certain  emergencies  to  an  elevation  of  spirit  far  above 
the  usual  level  of  their  moral  feelings ;  and  therefore,  though, 
at  the  time  when  the  sacrifice  was  made,  they  may  have  be- 
haved heroically,  they  are  apt  afterwards  to  revert  self-com- 
placently  to  their  noble  deeds,  as  an  old  soldier  goes  back  on 
his  battles,  and  with  Peter  to  ask,  with  a  proud  consciousness 
of  merit  for  having  forsaken  all,  What  shall  we  have  there- 
fore ? 

2.  There  is  great  danger  of  degeneracy  in  the  spirit  of 
those  who  make  sacrifices  for  the  kingdom  of  (Jod,  when  any 
particular  species  of  service  has  come  to  be  much  in  demand, 
and  therefore  to  be  held  in  very  high  esteem.  Take,  as  an 
example,  the  endurance  of  physical  tortures  and  of  death  in 
times  of  persecution.  It  is  weU  known  with  what  a  fv/ror 
of  admiration  martyrs  and  confessors  were  regarded  in  the 


278  THE  TBAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

sufTermg  church  of  the  early  centuries.  Those  who  suffered 
martyrdom  were  aknost  deified  by  popular  enthusiasm :  the 
anniversaries  of  their  death — of  their  birth-days/  as  they 
were  called,  into  the  eternal  world — were  observed  with  reli- 
gious solemnity,  when  their  doings  and  sufferings  in  this 
world  were  rehearsed  with  ardent  admiration  in  strains  of 
extravagant  eulogy.  Even  the  confessors,  who  had  suffered 
but  not  died  for  Christ,  were  looked  up  to  as  a  superior  order 
of  beings,  separated  by  a  wide  guK  from  the  common  herd  of 
tmtried  Christians.  They  were  saints,  they  had  a  halo  of 
glory  round  their  heads ;  they  had  power  with  God,  and 
could,  it  was  believed,  bind  or  loose  with  even  more  authority 
than  the  r^ular  ecclesiastical  authorities.  Absolution  was 
eagerly  sought  for  from  them  by  the  lapsed ;  admission  to 
their  communion  was  regarded  as  an  open  door  by  which 
sinners  might  return  into  the  fellowship  of  the  church.  They 
had  only  to  say  to  the  erring,  *'  Go  in  peace,"  and  even 
bishops  must  receive  them.  Bishops  joined  with  the  populace 
in  this  idolatrous  homage  to  the  men  who  suffered  for  Christ's 
sake.  They  petted  and  flattered  the  confessors,  partly  from 
honest  admiration,  but  partly  also  from  policy,  to  induce 
others  to  imitate  their  example,  and  to  foster  the  virtue  of 
hardihood,  so  much  needed  in  suffering  times. 

This  state  of  feeling  in  the  church  was  obviously  fraught 
with  great  danger  to  the  souls  of  those  who  endured  hardship 
for  the  truth,  as  tempting  them  to  fanaticism,  vanity,  spiritual 
pride,  and  presumption.  Nor  were  they  all  by  any  means 
temptation-proof.  Many  took  all  the  praise  they  received  as 
their  due,  and  deemed  themselves  persons  of  great  consequence. 
The  soldiers,  who  had  been  flattered  by  their  generals  to  make 
them  brave,  began  to  act  as  if  they  were  the  masters,  and 
could  write,  for  example,  to  one  who  had  been  a  special 
offender  in  the  extravagance  of  his  eulogies,  such  a  letter  as 
tiiis :  "  All  the  confessors  to  Cyprian  the  bishop :  Know  that 
we  have  granted  peace  to  all  those  of  whom  you  have  had  an 
account  what  they  have  done  ;  how  they  have  behaved  since 
the  commission  of  their  crimes ;  and  we  would  that  these 
presents  should  be  by  you  imparted  to  the  rest  of  the  bishops. 

^  The  festiyal  of  a  martyr  was  called  his  fuUcUitia. 


IN  PERJEA :   FIBST  LAST  AND  LAST  FIEST.  279 

We  wish  you  to  maintain  peace  with  the  holy  martyrs."^ 
Thus  was  fulfilled  in  these  confessors  the  saying,  "  Many  that 
are  first  shall  be  last."  First  in  suffering  for  the  truth,  and 
in  reputation  for  sanctity,  they  became  last  in  the  judgment 
of  the  great  Searcher  of  hearts.  They  gave  their  bodies  to 
be  scourged,  maimed,  burned,  and  it  profited  them  little  or 
nothing.* 

3.  The  first  are  in  danger  of  becoming  the  last  when  self- 
denial  is  reduced  to  a  system,  and  practised  ascetically,  not  for 
Christ's  sake,  but  for  one's  own  saka  That  in  respect  of  the 
amount  of  self-denial  the  austere  ascetic  is  entitled  to  rank 
first,  nobody  will  deny.  But  his  right  to  rank  first  in  intrinsic 
spiritual  worth,  and  therefore  in  the  divine  kingdom,  is  more 
open  to  dispute.  Even  in  respect  to  the  fundamental  matter 
of  getting  rid  of  self,  he  may  be,  not  first,  but  last.  The  self- 
denial  of  the  ascetic  is  in  a  subtle  way  intense  self-assertion. 
True  Christian  self-sacrifice  signifies  hardship,  loss  undergone, 
not  for  its  own  sake,  but  for  Christ's  sake,  and  for  truth's  sake, 
at  a  time  when  truth  cannot  be  maintained  without  sacrifice. 
But  the  self-sacrifice  of  the  ascetic  is  not  of  this  kind.  It  is 
all  endured  for  his  own  sake,  for  his  own  spiritual  benefit  and 
credit.  He  practises  self-denial  after  the  fashion  of  a  miser, 
who  is  a  total  abstainer  from  all  luxuries,  and  even  grudges 
himself  the  necessaries  of  life,  because  he  has  a  passion  for 
hoarding.  Like  the  miser,  he  deems  himself  rich ;  yet  both 
he  and  the  miser  are  alike  poor :  the  miser,  because  with  all 
his  wealth  he  cannot  part  with  his  coin  in  exchange  for  en- 
joyable commodities ;  the  ascetic,  because  his  coins,  "  good 
works "  so  called,  painful  acts  of  abstinence,  are  counterfeit, 
and  will  not  pass  current  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  All  his 
labours  to  save  his  soul  will  turn  out  to  be  just  so  much  rubbish 
to  be  burned  up;  and  if  he  be  saved  at  all,  it  will  be  as 
by  fire. 

BecaUing  now  for  a  moment  the  three  classes  of  cases  in 

^  Cave,  Primitive  Chriatiamty,  part  iii.  cap,  v.  For  the  original,  vid.  CTpriani 
Opera  [Clark's  Ante-Nicene  Library,  Cyprian,  vol.  i.  p.  64]. 

'  The  virtue  now  in  request  is  that  of  giving  liberally  to  miasions,  and  to 
philanthropic  enterprises  of  aU  sorts.  The  same  degeneracy  of  motive  may 
take  place  in  connection  with  giving  as  in  connection  with  suffering  in  early 
times ;.  and  the  first  in  our  subscription  lists  may  be  last  in  the  book  of  life. 


280  THE  TEAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

which  the  first  are  in  danger  of  becoming  last,  we  perceive 
that  the  word  *'  many"  is  not  an  exaggeration.  For  consider 
how  much  of  the  work  done  by  professing  Christians  belongs 
to  one  or  other  of  these  categories :  occasional  spasmodic 
efforts ;  good  works  of  liberaUty  and  philanthropy,  which  are 
in  fashion  and  in  high  esteem  in  the  rehgions  world ;  and  good 
works  done,  not  so  much  from  interest  in  the  work,  as  from 
their  reflex  bearing  on  the  doer's  own  reKgious  interests. 
Many  are  called  to  work  in  God's  vineyard,  and  many  are 
actually  at  work.  But  few  are  chosen ;  few  are  choice  workers ; 
few  work  for  God  in  the  spirit  of  the  precepts  taught  by 
Jesus. 

But  though  there  be  few  such  workers,  there  are  some. 
Jesus  does  not,  observe,  say  all  who  are  first  shall  be  last,  and 
all  who  are  last  shall  be  first :  His  word  is  many.  There  are 
numerous  exceptions  to  the  rule  in  both  its  parts.  Not  all 
who  bear  the  heat  and  burden  of  the  day  are  mercenary  and 
self-righteous.  No ;  the  Lord  has  always  had  in  His  spiritual 
vineyard  a  noble  band  of  workers,  who,  if  there  were  room 
for  boasting  in  any  case,  might  have  boasted  on  account  of  the 
length,  the  arduousness,  and  the  efficiency  of  their  service,  yet 
cherished  no  self-complacent  thoughts,  nor  indulged  in  any 
calculations  how  much  more  they  should  receive  than  others. 
Think  of  devoted  missionaries  to  heathen  lands ;  of  heroic 
reformers  like  Luther,  Calvin,  Knox,  and  Latimer;  of  the 
eminent  men  of  our  own  day,  but  recently  taken  from  amongst 
us.  Can  you  fancy  such  men  talking  like  the  early  labourers 
in  the  vineyard  ?  Nay,  verily !  aU  through  life  their  thoughts 
of  themselves  and  their  service  were  very  himible  indeed ;  and 
at  the  close  of  life's  day,  their  day's  work  seemed  to  them  a 
very  sorry  matter,  utterly  tmdeserving  of  the  great  reward  of 
eternal  lifa     Such  first  ones  shall  not  be  last 

If  there  be  some  first  who  shall  not  be  last,  there  are  doubt- 
less also  some  last  who  shall  not  be  first.  If  it  were  other- 
wise ;  if  to  be  last  in  length  of  service,  in  zeal  and  devotion, 
gave  a  man  an  advantage,  it  would  be  ruinous  to  the  interests 
of  the  kingdom  of  God.  It  would,  in  fact,  be  in  effect  putting 
a  premium  on  indolence,  and  encouraging  men  to  stand  all  the 
day  idle,  or  to  serve  the  devil  till  the  eleventh  hour;  and 


IN  PERAA.:   FIRST  LAST  AND  LAST  FIRST.  281 

then  in  old  age  to  enter  the  vineyard,  and  give  the  Lord  the 
poor  hour's  work,  when  their  limbs  were  stiff  and  their  frames 
feeble  and  tottering.  No  such  demoralizing  law  obtains  in  the 
divine  kingdom.  Other  things  being  equal,  the  longer  and 
the  more  earnestly  a  man  serves  God,  the  sooner  he  b^ins, 
and  the  harder  he  works,  the  better  for  himself  hereafter.  If 
those  who  begin  late  in  the  day  are  graciously  treated,  it  is  in 
spite,  not  in  consequence,  of  their  tardiness.  That  they  have 
been  so  long  idle,  is  not  a  commendation,  but  a  sin ;  not  a 
subject  of  scJf-congratulation,  but  of  deep  humiliation.  If  it 
be  wrong  for  those  who  have  served  the  Lord  much  to  glory 
in  the  greatness  of  their  service,  it  is  surely  stiU  more  unbe- 
coming, even  ridiculous,  for  any  one  to  pride  himself  in  the 
littleness  of  his.  If  the  first  has  no  cause  for  boasting  and 
seK-righteousness,  still  less  has  the  last 


CHAPTEE    XVII. 

THE   SONS    OF  ZEBEDEE  AGAIN. 
Matt.  xx.  17-28  ;  Mabk  x.  82-46 ;  Luke  xviii.  81-34. 

THE  incident  recorded  in  these  sections  of  Matthew's  and 
Mark's  Gospels  happened  while  Jesus  and  His  disciples 
were  going  up  to  Jerusalem  for  the  last  time,  journeying  via 
Jericho,  from  Ephraim  in  the  wilderness,  whither  they  had 
retired  after  the  raising  of  Lazarus.^  The  ambitious  request 
of  the  two  sons  of  Zebedee  for  the  chief  places  of  honour  in 
the  kingdom,  was  therefore  made  little  more  than  a  week 
before  their  Lord  was  crucified.  How  little  must  they  have 
dreamed  what  was  coming !  Yet  it  was  not  for  want  of 
warning ;  for,  just  before  they  presented  their  petition,  Jesus 
had  for  the  third  time  explicitly  announced  His  approaching 
passion,  indicating  that  His  death  would  take  place  in  connec- 
tion with  this  present  visit  to  Jerusalem,  and  adding  other 
particulars  respecting  His  last  sufferings  not  specified  before, 
fitted  to  arrest  attention ;  as  that  His  death  should  be  the  issue 
of  a  judicial  process,  and  that  He  should  be  delivered  by  the 
Jewish  authorities  to  the  Grentiles,  to  be  mocked,  and  scourged, 
and  crucified.* 

After  recording  the  terms  of  Christ's  third  announcement, 
Luke  adds,  with  reference  to  the  disciples :  **  They  understood 
none  of  these  things :  and  this  saying  was  hid  from  them, 
neither  knew  they  the  things  which  were  spoken."'  The  truth 
of  this  statement  is  sufficiently  apparent  from  the  scene  which 
ensued,  not  recorded  by  Luke,  as  is  also  the  cause  of  the  fact 
stated.     The  disciples,  we  perceive,  were  thinking  of  other 

'  John  xi.  54. 

'  Matt.  XX.  17-19.    Mark  (x.  34)  adds  spitting  to  the  catalogue  of  indignities. 

'  Luke  xyiiL  84. 


THE  SONS  OF  ZEBEDEE  AGAIN.  283 

matters,  yrhile  Jesus  spake  to  them  of  His  approaching  suffer- 
ings. They  were  dreaming  of  the  thrones  they  had  been  pro- 
mised in  Persea ;  and  therefore  were  not  able  to  enter  into 
the  thoughts  of  their  Master,  so  utterly  diverse  from  their  own. 
Their  minds  were  completely  possessed  by  romantic  expecta- 
tions, their  heads  giddy  with  the  sparkling  wine  of  vain  hope ; 
and  as  they  drew  nigh  the  holy  city,  their  firm  conviction  was, 
"  that  the  kingdom  of  God  should  immediately  appear."  ^ 

While  all  the  disciples  were  looking  forward  to  their 
thrones,  James  and  John  were  coveting  the  most  distinguished 
ones,  and  contriving  a  scheme  for  securing  these  to  them- 
selves, and  so  getting  the  dispute  who  should  be  the  greatest 
settled  in  their  own  favour.  These  were  the  two  disciples 
who  made  themselves  so  prominent  in  resenting  the  rudeness 
of  the  Samaritan  villagers.  The  greatest  zealots  among  the 
twelve  were  thus  also  the  most  ambitious;  a  circumstance 
which  will  not  surprise  the  student  of  human  nature.  On 
the  former  occasion  they  asked  fire  from  heaven  to  consume 
their  adversaries ;  on  the  present  occasion  they  ask  a  favour 
from  Heaven  to  the  disadvantage  of  their  friends.  The  two 
requests  are  not  so  very  dissimilar. 

In  hatching  and  executing  their  little  plot,  the  two  brothers 
enjoyed  the  assistance  of  their  mother,  whose  presence  is  not 
explained,  but  may  have  been  due  to  her  having  become  an 
attendant  on  Jesus  in  her  widowhood,*  or  to  an  accidental 
meeting  with  Him  and  His  disciples  at  the  junction  of  the 
roads  converging  on  Jerusalem,  whither  all  were  now  going  to 
keep  the  feast  Salome  was  the  principal  actor  in  the  scene, 
and  it  must  be  admitted  she  acted  her  part  well  Kneeling 
before  Jesus,  as  if  doing  homage  to  a  king,  she  intimated  her 
humble  wish  to  proffer  a  petition ;  and  being  gently  asked, 
"  What  wilt  thou  ?"  said,  "  Grant  that  these  my  two  sons  may 
sit,  the  one  on  Thy  right  hand,  and  the  other  on  the  left,  in 
Thy  kingdom" 

This  prayer  had  certainly  another  origin  than  the  inspira- 
tion of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  scheme  of  which  it  was  the 

^  Lukexix.  11. 

'  Salome  was  one  of  the  women  who  followed  Christ  in  Galilee,  and  senred 
Him.    Mark  xy.  41. 


2  84  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

outcome  was  not  one  which  we  should  have  expected  com- 
panions of  Jesus  to  entertain.  And  yet  the  whole  proceeding 
is  so  true  to  human  nature  as  it  reveals  itself  in  every  age, 
that  we  cannot  but  feel  that  we  have  here  no  myth,  but  a 
genuine  piece  of  history.  We  know  how  much  of  the  world's 
spirit  is  to  be  found  at  all  times  in  religious  circles  of  high 
reputation  for  zeal,  devotion,  and  sanctity ;  and  we  have  no 
right  to  hold  up  our  hands  in  amazement  when  we  see  it 
appearing  even  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  Jesus. 
The  twfelve  were  yet  but  crude  Christians,  and  we  must 
allow  them  time  to  become  sanctified  as  well  as  others.  There- 
fore we  neither  affect  to  be  scandalized  at  their  conduct,  nor, 
to  save  their  reputation,  do  we  conceal  its  true  character.  We 
are  not  surprised  at  the  behaviour  of  the  two  sons  of  Zebedee, 
and  yet  we  say  plainly  that  their  request  was  foolish  and 
offensive :  indicative  at  once  of  bold  presumption,  gross  stu- 
pidity, and  unmitigated  selfishness. 

It  was  an  irreverent,  presumptuous  request,  because  it  vir- 
tually asked  Jesus  their  Lord  to  become  the  tool  of  their 
ambition  and  vanity.  Fancying  that  He  would  yield  to  mere 
solicitation,  perhaps  calculating  that  He  would  not  have  the 
heart  to  refuse  a  request  coming  from  a  female  suppliant,  who 
as  a  widow  was  an  object  of  compassion,  and  as  a  contributor 
to  His  support  had  claims  to  His  gratitude,  they  begged  a 
favour  which  Jesus  could  not  grant  without  being  untrue  to 
His  own  character  and  His  habitual  teaching,  as  exemplified 
in  the  discourse  on  humility  in  the  house  at  Capernaum.  In 
so  doing,  they  were  guilty  of  a  disrespectful,  impudent  for- 
wardness most  characteristic  of  the  ambitious  spirit,  which  is 
utterly  devoid  of  delicacy,  and  pushes  on  towards  its  end, 
reckless  what  offence  it  may  give,  heedless  how  it  wounds 
the  sensibilities  of  others. 

The  request  of  the  two  brothers  was  as  ignorant  as  it  was 
presumptuous.  The  idea  implied  therein  of  the  kingdom  was 
utterly  wide  of  truth  and  reality.  James  and  John  not  only 
thought  of  the  kingdom  that  was  coining  as  a  kingdom  of  this 
world,  but  they  thought  meanly  of  it  even  under  that  view. 
For  it  is  an  imusually  corrupt  and  unwholesome  condition  of 
matters  even  in  a  secular  state,  when  places  of  highest  dis- 


THE  SONS  OF  ZEBEDEE  AGAIN.  285 

tinction  can  be  obtained  by  solicitation  and  favour,  and  not 
on  the  sole  ground  of  fitness  for  the  duties  of  the  position. 
When  family  influence  or  courtly  arts  are  the  pathway  to 
power,  every  patriot  has  cause  to  mourn.  How  preposterous, 
then,  the  idea  that  promotion  can  take  place  in  the  divine, 
ideally-perfect  kingdom,  by  means  that  are  inadmissible  in 
any  well-regulated  secular  kingdom !  To  cherish  such  an  idea 
is  in  effect  to  degrade  and  dishonour  the  Divine  King,  by 
likening  Him  to  an  unprincipled  despot,  who  has  more  favour 
for  flatterers  than  for  honest  men ;  and  to  caricature  the  divine 
kingdom,  by  assimilating  it  to  the  most  misgoverned  states  on 
earth,  such  as  those  ruled  over  by  a  Bomba  or  a  Nero. 

The  request  of  the  brethren  was  likewise  intensely  selfish. 
It  was  ungenerous  as  towards  their  feUow-disciples ;  for  it  was 
an  attempt  to  overreach  them,  and,  like  all  such  attempts,  pro- 
duced mischief,  disturbing  the  peace  of  the  family  circle,  and 
giving  rise  to  a  most  unseemly  embitterment  of  feeling  among 
its  members.  "When  the  ten  heard  it,  they  were  moved 
with  indignation."  No  wonder ;  and  if  James  and  John  did 
not  anticipate  such  a  result,  it  showed  that  they  were  very 
much  taken  up  with  their  own  selfish  thoughts ;  and  if  they 
did  anticipate  it,  and  nevertheless  shrank  not  from  a  course 
of  action  which  was  sure  to  give  offence,  that  only  made 
their  selfishness  the  more  heartless  and  inexcusable. 

But  the  petition  of  the  two  disciples  was  selfish  in  a  far 
wider  view,  viz.  with  reference  to  the  public  interests  of  the 
divine  kingdouL  It  virtually  meant  this:  "Grant  us  the 
places  of  honour  and  power,  come  what  may ;  even  though 
universal  discontent  and  disaffection,  disorder,  disaster,  and 
chaotic  confusion  ensue."  These  are  the  sure  effects  of  pro- 
motion by  favour  instead  of  by  merit,  both  in  church  and  in 
state,  as  many  a  nation  has  foimd  to  its  cost  in  the  day  of 
trial ;  and  as  all  the  world  may  now  see  in  France,  when  in 
three  short  months,  a  great  army  proudly  deeming  itself 
invincible,  commanded  by  generals  who  were  courtiers  rather 
than  soldiers,  and  who  received  promotion  as  the  reward  of 
their  subserviency  to  a  corrupt  imperialism,  has  been  utterly 
annihilated,  and  the  poor  French  nation  left  distracted,  with- 
out a  head,  and  prostrate  under  the  heel  of  a  victorious  foe. 


286  THE  TBAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

whose  strength  lies  in  this,  that  he  has  not  granted  places  of 
power  and  trust  to  favourites  and  self-seekers,  but  to  modest, 
capable,  earnest  men. 

To  be  sure,  James  and  John  never  dreamt  of  disaster  re- 
sulting from  their  petition  being  granted.  No  self-seekers 
and  place-hunters  ever  do  anticipate  evil  results  from  their 
promotion.  But  that  does  not  make  them  less  selfish.  It 
only  shows  that,  besides  being  selfish,  they  aie  vain. 

The  reply  of  Jesus  to  this  ambitious  request,  considering 
its  character,  was  singularly  mild.  Offensive  •  though  the  pre- 
sumption, forwardness,  selfishness,  and  vanity  of  the  two  dis- 
ciples must  have  been  to  His  meek,  holy,  self-forgetful  spirit. 
He  uttered  not  a  word  of  direct  rebuke,  but  dealt  with  them 
as  a  father  might  deal  with  a  child  that  had  made  a  senseless 
request.  Abstaining  from  animadversion  on  the  grave  faults 
brought  to  light  by  their  petition.  He  noticed  only  the  least 
culpable — ^their  ignorance.  "  Ye  know  not,"  He  said  to  them 
qidetly,  "  what  ye  ask ;"  and  even  this  remark  He  made  in*com- 
passion  rather  than  in  the  way  of  blame.  He  pitied  men  who 
offered  prayers  whose  fulfilment,  as  He  knew,  implied  painful 
experiences  of  which  they  had  no  thought  It  was  in  this 
.  spirit  that  He  asked  the  explanatory  question :  "  Are  ye  able 
to  drink  of  the  cup  that  I  shall  drink  of,  and  to  be  baptized 
with  the  baptism  that  I  am  baptized  with  ? " 

But  there  was  more  than  compassion  or  correction  in  this 
question  :  even  instruction  concerning  the  true  way  of  obtain- 
ing  promotion  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  In  interrogatory  form 
Jesus  taught  His  disciples  that  advancement  in  His  kingdom 
went  not  by  favour,  nor  was  obtainable  by  clamorous  solicita- 
tion ;  that  the  way  to  thrones  was  the  via  dolorosa  of  the 
cross ;  that  the  palm-bearers  in  the  realms  of  glory  should  be 
they  who  had  passed  through  great  tribulation,  and  the  princes 
of  the  kingdom  they  who  had  drunk  most  deeply  of  His  cup 
of  sorrow ;  and  that  for  those  who  refused  to  drink  thereof, 
the  selfish,  the  self-indulgent,  the  ambitious,  the  vain,  there 
would  be  no  place  at  all  in  the  kingdom,  not  to  speak  of  places 
of  honour  on  His  right  or  left  hand. 

The  startUng  question  put  to  them  by  Jesus  did  not  take 
James  and  John  by  surprise.      Promptly  and  firmly  they 


**  • 
THE  SONS  OF  ZEBEDEE  iUUIN.  287 

replied,  "  We  are  able."  Had  they  then  really  taken  into 
account  the  cup  and  the  baptism  of  suffeiing,  and  deliberately 
made  up  their  minds  to  pay  the  costly  price  for  the  coveted 
prize  ?  Had  the  sacred  fire  of  the  martyr  spirit  already  been 
kindled  in  their  hearts  ?  One  would  be  happy  to  think  so, 
but  we  fear  there  is  nothing  to  justify  so  favourable  an  opinion. 
It  is  much  more  probable  that,  in  their  eagerness  to  obtain  the 
object  of  their  ambition,  the  two  brothers  were  ready  to  promise 
anything,  and  that,  in  fact,  they  neither  knew  nor  cared  what 
they  were  promising.  Their  confident  declaration  bears  a  sus- 
piciously close  resemblance  to  the  bravado  uttered  by  Peter  a 
few  days  later :  ''  Though  all  men  shall  be  offended  because 
of  Thee,  yet  will  I  never  be  offended." 

Jesus,  however,  did  not  choose,  in  the  case  of  the  sons  of 
Zebedee,  as  in  the  case  of  their  friend,  to  call  in  question  the 
heroism  so  ostentatiously  professed,  but  adopted  the  course  of 
assuming  that  they  were  not  only  able,  but  willing,  yea  eager, 
to  participate  in  His  sufferings.  With  the  air  of  a  king  grant- 
ing to  favourites  the  privilege  of  drinking  out  of  the  royal 
wine-cup,  and  of  washing  in  the  royal  ewer.  He  replied :  "  Ye 
shall  drink  indeed  of  my  cup,  and  be  baptized  with  the  baptism 
that  I  am  baptized  witL"  It  was  a  strange  favour  which  the 
King  thus  granted  !  Had  they  only  known  the  meaning  of  . 
the  words,  the  two  brethren  might  well  have  fancied  that  their 
Master  was  indulging  in  a  stroke  of  irony  at  their  expensa 
Yet  it  was  not  so.  Jesus  was  not  mocking  His  disciples  when 
He  spake  thus,  offering  them  a  stone  instead  of  bread :  He 
was  speaking  seriously,  and  promising  what  He  meant  to 
bestow,  and  what,  when  the  time  of  bestowal  came — ^for  it  did 
come — ^they  themselves  regarded  as  a  real  privilege ;  for  all  the 
apostles  agreed  with  Peter  that  they  who  were  reproached  for 
the  name  of  Christ  were  to  be  accoimted  happy,  and  had  the 
spirit  of  glory  and  of  God  resting  on  them.  Such,  we  believe, 
was  the  mind  of  James  when  Herod  killed  him  with  the 
persecutor's  sword :  such,  we  know,  was  the  mind  of  John 
when  he  was  in  the  isle  of  Patmos  "  for  the  word  of  God,  and 
for  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ." 

Having  promised  a  favour  not  coveted  by  the  two  disciples, 
Jesus  next  explained  that  the  favour  they  did  covet  was  not 


288  THE  TRAINIKa  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

unconditionally  at  His  disposal :  "  But  to  sit  on  my  right 
hand  and  on  my  left  is  not  mine  to  give,  save  to  those  for 
whom  it  is  prepared  of  my  Father."  The  English  version 
suggests  the  idea  that  the  bestowal  of  rewards  in  the  kingdom 
is  not  in  Christ's  hands  at  alL  That,  however,  is  not  what 
Jesus  meant  to  say ;  but  rather  this,  that  though  it  is  Christ's 
prerogative  to  assign  to  citizens  their  places  in  His  kingdom, 
it  is  not  in  His  power  to  dispose  of  places  by  partiality  and 
patronage,  or  otherwise  than  in  accordance  with  fixed  prin- 
ciples of  justice  and  the  sovereign  ordination  of  His  Father. 
The  words  paraphrased  signify :  "  I  can  say  to  any  one.  Come, 
drink  of  my  cup,  for  there  is  no  risk  of  mischief  arising  out  of 
favouritism  in  that  direction.  But  there  my  favours  must  end. 
I  cannot  say  to  any  one,  as  I  please.  Come,  sit  beside  me  on  a 
throne ;  for  each  man  must  get  the  place  prepared  for  him, 
and  for  which  he  is  prepared." 

Thus  explained,  this  solemn  saying  of  our  Ix,rd  furnishes 
no  ground  for  an  inference  which,  on  first  view,  it  seems  not 
only  to  suggest,  but  to  necessitate ;  viz.  that  one  may  taste  of 
the  cup,  yet  lose  the  crown ;  or,  at  least,  that  there  is  no 
connection  between  the  measure  in  which  a  disciple  may  have 
had  fellowship  with  Christ  in  His  cross,  and  the  place  which 
shall  be  assigned  to  him  in  the  eternal  kingdom.  That  Jesus 
had  no  intention  to  teach  such  a  doctrine,  is  evident  from  the 
question  He  had  asked  just  before  He  made  the  statement 
now  under  consideration,  which  impUes  a  natural  sequence 
between  the  cup  and  the  throne,  the  suffering  and  the  glory. 
The  sacrifice  and  the  great  reward  so  closely  conjoined  in  the 
promise  made  to  the  twelve  in  Pereea,  are  disjoined  here, 
merely  for  the  purpose  of  signalizing  the  rigour  with  which 
all  corrupt  influences  are  excluded  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
It  is  beyond  doubt,  that  those  on  whom  is  bestowed  in  high 
measure  the  favour  of  being  companions  with  Jesus  in  tribula- 
tion, shall  be  rewarded  with  high  promotion  in  the  eternal 
kingdom.  Nor  does  this  statement  compromise  the  sovereignty 
of  the  Father  and  Lord  of  all ;  on  the  contrary,  it  contributes 
towards  its  establishment.  There  is  no  better  argument  in 
support  of  the  doctrine  of  election,  than  the  simple  truth  that 
affliction  is  the  education  for  heaven.     For  in  what  does  the 


THE  SONS  OF  ZEBEDEE  AGAIN.  289 

sovereign  hand  of  Grod  appear  more  signally,  than  in  the 
appointment  of  crosses  ?  If  crosses  would  let  us  alone,  we 
would  let  them  alone.  We  choose  not  the  bitter  cup  and  the 
bloody  baptism  :  we  are  chosen  for  them,  and  in  them.  GUkI 
impresses  men  into  the  warfare  of  the  cross ;  and  if  any  come 
to  glory  in  this  way,  as  many  an  unpressed  soldier  has  done, 
it  will  be  to  glory  to  which,  in  the  first  place  at  least,  they 
did  not  aspire. 

The  asserted  connection  between  sufiTering  and  glory  serves 
to  defend  as  well  as  to  establish  the  doctrine  of  election. 
Looked  at  in  relation  to  the  world  to  come,  that  doctrine 
seems  to  lay  God  open  to  the  charge  of  partiality,  and  is  cer- 
tainly very  mysterious.  But  look  at  election  in  its  bearing 
on  the  present  life.  In  that  view,  it  is  a  privilege  for  which 
the  elect  are  not  apt  to  be  envied.  For  the  elect  are  not  the 
happy  and  the  prosperous,  but  the  toilers  and  sufferers.^  In 
fact,  they  are  elected  not  for  their  own  sake,  but  for  the 
world's  sake,  to  be  Grod's  pioneers  in  the  rough  unwelcome 
work  of  turning  the  wilderness  into  a  fruitful  field ;  to  be  the 
world's  salt,  leaven,  and  light,  receiving  for  the  most  part 
little  thanks  for  the  service  they  render,  and  getting  often  for 
reward  the  lou  of  the  destitute,  the  aMcted,  and  the  tormented. 
So  that,  after  all,  election  is  a  favour  to  the  non-elect :  it  is 
God's  method  o2  benefiting  men  at  large  ;  and  whatever  pecu- 
liar benefit  may  be  in  store  for  the  elect  is  well  earned,  and 
should  not  be  grudged.  Does  any  one  envy  them  their  pro- 
spect ?  He  may  be  a  partaker  of  their  future  joy,  if  he  be 
willing  to  be  companion  to  such  forlorn  beings,  and  to  share 
their  tribulations  now;  and  if  he  be  unwilling,  he  has  no 
right  to  complain. 

It  is  hardly  needful  to  explain  that,  in  uttering  these  words, 
Jesus  did  not  mean  to  deny  the  utility  of  prayer,  and  to  say, 
"  You  may  ask  for  a  place  in  the  divine  kingdom,  and  not 
get  it ;  for  all  depends  on  what  God  has  ordained."  He  only 
wished  the  two  disciples  and  all  to  understand,  that  to  obtain 

'  The  lines  of  Euripides  may  be  appropriated  here  to  the  true  sons  of  God : 

ftiitf  tUm  /MraTf.— /Ofl^  510. 

X 


290  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

their  requests  they  must  know  what  they  ask,  and  accept  all 
that  is  implied,  in  the  present  as  well  as  in  the  future,  in  the 
answering  of  their  prayers.  This  condition  is  too  often  over- 
looked. Many  a  bold  ambitious  prayer,  even  for  spiritual 
blessing,  is  offered  up  by  petitioners  who  have  no  idea  what 
the  answer  would  involve,  and  if  they  had,  would  wish  their 
prayer  unanswered.  Crude  Christians  ask,  e.g.,  to  be  made 
holy.  But  do  they  know  what  doubts,  temptations,  and  sore 
trials  of  all  kinds  go  to  the  making  of  great  saints  ?  Others 
long  for  a  full  assurance  of  Grod's  love ;  desire  to  be  perfectly 
persuaded  of  their  election.  Are  they  willing  to  be  deprived 
of  the  sunshine  of  prosperity,  that  in  the  dark. night  of  sorrow 
they  may  see  heaven's  stars  ?  Ah  me !  how  few  among  us 
do  know  what  we  ask !  how  much  aU  need  to  be  taught  to 
pray  for  right  things  with  an  intelligent  mind  and  in  a  right 
spirit! 

Having  said  what  was  needful  to  James  and  John,  Jesus 
next  addressed  a  word  in  season  to  their  brethren,  inculcating 
humility;  most  appropriately,  for  though  the  ten  were  the 
offended  party,  not  offenders,  yet  the  same  ambitious  spirit 
was  in  them,  else  they  would  not  have  felt  and  resented  the 
wrong  done  so  keenly.  Prid^  and  selfishness  may  vex  and 
grieve  the  humble  and  the  self-forgetful,  but  they  provoke  re- 
sentment only  in  the  proud  and  the  selfish ;  and  the  best  way 
to  be  proof  against  the  assaults  of  other  men's  evil  passions, 
is  to  get  similar  affections  exorcised  out  of  our  own  breasts. 
"  Let  this  mind  be  in  you  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus ;"  then 
shall  nothing  be  done  by  you  at  least  in  strife  or  vainglory. 

"  When  the  ten  heard  it,"  we  read,  "  they  were  moved  with 
indignation  against  the  two  brethren."  Doubtless  it  was  a 
very  unedifying  scene  which  ensued ;  and  it  is  very  disap- 
pointing  to  witness  such  scenes  where  one  might  have  looked 
to  see  in  perfection  the  godly  spectacle  of  brethren  dwelling 
together  in  unity.  But  the  society  of  Jesus  was  a  real  thing, 
not  the  imaginary  creation  of  a  romance-writer ;  and  in  all  real 
human  societies,  in  happy  homes,  in  the  most  select  brother- 
hoods, scientific,  literary,  or  artistic,  in  Christian  churches, 
there  will  arise  tempests  now  and  then.  And  let  us  be 
thankful  that  the  twelve,  even  by  their  foUy,  gave  their  Master 


THE  SONS  OF  ZEBEDEE  AGAIN.  291 

an  occasion  for  uttering  the  sublime  words  here  recorded,  which 
shine  down  upon  us  out  of  the  serene  sky  of  the  gospel  story 
like  stars  appearing  through  the  tempestuous  clouds,  of  human 
passion — manifestly  the  words  of  a  Divine  Being,  though 
spoken  out  of  the  depths  of  an  amazing  self-humiliation. 

The  manner  of  Jesus,  in  addressing  His  heated  disciples, 
was  very  tender  and  subdued.  He  collected  them  all  around 
Him,  the  two  and  the  ten,  the  offenders  and  the  offended,  as 
a  father  might  gather  together  his  children  to  receive  admoni- 
tion, and  He  spoke  to  them  with  the  calmness  and  solemnity 
of  one  about  to  meet  death.  Yes !  throughout  this  whole 
scene  death's  solemnizing  influence  is  manifestly  on  the 
Saviour's  spirit  For  does  He  not  speak  of  His  approaching 
sufferings  in  language  reminding  us  of  the  night  of  His 
betrayal,  describing  His  passion  by  the  poetic  sacramental 
name  *'  my  cup,"  and  for  the  first  time  revealing  the  secret  of 
His  life  on  earth — ^the  grand  object  for  which  He  is  about 
to  die? 

In  moral  significance,  the  doctrine  of  Jesus  at  this  time  was 
a  repetition  of  His  teaching  in  Capernaum,  when  He  chose  the 
little  child  for  His  text.  As  He  said  then.  Who  would  be  great 
must  be  child-like.  He  says  here.  Whosoever  will  be  great 
among  you,  let  him  be  your  minister.  In  the  former  discourse 
His  model  and  His  text  was  an  infant ;  now  it  is  a  slave,  another 
representative  of  the  mean  and  despicable.  Now,  as  before.  He 
quotes  His  own  example  to  enforce  His  precept ;  stimulating 
His  disciples  to  seek  distinction  in  a  path  of  lowly  love,  by 
representing  the  Son  of  man  as  come  not  to  be  ministered 
imto,  but  to  minister,  even  to  the  length  of  giving  His  life  a 
ransom  for  the  many,  as  He  then  reminded  them,  that  the 
Son  of  man  came  like  a  shepherd,  to  seek  and  to  save  the 
lost  sheep. 

The  single  new  feature  in  the  lesson  which  Jesus  gave  His 
disciples  at  this  season  is,  the  contrast  between  His  kingdom 
and  the  kingdoms  of  earth,  in  respect  to  the  mode  of  acquir- 
ing dominion,  to  which  He  directed  attention,  by  w&y  of  pre- 
face, to  the  doctrine  about  to  be  communicated.  "  Ye  know," 
He  said,  "  that  the  princes  of  the  (Jentiles  exercise  dominion 
over  them,  and  they  that  are  great  (provincial  governors,  often. 


292  THE  TBAIKING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

more  tyrannical  than  their  superiors)  exercise  authority  upon 
them.  .  But  it  shall  not  be  so  among  yon."  There  is  a  hint 
here  at  another  contrast  besides  the  one  mainly  intended^ 
viz.  that  between  the  harsh  despotic  sway  of  worldly  poten- 
tates, and  the  gentle  dominion  of  love  alone  admissible  in  the 
divine  Jdngdonu  But  the  main  object  of  the  words  quoted 
is  to  point  out  the  difference  in  the  way  of  acquiring  rather 
than  in  the  manner  of  using  power.  The  idea  is  this :  earthly 
kingdoms  are  ruled  by  a  class  of  persons  who  possess  heredi- 
tary  rank — the  aristocracy,  nobles,  or  princes.  The  governing 
dass  are  those  whose  birthright  it  is  to  rule,  and  whose  boast 
it  is  never  to  have  been  in  a  servile  position,  but  always  to 
have  been  served.  In  my  kingdom,  on  the  other  hand,  a  man 
becomes  a  great  one,  and  a  ruler,  by  being  first  the  servant  of 
those  over  whom  he  is  to  bear  rule.  In  other  states,  they 
rule  whose  privilege  it  is  to  be  ministered  unto;  in  the 
divine  commonwealth,  they  rule  who  accoimt  it  a  privilege 
to  minister. 

In  drawing  this  contrast,  Jesus  had,  of  course,  no  intention 
to  teach  politics ;  no  intention  either  to  recognise  or  to  call 
in  question  the  divine  right  of  the  princely  caste  to  rule  over 
their  feUow-creatures.  He  spoke  of  things  as  they  were,  and 
as  His  hearers  knew  them  to  be  in  secular  states,  and  espe- 
cially in  the  Roman  Empire.  If  any  political  inference  might 
be  drawn  from  His  words,  it  would  not  be  in  favour  of 
absolutism  and  hereditary  privilege,  but  rather  in  favour  of 
power  being  in  the  hands  of  those  who  have  earned  it  by 
faithful  service,  whether  they  belong  to  the  governing  class 
by  birth  or  not.  For  what  is  beneficial  in  the  divine  king- 
dom cannot  be  prejudicial  to  secular  commonwealths.  The 
true  interests,  one  would  say,  of  an  earthly  kingdom  should 
be  promoted  by  its  being  goveroed  as  nearly  as  possible  in 
accordance  with  the  laws  of  the  kingdom  which  cannot  be 
moved.  Thrones  and  crowns  may,  to  prevent  disputco,  go  by 
hereditary  succession,  irrespective  of  personal  merit ;  but  the 
reality  of  power  should  ever  be  in  the  hands  of  the  ablest, 
the  wisest,  and  the  most  devoted  to  the  public  good. 

Having  explained  by  contrast  the  great  principle  of  the 
spiritual  commonwealth,  that  he  who  would  rule  therein  must 


THE  SONS  OF  ZEBEDEE  AGAIN.  293 

first  serve,  Jesus  proceeded  next  to  enforce  the  doctrine  by 
a  reference  to  His  own  example.  "  Whosoever  will  be  chief 
among  you,"  said  He  to  the  twelve, "  let  him  be  your  servant ;" 
and  then  He  added  the  memorable  words :  "  Even  as  the  Son 
of  man  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister,  and 
to  give  His  life  a  ransom  for  many." 

These  words  were  spoken  by  Jesus  as  one  who  claimed  to 
be  a  King,  and  aspired  to  be  the  first  in  a  great  and  mighty 
kingdom.  At  the  end  of  the  sentence  we  must  mentally 
supply  the  clause — which  was  not  expressed,  simply  because  it 
was  so  obviously  implied  in  the  connection  of  thought- — "  so 
seeking  to  win  a  kingdom."  Our  Lord  sets  Himself  forth 
here  not  merely  as  an  example  of  humility,  but  as  one  whose 
case  illustrates  the  truth,  that  the  way  to  power  in  the  spiri- 
tual world  is  service ;  and  in  stating  that  He  came  not  to  be 
ministered  imto,  but  to  minister.  He  expresses  not  the  whole 
truth,  but  only  the  present  fact  The  whole  truth  was,  that 
He  came  to  minister  in  the  first  place,  that  He  might  be 
ministered  to  in  turn  by  a  willing,  devoted  people,  acknow- 
ledging Him  as  their  sovereign.  The  point  on  which  He 
wishes  to  fix  the  attention  of  His  disciples,  is  the  peculiar 
way  He  takes  to  get  His  crown ;  and  what  He  says  in  effect 
is  this :  "  I  am  a  King,  and  I  expect  to  have  a  kingdom : 
James  and  John  were  not  mistaken  in  that  respect  But  I 
shall  obtain  my  kingdom  in  another  way  than  secular  princes 
get  theirs.  They  get  their  thrones  by  succession,  I  get  mine 
by  personal  merit ;  they  secure  their  kingdom  by  right  of 
birth,  I  hope  to  secure  mine  by  the  right  of  service ;  they 
inherit  their  subjects,  I  buy  mine,  the  purchase-money  being 
mine  own  life." 

What  the  twelve  thought  of  this  novel  plan  of  getting 
dominion  and  a  kingdom,  or  what  ideas  the  concluding  words 
of  their  Master  suggested  to  their  minds  when  uttered,  we 
know  not  It  is  certain,  however,  that  they  did  not  compre- 
hend what  they  had  heard.  No  wonder :  for  the  thoughts  of 
Jesus  were  very  deep.  Who  can  imderstand  them  fully  even 
now  ?  Here  we  emphatically  see  through  a  glass,  in  enigmas. 
Yet  these  things  we  may  without  presumption  say : 

The  plan  propounded  was  certainly  a  very  original  way 


294  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

of  getting  a  kingdom.  Men  have  got  kingdoms  for  them- 
selves in  various  ways :  some  by  inheritance,  the  most  respect- 
able way  known  to  the  worid ;  others  by  their  sword ;  others, 
again,  by  paying  down  a  sum  of  money,  as  when  in  its  last 
degenerate  days  the  Eoman  Empire  was  disposed  of  by  auction 
and  sold  to  the  highest  bidder.  But  who,  till  the  Son  of  man 
came,  ever  thought  of  earning  a  crown  by  the  service  of  lowly 
love  rendered  to  the  very  meanest  of  mankind  ?  Alexander 
of  Macedon  won  for  himseK  the  epithet  of  "  the  Great,"  and 
made  himself  master  of  almost  the  whole  earth,  by*  sacrificing 
millions  of  lives  to  his  ambition.  Jesus  of  Nazareth  alone 
entertained  the  singular  and  apparently  Utopian  idea  of  found- 
ing a  kingdom  not  less  extensive  than  that  of  Alexander  or 
Caesar,  by  giving  His  own  life  as  a  sacrifice  for  the  million. 

Strange  and  unheard  of  as  this  idea  was,  it  was,  after  all, 
a  most  rationed  one.  Supposing  that  the  dominion  aimed  at 
is  not  mere  despotic  control  over  men's  destinies,  but  sove- 
reign sway  over  their  hearts,  what  better  and  more  direct  way 
of  attaining  that  end  can  be  taken  than  to  devote  yourself  to 
their  interest  ?  The  sword  will  make  a  tyrant  master  of  his 
subjects'  lives  and  properties,  but  it  takes  quite  another  key 
than  that  of  brute  force  to  unlock  the  human  heart :  lowly 
love  alone  can  make  the  doors  fly  open,  and  win  for  itself  the 
place  of  sovereignty  there.  Now  it  was  the  sovereignty  of 
love,  and  not  of  mere  power,  that  Jesus  coveted  for  Himself. 
As  God,  He  already  possessed  dominion  over  men's  destiny ; 
but  He  was  not  content  with  that:  therefore  He  came  to 
earth  to  be  a  servant  to  His  own  subjects,  that  He  might  be- 
come their  King  by  acclamation,  and  wear  round  His  brow  a 
crown  fashioned  and  placed  on  His  head  by  their  own  devoted 
hands,  in  grateful  acknowledgment  of  the  services  He  had 
rendered  them.  This  kind  of  sovereignty  even  a  Divine  Being 
could  attain  to  only  by  himibling  Himself  to  take  upon  Him 
the  form  of  a  servant. 

The  method  adopted  by  Jesus  to  make  Himself  a  King 
of  men  has  been  successful.  The  proposal  to  gain  sovereign 
power  by  becoming  a  servant  might  seem  Utopian  to  the 
twelve  when  first  announced,  but  now  the  idea  has  become 
a  wonderful  accomplished  fact.     Jesus   Christ   is  now  the 


', 


THE  SONS  OF  ZEBEDEE  AGAIN.  295 

spiritual  sovereign  of  a  vast  holy  state,  the  direct  historical 
result  of  His  earthly  ministiy  of  love.  Because  He  came 
not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister,  therefore  He  is 
now  highly  exalted,  and  hath  a  name  which  is  above  every 
name.  At  the  name  of  Him  who  gave  His  life  a  ransom  for 
many,  millions  of  redeemed  men  in  earth  and  heaven  bow 
the  knee  in  lowly  reverence,  as  to  their  "King.  Innumerable 
tongues  in  many  languages  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord, 
to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father,  and  cordially  join  in  the  new 
song,  whereof  this  is  the  burthen :  "  Unto  Him  that  loved  us, 
and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  His  own  blood,  be  glory  and 
dominion  for  ever  and  ever." 

Once  more,  Jesus  gained  His  kingdom  in  a  way  that 
was  most  rigMtous,  He  fairly  and  fully  earned  the  right  to 
rule  over  His  subjects.  He  gave  His  life  a  ransom  for  them ; 
so  that  to  whomsoever  they  might  belong  before,  they  were 
certainly  His  most  rightfully  afterwards.  No  party  having 
any  claim  over  them,  real  or  imaginary,  could  come  forward 
and  say.  These  human  beings  for  whom  you  have  given  your 
life  stUl  belong  to  me.  Not  even  Satan,  who  seduced  man 
into  sin,  and  made  him  his  captive,  could  plausibly  deny  the 
right  of  Jesus  to  those  for  whom  He  died.  As  against  him, 
Jesus  might  have  asserted  His  kingly  rights  without  d3dng  at 
all ;  for  Satan's  dominion  over  man  was  a  mere  usurpation, 
and  no  length  of  time  could,  as  by  way  of  prescription,  make 
his  title  good.  It  was  therefore  a  great  mistake  on  the  .part 
of  early  writers  on  the  subject  of  redemption,  to  admit  the 
devil's  title  by  representing  the  "  ransom"  as  paid  to  him.^ 
If  there  had  been  no  other  ground  for  Christ's  dying  than  to 
liquidate  the  imaginary  claims  of  Satan  to  rule  over  sinners, 
we  do  not  think  He  would  have  died  at  alL  But  among  the 
many  collateral  ends  served  by  the  death  of  the  Eedeemer,  we 
may  enumerate  this  as  one,  tluLt  Satan's  mouth  was  shut  He 
could  not  even  pretend  to  have  a  claim  any  longer  over  men. 
In  his  eagerness  to  assert  his  cursed  dominion  over  the  whole 
human  race,  he  tried  by  temptations  and  terrors  to  bring  even 
Jesus  under  his  power.     And  he  succeeded  in  getting  Him 

*  So,  e.(7.,  Ireneeiu.    On  the  views  of  the  early  Fathers  on  the  atonement, 
vid,  Baur,  Vers&hnungdehre,  cap.  L 


296'  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

crucified ;  but  thereby  he  lost  his  hold  not  merely  of  Eim,  but 
Qf  a  multitude  of  sinners  whom  he  had  formerly  held  captive.^ 

Better  founded  than  those  of  Satan  are  the  claims  of  the 
moral  law  and  government  of  God.  It  is  a  righteous  law^ 
which  decrees  that  the  soul  that  sinneth  shall  die ;  and  it  is 
not  good  that  a  law  solemnly  enacted  should  be  allowed  to 
become  a  dead  letter.  It  has  been  disputed  among  theologians 
whether  it  was  absolutely  necessary  that  sin  should  be  atoned 
for  before  being  forgiven.  We  venture  not  to  pronounce  on 
this  question^  because  it  is  too  high  for  us.  In  place  of  dis- 
cussing a  priori  questions  as  to  what  could  or  could  not  have 
been,  we  prefer  to  look  at  what  has  been,  and  reverently  in- 
quire what  good  ends  it  serves,  and  how  it  tends  to  glorify  the 
wisdom  and  justice  and  goodness  of  Him  for  whom  are  all 
things,  and  by  whom  are  all  things.  And  this  seems  clear^ 
that  whether  or  not  men  could  have  been  saved  without  the 
Captain  of  salvation  enduring  sufifering,  it  is  better  in  every 
respect  that  they  are  saved  in  a  way  that  does  homage  to  the 
righteous  law  by  which  the  universe  of  intelligent  beings  is 
governed. 

In  such  a  way  has  Jesus  Christ  saved  men.  He  has  paid 
a  price  to  redeem  them  from  the  curse  of  the  law.  He  has 
given  His  life  a  ransom  for  the  lives  of  the  many  forfeited  to 
justice  by  sin.  And  the  law  is  satisfied.  It  admits  the  life 
of  the  One  to  be  worth  the  lives  of  the  whole  race  of  criminals, 
and  acknowledges  that  a  greater  homage  has  been  rendered  to 
its  majesty  by  a  Divine  Being  condescending  to  become  obe- 
dient to  death,  than  would  accrue  from  the  death  of  all  man- 
kind. The  ransom  e£&cient  for  the  many  is  accepted  as  being 
abundantly,  superabundantly  sufficient  for  the  whole  world. 

God  the  Father  also  cordially  acknowledges  his  Son's  claims 
to  His  kingdom.  For  the  Eternal  One  delights  in  the  spirit  of 
self-sacrifice ;  and  the  spectacle  of  love  making  itself  a  slave 
and  a  sufferer  for  the  good  of  others,  is  evermore  an  object  of 
complacent  contemplation  to  His  mind.    And  the  most  splendid 

'  The  ancient  writers  represented  the  cross  as  a  monse-trap  (Christ's  flesh 
being  the  bait)  in  which  Satan  was  caught.  To  refute  and  supersede  by  better 
ones  these  crude  notions,  was  the  object  of  Anselm  in  his  tract,  Cur  Deus 
Homo, 


THE  SONS  OF  ZEBEDEE  AGAIN.  297 

spectacle  of  that  kind  ever  exhibited — that^  viz.,  presented  in  - 
the  life  and  death  of  Jesus — thrilled  His  heart  so  much,  that 
He  could  not  refrain  from  expressing  His  pleasure  by  audible 
voices  from  heaven.  And  when  the  work  of  love  was  achieved. 
He  welcomed  His  Son  back  to  glory  with  a  "  Well  done,  good 
and  faithful  servant,"  and  conferred  on  Him  as  His  reward 
all  power  in  heaven  and  earth,  to  be  wielded  by  Him  for  the 
behoof  of  the  people  whom  He  purchased  with  His  own  "blood. 
Finally,  the  ransomed  ones  admit  the  claims  of  Jesus  to 
reign  over  them.  They  acknowledge  that  He  who  was  slain 
on  the  cross  is  worthy  to  receive  from  them  "power,  and 
riches,  and  wisdom,  and  strength,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and 
blessing."  They  are  constrained  to  make  this  admission.  The 
love  of  Christ  constraineth  them  to  hail  Him  their  King. 
There  is  a  moral  power  in  the  life  of  Jesus,  and  especially  in 
His  cross,  which  captivates  their  hearts,  and  turns  them  from 
sin.  Some  maintain  that  to  gain  this  power  was  the  sole 
object  of  Christ's  incarnation.  We  cannot  agree  with  this 
view ;  but  we  have  no  doubt  that,  to  gain  such  power  over 
human  hearts  as  springs  out  of  a  life  of  devoted  service,  and 
out  of  a  sacrifice  like  that  offered  on  Calvary,  was  one  reason 
why  the  Son  of  man  came  to  earth;  and  came  not  to  be 
ministered  unto,  but  to  minister.  He  wished  to  charm  us 
away  from  seK-indulgence  and  self-worship,  and  to  make 
Himself  the  centre  of  our  thoughts  and  of  our  whole  being ; 
to  emancipate  us  from  the  bondage  of  sin  by  the  power  of 
His  love,  in  order  that  we  might  acknowledge  ourselves  to  be 
His,  and  not  our  own,  and  gratefully  devote  ourselves  to  His 
service.  In  the  case  of  many,  if  not  in  the  case  of  all,  who 
have  heard  the  story  of  His  love  unto  death,  the  Bedeemer 
hath  gained  His  end.  Those  who  belong  to  the  number  of 
true  believers,  say  unto  Him,  in  the  words  of  the  Psalmist : 
"  0  Lord,  truly  I  am  Thy  servant ;  I  am  Thy  servant,  and  the 
son  of  Thine  handmaid:  Thou  hast  loosed  my  bonds."  In 
their  new  song  of  praise  to  Jesus,  the  ransomed  host  ascribe 
to  Him  glory  and  dominion,  not  merely  because  He  hath 
washed  them  from  their  sins,  but  also  because  He  hath  made 
them  kings  and  priests  unto  God ;  that  is,  men  at  once  spiri- 
tually free,  and  consciously  under  obligation  to  glorify  their 


298  THE  TEAmiNG  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

God  and  Saviour  with  their  bodies  and  spirits,  because  they 
have  been  "  bought  with  a  price." 

These  reflections  may  suffice  to  give  a  slight  hint  of  the 
pregnant  meaning  of  the  words  by  which  in  so  casual  a  way 
Jesus  indicated  to  the  twelve  the  design  of  His  approaching 
death.  They  certainly  do  nothing  more.  This  memorable 
word  of  our  Lord  is  a  deep,  deep  weU,  which  has  never  yet 
been  fully  fathomed,  and  never  wilL  Brought  in  so  quietly 
as  an  illustration  to  enforce  a  moral  precept,  it  opens  up 
a  region  of  thought  which  takes  us  far  beyond  the  imme- 
diate occasion  of  its  being  uttered.  It  contains  in  germ  the 
great  doctiine  of  redemption  as  afterwards  expounded  by  the 
apostles.  It  raises  questions  in  our  minds  which  it  does  not 
solve,  and  yet  4ihere  is  nothing  in  the  New  Testament  on  the 
subject  of  Christ's  death  which  might  not  be  comprehended 
within  the  limits  of  its  possible  significance.  Even  all  the 
utterances  of  the  Apostle  Paul  amount  to  nothing  more  than 
an  unfolding  of  the  meaning  of  the  one  word  "ransom." 

With  two  remarks  more  on  the  autobiographical  observation 
of  Jesus,  we  close  this  chapter : — 

When  He  says  of  Himself,  that  He  came  not  to  be  mini- 
stered imto,  but  to  minister.  He  alludes  not  merely  to  His 
death,  but  to  His  whole  life.  The  statement  is  an  epitome 
in  a  single  sentence  of  His  entire  earthly  history.  While 
He  was  in  the  world.  He  was  among  men  as  one  who  serveth. 
His  death  was  but  the  closing,  crowning,  most  signal  and 
decisive  act  of  service.  His  whole  career  was  but  one  long 
drama  of  self-sacrificing  love,  which  found  its  culminating 
point  in  the  cross.  The  reference  to  His  death  in  this  sen- 
tence has  the  force  of  a  superlative.  He  came  to  minister, 
even  to  the  exterrU  of  gimTig  His  life  a  ransom. 

The  other  remark  is,  that  this  memorable  saying  of  Jesus, 
while  breathing  the  spirit  of  utter  lowliness,  at  the  same 
time  betrays  the  consciousness  of  superhuman  dignity.  Jesus 
speaks  here  as  one  who  knows  that  He  might  have  come  to 
be  ministered  unto,  that  to  be  served  and  worshipped  was 
His  natural  right.  The  divinity  of  the  speaker  is  as  clearly 
revealed  in  these  words  as  it  is  proclaimed  in  the  celebrated 
passage  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians,  where  Paul  adverts 


THE  SONS  OF  ZEBEDEE  AGAIN.  299 

in  glowing  knguage  to  the  self-humUiation  of  Him  who  was 
in  the  form  of  God,  for  the  self-same  purpose  which  led  the 
Incarnate  One  to  speak  of  it  at  this  time  to  His  disciples,  viz. 
to  check  ambitious,  vainglorious  passions,  and  promote  imity 
and  peace  in  the  church.  Had  Jesus  not  been  more  than  man, 
His  language  would  not  have  been  humble,  but  presumptuous. 
Why  should  the  son  of  a  carpenter  say  of  himself,  "  I  came 
not  to  be  ministered  unto  ?"  A  servile  position  and  occupa- 
tion was  a  matter  of  course  for  such  an  one.  The  statement 
before  us  is  rational  and  humble,  only  as  coming  from  one 
who,  being  in  the  form  of  God,  freely  assumed  the  form  of  a 
servant,  and  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of 
the  cross,  for  our  salvation. 


CHAPTER    XVIIL 

THE    ANOINTING    IN    BETHANY. 
Matt.  xxvi.  6-13 ;   Mabk  xrv.  8-9 ;   John  xii.  1-8. 

THE  toucliing  story  of  the  anointing  of  Jesus  by  Mary  at 
Bethany  forms  part  of  the  preface  to  the  history  of  the 
passion,  as  recorded  in  the  synoptical  Gospels.  That  preface, 
as  given  most  fully  by  Matthew,  includes  four  particulars : 
fi/rst,  a  statement  made  by  Jesus  to  His  disciples  two  days 
before  the  passover  concerning  His  betrayal ;  second,  a  meet- 
ing of  the  priests  in  Jerusalem  to  consult  when  and  how  Jesus 
should  be  put  to  death ;  third,  the  anointing  by  Mary ;  f(ywrt\ 
the  secret  correspondence  between  Judas  and  the  priests.  In 
Mark's  preface,  the  first  of  these  four  particulars  is  omitted ; 
in  Luke's,  both  the  first  and  the  third. 

The  four  facts  related  by  the  first  evangelist  had  this  in 
common,  that  they  were  all  signs  that  the  end  so  often  foretold 
was  at  length  at  hand.  Jesus  now  says,  not  "  the  Son  of  man 
shall  be  betrayed,"  but  "  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to  be  cru- 
cified." The  ecclesiastical  authorities  of  Israel  are  assembled 
in  solemn  conclave,  not  to  discuss  the  question  what  should  be 
done  with  the  object  of  their  dislike — that  is  already  deter- 
mined— but  how  the  deed  of  darkness  may  be  done  most 
stealthily  and  most  securely.  The  victim  has  been  anointed 
by  a  friendly  hand  for  the  approaching  sacrifice.  And,  finally, 
an  instrument  has  been  found  to  relieve  the  priests  from  their 
perplexity,  and  to  pave  the  way  in  a  most  unexpected  manner 
for  the  consummation  of  their  wicked  purpose. 

The  grouping  of  the  incidents  in  the  introduction  to  the 
tragic  history  of  the  crucifixion  is  strikingly  dramatic  in  its 
efiTect  First  comes  the  Sanhedrim  in  Jerusalem  plotting 
against   the  life  of  the  Just  One.      Then  comes  Mary  at 


THE  ANOINTING  IN  BETHANY.  301 

Bethany,  in  her  unutterable  love  breaking  her  alabaster  box, 
and  pouring  its  contents  on  the  head  and  feet  of  her  beloved 
Lord.  Last  comes  Judas,  offering  to  sell  his  Master  for  less 
than  Mary  wasted  on  a  useless  act  of  affection  I  Hatred  and 
baseness  on  either  hand,  and  true  love  in  the  midst.^ 

This  memorable  transaction  of  Mary  with  her  alabaster  box 
belongs  to  the  history  of  the  passion,  in  virtue  of  the  inter- 
pretation put  upon  it  by  Jesus,  which  gives  to  it  the  character 
of  a  lyric  prelude  to  the  great  tragedy  enacted  on  Calvary. 
It  belongs  to  the  history  of  the  twelve  disciples,  because  of 
the  unfavourable  construction  which  they  put  on  it  All  the 
disciples,  it  seems,  disapproved  of  the  action,  the  only  differ- 
ence between  Judas  and  the  rest  being  that  he  disapproved 
on  hypocritical  grounds,  while  his  fellow-disciples  were  honest 
both  in  their  judgment  and  in  their  motives.  By  their  fault- 
finding the  twelve  rendered  to  Mary  a  good  service.  They 
secured  for  her  a  present  defender  in  Jesus,  and  future 
eulogists  in  themselves.  Their  censure  drew  horn  the  Lord 
the  extraordinary  statement,  that  wheresoever  the  gospel  might 
be  preached  in  the  whole  world,  what  Mary  had  done  would 
be  spoken  of  for  a  memorial  of  her.  This  prophecy  the  fault- 
finding disciples,  when  they  became  apostles,  helped  to  fulfil 
They  felt  bound  by  the  virtual  commandment  of  their  Master, 
as  well  as  by  the  generous  reaction  of  their  own  hearts,  to 
make  amends  to  Mary  for  former  wrong  done,  by  telling  the 
tale  of  her  true  love  to  Jesus  wherever  they  told  the  story 
of  His  true  love  to  men.  From  their  lips  the  touching  narra- 
tive passed  in  due  course  into  the  Gospel  records,  to  be  read 
with  a  thrill  of  delight  by  true  Christians  to  the  end  of  time. 
Verily  one  might  be  content  to  be  spoken  against  for  a  season^ 
for  the  sake  of  such  chivalrous  championship  as  that  of  Jesus, 
and  such  magnanimous  recantations  as  those  of  His  apostles  I 

When  we  consider  fix)m  whom  Mary's  defence  proceeds,  we 
must  be  satisfied  that  it  was  not  merely  generous,  but  just 
And  yet  surely  it  is  a  defence  of  a  most  surprising  character ! 
Verily  it  seems  as  if,  while  the  disciples  went  to  one  extreme 

1  On  the  apparent  discrepancy  between  the  Synoptists  and  John  as  to  time, 
and  on  aU  other  points  belonging  to  hannony,  see  the  commentaries,  especially 
Alford  and  Stier. 


302  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

in  blaming,  their  Lord  went  to  the  other  extreme  in  praising ; 
as  if,  in  so  lauding  the  woman  of  Bethany,  He  were  but  re- 
peating her  extravagance  in  another  form.  You  feel  tempted 
to  ask :  Was  her  action,  then,  so  pre-eminently  meritorious  as 
to  deserve  to  be  associated  with  the  gospel  throughout  all 
time  ?  Then,  as  to  the  explanation  of  the  action  given  by 
Jesus,  the  further  questions  suggest  themselves :  Was  there 
really  any  reference  in  Mar/s  mind  to  His  death  and  burial 
while  she  was  performing  it  ?  Does  not  Jesus  rather  impute 
to  her  His  own  feeling,  and  invest  her  act  with  an  ideal  poetic 
significance,  which  lay  not  in  it,  but  in  His  own  thoughts  ? 
And  if  so,  can  we  endorse  the  judgment  He  pronoimced ;  or 
must  we,  on  the  question  as  to  the  intrinsic  merit  of  Mary's 
act,  give  our  vote  on  the  side  of  the  twelve  against  their  Master? 

We,  for  our  part,  cordially  take  Christ's  side  of  the  ques- 
tion ;  and  in  doing  so,  we  can  afford  to  make  two  admissions. 
In  the  first  place,  we  admit  that  Maiy  had  no  thought  of 
embalming,  in  the  literal  sense,  the  dead  body  of  Jesus,  and 
possibly  was  not  thinking  of  His  death  at  all  when  she 
anointed  Him  with  the  precious  ointment.  Her  action  was 
simply  a  festive  honour  done  to  one  whom  she  loved  unspeak- 
ably, and  which  she  might  have  rendered  at  another  time.^ 
We  admit  further,  that  it  would  certainly  have  been  an  extra- 
vagance to  speak  of  Mary's  deed,  however  noble,  as  entitled 
to  be  associated  with  the  gospel  everywhere  and  throughout 
all  time,  unless  it  were  fit  to  be  spoken  of  not  merely  for  her 
sake,  but  more  especially  for  the  gospel's  sake ;  that  is  to  say, 
unless  it  were  capable  of  being  made  use  of  to  expound  the 
nature  of  the  gospeL  In  other  words,  the  breaking  of  the 
alabaster  box  must  be  worthy  to  be  employed  as  an  emblem 
of  the  deed  of  love  performed  by  Jesus  in  djdng  on  the  cross. 

Such,  indeed,  we  believe  it  to  be.  Wherever  the  gospel 
is  truly  preached,  the  story  of  the  anointing  is  sure  to  be 
prized  as  the  best  possible  illustration  of  the  spirit  which 
moved  Jesus  to  lay  down  His  life ;  as  also  of  the  spirit  of 

^  It  is  natural  to  connect  the  anointing  with  the  raising  of  Lazarus,  and  to 
find  in  gratitude  for  the  restoration  of  a  brother  to  life,  the  motive  to  that  deed 
of  love.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  ointment  may  originaUy  have  been 
provided  for  the  burial  rites  of  Lazarus. 


THE  ANOINTING  IN  BETHANY.  303 

Christianity  as  it  manifests  itself  in  the  lives  of  sincere  be- 
lievers. The  breaking  of  the  alabaster  box  is  a  beautiful 
symbol  at  once  of  Christ's  love  to  us,  and  of  the  love  we  owe 
to  Him.  As  Mary  broke  her  box  of  ointment  and  poured 
forth  its  precious  contents,  so  Christ  broke  His  body  and  shed 
His  precious  blood ;  so  Christians  pour  forth  their  hearts 
before  their  Lord,  counting  not  their  very  lives  dear  for  His 
sake.  Christ's  death  was  a  breaking  of  an  alabaster  box  for 
us  ;  our  life  should  be  a  breaking  of  an  alabaster  box  for  Him. 

This  relation  of  spiritual  afi6nity  between  the  deed  of  Mary 
and  His  own  deed  in  dying  is  the  true  key  to  all  that  is  enig- 
matical in  the  language  of  Jesus  in  speaking  of  the  former. 
It  explains,  for  example,  the  remarkable  manner  in  which  He 
referred  to  the  gospel  in  connection  therewitL  "  This  gospel," 
He  said,  as  if  it  had  been  already  spoken  of ;  nay,  as  if  the  act 
of  anointing  were  the  gospel  And  so  it  was,  in  a  fgwre. 
The  one  act  already  done  by  Mary  naturally  suggested  to  the 
nund  of  Jesus  the  other  act  about  to  be  done  by  Himself. 
"  There,"  He  thought  within  Himself,  "  in  that  broken  vessel 
and  outpoured  oil  is  my  death  foreshadowed ;  in  the  hidden 
motive  from  which  that  deed  proceeded,  is  the  eternal  spirit 
in  which  I  offer  myself  a  sacrifice  revealed." 

In  the  light  of  this  same  relation  of  spiritual  afl&nity,  we 
clearly  perceive  the  true  meaning  of  the  statement  made  by 
Jesus  concerning  Mary's  act:  "In  that  she  hath  poured  this 
ointment  on  my  body,  she  did  it  for  my  buriaL"  It  was  a 
mystic,  poetic  explanation  of  a  most  poetic  deed,  and  as  such 
was  not  only  beautiful,  but  trm.  For  the  anointing  in  Bethany 
has  helped  to  preserve,  to  embalm,  so  to  speak,  the  true  meaning 
of  the  Saviour's  death.  It  has  supplied  us  with  a  symbolic 
act,  through  which  to  understand  that  death;  it  has  shed 
around  the  cross  an  imperishable  aroma  of  self-forgetting 
love;  it  has  decked  the  Saviour's  grave  with  flowers  that 
never  shall  wither,  and  reared  for  Jesus,  as  well  as  for  Mary, 
a  memorial-stone  that  shall  endure  throughout  all  generations. 
Might  it  not  be  fitly  said  of  such  a  deed.  She  did  it  for  my 
burial  ?  Was  it  not  most  unfitly  said  of  a  deed  capable  of 
rendering  so  important  a  service  to  the  gospel,  that  it  was 
wasteful  and  useless  ? 


.• 


304  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

These  questions  will  be  answered  in  the  affirmative  by  all 
who  are  convinced  that  the  spiritual  affinity  asserted  by  us 
really  did  exist.  What  we  have  now  to  do,  therefore,  is  to 
show,  by  going  a  little  into  detail,  that  our  assertion  is  well- 
founded. 

There  are  three  outstanding  points  of  resemblance  between 
Mary's  ''  good  work"  in  anointing  Jesus,  and  the  good  work 
wrought  by  Jesus  Himself  in  dying  on  the  cross. 

There  was  first  a  resemblance  in  motive.  Mary  wrought 
her  good  work  out  of  pure  love.  She  loved  Jesus  with  her 
whole  heart,  for  what  He  was,  for  what  He  had  done  for  the 
family  to  which  she  belonged,  and  for  the  words  of  instruc- 
tion she  had  heard  from  His  lips  when  He  came  on  a  visit 
to  their  house.  There  was  such  a  love  in  her  heart  for  her 
friend  and  benefactor  as  imperatively  demanded  expression, 
and  yet  could  not  find  expression  in  words.  She  must  do 
something  to  relieve  her  pent-up  emotions :  she  must  get  an 
alabaster  box  and  break  ii;,  and  pour  it  on  ihe  person  of  Jesus^ 
else  her  heart  will  break. 

Herein  Mary's  act  resembles  closely  that  of  Jesus  in  dying 
on  the  cross,  and  in  coming  to  this  world  that  He  might  die. 
For  just  such  a  love  as  that  of  Mary,  only  far  deeper  and 
stronger,  moved  Him  to  sacrifice  Himself  for  us.  The  simple 
accoimt  of  Christ's  whole  conduct  in  becoming  man,  and 
imdergoing  what  is  recorded  of  Him,  is  this :  He  loved  sinners. 
After  wearying  themselves  in  studying  the  philosophy  of  re- 
demption, learned  theologians  come  back  to  this  as  the  most 
satisfactory  explanation  that  can  be  given.  Jesus  so  loved 
sinners  as  to  lay  down  His  life  for  them ;  nay,  we  might 
almost  say.  He  so  loved  them  that  He  must  needs  come  and  die 
for  them,  like  Nehemiah,  the  Jewish  patriot  in  the  court  of 
the  Persian  king,  He  could  not  stay  in  heaven's  court  while 
His  brethren  far  away  on  earth  were  in  an  evil  case ;  He 
must  ask  and  obtain  leave  to  go  down  to  their  assistance.^ 
Or  like  Mary,  He  must  procure  an  alabaster-box — a  human 
body — fill  it  with  the  fine  essence  of  a  himian  soul,  and 

*  See  Neh.  i.  and  ii.  Nehemiah,  like  Mary,  may  be  spoken  of  wherever  the 
gospel  is  preached,  to  illustrate  the  heart  of  the  Redeemer  and  interpret  His 
thoughts. 


THE  ANOINTING  IN  BETHANY.  305 

pour  out  His  soul  unto  death  on  the  cross  for  our  salvation. 
The  spirit  of  Jesus,  yea  the  spirit  of  the  Eternal  God,  is  the 
spirit  of  Mary  and  of  Nehemiah,  and  of  all  who  are  like- 
minded  with  them.  In  reverence  we  ought  rather  to  say,  the 
spirit  of  such  is  the  spirit  of  Jesus  and  of  God ;  and  yet  it  is 
needful  at  times  to  put  the  matter  in  the  inverse  way.  For 
somehow  we  are  slow  to  believe  that  love  is  a  reality  for 
God.  We  almost  shrink,  as  if  it  were  an  impiety,  fix)m 
ascribing  to  the  Divine  Being  attributes  which  we  confess  to 
be  the  noblest  and  most  heroic  in  human  character.  Hence 
the  practical  value  of  the  sanction  here  given  by  Jesus  to  the 
association  of  the  anointing  in  Bethany  with  the  crucifixion 
on  Calvary.  He,  in  effect,  says  to  us  thereby :  Be  not  afraid 
to  regard  my  death  as  an  act  of  the  same  kind  as  that  of 
Mary :  an  act  of  pure,  devoted  love.  Let  the  aroma  of  her 
ointment  circulate  about  the  neighbourhood  of  my  cross,  and 
help  you  to  discern  the  sweet  savour  of  my  sacrifice.  Amid 
all  your  speculations  and  theories  on  the  grand  theme  of 
redemption,  take  heed  that  ye  fail  not  to  see  in  my  death, 
my  loving  heart,  and  the  loving  heart  of  my  Father,  revealed.^ 

1  There  ib  a  tendency  among  a  certain  school  of  theologians  to  treat  aU  that 
is  said  of  love  in  connection  with  the  atonement  as  sentimental,  or  at  most  as 
ayailable  only  for  popular  purposes,  and  to  represent  the  judicial  aspect  of  the 
atonement  as  alone  of  scientific  validity.  Thus  a  recent  writer  on  the  History 
of  Doctrines  (Shedd)  says  :  **  AU  true  scientific  development  of  the  doctrine  of 
the  atonement,  it  is  very  evident,  must  take  its  departure  from  the  idea  of 
divine  justice.  This  conception  is  the  primary  one  in  the  biblical  representa- 
tion of  this  doctrine."  This  author  is  greatly  in  love  with  **  soteriologies"  of 
scientific  pretensions.  He  idolizes  Anselm  as  the  author  of  the  **  first  meta- 
physique  of  the  Christian  doctrine  of  atonement,"  and  as  the  first  to  chaUenge 
for  the  doctrine  of  vicarious  satisfaction  *'  both  a  rational  necessity  and  a  scien- 
tific rationality."  Anselm  did  certainly  carry  the  passion  for  d  priori  reasoning 
on  the  subject  of  redejnption  to  its  extreme  limit.  He  aimed  to  demonstrate 
not  only  a  hypothetical  necessity  for  an  atonement  in  order  to  salvation,  but  an 
absolute  necessity.  A  certain  number  of  sinners,  he  maintained,  must  be 
saved,  to  fill  up  the  numbers  of  the  fallen  angels,  as  "it  is  indubitable  that 
rational  nature  which  is  or  is  to  be  happy  in  the  contemplation  of  God  is  fore- 
known by  God  in  a  certain  rational  and  perfect  number  which  can  neither  be 
more  nor  less"  (Cur  DeuB  HomOf  L  c.  16).  How  happy  is  one  to  get  away  from 
such  science  so  called  to  the  supper  room  in  Bethany !  Let  the  august  attribute 
of  justice  get  its  due  place  in  the  theology  of  the  atonement,  but  let  not  "love" 
be  relegated  from  theology  to  popular  sermons.  Christ's  death  satisfied  both 
divine  justice  and  divine  love,  and  the  glory  of  the  gospel  is  that  the  tame  event 
satisfied  both. 


306  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

Maiy's  "  good  work"  further  resembled  Chriflt's  in  its  self- 
sacrificing  character.  It  was  not  without  an  effort  and  a 
sacrifice  that  that  devoted  woman  performed  her  famous  act  of 
homage.  All  the  evangelists  make  particular  mention  of 
the  costliness  of  the  ointment  Mark  and  John  represent 
the  murmuring  disciples  as  estimating  its  value  at  the  round 
sum  of  three  hundred  pence;  equal  say  to  the  wages  of  a 
labouring  man  for  a  whole  year  at  the  then  current  rate  of  a 
penny  per  day.  This  was  a  large  sum  in  itself;  but  what  is 
more  particularly  to  be  noted,  it  was  a  very  large  sum  for 
Mary.  This  we  learn  horn  Christ's  own  words,  as  recorded 
by  the  second  evangelist  "  She  hath  done  what  she  could/* 
He  kindly  remarked  of  her,  in  defending  her  conduct  against 
the  harsh  censures  of  His  disciples.  It  was  a  remark  of  the 
same  kind  as  that  which  He  made  a  day  or  two  after  in 
Jerusalem  concerning  the  poor  widow  whom  He  saw  casting 
two  mites  into  the  temple  treasury ;  and  it  implied  that  Mary 
had  expended  all  her  resources,  on  that  single  tribute  of  re- 
spect to  Him  whom  her  soul  loved.  All  her  earnings,  all 
her  little  hoard,  had  been  given  in  exchange  for  that  box^ 
whose  precious  contents  she  poured  on  the  Saviour's  person. 
Hers  was  no  ordinary  love ;  it  was  a  noble,  heroic,  self-sacri- 
ficing devotion,  which  made  her  do  her  utmost  for  its  object 

Herein  the  woman  of  Bethany  resembled  the  Son  of  man. 
He,  too,  did  what  He  could.  Whatever  it  was  possible  for  a 
holy  being  to  endure  in  the  way  of  humiliation,  temptation, 
sorrow,  suffering,  yea,  even  in  the  way  of  becoming  *'sin" 
and  "  a  curse,**  He  willingly  underwent.  All  through  His  life 
on  earth  He  scrupulously  abstained  from  doing  aught  that 
might  tend  to  make  His  cup  of  aMction  come  short  of 
absolute  fulness.  He  denied  Himself  all  the  advantages  of 
divine  power  and  privilege;  he  emptied  Himself;  He  made 
Himself  poor ;  He  became  in  all  possible  respects  like  His 
sinful  brethren,  that  He  might  qualify  Himself  for  being  a 
merciful  and  trustworthy  High  Priest  to  them  in  things  per- 
taining to  God.  Such  sacrifices  in  life  and  death  did  His 
life  impose  on  Him. 

While  imposing  sacrifices,  love,  by  way  of  compensation, 
makes  them  easy.     It  is  not  only  love's  destiny,  but  it  is 


THE  ANOINTING  IN  BETHANY.  307 

love's  delight,  to  endure  hardships,  to  bear  burdens  for  the 
object  loved.  It  is  not  satisfied  till  it  has  found  an  oppor- 
tunity of  embodying  itself  in  a  service  involving  cost,  labour, 
paiiL  The  things  from  which  selfishness  shrinks,  love  ardently 
longs  for.  These  reflections,  we  believe,  are  applicable  to  Mary. 
With  her  love  to  Jesus,  it  was  more  easy  for  her  to  do  what 
she  did  than  to  refrain  fix)m  doing  it  But  love's  readiness 
and  eagerness  to  sacrifice  herself  are  most  signally  exempli- 
fied in  the  case  of  Jesus  Himself.  It  was  indeed  His  plea- 
sure to  suffer  for  our  redemption.  Far  from  shrinking  from 
the  cross.  He  looked  forward  to  it  with  earnest  desire ;  and 
when  the  hour  of  His  passion  approached.  He  spoke  of  it  as 
the  hour  of  His  glorification.  He  had  no  thought  of  achiev- 
ing our  salvation  at  the  smallest  possible  cost  to  Himself. 
His  feeling  was  rather  akin  to  this :  "  The  more  I  suffer  the 
better :  the  more  thoroughly  shall  I  realize  my  identity  with 
my  brethren;  the  more  completely  will  the  sympathetic, 
burden-bearing,  help-bringing  instincts  and  yearnings  of  my 
love  be  satisfied."  Yes;  Jesus  had  more  to  do  than  to 
purchase  sinners  for  as  small  a  price  as  would  be  accepted . 
for  their  ransom.  He  had  to  do  justice  to  His  own  heart ; 
He  had  adequately  to  express  its  deep  compassion;  and  jio  act 
of  limited  or  calculated  dimensions  would  avail  to  exhaust 
the  contents  of  that  whose  dimensions  were  immeasurable. 
Measured  suffering,  especially  when  endured  by  so  august  a 
personage,  might  satisfy  divine  justice,  but  it  could  not  satisfy 
divine  love. 

A  third  feature  which  fitted  Mary's  "  good  work"  to  be  an 
emblem  of  the  Saviour's,  was  its  magnificence.  This  also  ap- 
peared in  the  expenditure  connected  with  the  act  of  anointing, 
which  was  not  only  such  as  involved  a  sacrifice. for  a  person 
of  her  means,  but  very  liberal  with  reference  to  the  purpose 
in  hand.  The  quantity  of  oil  employed  in  the  service  was, 
according  to  John,  not  less  than  a  pound  weight.  This  was 
much  more  than  could  be  said  to  be  necessary.  There  was  an 
appearance  of  waste  and  extravagance  in  the  manner  of  the 
anointing,  even  admitting  the  thing  in  itself  to  be  right  and 
proper.  Whether  the  disciples  would  have  objected  to  the 
ceremony,  however  performed,  does  not  appear ;  but  it  was 


308  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

evidently  the  extravagant  amount  of  ointment  expended  which 
was  the  prominent  object  of  their  displeasure.  We  conceive 
them  as  saying,  in  effect  :  "  Surely  less .  might  have  done : 
the  greater  part  at  least,  if  not  the  whole  of  this  ointment, 
might  have  been  saved  for  other  uses.  This  is  simply  sense- 
less, prodigal  expenditure." 

What  to  the  narrow-hearted  disciples  seemed  prodigality 
was  but  the  princely  magnificence  of  love,  which,  as  even  a 
heathen  philosopher  could  tell,  considers  not  for  how  much  or 
how  little  this  or  that  can  be  done,  but  how  it  can  be  done 
most  gracefully  and  handsomely.*  And  what  seemed  to  them 
purposeless  waste,  served  at  least  one  good  purpose.  It  sym- 
bolized a  similar  characteristic  of  Christ's  good  work  as  the 
Saviour  of  sinners.  He  did  His  work  magnificently,  and  in 
no  mean,  economical  way.  He  accomplished  the  redemption 
of  '*  many "  by  means  adequate  to  redeem  all  "  With  Him 
is  plenteous  redemption."  He  did  not  measure  out  His  blood 
in  proportion  to  the  number  to  be  saved,  nor  limit  His 
sympathies  as  the  sinner's  friend  to  the  elect.  He  shed  bitter 
tears  for  doomed  souls ;  He  shed  His  blood  without  measure, 
and  without  respect  to  numbers,  and  offered  an  atonement 
which  was  sufficient  for  the  sins  of  the  world.  Nor  was  this 
attribute  of  univei:3al  sufficiency  attaching  to  His  atoning 
work  one  to  which  He  was  indifiTerent.  On  the  contraiy,  it 
appears  to  have  been  in  His  thoughts  at  the  very  moment  He 
uttered  the  words  authorizing  the  association  of  Mary's  deed 
of  love  with  the  gospeL  For  He  speaks  of  that  gospel  which 
was  to  consist  in  the  proclamation  of  His  deed  of  love  in 
djdng  for  sinners,  as  a  gospel  for  the  whole  world ;  evidently 
desiring  that,  as  the  odour  of  Mary's  ointment  filled  the  room 
in  which  the  guests  were  assembled,  so  the  aroma  of  His 
sacrifice  might  be  diffused  as  an  atmosphere  of  saving  health 
among  all  the  nations. 

We  may  say,  therefore,  that  in  defending  Mary  against  the 
charge  of  waste,  Jesus  was  at  the  same  time  defending  Him- 
self;  replying  by  anticipation  to  such  questions  as  these  : 
To  what  purpose  weep  over  doomed  Jerusalem  ?  why  sorrow 
for  souls  that  are  after  all  to  perish  ?  why  trouble  Himself 

1  Ariatotle,  Eih.  Nic,  lib.  iv.  cap.  2.  9. 


THE  ANOmriNG  IN  BETHANY.  309 

about  men  not  elected  to  salvation  ?  why  command  His  gospel 
to  be  preached  to  every  creature,  with  an  emphasis  which 
seems  to  say  He  wishes  every  one  saved,  when  He  knows 
only  a  definite  number  will  believe  the  report  ?  why  not  con- 
fine His  sympathies  and  His  solicitudes  to  those  who  shall  be 
effectually  benefited  by  them  ?  why  not  restrict  His  love  to 
the  channel  of  the  covenant  ?  why  allow  it  to  overflow  the 
embankments,  like  a  river  in  full  flood  ?* 

Such  questions  betray  ignorance  of  the  conditions  imder 
which  even  the  elect  are  saved.  Christ  could  not  save  any 
unless  He  were  heartily  willing  to  save  all,  for  that  willingness 
is  a  part  of  the  perfect  righteousness  which  it  behoved  Him 
to  fulfiL  The  sum  of  duty  is.  Love  God  supremely,  and  thy 
neighbour  as  thyself ;  and  "  neighbour"  means,  for  Christ  as  for 
us,  every  one  who  needs  help,  and  whom  He  can  help.  But  not 
to  dwell  on  this,  we  remark  that  such  questions  show  ignorance 
of  the  nature  of  love.  Magnificence,  misnamed  by  churls 
extravagance  and  waste,  is  an  invariable  attribute  of  all  true 
love.  David  recognised  this  truth,  when  he  selected  the  pro- 
fuse anointing  of  Aaron  with  the  oil  of  consecration  at  his 
installation  into  the  office  of  high  priest  as  a  fit  emblem  of 
brotherly  love.*  There  was  "  waste  "  in  that  anointing  too,  as 
well  as  in  the  one  which  took  place  at  Bethany.  For  the  oil 
was  not  sprinkled  on  the  head  of  Aaron,  though  that  might 
have  been  sufficient  for  the  purpose  of  a  mere  ceremony.  The 
vessel  was  emptied  on  the  high  priest's  person,  so  that  its 
contents  flowed  down  &om  the  head  upon  the  beard,  and  even 
to  the  skirts  of  the  sacerdotal  robes.  In  that  very  waste  lay 
the  point  of  the  resemblance  for  David.  It  was  a  feature  that 
was  likely  to  strike  his  mind,  for  he  too  was  a  wasteful  man 
in  his  way.  He  had  loved  God  in  a  manner  which  exposed 
him  to  the  charge  of  extravagance.  He  had  danced  before  the 
Lord,  for  example,  when  the  ark  was  brought  up  horn  the 

^  On  the  apparent  waste  in  the  economy  of  redemption,  there  are  some  good 
remarks  in  the  writings  of  Andrew  Fuller,  and  especially  in  Three  ConvenaUans 
an  Particular  Redemption,  He  says  :  "It  accords  wiUi  the  general  conduct  of 
God  to  impart  His  fayours  with  a  kind  of  profusion  which,  to  the  mind  of  man 
that  sees  only  one  or  two  ends  to  be  answered  by  them,  may  haye  the  appearance 
of  waste. " 

'  Ps.  cxxxiii. 


31 0  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

house  of  Obed-edom  to  Jerusalem,  forgetful  of  his  dignity, 
exceeding  the  bounds  of  decorum,  and,  as  it  might  seem,  with- 
out excuse,  as  a  much  less  hearty  demonstration  of  his  feelings 
would  have  served  the  purpose  of  a  religious  solemnity.* 

David,  Mary,  Jesus,  all  loving,  devoted  beings,  prophets, 
apostles,  martyrs,  confessors,  belong  to  One  company,  and  come 
all  under  one  condemnation.  They  must  all  plead  guilty  to  a 
waste  of  affection,  sorrow,  labour,  tears  ;  all  live  so  as  to  earn 
for  themselves  the  blame  of  extravagance,  which  is  their 
highest  praise.  David  dances,  and  Michal  sneers ;  prophets 
break  their  hearts  for  their  people's  sins  and  miseries,  and  the 
people  make  sport  of  their  grief ;  Marys  break  their  alabaster 
boxes,  and  frigid  disciples  object  to  the  waste ;  men  of  God 
sacrifice  their  all  for  their  religious  convictions,  and  the  world 
calls  them  fools  for  their  pains,  and  philosophers  bid  them 
beware  of  being  martyrs  by  mistake ;  Jesus  weeps  over  sin- 
ners that  wiU  not  come  to  Him  to  be  saved,  and  thankless 
men  ask.  Why  shed  tears  over  vessels  of  wrath  fitted  for 
destruction  ? 

We  have  thus  seen  that  Mary's  good  deed  was  a  fit  and 
worthy  emblem  of  the  good  deed  of  Jesus  Christ  in  dying  on 
the  cross.  We  are  now  to  show  that  Majy  herself  is  in  some 
important  respects  worthy  to  be  spoken  of  as  a  model 
Christian.  Three  features  in  her  character  entitle  her  to  this 
honourable  name. 

First  among  these  is  her  enthusiastic  attachment  to  the 
person  of  Christ.  The  most  prominent  feature  in  Mary's 
character  was  her  power  of  loving,  her  capacity  of  self-devotion. 
It  was  this  virtue,  as  manifested  in  her  action,  that  elicited 
the  admiration  of  Jesus.  He  was  so  delighted  with  the 
chivalrous  deed  of  love,  that  He,  so  to  speak,  canonized  Mary 
on  the  spot,  as  a  king  might  confer  knighthood  on  the  battle- 
field on  a  soldier  who  had  performed  some  noble  feat  of  arms. 
"  Behold,"  He  said  in  effect,  "  here  is  what  I  understand  by 
Christianity :  an  unselfish  and  uncalculating  devotion  to  me 
as  the  Saviour  of  sinners,  and  as  the  Sovereign  of  the  kingdom 
of  truth  and  righteousness.  Therefore,  wherever  the  gospel 
is  preached,  let  this  that  this  woman  hath  done  be  spoken  of, 

1  2  Sam.  vi. 


THE  ANOINTING  IN  BETHANY.  311 

not  merely  as  a  memorial  of  her,  but  to  intimate  what  I  expect 
of  all  who  believe  in  me." 

In  80  commending  Marjr,  Jesus  gives  us  to  understand  in  effect 
that  love  is  the  chief  of  Christian  virtuea  He  proclaims  the 
same  doctrine  afterwards  taught  by  one  who,  though  last,  was 
the  first  of  all  the  apostles  in  his  comprehension  of  the  mind 
of  Christ — the  Apostle  PauL  That  glowing  panegyric  on 
charity,  so  well  known  to  all  readers  of  his  epistles,  in  which 
he  makes  eloquence,  knowledge,  faith,  the  gift  of  tongues,  and 
the  gift  of  prophecy  do  obeisance  to  her,  as  the  sovereign 
virtue,  is  but  the  faithful  interpretation  in  general  terms  of 
the  encomium  pronounced  on  the  woman  of  Bethany.  The 
story  of  the  anointing  and  the  thirteenth  chapter  of  the  First 
Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  should  be  read  together. 

In  making  love  the  test  and  measure  of  excellence,  Jesus 
and  Paul,  and  the  rest  of  the  apostles  (for  they  all  shared 
the  Master's  mind  at  last),  differ  widely  from  the  world  reli- 
gious and  irreligious.  Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  scrupulous 
religionists,  and  unscrupulous  men  of  no  religion,  agree  in 
disliking  ardent,  enthusiastic,  chivalrous  devotion,  even  in 
the  most  noble  cause.  They  are  wise  and  prudent,  and  their 
philosophy  might  be  embodied  in  such  maxims  as  these :  **  Be 
not  too  catholic  in  your  sentiments,  too  warm  in  your  sym- 
pathies, too  keen  in  your  sense  of  duty ;  never  allow  your 
heart  to  get  the  better  of  your  head,  or  your  principles  to  in- 
terfere with  your  interest"  So  widely  diffused  is  the  dislike 
to  earnestness,  especially  in  good,  that  all  nations  have  their 
proverbs  against  enthusiasm.  The  Greeks  had  their  fji/r}Bhf 
Sr/avy  the  Latins  their  Ne  quid  nimis ;  expressing  scepticism 
in  proverb-maker  and  proverb-quoter  as  to  the  possibility  of 
wisdom  being  enthusiastic  about  anything.  The  world  is 
prosaic,  not  poetic,  in  temperament — ^prudential,  not  impul- 
sive :  it  abhors  eccentricity,  in  good  or  in  evil ;  it  prefers  a 
dead  level  of  mediocrity,  moderation,  and  self-possession ;  its 
model  man  is  one  who  never  forgets  himself,  either  by  sinking 
below  himself  in  folly  or  wickedness,  or  by  rising  above  him- 
self, and  getting  rid  of  meanness,  pride,  selfishness,  cowardice, 
and  vanity  in  devotion  to  a  noble  cause. 

The  twelve  were  like  the  world  in  their  temperament  at 


312  THE  TBAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

the  time  of  the  anointmg :  they  seem  to  have  regarded  Maiy 
as  a  romantic,  quixotic,  crazy  creature,  and  her  action  as 
absurd  and  indefensible.  They  objected  not,  of  course,  to  her 
love  of  Jesus ;  but  they  deemed  the  manner  of  its  manifesta- 
tion foolish,  as  the  money  spent  on  the  ointment  might  have 
been  applied  to  a  better  purpose — say  to  the  relief  of  the 
destitute — and  Jesus  loved  nothing  the  less,  seeing  that,  ac- 
cording to  His  own  teaching,  all  philanthropic  actions  were 
deeds  of  kindness  to  Himself  And,  on  first  thoughts,  one  is 
half  inclined  to  say  that  they  had  reason  on  their  side,  and 
were  fox  wiser,  while  not  less  devoted  to  Jesus  than  Mary. 
But  look  at  their  behaviour  on  the  day  of  their  Lord's  cruci- 
fixion, and  learn  the  difference  between  them  and  her.  Mary 
loved  so  ardently  as  to  be  beyond  calculations  of  consequences 
or  expenses ;  they  loved  so  coldly,  that  there  was  room  for  fear 
in  their  hearts :  therefore,  while  Mary  spent  her  all  on  the 
ointment,  they  all  forsook  their  Master,  and  fled  to  save  their 
own  lives.  Whence  we  can  see  that,  despite  occasional  extrava- 
gances, apparent  or  real,  that  spirit  is  wisest  as  well  as  noblest 
which  makes  us  incapable  of  calculation,  and  proof  against 
temptations  arising  therefrom.  One  rash,  blundering,  but 
heroic  Luther,  is  worth  a  thousand  men  of  the  Erasmus  type, 
imspeakably  wise,  but  cold,  passionless,  timid,  and  time-serv- 
ing. Scholarship  is  great,  but  action  is  greater;  and  the 
power  to  do  noble  actions  comes  from  love. 

How  great  is  the  devoted  Mary,  compared  with  the  cold- 
hearted  disciples !  She  does  noble  deeds,  and  they  criticise 
them  I  Poor  work  for  a  human  being,  criticism,  especially 
the  sort  that  abounds  in  fault-finding !  Love  does  not  care 
for  such  occupation ;  it  is  too  petty  for  her  generous  mind. 
If  there  be  room  for  praise,  she  will  give  that  in  imstinted 
measure ;  but  rather  than  carp  and  blame,  she  prefers  to  be 
silent  Then  observe  again  how  love  in  Mary  becomes  a  sub- 
stitute for  prescience.  She  does  not  know  that  Jesus  is  about 
to  die,  but  she  acts  as  if  she  did.  Such  as  Mary  can  divine : 
the  instincts  of  love,  the  inspiration  of  the  God  of  love,  teach 
them  to  do  the  right  thing  at  the  right  time,  which  is  the 
very  highest  attainment  of  true  wisdom.  On  the  other  hand^ 
we  see  in  the  case  of  the  disciples  how  coldness  of  heart  con- 


THE  ANOINTING  IN  BETHANY.  313 


soimes  knowledge  and  makes  men  stupid.  They  liad  received 
far  more  information  than  Mary  concerning  the  future.  If 
they  did  not  know  that  Jesus  was  about  to  be  put  to  death, 
they  ought  to  have  known  from  the  many  hints  and  even 
plain  intimations  which  had  been  given  them.  But,  alas,  they 
had  forgot  all  these.  And  why  ?  For  the  same  reason  which 
makes  all  men  so  forgetful  of  things  pertaining  to  their  neigh- 
bours. The  twelve  were  too  much  taken  up  with  their  own 
affairs.  Their  heads  were  filled  with  vain  dreams  of  worldly 
ambition,  and  so  their  Master^s  words  were  forgotten  ahnost 
as  soon  as  they  were  uttered,  and  it  became  needful  that  He 
should  teU  them  pathetically  and  reproachfully :  "  The  poor  ye 
have  always  with  you,  but  me  ye  have  not  always."  Men  so 
minded  never  understand  the  times,  so  as  to  know  what  Israel 
ought  to  do,  or  to  approve  the  conduct  of  those  who  do  know. 

A  second  admirable  feature  in  Mary's  character  was  the 
freedom  of  her  spirit.  She  was  not  tied  down  to  methods  and 
rules  of  well-doing.  The  disciples,  judging  from  their  language, 
seem  to  have  been  great  methodists,  servile  in  their  adherence 
to  certain  stereotyped  modes  of  action.  "  This  ointment,"  said 
they,  "  might  have  been  sold  for  much,  and  given  to  the  poor'* 
They  understand  that  charity  to  the  poor  is  a  very  important 
duty :  they  know  that  their  Master  often  referred  to  it ;  and 
they  make  it  everything.  Charity  is  their  hobby.  When 
Judas  went  out  to  betray  his  Lord,  they  fancied  that  he  was 
gone  to  distribute  what  remained  of  the  supper  among  some 
poor  persons  of  his  acquaintance.  Their  very  ideas  of  well- 
doing appear  to  be  method-ridden.  Good  works  with  them 
do  not  seem  to  be  co-extensive  with  noble  deeds  of  all  sorts. 
The  phrase  is  technical,  and  limited  in  its  application  to  a 
confined  circle  of  actions  of  an  expressly  and  obviously  re- 
ligious and  benevolent  nature. 

Not  so  with  Mary.  She  knows  of  more  ways  of  doing  good 
than  one.  She  can  invent  ways  of  her  own.  She  is  original, 
creative,  not  slavishly  imitative.  And  she  is  as  fearless  as  she 
is  original  She  can  not  only  imagine  forms  of  well-doing  out 
of  the  beaten  track,  but  she  has  the  courage  to  realize  her  con- 
ceptions. She  is  not  afraid  of  the  public.  She  does  not  ask 
beforehand.  What  wiU  the  twelve  think  of  this  ?    With  a  free 


314  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

mind  she  forms  her  plan^  and  with  prompt,  £ree  hand  she 
forthwith  executes  it. 

For  this  freedom  Mary  was  indebted  to  her  large  heart 
Love  made  her  original  in  thought  and  conduct.  People 
without  heart  cannot  be  original  as  she  was.  They  may 
addict  themselves  to  good  works  from  one  motive  or  another ; 
but  they  go  about  them  in  a  very  slavish,  mechanical  way. 
They  have  to  be  told  by  some  individual  in  whom  they  con- 
fide, or  more  commonly  by  custom  or  fashion,  what  to  do ;  and 
hence  they  never  do  any  good  which  is  not  in  vogue.  But 
Mary  needed  no  counsellor ;  she  took  counsel  of  her  own  heart 
Love  told  her  infallibly  what  was  the  duty  of  the  hour ;  that 
her  business  for  the  present  was  not  to  give  alms,  but  to 
anoint  the  person  of  the  great  High  Priest 

Love,  we  learn  from  Mary's  case,  as  well  as  necessity,  is  the 
mother  of  invention.  A  great  heart  has  folly  as  much  to  do 
with  spiritual  originality  as  a  clever  head  What  is  needed 
to  fill  the  church  with  original  preachers,  original  givers, 
original  actors  in  all  departments  of  Christian  work,  is  not 
more  brains,  or  more  training,  or  more  opportunities,  but  above 
all,  more  heart  When  there  is  little  love  in  the  Christiaii 
community,  it  resembles  a  river  in  dry  weather,  which  not 
only  keeps  within  its  banks,  but  does  not  even  occupy  the 
whole  of  its  channel,  leaving  large  beds  of  gravel  or  sand 
lying  high  and  dry  on  both  sides  of  the  current.  But  when 
the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  the  hearts  of  her  members, 
the  church  becomes  like  the  same  river  in  time  of  rain.  The 
stream  begins  to  rise,  all  the  gravel  beds  gradually  disappear, 
and  at  length  the  swollen  flood  not  only  fills  its  channel,  but 
overflows  its  banks,  and  spreads  over  the  meadows.  New 
methods  of  well-doing  are  then  attempted,  and  new  measures 
of  well-doing  reached ;  new  songs  are  indited  and  sung ;  new 
forms  of  expression  for  old  truths  are  invented,  not  for  the  sake 
of  novelty,  but  in  the  creative  might  of  a  new  spiritual  life. 

It  was  love  that  made  Mary  free  from  fear,  as  well  as  from 
the  bondage  of  mechanical  custom.  "  Love,"  saith  one  who 
knew  love's  power  well,  "  casteth  out  fear."  Love  can  make 
even  shrinking,  sensitive  women  bold — ^bolder  even  than  men. 
It  can  teach  us  to  disregard  that  thing  called  public  opinion; 


THE  ANOINTING  IN  BETHANY.  315 

before  which  all  mankind  cowers.  It  was  love  that  made 
Peter  and  John  so  bold  when  they  stood  before  the  Sanhedrim, 
They  had  been  with  Jesus  long  enough  to  love  Him  more  than 
their  own  life,  and  therefore  they  quailed  not  before  the  face 
of  the  mighty.  It  was  love  that  made  Jesus  HimseK  so  indif- 
ferent to  censure,  and  so  disregardful  of  conventional  restraints 
in  the  prosecution  of  His  work  His  heart  was  so  devoted  to 
His  philanthropic  mission,  that  He  set  at  defiance  the  world's 
disapprobation ;  nay,  probably  did  not  so  much  as  think  of  it, 
except  when  it  obtruded  itself  upon  His  notice.  And  what 
love  did  for  Mary,  and  for  Jesus,  and  for  the  apostles  in  after- 
days,  it  does  for  all  Wherever  it  exists  in  liberal  measure, 
it  banishes  timidity  and  shyness,  and  the  imbecility  which 
accompanies  them,  and  brings  along  with  it  power  of  character 
and  soimdness  of  mind.  And  to  crown  the  encomium,  we  may 
add,  that  while  it  makes  us  bold,  love  does  not  make  us  impu- 
dent. Some  men  are  bold,  because  they  are  too  selfish  to  care 
for  other  people's  feelings.  Those  who  are  bold  through  love 
may  dare  to  do  things  which  will  be  found  fault  with ;  but 
they  are  always  anxious,  as  far  as  possible,  to  please  their 
neighbours,  and  to  avoid  giving  ofifenoe. 

One  remark  more  let  us  make  under  this  head.  The  liberty 
which  springs  from  love  can  never  be  dangerous.  In  these 
days,  good  men  are  greatly  alarmed  at  liie  progress  of  broad 
school  theology.  Well,  of  the  breadth  that  consists  in  sceptical 
indifference  to  important  Christian  truth  we  cannot  be  too 
jealous.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  of  the  breadth  and  freedom 
due  to  consuming  love  for  Christ,  and  all  the  grand  interests 
of  His  kingdom,  we  cannot  have  too  much.  The  spirit  of 
charity  may  indeed  treat  as  comparatively  light  matters,  things 
which  men  of  austere  mind  deem  of  almost  vital  importance, 
and  may  be  disposed  to  do  things  which  men  more  enamoured 
of  order  and  use  and  wont  than  of  freedom  may  consider 
licentious  innovations.  But  the  harm  done  wiH  be  imaginary 
rather  than  real ;  and  even  if  it  were  o&erwise,  the  impulsive 
Marys  are  never  so  numerous  in  the  church  that  they  may 
not  safely  be  tolerated.  There  are  always  a  suflBcient  number 
of  prosaic,  order-loving  disciples,  to  keep  their  quixotic  brethren 
in  due  check. 


316  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

Finally,  the  ndbility  of  Mary's  spirit  was  not  less  remark- 
able than  its  freedom.  There  was  no  taint  of  vulgar  utili- 
tarianism about  her  character.  She  thought  habitually,  not 
of  the  immediately,  obviously,  and  materially  useful,  but  of 
the  honourable,  the  lovely,  the  morally  beautiful  Hard  prac- 
tical men  might  have  pronoimced  her  a  romantic,  sentimental, 
dreamy  mystic ;  but  a  more  just,  appreciative  estimate  would 
represent  her  as  a  woman  whose  virtues  were  heroic  and 
chivalrous  rather  than  commercial  Jesus  signalized  the  salient 
point  in  Marj'^s  character  by  the  epithet  which  He  employed 
to  describe  her  action.  He  did  not  call  it  a  useful  work,  but 
a  good,  or  better  still,  a  no6fo  work. 

And  yet,  while  Mary's  deed  was  characteristically  noble,  it 
was  not  the  less  useful  All  good  deeds  are  useful  in  some 
way,  and  at  some  time  or  other.  All  noble  and  beautiful 
things — ^thoughts,  words,  deeds — contribute  ultimately  to  the 
benefit  of  the  world.  Only  the  uses  of  such  deeds  as  Mai/s 
— of  the  best  and  noblest  deeds — ^are  not  always  apparent  or 
appreciable.  If  we  were  to  make  immediate,  obvious,  and 
vulgar  uses  the  test  of  what  is  right,  we  should  exclude 
not  only  the  anointing  in  Bethany,  biit  all  fine  poems  and 
works  of  art,  all  sacrifices  of  material  advantage  to  truth  and 
duty ;  everything,  in  fact,  that  has  not  tended  directly  to 
increase  outward  wealth  and  comfort,  but  has  merely  helped 
to  redeem  the  world  from  vulgarity,  given  us  glimpses  of  the 
far-oflf  land  of  beauty  and  goodness,  concerning  which  we  now 
and  then  but  faintly  dream,  brought  us  into  contact  with  the 
divine  and  the  eternal,  made  the  earth  classic  ground,  a  field 
where  heroes  have  fought,  and  where  their  bones  are  buried, 
and  where  the  moss-grown  stone  stands  to  commemorate  their 
valour. 

In  this  nobility  of  spirit  Mary  was  pre-eminently  tht  ChrU- 
tian.  For  the  genius  of  Christianity  is  certainly  not  utilitarian. 
Its  counsel  is:  "Whatsoever  things  are  true,  whatsoever  things 
are  venerable,  whatsoever  thiugs  are  just,  whatsoever  things 
are  pure,  whatsoever  things  are  lovely,  think  of  these  thinga" 
All  these  things  are  emphatically  useful ;  but  it  is  not  of  their 
utility,  but  of  themselves,  we  are  asked  to  think,  and  that  for 
a  very  good  reason.     Precisely  in  order  to  be  useful,  we  must 


THE  ANOmm^G  IN  BETHANY.  317 

aim  at  something  higher  than  usefulness ;  just  as,  in  order  to 
be  happy,  we  must  aim  at  something  higher  than  happiness. 
We  must  make  right  revealed  to  us  by  an  enlightened  con- 
science and  a  loving  pure  heart  our  rule  of  duty,  and  then  we 
may  be  sure  that  uses  of  all  kinds  will  be  served  by  our  con- 
duct, whether  we  foresee  them  or  not ;  whereas,  if  we  make 
calculations  of  utility  our  guide  in  action,  we  shall  leave  un- 
done the  things  which  are  noblest  and  best,  because  as  a  rule 
the  uses  of  such  things  are  least  obvious,  and  longest  in  TnaVing 
their  appearance.  Supremely  usefcd  to  the  world  is  the  heroic 
devotion  of  the  martyr ;  but  it  takes  centuries  to  develope  the 
benefits  of  martyrdom ;  and  if  all  men  had  followed  the  maxims 
of  utilitarian  philosophy,  and  made  utility  their  motive  to 
action,  there  would  never  have  been  any  martyrs  at  alL  Utili- 
tarianism tends  to  trimming  and  time-serving ;  it  is  the  death 
of  heroism  and  self-sacrifice ;  it  walks  by  sight,  and  not  by 
faith  ;  it  Ipoks  only  to  the  present,  and  forgets  the  future  ;  it 
seats  prudence  on  the  throne  of  conscience ;  it  produces  not 
great  characters,  but  at  best  petty  busybodies.  These  things 
being  considered,  it  need  not  surprise  us  to  find  that  the  term 
"  usefulness,"  of  such  frequent  recurrence  in  the  religious 
vocabulary  of  the  present  day,  has  no  place  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament^ 

Two  further  observations  may  now  fitly  dose  these  medita- 
tions on  the  memorable  transactions  in  Bethany. 

1.  From  Christ's  defence  of  Maiy  we  may  learn,  that  being, 
found  fault  with  is  not  infallible  evidence  of  being  wrong.  A 
much  blamed  man  is  commonly  considered  to  have  done  some- 
thing amiss,  as  the  only  possible  reason  for  his  being  censured. 
But,  in  truth,  he  may  only  have  done  something  unusual ;  for 
all  imusual  things  are  found  fault  with — ^the  imusually  good 
as  well  as,  nay  more  than,  the  imusually  bad  Hence  it  comes 
that  Paul  makes  the  apparently  superfluous  remark,  that  there 
is  no  law  against  love  and  its  kindred  gracea  In  point  of 
fact,  these  virtues  are  treated  as  if  illegal  and  criminal, 
whenever  they  exceed  the  usual  stinted  niggard  measure  in 
which  such  precious  metals  are  found  in  the  world.     Was 

^  The  defects  of  ntilitarian  morality  are  well  exposed  in  Sir  James  Macin- 
tosh's DiasertoHonf  under  Jeremy  Benthanu 


318  THE  TBAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

not  He  who  perfectly  embodied  all  the  heavenly  graces, 
flung  out  of  existence  by  the  world  as  a  person  not  to  be 
tolerated  ? 

Happily  the  world  ultimately  comes  round  to  a  juster 
opinion,  though  often  too  late  to  be  of  service  to  those  who 
have  suffered  wrong.  The  barbarians  of  the  Island  of  Malta^ 
who,  when  they  saw  the  viper  fastened  on  Paul's  hand,  thought 
he  must  needs  be  a  murderer,  changed  their  minds  when  he 
shook  off  the  reptile  unharmed,  and  exclaimed, ''  He  is  a  god." 
Hence  we  should  learn  this  maxim  of  prudence,  not  to  be 
too  hasty  in  criticising,  if  we  want  to  have  credit  for  insight 
and  consistency.  But  we  should  discipline  ourselves  to  slow- 
ness in  judging  from  far  hi^er  considerations.  We  ought  to 
cherish  a  reverence  for  the  character  and  for  the  personality 
of  all  intelligent  respcmsible  beings,  and  to  be  imder  a  con- 
stant fear  of  making  mistakes,  and  calling  good  evil,  and  evil 
good.  In  the  words  of  an  ancient  philosopher,  "  We  ought 
always  to  be  very  careful  when  about  to  blame  or  praise  a 
man,  lest  we  speak  not  rightly.  For  this  puipose  it  is 
necessary  to  learn  to  discriminate  between  good  and  bad 
men.  For  God  is  displeased  when  one  blames  a  person  like 
Himself,  or  praises  one  unlike  Himself.  Do  not  imagine  that 
stones,  and  sticks,  and  birds,  and  serpents  are  holy,  and  that 
men  are  not.  For  of  all  things,  the  holiest  is  a  good  man, 
and  the  most  detestable  a  bad.''^ 

2.  If  we  cannot  be  Christians  like  Mary,  let  us  at  all 
events  not  be  disciples  like  Judas.  Some  may  think  it 
would  not  be  desirable  that  all  should  be  like  the  womtui  of 
Bethany  :  plausibly  alleging  that,  considering  the  infirmity  of 
human  nature,  it  is  necessary  that  the  romantic,  impulsive, 
mystic  school  of  Christians  should  be  kept  in  check  by  an- 
other school  of  more  prosaic,  conservative,  and  so  to  say, 
plebeian  character  ;  while  perhaps  admitting  that  a  few 
Christians  like  Mary  in  the  church  help  to  preserve  religion 
from  degenerating  into  coarseness,  vulgarity,  and  formalism. 
Be  this  as  it  may,  the  church  has  certainly  no  need  for 
Judases.  Judas  and  Mary!  these  two  represent  the  two 
extremes  of  human  character.      The  one  exemplifies  Plato's 

1  Plato,  Minos, 


THE  ANOINTING  IN  BETHANY.  319 

wdvTwv  fiiapdyraToVj  the  other  his  iraincDV  Upoyrarov.  Charac- 
ters so  diverse  compel  us  to  believe  in  a  heaven  and  a  helL 
Each  one  goeth  to  his  and  her  own  place :  Mary  to  the  "  land 
of  the  leal ;''  Judas  to  the  land  of  the  false^  who  sell  their 
conscience  and  their  God  for  gold. 


9 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

SIB,  WE  WOULD   SEE  JESUS. 
John  xii.  20-33. 

THIS  narrative  presents  interesting  points  of  affinity  with 
that  contaiQed  in  the  fourth  chapter  of  John's  Gospel : 
the  story  of  the  woman  by  the  well  In  both,  Jesus  comes 
into  contact  with  persons  outside  the  pale  of  the  Jewish 
church;  in  both,  He  takes  occasion  &om  such  contact  to 
speak  in  glowing  language  of  an  hour  that  is  coining,  yea, 
now  is,  which  shall  usher  in  a  glorious  new  era  for  the  kingdom 
of  God ;  in  both  He  expresses,  in  the  most  intense,  emphatic 
terms.  His  devotion  to  His  Father's  will.  His  faith  in  the 
future  spread  of  the  gospel,  and  His  lively  hope  of  a  personal 
reward  in  glory  ;^  in  both,  to  note  yet  one  other  point  of 
resemblance.  He  employs,  for  the  expression  of  His  thought, 
agricultural  metaphors:  in  one  case,  the  earlier,  borrowing 
his  figure  &om  the  process  of  reaping ;  in  the  other,  the  later, 
from  that  of  sowing. 

But,  besides  resemblances,  marked  differences  are  observ- 
able in  these  two  passages  from  the  life  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
Of  these  the  most  outstanding  is  this,  that  while  on  the 
earlier  occasion  there  was  nothing  but  enthusiasm,  joy,  and 
hope  in  the  Saviour's  breast,  on  the  present  occasion  these 
feelings  are  blended  with  deep  sadness.  His  soul  is  not  only 
elated  with  the  prospect  of  coming  glory,  but  troubled  as  with 
the  prospect  of  impending  disaster.  The  reason  is,  that  His 
death  is  nigh :  it  is  within  three  days  of  the  time  when  He 
must  be  lifted  up  on  the  cross ;  and  sentient  nature  shrinks 
from  the  bitter  cup  of  sufiTering. 

^  John  iv.  34-36.  Ver.  34  expresses  Christ's  devotion  ;  ver.  35  His  faith, 
making  visible  and  present  things  not  seen  and  future  ;  ver.  36  His  hope  of  a 
great  reward  in  common  with  all  sowers  and  reapers. 


SIR,  WE  WOULD  SEE  JESUS.  321 

But  while  we  observe  the  presence  of  a  new  emotion  here, 
we  also  see  that  its  presence  produces  no  abatement  in  the 
old  emotions  manifested  by  Jesus  in  connection  with  His 
interview  with  the  woman  of  Samaria.  On  the  contrary,  the 
near  prospect  of  death  only  furnishes  the  Saviour  with  the 
means  of  giving  enhanced  intensity  to  the  expression  of  His 
devotion,  and  His  faith  and  hope.  Fonnerly  He  said  that 
the  doing  of  His  Father's  will  was  more  to  Him  than  meai ; 
now  He  says  in  effect  that  it  is  more  to  Him  than  life}  At 
the  beginning  He  had  seen  by  the  eye  of  faith  a  vast  extent 
of  fields,  white  already  to  the  harvest,  in  the  wide  wilderness 
of  Gentile  lands ;  now  He  not  only  continues  to  see  these 
fields  in  spite  of  His  approaching  passion,  but  He  sees  them 
as  the  effect  thereof, — ^a  whole  world  of  golden  grain,  growing 
out  of  one  com  of  wheat  cast  into  the  groimd,  and  rendered 
firuitful  of  life  by  its  own  death.*  At  the  well  of  Sychar 
He  had  spoken  with  lively  hope  of  the  wages  in  store  for 
Himself,  and  all  fdlow-labourers  in  the  kingdom  of  God, 
whether  sowers  or  reapers  ;  here  death  is  swallowed  up  in 
victory,  through  the  power  of  His  hope.  To  suffer  is  to 
enter  into  glory ;  to  be  lifted  up  on  the  cross,  is  ^to  be  ex- 
alted to  heaven,  and  seated  on  the  throne  of  a  world-wide 
dominion.* 

The  men  who  desired  to  see  Jesus  while  He  stood  in  one 
of  the  courts  of  the  temple,  were,  the  evangelist  informs  us, 
Greeks.  Whence  they  came,  whether  bom  east  or  from  west, 
or  from  north  or  from  south,  we  know  not ;  but  they  were 
evidently  bent  on  entering  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  They 
had  got  so  far  on  the  way  to  the  kingdom  already.  They  had 
embraced  the  faith  of  One  living,  true  God,  as  taught  by  the 
Jews,  and  were  come  at  this  time  up  to  Jerusalem  to  worship 
at  the  passover  as  Jewish  proselytes ;  but  they  had  not,  it 
would  seem,  found  rest  to  their  souls :  there  was  something 
more  to  be  known  about  Grod  which  was  still  hid  &om  them. 
This  they  hoped  to  learn  from  Jesus,  with  whose  name  and 
fame  they  had  somehow  become  acquainted.  Accordingly, 
an  opportunity  presenting  itself  to  them  of  communicating 
with  one  of  those  who  belonged  to  His  company,  they  re- 

»  John  xiL  28.  •  Ver.  «L  •  Yen.  2^,  82; 


322  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

spectfully  expressed  to  him  their  desire  to  meet  his  Master. 
''Sir,"  said  they,  "we  would  see  Jesus."  In  themselves, 
the  words  might  be  nothing  more  than  the  expression  of  a 
curious  wish  to  get  a  passing  glimpse  of  one  who  was  und^- 
stood  to  be  a  remarkable  man.  Such  an  interpretation  oi 
the  request,  however,  is  •excluded  by  the  deep  emotion  it 
awakened  in  the  breast  of  Jesus.  Idle  curiosity  woitld  not 
have  stirred  His  soul  in  such  a  fashion.  Then  the  notion 
that  these  Greeks  were  merely  curious  strangers,  is  entirely 
inconsistent  with  the  connection  in  which  the  story  is  intro^ 
duo^  John  brings  in  the  present  narrative  immediately 
after  quoting  a  reflection  made  by  the  Pharisees  respecting 
the  popularity  accruiiig  to  Jesus  from  the  resurrection  oi 
Lazarus.  "  Perceive  ye,"  said  they  to  each  other,  "  how  ye 
prevail  nothing  1  Behold^  the  world  is  gone  after  him." 
"  Yes  indeed,"  rejoins  the  evangelist  in  effect,  "  and  that  to 
an  extent  of  which  ye  do  not  dream.  He  whom  ye  bate  is 
beginning  to  be  inquired  after,  even  by  Grentiles  Srom  oEbu,  as 
the  following  history  will  show." 

We  do  right,  then,  to  regard  the  Greek  strangers  as  earnest 
inquirers.  They  were  true  seekers  after  God.  They  were 
genuine  spiritual  descendants  of  their  illustrious  countrymen 
Socrates  and  Plato,  whose  utterances,  written  or  unwritten^ 
were  one  long  prayer  for  light  and  truth,  one  deep  unconspious 
sigh  for  a  sight  of  Jesus.  They  wanted  to  see  the  Saviour, 
not  with  the  eye  of  the  body  merely,  but  above  all,  with  the 
eye  of  the  spirit 

The  bearing  of  these  Grentiles  quite  harmonizes  with  th» 
character  we  ascribe  to  them.  They  are  modest,  courteous^ 
reverential  They  seek  admission  to  the  presence  of  Jesus, 
as  one  might  to  the  presence  of  a  king.  They  are  mo6t 
respectful  even  to  His  servants.  Sir,  Lord,  is  the  title  they 
give  even  to  a  humble  disciple  like  Philip.  True  seekers 
after  God  and  truth  are  ever  the  same — ^ingenuous,  meek, 
lowly. 

It  is  natural  to  ask,  .Did  these  men,  then,  see  Jesus  after 
all  ?  We  reply  confidently.  Yes,  now  or  at  another  time :  if  not 
with  the  eye  of  sense,  then  with  the  eye  of  feutL  We  rest 
our  belief  of  this  not  on  the  Gospel  narrative,  but  on  the 


SIB,  WE  WOULD  BEE  JESUS.  323 

sure  word,  that  they  who  seek  shall  find.  No  one  ever 
sought  God  with  his  whole  heart  in  vain.  We  think  it 
highly  probable  that  the  Greeks  were  present  when  Jesus 
uttered  the  deep  thoughts  here  recorded.  It  is  not^condusive 
against  this  view  that  the  evangelist  takes  no  notice  of  their 
presence,  because  he  is  concerned  not  to  inform  us  of  the  issue 
of  the  request,  but  to  record  the  fieu^t  of  its  being  made.  But 
be  this  as  it  may,  of  one  thing  we  are  sure,  that  the  prayer  of 
these  devout  inquirers  was  granted  by  Jesus,  either  while  He 
was  on  earth  or  after  He  was  lifted  up  into  glory. 

The  part  played  by  the  two  disciples  named  in  the  narra- 
tive, in  connection  with  this  memorable  incident,  claims  a 
brief  notice.  Philip  and  Andrew  had  the  honour  to  be  the 
medium  of  communication  between  the  representatives  of  the 
Gentile  world,  and  Him  who  had  come  to  fulfil  the  desire  and 
be  the  Saviour  of  all  nationa  The  devout  Greeks  addressed 
themselves  to  the  former  of  these  two  disciples,  and  he  in 
turn  took  his  brother-disciple  into  his  counsels.  How  Philip 
came  to  be  selected  as  the  bearer  of  their  request  by  these . 
Gentile  inquirers,  we  do  not  know.  Reference  has  been  made 
to  the  fact  that  the  name  Philip  is  Greek,  as  implying  the 
probability  that  the  disciple  who  bore  it  had  Greek  connec- 
tions, and  the  possibility  of  a  previous  acquaintance  between 
him  and  the  persons  who  accosted  him  on  this  occasion. 
There  may  be  something  in  these  conjectures,  but  it  is  more 
important  to  remark  that  the  Greeks  were  happy  in  their 
choice  of  an  intercessor.  Philip  was  himself  an  inquirer,  and 
had  an  inquirer's  sympathy  with  all  who  might  be  in  a 
similar  state  of  mind.  The  first  time  he  is  named  in  the 
Gospel  history  he  is  introduced  expressing  his  futh  in  Jesus, 
as  one  who  had  carefully  sought  the  truth,  and  who,  having 
at  length  found  what  he  sought,  strove  to  make  others  par* 
takers  of  the  blessing.  '*  Philip  findeth  Kathanael,  and  saith 
unto  him.  We  have  found  him  of  whom  Moses,  in  the  law, 
and  the  prophets  did  write,  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  son  of 
Joseph."  The  exactness  and  fulness  of  this  confession  speaks 
to  careful  and  conscientious  searcL  And  Philip  has  still 
the  inquirer's  temper.  A  day  or  two  subsequent  to  this 
meeting  with  the  Greeks,  we  find  him  making  for  himself 


324  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

the  most  important  request :  "  Lord,  show  us  the  Father,  and 
it  sufficeth  us." 

But  why,  then,  does  this  sympathetic  disciple  not  convey 
the  request  of  the  Greeks  direct  to  Jesus  ?  Why  take 
Andrew  with  him,  as  if  afraid  to  go  alone  on  such  an  errand  t 
Just  because  the  petitioners  are  Greeks  and  Gentiles.  It  is 
one  thing  to  introduce  a  devout  Jew  like  Nathanael  to  Jesus, 
quite  another  to  introduce  Gentiles,  however  devout.  Philip 
is  pleased  that  lus  Master  should  be  inquired  after  in  such  a 
quarter,  but  he  is  not  sure  about  the  propriety  of  acting  on 
his  first  impulse.  He  hesitates,  and  is  in  a  flurry  of  excite- 
ment in  presence  of  what  he  feels  to  be  a  new  thing,  a  sig- 
nificant event,  the  beginning  of  a  religious  revolution.^  His 
inclination  is  to  play  the  part  of  an  intercessor  for  the  Greeks ; 
but  he  distrusts  his  own  judgment,  and,  before  acting  on  it^ 
lays  the  case  before  his  brother-disciple  and  fellow-townsman 
Andrew,  to  see  how  it  will  strike  him. 

The  result  of  the  consultation  was,  that  the  two  disciples 
came  and  told  their  Master.  They  felt  that  they  were  per- 
fectly safe  in  mentioning  the  matter  to  Him,  and  then  leaving 
Him  to  do  as  He  pleased. 

It  is  interesting  to  consider  that  these  two  brethren,  Philip 
and  Andrew,  being  of  the  five  who  were  introduced  to  Jesus 
at  the  very  beginning  of  His  ministry,  were  in  aU  probabi- 
lity  present  at  the  memorable  scene  by  the  well  of  Sychar. 
Comparing  their  spiritual  state  now  with  their  state  then,  we 
perceive  they  have  made  some  progress.  Then,  they  and  the 
rest  of  the  disciples  marvelled  that  their  Master  talked  with 
a  Samaritan  woman,  and  were  only  restrained  by  reverence 
from  expressing  their  surprise  ;  now,  they  are  apparently 
elated  with  joy  to  find  their  beloved  Master  attracting  the 
attention  of  foreigners,  and  see  no  insuperable  objections  to 
an  interview  between  them  and  Him.  Still  it  is  the  day  of 
small  things  with  these  disciples.  They  are  far,  far  yet  from 
the  joy  of  being  reapers  in  Gentile  fields,  far  from  the  faith 

'  Lnthardt  {DasJoh,  Evan,  i.  102)  thinks  this  hesitancy  specially  character- 
istic of  Philip,  and  contrasts  with  it  the  promptitude  of  Andrew,  as  exhibited 
here,  and  also  in  John  vi  9.  This  is  possible.  Thoughtful,  inquiring  men 
are  often  unready  in  practical  matters. 


SIB,  WE  WOULD  SEE  JESUS.  325 

that  could  see  in  heathen  nations  fields  white  to  the  harvest, 
far  from  comprehending  what  that  "  hour  "  was  whereof  Jesus 
spoke  in  mystic  but  glowing  language,  the  hour  of  a  new 
spiritual  worship  and  of  His  own  glorification.  But  to  all 
this  they  will  attain  ere  long. 

Passing  on  now  to  the  reception  given  by  Jesus  to  the 
communication  of  the  two  disciples,  we  observe  that  His 
soul  was  mightily  stirred  by  the  information  which  they 
brought  to  Him.  Manifestations  of  spiritual  susceptibility, 
by  persons  who  were  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel, 
did  always  greatly  move  His  feelings.  The  open-mindedness 
of  the  people  of  Sychar,  the  faith  of  the  centurion,  the  grati- 
tude of  the  Samaritan  leper,  touched  Him  profoundly.  Such 
things  came  upon  His  spirit  like  breezes  on  an  iEolian  harp, 
drawing  forth  fi-om  it  sweetest  tones  of  faith,  hope,  joy,  charity ; 
and  alas !  also  sometimes  sad,  plaintive  tones  of  disappoint- 
ment and  sorrow,  like  the  sighing  of  the  autumn  wind  among 
Scottish  pines,  when  He  thought  of  the  unbelief  and  spiritual 
deadness  of  the  chosen  people,  for  whom  He  had  done  so  mucL^ 

Never  was  the  heart  of  the  Son  of  man  more  deeply 
affected  than  on  the  present  occasion.  No  wonder  !  What 
sight  more  moving  than  that  of  a  human  being  seeking  after 
God,  the  fountain  of  light  and  of  life  !  Then  the  spontaneity 
of  these  Greek  inquirers  is  beautiful  It  is  something  to  be 
thankful  for  in  this  unspiritual,  imbelieving  world,  when  one 
and  another,  here  and  there,  responds  to  God's  call,  and 
receives  a  divine  word  which  has  been  spoken  to  him.  But 
here  we  have  the  rare  spectacle  of  men  coming  uncalled :  not 
sought  after  by  Christ,  and  accepting  Him  offering  HimseK  to 
them  as  a  Saviour  and  Lord,  but  seeking  Him,  and  begging  it 
as  a  great  favour  to  be  admitted  to  His  presence,  that  they 
may  offer  Him  their  sincere  homage,  and  hear  Him  speak 
words  of  eternal  life.  They  come,  too,  from  a  most  unusual 
quarter ;  and,  what  is  still  more  worthy  to  be  noticed,  at  a 
most  critical  time.  Jesus  is  just  about  to  be  conclusively 
rejected  by  His  own  people ;  just  on  the  point  of  being 

^  John  zii.  87-43.  See  next  cluipteT  of  this  work,  the  perusal  of  which  may 
help  the  reader  to  understand  the  emotion  awakened  in  Christ's  breast  by  the 
request  of  these  Greek  strangers. 


326  THE  TRAINING  OP  THB  TWELVE. 

crucified  by  them.  Some  have  shut  their  eyeai,  and  stopped 
their  ears,  and  hardened  their  hearts  in  the  most  determined 
manner  against  Him  and  His  teaching ;  others,  not  insensible 
to  His  merits,  have  meanly  and  heartlessly  concealed  their 
convictions,  fearing  the  consequences  of  an  open  profession. 
The  saying  of  the  prophet  Esaias  has  been  fulfilled  in  His 
bitter  experience,  "  Who  hath  believed  our  report  ?  and  to 
whom  hath  the  arm  of  the  Lord  been  revealed  ? "  Pharisar 
ism,  Sadduceeism,  ignorance,  indifference,  fickleness,  cowardice, 
have  confronted  Him  on  every  side.  How  refreshing,  amidst 
aboimding  contradiction,  stupidity,  and  dull  insusceptibility, 
this  intimation  brought  to  Him  at  the  eleventh  hour  :  "  Here 
are  certain  Greeks  who  are  interested  in  you,  and  want  to  see 
you !"  The  words  fall  on  His  ear  like  a  strain  of  sweet  music ; 
the  news  is  reviving  to  His  burdened  spirit,  like  the  sight  of 
a  spring  to  a  weary  traveller  in  a  sandy  desert ;  and  in  the 
fulness  of  His  joy  He  exclaims  :  "  The  hour  is  come  that  the 
Son  of  man  should  be  glorified."  Rejected  by  His  own  people, 
He  is  consoled  by  the  inspiring  assurance  that  He  shall  be 
believed  on  in  the  world,  and  accepted  by  the  outlying  nations 
as  all  their  salvation  and  all  their  desire. 

The  thoughts  of  Jesus  at  this  time  were  as  deep  as  His 
emotions  were  intense.  Specially  remarkable  is  the  first 
thought  to  which  He  gave  utterance  in  these  words :  "  Verily, 
verily,  I  say  unto  you.  Except  a  com  of  wheat  fall  into  the 
ground  and  die,  it  abideth  alone ;  but  if  it  die,  it  bringeth 
forth  much  fruit."  He  speaks  here  with  the  solemnity  of  one 
conscious  that  he  is  announcing  a  truth  new  and  strange  to  his 
hearers.  His  object  is  to  make  it  credible  and  comprehensible 
to  His  disciples,  that  death  and  increase  may  go  together.  He 
points  out  to  them  that  the  fact  is  so  in  the  case  of  grain ;  and 
He  would  have  them  understand  that  the  law  of  increase,  not 
only  in  sfpiie  but  in  virtue  of  death,  will  hold  true  equally  in 
His  own  case.  "  A  grain  of  wheat,  by  dying,  becometh  fniitfol ; 
so  I  must  die  in  order  to  become,  on  a  large  scale,  an  object 
of  faith  and  source  of  life.  During  my  lifetime  I  have  had 
little  success.  Few  have  believed,  many  have  disbelieved ; 
and  they  are  about  to  crown  their  imbelief  by  putting  me  to 
deatL     But  my  death,  so  far  from  being,  as  they  fancy,  my 


SIB,  WE  WOULD  SEE  JESCJS.  327 

defeat  and  destruction,  will  be  but  the  beginning  of  my  glori- 
fication. After  I  have  been  crucified,  I  shall  begin  to  be  be- 
lieved in  extensively  as  the  Lord  and  Saviour  of  men." 

Having,  by  the  analogy  of  the  com  of  wheat,  set  forth  death 
as  the  condition  of  fruitfulness,  Jesus,  in  a  word  subsequently 
spoken,  proclaiined  His  approaching  crucifixion  as  the  secret  of 
His  future  fcfww,  "  I,'*  said  He,  "  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the 
earth,  will  draw  all  men  imto  me."  He  used  the  expression- 
"  lifted  up"  in  a  double  sense, — ^partly,  as  the  evangelist  in- 
forms us,  in  allusion  to  the  manner  of  His  death,  partly  with 
reference  to  His  ascension  into  heaven ;  and  He  meant  to  say, 
that  after  He  had  been  taken  up  into  glory.  He  would,  through 
His  cross,  attract  the  eyes  and  hearts  of  men  towards  Himsel£ 
And,  strange  as  such  a  statement  might  appear  before  the 
event,  the  fact  corresponded  to  the  Saviour's  expectation.  The 
cross — symbol  of  shame ! — did  become  a  source  of  glory ;  the 
sign  of  weakness  became  an  instrument  of  moral  power.  Christ 
crucified,  though  to  imbelieving  Jews  a  stumbling-block,  and 
to  philbsophic  Greeks  foolishness,  became  to  many  believers 
the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God.  By  His  volimtaiy 
humiliation  and  meek  endurance  of  suffering,  the  Son  of  God 
drmjo  men  to  Him  in  sincerest  faith>  and  devoted  reverential 
love. 

The  largeness  of  Christ's  desires  and  expectations  is  very 
noteworthy.  He  speaks  of  "  much  fruit,"  and  of  drawing  "  all 
men"  unto  Him.  Of  course  we  are  not  to  look  here  for  an 
exact  definition  of  the  extent  of  redemption.  Jesus  speaks  as  a 
man  giving  utterance,  in  the  fulness  of  his  heart,  to  his  high, 
holy  hope ;  and  we  may  learn  from  His  ardent  words,  if  not 
the  theological  extent  of  atonement,  at  least  the  eaciiefMivefn/m  of 
the  Atoner's  good  wishes.  He  would  have  all  men  believe  in 
Him  and  be  saved.  He  complained  with  deep  melancholy  of 
the  fewness  of  believers  among  the  Jews;  He  turned  with 
unspeakable  longing  to  the  Gentiles,  in  hope  of  a  better  re- 
ception from  them.  The  greater  the  number  of  believers  at 
any  time  and  in  any  place,  the  better  He  is  pleased ;  and  He 
certainly  does  not  contemplate  with  indifference  the  vast  amount 
of  unbelief  which  still  prevails  in  all  quarters  of  the  world. 
His  heart  is  set  on  the  complete  expidsion  of  the  prince  of 


328  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

this  world  from  his  usurped  dominion,  that  He  Himself  may 
reign  over  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  eartL 

The  narrative  contains  a  word  of  application  addressed  by 
Jesus  to  His  disciples  in  connection  with  the  law  of  increase 
by  death,  saying  in  effect  that  it  applied  to  them  as  well  as  to 
Himself^     This  appears  at  first  surprising,  insomuch  that  we 
are  tempted  to  think  that  the  sayings  alluded  to  are  brought  in 
here  by  the  evangelist  out  of  their  true  historical  connection. 
But  on  reconsideration  we  come  to  think  otherwisa    We  observe 
that  in  all  cases,  wherever  it  is  possible,  Christ  in  His  teaching 
takes  His  disciples  into  partnership  with  Himself.     He  does 
not  insist  on  those  aspects  of  truth  which  are  peculiar  to  Him- 
self,  but  rather  on  those  which  are  common  to  Him  with  His 
followers.     If  there  be  any  point  of  contact  at  aU,  any  sense 
in  which  what  He  states  of  Himself  is  true  of  those  who  be- 
lieve in  Him,  He  seizes  on  that,  and  makes  it  a  prominent 
topic  of  discourse     So  He  did  on  the  occasion  of  the  meeting 
by  the  well ;  so  when  He  first  plainly  announced  to  His  dis- 
ciples that  He  was  to  be  put  to  deatL     And  so  also  He  does 
here.    Here,  too.  He  asserts  a  fellowship  between  Himself  and 
His  followers  in  respect  to  the  necessity  of  death  as  a  condition 
of  fruitfulness.    And  the  fellowship  asserted  is  not  a  far-fetched 
conceit:  it  is  a  great  practical  reality.     The  principle  laid 
down  is  this,  that  in  proportion  as  a  man  is  a  partaker  of 
Christ's  suffering  in  His  estate  of  humiliation,  shall  he  be  a 
|>artaker  of  the  glory,  honour,  and  power  which  belong  to  His 
estate  of  exaltation.     This  principle  holds  true  even  in  this 
life.     The  bearing  of  the  cross,  the  undergoing  of  death,  is  the 
condition  of  fruit-bearing  both  in  the  sense  of  personal  sancti- 
fication,  and  in  the  sense  of  effective  service  in  the  kingdom 
of  God.    In  the  long-run  the  measure  of  a  man's  power  is  the 
.extent  to  which  he  is  baptized  into  Christ's  death.     We  must 
fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the  ajQUctions  of  Christ  in  our 
flesh  for  His  body's  sake,  which  is  the  church,  if  we  would  be 
the  honoured  instruments  of  advancing  that  great  work  in  the 
world  for  which  He  was  willing,  like  a  com  of  wheat,  to  fell 
into  the  ground  and  die. 

1  John  xiL  25,  26. 


CHAPTER    XX. 

0     JEBnSALEM,     JEBDBALEU ! 
Uatt.  xsi.-xxt.  ;  IIamk  zi.-ZIIi.  ;  Luxx  xix.  29--4S,  zz.  riL 

THE  few  days  interveiiiiig  between  the  anointing  and  the 
passover  were  spent  by  Jesus  in  daily  visits  to  Jeru- 
salem in  company  with  His  disciples,  returning  to  Bethany 
in  the  evening.  During  that  time  He  spoke  much  in  public 
and  in  private,  on  themes  congenial  to  His  feelings  and  situa- 
tion :  the  sin  of  the  Jewish  nation,  and  specially  of  its  reli- 
gious leaders ;  the  doom  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  end  of  the 
world.  The  record  of  His  sayings  during  these  last  days  fills 
five  chapters  of  Matthew's  Gospel, — a  proof  of  the  deep  im- 
pressions which  they  made  on  the  mind  of  the  twelva 

Prominent  among  these  utterances,  which  together  form  the 
dying  testimony  of  the  "Prophet  of  Nazareth,"  stands  the 
great  philippic  delivered  by  Him  gainst  the  scribes  and 
Pharisees  of  Jerusalem.  This  terrible  discourse  had  been 
preceded  by  various  encounters  between  the  speaker  and  His^ 
inveterate  foes,  which  were  as  the  preliminary  skirmishes  that  - 
form  the  prelude  to  a  great  engagement.  In  these  petty  fights 
Jesus  had  been  uniformly  victorious,  and  had  overwhelmed 
His  opponents  with  confusion.  They  had  asked  Him  con- 
cerning His  authority  for  taking  upon  Him  the  office  of  a 
reformer,  in  clearing  the  temple  precincts  of  traders ;  and  He 
had  silenced  them  by  asking  in  reply  their  opinion  of  John's 
mission,  and  by  speaking  in  their  hearing  the  parables  of  the 
Two  Sons,  the  Vinedressers,  and  the  SgecUd  SUyne  ;^  wherein 
their  hypocrisy,  unrighteousnesB,  and  ultimate  damnation  were 
vividly  depicted.  They  had  tried  to  catch  Him  in  a  trap  by 
an  ensnaring  question  concerning  the  tribute  paid  to  the 
Soman  government ;  and  He  had  extricated  Himself  with  ease, 
>  H>tt.  ni  23-46. 


•   • 


330  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  JWELVE. 

by  simply  asking  for  a  penny,  and  pointing  to  the  emperor's 
head  on  it,  demanding  of  His  assailants  "  whose  is  this  image 
and  superscription ;"  and  on  receiving  the  reply,  "  Ceesar's," 
giving  His  judgment  in  these  terms :  "  Eender  therefore  unto 
Caesar  the  things  which  are  Caesar's,  and  unto  God  the  things 
that  are  God's."  ^  Twice  foiled,  the  Pharisees  (with  their  friends 
the  Herodians)  gave  place  to  their  usual  foe?,  but  present  allies, 
the  Sadducees,  who  attempted  to  puzzle  Jesus  on  the  subject 
of  the  resurrection,  only  to  be  ignominiously  discomfited;* 
whereupon  the  pharisaic  brigade  returned  to  the  charge,  and 
through  the  mouth  of  a  lawyer  not  yet  wholly  perverted  in- 
quired, "Which  is  the  great  commandment  in  the  law ?"  To 
this  question  Jesus  gave  a  direct  and  serious  reply,  summing 
up  the  whole  law  in  love  to  God  and  love  to  man,  to  the 
entire  contentment  of  His  interrogator.  Then,  impatient 
of  further  trifling,  He  blew  a  trumpet-peal,  the  signal  of  a 
grand  offensive  attack,  by  propounding  the  question,  *  What 
think  ye  of  Christ,  whose  son  is  He  ?"  and  taking  occasion 
fixjm  the  reply  to  quote  the  opening  verse  of  David*^  martial 
psalm,  asking  them  to  reconcile  it  with  their  answer.'  In 
appearance  fighting  the  Pharisees  with  their  own  weapons, 
and  framing  a  mere  theological  puzzle,  He  was  in  reality 
reminding  them  who  He  was,  and  intimating  to  them  the 
predicted  doom  of  those  who  set  themselves  against  the  Lord's 
.  anointed. 

Thereupon  David's  Son  and  David's  Lord  proceeded  to  fulfil 
the  prophetic  figure,  and  to  make  a  footstool  of  the  men  who 
sat  in  Moses'  seat,  by  delivering  that  discourse  in  whi,ch,  to 
change  the  figure,  the  Pharisee  is  placed  in  a  moral  pillory, 
a  mockery  and  a  byword  to  aU  after  ages ;  and  a  sentence  is 
pronounced  on  the  pharisaic  character  inexorably  severe,  yet 
justified  by  fact,  and  approved  by  the  conscience  of  all  true 
Christians.^  This  anti-pharisaic  speech  may  be  regarded  as  the 
final,  decisive,  comprehensive,  dying  testimony  of  Jesus  against 
the  most  deadly  and  damning  form  of  evil  prevailing  in  His 
age,  or  that  can  prevail  in  any  age — ^religious  hypocrisy ;  and 
as  such  it  forms  a  necessary  part  of  the  Eighteous  One's 

^  Matt  xxiL  15-22.  «  Matt  xxii.  23-33. 

s  Matt  xxii.  41-45.  *  Matt  xxiiL 


•• 


0  JERUSALEM,  JEBUSALEM  !  331 

witness-bearing  in  behalf  of  the  truth,  to  which  His  disciples 
are  expected  to  say  Amen  with  no  faltering  voice.  For  the 
spirit  of  moral  resentment  is  as  essential  in  Christian  ethics 
as  the  spirit  of  mercy;  nor  can  any  one  who  regards  the 
anti-pharisaic  polemic  of  the  Gospel  history  as  a  scandal  to  be 
ashamed  of,  or  a  blemish  to  be  apologized  for,  or  at  least  as  a 
thing  which,  however  necessary  at  the  time,  propriety  now 
requires  us  to  treat  with  neglect, — a  practice  too  common  in 
the  religious  world, — be  cleared  of  the  suspicion  of  having 
more  sympathy  at  heart  with  the  men  by  whom  the  Lord  was 
crucified  than  with  the  Lord  Himselt  Blessed  is  he  who  is  not 
ashamed  of  Christ's  sternest  words ;  who,  far  fix)m  stumbling 
at  those  bold  prophetic  utterances,  has  rather  found  in  them 
an  aid  to  faith  at  the  crisis  of  his  religious  history,  as 
evincing  an  identity  between  the  moral  sentiments  of  the 
Founder  of  the  faith  and  his  own,  and  helping  him  to  see  that 
what  he  may  have  mistaken  for,  and  what  claimed  to  be, 
Christianity,  was  not  that  at  all,  but  only  a  modem  repro- 
duction of  a  religious  system  which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
could  not  endure,  or  be  on  civil  terms  with. 

Without  for  a  moment  admitting  that  there  is  anjrthing 
in  these  invectives  against  hypocrisy  to  be  apologized  for,  we 
must  nevertheless  advert  to  the  view  taken  of  them  by  some 
recent  critics  of  the  sceptical  school  These  speeches,  then, 
we  are  told,  are  the  rash,  unqualified  utterances  of  a  young 
man,  whose  spirit  was  unmellowed  by  years  and  experience  of 
the  world ;  whose  temperament  was  poetic,  therefore  irritable, 
impatient,  and  unpractical ;  and  whose  temper  was  that  of  a 
Jew,  morose,  and  prone  to  bitterness  in  controversy.  At  this 
time,  we  are  further  to  understand,  provoked  by  persevering 
opp6sition.  He  had  lost  self-possession,  and  had  abandoned 
Himself  to  the  violence  of  anger;  His  bad  humour  having 
reached  such  a  pitch  as  to  make  Him  guilty  of  actions  seem- 
ingly absurd,  such  as  that  of  cursing  the  fig-tree.  He  had,  in 
fact,  become  reckless  of  consequences,  or  even  seemed  to  court 
such  as  were  disastrous;  and,  weary  of  conflict,  sought  by 
violent  language  to  precipitate  a  crisis,  and  provoke  His  enemies 
to  put  Him  to  death.^ 

1  See  Bexum,  Vie  de  Jmu,  pp.  819,  824-4. 


332  THE  TBAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

These  are  blasphemies  against  the  Son  of  man  as  unfounded 
as  they  are  injurious.  The  last  days  of  Jesus  were  certainly 
full  of  intense  excitement^  but  to  a  candid  mind  no  traces  of 
passion  are  discernible  in  His  conduct  ALL  His  recorded 
utterances  during  those  days  are  in  a  high  key  suited  to  one 
whose  soul  was  animated  by  the  most  sublime  feelings. 
Every  sentence  is  eloquent,  every  word  tells ;  but  all  through- 
out is  natural,  and  appropriate  to  the  situation.  Even  when 
the  terrible  attack  on  the  religious  leaders  of  Israel  begins,  we 
listen  awe-struck,  but  not  shocked.  We  feel  that  the  speaker 
has  a  right  to  use  such  language,  that  what  He  says  is  true, 
and  that  aU  is  said  with  commanding  authority  and  dignity, 
such  as  became  the  Messianic  King.  When  the  speaker  has 
come  to  an  end  we  breathe  finely,  sensible  that  a  delicate 
though  necessary  task  has  been  performed  with  not  less  wisdom 
than  fidelity.  Deep  and  undisguised  abhorrence  is  expressed 
in  every  sentence,  such  as  it  would  be  difficult  for  any  ordinary 
man,  yea,  even  for  an  extraordinary  one,  to  cherish  without 
some  admixture  of  that  wrath  which  worketh  not  the  right- 
eousness of  God.  But  in  the  antipathies  of  a  Divine  Being 
the  weakness  of  passion  finds  no*  place :  His  abhorrence  may 
be  deep,  but  it  is  also  ever  calm ;  and  we  challenge  unbe- 
lievers to  point  out  a  single  feature  in  this  discourse  incon- 
sistent with  the  hypothesis  that  the  speaker  is  divine.  Nay, 
leaving  out  of  view  Christ's  divinity,  and  criticising  His  words 
with  a  freedom  unfettered  by  reverence,  we  can  see  no  traces 
in  them  of  a  man  carried  headlong  by  a  tempest  of  anger.  We 
find,  after  strictest  search,  no  loose  expressions,  no  passionate 
exaggerations,  but  rather  a  style  remarkable  for  artistic  pre- 
cision and  accuracy.  The  pictures  of  the  ostentatious,  place- 
hunting,  title-loving  rabbi ;  of  the  hypocrite,  who  makes  long 
prayers  and  devours  widows*  houses ;  of  the  zealot,  who  puts 
himself  to  infinite  trouble  to  make  converts,  only  to  make 
his  converts  worse  rather  than  better  men ;  of  the  Jesuitical 
scribe,  who  teaches  that  the  gold  of  the  temple  is  a  more 
sacred,  binding  thing  to  swear  by  than  the  temple  itself ;  of 
the  Pharisee,  whose  conscience  is  strict  or  lax  as  suits  his 
convenience ;  of  the  whited  sepulchres,  fair  without,  full  within 
of  dead  men's  bones ;  of  the  men  whose  piety  manifests  itself 


0  JEBUSALEM,  JEBUSALEM  !  333 

in  murdering  living  prophets  and  garnishing  the  sepulchres 
of  dead  ones, — are  moral  daguerrotypes  which  will  stand  the 
minutest  inspection  of  criticism,  drawn  by  no  irritated,  de- 
feated man,  feeling  sorely  and  resenting  keenly  the  malice  of 
his  adversaries,  but  by  one  who  has  gained  so  complete  a 
victory,  that  He  can  make  sport  of  His  foes,  and  at  all  events 
runs  no  risk  of  losing  self-controL 

The  aim  of  the  discourse,  equally  with  its  style,  is  a  suffi- 
cient defence  against  the  charge  of  bitter  personality.  The 
direct  object  of  the  speaker  was  not  to  expose  the  blind  guides 
of  Israel,  but  to  save  from  delusion  the  people  whom  they 
were  misguiding  to  their  ruin.  The  audience  consisted  of  the 
disciples  and  the  multitude  who  heard  Him  gladly.  It  is 
most  probable  that  many  of  the  blind  guides  were  present ; 
and  it  would  make  no  difference  to  Jesus  whether  they  were 
or  not,  for  He  had  not  two  ways  of  speaking  concerning  men — 
one  .before  their  faces,  another  behind  their  backs.  It  is  told 
of  Demosthenes,  the  great  Athenian  orator,  and  the  determined 
opponent  of  Philip  of  Macedon,  that  he  completely  broke 
down  in  that  king's  presence  on  the  occasion  of  his  first 
appearance  before  him  as  an  ambassador  from  his  native  city. 
But  a  greater  than  Demosthenes  is  here,  whose  sincerity  and 
courage  are  as  marvellous  as  His  wisdom  and  eloquence,  and 
who  can  say  all  He  thinks  of  the  religious  heads  of  the  people 
in  their  own  hearing.  Still,  in  the  present  instance,  the  parties 
formally  addressed  were  not  the  heads  of  the  people,  but  the 
people  themselves ;  and  it  is  worthy  of  notice  how  carefully 
discriminating  the  speaker  was  in  the  coimsel  which  He  gave 
them.  He  told  them  that  what  He  objected  to  was  not  so 
much  the  teaching  of  their  guides,  as  their  lives :  they  might 
follow  aU  their  precepts  with  comparative  impunity,  but  it 
would  be  fatal  to  follow  their  example.  How  many  reformers 
in  similar  circumstances  would  have  joined  doctrine  and  prac- 
tice together  in  one  indiscriminate  denunciation!  Such 
moderation  is  not  the  attribute  of  a  man  in  a  rage. 

But  the  best  due  of  aU  to  the  spirit  of  the  speaker  is  the 
manner  in  which  His  discourse  ends :  "  0  Jerusalem,  Jeru- 
salem ! "  Strange  ending  for  one  filled  with  angry  passion  ! 
0  Jesus,  Jesus!  how  Thou  risest  above  the  petty  thoughts 


334  THE  TBAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

t 

and  feelings  of  men  I  Who  shall  fathom  the  depths  of  Thy 
heart  ?  What  mighty  waves  of  righteousness,  truth,  pity,  and 
sorrow  roll  through  Thy  bosom  I 

Having  uttered  that  piercing  cry  of  grie^  Jesus  left  the 
temple,  never,  so  far  as  we  know,  to  retiuru.  His  last  words 
to  the  people  of  Jerusalem  were :  "  Behold,  your  house  is  left 
unto  you  desolate.  For  I  say  unto  you,  Ye  shall  not  see 
me  henceforth,  till  ye  shall  say,  Blessed  is  He  that  cometh 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord."  On  the  way  fipom  the  city  to 
Bethany,  by  the  Mount  of  Olives,  the  rejected  Saviour  again 
alluded  to  its  coming  doom.  The  light-hearted  disciples  had 
drawn  His  attention  to  the  strength  and  beauty  of  the  temple 
buildings,  then  in  full  view.  In  too  sad  and  solemn  a  mood 
for  admiring  mere  architecture.  He  replied  in  the  spirit  of  a 
prophet :  "  See  ye  not  all  these  things  ?  Verily  I  say  unto 
you.  There  shall  not  be  left  here  one  stone  upon  coiother,  that 
shall  not  be  thrown  down,"  ^ 

Arrived  at  Mount  Olivet,  the  company  sat  down  to  take  a 
leisurely  view  of  the  majestic  pile  of  which  they  had  been 
speaking.  How  different  the  thoughts  and  feelings  suggested  by 
the  same  object  to  the  minds  of  the  spectators !  The  twelve 
look  with  merely  outward  eye ;  their  Master  looks  with  the 
inward  eye  of  prophecy.  They  see  nothing  before  them  but 
the  goodly  stones ;  He  sees  the  profanation  in  the  interior, 
greedy  traders  within  the  sacred  precincts,  religion  so  vitiated 
by  ostentation,  as  to  make  a  poor  widow  casting  her  two  mites 
into  the  treasury,  in  pious  simplicity,  a  rare  and  pleasing 
exception.  The  disciples  think  of  the  present  only;  Jesus 
looks  forward  to  an  approaching  doom  fearful  to  contemplate, 
and  doubtless  backward  too,  over  the  long  and  chequered 
history  through  which  the  once  venerable,  now  polluted,  house 
of  God  had  passed.  The  disciples  are  elated  with  pride  as 
they  gaze  on  this  national  structure,  the  glory  of  their  country, 
and  are  happy  as  thoughtless  men  are  wont  to  be ;  the  heart 
of  Jesus  is  heavy  with  the  sadness  of  wisdom  and  prescience, 
and  of  love  that  would  have  saved,  but  can  now  do  nothing 
but  weep,  and  proclaim  the  awful  words  of  doom. 

Yet,  with  all  their  thoughtlessness,  the  twelve  could  not 

^  Matt.  zziv.  1,  2. 


0  JERUSALEM,  JEBUSAIiEM  !  335 

quite  forget  those  dark  forebodings  jof  their  Master.  The 
weird  words  haunted  their  minds,  and  made  them  curious  to 
know  more.  Therefore  they  came  to  Jesus,  or  some  of  them 
— Mark  mentions  Peter,  James,  John,  and  Andrew^ — and 
asked  two  questions :  when  Jerusalem  should  be  destroyed ; 
and  what  should  be  the  signs  of  His  coming,. and  of  the  end 
of  the  world.  The  two  events  referred  to  in  the  questions — 
the  end  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  end  of  the  world — ^were  assumed 
by  the  questioners  to  be  contemporaneous.  It  was  a  natural 
and  by  no  means  a  singular  mistake.  Local  and  partial  judg- 
ments are  wont  to  be  thus  mixed  up  with  the  universal  one 
in  men's  imaginations ;  and  hence  almost  every  great  calamity 
which  inspires  awe,  leads  to  anticipations  of  the  last  day. 
Thus  Luther,  when  his  mind  was  clouded  by  the  dark  shadow 
of  present  tribulation,  would  remark  :  "  The  world  cannot 
stand  long,  perhaps  a  hundred  years  at  the  outsida  At  the 
last  will  be  great  alterations  and  commotions,  and  already 
there  are  great  commotions  among  men.  Never  had  the  men 
of  law  so  much  occupation  as  now.  There  are  vehement  dis- 
sensions in  our  families,  and  discord  in  the  church."^  In' 
apostolic  times.  Christians  expected  the  immediate  coming 
of  Christ  with  such  confidence  and  ardour,  that  some  even 
neglected  their  secular  business,  just  as  towards  the  dose  of 
the  tenth  century  people  allowed  churches  to  fall  into  disre- 
pair because  the  end  of  the  world  was  deemed  close  at  hand. 

In  reality,  the  judgment  of  Jerusalem  and  that  of  the  world 
at  large  were  to  be  separated  by  a  long  interval  Therefore 
Jesus  treated  the  two  things  as  distinct  in  His  prophetic  dis- 
course, and  gave  separate  answers  to  the  two  questions  which 
the  disciples  had  combined  into  one,  that  respecting  the  end 
of  the  world  being  disposed  of  first* 

The  answer  He  gave  to  this  question  was  general  and 
negative.  He  did  not  fi^  a  time,  but  said  in  eflfect :  "  The 
end  will  not  be  till  such  and  such  things  have  taken  place ;  *' 
specifying  six  antecedents  of  the  end  in  succession,  the  first 
being  the  appearance  of  false  Christs.^  Of  these  He  assured 
His  disciples  there  would  be  many,  deceiving  many ;  and  most 

1  Mark  xiii  3.  *  Luther's  Table  Talk,  Bohn's  edition,  p.  325. 

» Matt  xxiy.  4-li.  *  Ver.  5, 


f 

336  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

truly,  for  several  quack  Messiahs  did  appear  even  before  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  availing  themselves  of,  and  imposing 
on,  the  general  desire  for  deliverance,  even  as  quack  doctors 
do  in  reference  to  bodily  ailments,  and  succeeding  in  deceiving 
many,  as  unhappily  in  such  times  is  only  too  easy.  But  among 
the  number  of  their  dupes  were  found  none  of  those  who  had 
been  previously  instructed  by  the  true  Christ  to  regard  the 
appearance  of  pseudo-Christs  merely  as  one  of  the  signs  of  an 
evil  time.  The  deceivers  of  others  were  for  them  a  preserva- 
tive against  delusion. 

The  second  antecedent  is,  "wars  and  rumours  of  wars." 
Nation  must  rise  against  nation  ;  there  must  be  times  of  up- 
heaving and  dissolution ;  declines  and  falls  of  empires,  and 
risings  of  new  kingdoms  on  the  ruins  of  the  old.  This  second 
sign  would  be  accompanied  by  a  third,  in  the  shape  of  com- 
motions in  the  physical  world,  emblematic  of  those  in  the 
political  Famines,  earthquakes,  pestilences,  etc.,  would  occur 
in  divers  places.^ 

Yet  these  things,  however  dreadful,  would  be  but  the  begin- 
ning of  sorrows ;  nor  would  the  end  come  till  those  signs  had 
repeated  themselves  again  and  again.  No  one  could  tell  from 
the  occurrence  of  such  phenomena  that  the  end  would  be 
now  ;  he  could  only  infer  that  it  was  not  yet? 

Next  in  order  come  persecutions,  with  all  the  moral  and 
social  phenomena  of  persecuting  times.*  Christians  must 
undei^o  a  discipline  of  hatred  among  the  nations  because 
of  the  name  they  bear,  and  as  the  reputed  authors  of  all 
the  disasters  which  befall  the  people  among  whom  they  live. 
Times  must  come  when,  if  the  Tiber  inundate  Rome,  if  the 
Nile  overflow  not  his  fields,  if  drought,  earthquake,  famine,  or 
plague  visit  the  earth,  the  cry  of  the  populace  will  forthwith 
be,  "  The  Christians  to  the  lions  ! " 

Along  with  persecutions,  as  a  fifth  antecedent  of  the  end, 
would  come  a  sifting  of  the  church.*  Many  would  break 
down  or  turn  traitors ;  there  would  spring  up  manifold  ani- 
mosities, schisms,  and  heresies,  each  named  from  its  own 
false  prophet.     The  prevalence  of  these  evils  in  the  church 

1  Matt.  xxiv.  6,  7.  •  Ver.  8. 

»  Ver.  9.  *  Ver.  10. 


0  JERUSALEM,  JEBUSALEM  !  337 

would  give  rise  to  much  spiritual  declension,  "Because 
iniquity  shall  abound,  the  love  of  many  shall  wax  cold."  ^ 

The  last  thing  that  must  happen  ere  the  end  come  is 
the  evangelization  of  the  worid ;  *  which  being  achieved, 
the  end  would  at  length  arrive.  From  this  sign  we  may 
guess  that  the  world  will  last  a  long  while  yet ;  for,  accord- 
ing to  the  law  of  historical  probabiKty,  it  will  be  long  ere  the 
gospel  shall  have  been  preached  to  all  men  for  a  witness. 
Ardent  Christians  or  enthusiastic  students  of  prophecy  who 
think  otherwise,  must  remember  that  sending  d  few  mission- 
aries to  a  heathen  country  does  not  satisfy  the  prescribed 
condition.  The  gospel  has  not  been  preached  to  a  nation  for 
a  witness,  that  is,  so  as  to  form  a  basis  of  moral  judgment, 
till  it  has  been  preached  to  the  whole  people  as  in  Christen- 
dom. This  has  never  yet  been  done  for  aU  the  nations,  and  at 
the  present  rate  of  progress  it  is  not  likely  to  be  accomplished 
for  centuries  to  come. 

Having  rapidly  sketched  an  outUne  of  the  events  that  must 
precede  the  end  of  the  world,  Jesus  addressed  Himself  to  the 
more  special  question  which  related  to  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem.  He  could  now  speak  on  that  subject  with  more 
freedom,  after  He  had  guarded  against  the  notion  that  the  de- 
struction of  the  holy  city  was  a  sign  of  His  own  immediate 
final  coming.  "When,  then,**  He  b^an — the  introductory 
formula  signifying,  to  answer  now  your  first  question— "ye 
shall  see  the  abomination  of  desolation  spoken  of  by  Daniel  the 
prophet  stand  in  the  holy  place,  then  let  them  which  be  in 
Judea  flee  into  the  mountains ; "  the  abomination  of  desola- 
tion being  the  Boman  army  with  its  ea^es — abominable  to  the 
Jew,  desolating  to  the  land.  When  the  eagles  appeared,  all 
might  flee  for  their  life ;  resistance  would  be  vain,  obstinacy 
and  bravery  utterly  unavailing.  The  calamity  would  be  so 
sudden  that  there  would  be  no  time  to  save  anything.  It 
would  be  as  when  a  house  is  on  fire ;  people  would  be  glad 
to  escape  with  their  life.'  It  would  be  a  fearful  time  of 
tribulation,  unparalleled  before  or  after.*  Woe  to  poor  nursing 
mothers  in  those  horrible  days,  and  to  such  as  were  with 
child !     What  barbarities  and  inhumanities  awaited  them  I 

» Matt  xxiv.  12.  •  Ver.  14.  »  Vers.  17,  18.  *  Ver.  21. 

Y 


338  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

The  calamities  that  were  coming  would  spare  nobody,  not 
even  Christians.  They  would  find  safety  only  in  flight,  and 
they  would  have  cause  to  be  thankful  that  they  escaped  at  alL 
But  their  flight,  though  unavoidable,  might  be  more  or  less 
grievous  according  to  circumstances ;  and  they  should  pray  for 
what  might  appear  small  mercies,  even  for  such  alleviations 
as  that  they  might  not  have  to  flee  to  the  mountains  in 
winter,  when  it  is  cold  and  comfortless,  or  on  the  Sabbath,  the 
day  of  rest  and  peace.^ 

After  giving  this  brief  but  graphic  sketch  of  the  awful 
days  approaching,  intolerable  by  mortal  men  were  they  not 
shortened  "  for  the  elect's  sake,"  Jesus  repeated  His  warning 
word  against  deception,  as  if  in  fear  that  His  disciples,  dis- 
tracted by  such  calamities,  might  think  "  surely  now  is  the 
end."  He  told  them  that  violence  would  be  followed  by 
apostasy  and  falsehood,  as  great  a  trial  in  one  way  as  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem  in  another.  False  teachers  should 
arise,  who  would  be  so  plausible  as  almost  to  deceive  the  very 
elect.  The  devil  would  appear  as  an  angel  of  light ;  in  the 
desert  as  a  monk,  in  the  shrine  as  an  object  of  superstitious 
worship.  But  whatever  men  might  pretend,  the  Christ  would 
not  be  there ;  nor  would  His  appearance  take  place  then,  nor 
at  any  fixed  calculable  time,  but  suddenly,  unexpectedly,  like 
the  lightning  flash  in  the  heavens.  When  moral  corruption  had 
attained  its  full  development,  then  would  the  judgment  coma* 

In  the  following  part  of  the  discourse,  the  end  of  the 
world  seems  to  be  brought  into  immediate  proximity  to 
the  destruction  of  the  holy  city.^  If  a  long  stretch  of  ages 
was  to  intervene,  the  perspective  of  the  prophetic  picture 
seems  at  fault.  The  far  distant  mountains  of  the  eternal 
world,  visible  beyond  and  above  the  near  hills  of  time  in  the 
foreground,  want  the  dim  blue  haze,  which  helps  the  eye 
to  realize  how  far  off  they  are.  This  defect  in  Matthew's 
narrative,  which  we  have  been  taking  for  our  text,  is  supplied 
by  Luke,  who  interprets  the  0\lyjn<;  so  as  to  include  the  sub- 
sequent long-lasting  dispersion  of  Israel  among  the  nations.* 

The  parable  of  the  fig-tree,  employed  by  Jesus  to  indicate 
the  sure  connection  between  the  signs  foregoing  and  the  grand 

*  Matt  xxir.  19,  20.        «  Vera.  23-28.         »  Ver.  29.         *  Luke  xxi  24. 


0  JEBUSALEM,  JEBUSALEM  I  339 

event  that  was  to  follow,  seems  at  first  to  exclude  the  idea  of 
a  protracted  duration,  but  on  second  thoughts  we  shall  find  it 
does  not.  The  point  of  the  parable  lies  in  the  comparison  of 
the  signs  of  the  times  to  the  first  buds  of  the  fig-tree.  This 
comparison  implies  that  the  last  judgment  is  not  the  thing 
which  is  at  the  doors.  The  last  day  is  the  harvest  season,  but 
from  the  first  buds  of  early  summer  to  the  harvest  there  is  a 
long  interval  The  parable  further  suggests  the  right  way  of 
understanding  the  statement :  "  This  generation  shall  not  pass 
till  all  these  things  be  fulfilled."  Christ  did  not  mean  that 
the  generation  then  living  was  to  witness  the  end,  but  that  in 
that  generation  all  the  things  which  form  the  incipient  stage 
in  the  development  would  appear.  It  was  the  age  of  begin- 
nings,  of  shoots  and  blossoms,  not  of  fruit  and  ingathering.  In 
that  generation  fell  the  beginnings  of  Christianity  and  the 
new  world  it  was  to  create,  and  also  the  end  of  the  Jewish 
world,  of  which  the  symbol  was  a  fig-tree  covered  with  leaves, 
but  without  any  blossom  or  fruit,  like  that  Jesus  Himself  had 
cursed,  by  way  of  an  acted  prophecy  of  Israel's  coming  doom. 
The  buds  of  most  things  in  the  church's  history  appeared  in 
that  age :  of  gospel  preaching,  of  antichristian  tendencies,  of 
persecutions,  heresies,  schisms,  and  apostasiea  All  these, 
however^  had  to  grow  to  their  legitimate  issues  before  the  end 
came.  How  long  the  development  would  take,  no  man  could 
tell,  not  even  the  Son  of  man.^  It  was  a  state  secret  of  the 
Almighty,  into  which  no  one  should  wish  to  pry. 

This  statement,  that  the  time  of  the  end  is  known  alone  to 
Grod,  excludes  the  idea  that  it  can  be  calculated,  or  that  data 
are  given  in  Scripture  for  that  purpose.  K  such  data  be 
given,  then  the  secret  is  virtually  disclosed.  We  therefore 
regard  the  calculations  of  students  of  prophecy  respecting 
the  times  and  seasons  as  random  guesses  unworthy  of  serious 
attention.  The  death-day  of  the  world  needs  to  be  hid  for 
the  purposes  of  providence  as  much  as  the  dying-day  of 
individuals.  And  we  have  no  doubt  that  God  has  kept  His 
secret ;  though  some  fancy  they  can  cast  the  world's  horoscope 

^  Mark  xiii  32.  Christ  would  have  contradicted  Himself  if  He  [had  com- 
mitted Himself  to  any  statement  of  time,  and  yet  made  that  profession  of 
ignorance. 


340  THE  TBAINING  OF  THE  TWELYK 

fixjin  prophetic  nmnbers,  as  astrologers  were  wont  to  deter- 
mine the  course  of  individual  lives  from  the  positions  of  the 
stars. 

Though  the  prophetic  discourse  of  Jesus  revealed  nothing 
as  to  times,  it  was  not  therefore  valueless.  It  taught  effec- 
tively two  lessons :  one  specially  for  the  benefit  of  the  twelve, 
and  the  other  for  all  Christians  and  aU  ages.  The  lesson  for 
the  twelve  was,  that  they  might  dismiss  from  their  minds  all 
fond  hopes  of  a  restoration  of  the  kingdom  to  Israel  Not 
reconstruction,  but  dissolution  and  dispersion,  was  Israel's 
melancholy  doom. 

The  general  lesson  for  all  in  this  discourse  is :  "  Watch,  for 
ye  know  not  what  hour  your  Lord  doth  coma"  The  call  to 
watchfulness  is  based  on  our  ignorance  of  the  time  of  the  end, 
and  on  the  fact  that,  however  long  delayed  the  end  may  be, 
it  will  come  suddenly  at  last,  as  a  thief  in  the  night.  The 
importance  of  watching  and  waiting,  Jesus  illustrated  by  two 
parables,  the  Absent  Cfoodman,  and  tJie  Wise  and  Foolish  Virgins} 
Both  parables  depict  the  diverse  conduct  of  the  professed 
servants  of  God  during  the  period  of  delay.  The  effect  on 
some,  we  are  taught,  is  to  make  them  negligent ;  they  being 
eye-servants  and  fitftd  workers,  who  need  oversight  and  the 
stimulus  of  extraordinary  events.  Others,  again,  are  steady, 
equal,  habitually  faithftd,  working  as  well  when  the  master 
is  absent  as  when  they  are  under  his  eye.  The  treatment  of 
both  on  the  master's  return  corresponds  to  their  respective 
behaviour,  one  class  being  rewarded,  the  other  punished 
Such  is  the  substance  of  the  parable  of  the  Absent  Gk)odman. 
Luke  gives  an  important  appendix,  which  depicts  the  conduct 
of  persons  in  authority  in  the  house  of  the  absent  lord.* 
While  the  common  servants  are  for  the  most  part  n^ligent, 
the  upper  servants  play  the  tyrant  over  their  fellows.  This 
is  exactly  what  church  dignitaries  did  in  after  ages ;  and  the 
fact  that  Jesus  contemplated  such  a  state  of  things,  which 
required  the  lapse  of  centuries  to  bring  it  about,  is  another 
proof  that  in  this  discourse  His  prophetic  eye  swept  over  a 
vast  tract  of  time.  Another  remark  is  suggested  by  the  great 
reward  promised  to  such  as  should  not  abuse  their  authority : 

»  Matt.  xxiv.  46-51,  xxr.  1-13.  •  Luke  xiL  41-48. 


0  JEBUSALEM,  JEBUSALEM  I  341 

"  He  will  make  him  ruler  over  all  that  he  hatL'*  The  great- 
ness of  the  reward  indicates  an  expectation  that  fidelity  will 
be  rare  among  the  stewards  of  the  house.  Indeed,  the  Head 
of  the  church  seems  to  have  apprehended  the  prevalence  of  a 
negligent  spirit  among  aU  His  servants,  high  and  low ;  for  He 
speaks  of  the  lord  of  the  household  as  so  gratified  with  the 
conduct  of  the  faithful,  that  he  girds  himself  to  serve  them 
while  they  sit  at  meat^  Has  not  the  apprehension  been  too 
well  justified  by  events  ? 

The  parable  of  the  ten  virgins,  familiar  to  aU,  and  full  of 
instruction,  teaches  us  this  peculiar  lesson,  that  watching  does 
not  imply  sleepless  anxiety  and  constant  thought  concerning 
the  future,  but  quiet,  steady  attention  to  present  duty.  While 
the  bridegroom  tarried,  all  the  virgins,  wise  and  foolish  alike, 
slumbered  and  slept,  the  wise  differing  firom  their  sisters  in 
having  all  things  in  readiness  against  a  sudden  calL  This  is 
a  sober  and  reasonable  representation  of  the  duty  of  waiting 
by  one  who  understands  what  is  possible ;  for,  in  a  certain 
sense,  sleep  of  the  mind  in  reference  to  eternity  is  as  necessary 
as  physical  sleep  is  to  the  body.  Constant  thought  about  the 
great  realities  of  the  future  would  only  result  in  weakness, 
distraction,  and  madness,  or  in  disorder,  idleness,  and  restless- 
ness; as  in  Thessalonica,  where  the  conduct  of  many  who 
watched  in  the  wrong  sense  made  it  needful  that  Paul  should 
give  them  the  wholesome  coimsel  to  be  quiet,  and  work,  and 
eat  bread  earned  by  the  labour  of  their  own  hands.* 

The  great  prophetic  discourse  worthUy  ended  with  a  solemn 
representation  of  the  final  judgment  of  the  world,  when  all 
mankind  shall  be  assembled  to  be  judged  either  by  the  his- 
torical gospel  preached  to  them  for  a  witness,  or  by  its  great 
ethical  principle,  the  law  of  charity  written  on  their  hearts ;  and 
when  those  who  have  loved  Christ  and  served  Him  in  person, 
or  in  His  representatives — the  poor,  the  destitute,  the  suffering 
— shall  be  welcomed  to  the  realms  of  the  blessed,  and  those 
who  have  acted  contrariwise  shall  be  sent  away  to  keep  com- 
pany with  the  devil  and  lus  angels. 

1  Luke  3dL  37.  *  2  Theas.  iu.  12. 


CHAPTEE    XXL 

THE  MASTEK  SERVING. 

Section  i. — The  Washing. 

John  xiii.  1-11. 

UP  to  this  point,  the  fourth  evangelist  has  said  very  little 
indeed  of  the  special  relations  of  Jesus  and  the  twelve. 
Now,  however,  he  abundantly  makes  up  for  any  deficiency 
on  this  score.  The  third  part  of  his  Gospel,  which  begins 
here,  is,  with  the  exception  of  two  chapters  relating  the  his- 
tory of  the  passion,  entirely  occupied  with  the  tender,  intimate 
intercourse  of  the  Lord  Jesus  with  "  His  own,"  from  the  even- 
ing before  His  death  to  the  time  when  He  departed  out  of 
the  world  leaving  them  behind  !  The  thirteenth  and  four 
following  chapters  relate  scenes  and  discourses  fipom  the  last 
hours  spent  by  the  Saviour  with  His  disciples  previous  to  His 
betrayal  into  the  hands  of  His  enemies.  He  has  uttered  His 
final  word  to  the  outside  world,  and  withdrawn  Himself  within 
the  bosom  of  His  own  family ;  and  we  are  privileged  here  to 
see  Him  in  their  midst,  and  to  hear  His  farewell  words  to 
them  in  view  of  His  decease.  It  becomes  us  to  enter  the 
supper  chamber  with  deep  reverence.  "  Put  ofi*  thy  shoes 
from  ofi*  thy  feet,  for  the  place  whereon  thou  standest  is  holy 
ground." 

The  first  thing  we  see,  on  entering,  is  Jesus  washing  His 
disciples'  feet.  Marvellous  spectacle  !  and  the  evangelist  has 
taken  care,  in  narrating  the  incident,  to  enhance  its  impres- 
siveness  by  the  manner  in  which  he  introduces  it.  He  has 
put  the  beautiful  picture  in  the  best  light  for  being  seen  to 
advantage.  The  preface  to  the  story  is  indeed  a  little  puzzling 
to  expositors,  the  sentences  being  involved,  and  the  sense  some- 
what obscure.     Many  thoughts  and  feelings  crowd  into  the 


THE  MASTER  SERVING  :   THE  WASHING.  343 

apostle's  mind  as  he  proceeds  to  relate  the  memorahilia  of 
that  eventful  night ;  and,  so  to  speak,  they  jostle  one  another 
in  the  struggle  for  utterance.  Yet  it  is  not  very  difficult  to 
disentangle  the  meaning  of  these  opening  sentences.  In  the 
first,  John  adverts  to  the  peculiar  tenderness  with  which  Jesus 
regarded  His  disciples  on  the  eve  of  His  crucifixion,  and  in 
prospect  of  His  departure  from  the  earth  to  heaven.  "  Before 
the  feast  of  the  passover,  when  Jesus  knew  that  His  hour  was 
come  that  He  should  depart  out  of  this  world" — ^how  at 
such  an  hour  did  He  feel  towards  those  who  had  been  His 
companions  throughout  the  years  of  His  public  ministry,  and 
whom  He  was  soon  to  leave  behind  Him  ?  "  He  loved  them 
unto  the  end."  Not  selfishly  engrossed  with  His  own  sorrows, 
or  with  the  prospect  of  His  subsequent  joys.  He  found  room 
in  His  heart  for  His  followers  stiU ;  nay.  His  love  burned  out 
towards  them  with  extraordinary  ardour,  and  His  whole  care 
was  by  precept  and  example,  by  words  of  comfort,  warning, 
and  instruction,  to  prepare  them  for  future  duty  and  trial,  as 
the  narrative  here  commencing  would  abundantly  demonstrate. 

The  second  verse  of  the  preface  alludes  parenthetically  to  a 
fact  which  served  as  a  foil  to  the  constancy  of  Jesus  :  "  The 
devil  having  abeady  put  into  the  heart  of  Judas  Iscariot, 
Simon's  son,  to  betray  Him."  John  would  say  :  "  Jesus  loved 
His  disciples  to  the  end,  though  they  did  not  all  so  love  Him. 
One  of  them  at  this  very  moment  entertained  the  diabolic 
purpose  of  betraying  his  Lord.  Yet  that  Lord  loved  even 
him,  condescending  to  wash  even  his  feet ;  so  endeavouring,  if 
possible,  to  overcome  his  evil  with  good." 

The  aim  of  the  evangelist,  in  the  last  sentence  of  his  pre- 
face, is  to  show  by  contrast  what  a  wondrous  condescension  it 
was  in  the  Saviour  to  wash  the  feet  of  any  of  the  disciples. 
Jesus  knowing  these  things, — these  things  being  true  of  Him  : 
that  "  the  Father  had  given  all  things  into  His  hands  " — 
sovereign  power  over  all  flesh ;  "  that  He  was  come  from 
God  " — a  divine  being  by  nature,  and  entitled  to  divine 
honours ;  "  and  that  He  was  about  to  return  to  God,"  to  enter 
on  the  enjoyment  of  such  honours, — did  as  is  here  recorded. 
He,  the  august  Being  who  had  such  intrinsic  dignity,  such  a 
consciousness,  such  prospects — even  "  He  riseth  from  supper 


4 

I 

344  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVlJ-  * 


•.. 


r     » 


and  laid  aside  His  garments,  and  tcx)k  a,  towel  and  girded 
Himsel£  After  that  He  poureth  water  into  a  betsin,  and 
began  to  wash  the  disciples'  feet,  and  to  wipe  them  with  the 
towel  wherewith  He  'was  girded."  '«.,    . 

The  time  when  all  this  took  place  was,  ft  wonld  seem, 
about  the  commencement  of  the  eyening  meal  The  words  of 
the  evangelist  rendered  in  the  English  version,  ^  supper  being 
ended,"  may  be  translated  supper  being  begun,  or  better, 
supper-time  having  arrived;^  and  from  the  sequel  of  the 
narrative,  it  is  evident  that  in  this  sense  they  must  be 
understood  here.  The  supper  was  still  going  on  when  Jesus 
introduced  the  subject  of  the  traitor,  which  He  did  not  only 
after  He  had  washed  the  feet  of  His  disciples,  but  after  He 
had  resumed  His  seat  at  the  table,  and  given  an  explanation 
of  what  He  had  just  done.* 

That  explanation  will  fall  to  be  more  particularly  considered 
afterwards ;  but  meantime  it  bears  on  its  face  that  the  occasion 
of  the  feet-washing  was  some  misbehaviour  on  the  part  of  the 
disciples.  Jesus  had  to  condescend,  we  judge,  because  Hia 
disciples  would  not  condescend.  This  impression  is  confirmed 
by  a  statement  in  Luke's  Gospel,  that  on  the  same  evening 
a  strife  arose  among  the  twelve  which  of  them  should  be 
accounted  the  greatest  Whence  that  new  strife  arose  we 
know  not,  but  it  is  possible  that  the  old  quarrel  about  place 
was  revived  by  the  words  uttered  by  Jesus  as  they  were  about 
to  sit  down  to  meat :  "  With  desire  I  have  desired  to  eat  this 
passover  with  you  before  I  suflfer.  For  I  say  unto  you,  I  will 
not  any  more  eat  thereof  untU  it  be  fulfilled  in  the  kingdom 
of  God."  *  The  allusion  to  the  kingdom  was  quite  sufficient 
to  set  their  imaginations  on  fire  and  reawaken  old  dreams  about 
thrones,  and  from  old  dreams  to  old  feuds  and  jealousies  the 
transition  was  natural  and  easy ;  and  so  we  can  conceive  how 
even  before  the  supper  began,  the  talk  of  the  brethren  had 
waxed  noisy  and  warm.     Or  the  point  in  dispute  may  have 

^  Alford,  in  loco,  gives  as  examples  of  a  similar  use  of  ytv»/uv§t :  Matt.  zxvi. 
6  ;  John  zzL  4 ;  Mark  yi.  2.  Hoffman  (SchriftbeweiSf  iii.  207-8)  renders  the 
phrase  as  in  the  Eng.  ver.,  and  reconciles  this  view  with  the  narrative  con- 
cerning Judas  by  assuming  that  vers.  26,  27  relate  a  transaction  distinct  from 
and  subsequent  to  the  supper. 

>  John  ziii  21.  >  Luke  zxiL  15,  16. 


*'._ 


9hE  master  serving  :  THE  WASHING.  345 

been  in  what  order  they  should  sit  at  table,  or  who  should  be 
the  servant  for  the  occasion,  and  wash  the  feet  of  the  company. 
Any  one  of  these  suppositions  might  account  for  the  fact  re- 
corded by  Luke;  for  it  does  not  require  much  to  make  children 
quarreL 

The  expedient  employed  by  Jesus  to  divert  the  minds  of 
His  disciples  from  unedifying  themes  of  conversation,  and  to 
exorcise  ambitious  passions  from  their  breasts,  was  a  most 
efTectual  one.  The  very  preliminaries  of  the  feet-washing 
scene  must  have  gone  far  to  change  the  current  of  feeling. 
How  the  spectators  must  have  stared  and  wondered,  as  the 
Master  of  the  feast  rose  from  His  seat,  laid  aside  His  upper 
garment,  girt  Himself  with  a  towel,  and  poured  out  water  into 
a  basin ;  doing  all  with  the  utmost  self-possession,  composure, 
and  deliberation ! 

With  which  of  the  twelve  Jesus  made  a  beginning  we  are 
not  informed ;  but  we  know,  as  we  might  have  guessed  without 
being  t(dd,  who  was  the  first  to  dpeak  his  mind  about  the 
singular  transaction.  When  Peter's  turn  came,  he  had  so  far 
recovered  from  the  amazement,  under  whose  influence  the  first 
washed  may  have  yielded  passively  to  their  Lord's  will,  as  to 
be  capable  of  reflecting  on  the  indecency  of  such  an  inversion 
of  the  right  relation  between  master  and  servanta  Therefore, 
when  Jesus  came  to  him,  that  outspoken  disciple  asked,  in 
astonishment,  *'  Lord,  washest  Thou  my  feet  ? "  His  spirit  rose 
in  rebellion  against  the  proposal,  as  one  injurious  to  the  dignity 
of  his  beloved  Lord,  and  as  an  outrage  upon  his  own  sense  of 
reverence.  This  impulse  of  instinctive  aversion  was  by  no 
means  discreditable  to  Peter,  and  it  was  evidently  not  re- 
garded with  disapprobation  by  his  Master.  The  reply  of  Jesus 
to  his  objection  is  markedly  respectful  in  tone :  "  What  I  do," 
He  said,  "  thou  knowest  not  now,  but  thou  shalt  know  here- 
after;" virtually  admitting  that  the  proceeding  in  question 
needed  explanation,  and  that  Peter's  opposition  was,  in  the 
first  place,  perfectly  natural  "  I  Acknowledge,"  He  meant  to 
say,  ''  that  my  present  action  is  an  ofTence  to  the  feelings  of 
reverence  which  you  rightly  cherish  towards  me.  Neverthe- 
less, suffer  it.  I  do  this  for  reasons  which  you  do  not  com- 
prehend now,  but  which  you  shall  understand  ere  long." 


346  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TW^VE. 

Had  Peter  been  satisfied  with  this  apologetic  reply,  his  con- 
duct would  have  been  entirely  free  from  blame.  But  he  was 
not  content,  but  persisted  in  opposition  after  Jesus  had  dis- 
tinctly intimated  His  will,  and  vehemently  and  stubbornly 
exclaimed :  "  Thou  shalt  Tu^er  wash  my  feet!"  The  tone  here 
changes  utterly.  Peter's  first  word  was  the  expression  of 
sincere  reverence ;  his  second  is  simply  the  language  of  un- 
mitigated irreverence  and  downright  disobedience.  He  rudely 
contradicts  his  Master,  and  at  the  same  time,  we  may  add, 
flatly  contradicts  himselt  His  whole  behaviour  on  this  occa- 
sion presents  an  odd  mixture  of  moral  opposites :  self-abase- 
ment and  self-wiU,  humility  and  pride,  respect  and  disrespect 
for  Jesus,  to  whom  he  speaks  now  as  one  whose  shoe-latchet 
he  is  not  worthy  to  unloose,  and  anon  as  one  to  whom  he 
might  dictate  orders.  What  a  strange  man!  But,  indeed, 
how  strange  are  we  all ! 

Peter  having  so  changed  his  tone,  Jesus  found  it  needful 
to  alter  His  tone  too,  from  the  apologetic  mildness  of  the  first 
reply  to  that  of  magisterial  sternness.  "  If  I  wash  thee  not^" 
He  said  gravely, "  thou  hast  no  part  with  me;"  meaning,  "  Thou 
hast  taken  up  a  most  serious  position,  Simon  Peter;  the 
question  at  issue  being  simply,  Are  you  or  are  you  not  to  be 
admitted  into  my  kingdom — to  be  a  true  disciple,  and  to  have 
a  true  disciple's  reward  ? " 

On  a  surface  view,  it  is  difi&cult  to  see  how  this  could  be 
the  state  of  the  question.  One  is  tempted  to.  think  that  Jesus 
was  indulging  in  exaggeration,  for  the  purpose  of  intimidat- 
ing a  refractory  disciple  into  compliance  with  His  will  If 
we  reject  this  method  of  interpretation  as  incompatible  with 
the  character  of  the  speaker  and  the  seriousness  of  the  occa- 
sion, we  are  thrown  back  on  the  inquiry.  What  does  washing 
in  this  statement  mean  ?  Evidently  it  signifies  more  than  meets 
the  ear,  more  than  the  mere  literal  washing  of  the  feet ;  and 
is  to  be  regarded  as  a  symbol  of  the  washing  of  the  soul  from 
sin,  or  still  more  comprehensively,  and  in  our  opinion  more 
correctly,  as  representing  all  in  Christ's  teaching  and  work 
which  wcndd  be  compromised  by  the  consistent  carrying  out  of  the 
principle  on  which  Peter's  opposition  to  the  washing  of  his  feet 
by  Jesus  was  based.     On  either  supposition,  the  statement  of 


THE  MASTER  SERVING  :   THE  WASHING.  347 

Jesus  was  true :  in  the  fonner  case  obviously ;  in  the  latter 
not  so  obviously,  but  not  less  really,  as  we  proceed  to  show. 

Observe,  then,  what  was  involved  in  the  attitude  assumed 
by  Peter.  He  virtually  took  his  stand  on  these  two  posi- 
tions :  that  he  would  admit  of  nothing  which  seemed  incon- 
sistent with  the  personal  dignity  of  his  Lord,  and  that  he 
would  adopt  as  his  rule  of  conduct  his  own  judgment  in  pre- 
ference to  Christ's  will ;  the  one  position  being  involved  in  the 
question.  Dost  Thou  wash  my  feet  ?  the  other  in  the  resolu- 
tion. Thou  shalt  never  wash  my  feet.  In  other  words,  the 
ground  taken  up  by  this  disciple  compromised  the  whole  sum 
and  substance  of  Christianity ;  the  former  principle  sweeping 
away  Christ's  whole  state  and  experience  of  humiliation,  and 
the  latter  not  less  certainly  sapping  the  foundation  of  Christ's 
lordship. 

That  this  is  no  exaggeration  on  our  part,  a  moment's  reflec- 
tion will  show.  Look,  then,  first  at  the  objection  to  the  feet- 
washing  on  the  score  of  reverence.  If  Jesus  might  not  wash 
the  feet  of  His  disciples  because  it  was  beneath  His  dignity, 
then  with  equal  reason  objection  might  be  taken  to  any  act 
involving  self-humiliation.  One  who  said.  Thou  shalt  not  wash 
my  feet,  because  the  doing  of  it  is  imworthy  of  Thee,  might 
as  well  say.  Thou  shalt  not  wash  my  soul,  or  do  aught  towards 
that  end,  because  it  involves  humiliating  experiences.  Why, 
indeed,  make  a  difl&culty  about  a  trifling  matter  of  detail? 
Go  to  the  heart  of  the  business  at  once,  and  ask,  "Shall  the 
Eternal  Son  of  God  become  flesh,  and  dweU  among  us  ?  shall 
He  who  was  in  the  form  of  God  lay  aside  His  robes  of 
state,  and  gird  Himself  with  the  towel  of  humanity,  to  perform 
menial  ofiices  for  His  own  creatures  ?  shall  the  ever-blessed 
One  become  a  curse  by  enduring  crucifixion  ?  shall  the  Holy 
One  degrade  Himself,  by  coming  into  close  companionship 
with  the  depraved  sons  of  Adam  ?  shall  the  Eighteous  One 
pour  His  life-blood  into  a  basin,  that  there  may  be  a  fountain 
wherein  the  unrighteous  may  be  cleansed  from  their  guilt  and 
iniquity?"  In  short,  incarnation,  atonement,  and  Christ's 
whole  earthly  experience  of  temptation,  hardship,  indignity, 
and  sorrow  must  go,  if  Jesus  may  not  wash  a  disciple's  feet. 

Not  less  clearly  is  Christ's  lordship  at  an  end  if  a  disciple 


348  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

may  give  Him  orders,  and  say/  "  Thou  shalt  never  wash  my 
feet."  K  Peter  meant  anything  more  by  these  words  than  a 
display  of  temper  and  caprice,  he  meant  this :  that  he  would 
not  submit  to  the  proposed  operation,  because  his  moral  feel- 
ings and  his  judgment  told  him  it  was  wrong.  He  made  his 
own  reason  and  conscience  the  supreme  rule  of  conduct  Now, 
in  the  first  place,  by  this  position  the  principle  of  obedience 
was  compromised,  which  requires  that  the  will  of  the  Lord, 
once  known,  whether  we  understand  its  reason  or  perceive  its 
goodness  or  not,  shall  be  supreme.  Then  there  are  other 
things  much  more  important  than  the  washing  of  the  feet,  to 
which  objection  might  be  taken  on  the  score  of  reason  or  con- 
science with  equal  plausibility.  For  example,  Christ  tells  us 
that  those  who  would  be  His  disciples,  and  obtain  entrance 
into  His  kingdom,  must  be  willing  to  part  with  earthly  goods, 
and  even  with  nearest  and  dearest  friends.  To  many  men 
this  seems  imreasonable,  and  on  Peter's  principle  they  should 
forthwith  say,  "  I  will  never  do  any  such  thing."  Or,  again, 
Christ  tells  us  that  we  must  be  born  again,  and  that  we  must 
eat  His  flesh  and  drink  His  blood.  To  me  these  doctrines  may 
seem  incomprehensible,  and  even  absurd;  and  therefore,  oil 
Peter^s  principle,  I  may  turn  my  back  on  the  great  Teacher, 
and  say,  *'  I  wiU  not  have  this  speaker  of  dark,  mystic  sayings 
for  my  master."  Once  more,  Christ  tells  us  that  we  must 
give  the  kingdom  of  God  the  first  place  in  our  thoughts,  and 
dismiss  from  our  hearts  carking  care  for  to-morrow.  To  me 
this  appears  in  my  present  mood  simply  impossible;  and 
therefore,  on  Peter's  principle,  I  may  set  aside  this  moral 
requirement  as  Utopian,  however  beautiful,  without  even 
seriously  attempting  to  comply  with  it 

Now  that  we  know  whither  Peter's  refusal  tends,  we  can 
see  that  Jesus  spake  the  simple  truth  when  He  said  :  ''  If  I 
wash  thee  not,  thou  hast  no  part  with  me."  Look  at  that  re- 
fusal as  an  objection  to  Christ  humbling  Himself  K  Christ 
may  not  humble  Himself,  then,  in  the  first  place.  He  can  have 
no  part  with  us.  The  Holy  Son  of  God  is  forbidden  by  a 
r^ard  to  His  dignity  to  become  in  anything  like  unto  His 
brethren,  or  even  to  acknowledge  them  as  His  brethren.  The 
grand  fraternal  law,  by  which  the  Sanctifier  is  identified  with 


THE  MASTEB  SERVING  :   THE  WASHING.  349 

them  that  are  to  be  sanctified,  is  disannulled,  and  all  its  con- 
sequences made  void.  A  great  impassable  gulf  separates  the 
Divine  Being  from  His  creatures.  He  may  stand  on  the  far- 
off  shore,  and  wistfully  contemplate  their  forlorn  estate ;  but 
He  cannot,  He  dare  not — ^His  majesty  forbids  it — come  near 
them,  and  reach  forth  a  helping  hand. 

But  if  the  Son  of  God  may  have  no  part  with  us,  then,  in 
the  second  place,  we  can  have  no  part  with  Him.  We  can- 
not share  His  fellowship  with  the  Father,  if  He  come  not 
forth  to  declare  Him.  We  can  receive  no  acts  of  brotherly 
kindness  from  Him.  He  cannot  deliver  us  from  the  curse  of 
the  law,  or  from  the  fear  of  death ;  He  cannot  succour  us  when 
we  are  tempted ;  He  cannot  wash  our  feet ;  nay,  what  is  a 
far  more  serious  matter.  He  cannot  wash  our  souls.  If  there 
is  to  be  no  fountain  opened  for  sin  in  the  human  nature  of 
Emmanuel,  sinners  must  remain  impure.  For  a  God  afar  off 
is  not  able,  even  if  He  were  willing,  to  purify  the  human  souL 
A  God  whose  majesty,  like  an  iron  fate,  kept  Him  aloof  from 
sinners,  could  not  even  effectively  forgive  them.  Still  less 
could  He  sanctify  them.  Love  alone  has  sanctifying  virtue, 
and  what  room  is  there  for  love  in  a  Being  who  cannot 
humble  Himself  to  be  a  servant  ? 

Look  now  at  Peter^s  refusal  as  resistance  to  Christ's  wilL 
In  this  view  also  it  justified  the  saying,  "  Thou  hast  no  part 
with  me."  It  excluded  from  salvation ;  for  if  Jesus  is  not 
to  be  Lord,  He  will  not  b6  Saviour.^  It  excluded  from  fellow- 
ship ;  for  Jesus  will  have  no  communion  with  self-wilL  His 
own  attitude  towards  His  Father  was,  "  Not  my  will,  but 
Thine  ;"  and  He  demands  this  attitude  towards  Himself  in  turn 
from  all  His  disciples.  Not  that  He  would  have  us  be  always 
servants,  blindly  obeying  a  Lord  whose  will  we  do  not  under- 
stand. His  aim  is  to  advance  us  ultimately  to  the^  status  of 
friends,*  doing  His  will  intelligently  and  freely — not  as  com- 
plying mechanically  with  an  outward  commandment,  but  as 
being  a  law  to  ourselves.  But  we  can  attain  that  high  posi- 
tion only  by  beginning  with  a  servant's  obedience.     We  must 

^  Peter  the  apostle  nnderstood  this  well.    Four  times  in  his  second  epistle 
he  conjoins  Lord  and  Saviour  in  naming  Christ  (i.  11,  ii.  20,  iii  2,  18). 
'  John  ZY.  16. 


^ 


35Q  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

do,  and  suffer  to  be  done  to  us,  what  we  know  not  now,  in 
order  that  we  may  know  hereafter  the  philosophy  of  our  duty 
to  our  Lord,  and  of  our  Lord's  dealings  with  us. 

It  was  a  serious  thing,  therefore,  to  say,  "  Thou  shalt  never 
wash  my  feet"  But  Peter  was  not  aware  how  serious  it  was. 
He  knew  not  what  he  said,  or  what  he  did.  He  had  hastily 
taken  up  a  position  whose  ground  and  consequences  he  had 
not  considered.  And  his  heart  was  right,  though  his  temper 
was  wrong.  Therefore  the  stem  declaration  of  Jesus  at  once ' 
brought  him  to  reason,  or  rather  to  unreason  in  an  opposite 
direction.  The  idea  of  being  cut  off  from  his  dear  Master's 
sjrmpathy  or  favour,  through  his  waywardness,  drove  him  in 
sheer  fright  to  the  opposite  extreme  of  overdone  compliance ; 
and  he  said  in  effect,  "  If  my  interest  in  Thee  depends  on  my 
feet  being  washed,  then.  Lord,  wash  my  whole  body — ^hands, 
head,  feet,  and  all"  How  characteristic !  how  like  a  child,  in 
whose  heart  is  much  foolishness,  but  also  much  affection,  and 
who  can  always  be  managed  by  the  bands  of  love !  There  is 
as  yet  a  sad  want  of  balance  in  this  disciple's  character :  he 
goes,  swinging  like  a  pendulum,  from  one  extreme  to  another ; 
and  it  will  take  some  time  ere  he  settle  down  into  a  har- 
monious equipoise  of  all  parts  of  his  being — intellect,  will, 
heart,  and  conscience.  But  the  root  of  the  matter  is  in  him  : 
he  is  sound  at  the  core ;  and  after  the  due  amount  of  mis- 
takes, he  will  become  a  wise  man  by  and  by.  He  is  clean, 
and  needs  not  more  than  to  have  his  feet  washed.  Jesus 
Himself  admits  it  of  him,  and  of  all  his  brother-disciples — 
save  one,  who  is  imclean  all  over. 

FeUow-Christians,  can  as  much  be  said  of  us  ?  Are  we 
clean-hearted  and  true-hearted,  however  ignorant,  erratic,  or 
faulty  ?  Or  are  we  of  those  who  put  lip-homage  in  the  place 
of  obedience,  pious  sentiment  in  place  of  godly  conduct ;  of 
those  who,  not  in  haste,  but  deliberately,  act  on  the  principle 
of  believing  and  doing  nothing  which  they  do  not  fuUy  under- 
stand and  sympathize  with ;  of  those  who  not  merely  commit 
occasional  offences  against  the  will  of  the  Lord,  but  systema- 
tically exempt  whole  departments  of  their  life  from  the  reign 
of  His  law  ?  If  we  belong  to  this  latter  category,  then  have 
we  no  part  with  the  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ    He  who. 


THE  MASTER  SEBVING  :   THE  EXPLANATION.  351 

though  a  Son,  humbled  Himself  to  be  a  servant^  is  the  author 
of  eternal  salvation  only  to  them  that  obey  Him, 

Note,  finally,  as  a  lesson  from  this  passage,  in  what .  the 
perfection  of  obedience  consists.  It  lies  in  letting  the  Lord 
change  places  with  us,  and,  if  it  seem  good  to  Him,  humble 
Himself  to  be  our  servant  Our  true  humility  is  not  to  object 
to  Christ's  humiliation,  but,  on  the  contrary,  to  recognise  its 
necessity,  in  order  to  our  deliverance  firom  sin.  They  honour 
not  God  who  deny  the  incarnation  and  the  redeeming  death 
of  the  eternal  Son  as  unworthy  of  Him.  Eather  do  they 
doubly  dishonour  the  Divine  Being ;  first  by  misconceiving 
wherein  His  glory  lies,  and  next  by  ignoring  their  own  need 
of  redemption.  The  only  genuine  piety  is  that  which  owns 
man's  moral  defilement,  and  leaves  God  to  remove  it  in  His 
own  way. 


Section  n. — The  Explanation, 

John  xiji.  12-20. 

Peter's  resistance  overcome,  the  washing  proceeded  without 
further  interruption.  When  the  process  had  come  to  an  end, 
Jesus,  putting  on  again  His  upper  garment,  resumed  His 
seat,  and  briefly  explained  to  His  disciples  the  purport  of 
the  action.  "  Know  ye,"  He  inquired,  "  what  I  have  done 
unto  you?"  Then,  answering  His  own  question,  He  went 
on  to  say :  "  Ye  call  me  Master  and  Lord :  and  ye  say  well ; 
for  so  I  am.  K  I  then,  your  Lord  and  Master,  have  washed 
your  feet,  ye  also  ought  to  wash  one  another^s  feet  For  I 
have  given  you  an  example,  that  ye  should  do  as  I  have  done 
to  you." 

It  was  another  lesson  in  humility  which  Jesus  had  been 
giving  "  His  own," — a  lesson  very  similar  to  the  earlier  ones 
recorded  in  the  synoptical  Gospels.  John's  Christ,  we  see 
here,  teaches  the  same  doctrine  as  the  Christ  of  the  three  first 
evangelists.  The  twelve,  as  they  are  depicted  in  the  fourth 
Gospel,  are  just  such  as  we  have  found  them  in  Matthew, 
Mark,  and  Luke — ^grievously  needing  to  be  taught  meekness 


362  THE  TRAININa  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

f 

and  brotherly-kindness ;  and  Jesns  teaches  them  these  viitaes 
in  much  the  same  way  here  as  elsewhere — ^by  precept^  pud 
example,  by  symbolic  act,  and  added  word  of  interpretation. 
Once  He  held  up  a  little  child,  to  shame  them  out  of  ambi- 
tious pas9ibns ;  here  He  rebukes  their  pride,  by  becoming  the 
menial  of  the  household.  At  another  time  He  hushed  theii 
angry  strife  by  adverting  to  His  own  self-humiliation,  in  com- 
ing from  heaven  to  be  a  minister  to  men's  needs  in  life  and 
in  death ;  here  He  accomplishes  the  same  end,  by  expressing 
the  spirit  and  aim  of  His  whole  earthly  ministry  in  a  repre- 
sentative, typical  act  of  condescension. 

This  lesson,  like  all  the  rest,  Jesus  gave  with  the  authority 
of  one  who  might  lay  down  the  law.  In  the  very  act  of 
playing  the  servant's  part,  He  was  asserting  ffis  sovereignty. 
He  reminds  His  disciples,  when  the  service  is  over,  of  the 
titles  they  were  wont  to  give  Him,  and  in  a  marked,  emphatic 
manner  He  accepts  them  as  His  due.  He  tells  them  distinctly 
that  He  is  indeed  their  Teacher,  whose  doctrine  it  is  their 
business  to  learn,  and  their  Lord,  whose  will  it  is  their  duty 
to  obey.  His  humility,  therefore,  is  manifestly  not  an  affecta- 
tion of  ignorance  as  to  who  and  what  He  is.  He  knows  full 
well  who  He  is,  whence  He  has  come,  whither  He  is  going ; 
His  humility  is  that  of  a  king,  yea,  of  a  Divine  Being.  The 
pattern  of  meekness  is  at  the  same  time  one  who  prescribes 
Himself  to  His  followers  as  a  pattern,  and  demands  that  they 
fix  their  attention  on  His  behaviour,  and  strive  to  copy  it 

In  making  this  demand,  Jesus  is  obviously  very  thoroughly 
in  earnest.  He  is  not  less  earnest  in  requiring  the  disciples 
to  wash  one  another's  feet,  than  He  was  in  insisting  that  He 
Himself  should  wash  the  feet  of  one  and  all.  As  He  said  to 
Peter  in  express  words,  "  If  I  wash  thee  not,  thou  hast  no  part 
with  me ;"  so  He  says  to  them  all  in  effect,  though  not  in 
words,  "  If  ye  wash  not  each  other,  if  ye  refuse  to  serve  one 
another  in  love,  ye  have  again  no  part  with  me."  This  is  an 
hard  saying ;  for  if  it  be  difl&cult  to  believe  in  the  humiliation 
of  Christ,  it  is  still  more  diflRcult  to  humble  ourselves.  Hence, 
notwithstanding  the  frequency  and  urgency  with  which  the 
Saviour  declares  that  we  must  have  the  spirit  manifested  in 
His  humiliation  for  us  dwelling  in  us,  and  giving  birth  in 


k 


THE  MASTER  SERVING  :   THE  EXPLANATION.  353 

our  life  to  conduct  kindred  to  His  own,  even  sincere  disdples 
BTQ  oonstantly,  though  it  may  be  half  unconsciously,  inventing 
excuses  for  treating  the  example  of  their  Lord  as  utterly 
inimitable,  and  therefore  in  reality  no  example  at  alL  Even 
the  apparently  unanswerable  argument  employed  by  Jesus  to 
enforce  imitation  does  not  escape  secret  criticism.  "  Verily, 
verily,"  saith  He,  "  the  servant  is  not  greater  than  his  lord, 
neither  he  that  is  sent  greater  than  he  that  sent  him."  "  It 
may,"  say  we,  "  be  more  incumbent  on  the  servant  to  humble 
himself  than  on  the  master,  but  in  some  respects  it  is  also 
more  difficult.  The  master  can  afford  to  condescend :  his 
action  will  not  be  misunderstood,  but  will  be  taken  for  what 
it  is.  But  the  servant  cannot  afford  to  be  humble  :  he  must 
assert  himself,  and  assume  airs,  in  order  to  make  himself  of 
any  consequence." 

The  great  Master  knew  too  well  how  slow  men  would  ever 
be  to  learn  the  lesson  He  had  just  been  teaching  His  dis- 
ciples. Therefore  He  appended  to  His  explanation  of  the 
feet-washing  this  reflection :  "  If  ye  know  these  things,  happy 
are  ye  if  ye  do  them ;"  hinting  at  the  rarity  and  difficulty 
of  such  high  morality  as  He  had  been  inculcating,  and  de- 
claring the  blessedness  of  the  few  who  attained  unto  it. 
And  surely  the.  reflection  is  just !  Is  not  the  morality  here 
enjoined  indeed  rare  ?  Are  not  the  virtues  called  into  play  by 
acts  of  condescension  and  charity  most  high  and  difficult? 
Who  dreams  of  calling  them  easy?  How  utterly  contrary 
they  are  to  the  native  tendencies  of  the  human  heart !  how 
alien  from  the  spirit  of  society !  Is  it  the  way  of  men  to  be 
content  with  the  humblest  place,  and  to  seek  their  felicity 
in  serving  others  ?  Doth  not  the  spirit  that  is  in  us  lust 
unto  envy,  strive  ambitiously  for  positions  of  influence,  and 
deem  it  the  greatest  happiness  to  be  served,  and  to  be  exempt 
from  the  drudgery  of  servile  tasks  ?  The  world  itself  does  not 
dispute  the  difficulty  of  Christ-like  virtue ;  it  rather  exagge- 
rates its  difficulty,  and  pronounces  it  Utopian  and  impracti- 
cable— merely  a  beautiful,  unattainable  ideal 

And  as  for  the  sincere  disciple  of  Jesus,  no  proof  is  needed 
to  convince  him  of  the  arduousness  of  the  task  appointed  him 
by  his  Lord.    He  knows  by  bitter  experience  how  fai  conduct 

z 


354  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

lags  behind  knowledge,  and  how  hard  it  is  to  translate  admira- 
tion of  unearthly  goodness  into  imitation  thereo£  His  mind  is  * 
familiarly  conversant  with  the  doctrine  and  life  of  the  Saviour ; 
he  has  read  and  re-read  the  Gospel  story,  fondly  lingering  over 
its  minutest  details ;  his  heart  has  ;bumed  as  he  followed  the 
footsteps  of  the  Blessed  One  walking  about  on  this  earth,  ever 
intent  on  doing  good :  sweeter  to  his  ear  than  the  finest  lyric 
poems  are  the  stories  of  the  woman  by  the  well,  the  sinner 
in  the  house  of  Simon,  and  of  Zacchseus  the  publican ;  those 
touching  incidents  of  the  little  child  upheld  as  a  pattern  of 
humility,  and  of  the  Master  washing  quarrelsome  disciples' 
feet,  and  the  exquisite  parables  of  the  Prodigal,  the  Lost  Sheep, 
and  the  Good  Samaritan.  He  has  sat  down  at  the  foot  of  the 
cross,  and  watched  the  Eedeemer  hanging  thereon,  and  said  to 
hiliaself  with  perfect  sincerity : 

'*  Sweet  the  moments,  ricli  in  blessmg, 

Which  before  the  creas  I  spend ; 
Life,  and  health,  and  peace  possessing^ 

From  the  sinner's  .dying  Friend. 
Here  I'U  sit,  for  erer  viewing 

Mercy's  streams  in  streams  of  blood  ; 
Frecions  drops,  my  soul  bedewing. 

Plead  and  claim  my  peace  with  God." 

But  when  he  has  to  dose  his  New  Testament,  and  rise  &om 
the  foot  of  the  cross,  and  go  away  into  the  rude,  ungodly, 
matter-of-fact  world,  and  be  there  a  Christ-like  man,  and  do 
the  things  which  he  knows  so  intimately,  and  counts  himself 
blessed  in  knowing,  alas,  what  a  descent !  It  is  like  a  fall 
&om  Eden  into  a  state  of  mere  sin  and  misery.  And  the 
longer  he  lives,  and  the  more  he  gets  mixed  up  with  life's 
relations  and  engagements,  the  further  he  seems  to  himself  to 
degenerate  from  the  gospel  pattern ;  till  at  length  he  is  almost 
ashamed  to  think  or  speak  of  the  beauties  of  holiness  ex- 
hibited therein,  and  is  tempted  to  adopt  a  lower  and  more 
worldly  tone,  out  of  a  regard  to  sincerity,  and  in  fear  of 
becoming  a  mere  sentimental  hypocrite  Mke  Judas,  who  kissed 
his  Master  at  the  very  moment  he  was  betraying  Him, 

In  proportion  to  the  diflSiculty  and  the  rarity  of  the  virtue 
prescribed,  is  the  felicity  of  those  who,  by  divine  grace  vouch- 
safed in  answer  to  earnest  persevering  prayer,  are  enabled  to 


THE  MASTER  SERVING  :   THE  EXPLANATION.  355 

* 

practise  it  Theirs  is  a  threefold  blessedness.  First,  they 
have  the  joy  connected  with  the  achievement  of  an  arduous 
task.  Easy  undertakings  bring  small  pains,  but  they  also 
bring  small  pleasures :  rapturous  delight  is  reserved  for  those 
who  attempt  and  accomplish  that  which  passes  for  impossible. 
And  what  raptures  can  be  purer,  holier,  and  more  intense 
than  those  of  the  man  who  has  at  length  succeeded  in  making 
the  mind  of  the  meek  and  lowly  One  his  own ;  who,  after 
long  climbing)  has  readied  the  alpine  summit  of  seK-forgetful, 
seK-humbling  love ! 

Another  ingredient  in  the  felicity  of  those  who  practise 
the  things  here  enjoined  is,  that  they  win  for  themselves  the 
approbation  of  their  Lord.  A  master  is  pleased  when  a  pupil 
understands  his  lesson,  but  a  lord  is  pleased  only  when  his 
servants  do  his  bidding.  Christ,  being  Lord  as  well  as  Master, 
demands  that  we  shall  not  only  hnow^  but  do^  And  in  pro- 
portion to  the  peremptoriness  of  the  demand  is  the  satisfac- 
tion with  which  the  Lord  of  Christians  regards  all  earnest 
efibrts  to  comply  with  Hia  will,  and  to  jEoUow  His  example. 
And  to  all  who  make  such  efforts  it  is  a  great  happiness  to 
be  assured  of  the  approval  of  Him  whom  they  serve.  The 
thought,  "  I  am  guided  in  my  present  action  by  the  spirit  of 
Jesus,  and  He  approves  what  I  do,"  sustaina  the  mind  in 
peace,  even  when  one  has  not  the  happiness  to  win  the 
approbation  of  his  fellow-men ;  which  is  not  am  impertinent 
remark  h^^,  for  it  wUl  often  happen  to  us  to  please  men 
least  when  we  are  pleasing  the  Lord  ijiost.  You  shall  please 
many  men  by  a  prudent  selfishness  much  more  readily  than 
by  a  generous  imcalculating  devotion  to  what  is  rigM,  "  Men 
will  praise  thee  when  thou  doest  well  to  thyself;"  and  they 
will  wink  at  very  considerable  deviations  from  the  line  of 
pure  Christian  morality  in  the  prosecution  of  self-interest, 
provided  you  be  successfuL  Even  religious  people  will  often 
vex  and  grieve  you  by  advices  savouring  much  more  of  worldly 
wisdom  than  of  Christian  simplicity  and  godly  sincerity. 
Many  a  true  follower  of  Jesus  has  had  occasion  to  repeat  his 
Master's  complaint^  "  Yea>  mine  own  familiar  friend,  in  whom 
I  trusted,  who  did  eat  of  my  bread,  hath  lifted  up  his  heel 
against  me;"  and  to  re-echo  the  bitter  reflections  of  David, 


356  THE  TEAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

"  It  was  not  an  enemy  that  reproached  me ;  then  I  would 
have  borne  it:  neither  was  it  he  that  hated  me  that  did 
magnify  himself  against  me ;  then  I  would  have  hid  myself 
from  him :  but  it  was  thou,  a  man  mine  equal,  my  guide  and 
mme  acquaintance.  We  took  sweet  counsel  together,  and 
walked  into  the  house  of  Grod  in  company."  VerQy  a  sore 
case !  Yet,  if  the  Lord  approve,  we  may  make  shift  to  do 
without  the  sjnnpathy  and  approbation  of  men.  Their  appro- 
bation is  at  most  but  a  comfort;  EUs  is  matter  of  life  and 
death.  For  He  is  the  Judge:  He,  not  men,  not  priests, 
not  fellow-disciples,  hath  the  keys  of  the  kingdom.  Blessed, 
therefore,  are  they  that  do  His  commandments,  that  they  may 
have  right  to  the  tree  of  life,  and  may  enter  in  through  the 
gates  into  the  city. 

There  is  yet  another  element  in  the  felicity  of  the  man  who 
is  not  merely  a  forgetful  hearer,  but  a  doer  of  the  perfect  law 
of  Christ.  He  escapes  the  guilt  of  unimproved  knowledge. 
It  is  a  religious  commonplace,  that  to  sin  against  light  is  more 
heinous  than  to  sin  in  ignorance.  **  To  him  that  knoweth  to 
do  good,  and  doeth  it  not,  to  him  it  is  sin."  And,  of  course, 
the  clearer  the  light  the  greater  the  responsibility.  Now,  in  no 
department  of  Christian  truth  is  knowledge  clearer  than  in 
that  which  belongs  to  the  department  of  ethica  There  are  some 
doctrines  which  the  church,  as  a  whole,  can  hardly  be  said  to 
know,  they  are  so  mysterious,  or  so  disputed.  But  the  ethical 
teaching  of  Jesus  is  simple-  and  copious  in  all  its  leading  fea- 
tures ;  it  is  universally  imderstood,  and  as  universally  admired. 
Protestants  and  Papists,  Trinitarians,  Socinians,  and  Deists,  are 
all  at  one  here.  Happy  then  are  they,  of  all  sects  and  deno- 
minations, who  do  the  things  which  all  know  and  agree  in 
admiring ;  for  a  heavy  woe  lies  on  those  who  do  them  not 
The  woe  is  not  indeed  expressed,  but  it  is  implied  in  Christ's 
words.  The  common  Lord  of  all  believers  virtually  addresses 
all  Christendom  here,  saying :  "  Ye  behold  the  simlight  of  a 
perfect  example ;  ye  have  been  made  acquainted  with  a  high 
and  lovely  ideal  of  life,  such  as  pagan  moralists  never  dreamed 
o£  What  are  ye  doing  with  your  light?  Are  ye  merely 
looking  at  it,  and  writing  books  about  it,  and  boasting  of  it, 
and  talking  of  it,  meanwhile  allowing  men  outside  the  pale  of 


THE  MASTER  SERVING  :   THE  EXPLANATION.  357 

the  church  to  surpass  you  in  humane  and  philanthropic  virtue  ? 
If  this  is  all  the  use  you  are  making  of  your  knowledge,  it 
will  be  more  tolerable  for  pagans  at  the  day  of  judgment 
than  for  you." 

Having  made  the  reflection  we  have  been  considering,  Jesus 
followed  it  up  with  a  word  of  apology  for  the  tone  of  suspi- 
cion with  which  it  was  uttered,  and  which  was  no  doubt  felt 
by  the  disciples.  "  I  speak  not,"  He  said, "  of  you  all ;  I  know 
whom  I  have  chosen,"  etc.  The  remark  may  be  thus  para- 
phrased :  "  In  hinting  at  the  possibility  of  a  knowledge  of 
right,  tmaccompanied  by  corresponding  action,  I  have  not  been 
indulging  in  gratuitous  insinuation.  I  do  not  indeed  think 
so  badly  of  you  all,  as  to  imagine  you  capable  of  deliberate 
and  habitual  neglect  of  kno^rn  duty.  But  there  is  one  among 
you  who  is  capable  of  such  conduct  I  have  chosen  you 
twelve,  and  I  know  the  character  of  every  one  of  you ;  and, 
as  I  said  a  year  ago,  after  asking  a  question  which  hurt  your 
feelings,  that  one  of  you  had  a  devil,^  so  now,  after  mddng 
a  suspicious  reflection,  I  say  there  is  one  among  you  whose 
character  illustrates  negatively  its  meaning :  one  who  knows, 
but  wiU  not  do ;  who  puts  sentiment  in  place  of  action,  and . 
admiration  in  place  of  imitation ;  one  who,  having  eaten  bread 
with  me  as  a  familiar  friend,  will  repay  me  for  all  my  kind- 
ness, not  by  loving  obedience,  but  by  lifting  up  his  heel 
against  me." 

When  we  conceive  of  the  reflection,  "  If  ye  know  these 
things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them,"  as  addressed,  not  to  the 
twelve,  but  to  the  great  Christian  public,  we  feel  that  it  needs 
no  apology.  Alas,  the  divorce  of  light  and  life,  of  knowledge 
and  practice,  is  not  so  rare,  that  one  may  regard  an  allusion  to 
it  as  an  injurious  imputation.  Knowing  unaccompanied  with 
doing,  orthodoxy  severed  from  sanctity,  evangelical  faith  and 
sentiment  disunited  from  evangelical,  gospel-like  conduct,  is 
the  great  scandal  of  the  churcL     The  thing  is  so  common 

^  John  YL  66-70.  The  words  of  Jesus  on  the  present  occasion  become  clearer 
when  viewed  in  the  light  of  the  earlier  occurrence,  comparing  the  two  passages 
together.  We  are  satisfied  that  the  words,  **  I  speak  not  of  you  all,"  mean,  **  I 
do  not  suspect  you  all  of  the  sin  of  knowing  and  not  doing,"  rather  than,  **  Yon 
shall  not  aJl  partake  of  the  happiness  of  those  who  both  know  and  do." 


358  THE  TBAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

that  it  is  thought  nothing  o£  Insincerity  is  looked  on  as  a 
matter  of  course.  Who  infers  anything  as  to  a  man's  good- 
ness from  the  fact  of  his  being  a  church  member?  Who 
attaches  high  importance  to  a  church  certificate  ?  Who  does 
not  know  that  the  document,  far  from  guaranteeing  the  pos- 
session of  or  aspiration  after  the  high  Christian  virtue  taught 
by  Jesus  in  the  supper  chamber,  is  not  even  a  reliable  guaran- 
tee  of  the  most  commonplace  morality,  and  that  your  certifi- 
cated Christian  may  be  a  cheat,  a  sot,  a  prodigal,  or  a  wanton  ? 
Unhappy  is  the  religious  society  in  which  it  has  become 
the  fashion  to  know  and  not  to  do.  There  has  the  salt  indeed 
lost  its  savour,  and  become  good  for  nothing.  For  what  can 
be  more  worthless,  than  knowledge  of  the  true  and  good 
divorced  from  the  practice  thereof  ?  Knowledge  puffeth  up, 
charity  buildeth  up ;  the  product  of  the  one  is  a  balloon,  that 
of  the  other  is  a  temple  of  God.  A  character  in  which  cor- 
rect thinking  and  fine  sentiment  are  combined  with  practical 
laxity — in  which  to  promise  is  put  instead  of  performance,  and 
to  utter  the  becoming  word  about  a  matter  is  substituted  for 
doing  the  appropriate  deed — ^is,  to  say  the  least,  not  one  to  be 
desired.  It  may  look  weU  at  a  distance,  but  it  will  not  stand 
dose  inspection ;  it  may  be  fair,  but  it  is  false ;  its  superficial 
verdure  is  that  of  the  turf  which  covers  a  grave ;  its  beauty 
that  of  a  decaying  tree,  overspread  with  mosses  of  various 
species  and  motley  hues.  "  If  any  man  among  you  seem  to 
be  religious,  and  bridleth  not  his  tongue,  but  deceiveth  his 
own  heart,  this  man's  religion  is  vain.  Pure  religion  and 
undefiled  before  God  and  the  Father  is  this:  to  visit  the 
fatherless  and  widows  in  their  affiction,  and  to  keep  himself 
unspotted  from  the  world."  "  The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  in 
word,  but  in  power." 


CHAPTER   XXII 

IN  M£MOBIAM. 
Matt.  xxvi.  26-29 ;  Mabk  xiv.  22-25 ;  Luke  xxii.  17-20  (1  Cob.  xi.  2^-26). 

THE  Lord's  Supper  is  a  monuinent  sacred  to  the  memory 
of  Jesus  Christ.  "This  do  in  remembrance  of  me." 
In  Bethany  Jesus  had  spoken  as  if  He  desired  that  Mary 
should  be  kept  in  remembrance  in  the  preaching  of  His 
gospel;  in  the  supper  chamber  He  expressed  His  desire  to 
be  remembered  Himself  He  would  have  Mary's  deed  of  love 
commemorated  by  the  rehearsal  of  her  story ;  He  would  have 
His  own  deed  of  love  commemorated  by  a  symbolic  action, 
to  be  often  repeated  throughout  the  ages  to  the  end  of  the 
world. 

The  rite  of  the  Supper,  besides  commemorating,  is  likewise 
of  use  to  interpret  the  Lord's  death.  It  throws  important  light 
on  the  meaning  of  that  solemn  event  The  institution  of  this 
symbolic  feast  was  in  fact  the  most  important  contribution 
made  by  Jesus  during  His  personal  ministry  to  the  doctrine  of 
atonement  through  the  sacrifice  of  Himsell  Therefrom,  more 
clearly  than  from  any  other  act  or  word  performed  or  spoken 
by  Him,  the  twelve  might  learn  to  conceive  of  their  Master's 
death  as  possessing  a  redemptive  character.  Thereby  Jesus,  as 
it  were,  said  to  His  disciples :  My  approaching  passion  is  not 
to  be  regarded  as  a  mere  calamity,  or  dark  disaster,  falling  out 
contrary  to  the  divine  purpose  or  my  expectation ;  not  as  a 
fatal  blow  inflicted  by  ungodly  men  on  me  and  you,  and  the 
cause  which  is  dear  to  us  all ;  not  even  as  an  evil  which  may 
be  overruled  for  good ;  but  as  an  event  fulfilling,  not  frustrat- 
ing, the  purpose  of  my  mission,  and  fruitful  of  blessing  to  the 
world.     What  men  mean  for  evil,  God  means  for  good,  to 


360  THE  TBAmiNG  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

bring  to  pass  to  save  much  people  aliv^  The  shedding  of  my 
blood,  in  one  aspect  the  crime  of  wittbed  Jews,  is  in  another 
aspect  my  own  voluntary  act  I  pour  forth  my  blood  for  a 
gracious  end,  even  for  the  remission  of  sin«.  My  death  will 
initiate  a  new  dispensation,  and  seal  a  new  testament ;  it  will 
fulfil  the  purpose,  and  therefore  take  the  place,  of  the  mani- 
fold sacrifices  of  the  Mosaic  ritual,  and  in  particular  of  the 
paschal  lamb,  which  is  even  now  being  eaten.  I  shall  be  the 
Paschal  Lamb  of  the  Israel  of  Grod  henceforth ;  at  once  pro- 
tecting them  from  death,  and  feeding  their  souls  with  my 
crucified  humanity,  as  the  bread  of  eternal  life. 

These  truths  are  very  familiar  to  us,  however  new  and 
strange  they  may  have  been  to  the  disciples ;  and  we  are  more 
accustomed  to  explain  the  Supper  by  the  death,  than  the  death 
by  the  Supper.  It  may  be  useful,  however,  here  to  reverse 
the  process,  and,  imagining  ourselves  in  the  position  of  the 
twelve,  as  witnesses  to  the  institution  of  a  new  religious 
symbol,  to  endeavour  to  rediscover  there&om  the  meaning  of 
the  event  with  which  it  is  associated,  and  whose  significance 
it  is  intended  to  shadow  forth.  Let  us  then  take  our  stand 
beside  this  ancient  monument,  and  try  to  read  the  Bunic 
inscription  on  its  weather-worn  surface. 

1.  First,  then,  we  perceive  at  once  that  it  is  to  the  death 
of  Jesus  this  monument  refers.  It  is  not  merely  erected  to 
His  memory  in  general,  but  it  is  erected  specially  in  memory 
of  His  decease.  All  things  point  forward  to  what  was  about 
to  take  place  on  Calvary.  The  sacramental  acts  of  breaking 
the  bread  and  pouring  out  the  wine  manifestly  look  that  way. 
The  words  also  spoken  by  Jesus  in  instituting  the  Supper  all 
involve  allusions  to  His  deatL  Both  the  fact  and  the  manner 
of  His  death  are  Mated  at,  by  the  distinction  He  makes  be- 
tween ffis  body  and  His  blood :  "  This  is  my  body,"  "  this 
is  my  blood."  Body  and  blood  are  one  in  life,  and  become 
separate  things  only  by  death ;  and  not  by  every  kind  of  death, 
but  by  one  whose  manner  involves  blood-shedding,  as  in  the 
case  of  sacrificial  victims.  The  epithets  applied  to  the  body 
and  the  blood  point  at  death  still  more  clearly.  Jesus  speaks 
of  His  body  as  "  given" — as  if  to  be  slain  or  "  broken"^  in 

i  1  Cor.  XL  24. 


IN  MEMOBIAM.  361 

sacrifice,  and  of  His  blood  as  "  shed."  Then,  finally,  by  de- 
scribing the  blood  aboiil  to  be  shed  as  the  blood  of  a  new 
testament,  the  Saviour  put  it  beyond  all  doubt  what  He  was 
alluding  to.  Where  a  testament  is,  there  must  also  be  the 
death  of  the  testator.  And  though  an  ordinary  testator  may 
die  an  ordinary  death,  the  Testator  of  the  new  testament  must 
die  a  sacrificial  death ;  for  the  epithet  new  implies  a  reference 
to  the  old  Jewish  covenant,  which  was  ratified  by  the  sacrifice 
of  bumt-oflferings  and  peace-oflferings  of  oxen,  whose  blood 
was  sprinkled  on  the  altar  and  on  tiie  people,  and  called  by 
Moses  "  the  blood  of  the  covenant." 

2.  The  mere  fact  that  the  Lord's  Supper  commemorates 
specially  the  Lord's  death,  implies  that  that  death  must  have 
been  an  event  of  a  very  important  character.  By  instituting 
a  symbolic  rite  for  such  a  purpose,  Jesus,  as  it  were,  said  to 
His  disciples  and  to  us :  "  Fix  your  eyes  on  Calvary,  and  watch 
what  happens  there.  That  is  the  great  event  in  my  earthly 
history.  Other  men  have  monuments  erected  to  them  because 
they  have  lived  lives  deemed  memorable.  I  wish  you  to  erect 
a  monument  to  me  because  I  have  died :  not  forgetful  of  my 
life  indeed,  yet  specially  mindful  of  my  death  ;  commemorat- 
ing it  for  its  own  sake,  not  merely  for  the  sake  of  the  life 
whereof  it  is  the  termination.  The  memory  of  other  men  is 
cherished  by  the  celebration  of  their  birth-day  anniversaries  ; 
but  in  my  case,  better  is  the  day  of  my  death  than  the  day 
of  my  birth  for  the  purpose  of  a  commemorative  celebration. 
My  birth  into  this  world  was  marvellous  and  momentous ;  but 
still  more  marvellous  and  momentous  is  my  exit  out  of  it  by 
crucifixion.  Of  my  birth  no  festive  commemoration  is  needed ; 
but  of  my  death  keep  alive  the  memory  by  the  Holy  Supper 
till  I  come  again.  Kemembering  it  well,  you  remember  all 
my  earthly  history ;  for  of  all  it  is  the  secret,  the  consimmia- 
tion,  and  the  crown." 

But  why,  in  a  history  throughout  so  remarkable,  should  the 
death  be  thus  singled  out  for  commemoration  ?  Was  it  its 
tragic  character  that  won  for  it  this  distinction  ?  Did  the 
crucified  One  mean  the  Supper  which  goes  by  His  name  to  be 
a  mere  dramatic  representation  of  His  passion,  for  the  purpose 
of  exciting  our  feelings,  and  eliciting  a  sympathetic  tear,  by 


364  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

Bhedding.  But  in  bidding  His  disciples  diink  the  cup,  the 
Lord  intimates  that  after  His  death  there  will  be  no  more 
need  oi  sacrifices.  The  sin-oflfering  of  blood  will  be  converted 
into  a  thank-ofTering  of  wine,  a  cup  of  salvation,  to  be  drunk 
with  grateful,  joyful  hearts  by  all  who  through  faith  in  His 
sacrifice  have  received  the  pardon  of  their  sina  Finally,  Jesus 
intimates  that  the  new  covenant  concerns  the  many,  not  the 
few — not  Israel  alone,  but  all  nations  :  it  is  a  gospel  which 
He  bequeaths  to  sinners  of  mankind. 

Well  may  we  drink  of  this  cup  with  thankfulness  and  joy ; 
for  the  "  new  covenant"  (new,  yet  far  older  than  the  old),  of 
which  it  is  the  seal,  is  in  all  respects  well  ordered  and  sure. 
Well  ordered;  for  surely  it  is  altogether  a  good  and  God- 
worthy  constitution  of  things,  which  connects  the  blessing  of 
pardon  with  the  sacrificial  death  of  Him  through  whom  it 
comes  to  us.  It  is  good  in  the  interests  of  righteousness :  for 
it  provides  that  sin  shall  not  be  pardoned  till  it  has  been 
adequately  atoned  for  by  the  sacrifice  of  the  sinner's  Friend ; 
and  it  is  just  and  right  that  without  the  shedding  of  the 
Eighteous  One's  blood  there  should  be  no  remission  for  the 
unrighteous.  Then  this  economy  serves  well  the  interest  of 
divine  love,  as  it  gives  that  love  a  worthy  career,  and  ficee 
scope  to  display  its  magnanimous  nature  in  bearing  the  bur- 
den of  the  sinful  and  the  miserable.  And  yet  once  more,  the 
constitution  of  the  new  covenant  is  admirably  adapted  to  the 
great  practical  end  aimed  at  by  the  scheme  of  redemption, 
viz.  the  elevation  of  a  fallen,  degraded  race  out  of  a  state  of 
corruption  into  a  state  of  holiness.  The  gospel  of  forgive- 
ness through  Christ's  death  is  the  moral  power  of  Grod  to  raise 
such  as  believe  it  out  of  the  world's  selfishness,  and  enmities, 
and  baseness,  into  a  celestial  life  of  devotion,  self-sacrifice, 
patience,  and  humility.  If  by  faith  in  Christ  be  understood 
merely  belief  in  the  opvs  operatum  of  a  vicarious  death,  the 
power  of  such  a  faith  to  elevate  is  more  than  questionable. 
But  when  faith  is  taken  in  its  true  scriptural  sense,  as  imply- 
ing not  only  belief  in  a  certain  transaction,  the  endurance  of 
death  by  one  for  others,  but  also,  and  more  especially,  hearty 
appreciation  of  the  spirit  of  the  deed  and  the  Doer,  then  its 
purifying  and  ennobling  power  is  beyond  all  question.     "  The 


IN  MEMORIAM.  365 

love  of  Christ  constraineth  me ;"  and  "  I  am  crucified  with 
Christ,"  as  the  result  of  such  f&ith. 

How  poor  is  the  Socinian  scheme  of  salvation  in  comparison 
with  this  of  the  new  covenant !  In  that  scheme  pardon  has 
no  real  dependence  on  the  blood  of  Jesus :  He  died  as  a  martyr 
for  righteousness,  not  as  a  Eedeemer  for  the  unrighteous.  We 
are  forgiven  on  repenting  by  a  simple  word  of  GoA  Forgive- 
ness cost  the  Forgiver  no  trouble  or  sacrifice ;  only  a  word,  or 
stroke  of  the  pen  signing  a  document,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord." 
What  a  frigid  transaction  I  What  cold  relations  it  implies 
between  the  Deity  and  His  creatures  !  How  vastly  preferable 
a  forgiveness  which  means  a  giving :  for^ — and  costs  the  For- 
giver sorrow,  sweat,  pain,  blood,  wounds,  death, — a  forgiveness 
coming  fro/n  a  God  who  says  in  effect :  "  I  wiU  not,  to  save 
sinners,  repeal  the  law  which  connects  sin  with  death  as  its 
penalty ;  but  I  am  quite  willing  for  that  end  to  become  myself 
the  law's  victim."  Such  a  forgiveness  is  at  once  an  act  of 
righteousness  and  an  act  of  marvellous  love ;  whereas  forgive- 
ness without  satisfaction,  though  at  first  sight  it  may  appear 
both  rational  and  generous,  manifests  neither  God's  righteous- 
ness nor  His  love.  A  Socinian  God,  who  pardons  without 
atonement,  is  destitute  alike  of  a  passionate  abhorrence  of  sin 
and  of  a  passionate  love  to  siimers. 

Jesus  once  said,  "He  loveth  much  who  hath  much  forgiven 
him."  It  is  a  deep  truth,  but  there  is  another  not  less  deep  to 
be  put  alongside  of  it ;  we  must  feel  that  our  forgiveness  has 
cost  the  Forgiver  much,  in  order  to  love  Him  much.  It  is 
because  they  feel  this,  that  true  professors  of  the  catholic 
faith  exhibit  that  passionate  devotion  to  Christ  which  forms 
such  a  contrast  to  the  cold  intellectual  homage  paid  by  the 
Deist  to  his  God.  When  the  orthodox  Christian  thinks  of  the 
tears,  agonies,  bloody  sweat,  shame,  and  pain  endured  by  the 
Eedeemer,  of  His  marred  vision,  broken  heart,  pierced  side, 
lacerated  hands  and  feet,  his  bosom  bums  with  devoted  love. 
The  story  of  the  passion  opens  all  the  fountains  of  feeling ; 
and  by  no  other  way  than  the  via  dolorosa  could  Jesus  have 
ascended  the  throne  of  His  people's  hearts. 

The  new  covenant  inaugurated  by  Christ's  death  is  sure  as 

*  Thia  idea  is  well  put  in  Buahnell's  VicariouB  Sacrifice, 


366  THE  TRAINING  OP  THE  TWELVE. 

well  as  orderly.  It  is  reliably  sealed  by  the  blood  of  the 
Testator.  For,  first,  what  better  gaarantee  can  we  have  of  the 
good-will  of  God  ?  "  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that 
ft  man  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends."  **  Hereby  perceive  we 
the  love  of  God,  because  He  laid  down  His  life  for  us."  Look- 
ing at  the  matter  in  the  light  of  justice,  again,  this  covenant 
is  equally  sure.  Gk)d  is  not  unrighteous,  to  forget  His  Son's 
labour  of  love.  As  He  is  true,  Christ  skoM  see  of  the' travail 
of  His  souL  It  cannot  be  otherwise  under  the  moral  admini- 
stration of  Jehovah.  Can  the  G<k1  of  truth  break  His  word  ? 
Can  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  permit  one,  and  especially  His 
own  Son,  to  give  HimseK  up,  out  of  purest  love,  to  sorrow, 
and  pain,  and  shame,  for  His  brethren,  without  receiving  the 
hire  which  He  desires,  and  which  was  promised  Him— many 
souls,  many  lives,  many  sinners  saved  ?  Think  of  it :  holi- 
ness suffering  for  righteousness'  sake,  and  yet  not  having  the 
consolation  of  doing  something  in  the  way  of  destroying  un- 
righteousness, and  turning  the  disobedient  to  the  obedience  of 
the  just ;  love,  by  the  impulse  of  its  nature,  and  by  covenant 
obligations,  laid  under  a  necessity  of  labouring  for  the  lost, 
and  yet  doomed  by  the  untowardness,  oi  apathy,  or  faithless- 
ness of  the  Governor  of  the  universe  to  go  unrewarded; — Clove's 
labour  lost,  nobody  the  better  for  it,  things  remaining  as  be- 
fore :  no  sinner  pardoned,  deUvered  from  the  pit  and  restored 
to  holiness;  no  chosen  people  brou^t  out  of  darkness  in(o 
marvellous  light !  Such  a  state  of  things  caimot  be  in  Gkd's 
dominions.  The  government  of  God  is  carried  on  in  the 
interest  of  Holy  Love.  It  gives  love  free  scope  to  bear  others* 
burdens  :  it  arranges  that  if  she  will  da  so,  she  shall  feel  the 
full  weight  of  the  burden  she  takes  upon  her ;  but  it  also 
arranges,  by  an  eternal  covenant  of  truth  and  equity,  that 
when  the  burden  has  been  borne,  the  Burden-bearer  shall  re- 
ceive His  reward  in  the  form  He  likes  best — ^in  souls  washed, 
pardoned,  sanctified,  and  led  to  everlasting  glory  by  Himself 
as  His  ransomed  brethren  or  children. 

The  principle  of  vicarious  merit  involved  in  the  doctrine 
that  we  are  pardoned  simply  because  Christ  died  for  our 
sins,  when  looked  at  with  unprejudiced  eyes,  commends  itself 
to  reason  as  well  as  to  the  heart.     It  means  practically  a 


IN  MEMOBIAM.  367 

premium  held  out  to  foster  righteousness  and  lova  This 
offered  premium  carried  Jesus  through  His  heavy  task.  It 
was  because,  relying  on  His  Father's  promise.  He  saw  the 
certain  joy  of  saving  many  before  Him,  that  He  endured  the 
cross.  It  is  the  same  principle,  in  a  restricted  application  of 
it,  which  stimulates  Christians  to  fill  up  that  which  is  behind 
of  the  suflferings  of  their  Lord,  They  know  that,  if  they  be 
faithful,  they  shall  not  live  unto  themselves,  but  shall  benefit 
Christ's  mystic  body  the  church,  and  also  the  world  at  large. 
If  the  fact  were  otherwise,  there  would  be  very  little  either  of 
moral  fidelity  or  of  love  in  the  world*  If  the  moral  govern- 
ment of  the  universe  made  it  impossible  for  one  being  to  benefit 
another  by  prayer  or  loving  pains>  impossible  for  ten  good 
men  to  be  a  shield  to  Sodom,  for  the  elect  to  be  a  salt  to  the 
earth,  men  would  give  up  trying  to  do  it ;  generous  concern 
about  public  well-being  would  cease,  and  universal  selfishness 
become  the  order  of  the  day.  Or  if  this  state  of  things  should 
not  ensue,  we  should  only  have  darkness  in  a  worse  form :  the 
inscrutable  enigma  of  Bighteousness  crucified  without  benefit  to 
any  living  creature, — a  scandal  and  a  reproach  to  the  govern- 
ment and  character  of  God.  If,  therefore,  we  are  to  hold  fast 
our  faith  in  the  divine  holiness,^  justice,,  goodness,  and  truth, 
we  must  believe  that  the  blood  of  Jesus  doth  most  certainly 
procure  for  us  the  remission  of  sins ;  and  likewise,  that  the 
blood  of  His  saints,  though  neither  available  nor  necessary  to 
obtain  for  sinners  the  blessing  of  pardon  before  the  divine 
tribunal — Christ's  blood  alone  being  capable  of  rendering  us 
that  service,  and  having  rendered  it  effectually  and  oifbe  for 
all — is  nevertheless  precious  in  God's  sight,  and  makes  the 
pec^Ie  precious  among  whom  it  is  shed,  and  is  by  God's 
appointment,  in  manifold  ways,  a  source  of  blessing  unto  a 
world  unworthy  to  number  among  its  inhabitants  men  whom 
it  knows  not  how  to  use  otherwise  than  as  lambs  for  the 
slaughter. 

4.  The  sacrament  of  the  Supper  exhibits  Christ  not  merely  as 
a  Lamb  to  be  slain  for  a  sin-offering,  but  as  a  Paschal  Lamb  to 
be  eaten  for  spiritual  nourishment  "  Take,  eat,  this  is  my  body." 
By  this  injunction  Jesus  taught  the 'twelve,  and  through  them 
all  Christians,  to  regard  His  crucified  humanity  as  the  bread  of 


368  THE  TRADTIKa  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

God  for  the  life  of  their  souls.  We  must  eat  the  flesh  and 
drink  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  man  spirituaUy  by  faith,  as  we 
eat  the  bread  and  drink  jt^e  wine  literally  with  the  mcmth. 

In  regarding  Christ  as  the  Bfftad  of  life,  we  are  not  to 
restrict  ourselves  to  the  one  benefit  mentioned  by  Him  in 
instituting  the  feast,  the  reimssion  tf  sins,  )mt  to  have  in  view 
all  His  benefits  tending  to  our  spi^tuid  nourishment  and 
growth  in  grace.  Christ  is  the  Bread  of  life  in  all  Bjb 
offices.  As  a  Prophet,  He  supplies  the  bread  of  illvime  truth 
to  feed  our  loinds ;  as  a  Priest,  He  furnishes  the  bread  of 
righteousness  to  satisfy  our  troubled  consciences ;  as  a  King, 
He  presents  Himself  to  us  as  an  object  of  devotion,  that  shall 
fill  our  hearts,  and  whom  we  may  worship  without  fear  of 
idolatry. 

As  often  as  the  Lord's  Supper  is  celebrated,  we  are  invited 
to  contemplate  Christ  as  the  food  of  our  souls  in  this  compre- 
hensive sense.  As  often  as  we  eat  the  bread  and  drink  the 
cup,  we  declare  that  Christ  has  been,  and  is  now,  our  soul's 
food  in  all  these  ways.  And  as  often  as  we  use  the  Supper 
with  sincerity,  we  are  helped  to  appropriate  Christ  as  our 
spiritual  food  more  and  more  abundantly.  Even  as  a  symbol 
or  picture — mysticism  and  magic  apart — ^the  Holy  Supper 
aids  our  faith.  Through  the  eye  it  affects  the  heart,  as  do 
poetry  and  music  through  the  ear.  The  very  mysticism  and 
superstition  that  have  grown  around  the  sacraments  in  the 
course  of  ages,  are  a  witness  to  their  powerful  influence  over 
the  imagination.  Men's  thoughts  and  feelings  were  so  deeply 
stirrecf,  they  could  not  believe  such  power  lay  in  mere  symbdb; 
and  by  a  confusion  of  ideas  natural  to  an  excited  imagination, 
they  imputed  to  the  sign  all  the  virtues  of  the  things  signi- 
fied. By  this  means  faith  was  transferred  from  Christ  the 
Eedeemer,  and  the  Spirit  the  Sanctifier,  to  the  rite  of  baptism 
and  the  service  of  the  mass.  This  result  shows  the  need  of 
knowledge  and  spiritual  discernment  to  keep  the  imagination 
in  check,  and  prevent  the  eyes  of  the  understanding  from 
being  put  out  by  the  dazzling  glare  of  fancy.  Some,  con- 
sidering how  thoroughly  the  eyes  of  the  understanding 
have  been  put  out  by  theories  of  sacramental  grace^  have 
been  tempted  to  deny  that  sacraments  are  even  Toeatys  of 


IV 


IK  MEMORIAM.  369 


•4      • 


f  *■ 


grace,  and  to  think  that  instittttions  which  have  been  so  fear- 
fully abused  ought  to  be  allowed  to  fall  into  desuetude.  This 
is  a  natural  reaction,  but  it  jfi  an  e^dtoeme  opinion.  The  sober, 
true  view  of  the  matter  is,  Chat  sacraments  are  means  of  grace, 
not  from  any  magic  virtue  in  them  or  in  the  priest  admini- 
stering them,  but  m  helpiHtg  faith  by  sense,  and  still  more  by 
the  blessing  jpf  Christ  and  the  working  of  His  Spirit,  as  the 
reward  of  an  int^geni,  sincere,  believing  use  of  them. 

This,  d^,  is  what  ^e  have  learned  from  the  monumental 
stone.  The  Lord's  Supper  commemorates  the  Lord's  death; 
points  out  that  death  as  an  event  of  transcendent  importance ; 
sets  it  forth,  indeed,  as  the  ground  of  our  hope  for  the  pardon 
of  sin ;  and  finally  exhibits  Christ  the  Lord,  who  died  on  the 
cross,  as  all  to  us  which  our  spirits  need  for  health  and  salvei- 
tion — our  mystic  bread  and  wine.  This  rite,  instituted  by 
Jesus  on  the  night  on  which  He  was  betrayed.  He  meant  to 
be  repeated  not  merely  by  the  apostles,  but  by  His  believing 
people  in  all  ages  till  He  came  again.  So  we  learn  from 
Paul ;  so  we  might  have  inferred,  apart  from  any  express  in- 
formation. An  act  so  ongmsl,  so  impressive,  so  pregnant  with 
meaning,  so  helpful  to  faith,  once  performed,  was  virtually  an 
enactment  In  performing  it,  Jesus  said  in  effect :  *'  Let  this 
become  a  great  institution,  a  standing  observance  in  the  com- 
munity to  be  called  by  my  name." 

And  now,  finally,  in  what  spirit  should  an  ordinance  having 
such  a  significance  as  we  have  seen  be  observed  by  the  church  ? 
In  a  spirit,  surely,  of  humility,  thankfulness,  and  brotherly 
love.  Christians  should  come  to  the  table  as  men  confessing 
their  sinfulness,  acknowledging  their  desert  of  condemnation, 
devoutly  thanking  God  for  His  covenant  of  grace,  and  His 
mercy  to  them  in  Christ,  loving  Him  who  loved  them,  and" 
washed  them  from  their  sins  in  His  own  blood,  and  who  daily 
feedeth  their  souls  with  heavenly  food,  and  giving  Him  all 
glory  and  dominion ;  and  loving  one  another — loving  all  re- 
deemed men  and  beMevers  in  Jesus  as  brethren,  and  toMng 
the  Supper  together  as  a  family  meal;  withal  praying  that  an 
ever-increasing  number  may  experience  the  saving  efficacy  of 
Christ's  death,  and  swell  the  song  of  those  who  sing  the  praise 
of  the  Lamb  that  was  slain  to  take  away  the  sin  of  the  world. 

«  A 


370  THE  TBAININa  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

After  this  fashion  did  the  apostles  and  the  apostolic  church 
celebrate  the  Supper  at  Pentecost,  after  Jesus  had  ascended 
to  glory.  Continuing  daily  with  one  accord  in  the  temple,  and 
breaking  bread  from  house  to  house,  they  did  eat  their  meat 
with  gladness  and  singleness  of  heart  Would  that  we  now 
could  keep  the  feast  as  they  kept  it  then !  But  how  much 
must  be  done  ere  that  be  possible !  The  moss  of  Time  must 
be  cleared  away  from  the  monumental  stone,  that  its  inscrip- 
tion may  become  once  more  distinctly  legible ;  the  accumu- 
lated debris  of  a  millennium  and  a  half  of  theological  contro- 
versies about  sacraments  must  be  carted  out  of  sight  and 
mind ;  ^  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  must  be  separated  from 
the  alloy  of  human  error ;  the  homely  rite  of  the  Supper  must 
be  divested  of  the  state  robes  of  elaborate  ceremonial  by  which 
it  has  been  all  but  stifled,  and  allowed  to  return  to  congenial 
primitive  simplicity.  These  things,  so  devoutly  to  be  wished, 
will  come  at  last :  if  not  on  earth,  in  that  day  when  the  Lord 
Jesus  wiU  drink  new  wine  with  His  people  in  the  kingdom 
of  His  Father. 

1  The  history  of  these  controversies  is  vexy  humiliating,  and  their  conse- 
quences most  disastrous.  Through  them  the  83rmbol  of  union  has  been  tamed 
into  a  chief  cause  of  division.  The  church  has  remembered  her  Lord,  and 
obeyed  His  commandment  of  love,  as  members  of  families  sometimes  remember 
a  deceased  parent ;  casting  angry  glances  at  each  other  across  his  grave,  and 
retiring  to  the  house,  whose  head  they  have  buried,  to  squabble  about  the  mean- 
ing of  his  will. 


CHAPTER   XXIII. 


JTJDAS  ISOARIOT. 


Matt.  xxn.  2(y-23  ;  Mark  xiv.  17-21 ;  Luke  xxii.  21-23 ; 

John  xiii.  21-80. 

BESIDES  the  feet-washing  and  the  institution  of  the  Sup- 
per, yet  another  scene  occurred  on  the  night  preceding 
the  Lord's  death,  helping  to  render  it  for  ever  memorable.  On 
that  same  night,  during  the  course  of  the  evening  meal,^  Jesus 
exposed  and  expelled  the  false  disciple,  who  had  undertaken 
to  deliver  his  Master  into  the  hands  of  those  who  sought  His 
life.  Already,  while  occupied  with  the  washing.  He  had  made 
premonitory  allusions  to  the  fact  that  there  was  a  traitor 
among  the  twelve,  hinting  that  they  were  not  aU  dean^  and 
insinuating  that  there  was  one  of  them  who  knew,  and  would 
not  do.  Having  finished  and  explained  the  service  of  lowly 
love.  He  next  proceeded  to  the  unwelcome  task  of  indicating 
distinctly  to  which  of  the  disciples  He  had  been  alluding. 
With  spirit  troubled  at  thought  of  the  painful  duty,  and 
shuddering  in  presence  of  such  satanic  wickedness.  He  intro- 
duced the  subject  by  making  the  general  announcement: 
"  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  that  one  of  you  shall  betray 
me."  Thereafter,  in  answer  to  inquiries.  He  indicated  the 
particular  individual,  by  explaining  that  the  traitor  was  he  to 
whom  He  should  give  a  sop  or  morsel  after  He  had  dipped  it.' 
The  fact  then  announced  was  new  to  the  disciples,  but  it 

^  Whether  before  or  after  the  institution  of  the  Supper  has  been  muokdiB- 
cussed,  and  is  of  no  theological  importance,  though  it  has  been  thought  to  b« 
80  in  connection  with  the  question  of  strict  communion. 

'  On  the  harmony  of  this  subject,  see  Ebrard,  Oospd  History ;  and  also 
Stier,  Reden  Jesu,  who  reconciles  the  Synoptics  with  John,  by  supposing  two 
announcements  of  the  traitor,  with  the  Lord's  Supper  intervening,  which  he 
brings  in  between  vers.  22  and  23  of  John's  narrative. 


37!^  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

was  not  tie'w  to  theit  Master.  Jesus  had  known  all  along 
that  there  was  a  traitor  in  the  camp.  He  had  even  hinted  as 
much  a  full  year  before.  Biit^  excepting  on  that  one  occasion. 
He  had  not  spoken  of  the  matter  hitherto,  but  had  patiently 
borne  it  as  a  secret  burden  on  His  own  heart  Now,  however, 
the  secret  may  be  hid  no  longer.  The  hour  is  come  when  the 
Son  of  man  must  be  glorified.  Judas,  for  his  part,  has  made 
up  his  mind  to  be  the  instrument  of  betraying  his  Lord  to  death ; 
and  such  bad  work,  once  resolved  on,  should  by  all  means  be 
done  without  delay.  Then  Jesus  wants  to  be  rid  of  the  false 
disciple's  company.  He  desires  to  ^)end  the  few  last  hours 
of  His  life  in  tender,  confidential  fellowship  with  His  faithful 
ones,  free  from  the  irritation  and  distraction  caused  by  the 
presence  of  an  undeclared  yet  deadly  enemy.  Therefore  He 
does  not  wait  tiU  it  pleiases  Judas  to  depart ;  He  bids  him  go, 
asserting  His  authority  over  him  even  after  he  has  renounced 
his  allegiance  and  given  himself  up  to  the  devil's  service. 
•Re&ohing  the  sop.  He  says  to  him  in  effect :  "  I  know  thee, 
Judas ;  thou  art  the  man :  thou  hast  resolved  to  betray  me : 
away,  then,  and  do  it"  And  then  He  says  expressly :  "  That 
thou  doest,  do  quickly."  It  was  an  order  to  go,  and  go  at  once. 
Judas  took  the  hint  He  "  went  immediately  (mt,^*  and  so 
finally  quitted  the  society  of  which  he  had  been  an  unworthy 
member.  One  wonders  how  such  a  man  ever  got  in :  how  he 
ever  was  admitted  into  such  a  holy  fellowship  :  how  he  came 
to  be  chosen  one  of  tiie  twelve.  Did  Jesus  not  know  the  real 
character  of  this  man  when  He  chose  him  ?  The  words  of 
our  Lord,  spoken  just  before,  not  to  say  a  right  view  of  His 
person,  forbid  us  to  think  this.  "  I  know,"  said  He,  while 
expounding  the  feet-washing, "  whom  I  have  chosen,"  meaning 
evidently  to  claim  knowledge  of  them  all,  Judas  included,  at 
the  time  He  chose  them.  Did  He  then  choose  Judas,  knowing 
what  he  was,  that  He  might  have  among  the  twelve  one  by 
whom  He  might  be  betrayed,  and  the  Scriptures  in  that  par- 
ticular be  fulfilled  ?  So  He  seems  to  hint  in  the  declaration 
just  alluded  to ;  for  He  goes  on  to  say :  "  But,  that  the  scripture 
may  be  fulfilled.  He  that  eat^th  bread  with  me  hath  lifted  up 
liis  heel  agaln^  me."^     But  it  is  not  credible  that  Iscariot  was 

Wohn  »iii.  18. 


JUDAS  ISCABIQX..  373 

chosen  merely  to  be  a  traitor,  as  an  actor  might  l^e  chosen 
by  a  theatre  manager  to  play  the  part  of  lago.  The  end 
pointed  at  in  the  scripture  quoted  might  be  ultimately  servecjl 
by  his  being  chosen,  but  that  end  was  not  the  motive  of  the 
choice.  We  may  regard  these  two  points  as  certain  :  on  th0 
one  hand,  that  Judas  did  not  become  a  follower  of  Jesus 
with  treacherous  intentions ;  and  on  the  other,  that  Jesus  did 
not  elect  Judas  to  be  one  of  the  twelve  because  He  foreknew 
that  he  would  eventually  become  a  traitor. 

If  the  choice  of  the  false  disciple  was  not  due  either  to 
ignorance  or  to  foreknowledge,  how  is  it  to  be  explained  ?  The 
only  explanation  that  can  be  given  is  that,  apart  from  secret 
insight,  Judas  was  to  all  appearance  an  eligible  man,  and  could 
not  be  passed  over  on  any  grounds  coming  under  ordinary 
observation.  His  qualities  must  have  been  such,  that  one  not 
possessing  the  eye  of  omniscience,  looking  on  him,  ^ould,  hav^ 
been  disposed  to  say  of  him,  what  Samuel  said  oS,  Eliab : 
"  Surely  the  Lord's  anointed  is  before  Him."^-  In,  that  case,  his 
election  by  Jesus  is  perfectly  intelligible.  The  Head  of  tte 
church  simply  did  what  the  church  has  to  do  in  analogous 
instances.  The  church  chooses  men  to  fill  sacred  offices  on  a 
conjunct  view  of  ostensible  qualification^,  such  as  knowledge, 
zeal,  apparent  piety,  and  correctness  of  outward  conduct  In 
so  doing,  she  often  makes  unhappy  appointments,  and  confers 
dignity  on  persons  of  the  Judas  type,  who  dishonour  the 
positions  they  filL  The  mischief  resulting  is  great ;  but  Gl^ristl 
has  taught  us,  by  His  example  ia  choosing  Judas,  a9  also  by 
the  parable  of  the  tares,  that  we  m,ust  submit  tjo  the  evO,  and 
leave  the  remedy  in  higher  bauds.  Out  of  eyil  God  often 
brings  good,  as  He  did  in  the  case  of  the  traitor. 

Supposing  Judas  to  have  been  chosen  to  the  apostleship  on 
the  grotmd  of  apparent  fitness,  what  manner  of  man  would 
that  imply  ?  A  vulgar,  conscious  hypocrite,  seeking  some 
mean  by-end,  while  professedly  aiming  at  a  higher  ?  Not 
necessarily;  not  probably.  Bather  such  an  one  as  Jesns 
indirectly  described  Judas  to  be  when  He  made  that  reflection : 
If  ye  know  these  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them.  The 
false  disciple  was  a  sentimental,  plausible,  self-deceived  pietist, 

1 1  Sun.  zW.  6. 


374  THE  TBAIKINO  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

who  knew  and  approved  the  good,  though  not  conscientiously 
practising  it ;  one  who>  in  sesthetic  feeling,  in  fancy,  and  in 
intellect,  had  affinities  for  the  noble  and  the  holy,  while  in 
will  and  in  conduct  he  was  the  slave  of  base  selfish  passions ; 
one  who,  in  the  last  resource^  would  always  put  self  upper- 
most, yet  could  zealously  devote  himself  to  well-doing  when 
personal  interests  were  not  compromised.  In  thus  describing 
Judas,  we  draw  not  the  picture  of  a  solitary  monster.  Men 
of  such  a  type  are  by  no  means  so  rare  as  some  may  imagina 
History,  sacred  and  profaue>  supplies  numerous  examples  of 
them,  playing  an  important  part  in  human  affairs.  Balaam, 
who  had  the  vision  of  a  prophet  and  the  soul  of  a  miser, 
was  such  a  man.  Robespierre,  the  evil  genius  of  the  French 
Bevolution,  was  another.  The  man  who  sent  thousands  to 
the  guillotine  had  in  his  younger  days  resigned  his  office  as 
a  provincial  judge,  because  it  was  against  his  conscience  to 
pronotmce  sentence  of  death  on  a  culprit  found  guilty  of  a 
capital  offence.^  A  third  example,  more  remarkable  than  either, 
may  be  fotmd  in  the  famous  Greek  Alcibiades,  who,  to  un- 
bounded ambition,  unscrupulousness,  and  licentiousness,  united 
a  warm  attachment  to  the  greatest  and  best  of  the  Greeks. 
The  man  who  in  after  years  betrayed  the  cause  of  his  native 
city,  and  went  over  to  the  side  of  her  enemies,  was  in  his 
youth  an  enthusiastic  admirer  and  disciple  of  Socratea  How 
he  felt  towards  the  Athenian  sage,  may  be  gathered  from  words 
put  into  his  mouth  by  Plato  in  one  of  his  dialogues :  words 
which  involuntarily  suggest  a  parallel  between  the  speaker  and 
the  imworthy  follower  of  a  greater  than  Socrates  :  "  I  experi- 
ence towards  this  man  alone  (Socrates)  wha^  no  one  would 
believe  me  capable  of :  a  sense  of  shame.  For  X  ani  conscious 
of  an  inability  to  contradict  him,  and  decline  to  do  what  he 
bids  me  ;  and  when  I  go  away,  I  feel  myself  overcome  by  the 
desire  of  popular  esteem.  Therefore  I  flee  from  him,  and 
avoid  him.  But  when  I  see  him,  I  am  ashamed  of  my  admis- 
sions, and  oftentimes  I  would  be  glad  if  he  ceased  to  exist 
among  the  living ;  and  yet  I  know  well,  that  were  that  to 
happen,  I  should  be  still  more  grieved."* 

*  Carlyle,  French  Revolution,  voL  i  pp.  170-1. 
'  Plato,  2v/»r«V/«y :  Alcibiades  loquUur, 


JUDAS  ISCABIOT.  375 

The  character  of  Judas  being  such  as  we  have  described, 
the  possibility  at  least  of  his  turning  a  traitor  becomes  com- 
prehensible. One  who  loves  himself  more  than  any  man, 
however  good,  or  any  cause,  however  holy,  is  always  capable 
of  bad  faith  more  or  less  heinous.  He  is  a  traitor  at  heart 
from  the  outset,  and  all  that  is  wanted  is  a  set  of  circumstances 
calculated  to  bring  into  play  the  evil  elements  of  his  nature. 
The  question  therefore  arises.  What  were  the  circumstances 
which  converted  Judas  from  a  possible  into  an  actual  traitor  ? 

This  is  a  question  very  hard  indeed  to  answer.  The  crime 
committed  by  Iscariot,  through  which  he  has  earned  for  himself 
*'  a  frightful  renown,"  remains,  in  spite  of  all  the  discussion 
whereof  it  has  been  the  subject,  still  mysterious  and  imac- 
countable.  Many  attempts  have  been  made  to  assign  probable 
motives  for  the  nefarious  deed,  some  tending  to  excuse  the 
doer,  and  others  to  aggravate  his  guilt ;  all  more  or  less  con- 
jectural, and  none  perfectly  satisfactory.  As  for  the  Grospel 
narratives,  they  do  not  explain,  but  merely  record,  the  wicked- 
ness of  Judas.  The  synoptical  evangelists  do  indeed  mention 
that  the  traitor  made  a  bargain  with  the  priests,  and  received 
from  them  a  simi  of  money  for  the  service  rendered ;  and 
John,  in  his  narrative  of  the  anointing  at  Bethany,  teikes 
occasion  to  state  that  the  fault-findiQg  disciple  was  a  thief, 
appropriating  to  his  own  uses  money  out  of  the  common  purse, 
of  which  he  had  charge.^  These  facts,  of  course,  show  Iscariot 
to  have  been  a  covetous  man.  None  but  a  man  of  greedy, 
covetous  spirit  could  have  taken  money  for  such  a  service. 
A  vindictive  man,  whose  vanity  had  been  wounded,  or  who 
fancied  himself  in  some  way  wrpnged,  might  play  the  traitor 
for  love  of  revenge,  but  he  would  scorn  to  be  paid  for  his  work. 
The  petty  pilfering  from  the  bag  was  also  a  sure  sign  of  a 
mean,  sordid  soul  Perhaps  the  very  fact  of  his  being  the 
purse-bearer  to  the  company  of  Jesus  may  be  regarded  83  an 
indication  that  his  heart  hankered  after  greed.  He  got  the 
bag  to  carry,  we  imagine,  because  the  other  disciples  were  all 
supremely  careless  about  money  matters,  while  he  had  decided 
proclivities  towards  finance,  and  showed  a  desire  to  have 
charge  of  the  superfluous  funds.     All  the  rest  would  be  only 

^  John  xii  6. 


376  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

too  glad  to  find  a  brother  willing  to  take  the  trouble ;  and 
having  imbibed  the  spirit  of  their  Master^s  precept.  Take  no 
thought  for  the  morrow,  they  would  not  think  of  presenting 
themselves  as  rival  candidates  for  the  office. 

The  evangelists  do  therefore  most  distinctly  represetft  Judas 
as  a  covetous  man.  But  they  do  not  represent  his  covetous- 
ness  as  the  sole,  or  even  as  the  principal,  motive  of  his  crima 
That,  indeed,  it  can  hardly  have  been.  For,  in  the  first  place, 
would  it  not  have  been  a  better  speculation  to  have  continued 
purse-bearer,  with  facilities  for  appropriating  its  contents,  than 
to  sell  his  Master  for  a  paltry  sum  not  exceeding  five  pounds?^ 
Then  what  could  induce  a  man  whose  chief  and  ruling  passion 
was  to  amass  money  to  become  a  disciple  of  Jesus  at  all  ? 
Surely  following  Him  who  had  no  place  where  to  lay  His 
head  was  not  a  likely  way  to  money-making  !  Then,  finally, 
how  account  for  the  repentance  of  the  traitor,  so  great  in  its 
vehemence,  though  most  unholy  in  its  nature,  on  the  hypo- 
thesis that  his  sole  object  was  to  gain  a  few  pieces  of  silver  ? 
Avarice  may  make  a  man  of  splendid  talents  thoroughly  mer- 
cenary and  unscrupulous,  as  is  said  to  have  been  the  case 
with  the  famous  Duke  of  Marlborough  ;  but  it  is  rarely, 
indeed,  that  a  man  given  up  to  avaricious  habits  takes 
seriously  to  heart  the  crimes  committed  under  their  influence. 
It  is  the  nature  of  avarice  to  destroy  conscience,  and  to  make 
all  things,  however  sacred,  venaL  Whence,  then,  that  mighty 
volcanic  upheaving  in  the  breast  of  Judas  ?  Surely  other 
passions  were  at  work  in  his  soul  when  he  sold  his  Lord,  than 
the  cold  and  hardening  love  of  gain  ! 

Pressed  by  this  difficulty,  some  have  suggested  that,  in 
betraying  Jesus,  Judas  was  actuated  principally  by  feelings  of 
jealousy  or  spite,  arising  out  of  internal  dissensions  or  ima- 
gined injuries.  This  suggestion  is  in  itself  not  improbable 
Offences  might  very  easily  come  from  various  sources.  The 
mere  fact  that  Judas  was  not  a  Galilean,^  but  a  native  of 
another  province,  might  give  rise  to  misunderstanding. 
Human  sympathies  and  antipathies  depend  on  very  little 
things.  Kinsmanship,  a  common  name,  or  a  XK)inmon  birth- 
place, have  far  more  power  than  the   grand   bonds  which 

^  Renan,  Vie  de  JeMts^  p.  881.  '  Vide  cap.  iv. 


JUDAS  ISCARIOT.  377 

connect  us  with  all  the  race.  In  religion  the  same  remark 
holds  good.  The  ties  of  a  common  Lord,  a  common  hope,  and 
a  common  spiritual  life,  are  feeble,  as  compared  with  those  of 
sect  and  sectional  religious  custom  and  opinion.  Then  who 
knows  what  offences  sprang  from  those  disputes  {unong  the 
disciples  who  should  be  the  greatest  in  the  kingdom  ?  What 
if  the  man  of  Kerioth  had  been  made  to  feel  that,  whoever 
was  to  be  the  greatest,  he  at  least  had  no  chance,  not  being 
a  Galilean  ?  The  mean,  narrow  habits  of  Judas  as  treasurer 
would  be  a  third  cause  of  bad  feeling  in  the  apostolic  com- 
pany. Supposing  his  dishonesty  to  have  escaped  observation, 
his  tendency  to  put  the  interest  of  the  bag  above  the  objects 
for  which  its  contents  were  destined,  and  so  to  dole  out  sup- 
plies either  for  the  company  or  for  the  poor  grudgingly,  would 
be  sure  to  be  noticed,  and,  being  noticed,  would  certainly,  in 
such  an  outspoken  society,  not  fail  to  be  remarked  on.^ 

These  reflections  show  how  ill-ieeling  might  have  arisen 
between  Judas  and  his  fellow-disciples ;  but  what  we  have  to 
account  for  is  the  hatred  of  the  false  disciple  against  his 
Master.  Had  Jesus,  then,  done  anything  to  offend  the  man  by 
whom  He  was  betrayed  ?  Yes !  He  had  seen  through  him, 
and  that  was  offence  enough  !  For,  of  course,  Judas  knew  that 
he  was  seen  through.  Men  cannot  live  together  in  close  fel- 
lowship long  without  coming  to  know  with  what  feelings  they 
are  regarded  by  each  other.  K  I  distrust  a  brother,  he  will 
find  it  out,  even  should  I  attempt  to  conceal  it.  But  the 
guileless  and  faithful  One  would  make  no  attempt  at  conceal- 
ment. He  would  not,  indeed,  offensively  obtrude  His  distrust 
on  the  notice  of  Judas  ;  but  neither  would  He  studiously  hide 
it,  to  make  matters  go  smoothly  between  them.  He  who  so 
faithfully  corrected  the  faults  of  the  other  disciples,  would  do 
His  duty  to  this  one  also,  and  make  him  aware  that  He  re- 
garded his  spirit  and  evil  habits  with  disapprobation,  in  order 

*  Renan,  Vie  de  Jesua,  p.  382. 

The  poor  were  not  forgotten  by  Jesos  and  Hib  disciples  (John  JoL  5,  xiii. 
29).  When  supplies  overflowed,  they  were  not  hoarded  for  to-morrow,  but  for 
the  destitute.  That  they  had  more  than  they  needed  was  the  result  of  the  love 
of  grateful  souls  (Luke  viii.  1-3),  and  the  bag  was  kept,  that  nothing  might  be 
wasted  ;  for  the  ethics  of  Jesus  condemn  waste  as  strongly  as  they  discoun- 
tenance carefulness.     "  Gather  up  the  fragments,"  etc. 


378  THE  TRAINIKO  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

to  bring  him  to  repentance.  And  what  the  effect  of  snch 
dealing  would  be^  it  is  not  difficult  to  imagine.  On  a  Peter^ 
correction  had  a  most  wholesome  inJBuence ;  it  brought  him  at 
once  to  a  right  mind.  In  the  case  of  a  Judas  the  result  would 
be  very  different  The  mere  consciousness  that  Jesus  did  not 
think  well  of'  him,  and  still  more  the  shame  of  an  open  rebuke^ 
would  breed  sullen  resentment  and  ever-deepening  alienation 
of  heart ;  till  at  length  love  was  turned  to  hatred,  and  the 
impenitent  disciple  began  to  cherish  vindictive  passions. 

The  manner  in  which  the  betrayal  was  gone  about  supports 
the  idea  that  the  agent  was  actuated  by  malicious,  revengeful 
feelings.  Not  content  with  giving  such  information  as  would 
enable  the  Jewish  authorities  to  get  their  victim  into  their 
hands,  Judas  conducted  the  band  that  was  sent  to  apprehend 
his  Master,  and  even  pointed  Him  out  to  them  by  an  affec- 
tionate salutation.  To  one  in  a  vengeful  mood  that  kiss  might 
be  sweet ;  but  to  a  man  in  any  other  mood,  even  though  he 
were  a  traitor,  how  abhorrent  and  abominable !  The  saluta- 
tion was  entirely  gratuitous:  it  was  not  necessary  for  the 
success  of  the  plot ;  for  the  military  detachment  was  furnished 
with  torches,  and  Judas  could  have  indicated  Jesus  to  them, 
while  he  himself  kept  in  the  background.  But  that  way 
would  not  satisfy  a  bosom  friend  turned  to  be  a  mortal 
enemy.^ 

Along  with  malice  and  greed,  the  instinct  of  self-preserva- 
tion may  have  had  a  place  among  the  motives  of  Judas. 
Perfidy  might  be  recommended  by  the  suggestions  of  selfish 
prudence.  The  traitor  was  a  shrewd  man,  and  believed  that 
a  catastrophe  was  near.  He  understood  better  than  his  single- 
minded  brethren  the  situation  of  affairs ;  for  the  children  of 
this  world  are  wiser  in  their  generation  than  the  children  of 
light.  The  other  disciples,  by  their  generous  enthusiasms 
and  patriotic  hopes,  were  blinded  to  the  signs  of, the  times; 
but  the  false  disciple,  just  because  he  was  less  noble,  was 
more  discerning.    Disaster,  then,  being  imminent,  what  was  to 

'  Renan,  Vie  de  Jesiu,  favours  the  idea  that  Judas  was  actuated  hj  spite. 
He  remarks,  on  the  number  of  denunciators  connected  with  secret  societies : 
'*  Un  l^ger  d^pit,"  he  says,  "  suffisait  pour  faire  d'un  sectaire  tin  traitre  "  (p. 
882). 


JUDAS  ISCARIOT.  379 

be  done  ?  What  but  turn  king's  evidence  and  make  terms 
for  himself,  so  that  Christ's  loss  might  be  his  gain  ?  If  this 
baseness  could  be  perpetrated  imder  pretence  of  provocation, 
why  then,  so  much  the  better ! 

These  observations  help  to  bring  the  crime  of  Judas  Iscariot 
within  the  range  of  himian  experience.  And  on  this  account 
it  was  worth  our  while  to  make  them ;  for  it  is  not  desirable 
that  we  should  think  of  the  traitor  as  an  absolutely  unique 
character,  as  the  solitary  perfect  incarnation  of  satanic  wicked- 
ness.^ We  should  rather  so  think  of  his  crime  as  that  the 
effect  of  contemplating  it  on  our  minds  shall  be  to  make  us, 
like  the  disciples,  ask.  Is  it  I  ?  Is  it  I  ?  *  "  Who  can  under- 
stand his  eiTors  ?  Keep  back  Thy  servant  from  presumptuous 
sins."  There  have  been  many  traitors,  besides  Judas,  who, 
from  malice  or  for  gain,  have  played  false  to  noble  men  and 
noble  causes ;  some  of  them  perhaps  even  worse  men  than  he. 
It  was  his  unenviable  distinction  to  betray  the  most  exalted 
of  all  victims  ;  but  many  who  have  been  substantially  guilty 
of  his  sin  have  not  taken  it  so  much  to  heart,  but  have  been 
able  to  live  happily  after  their  deed  of  villany  was  wrought 

Yet,  while  it  is  important  for  our  warning  not  to  conceive 
of  Judas  as  an  isolated  sinner,  it  is  also  most  desirable  that 
we  should  regard  his -crime  as  an  incomprehensible  mystery  of 
iniquity.  It  is  in  this  light  that  the  fourth  evangelist  would 
have  us  look  at  it  He  could  have  told  us  much  about  the 
mutual  relations  of  Judas  and  Jesus  tending  to  explain  the 
deed  of  the  former.  But  he  has  not  chosen  to  dp  so.  The 
only  explanation  he  gives  of  the  traitor's  crime  is,  that  Satan 
had  taken  possession  of  him.  This  he  mentions  twice  over 
in  one  chapter,  as  if  to  express  his  own  horror,  and  to  awaken 
similar  horror  in  his  readers.'  And  to  deepen  the  impression, 
after  relating  the  exit  of  Judas,  he  adds  the  suggestive  reflec- 
tion that  it  took  place  after  nightfall:    ''He  then,  having 

^  Sach  is  the  view  of  Daub  in  Mb  Jvda*  Isecuriot,  oder  Da9  Bdse  in  Fer- 
hdUniss  zum  Outen, 

'  The  disciples  first  trembled,  each  one  for  himself ;  then,  alter  recovering 
their  compoenre,  began  to  wonder  who  it  conld  be ;  and  finally,  Peter  made  a 
sign  to  John,  who  was  next  Jesns,  to  inquire. 

'  John  ziiL  2,  27.  Satan  entered  Judas  first  as  the  Satan  of  wicked  par- 
pose  ;  then,  after  the  sop  (Christ's  challenge  to  Jndas),  as  the  Satan  of  action. 


380  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELYK 

received  the  sop,  went  immediately  out :  and  ii  was  nighiT 
Fit  time  for  such  an  errand  ! 

Judas  went  out  and  betrayed  his  Lord  to  death,  and  then 
he  went  and  took  his  own  life.  What  a  tragic  accompani- 
ment to  the  crucifixion  was  that  suicide  1  What  an  impressive 
illustration  of  the  evil  of  a  double  mind !  To  be  happy  in 
some  fashion,  Judas  should  either  have  been  a  better  man  or 
a  worse.  Had  he  been  better,  hp  would  have  been  saved 
from  his  crime ;  had  he  been  worse,  he  would  have  escaped 
torment  before  the  time.  As  it  was,  he  was  bad  enough  to 
do  the  deed  of  infamy,  and  good  enough  to  be  unable  to 
bear  the  burden  of  its  guilt  Woe  to  such  a  man !  Better 
for  him,  indeed,  that  he  had  never  been  bom  ! 

What  a  melancholy  end  was  that  of  Judas  to  an  auspicious 
beginning !  Chosen  to  be  a  companion  of  the  Son  of  man, 
and  an  eye  and  ear  witness  of  His  work,  once  engaged  in 
preaching  the  gospel  anjd  casting  out  devils ;  now  possessed  of 
the  devil  himself,  driven  on  by  him  to  damnable  deeds,  and 
finally  employed  by  a  righteous  Providence  to  take  vengeance 
on  his  own  crime.  In  view  of  this  history,  how  shallow  the 
theory  that  resolves  all  moral  differences  between  men  into 
the  effect  of  circumstancea !  Who  was  ever  better  circum- 
stanced for  becoming  good  than  Judas  ?  Yet  the  very 
influences  which  ought  to  have  fostered  goodness  served  only 
to  provoke  into  activity  latent  evil.  Surely  there  are  pre- 
destined vessels  of  wrath  as  well  ^  predestined  vessels  of 
mercy ! 

If  the  conjecture  be  veil  founded,  that  disagreements 
among  the  disciples  had  their  own  share  in  putting  Judas 
into  bad  humour,  what  an  impressive  lesson  is  his  crime  on 
the  importance  of  a  good  understanding  being  maintained 
among  brethren  !  Who  can  tell  what  public  mischiefs,  what 
tragedies,  what  treasons,  may  arise  from  private  grudges  ? 
Two  churchmen  quarrel,  and  thenceforth  they  take  different 
roads  in  all  things.  Whom  the  one  loves,  the  other  feels 
bound  to  hate.  Whatever  view  of  a  public  question  the 
one  espouses,  the  other  as  a  matter  of  course  determinedly 
opposes ;  and  the  church  is  rent  asimder,  and  the  cause  of 
God  is  frustrated,  and  either  or  each  of  the  alienated  disciples 


\ 


JUDAS  ISCARIOT.  381 

repeats  the  part  of  Judas,  and  betrays  truth  and  the  King  of 
truth,  to  gratify  unholy,  wicked  resentments. 

Yet  one  other  reflection.  What  a  bitter  cross  must  the 
constant  presence  of  such  a  man  as  Judas  have  been  to  the 
pure,  loving  heart  of  Jesus !  Yet  how  patiently  it  was  borne 
for  years  !  Herein  He  is  an  exeunple  and  a  comfort  to  His 
true  followers,  and  for  this  end  among  others  had  He  this 
cross  to  bear.  The  Eedeemer  of  men  had  a  companion  who 
lifted  up  his  heel  against  Him,  that  in  this  as  in  all  other 
respects  He  might  be  like  unto,  and  able  to  succour,  His 
brethren.  Has  any  faithful  servant  of  Christ  to  complain 
that  his  love  has  been  requited  by  hatred,  his  truth  with  bad 
faith ;  or  that  he  is  obliged  to  treat  as  a  true  Christian  one 
whom  he  more  than  su^cts  to  be  «  hypocrite  ?  It  is  a  hard 
trial,  but  let  him  look  unto  Jesus  and  be  patient ! 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

the  dying  parent  and  his  little  ones  (still  beclinino  at 

table). 

Section  l — Words  of  Comfort  and  Counsel  to  the  Sorrowing 

Children. 

John  xiii.  31-^5,  xnr.  l-i,  15-21. 

THE  exit  of  Judas  into  the  darkness  of  night,  on  his  still 
darker  errand,  was  a  summons  to  Jesus  to  prepare  for 
deatL  Yet  He  was  thankful  for  the  departure  of  the  traitor. 
It  took  a  burden  off  His  heart,  and  allowed  Him  to  breathe 
and  to  speak  freely ;  and  if  it  brought  Him,  in  the  first  place, 
near  to  His  last  sufferings,  it  brought  Him  also  near  to  the 
ulterior  joy  of  resurrection  and  exaltation  to  glory.  There- 
fore His  first  utterance,  after  the  departure  took  place,  was  an 
outburst  of  unfeigned  gladness.  When  the  false  disciple  was 
gone  out,  and  the  sound  of  his  retiring  footsteps  had  died 
away,  Jesus  said:  "Now  is  the  Son  of  man  glorified:  and 
God  is  glorified  in  Him ;  and  God  shall  glorify  Him  in  Him- 
self, yea.  He  shall  straightway  glorify  Him."^ 

But  while,  by  a  faith  which  substantiated  things  hoped  for, 
and  made  evident  tilings  not  visible,  Jesus  was  able  to  see 
in  present  death  coming  glory.  He  remembered  that  He  had 
around  Him  disciples  to  whom,  in  their  weakness,  His  decease 
and  departure  would  mean  simply  bereavement  and  desola- 
tion. Therefore  He  at  once  turned  His  thoughts  to  them, 
and  proceeded  to  say  to  them  such  things  as  were  suitable  to 
their  inward  state  and  their  outward  situation. 

In  His  last  words  tO  His  own,  the  Saviour  employed  two 

*  John  xiii.  31,  32.     The  words  u  i  ef«;  Ihlarfti  i»  avr«  are  regarded  as 

spurious  by  Luthardt  and  other  critics. 


THE  DYING  PARENT:   WORDS  OF  COMFORT.  383 

different  styles  of  speech.  First,  He  spoke  to  them  as  a 
dying  parent  addressing  his  children ;  and  then  He  assumed 
a  loftier  tone,  and  spoke  to  them  as  a  dying  Lord  addressing 
His  servants,  friends,  and  representativea  The  words  of 
comfort  and  counsel  spoken  by  Jesus  in  the  former  capacity, 
we  find  in  the  passages  cited  from  the  thirteenth  and  four- 
teenth chapters  of  John's  Gk)spel ;  while  the  directions  of  the  , 
departing  Lord  to  His  future  apostles  are  recorded  in  the 
two  chapters  which  foUow.  We  have  to  consider  in  this 
chapter  the  dying  Parent's  last  words  to  His  sorrowing 
children. 

These,  it  wiU  be  observed,  were  not  spoken  in  one  con- 
tinuous address.  While  the  dying  Parent  spake,  the  children 
kept  asking  Him  child's  questions.  First  one,  then  another, 
then  a  third,  and  then  a  fourth,  asked  Him  a  question, 
suggested  by  what  He  had  been  saying.  To  these  questions 
Jesus  listened  patiently,  and  returned  answer  as  He  could. 
The  answers  He  gave,  and  the  things  He  meant  to  say, 
without  reference  to  possible  interrogations,  are  mixed  up 
together  in  the  narrative.  It  will  be  convenient  for  our 
purpose  to  separate  these  from  those ;  and  to  consider  first, 
taken  together,  the  words  of  comfort  spoken  by  Jesus  to  His 
disciples,  and  then  their  questionings  of  Him,  with  the  replies 
which  these  elicited. 

Knowing  to  whom  He  speaks,  Jesus  begins  at  once  with 
the  nursery  dialect.  He  addresses  His  disciples  not  merely 
as  children,  but  as  "  little  children,"  by  the  endearing  name 
expressing  His  tender  affection  towards  them,  and  His  com- 
passion for  their  weakness.  Then  He  alludes  to  His  death 
in  a  delicate  roundabout  way,  adapted  to  childish  capacity 
and  feelings.  He  tells  them  He  is  going  a  road  they  cannot 
follow,  and  that  they  will  miss  Him  as  children  miss  their 
father  when  he  goes  out  and  ijever  returns.  "  Yet  a  little 
while  I  am  with  you.  Ye  shall  seek  me :  and  as  I  said  unto 
the  Jews,  Whither  I  go,  ye  cannot  come ;  so  now  I  say 
to  you." 

After  this  brief,  simple  preface,  Jesus  went  on  to  give  His 
little  ones  His  first  dying  counsel.  That  was,  that  they 
should  love  one  another.     Surely  it  was  a  counsel  well  worthy 


/ 

384  ;i      T»  TKAININQ  OF  fHE  TWELVE.  ^ 

to  come  first !  For  what  solace  can  be  greater  to  orphaned 
ones  than  mutual  love  ?  Let  the  world  be  ever  so  dark 
and  cheerless,  while  brothers  in  affliction  are  true  brothers  to 
Oach  other  in  sympathy  and  reciprocal  helpfulness,  they  have 
an  unfailing  weU-spring  of  joy  in  the  desert  of  sorrow.  If, 
on  the  other  hand,  to  all  the  other  ills  of  life  there  be  added 
alienation,  distrust,,  antagonism, .  the  bereaved  are  desolate 
indeed ;  their  night  of  sorrow  hath  not  even  a  solitary  star 
to  alleviate  its  gloom. 

Anxious  to  secure  due  attention  to  a  precept  in  itself 
most  seasonable,  and  even  among  the  disciples  needing 
enforcement,  Jesus  conferred  on  it  all  the  dignity  and  im- 
portance of  a  new  commandment,  and  made  the  love  enjoined 
therein  the  distinctive  mark  of  Christian  discipleship.  "  A 
new  commandment,"  said  He,  "  I  give  unto  you,  that  ye  love 
one  another ;"  thus,  on  that  memorable  night,  adding  a  third 
novelty  to  those  already  introduced — the  new  sacrament  and 
the  new  covenant.  The  commandment  and  the  covenant 
were  new  in  the  same  sense ;  not  as  never  having  been  heard 
of  before,  but  as  now  for  the  first  time  procllEdmed  with  the 
due  emphasis,  and  assuming  their  rightful  place  of  supremacy 
above  the  details  of  Mosaic  moral  legislation  and  the  shadowy 
rites  of  the  legal  religious  economy.  Now  love  was  to  be  the 
outstanding  royal  law,  and  free  grace  was  to  antiquate  Sinaitic 
ordinancea  And  why  now  ?  In  both  cases,  because  Jesus 
was  about  to  die.  His  death  would  be  the  seal  of  the  New 
Testament,  and  it  would  exemplify  and  ratify  the  new  com- 
mandment. Hence  He  goes  on  to  say,  after  giving  forth  that 
new  law,  "  as  I  have  loved  yoiL"  The  past  tense  is  not  to 
be  interpreted  strictly  here :  the  perfect  must  be  taken  as  a 
futv/re  perfect,  so  as  to  include  the  death  which  was  the 
crowning  act  of  the  Saviour's  love.  "  Love  one  another," 
Jesus  would  say,  "  as  I  shall  have  loved  you,  and  as  ye  shall 
know  that  I  have  loved  you  when  ye  come  to  need  the 
consolation  of  so  loving  each  other."  So  imderstanding  His 
words,  we  see  clearly  why  He  caUs  the  law  of  love  new. 
His  own  love  in  giving  His  life  for  His  people  was  a  new 
thing  on  earth ;  and  a  love  among  His  followers,  one  towards 
another,  kindred  in  spirit  and  ready  to  do  the  same  thing  if 


THE  DTING  PARENT  :   WOBDS  OF  0(tt»OKi  385 

needful^  would  be  equally  a  novelty  at  which  the  wofld  would 
stare,  asking  in  wonder  whence  it  came,  till  at  length  it  per-' 
ceived  that  the  men  who  so  loved  had  been  with  Jesns. 

The  second  word  of  comfort  spoken  by  Jesus  to  the  little 
ones  He  was  about  to  leave  was  an  exhortation  to  faith: 
"  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled ;  believe  in  God,  and  believe 
in  me."^  The  exhortation  embraces  in  its  scopt  the  whole 
interests  of  the  disciples,  secular  and  spiritual,  temporal  and 
eternal  Their  dying  Master  recommends  them  first  to  exercise 
faith  in  God,  mainly  with  reference  to  temporal  anxieties. 
He  says  to  them,  in  effect :  "  I  am  going  to  leave  you,  my 
children  ;  but  be  not  afraid.  You  shall  not  be  in  the  world 
as  poor  orphans,  defenceless  and  improvided  for ;  God  my 
Father  will  take  care  of  you ;  trust  in  Divine  Providence, 
and  let  peace  rule  in  your  hearts."  Having  thus  exhorted 
them  to  exercise  faith  in  God  the  Provider,  Jesus  next  ex- 
horts His  little  ones  to  believe  in  Himself,  with  special  refer- 
ence to  those  spiritual  and  eternal  interests  for  the  sake  of 
which  they  had  left  all  and  followed  Him.  "Believing  in 
God  for  food  and  raiment,  believe  in  me  too,  and  be  assured 
that  all  I  said  to  you  about  the  kingdom  and  its  joys  and 
rewards  is  trua  Soon  ye  will  find  it  very  hard  to  believe 
this:  it  will  seem  to  you  as  if  the  promises  I  made  were 
deceptive,  and  the  kingdom  a  dream  and  a  hallucination.  But 
do  not  allow  such  dark  thoughts  to  take  possession  of  your 
minds :  recollect  what  you  know  of  me,  and  ask  yourselves 
whether  it  is  likely  that  He  whose  companions  you  have  been 
during  these  years,  would  deceive  you  with  romantic  promises 
that  were  never  to  be  fulfilled." 

The  kingdom  and  its  rewards ;  these  were  the  things  which 
Jesus  had  encouraged  His  followers  to  expect.  Of  these,  accord- 
ingly. He  proceeded  next  to  speak,  in  the  style  suited  to  the 
character  He  had  assumed, — that^  viz.,  of  a  dying  parent  ad- 
dressing his  children.    **  In  my  Father^s  house,"  said  He,  "  are 

^  John  ziv.  1.  The  verb  wsrnvtn  in  either  danse  may  be  either  imperatiye 
or  indicative,  and  four  different  renderings  are  possible.  The  rendering  in  the 
£ng.  ver.  and  that  given  above  come  practically  to  the  same  thing.  Even  in  the 
indicative,  Ye  believe  in  God,  an  imperative  is  implied:  Exerdse  and  draw  com- 
fort from  yonr  faith  in  God. 

S  B 


886  THE  TRAIKINa  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

many  mansions."  Here  was  a  cheering  prospect  for  them ! 
In  the  hour  of  despondency  the  little  ones  would  think  them- 
selves orphans,  without  a  home  either  in  earth  or  in  heaven. 
But  their  Friend  assures  them  that  they  should  not  merely 
have  a  home,  but  a  splendid  one ;  not  merely  a  humble  shed  to 
shelter  them  from  the  storm,  but  a  glorious  palace  to  reside 
in,  in  a  region  where  storms  were  imknown, — a  house  with  a 
great  many  rooms  in  it,  supplying  abundant  accommodation 
for  them  all,  incomparably  more  capacious  than  the  temple 
which  had  been  the  earthly  dwelling-place  of  Grod. 

This  child-like  yet  profound  saying  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  not 
only  cheering,  but  most  stimulating  to  the  imagination.  The 
"  many  mansions  *'  suggest  many  thoughts.  We  think  with 
pleasure  of  the  vast  numbers  which  the  many-mansioned 
house  is  capable  of  containing.  We  may  too,  harmlessly, 
though  perhaps  fancifully,  with  the  saints  of  other  ages,  think 
of  the  lodgings  in  the  Father^s  house  as  not  only  many  in 
number,  but  also  as  many  in  kind,  corresponding  to  the  classes 
or  ranks  of  the  residents.^  But  to  some  the  most  comfortable 
thought  of  all  suggested  by  this  pregnant  poetic  word  is  the 
certainty  of  an  eternal  life.  To  men  who  have  doubted  con- 
cerning the  life  beyond,  the  grand  desideratum  is  not  detailed 
information  respecting  the  site,  and  the  size,  and  the  archi- 
tecture of  the  celestial  city,  but  to  know  for  certain  that  there 
is  such  a  city,  that  there  is  an  house  not  made  with  hands 
eternal  in  the  heavens.  This  desideratum  is  supplied  in  this 
word  of  Christ.  For  whatever  the  many  mansions  may  mean 
besides,  they  do  at  the  least  imply  that  there  is  a  state  of 
happy  existence  to  be  reached  by  believers,  as  He  in  whom 
they  believe  reached  it,  viz.  through  death.  The  life  ever- 
lasting, whatever  its  conditions,  is  undoubtedly  taught  hera 
And  it  is  taught  with  authority.  Jesus  speaks  as  one  who 
knows,  not  (like  Socrates)  as  one  who  merely  has  an  opinion 
on  the  subject      At  his  farewell  meeting  with  his  friends 

^  For  C3rprian'8  opinion,  see  p.  257  of  this  work.  The  same  idea  ocean  in 
Irensus,  Hcsres,  v.  86.  Ko  doubt  there  is  a  tmth  in  thid  view.  There  wiU  he 
Christians  of  various  ranks  in  heaven — ^princes  and  doorkeepers ;  alao  of  TBrioQi 
schools.  High  Church,  Broad  Church,  and  Low  Church,  Ma  at  \mX  to  belieie 
each  other  to  he  Christians. 


THS  DTINO  PABENT :   WOBDS  OF  COHFgfiT.  387 

before  he  drank  the  hemlock  cup,  the  Athenian  sage  dis- 
cussed with  them  the  question  of  the  immortality  of  the  souL 
On  that  question  he  strongly  maintained  the  afiBrmative ;  but 
still  only  as  one  who  looked  on  it  as  a  fair  subject  for  dis- 
cussion, and  knew  that  there  was  a  good  deal  to  be  said  on 
both  sides.  But  Jesus  does  more  than  maintain  the  affirma- 
tive on  the  subject  of  the  life  to  come.  He  speaks  thereon 
with  oracular  confidence,  offering  to  us  not  the  firail  raft  of  a 
probable  opinion,  whereon  we  may  perilously  saU  down  the 
stream  of  life  towards  death ;  but  the  strong  ship  of  a  divine 
word,  wherein  one  may  sail  securely,  for  which  Socrates  and 
his  companions  sighed.^  And  He  so  speaks  with  a  full  sense 
of  the  responsibility  He  thereby  takes  upon  Himself  "  If  it 
were  not  so,"  He  remarked  to  His  disciples,  "  I  would  have 
told  you;"  which  is  as  much  as  to  say,  that  one  should  not 
encourage  such  expectations  as  He  had  led  them  to  entertain 
imless  he  were  sure  of  his  ground.  It  was  not  enough  to 
have  an  opinion  about  the  world  to  come :  one  who  took  the 
responsibility  of  asking  men  to  leave  this  present  world  for 
its  sake,  should  be  quite  certain  that  it  was  a  reality,  and  not 
a  dream. 

What  condescension  to  the  weakness  of  the  disciples  is 
shown  in  this  self-justifying  reflection  of  their  Lord !  What 
an  aid  also  it  lends  to  our  faith  in  the  reality  of  future  bliss ! 
Surely  such  an  one  as  Jesus  Christ  would  not  have  spoken  in 
this  way,  unless  He  had  possessed  authentic  information  about 
the  world  beyond  !  Look  at  Him  simply  as  a  man.  Did  He 
not  know  the  difference  between  opinion  and  knowledge,  pro- 
bability and  certainty ;  and  could  He  have  assumed,  in  con- 
nection with  the  former,  the  confident  tone  which  is  justifiable 
only  in  connection  with  the  latter,  even  when  expressing  His 
own  convictions,  much  more  when  dealing  with  the  convic- 
tions of  other  men  ?  The  man  Jesus  coidd  not  have  spoken 
with  such  confidence  at  all,  and  the  fact  that  He  does  so  speak 

'  PhxdOt  cap.  zxxY. :  "  One  must  do  one  of  two  things  (in  reference  to  the 
question  of  a  fatnre  state) :  either  learn  how  the  case  stands,  or  find  out ;  or  if 
these  are  impossible,  taking  the  best  and  least  easily  refated  of  human  opinions, 
and  embarking  on  it  as  on  a  raft  (r;^t)ic#),  sail  perilously  through  life  ;  uulesB 
one  could  more  securely  and  less  perilously  saU  upon  a  stronger  yessel  or  some 
divine  word  (x«7«v  hi»y  r/Mf).** 


33.1  ?3S  TSJklSISC  (Sr  "^gg  TW1E9X. 


]iinw3  r£flc  He  ia  mam  'iiaxi  tiiui,  Si^  sealis  'if  i:^  wodi 
ahnvi^  »  vmAdavdj  bccanae  Hid  ons  bcsL  AfniF.  and  b  a&m 

(»ii9cLiciniL  "Tix  the  .ighii  in.  vtuida.  J^ssob  pceaous  ffis  owm 
fiksftck  Vi  HIa  Msct^ies.  -vtcIiGiic  ■^T^rggBty  TmrnfTig  3L  "^  I  so* 
soiii  He.  "*  ZA  zw^art  x  puhie  5:ir  jnaJ*^     WEmc  ;k  besxcifid 

men  wfu'>  'iiii  icc  Truferwanii  i&e  my^coy  oc  «r&z2C  3  Jatt^ 
there  !rjixje[  nrx  be  %  'iaA^  insLcxc  Than  done  *i£  tihe  eleron  ift 
the  pr*sKiiu  ■g'Xtf.  lu  WIS  js  if  Hipir  hope  •?£  &  lifiiiafr  iiBg- 
iuiOL  xad  'i  Kffi*mpi;7aa  D>  T^nrf.  hod  ensued  one  a  A»?TnowM^ 
and  «3  ff  -f '>sc:§  -Aetr  KiSfer  wtis  occ  a  d>csTisEi  onfi-  feeoaae 
He  via  H^'^rff  deeecraL  Y^  ^has  tiesidL  wii5ciL  seened  to 
aaj,  TLere  is  no  hcpe  f^r  j:^.  eij  chiLiFgL :  ririfre  b  n>  bat 
trir  Toti.  Tjfi  are  t-^t  ^jrphan:?.  vTks  Ci>  be  the  Tarr  meaas  Ift 
wtfch  their  hope  wijiiLd  ce  f:ililkil  and  a  ksne  seeored. 
Jes^^,  in  jjing  azui  leaTin^  the  euth.  wis  szaptr  gciii^  to  a 
La(»P7  land,  to  prepare  a  pl;ice  of  abode  fo€  His  dukfaen; 
intendio?,  when  all  thiEo?  wee  readr,  u>  reconi.  and  take 
them  to  their  new  home,  where  tfaeT  «h*:<^i  dwell  with  Him 
tor  erer.  '^  Axkd  if  I  go  azkd  prepare  a  place  for  too,  I  will 
come  again,  and  reeeive  too  imto  myself:  that  where  I  am, 
there  ve  mar  be  also.** 

What  He  meant  by  "  j»epazing"  the  place,  and  when  He 
waa  to  come  again  for  those  He  left  behind,  Jesos  did  not 
explain.  He  only  added,  as  if  coaxing  them  to  take  a  cheer- 
ful view  of  the  sitnadon,  "  And  whither  I  go,  ye  know,  and 
the  way  ye  know ;"'  meaning,  "  Think  whither  I  go — to  the 
Father :  and  think  of  mv  death  as  meielv  mv  wav  thither ; 
and  80  let  my  absence  from  the  world  not  make  yon  sad,  nor 
my  death  seem  something  dreadfoL" 

The  third  Xayo9  r^  vap(ucXqa&i^  begins  at  the  fifteenth 
verse  of  the  same  chapter,  and  extends  to  the  twenty-first 

I  Th«  Ui  before  wf%9ftmt  in  the  mding  prefeiied  bj  Alfoid  and  othcn  It 
perplexing  for  ezpositori,  but  for  oar  object  it  is  not  neoeamy  to  adTctt  to  it 
at  all. 

>  Lnthardt  and  Alfoid  read  here,  jmu  Um  \yi,  mm-mym  >a«n  «^  a;»:  and 
wbithar  I  fp>—yt  know  the  way. 


1^ 


THE  DYING  PARENT  :   WORDS  OF  COMFORT.  389 

The  leading  thought  therein  is  the  promise  of  another  Com- 
forter who  should  take  the  place  of  Him  who  was  going  away, 
and  make  the  bereaved  feel  as  if  He  were  still  with  them.  In 
the  second  word  of  comfort,  Jesus  had  said  that  He  was  going 
to  provide  a  home  for  the  little  ones,  and  that  then  He  would 
return  and  take  them  to  it.  In  this  third  final  word  He 
virtually  promises  to  be  present  with  them  by  substitute, 
even  when  He  is  absent  "  I  will  pray  the  Father,**  He  says, 
'*  and  He  shall  give  you  another  Comforter,  that  He  may  abide 
with  you  for  ever "  ^  (not  for  a  season,  as  has  been  the  case 
with  me).  Then  He  tells  them  who  this  wonderful  Com- 
forter is :  His  name  is  "  the  Spirit  of  TrvihP  *  llien,  lastly. 
He  gives  them  to  understand  that  this  Spirit  of  Truth  will  be 
a  Comforter  to  them,  by  restoring,  as  it  were,  the  consciousness 
of  His  own  presence,  so  that  the  coming  of  this  other  Com- 
forter will  just  be,  in  a  sense,  His  own  spiritual  return.  "  I 
will  not  leave  you  comfortless,"  He  assures  them:  "I  will 
not  leave  you  orphans,  /will  come  to  you ;" '  promising  there- 
by not  a  different  thing,  but  the  same  thing  which  He  had 
promised  just  before,  in  different  terma.  How  the  other 
Comforter  would  make  Himself  an  alter  ego  of  the  departed 
one.  He  does  not  here  distinctly  explain.  At  a  subsequent 
stage  in  His  discourse.  He  did  inform  His  disciples  how  the 
wonder  would  be  achieved.  The  Spirit  would  make  the 
absent  Jesus  present  to  them  again,  by  bringing  to  their 
remembrance  aU  His  words,*  by  testifying  of  Him,*  and  by 
guiding  them  into  an  intelligent  apprehension  of  aU  Christian 
truth.^  All  this,  though  not  said  here,  is  sufficiently  hinted 
at  by  the  name  given  to  the  new  Paradete.  He  is  called 
the  Spirit  of  Truth,  not  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  elsewhere,  because 
He  was  to  comfort  by  enlightening  the  minds  of  the  disciples 
in  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  so  that  they  should  see  Him 
clearly  by  the  spiritual  eye,  when  He  was  no  longer  visible 
to  the  eye  of  the  body. 

This  spiritual  vision,  when  it  came,  was  to  be  the  true 
effectual  consolation  for  the  absence  of  the  Jesus  whom  the 
eleven  had  known  after  the  fiesL     It  would  be  as  the  dawn 

»  John  xiv.  16.  «  Ver.  17.  »  Ver.  18. 

«  Yer.  26.  >  John  xt.  26.  ^  John  zri.  18,  14. 


390  TSR  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

of  day,  which  banishes  the  fears  and  discomforts  of  the  night 
While  the  night  lasts,  all  comforts  are  but  partial  alleviations 
of  discomfort  A  father^s  hand  and  voice  have  a  reassuring 
efifect  on  the  timid  heart  of  his  child,  as  they  walk  together 
by  night ;  but  while  the  darkness  lasts,  the  little  one  is  liable 
to  be  scared  by  objects  dimly  seen,  and  distorted  by  fear- 
stricken  fancy  into  fantastic  forms.  "  In  the  night-time  men 
(much  more  children)  think  every  bush  a  thief;"  and  all  can 
sympathize  with  him  who  said,  "  It  is  my  nature  to  be  afraid 
of  darkness."  light  is  welcome  even  when  it  only  reveals  to 
us  the  precise  nature  and  extent  of  our  miseries.  If  it  do  not 
in  that  case  drive  sorrow  away,  it  helps  at  least  to  make  it 
calm  and  sober. 

Such  cold  comfort,  however,  was  not  what  Jesus  promised 
His  followers.  The  Spirit  of  Truth  was  not  to  come  merely 
to  show  them  their  desolation  in  all  its  nakedness,  and  to 
reconcile  them  to  it  as  inevitable,  by  teaching  them  to  regard 
their  early  hopes  as  romantic  dreams,  the  kingdom  of  Gk)d  as 
a  mere  ideal,  and  the  death  of  Jesus  as  the  fate  that  awaits 
every  earnest  attempt  to  realize  that  ideal  Miserable  com- 
fort this !  to  be  told  that  all  earnest  religion  must  end  in 
infidelity,  and  all  enthusiasm  in  despair ! 

The  third  word  of  consolation  was  introduced  by  an  in- 
junction laid  by  Jesus  on  His  disciples.  "  If  ye  love  me," 
said  He  to  them,  "  keep  my  commandments."  It  is  probable 
that  the  speaker  meant  here  to  set  the  true  way  of  showing 
love  over  against  an  unprofitable,  bootless  one,  which  His 
hearers  were  in  danger  of  taking ;  that,  namely,  of  grieving 
over  His  loss.  We  may  paraphrase  the  words  so  as  to  indi- 
cate the  connection  of  thought  somewhat  as  follows :  *'  If  ye 
love  me,  show  not  your  love  by  idle  sorrow,  but  by  keeping 
my  commandments;  whereby  ye  shaU  render  to  me  a  real 
service.  Let  the  precepts  which  I  have  taught  you  from 
time  to  time  be  your  concern,  and  be  not  troubled  about  your- 
selves. Leave  your  future  in  my  hands ;  I  will  look  after  it : 
for  I  wiU  pray  the  Father,  and  He  will  send  you  another 
Comforter."  ^ 

'  The  words  of  Qermanicns  dying  (at  Antioch  a.d.  19 :  supposed  to  be  poisoned 
hj  direction  of  Tiberius)  to  his  friends  occur  to  the  mind  here :    "  Non  hoc 


THS  DYINQ  PABENT :   WOBDS  OF  COHPOBT.  391 

But  this  paraphrase,  though  true  so  far  as  it  goes,  does  not 
exhaust  the  meaning  of  this  weighty  word.  Jesus  prefieuses 
the  promise  of  the  Comforter  by  an  injimction  to  keep  His 
commandments,  because  He  wishes  His  disciples  to  tmderstand 
that  the  fulfihnent  of  the  promise  and  the  keeping  of  the 
commandments  go  together.  This  truth  is  hinted  at  by  the 
word  "  and  "  which  forms  the  link  of  connection  between  pre- 
cept and  promise ;  and  it  is  reiterated  under  various  modes 
of  expression  in  the  passage  we  are  now  considering.  Xhe 
necessity  of  moral  fidelity  in  order  to  spiritual  illumination  is 
plainly  taught  when  the  promised  Comforter  is  described  as 
a  Spirit  "whom  the  world  cannot  receive,  because  it  seeth 
Him  not,  neither  knoweth  Him."^  It  is  still  more  plainly 
taught  in  the  last  verse  of  this  section :  "  He  that  hath  my 
commandments,  and  keepeth  them,  he  it  is  that  loveth  me ; 
and  he  that  loveth  me  shall  be  loved  of  my  Father ;  and  I  will 
love  him,  and  will  manifest  myself  to  him."'  As  in  His  first 
great  sermon  (on  the  mount)  Jesus  had  said,  "Blessed  are 
the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  Gk)d  ; ''  so  in  His  farewell 
discourse  to  His  own.  He  says  in  effect :  Be  pure  in  heart, 
and  through  the  indwelling  Spirit  of  Truth  ye  shall  see  me, 
even  when  I  am  become  invisible  to  the  world.' 

Life  and  light  go  together :  such  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  as  of  all  Scripture.  Keeping  in  mind  this  great  truth, 
we  comprehend  the  diverse  issues  of  religious  perplexities; 
in  one  resulting  in  the  illuminism  of  infidelity ;  in  another, 
in  an  enlightened,  unwavering  faith.  The  "illumination" 
which  consists  in  the  extinction  of  the  heavenly  luminaries 
of  faith  and  hope,  is  the  penalty  of  not  faithfally  keeping 
Christ's  commandment's ;  that  which  consists  in  the  restora- 
tion of  the  spiritual  lights  after  a  temporary  obscuration  by 
the  clouds  of  doubt,  is  the  reward  of  holding  fast  moral 
integrity  when  faith  is  eclipsed,  and  of  fearing  Gk)d  while 
walking  in  darkness.     A  man,  e.g,,  who,  having  believed  for 

pnecipntun  amicomm  nmnns  eat,  prosequi  defanctam  ignavo  queesta :  sed  qius 
yoluerit   xneminiBse,   quse   mandayerit   ezsequi :   flebont   Germanicum  etiam 
ignoti :  vindicabitia  Yos,  A  me  potius  qnam  fortnnam  meam  foyebatia." — ^Taciti 
Annal.  ii.  71. 
•  John  xiT.  17.  •  Jobn  xiv.  21.  "  John  xiT.  1 9. 


392  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

a  time  the  divinity  of  Christ  and  the  life  to  come,  ends  by 
believing  that  Jesus  was  only  a  deluded  enthusiast,  and  that 
the  divine  kingdom  is  but  a  beautiful  dream,  will  not  be  found 
to  have  made  any  great  effort  to  realize  his  own  ideal,  cer- 
tainly  not  to  have  been  guilty  of  the  foUy  of  suffering  for  it. 
To  many,  the  creed  which  resolves  all  religion  into  imprac- 
ticable ideds  is  very  convenient.  It  saves  a  world  of  trouble 
and  pain ;  ft  pennits  them  to  think  fine  thoughts,  without  re- 
qipring  them  to  do  noble  actions,  and  it  substitutes  romancing 
about  heroism  in  the  place  of  being  heroes. 


Section  ii. — The  Children's  Questions,  and  the  Adieu, 

John  xtii.  86-88,  xiv.  6-7,  8-14,  22-81. 

The  questions  put  successively  by  four  of  the  little  ones  to 
their  dying  Parent  now  invite  our  attention. 

The  first  of  these  was  asked  by  the  disciple  who  was  ever 
the  most  forward  to  speak  his  mind — Simon  Peter.  His 
question  had  reference  to  the  intimation  made  by  Jesus  about 
His  going  away.  Peter  had  noted  and  been  alarmed  by  that 
intimation.  It  seemed  to  hint  at  danger ;  it  plainly  spoke  of 
separation.  Tormented  with  imcertainty,  terrified  by  the  vague 
presentiment  of  hidden  peril,  grieved  at  the  thought  of  being 
parted  from  his  beloved  Master,  he  could  not  rest  till  he  had 
penetrated  the  mystery ;  and  at  the  very  first  pause  in  the  dis- 
course he  abruptly  inquired,  "Lord,  whither  goest  Thou?" 
thinking,  though  he  did  not  say,  "  Where  Thou  goest,  I  will  go." 

It  was  to  this  unexpressed  thought  that  Jesus  directed  His 
reply.  He  did  not  say  where  He  was  going ;  but,  leaving  that 
to  be  inferred  from  His  studied  reserve,  and  from  the  tone  in 
which  He  spoke.  He  simply  told  Peter :  "  Whither  I  go,  thou 
canst  not  foUow  me  now,  but  thou  shalt  follow  me  afterwards." 
By  this  answer  He  showed  He  had  not  forgotten  that  it 
was  with  children  He  had  to  deal  He  does  not  look  for 
heroic  behaviour  on  the  part  of  Peter  and  his  brother  disciples 
at  the  approaching  crisis.  He  does  indeed  expect  that  they 
shall  play  the  hero  by  and  by,  and  follow  Him  on  the  martyr's 


THE  DYING  PARENT:   THE  CHILDREN'S  QUESTIONS.        393 

path,  bearing  their  cross,  in  accordance  with  the  law  of  dis- 
cipleship  proclaimed  by  Himself  in  connection  with  the  first 
announcement  of  His  own  deatL  But  meantime  He  expects 
them  to  behave  simply  as  little  children,  running  away  in 
terror  when  the  moment  of  danger  arrives. 

While  this  was  the  idea  Jesus  had  of  Peter,  it  was  not 
the  idea  which  Peter  had  of  himself.  He  thought  himself 
no  child,  but  a  man  every  inch.  Dimly  apprehending  what 
following  his  Master  meant,  he  deemed  himself  perfectly  com- 
petent to  the  task  tww,  and  felt  almost  aggrieved  by  the  poor 
opinion  entertained  of  his  courage.  "Why,"  he  therefore  asked 
in  a  tone  of  injured  virtue,  "  Lord,  why  cannot  I  follow  Thee 
now  ?"  Is  it  because  there  is  danger,  imprisonment,  death, 
in  the  path  ?  K  that  be  all,  it  is  no  good  reason,  for  "  I  will 
lay  down  my  life  for  Thy  sake."  Ah,  that  *'  why,"  how  like  a 
child ;  that  self-confidence,  what  an  infallible  mark  of  spiritual 
weakness ! 

If  the  answer  of  Jesus  to  Peter's  first  question  was  indirect 
and  evasive,  that  which  He  gave  to  his  second  was  too  plain 
to  be  mistaken.  "  Wilt  thou,"  He  said,  taking  up  the  dis- 
ciple's words,  "  Wilt  thou  lay  down  thy  life  for  my  sake  ? 
Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee,  The  cock  shall  not  crow  till 
thou  hast  denied  me  thrice."  *  Better  for  Peter  had  he  been 
content  with  the  first  reply !  Yet  no :  not  better,  only  plea- 
santer  for  the  moment.  It  was  good  for  Peter  to  be  thus 
bluntly  told  what  his  Lord  thought  of  him,  and  to  be  shown 
once  for  all  his  own  picture  drawn  by  an  xmerring  hand.  It 
was  just  what  was  needed  to  lead  him  to  self-knowledge,  and 
to  bring  on  a  salutary  crisis  in  his  spiritual  history.  Already 
more  than  once  he  had  been  faithfully  dealt  with  for  faidts 
springing  from  his  characteristic  vices  of  forwardness  and  self- 
confidence.  But  such  correction  in  detail  had  produced  no 
deep  impression,  no  decisive  lasting  effect  on  his  mind.  He 
was  still  ignorant  of  himself,  still  as  forward,  self-confident, 
and  self-willed  as  ever,  as  the  declaration  he  had  just  made 

^  So  snbstantially  in  the  synoptical  Gospels  (Matt  xzvi.  33-85  ;  Mark  xiy.  30  ; 
Luke  xxlL  34).  The  hannony  of  this  subject  is  difficult.  Some  suppose  two 
allusions  to  Peter's  denial,  once  in  the  upper  chamber,  and  a  second  time  on  the 
way  to  Gethsemane.    See  Stier  for  this  yiew. 


396  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

in  his  sadness  delights  in  gloom.  He  waits  not  eagerly  for 
the  dawn  of  day ;  he  rather  takes  pleasure  in  the  night,  as 
congenial  to  his  present  frame  of  mind.  Good  men  of  melan- 
cholic temperament  are,  at  the  best,  like  men  walking  amid 
the  solemn  gloom  of  a  forest  Sadness  is  the  prevailing 
feeling  in  their  souls,  and  they  are  content  to  have  occasional 
broken  glimpses  of  heaven,  like  peeps  of  the  sky  through  the 
leafy  roof  of  the  wood.  But  Thomas  is  so  heavy-hearted,  that 
he  hardly  cares  even  for  a  glimpse  of  the  celestial  world ;  he 
looks  not  up,  but  walks  through  the  dark  forest  at  a  slow  pace, 
with  his  eyes  fixed  upon  the  ground. 

The  argumentative  proclivities  ^  of  this  disciple  appear  in  his 
words  as  well  as  his  proneness  to  despondency.  Another  man 
in  despairing  mood  might  have  said :  We  know  neither  end 
nor  way ;  we  are  utterly  in  the  dark  both  as  to  whither  you 
are  going,  and  as  to  the  road  by  which  you  are  to  go  thither. 
But  Thomas  must  needs  reason ;  his  mental  habit  leads  him 
to  represent  one  piece  of  ignorance  as  the  necessary  conse- 
quence of  another  :  We  know  not  the  terminus  ad  quern,  and 
therefore  it  is  impossible  that  we  can  know  the  way.  This 
man  is  afflicted  with  the  malady  of  thought ;  he  gives  reasons 
for  everything,  and  he  will  demand  reasons  for  everything. 
Here  he  demonstrates  the  impossibility  of  a  certain  kind  of 
knowledge ;  at  another  crisis  we  shall  find  him  insisting  on 
palpable  demonstration  that  his  Lord  is  indeed  risen  from 
the  dead. 

How  does  Jesus  reply  to  the  lugubrious  speech  of  Thomas  ? 
Most  compassionately  and  sympathetically,  now  as  at  another 
time.  To  the  curious  question  of  Peter  He  returned  an 
evasive  answer;  to  the  sad-hearted  Thomas,  on  the  other 
hand.  He  vouchsafes  information  which  had  not  been  asked. 
And  the  information  given  is  full  even  to  redundancy.  The 
disciple  had  complained  of  ignorance  concerning  the  end,  and 
especially  concerning  the  way;  and  it  would  have  been  a 
sufficient  reply  to  have  said.  The  Father  is  the  end,  and  I  am 
the  way.  But  the  Master,  out  of  the  fulness  of  His  heart, 
said  more  than  this.  With  firm,  emphatic  tones  He  uttered 
tliis  oracular  response,  meant  for  the  ear  not  of  Thomas  alone, 

^  On  the  80-called  Rationalism  of  Thomas,  see  cap.  xxviii.  sec  8. 


THE  DYING  PARENT:   THE  CHILDREN'S  QUESTIONS.        397 

but  of  all  the  world :  "  I  am  the  way,  and  the  truth,  and  the 
life.     No  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  me." 

Comparing  this  momentous  declaration  with  the  preceding 
word  of  consolation,  we  observe  a  change  in  the  mode  of  pre- 
senting the  truth.  The  Father  Himself  takes  the  place  of 
the  Father^s  house  with  its  many  mansions,  as  the  end ;  and 
Jesus,  instead  of  being  the  guide  who  shall  one  day  lead  His 
children  to  the  common  home,  becomes  Himself  the  way. 
The  kind  Master  alters  His  language,  in  gracious  accommoda- 
tion to  childish  capacities.  Of  Christians  at  the  best  it  may 
be  said,  in  the  words  of  Paul,  that  now,  in  this  present  time- 
life,  they  see  the  heavenly  and  the  eternal  as  through  a  glass, 
in  enigmas.^  But  the  disciples  at  this  crisis  in  their  history 
were  not  able  to  do  even  so  much.  Jesus  had  held  up  before 
their  eyes  the  brightly  polished  mirror  of  a  beautiful  parable 
concerning  a  house  of  many  mansions,  and  they  had  seen 
nothing  there ;  no  image,  but  only  an  opaque  surface.  The 
future  remained  dark  and  hidden  as  before.  What,  then,  was 
to  be  done  ?  Just  what  Jesus  did  Persons  must  be  sub- 
stituted for  places.  Disciples  weak  in  faith  must  be  addressed 
in  this  fashion :  Can  ye  not  comprehend  whither  I  am  going  ? 
Think,  then,  to  whom  I  go.  If  ye  know  nothing  of  the  place 
called  heaven,  know  at  least  that  ye  have  a  Father  there. 
And  as  for  the  way  to  heaven,  let  that  for  you  mean  me» 
Knowing  me,  ye  need  no  further  knowledge;  believing  in 
me,  ye  may  look  forward  to  the  future,  even  to  death  itself, 
without  fear  or  concern. 

Oh  that  doubting,  melancholy  Thomases  would  but  listen 
to  Him  who  speaketh  to  them  thus !  With  a  Father  in 
heaven,  and  with  Jesus  Christ  ever  in  our  eye  and  in  our 
heart,  we  might  get  through  this  world  very  comfortably,  not- 
withstanding the  darkness  which  hems  us  in  on  every  side. 

On  looking  more  narrowly  into  the  response  given  by  Jesus 
to  Thomas,  we  find  it  by  no  means  easy  to  satisfy  ourselves 
as  to  how  precisely  it  should  be  expounded.  The  very  fulness 
of  this  saying  perplexes  us ;  it  is  dark  with  excess  of  light. 
Interpreters  differ  as  to  how  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  life 
are  to  be  distinguished^  and  how  they  are  related  to  each  other. 

*  U  mifiyfutri^  1  Cor.  ijij.  12. 


398  THE  TBAIHING  OF  THE  TWELYEL 

One  offers,  as  a  paraphrase  of  the  text :  I  am  the  b^inniiig, 
the  middle,  and  the  end  of  the  ladder  which  leads  to  heaven ; 
another :  I  am  the  example,  the  teacher,  the  giver  of  eternal 
life  ;  while  a  third  subordinates  the  two  last  attributes  to  the 
first,  and  reads :  I  am  the  true  way  of  lifa^  Each  view  is 
true  in  itself,  yet  one  hesitates  to  accept  either  of  them  as 
exhausting  the  meaning  of  the  Saviour^s  words. 

Whatever  be  the  preferable  method  of  interpreting  these 
words  of  our  Lord,  two  things  at  least  are  clear  from  them. 
Jesus  sets  Himself  forth  here  as  all  that  man  needs  for  eternal 
salvation,  and  as  the  only  Saviour.  He  is  way,  truth,  life, 
everything  ;  and  He  alone  conducts  to  the  Father.  He  says 
to  men  in  effect :  **  What  is  it  you  want  ?  Is  it  light  ?  I  am 
the  light  of  the  world,  the  revealer  of  the  Father :  for  this  end 
I  came,  that  I  might  declare  Him.  Or  is  it  reconciliation  you 
want  ?  I  by  that  very  death  which  I  am  about  to  endure  am 
the  Reconciler,  My  very  end  in  dying  is  to  bring  you  who 
are  far  off  nigh  to  God,  as  to  a  forgiving,  gracious  Father. 
Or  is  it  life,  spiritual,  never-ending  life,  you  seek  ?  Believe 
in  me,  and  ye  shall  never  die  ;  or  though  ye  die,  I  will  raise 
you  again  to  enter  on  an  inheritance  that  is  incorruptible, 
undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away,  eternal  in  the  heavens. 
Let  all  who  seek  these  things  look  to  Me,  Look  to  me  for 
light,  not  to  rabbis  or  philosophers  ;  not  even  to  nature 
and  providence.  These  last  do  indeed  reveal  Grod,  but  they 
do  so  dimly.  The  light  of  creation  is  but  the  starlight  of 
theology,  and  the  light  of  providence  is  but  its  moonlight, 
while  I  am  the  sunlight  My  Father's  name  is  written  in 
hieroglyphics  in  the  works  of  creation;  in  providence  and 
history  it  is  written  in  plain  letters,  but  so  far  apart  that  it 
takes  much  study  to  put  them  together,  and  so  spell  out  the 
divine  name :  in  me  the  divine  name  is  written  so  that  he 
may  read  who  runs,  and  the  wisdom  of  God  is  become  rnilk 
for  babes.'     Look  to  me  also  for  reconciliation,  not  to  legal 

>  Luther,  Qrotias,  Augustine,  quoted  in  Lange,  Bibelwerk  das  Evang,  Johan. 

'  Verbum  caro  factum  est,  ut  infantie  nostro  lactesceret  sapientia  tua,  per 
quam  creasti  omnia.  August  Car^,  vii  18.  The  idea  that  Christ  became  man 
to  be  the  Revealer  of  God  is  made  yery  prominent  in  the  tract  of  Athanasiua, 


THE  DTINQ  PABENT:   THE  CHILDBEN'S  QUESTIONS.        399 

sacrifices.  That  way  of  appFoaching  (rod  is  antiquated  now. 
I  am  the  new,  the  living,  the  eternal  way  into  the  holy  of 
holies,  through  which  all  may  draw  near  to  the  divine  presence 
with  a  true  heart,  in  full  assurance  of  fEdth.  Look  to  me, 
finally,  for  eternal  blessedness.  I  am  He  who,  having  died, 
shaU  rise  again,  and  live  for  evermore,  and  shaU  hold  in  my 
hands  the  keys  of  Hades  and  of  death,  and  shall  open  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers." 

The  doctrine  that  in  Christ  is  the  fulness  of  grace  and  truth, 
is  very  comforting  to  those  who  know  Him  ;  but  what  of  those 
who  know  Him  not,  or  who  possess  only  such  an  implicit, 
xmconscious  knowledge,  as  hardly  merits  the  name  ?  Does 
the  statement  we  have  been  considering  exclude  such  from  the 
possibility  of  salvation  ?  It  does  not  It  declares  that  no 
man  cometh  to  the  Father  but  by  Christ,  but  it  does  not  say 
how  much  knowledge  is  required  for  salvatioa^  It  is  possible 
that  some  may  be  saved  by  Christ,  and  for  His  sake,  who 
know  very  little  about  Him  indeed.  This  we  may  infer  fix)m 
the  case  of  the  disciples  themselves.  What  did  they  know 
about  the  way  of  salvation  at  this  period  ?  Jesus  addresses 
them  as  persons  yet  in  ignorance  concerning  Himself,  saying : 
"  If  ye  had  known  me,  ye  should  have  known  my  Father  also." 
Nevertheless,  He  has  no  hesitation  in  speaking  to  them  as 
persons  who  shoidd  be  with  Him  in  the  Father's  housa  And 
what  shall  we  say  of  Job,  and  the  Syrophoenician  woman,  and' 
the  Ethiopian  eunuch,  and  Cornelius,  and  we  may  add,  after 
Calvin,  the  Syrian  courtier  Naaman  ?     We  cannot  say  more 

^  The  doctrine  of  the  Westminster  Confession  is  ambigaons  on  this  point. 
Its  words  are  :  "  Much  less  con  men  not  professing  the  Christian  religion  be 
saved  in  any  other  way  whatsoever,  be  they  ever  so  diligent  to  frame  their  lives 
according  to  the  light  of  nature,  and  the  law  of  that  religion  they  do  profess." 
This  statement  may  mean  either  that  the  persons  in  question  absolutely  cannot 
be  saved, — their  non-profession  of  the  Christian  religion  excluding  them  from 
being  saved  in  the  true  way,  and  all  other  ways  being  unavailable  ;  or  that  they 
cannot  be  saved  by  any  otlier  way  :  if  saved,  it  must  be  in  spite  of  other  ways, 
and  through  the  one  true  way— Christ.  The  statement  in  the  first  chapter, 
Of  the  Holy  Scripture^  seems  to  make  the  balance  incline  towards  the  former 
view.  In  that  chapter  the  insufficiency  of  the  light  of  nature  to  give  that 
knowledge  of  God  which  is  necessary  for  salvation  is  affirmed,  and  the  affirma- 
tion is  made  the  basis  of  the  doctrine  of  revelation.  The  strongest  statement  of 
aU  is  in  the  Larger  CaUehism,  Q.  60,  which  seems  to  affirm  positively  that  none 
can  be  saved  who  have  not  heard  the  gospeL 


'      400  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

than  the  great  theologian  of  Geneva  has  himself  said  concern- 
ing such  cases :  "  I  confess,"  he  writes,  "  (hat  in  a  certain 
respect  their  faith  was  implicit,  not  only  as  to  the  person  of 
Christ,  but  as  to  His  virtue  and  grace,  and  the  office  assigned 
Him  by  the  Father.  Meanwhile  it  is  certain  that  they  were 
imbued  with  principles  which  gave  some  taste  of  Christ,  how- 
ever slight."^  It  is  doubtful  whether  even  so  much  can  be 
said  of  Naaman  ;  though  Calvin,  without  evidence,  and  merely 
to  meet  the  exigencies  of  a  theory,  argues  that  it  would  have 
been  too  absurd,  when  Elisha  had  spoken  to  him  of  little 
matters,  to  have  been  silent  on  the  most  important  subject. 
Or  if  we  grant  to  Naaman  the  slight  taste  contended  for,  must 
we  not  grant  it  also,  with  Justin  Martyr*  and  Zwingli,  to 
Socrates  and  Plato  and  others,  on  the  principle  that  all  true 
knowledge  of  God,  by  whomsoever  possessed  and  however 
obtained,  whether  it  be  sunlight,  moonlight,  or  starlight,  is 
virtually  Christian ;  in  other  words,  that  Christ,  just  because 
He  is  the  only  light,  is  the  light  of  every  man  who  hath  any 
light  in  him  ? 

This  principle,  while  it  has  its  truth,  may  very  easily  be 
perverted  into  an  argument  against  a  supernatural  revelation. 
Hence  in  its  very  first  chapter.  Of  the  Holy  Scripture,  the 
Westminster  Confession  broadly  asserts  that  the  light  of  nature 
and  the  works  of  creation  and  providence  are  not  sufficient  to 
give  that  knowledge  of  God  and  of  His  will  which  is  necessary 
imto  salvation.  While  strongly  maintaining  this  truth,  how- 
ever, we  must  beware  of  being  drawn  into  a  tone  of  disparage- 
ment in  speaking  of  what  may  be  learnt  of  God  from  these 
lower  sources.  While  walking  in  the  sunlight,  we  must  not 
.  despise  the  dimmer  luminaries  of  the  night,  or  forget  their 
existence,  as  in  the  day-time  men  forget  the  moon  and  the 

1  Calv.  Inst  m.  u.  82. 

'  Xftfrf  il  rf  ««i  y«r«  2tf»far»v  ««r«  ftifvt  yfat^iifrt  {xiyif  ykf  ii»,  Koti  terif  i  iv 
ir*9r)  mf).  Apol,  ii.  10  ;  so  also  ApoL  L  5.  The  anticipations  of  Cliristian 
thonght  in  Plato  and  in  Euripides  are  familiar  to  scholars.  The  foUowing 
opinion  on  the  salvation  of  the  heathen  from  Richard  Baxter  deserves  notice : — 
"  I  am  not  so  much  inclined  (as  he  once  was)  to  pass  a  peremptory  sentence  of 
damnation  upon  all  that  never  heard  of  Christ,  having  some  more  reasons  than  I 
knew  of  before  to  think  that  God's  dealing  with  such  is  much  unknown  to  us." 
BdiquioB  Baxterkmce,  lib.  i.  part  L,  comparing  his  earlier  and  l^ter  religious 
views. 


r 


^  THE  DYING  PABENT  :   THE  CHILDREN'S  QUESTIONS.        401 

stars.  By  so  doing,  we  should  be  virtually  disparaging  the 
Scriptures  themselves.  For  much  that  is  in  the  Bible,  espe- 
cially in  the  Old  Testament,  is  but  a  record  of  what  inspired 
men  had  learned  from  observation  of  God's  works  in  creation, 
and  of  His  ways  in  providence.  All  cannot,  indeed,  see  as 
much  there  as  they  saw.  On  the  contrary,  a  revelation  was 
needed  not  only  to  make  known  truths  lying  beyond  the 
teachings  of  natural  religion,  but  even  to  direct  men's  dim  eyes 
to  truths  which,  though  visible  in  nature,  were  in  fact  for  the 
most  part  not  seen.  The  Bible,  in  the  quaint  language  of 
Calvin,  is  a  pair  of  spectacles,  through  which  our  weak  eyes 
see  the  glory  of  God  in  the  world.*  Yet  what  is  seen  through 
the  spectacles  by  weak  eyes  is  in  many  passages  just  what 
might  be  seen  by  strong  eyes  without  their  aid, — *'  nothing 
being  placed  there  which  is  not  visible  in  the  creation."  * 

These  observations  may  help  us  to  cherish  hope  for  those 
whose  opportimities  of  knowing  Him  who  is  "  the  way,  the 
truth,  and  the  life,"  are  smalL  They  do  not,  however,  justify 
those  who,  having  abimdant  facilities  for  knowing  Christ,  are 
content  with  the  minimum  of  knowledge.  There  is  more  hope 
for  the  heathen  than  for  such  men.  To  their  number  no  true 
Christian  can  belong.  A  genuine  disciple  may  know  little  to 
begin  with :  this  was  the  case  even  with  the  apostles  them- 
selves ;  but  he  wiU  not  be  satisfied  to  be  in  the  dark.  He  will 
desire  to  be  enlightened  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  and  wiU 
pray,  "  Lord,  show  us  the  Father." 

Such  was  the  prayer  of  Philip,  the  third  disciple  who  took 
part  in  the  dialogue  at  the  supper-table.  Philip's  request, 
like  Thomas's  question,  was  a  virtual  denial  of  a  statement 
previously  made  by  Jesus.  "  If  ye  had  known  me,"  Jesus  had 
said  to  Thomas,  "  ye  should  have  known  my  Father  also ;" 
and  then  He  had  added,  *'  and  from  henceforth  ye  know  Him, 
and  have  seen  Him."    This  last  statement  Philip  felt  himself 

'  Slcuti  senes  vel  lippi,  et  quicunqne  oculis  caligant  si  vel  pnlcherrimam 
Yolumen  illis  objicias  quamvis  agnoscant  esse  aliquid  scriptum,  vix  tamen  dnas 
voces  contexere  potenmt ;  specillis  autem  interpositis  adjuti  distincte  legeie 
incipient :  ita  Scriptnra  confdsam  alioqui  Dei  notitiam  in  mentibnB  nostris  col- 
ligens,  discnssft  caligine  liquido  nobis  yerum  Deum  ostendit — Inst,  L  yi  1. 

*  Nihil  tamen  illic  (Ps.  cxIy.,  etc.)  ponitor  quod  non  liceat  in  creaturiB  contem- 
plari. — Calv.  Inst  L  x.  2« 

S  G 


^ 


402  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

unable  to  homologate.  ''  Seen  the  Father !  would  it  were  so  ! 
nothing  would  gratify  us  more :  Lord,  show  us  the  Father, 
and  it  sufficeth  us.'' 

In  itseK,  the  prayer  of  this  disciple  was  most  devout  and 
praiseworthy.  There  can  be  no  loftier  aspiration  than  that 
which  seeks  the  knowledge  of  God  the  Father,  and  no  better 
index  of  a  spiritual  mind  than  to  account  such  knowledge  the 
summum  hmum.  In  these  respects,  the  sentiments  uttered  by 
Philip  were  fitted  to  gratify  his  Master.  In  other  respects, 
however,  they  were  not  so  satisfactory.  The  ingenuous  in- 
quirer had  evidently  a  very  crude  notion  of  what  seeing  the 
Father  amoimted  to.  He  fancied  it  possible,  and  he  appears 
to  have  wished,  to  see  the  Father  as  he  then  saw  Jesus — as  an 
outward  object  of  vision  to  the  eye  of  the  body.  Then,  sup- 
posing that  to  be  his  wish,  how  fooUsh  the  reflection,  *'  and 
it  sufl&ceth  us  !"  What  good  could  a  mere  external  vision  of 
the  Father  do  any  one  ?  And  finally,  that  same  reflection 
painfully  showed  how  little  the  disciples  had  gained  hitherto 
from  intercourse  with  Jesus.  They  had  been  with  Him  for 
years,  yet  had  not  found  rest  and  satisfaction  in  Him,  but  had 
stiU  a  craving  for  something  beyond  Him ;  while  what  they 
craved  they  had,  without  knowing  it,  been  getting  from  Him 
all  along. 

Such  ignorance  and  spiritual  incapacity  so  late  in  the  day 
were  very  disappointing.  And  Jesus  was  disappointed,  but, 
with  characteristic  patience,  not  irritated.  He  took  not  offence 
either  at  Philip's  stupidity,  or  at  the  contradiction  he  had 
given  to  His  own  statement  (for  He  would  rather  be  contra- 
dicted than  have  disciples  pretend  to  know  when  they  do  not), 
but  endeavoured  to  enlighten  the  little  ones  somewhat  in  the 
knowledge  of  the  Father.  For  this  end  He  gave  great  promi- 
nence to  the  truth,  that  the  knowledge  of  the  Father  and  of 
Himself,  the  Son,  were  one ;  that  He  that  hath  seen  the  Son, 
hath  seen  the  Father.  The  better  to  fix  this  great  principle 
in  the  minds  of  His  hearers.  He  put  it  in  the  strongest  possible 
manner,  by  treating  their  ignorance  of  the  Father  as  a  virtual 
ignorance  of  Himself.  "  Have  I,"  He  asked,  **  been  so  long 
time  with  you,  and  yet  hast  thou  not  known  Toe,  Philip  ? " 
Then  He  went  on  to  reason,  as  if  to  be  ignorant  of  the  Father 


THE  DYING  FAEENT:   THE  CHILDBEN'S  QUESTIONS.       403 

was  to  be  SO  far  ignorant  of  Himself,  as  in  effect  to  deny  His 
divinity.  *'  Believest  thou  not,"  He  again  asked,  '*  that  I  am 
in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in  me  ?"  and  then  He  followed 
up  the  question  with  a  reference  to  those  things  which  went 
to  prove  the  asserted  identity — His  words  and  His  works? 
Nor  did  He  stop  even  here,  but  proceeded  next  to  speak  of 
still  more  convincing  proofs  of  His  identity  with  the  Father, 
to  be  supplied  in  the  marvellous  works  which  should  after- 
wards be  done  by  the  apostles  themselves,  in  His  name,  and 
through  powers  granted  to  them  by  Himself  in  answer  to  their 
prayers.^ 

The  first  question  put  by  Jesus  to  Philip,  "  Hast  thou  not 
known  meV  was  something  more  than  a  logical  artifice  to 
make  stupid  disciples  reflect  on  the  contents  of  the  knowledge 
they  already  possessed.     It  hinted  at  a  real  fact.     The  dis- 
ciples had  reaUy  not  yet  seen  Jesus,  for  as  long  as  they  had 
been  with  Him.     They  knew  Him,  and  they  did  not  know 
Him  ;  they  knew  not  tluit  they  knew,  nor  whai  they  knew. 
They  were  like  children,  who  can  repeat  the  Catechism  with- 
out understanding  its  sense,  or  who  possess  a  treasure  without 
being  capable  of  estimating  its  valua     They  were  like  men 
looking  at  an  object  through  a  telescope  without  adjusting  the 
focus,  or  like  an  ignorant  peasant  gazing  up  at  the  sky  on  a 
winter  night,  and  seeing  the  stars  which  compose  a  constella- 
tion, such  as  the  Bear  or  Orion,  yet  not  recognising  the  con- 
stellation itseK.     The  disciples  were  familiar  with  the  words, 
parables,  discourses,  etc.,  spoken,  and  with  t];ie  miraculous 
works  done,  by  their  Master ;  but  they  knew  these  only  as 
isolated  particulars :  the  separate  rays  of  light  emanating  from 
the  fountain  of  divine  wisdom,  power,  and  love  in  Jesus,  had 
never  been  gathered  into  a  focus,  so  as  to  form  a  distinct  image 
of  Him  who  came  in  the  flesh  to  reveal  the  invisible  God. 
They  had  seen  many  a  star  shine  out  in  the  spiritual  heavens 
while  in  Christ's  company ;  but  the  stars  had  not  yet  assumed 
to  their  eye  the  aspect  of  a  constellation.    They  had  no  clear, 
fall,  consistent,  spiritual  conception  of  the  mind,  heart,  and 
character  of  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  in  whom  dwelt  all  the 
fulness  of  Godhead  bodily.     Nor  would  they  possess  such  a 

>  John  zir.  10,  11.  '  John  zir.  12-14. 


404  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

conception  till  the  Spirit  of  truth,  the  promised  Comforter, 
came.  The  very  thing  He  was  to  do  for  them  was  to  show 
them  Christ ;  not  merely  to  recall  to  their  memories  the  details 
of  His  life,  but  to  show  them  the  one  mind  and  spirit  which 
dwelt  amid  the  details,  as  the  soul  dwells  in  the  body,  and  made 
them  an  organic  whole,  and  which  once  perceived,  would  of 
itself  recall  to  recollection  all  the  isolated  particulars  at  present 
Ijdng  latent  in  their  consciousness.  When  the  apostles  had 
got  that  conception,  they  would  know  Christ  indeed :  the  same 
Christ  whom  they  had  known  before,  yet  different :  a  new 
Christ,  because  a  Christ  comprehended — seen  with  the  eye  of 
the  spirit,  as  the  former  had  been  seen  with  the  eye  of  the  flesh. 
And  when  they  had  thus  seen  Christ,  they  would  feel  that  they 
had  also  seen  the  Father.  The  knowledge  of  Christ  would 
satisfy  them,  because  in  Him  they  should  see  with  unveiled 
face  the  glory  of  the  Lord. 

The  soul-satisfying  vision  of  God  being  a  future  good,  to  be 
attained  after  the  advent  of  the  Comforter,  it  could  not  have 
been  the  intention  of  Jesus  to  assure  the  disciples  that  they 
possessed  it  already,  still  less  to  force  it  on  them  by  a  process 
of  reasoning.  "When  He  said,  "  From  henceforth  ye  know 
Him  (the  Father),  and  have  seen  Him,"  He  evidently  meant : 
"  Ye  now  know  how  to  see  Him,  viz.  by  reflecting  on  your 
intercourse  with  me."  And  the  sole  object  of  the  statements 
made  to  Philip  concerning  the  close  relations  between  the 
Father  and  the  speaker,  evidently  was  to  impress  upon  the 
disciples  the  great  truth,  that  the  solution  of  all  religious 
difficulties,  the  satisfaction  of  all  longings,  was  to  be  found  in 
the  knowledge  of  Himself.  "  Know  me,"  Jesus  would  say, 
"  trust  me,  pray  to  me,  and  all  shall  be  well  with  you.  Your 
mind  shall  be  filled  with  light,  your  heart  shall  be  at  rest ;  you 
shall  have  everything  you  want ;  your  joy  shall  be  full" 

A  most  important  lesson  this;  but  also  one  which,  like 
Philip  and  the  other  disciples,  all  are  slow  to  learn.  How 
few,  even  of  those  who  confess  Christ's  divinity,  do  see  in 
Him  the  true  Perfect  Eevealer  of  God !  To  many  Jesus  is 
one  Being,  and  God  is  another  and  quite  a  different  Being ; 
though  the  truth  that  Jesus  is  divine  is  all  the  while  honestly 
acknowledged.     That  great  truth  lies  in  the  mind  like  an 


THE  DYING  PARENT:   THE  CHILDREN'S  QUESTIONS.        405 

unfructifying  seed  buried  deep  in  the  soil,  and  we  may  say 
of  it  what  has  been  said  of  the  doctrine  of  the  soul's  immor- 
tality :  "  One  may  believe  it  for  twenty  years,  and  only  in  the 
twenty-first,  in  some  great  moment,  discover  with  astonish- 
ment the  rich  contents  of  this  belief,  the  warmth  of  this 
naphtha  spring."^  Impressions  of  Grod  have  been  received 
from  one  quarter,  impressions  of  Christ  'from  another ;  and 
the  two  sets  of  impressions  lie  side  by  side  in  the  mind, 
incompatible,  yet  both  receiving  house-room.  Hence,  when  a 
Christian  begins  to  carry  out  consistently  the  principle  that, 
Jesus  being  God,  to  know  Jesus  is  to  know  God,  he  is  apt  to 
experience  a  painful  conflict  between  a  new  and  an  old  class 
of  ideas  about  the  Divine  Being.  Two  Gods — a  christianized 
God,  and  a  sort  of  pagan  divinity — struggle  for  the  place  of 
sovereignty;  and  when  at  last  the  conflict  ends  in  the  enthrone- 
ment in  the  mind  and  heart  of  the  God  whom  Jesus  revealed, 
the  day-dawn  of  a  new  spiritual  life  has  arrived. 

One  most  prominent  idea  in  the  conception  of  (xod  as  re- 
vealed by  Jesus  Christ,  is  that  expressed  by  the  name  Father. 
According  to  the  doctrine  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  God  is 
not  truly  known  till  He  is  thought  of  and  heartily  believed 
in  as  a  Father ;  neither  can  any  God  who  is  not  regarded  as 
a  Father  satisfy  the  human  heart.  Hence  His  own  mode  of 
speaking  concerning  God  was  in  entire  accordance  with  this 
doctrine.  He  did  not  speak  to  men  about  the  Deity,  or  the 
Almighty.  Those  epithets  which  philosophers  are  so  fond  of 
applying  to  the  Divine  Being,  the  Infinite,  the  Absolute,  etc., 
never  crossed  His  Ups.  No  words  ever  uttered  by  Him  could 
suggest  the  idea  of  the  gloomy  arbitrary  tyrant,  before  whom 
the  guilty  conscience  of  superstitious  heathenism  cowers. 
He  spake  evermore,  in  sermon,  parable,  model  prayer,  and 
private  conversation,  of  a  Father.  Such  expressions  as  "  the 
Father,"  "  my  Father,"  "  your  Father,"  were  constantly  on  His 
tongue ;  and  all  He  taught  concerning  God  harmonized  per- 
fectly with  the  feelings  these  expressions  were  fitted  to  call 
forth. 

Yet  notwithstanding  aU  His  pains,  and  aU  the  beauty  of  His 
utterances  concerning  the  Being  whom  no  man  hath  seen, 

'  Jean  Paul  Ricbter,  Siebenkdi  Erates  BlumenstUck. 


406  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

Jesus,  it  is  to  be  feared,  has  only  imperfectly  succeeded  in 
establishing  the  worship  of  the  Father.  From  ignorance  or 
from  preference,  men  still  extensively  worship  God  under 
other  names  and  categories.  Some  deem  the  paternal  appel- 
lation too  homely,  and  prefer  a  name  expressive  of  more  dis- 
tant and  ceremonious  relations.  The  Deity,  or  the  Almighty, 
suffices  them.  Philosophers  dislike  the  appellation  Father, 
because  it  makes  the  personality  of  God  too  prominent  They 
prefer  to  think  of  the  Uncreated  as  an  Infinite,  Eternal  Abstrac- 
tion— an  object  of  speculation  rather  than  of  faith  and  love. 
Legal-minded  professors  of  religion  take  fright  at  the  word 
Father.  They  are  not  sure  that  they  have  a  right  to  use  it, 
and  they  deem  it  safer  to  speak  of  God  in  general  terms, 
which  take  nothing  for  granted,  as  the  Judge,  the  T&skmaster, 
or  the  Lawgiver.  The  worldly,  the  learned,  and  the  religious, 
from  difTerent  motives,  thus  agree  in  allowing  to  fall  into 
desuetude  the  name  into  which  they  have  been  baptized,  and 
only  a  small  minority  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in 
truth. 

Superficial  readers  of  the  gospel  may  cherish  the  idea  that 
the  name  Father,  applied  to  God  by  Jesus,  is  simply  or  mainly 
a  sentimental  poetic  expression,  whose  loss  were  no  great 
matter  for  regret.  There  could  not  be  a  greater  mistaka  The 
name,  in  Christ's  lips,  always  represents  a  definite  thought, 
and  teaches  a  great  truth.  When  He  uses  the  term  to  express 
the  relation  of  the  Invisible  One  to  Himself,  He  gives  us  a 
glimpse  into  the  mystery  of  the  Divine  Being,  telling  us  that 
God  is  not  abstract  being,  as  Platonists  and  Arians  conceived 
Him ;  not  the  absolute,  incapable  of  relations ;  not  a  passion- 
less being,  without  aflfections ;  but  one  who  eternally  loves, 
and  is  loved,  in  whose  infinite  nature  the  family  aflfections 
find  scope  for  ceaseless  play — One  in  three :  Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Ghost,  three  persons  in  one  divine  substance.  Then, 
again,  when  He  calls  God  Father,  in  reference  to  mankind  in 
general,  as  He  does  repeatedly.  He  proclaims  to  men  sunk 
in  ignorance  and  sin  this  blessed  truth :  "  God,  my  Father,  is 
your  Father  too;  cherishes  a  paternal  feeling  towards  you, 
though  ye  be  so  marred  in  moral  vision  that  He  might  well 
not  know  you,  and  so  degenerate  that  He  might  well  be 


THE  DTIKG  FABENT :   THE  CHILDBEN'S  QTmSTIONS.        407 

ashamed  to  own  you ;  and  I  His  Son  am  come,  your  elder 
brother,  to  bring  you  back  to  your  Father's  house.  Ye  are 
not  worthy  to  be  called  His  sons,  for  ye  have  ceased  to  bear 
His  image,  and  ye  have  not  yielded  Him  filial  obedience  and 
reverence;  nevertheless  He  is  willing  to  be  a  Father  unto 
you,  and  receive  you  graciously  in  His  arms.  Believe  this, 
and  become  in  heart  and  conduct  sons  of  God,  that  ye  may 
enjoy  the  full,  the  spiritual  and  eternal,  benefit  of  God's  pater- 
nal love."  ^  When,  finally.  He  calls  God  Father,  with  special 
reference  to  His  own  disciples,  He  assures  them  that  they  are 
the  objects  of  God*s  constant,  tender,  and  effective  care ;  that  all 
His  power,  wisdom,  and  love  are  engaged  for  their  protection, 
preservation,  guidance,  and  final  eternal  salvation ;  that  their 
Father  in  heaven  will  see  that  they  lack  no  good,  and  will 
make  all  things  minister  to  their  interest,  and  in  the  end 
secure  to  them  their  inheritance  in  the  everlasting  kingdom. 
"  Fear  not,"  is  His  comforting  message  to  His  little  chosen 
flock,  "  it  is  your  Father's  good  pleasure  to  give  you  the 
kingdom." 

Before  parting  with  Philip,  we  must  advert  in  a  sentence  to 
the  good  qualities  exhibited  by  him  on  this  occasion.  If  he 
be  ignorant,  and  even  stupid,  he  is  also  honest  and  anxious  to 

'  The  Fatherhood  of  God,  its  nature  and  extent,  like  all  other  things,  has 
become  a  subject  of  controversy.  Principal  Candlish,  in  the  Cunningham 
Lectures,  maintains  that  the  term  Father  applies  exclusively  to  the  sonship  of 
believers  ;  while  Dr.  Crawford,  Professor  of  Theology,  University  of  Edinburgh, 
in  his  reply,  contends  for  a  xmiversal  Fatherhood,  as  well  as  a  special  one 
founded  in  grace.  The  question  is  mainly  verbal ;  for  both  admit  that  God  in 
many  ways  performs  a  Father's  part  towards  all  men,  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
that  the  full  benefit  of  God's  paternal  love  cannot  be  exgoyed  unless  men  have 
the  hearts  of  sons.  A  more  important  question  is.  How  the  sonship  of  beUevers 
is  to  be  defined.  Dr.  Candlish  asserts  that  it  is  substantially  identical  with  that 
of  Christ, — a  position  which  (as  it  seems  to  us)^  consistently  carried  out,  deifies 
man,  or  reduces  Christ  to  man's  leveL  In  point  of  fact,  Athanasius  contro- 
verted this  view,  as  maintained  by  the  Arians.  His  Arian  opponent  adduced 
John  xvii.  20-23  to  prove  the  identity  of  Christ's  Sonship  with  that  of  be- 
lievers, and  contended  that  the  only  difference  was  one  of  Ume.  Athanasius, 
on  the  contrary,  contended  that  in  that  case  the  epithet  fM9»ytfiit  was  inap- 
plicable to  Christ ;  and  distinguished  the  two  sonships,  by  saying  that  the  one, 
that  of  Christ,  was  »«r  •vr/«r ;  the  other,  that  of  believers,  was  il  mfirnt.  The 
latter  he  regarded  as  liable  to  be  lost  with  the  loss  of  i^trn. — Athanasius,  de 
Decretia  Nic.  8yn,  capp.  6  and  22.  Also  OraHanes  contra  Arianos,  L  cap.  87, 
and  iii  capp.  17,  80. 


408  THE  TKAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

learn.  He  desires  knowledge,  and  he  frankly  confesses  his 
want  of  it.  One  of  whom  these  things  can  be  said  will  not 
always  be  ignorant.  The  candid,  aspiring  disciple  will  one  day 
be  a  wise,  enlightened  apostle.  For  such  as  Philip  there  is  no 
cause  to  be  anxious.  Open  the  windows  of  the  mind,  and 
the  light  of  truth  will  stream  in.  Those  who  remain  in  the 
dark,  are  they  who  are  too  indolent  to  aspire  after  knowledge, 
or  too  proud  to  learn,  or  both  together.  Such  say  in  effect : 
We  are  not  ambitious  ;  we  do  not  envy  those  who  live  in  the 
regions  of  the  day ;  we  are  very  happy  in  the  unbroken  night 
of  the  Arctic  Circle,  burrowing  in  our  earth-holes ;  and  we 
don't  care  though  we  never  see  the  sun.  Or  they  say :  We  are 
not  satisfied ;  we  would  like  to  have  more  light  about  God 
and  the  way  of  salvation,  and  our  own  spiritual  condition ;  but 
we  have  a  reputation  for  spiritual  knowledge  and  advanced 
piety,  and  we  cannot  afford  to  let  our  real  state  be  known. 
Shall  I,  a  master  in  Israel,  acknowledge  that  I  have  difl&culties 
about  this  and  the  other  doctrine,  that  I  want  the  spirit  of 
adoption,  and  do  not  bask  in  the  sunlight  of  God's  love  ?  Shall 
I,  a  convert,  who  made  years  ago  conspicuous  professions  of 
my  faith  in  Christ,  and  of  my  assurance  of  salvation,  confess 
that  now  all  is  changed  within  me.  Calvary  and  the  face  of 
God  being  hid  in  a  mist,  and  my  mind  dark  as  midnight  in 
reference  to  my  own  spiritual  state  ?  Why  not  ?  Away  with 
pride,  and  take  your  seat  beside  Philip  in  the  school  of  Jesus. 
Assume  not  the  air  of  apostles,  aping  the  graces,  and  repeating 
the  phrases  of  aged  sanctity  and  wisdom.  Be  disciples  first, 
and  talk  like  the  disciples,  and  ask  questions  like  them ;  and 
in  your  abhorrence  of  insincerity,  rather  than  speak  in  a  style 
in  advance  of  your  attainments,  refuse,  with  Philip,  to  say  that 
you  know  what  you  don't  know,  even  though  the  Lord  Him- 
self should  tell  you  that  you  do  know  it  So  acting,  "  what 
thou  knowest  not  now,  thou  shalt  know  hereafter."  The  Spirit 
of  truth  will  come,  and  in  His  own  way,  not  in  the  way  human 
teachers  or  you  yourself  might  prefer,  will  lead  you  into  all 
truth. 

We  have  now  to  notice  the  last  of  the  children's  questions, 
which  was  put  by  Judas,  "  not  Iscariot"  (he  is  otherwise  occu- 


THE  DTINO  PARENT:   THE  CHILDBEN'S  QUESTIONS.        409 

pied),  but  the  other  disciple  of  that  name,  also  called  Lebbaeus 
and  Thaddseus.^ 

In  His  third  word  of  consolation,  Jesus  had  spoken  of  a 
reappearance  (after  His  departure)  specially  and  exdusively  to 
"  His  own,"  "  The  world,"  He  had  said,  "  seeth  me  no  more ; 
but  ye  see  me,"  that  is,  shall  see  after  a  little  while.  Now 
two  questions  might  naturally  be  asked  concerning  this  exdu- 
sive  manifestation  :  How  was  it  possible  ?  and  what  was  the 
reason  of  it  ?  How  could  Jesus  make  HimseK  visible  to  His 
disciples,  and  yet  remain  invisible  to  all  others  ?  and  granting 
the  possibility,  cut  bono,  why  not  show  HimseK  to  the  world 
at  large  ?  It  is  not  easy  to  decide  which  of  these  two  diffi- 
culties Judas  had  in  his  mind;  for  his  question  might  be 
interpreted  either  way.  Literally  translated,  it  was  to  this 
effect :  "  Lord,  what  has  happened,  that  Thou  art  about  to 
manifest  Thyself  unto  us,  and  not  unto  the  world  ?"  The  dis- 
ciple might  mean,  like  Nicodemus,  to  ask,  "  How  can  these 
things  be  ?"  or  he  might  mean,  "  We  have  been  hoping  for 
the  coming  of  Thy  kingdom  in  power  and  glory,  visible  to  the 
eyes  of  all  men  :  what  has  led  Thee  to  change  Thy  plan  ? " 

In  either  case,  the  question  of  Judas  was  foimded  on  a  mis- 
apprehension of  the  nature  of  the  promised  manifestation. 
He  imagined  that  Jesus  was  to  reappear  corporeally,  after  His 
departure  to  the  Father,  therefore  so  as  to  be  visible  to  the 
outward  eye,  and  not  of  this  one  or  that  one,  but  of  all,  unless 
He  took  pains  to  hide  HimseK  from  some  while  revealing  Him- 
seK to  others.*  Neither  Judas  nor  any  of  his  brethren  was 
capable  as  yet  of  conceiving  a  spiritual  manifestation,  not  to 
speak  of  finding  therein  a  full  compensation  for  the  loss  of  the 
corporeal  presence.  Had  they  grasped  the  thought  of  a  spi- 
ritual presence,  they  could  have  had  no  difficulty  in  reconcil- 
ing visibility  to  one  with  invisibility  to  another;  for  they 
would  have  understood  that  the  vision  could  be  enjoyed  only 
by  those  who  possessed  the  inward  sense  of  sight 

'  Vid.  chap.  iv.  of  this  work. 

'  Lnthardt  (Dcu  Johan.  Evang,  ii.  313)  contends  that  a  corporeal  manifesta- 
tion (at  the  end  of  the  world)  is  meant,  and  weakly  argaes,  that  if  only  a 
spiritual  presence  were  meant,  Jesus  would  have  said  U  mirf  instead  of  wmf 
mvrf  in  Tcr.  28.  Uetfk  suits  the  parabolic  style  of  speech ;  Ip  would  be  an 
mUrpretaHon  of  the  figure. 


410  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

How  was  a  question  dictated  by  incapacity  to  understand 
the  subject  to  which  it  referred  to  be  answered  ?  Just  as  you 
would  explain  the  working  of  the  electric  telegraph  to  a  child. 
If  your  child  asked  you,  Father,  how  is  it  tlmt  you  can  send 
a  message  by  the  telegraph  to  my  uncle  or  aimt  in  America, 
so  far,  fax  away  ?  you  would  not  think  of  attempting  to  ex- 
plain to  him  the  mysteries  of  electricity.  You  would  take 
him  to  a  telegraph  office,  and  bid  him  look  at  the  man  actually 
engaged  in  sending  a  message,  and  tell  him,  that  as  the  man 
moved  the  handle,  a  needle  in  America  pointed  at  letters  of 
the  alphabet,  which,  when  put  together,  made  up  words  which 
said  just  what  you  wished  to  say. 

In  this  way  it  was  that  Jesus  answered  the  question  of 
Judas.  He  did  not  attempt  to  explain  the  difference  between 
a  spiritual  and  a  corporeal  manifestation,  but  simply  said  in 
effect :  Do  you  so  and  so,  and  what  I  have  promised  will  come 
true.  "  If  a  man  love  me,  he  will  keep  my  words ;  and  my 
Father  will  love  him,  and  we  will  come  unto  him,  and  make 
our  abode  with  him."  It  is  just  the  former  statement  repeated, 
in  a  slightly  altered,  more  pointed  form.  Nothing  new  is  said, 
because  nothing  new  can  be  said  intelligibly.  The  old  promise 
is  simply  so  put  as  to  arrest  attention  on  the  condition  of  its 
fulfilment.  "  If  &  man  love  me,  he  will  keep  my  words  :" 
attend  to  that,  my  children,  and  the  rest  will  follow.  The 
divine  Trinity — Father,  Son,  and  Spirit — will  verily  dwell 
with  the  faithful  disciple,  who  with  trembling  solicitude  strives 
to  observe  my  commandments.  As  for  those  who  love  me  not, 
and  keep  not  my  sayings,  and  believe  not  on  me,  it  is  simply 
impossible  for  them  to  enjoy  such  august  company.  The  pure 
in  heart  alone  shall  see  God. 

Jesus  had  now  spoken  all  He  meant  to  say  to  His  disciples, 
in  the  capacity  of  a  dying  parent  addressing  his  sorrowing 
children.  It  remained  now  only  to  wind  up  the  discourse, 
and  bid  the  little  ones  adieu. 

In  drawing  to  a  close,  Jesus  does  not  imagine  that  He  has 

removed  all  difficulties  and  dispelled  all  gloom  from  the  minds 

•  of  the  disciples.     On  the  contrary.  He  is  conscious  that  all 

He  has  said  has  made  but  a  slight  impression.     Nevertheless 


THE  DYING  PARENT  :   THE  ADIEU.  411 

He  will  say  no  more  in  the  way  of  comfort.  There  is,  in  the 
first  place,  no  time.  Judas  and  his  band,  the  prince  of  this 
world,  whose  servants  Judas  and  all  his  associates  are,  may 
now  be  expected  at  any  moment,  and  He  must  hold  Himself 
in  readiness  to  go  and  meet  the  enemy.^  Then,  secondly,  to 
add  anything  further  would  be  useless.  It  is  not  possible  to 
make  things  any  clearer  to  the  disciples  in  their  present  state, 
by  any  amount  of  speech.  Therefore  He  does  not  attempt  it, 
but  refers  them  for  all  other  explanations  to  the  promised 
Comforter,*  and  proceeds  to  utter  the  words  of  farewell :  "  Peace 
I  leave  with  you,  my  peace  I  give  unto  you,"  * — words  touch- 
ing at  all  times,  unspeakably  affecting  in  the  circumstances  of 
the  Speaker  and  hearers.  We  know  not  but  they  did  more  to 
comfort  the  dispirited  little  ones  than  all  that  had  been  said 
before.  There  is  a  pathos  and  a  music  in  the  very  sound  of 
them,  apart  from  their  sense,  which  are  wonderfully  soothing. 
We  can  imagine,  indeed,  that  as  they  were  spoken,  the  poor 
disciples  were  overtaken  with  a  fit  of  tenderness,  and  burst 
into  tears.  That,  however,  would  do  them  good.  Sorrow  is 
healed  by  weeping :  the  sympathy  which  melts  the  heart  at 
the  same  time  comforts  it. 

This  touching  sympathetic  farewell  is  more  than  a  good 
wish :  it  is  a  promise — a  promise  made  by  One  who  knows 
that  the  blessing  promised  is  within  reacL  It  is  like  the 
cheering  word  spoken  by  David  to  brothers  in  aflliction :  "Wait 
on  the  Lord :  be  of  good  courage,  and  He  shaU  strengthen  thine 
heart :  wait,  I  say,  on  the  Lord"  David  spoke  that  word  from 
experience ;  and  even  so  does  Jesus  speak  here.  The  peace  He 
offers  His  disciples  is  His  own  peace — "  my  peace :"  not  merely 
peace  of  Btts  procuring,  but  peace  of  His  experiencing.  He 
has  had  peace  in  the  world,  in  spite  of  sorrow  and  temptation : 
perfect  peace  through  faith.  Ilierefore  He  can  assure  them 
that  such  a  thing  is  possible.  They,  too,  can  have  peace  of 
mind  and  heart  in  the  midst  of  untoward  tribulation.  The 
world  can  neither  understand  nor  impart  such  peace ;  the  only 
peace  it  knows  anything  about  being  that  connected  with  pros- 
perity, which  trouble  can  destroy  as  easily  as  a  breath  of  wind 
agitates  the  calm  surface  of  the  sea.     But  there  is  a  peace 

1  John  xiv.  80,  81.  >  John  xiv.  25,  20.  •  John  xiv.  27. 


412  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

which  is  independent  of  outward  circumstances,  whose  sove- 
reign virtue  and  blessed  function  it  is  to  keep  the  heart  against 
fear  and  care.  Such  peace  Jesus  had  HimseK  enjoyed ;  and 
He  gives  His  disciples  to  understand,  that  through  faith  and 
singleness  of  mind  they  may  enjoy  it  also. 

The  farewell  word  is  not  only  a  promise  made  by  One  who 
knows  whereof  He  speaks,  but  the  promise  of  One  who  can 
bestow  the  blessing  promised.  Jesus  does  not  merely  say :  Be 
of  good  cheer ;  ye  may  have  peace,  even  as  I  have  had  peace, 
in  spite  of  tribulation.  He  says  moreover,  and  more  particu- 
larly :  Such  peace  as  I  have  had  I  bequeath  to  you  as  a 
dying  legacy,  I  bestow  on  you  as  a  parting  gift  The  inherit- 
ance of  peace  is  made  over  to  the  little  ones  by  a  last  will 
and  testament,  though,  being  minors,  they  do  not  presently 
enter  into  actual  possession.  When  they  arrive  at  their  ma- 
jority, they  shall  inherit  the  promise,  and  delight  themselves 
in  the  abundance  of  peace. 

The  after-experience  of  the  disciples  proved  that  the  pro- 
mise made  to  them  by  their  Lord  had  not  been  false  and  vain. 
The  apostles,  as  Jesus  foretold,  foimd  in  the  world  much  tribu- 
lation ;  but  in  the  midst  of  all  they  enjoyed  perfect  peace. 
Trusting  in  the  Lord,  and  doing  good,  they  were  without  fear 
and  without  care.  In  everything,  by  prayer  and  supplication, 
with  thanksgiving,  they  made  their  requests  known  unto  God ; 
and  the  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  understanding,  did  verily 
keep  their  hearts  and  minds  in  Christ  Jesus. 

Jesus  had  not  yet  said  His  last  word  to  the  little  ones. 
Seeing  in  their  faces  the  signs  of  grief,  in  spite  of  all  that 
He  had  spoken  to  comfort  them.  He  abruptly  threw  out  an 
additional  remark,  which  gave  to  the  whole  subject  of  His 
departure  quite  a  new  turn.  He  had  been  telling  them,  all 
through  His  farewell  address,  that  though  He  was  going  away. 
He  would  come  again  to  them,  either  personally  or  by  deputy, 
in  the  body  at  last,  in  the  Spirit  meanwhile.  He  now  told 
them,  that  apart  from  His  return.  His  departure  itseK  should 
be  an  occasion  of  joy  rather  than  of  sorrow,  because  of  what 
it  signified  for  Himself.  "  Ye  have  heard  how  I  said  unto 
you,  I  go  away,  and  come  again  unto  you :"  extract  comfort 
from  that  promise  by  all  means.     But  "  if  ye  loved  me  (as 


THE  DTmO  PARENT  :   THE  ADIEU.  413 

you  ought),  ye  would  rejoice  because  I  said,  I  go  unto  the 
Father,"^  forgetting  yourselves,  and  thinking  what  a  happy 
change  it  would  be  for  me.  Then  He  added  :  "  For  my  Father 
is  greater  than  I."  The  connection  between  this  clause  and 
the  foregoing  part  of  the  sentence  is  somewhat  obscure,  as  is 
also  its  theological  import  Our  idea,  however,  is,  that  when 
Jesus  spake  these  words.  He  was  thinking  of  His  death,  and 
meeting  an  objection  thence  arising  to  the  idea  of  rejoicing  in 
His  departure.  "  You  are  going  to  the  Father,"  one  might 
have  said — "  yes ;  but  by  what  a  way  !"  Jesus  replies :  The 
way  is  rough,  and  abhorrent  to  flesh  and  blood ;  but  it  is  the 
way  my  Father  has  appointed.,  and  that  is  enough  for  me :  for 
my  Father  is  greater  than  L  So  interpreting  the  words,  we 
only  make  the  speaker  hint  therein  at  a  thought  which  we 
find  Him  plainly  expressing  immediately  after,  in  His  con- 
cluding sentence,  where  He  represents  His  voluntary  endurance 
of  death  as  a  manifestation  to  the  world  of  His  love  to  the 
Father,  and  as  an  act  of  obedience  to  His  commandment. 

And  now,  finally,  by  word  and  act,  Jesus  strives  to  impress 
on  the  little  children  the  solemn  reality  of  their  situation. 
First,  He  bids  them  mark  what  He  has  told  them  of  His 
departure,  that  when  the  separation  takes  place,  they  may  not 
be  taken  by  surprise.  "  Now  I  have  told  you  before  it  come 
to  pass,  that  when  it  is  come  to  pass  ye  might  believe."  ^  Then 
He  gives  them  to  understand  that  the  parting  hour  is  at  hand. 
Hereafter  He  will  not  talk  much  with  them  :  there  wiU  not 
be  opportimity ;  for  the  prince  of  this  world  cometh.  Then 
He  adds  words  to  this  effect :  *'  Let  him  come ;  I  am  ready 
for  him.  He  has  indeed  nothing  in  me  ;  no  claim  upon  me  ; 
no  power  over  me  ;  no  fault  which  he  can  charge  against  me. 
Nevertheless  I  yield  myself  up  into  his  hands,  that  all  men 
may  see  that  I  love  the  Father,  and  am  loyal  to  His  will :  that 
I  am  ready  to  die  for  truth,  for  righteousness,  for  the  un- 
righteous." *  Then,  lastly,  with  firm,  resolute  voice.  He  gives 
the  word  of  command  to  all  to  rise  up  from  the  couches  on 
which  they  have  been  reclining,  doubtless  suiting  His  own 
action  to  the  word :  *'  Arise,  let  us  go  hence."  * 

From  the  continuation  of  the  discourse,  as  recorded  by 

1  Jolin  xir.  28.  >  Ver.  29.  •  Vera.  80,  81.  *  Ver.  81. 


414  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

John^  as  well  as  from  the  statement  made  by  him  at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  eighteenth  chapter  of  his  Gospel  (When 
Jesus  had  spoken  these  words.  He  went  forth,  etc.),  we  infer 
that  the  company  did  not  at  this  point  leave  the  supper-cham- 
ber. They  merely  assumed  a  new  attitude,  and  exchanged 
the  recumbent  for  a  standing  posture,  as  if  in  readiness  to 
depart.  This  movement  was,  in  the  circumstances,  thoroughly 
natural.  It  fitly  expressed  the  resolute  temper  of  Jesus ;  and 
it  corresponded  to  the  altered  tone  in  which  He  proceeded  to 
address  His  disciples.  The  action  of  rising  formed,  in  fact, 
the  transition  from  the  first  part  of  His  discourse  to  the  second. 
Better  than  words  could  have  done,  it  altered  the  mood  of 
mind,  and  prepared  the  disciples  for  listening  to  language  not 
soft,  tender,  and  familiar,  as  heretofore,  but  stem,  dignified, 
impassioned.  It  struck  the  keynote,  if  we  may  so  express  it, 
by  which  the  speaker  passed  from  the  lyric  to  the  heroic  styla 
It  said,  in  effect :  Let  us  have  done  with  the  nursery  dialect, 
which,  continued  longer,  would  but  enervate :  let  me  speak  to 
you  now  for  a  brief  space  as  men  who  have  got  to  play  an 
important  part  in  the  world.  Arise ;  shake  off  languor,  and 
listen,  while  I  utter  words  fitted  to  fire  you  with  enthusiasm, 
to  inspire  you  with  courage,  and  to  impress  you  with  a  sense 
of  the  responsibilities  and  the  honours  connected  with  your 
future  position. 

So  understanding  the  rising  from  the  table,  we  shall  be 
prepared  to  listen  along  with  the  disciples,  and  to  enter  on  the 
study  of  the  remaining  portion  of  Christ's  farewell  discourse, 
without  any  feeling  of  abruptness. 


CHAPTER    XXV. 

DYING  CHARGE  TO  THE  APOSTLES. 

Section  i,~^The  Vine  and  its  Bran/Hus, 

John  xv.  xvi. 

THE  subject  of  discourse  in  these  chapters  is  the  future 
work  of  the  apostles;  its  nature^  honours,  hardships, 
and  joys.  Much  that  is  said  therein  admits  of  application  to 
Christians  in  general,  but  the  reference  in  the  first  place  is 
undoubtedly  to  the  eleven  then  present ;  and  only  by  keep- 
ing this  in  mind  can  we  get  a  clear  idea  of  the  import  of  the 
discourse  as  a  whole. 

The  first  part  of  this  charge  to  the  future  apostles  has  for 
its  object  to  impress  upon  them  that  they  have  a  great  work 
before  them.^  The  keynote  of  the  passage  may  be  foimd  in 
the  words  :  "  Ye  have  not  chosen  me,  but  I  have  chosen  you, 
and  ordained  you,  that  ye  should  go  and  bring  forth  fruit,  and 
that  your  fruit  should  remain."*  Jesus  would  have  His 
chosen  ones  understand  that  He  expects  more  of  them  than 
that  they  shall  not  lose  heart  when  He  has  left  the  eartL 
They  must  be  great  actors  in  the  world,  and  leave  their  mark 
permanently  on  its  history :  they  must,  in  fact,  take  His  place, 
and  be  in  His  stead,  and  carry  on  the  work  He  had  begun,  in 
His  name  and  through  His  aid. 

To  put  their  duty  clearly  before  the  minds  of  His  disciples, 
Jesus  made  large  use  of  a  beautiful  figure  drawn  from  the 
vine-tree,  which  He  introduced  at  the  very  outset  of  His  dis- 
course. "  I  am  the  true  vine :"  that  is  the  theme,  which  in 
the  sequel  is  worked  out  with  considerable  minuteness  of 
detail,  —  figure  and  interpretation  being    freely  mixed    up 

>  Jolin  rv.  1-17.  *  John  xv.  16. 


416  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

together  in  the  exposition.  The  question  has  often  been 
asked,  What  led  Jesus  to  adopt  this  particular  emblem  as  the 
vehicle  of  His  thoughts  ?  and  many  conjectural  answers  have 
been  hazarded.  In  absence  of  information  in  the  narrative, 
however,  we  must  be  content  to  remain  in  ignorance  on  this 
point,  without  attempting  to  supply  the  missing  link  in  the 
association  of  ideas.  This  is  no  great  hardship ;  for,  after  all, 
what  does  it  matter  how  a  metaphor  is  suggested  (a  thing 
which  even  the  person  employing  the  metaphor  often  does  not 
know),  provided  it  be  in  itself  apt  to  the  purpose  to  which  it 
is  applied  ?  Of  the  aptness  of  the  metaphor  here  employed 
there  can  be  no  doubt  in  the  mind  of  any  one  who  attentively 
considers  the  felicitous  use  which  the  speaker  made  of  it 

Turning  our  attention,  then,  to  the  discourse  of  Jesus  on  His 
own  chosen  text,  we  cannot  but  be  struck  with  the  manner  in 
which  He  hurries  on  at  once  to  speak  of  fruit.  We  should 
have  expected  that,  in  introducing  the  figure  of  the  vine.  He 
would,  in  the  first  place,  state  fully  in  terms  of  the  figure 
how  the  case  stood.  After  hearing  the  words,  "  I  am  the 
true  vine,  and  my  Father  is  the  husbandman,"  we  expect  to 
hear,  "  and  ye,  my  disciples,  are  the  branches,  through  which 
the  vine  brings  forth  fruit."  That,  however,  is  not  said  here ; 
but  the  speaker  passes  on  at  once  to  tell  His  hearers  how  the 
branches  (of  which  no  mention  has  been  made)  are  dealt  with 
by  the  divine  Husbandman ;  how  the  fruitless  branches,  on 
the  one  hand,  are  lopped  oflF,  while  the  fruitful  ones  are 
pruned  that  they  may  become  still  more  productive.^  This 
shows  what  is  uppermost  in  the  mind  of  Jesus.  His  heart's 
desire  is,  that  His  disciples  may  be  spiritually  fhiitfuL 
"  Fruit,  fruit,  my  disciples,"  He  exclaims  in  eflfect ;  "  ye  are 
useless  unless  ye  bear  fruit :  my  Father  desires  fruit,  even  as 
I  do ;  and  His  whole  dealing  with  you  will  be  regulated  by  a 
purpose  to  increase  your  fruitfulness." 

"  While  urgent  in  His  demand  for  fruit,  Jesus  does  not,  we 
observe,  in  any  part  of  this  discourse  on  the  vine,  indicate 
wherein  the  expected  fruit  consists.  When  we  consider  to 
whom  He  is  speaking,  however,  we  can  have  no  doubt  as  to 
what  He  principally  intends.     The  fruit  He  looks  for  is  the 

1  John  XV.  2. 


DYING  CHAEGE :   THE  VINE  AND  ITS  BRANCHES.  417 

spread  of  the  gospel  and  the  ingathering  of  souls  into  the 
kingdom  of  God  by  the  disciples,  in  the  discharge  of  their 
apostolic  vocation.  Personal  holiness  is  not  overlooked ;  but 
it  is  required  rather  as  a  means  towards  fruitfulness,  than  as 
itseK  the  fruit.  It  is  the  purging  of  the  branch  which  leads 
to  increased  fertility. 

The  next  sentence  ("  Now  ye  are  clean  through  the  word 
which  I  have  spoken  unto  you  "  ^)  it  seems  best  to  regard  as 
a  parenthesis,  in  which  for  a  moment  the  figure  of  the  vine  is 
lost  sight  of  The  mention  of  branches  which,  as  unproductive, 
are  cut  off,  recalls  to  the  Lord's  thoughts  the  case  of  one  who 
had  already  been  cut  off — the  false  disciple  Judas — and  leads 
Him  naturally  to  assure  the  eleven  that  He  hopes  better 
things  of  them.  The  process  of  excision  had  already  been 
appUed  among  them  in  one  instance :  therefore  they  should 
not  be  high-minded,  but  fear.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  as  He 
had  said  before  in  connection  with  the  feet- washing,  that  they 
were  clean,  with  one  exception ;  so  now  He  would  say  they 
were  all  clean,  without  exception,  through  the  word  which  He 
had  spoken  to  them.  As  branches  they  might  need  pruning, 
but  there  would  be  no  occasion  for  cutting  off. 

Having  strongly  declared  the  indispensableness  of  fruit- 
bearing  in  order  to  continued  connection  with  the  vine,  Jesus 
proceeded  next  to  set  forth  the  conditions  of  fruitfulness,  and 
(what  we  should  have  expected  at  the  very  commencement  of 
the  discourse)  the  relation  subsisting  between  HimseK  and 
His  disciples.  "  I  am  the  vine,"  He  said  (to  take  the  latter 
fii^t),  "  ye  are  the  branches."  *  By  this  statement  He  explains 
why  He  is  so  urgent  that  His  disciples  should  be  fruitful  The 
reason  is,  that  they  are  the  media  through  which  He  Himself 
brings  forth  fruit,  serving  the  same  purpose  to  Him  that  the 
branches  serve  to  the  vine.  His  own  personal  work  had 
been  to  choose  and  train  them, — to  fill  them,  so  to  speak,  with 
the  sap  of  divine  truth ;  and  their  work  was  now  to  turn  that 
sap  into  grapes.  The  Father  in  heaven,  by  sending  Him  into 
the  world,  had  planted  Him  in  the  earth,  a  new,  mystic,  spi- 
ritual vine ;  and  He  had  produced  them,  the  eleven,  as  His 
branches.     Now  His  personal  ministry  was  at  an  end,  and  it 

^  John  XY.  8.  '  Jolin  xy.  5. 

2  D 


418  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

remained  for  the  branches  to  carry  on  the  work  to  its  natural 
consummation,  and  to  bring  forth  a  crop  of  fruit,  in  the  shape^ 
of  a  church  of  saved  men  believing  in  His  nama  K  they 
failed  to  do  this.  His  labour  would  be  all  in  vain. 

Returning  now  to  the  conditions  of  fruitfulness,  we  find 
Jesus  expressing  them  in  these  terms :  "  Abide  in  me,  and 
I  in  you."^  These  words  point  to  a  dependence  of  the  dis- 
ciples on  their  Lord  imder  two  forms,  which  by  help  of  the 
analogy  of  a  tree  and  its  branches  it  is  easy  to  distinguish. 
The  branch  abides  in  the  vine  structurally;  and  the  vine 
abides  in  the  branch  through  its  sap,  vitally.  Both  of  these 
abidings  are  necessary  to  fruit-bearing.  Unless  the  branch 
be  organicfdly  connected  with  the  stem,  the  sap  which  goes  to 
make  fruit  cannot  pass  into  it.  On  the  other  hand,  although 
the  branch  be  organically  connected  with  the  stem,  yet  if  the 
sap  of  the  stem  do  not  ascend  into  it  (a  case  which  is  possible 
and  common  in  the  natural  world),  it  must  remain  as  fruitless 
as  if  it  were  broken  off  and  lying  on  the  ground. 

All  this  is  clear ;  but  when  we  ask  what  do  the  two  abid- 
ings signify  in  reference  to  the  mystic  vine,  the  answer  is  not 
quite  so  easy.  The  tendency  here  is  to  run  the  two  into  one, 
and  to  make  the  distinction  between  them  merely  nominal 
The  best  way  to  come  at  the  truth  is  to  adhere  as  closely  as 
possible  to  the  natural  analogy.  What,  then,  would  one  say 
most  nearly  corresponded  to  the  structural  abiding  of  the 
branch  in  the  tree  ?  We  think,  abiding  in  the  doctrine  of 
Christ,  in  the  doctrine  He  taught ;  and  acknowledging  Him 
as  the  source  whence  it  had  been  learned.  In  other  words, 
"Abide  in  me"  means.  Hold  and  profess  the  truth  I  have 
spoken  to  you,  and  give  yourselves  out  merely  as  my  wit- 
nesses. The  other  abiding,  on  the  other  hand,  signifies  the 
indwelling  of  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  in  the  hearts  of  those  who 
believe.  Jesus  gives  His  disciples  to  imderstand  that,  while 
abiding  in  His  doctrine,  they  must  also  have  His  Spirit  abid- 
ing in  them  ;  that  they  must  not  only  hold  fast  the  truth,  but 
be  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  truth. 

As  thus  distinguished,  the  two  abidings  are  not  only 
different  in  conception,  but  separable  in  fact.     On  the  one 

^  John  XV.  4. 


DYING  CHARGE:  THE  VINE  AND  ITS  BRANCHES.     419 

hand,  there  may  be  Christian  orthodoxy  in  the  letter,  where 
there  is  little  or  no  spiritual  life  ;  and  there  may,  on  the  other 
hand,  be  a  certain  species  of  spiritual  vitality,  a  great  moral, 
and  in  some  respects  most  Christian-like  earnestness,  accom- 
panied with  serious  departure  from  the  faith.  The  one  may 
be  likened  unto  a  dead  branch  on  a  living  tree,  bleached, 
barkless,  moss-grown,  and  even  in  summer  leafless,  stretching 
out  like  a  withered  arm  from  the  trunk  into  which  it  is 
inserted,  and  with  which  it  still  maintains  an  organic  struc- 
tural connection.  The  other  is  a  branch  cut  oflf  by  pride  or 
self-will  from  the  tree,  full  of  the  tree's  sap,  and  clothed  with 
verdure  at  the  moment  of  excision,  and  foolishly  imagining, 
because  it  does  not  wither  at  once,  that  it  can  live  and  grow 
and  blossom  independently  of  the  tree  altogether.  Have 
such  things  never  been  since  Christianity  began  ?  Alas, 
would  it  were  so !  In  the  grand  primeval  forest  of  the  church 
too  many  dead  orthodoxies  have  ever  been  visible ;  and  as  for 
branches  setting  up  for  themselves,  their  name  is  legioa 

The  two  abidings,  which  we  have  seen  to  be  not  only 
separable,  but  often  separated,  cannot  be  separated  without 
fatal  eflfects.  The  result  ever  is  in  the  end  to  illustrate  the 
truth  of  Christ's  words,  "  Without,  or  severed  from,  me  ye 
can  do  nothing."^  Dead  orthodoxy  is  notoriously  impotent. 
Feeble,  timid,  torpid,  averse  to  anything  arduous,  heroic,  stir- 
ring in  thought  or  conduct  at  best,  it  becomes  at  last  insincere 
and  demoralizing :  salt  without  savour,  fit  only  to  be  thrown 
out  ;  worthless  vine-wood,  good  for  nothing  except  for  fuel, 
and  not  worth  much  even  for  that  purpose.  Heresies, 
not  abiding  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  are  equally  helpless  :  at 
first,  indeed,  they  possess  a  spurious  ephemeral  vitality,  and 
make  a  little  noise  in  the  world ;  but  by  and  by  their  leaf 
begins  to  wither,  and  they  bring  forth  no  abiding  fruit  Look 
at  the  conceited  pretentious  Deists  of  last  century.  They 
thought  they  were  going  to  supersede  Christianity,  and  bring 
in  a  new  rational  philosophic  creed,  infinitely  superior  to  the 
superstitious,  supernatural,  incredible  one  which  had  previously 
been  in  vogue.  What  has  become  of  them  now  ?  Their 
leaf  has  withered :  their  very  writings  have  long  ago  become 

^  John  ZY.  5. 


420  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

like  rotten  branches  fit  for  the  fire,  and  are  now  read  only  by 
antiquarians;  while  Paul,  and  Peter,  and  James,  whose  Epistles 
they  meant  to  banish  from  the  civilised  world,  are  still  as 
much  in  favour  as  ever, — tJidr  fruit  remaining  because  they 
abode  in  Christ's  word,  and  had  His  Spirit  abiding  in  them. 

The  conception  of  a  dead  branch,  applied  to  individuals  as 
distinct  from  churches  or  the  religious  world  viewed  collec- 
tively, is  not  without  difficulty.  A  dead  branch  on  a  tree  was 
not  always  dead :  it  was  produced  by  the  vital  force  of  the 
tree,  and  had  some  of  the  tree's  life  in  it.  Does  the  analogy 
between  natural  and  spiritual  branches  hold  at  this  point? 
Kot  in  any  sense,  as  we  believe,  that  would  compromise  the 
doctrine  of  perseverance  in  grace,  nowhere  taught  more 
clearly  than  in  the  words  of  our  Lord.  At  the  same  time,  it 
cannot  be  denied  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  abortive 
religious  experience.  There  are  blossoms  on  the  tree  of  life 
which  are  blasted  by  spring  frosts,  green  fruits  which  fall  off 
ere  they  ripen,  branches  which  become  sickly  and  die.  Jona- 
than Edwards,  a  high  Calvinist,  but  also  a  candid,  shrewd 
observer  of  facts,  remarks :  "  I  cannot  say  that  the  greater 
part  of  supposed  converts  give  reason  by  their  conversation 
to  suppose  that  they  are  true  converts.  The  proportion  may 
perhaps  be  more  truly  represented  by  the  proportion  of  the 
blossoms  on  a  tree  which  abide,  and  come  to  mature  fruit,  to 
the  whole  number  of  blossoms  in  spring."^  The  permanency 
of  many  spiritual  blossoms  is  here  denied,  but  the  very  denial 
implies  an  admission  that  they  were  blossoms. 

That  some  branches  should  become  imfruitful,  and  even 
die,  while  others  flourish  and  bring  forth  fruity  is  a  great 
mystery,  whose  explanation  lies  deeper  than  theologians  of 
the  Arminian  school  are  willing  to  admit.  Yet,  while  this 
is  true,  the  responsibility  of  man  for  his  own  spiritual 
character  cannot  be  too  earnestly  insisted  oa  Though  the 
Father,  as  the  husbandman,  wields  the  pruning-knife,  the 
process  of  purging  cannot  be  carried  on  without  our  consent 
and  co-operation.  For  that  process  means  practically  the 
removal  of  moral  hindrances  to  life  and  growth— the  cares  of 

^  See  memoir  by  Sereno  E.  Dwight,  prefixed  to  English  edition  of  the  Works  of 
Edwards,  in  two  volomes :  voL  i.  p.  clxxii. 


DYING  CHARGE :   THE  VINE  AND  ITS  BRANCHES.  421 

life,  the  insidious  influence  of  wealth,  the  lusts  of  the  flesh, 
and  the  passions  of  the  soul :  evils  which  cannot  be  overcome 
unless  our  will  and  all  our  moral  powers  be  brought  to  bear 
against  them.  Hence  Jesus  lays  it  upon  His  disciples  as  a 
duty  to  abide  in  Him,  and  have  Him  abiding  in  them,  and 
resolves  the  whole  matter  at  last,  in  plain  terms,  into  keeping 
His  commandments.^  If  they  diligently  and  faithfully  do 
their  part,  the  divine  Husbandman,  He  assures  them,  will  not 
fail  to  give  them  liberally  all  things  needful  for  the  most 
abundant  fruitfulness.  *'  Ye  shall  ask  what  ye  wOl,  and  it 
shall  be  done  unto  you."  ^ 

The  doom  of  branches  coming  short  in  either  of  the  two 
possible  ways  is  very  plainly  declared  by  Jesus.  The  doom 
of  the  branch  which,  while  in  Him  structurally,  beareth  not 
fruit,  either  because  it  is  absolutely  dead  and  dry,  or  because 
it  is  afficted  with  a  vice  which  makes  it  barren,  is  to  be  taken 
away — judicially  severed  from  the  tree.'  The  doom  of  the 
branch  which  wUl  not  abide  in  the  vine  is,  not  to  be  cut  off — 
for  that  it  does  itseK — ^but  to  be  thrown  out  of  the  vineyard, 
there  to  lie  till  it  be  withered,  and  at  length,  at  a  convenient 
season,  to  be  gathered  along  with  all  its  seK- willed,  erratic 
brethren  into  a  heap,  and  burned  in  a  bonfire  like  the  dry 
rubbish  of  a  garden.* 

The  doom  of  excision  or  ejection  may  be  very  serious  in 
its  consequences  to  those  on  whom  it  is  inflicted,  but  it  is 
very  salutary  for  the  vine.  Hypocrisy  and  infidelity,  quietly 
tolerated,  are  fatal  to  the  church's  life..  Men  living  lives 
which  make  their  profession  of  faith  incredible,  and  men 
openly  professing  imbelief  in  the  great  fimdamentak  of 
Christianity,  must  be  expelled  from  the  communion  of  the 
faithful,  as  remorselessly  as  the  surgeon  cuts  off  a  mortifying 
limb,  and  for  the  same  reason,  viz.  to  save  the  life  of  the 
body.  What  is  lost  in  numbers  by  the  excommunication  of 
imworthy  persons,  is  gsiined  in  moral  power  and  spiritual 
fertility.  The  loss  is  simply  a  collection  of  branches  dead  or 
barren,  whose  presence  on  the  tree  renders  it  utterly  impro- 
ductive ;  the  gain  is  a  goodly  crop  of  fruit  on  the  branches 
left  behind. 

*  John  XY.  10.  »  Ver.  7.  *  Vcr.  2.  *  Ver.  6. 


422  THE  TRAINIKG  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

In  the  latter  portion  of  the  disconise  on  the  vine/  Jesns 
expresses  His  high  expectations  with  respect  to  the  froitfol- 
ness  of  the  apostolic  branches,  and  suggests  a  yariety  of 
considerations  which,  acting  on  the  minds  of  the  disciples 
as  motives,  might  lead  to  the  fulfilment  of  His  hopes. 

As  to  the  former.  He  gave  the  disciples  to  understand  iliat 
He  expected  of  them  not  only  fruit,  but  much  fruit,'  and 
fruit  not  only  abundant  in  quantity,  but  good  in  quality;' 
fruit  that  should  remain,  grapes  whose  juice  should  be  worthy 
of  preservation,  as  wine  in  bottles;  a  church  that  should 
endure  till  the  world's  end 

On  these  two  requirements  we  make  four  remarks : — 

1.  Taken  together,  they  amount  to  a  very  high  demand.  It 
is  very  hard  indeed  to  produce  fruit  at  once  abundant  and 
enduring.  The  two  requirements,  to  a  certain  extent^  limit 
each  other.  AiTning  at  high  quality  leads  to  undue  thinning 
of  the  clusters,  whUe  aiming  at  quantity  may  easily  lead  to 
deterioration  in  the  quality  of  the  whole.  The  thing  to  be 
studied  is,  to  secure  as  large  an  amount  of  fruit  as  is  con- 
sistent with  permanence ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  to  cultivate 
excellence  as  far  as  is  consistent  with  obtaining  a  fair  crop 
which  will  repay  labour  and  expense.  This  is,  so  to  speak, 
the  ideal  theory  of  vine-culture ;  but  in  practice  we  must  be 
content  with  something  short  of  the  perfect  realization  of  our 
theory.  We  cannot,  for  example,  rigorously  insist  that  all 
the  fruit  shall  be  such  as  can  endure.  Many  fruits  of  Chris- 
tian labour  are  only  transient  means  towards  other  fruits  of  a 
permanent  nature ;  and  if  we  satisfy  the  law  of  Christ  so  far 
as  to  produce  much  fruit,  some  of  which  shall  remain,  we  do 
welL  The  permanent  portion  of  a  man's  work  must  always 
be  small  in  proportion  to  the  whole.  At  highest,  it  can  only 
bear  such  a  proportion  to  the  whole,  as  the  grape-juice  bears 
to  the  grapes  out  of  which  it  is  pressed.  A  small  cask  of 
wine  represents  a  much  larger  bulk  of  grapes;  and  in  like 
manner,  the  perennial  result  of  a  Christian  life  is  veiy  incon- 
siderable in  volume,  compared  with  the  mass  of  thoughts,  words, 
and  deeds  of  which  that  life  was  made  up.  One  little  book, 
for  instance,  may  preserve  to  all  generations  the  soul  and 

'  John  XT.  8-17.  «  Ver.  8.  *  Vcr.  16. 


DTING  CHARGE:   THE  VINE  AND  ITS  BRANCHES.  423 

essence  of  the  thoughts  of  a  most  giftal  mind,  and  of  the 
graces  of  a  noble  heart  Witness  that  wondrous  book  the 
PUgrinCs  Progress,  which  contains  more  wine  in  it  than  may 
be  found  in  the  ponderous  folios  of  some  wordy  authors,  whose 
works  are  but  huge  wine-casks  with  very  little  wine  in  them, 
and  sometimes  hardly  even  the  scent  of  it. 

2.  To  satisfy  these  two  requirements,  two  virtues  are  above 
all  needful,  viz.  diligence  and  patience :  the  one  to  ensure 
quantity,  the  other  to  ensure  superior  quality.  One  must 
know  both  how  to  labour  and  how  to  wait ;  never  idle,  yet 
never  hurrying.  Diligence  alone  will  not  suffica  Bustling 
activity  does  a  great  many  things  bcwily,  but  nothing  well. 
On  the  other  hand,  patience  imaccompanied  by  diligence  de- 
generates into  indolence,  which  brings  forth  no  fruit  at  all, 
either  good  or  bad.  The  two  virtues  must  go  together ;  and 
when  they  do,  they  never  fail  to  produce,  in  greater  or  less 
abundance,  fruit  that  remaineth  in  a  holy,  exemplary  life, 
whose  memory  is  cherished  for  generations,  in  books  or  in 
philanthropic  institutions,  in  the  character  of  descendants, 
scholai-s,  or  hearers. 

3.  When  the  two  requirements  are  taken  as  applying  to  all 
believers  in  Christ,  the  term  *'  much  **  must  be  understood 
relatively.  It  is  not  required  of  all  indiscriminately  to  pro- 
duce an  absolutely  large  quantity  of  fruit,  but  only  of  those 
who,  like  the  apostles,  have  been  chosen  and  endowed  to 
occupy  distinguished  positions.  Of  him  to  whom  little  is 
given,  shall  little  be  required.  For  men  of  few  talents  it  is 
better  not  to  attempt  much,  but  rather  to  endeavour  to  do 
well  the  little  for  which  they  have  capacity.  Aspiration  is 
good  in  the  abstract ;  but  to  aspire  to  exceed  the  appointed 
dimensions  of  our  career,  is  to  supply  a  new  illustration  of  the 
old  fable  of  the  frog  and  the  ox.  The  man  who  would  be  and 
do  more  than  he  is  fit  for,  is  worse  than  useless.  He  brings 
forth,  not  the  sweet,  wholesome  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  but  the 
inflated  fruits  of  vanity,  which,  like  the  apples  of  Sodom,  are 
fair  and  delicious  to  the  eye  and  soft  to  the  touch,  but  are  yet 
fidl  of  wind,  and  being  pressed,  explode  like  a  puflf  baU.^ 

4.  The  demand  for  much  fruit,  while  very  exacting  as 

^  RobinBon,  BiibUcal  JUsearehea^  L  528. 


424  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

towards  the  apostles,  to  whom  it  in  the  first  place  refers,  has 
a  very  gracious  aspect  towards  the  world.  The  fruit  which 
Jesus  expected  from  His  chosen  ones,  was  the  conversion  of 
men  to  the  faith  of  the  gospel — the  ingathering  of  souls  into 
the  kingdom  of  God.  A  demand  for  much  fruit  in  this  sense 
is  an  expression  of  goodwill  to  mankind,  a  revelation  of  the 
Saviour's  loving  compassion  for  a  world  Ij^g  in  sin,  and  error, 
and  darkness.  In  making  this  demand,  Jesus  says  in  effect 
to  His  apostles :  Go  into  the  world,  bent  on  evangelizing  all 
the  nations :  be  fruitful,  and  multiply,  and  replenish  the  earth, 
and  subdue  it.  Ye  cannot  bring  too  many  to  the  obedience 
of  faith  :  the  greater  the  number  of  those  who  believe  on  me 
through  your  word,  the  better  I  shall  be  pleased.  We  have 
here,  in  short,  but  an  echo  of  the  impassioned  utterances  of 
that  earlier  occasion,  when  Jesus  welcomed  death  as  the  con- 
dition of  abundant  fruitfulness,  and  the  cross  as  a  power  by 
whose  irresistible  attraction  He  should  draw  all  imto  Him.^ 

From  the  high  requirements  of  the  Lord,  we  pass  on  to  the 
arguments  with  which  He  sought  to  impress  on  the  disciples 
the  duty  of  bringing  forth  much  and  abiding  fruit.  Of  these 
there  are  no  less  than  six,  grouped  in  pairs.  The  first  pair  we 
find  indicated  in  the  words  :  "  Herein  is  my  Father  glorified, 
that  ye  bear  much  fruit,  and  that  ye  may  be  my  disciples."  * 
In  other  words,  Jesus  would  have  His  chosen  ones  remember 
that  the  credit,  both  of  the  divine  Husbandman,  and  of  Him- 
self, the  Vine,  largely  depended  on  their  behaviour.  The  world 
would  judge  by  results.  If  they,  the  apostles,  abounded  in 
fruitfulness,  it  would  be  remarked  that  God  had  not  sent  Christ 
into  the  world  in  vain ;  and  their  success  would  be  ascribed  to 
Him  whose  disciples  they  had  been.  If  they  failed,  men  would 
say :  God  planted  a  vine  which  has  not  thriven ;  and  the  vine 
produced  branches  which  have  borne  no  fruit ;  or  in  plain 
terms,  Christ  chose  agents  who  have  done  nothing. 

The  force  of  these  arguments  for  fruitfulness  is  more  obvious 
in  the  case  of  the  apostles,  the  founders  of  the  church,  than 
in  reference  to  the  present  condition  of  the  church,  when  the 

1  John  xii.  24,  88. 

'  John  XY.  8.     Vide  varions  reading,  yitn^i  instead  of  ytfn^trft.    The  sense 
is  the  same  ultimately,  whichever  reading  we  prefer. 


K 


DYING  CHABGE  :   THE  VINE  AND  ITS  BKANCHES.  425 

honour  of  Christ  and  of  Grod  the  Father  seems  to  depend  in  a 
very  small  measure  on  the  conduct  of  individuals.  The  whole 
stress  then  lay  on  eleven  men.  Now  it  is  distributed  over 
millions.  Nevertheless  there  is  great  need,  even  yet,  for 
spiritually  fruitf id  life  in  the  church,  to  uphold  the  honour  of 
Christ's  name ;  for  there  is  a  tendency  at  the  present  time 
to  look  on  Christianity  as  used  up.  The  old  vine-stock  is  con- 
sidered by  many  to  be  effete,  and  past  fruit-bearing ;  and  a 
new  plant  of  renown  is  called  for.  This  idea  can  be  exploded 
effectually  only  in  one  way,  viz.  by  the  rising  up  of  a  genera- 
tion of  Christians  whose  life  shall  demonstrate  that  the  "  true 
vine"  is  not  one  of  the  things  that  wax  old  and  vanish  away, 
but  possesses  eternal  vitality,  sufficient  not  only  to  produce 
new  branches  and  new  clusters,  but  to  shake  itseK  clear  of 
dead  branches,  and  of  all  the  moss  by  which  it  may  have 
become  overgrown  in  the  course  of  ages. 

A  second  pair  of  motives  to  fruitfulness  we  find  hinted  at 
in  the  words :  "  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  that 
my  joy  might  remain  in  you,  and  that  your  joy  might  be 
fulfilled."^  Jesus  means  to  say,  that  the  continuance  of  His 
joy  in  the  disciples,  and  the  completion  of  their  own  joy  as 
believers  in  Him,  depended  on  their  being  fruitfuL  The 
emphasis  in  the  first  clause  lies  on  the  word  "  remain."  Jesus 
has  joy  in  His  disciples  even  now,  though  spiritually  crude, 
even  as  the  gardener  hath  joy  in  the  clusters  of  grapes  when 
they  are  green,  sour,  and  imeatable.  But  He  rejoices  in  them 
at  present,  not  for  what  they  are,  but  because  of  the  promise 
that  is  in  them  of  ripe  fruit.  If  that  promise  were  not  ful- 
filled. He  should  feel  as  the  gardener  feels  when  the  blossom 
is  nipped  by  frost,  or  the  green  fruit  destroyed  by  mildew ;  or 
as  a  parent  feels  when  a  son  belies  in  his  manhood  the  bright 
promise  of  his  youth.  He  can  bear  delay,  but  He  cannot  bear 
failure.  He  can  wait  patiently  till  the  process  of  growth  has 
passed  through  all  its  stages,  and  can  put  up  with  all  the  un- 
satisfactory qualities  of  immaturity,  for  the  sake  of  what  they 
shall  ripen  into.  But  if  they  never  ripen,  if  the  children 
never  become  men,  if  the  pupUs  never  become  teachers,  then 
He  will  exclaim,  in  bitter  disappointment :  "  Woes  me !  my 

*  John  XY.  11, 


426  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

soul  desired  ripe  fruit ;  and  is  this  what  I  find  after  waiting 
so  long  ? " 

In  the  second  clause  the  stress  lies  on  the  word  ''  fulfilled." 
It  is  not  said  or  insinuated  that  a  Christian  can  have  no  joy 
till  his  character  be  matured  and  his  work  accomplished.  The 
language  of  Jesus  is  quite  compatible  with  the  assertion,  that 
even  at  the  very  commencement  of  the  spiritual  life  there 
may  be  a  great,  even  passionate,  outburst  of  joy.  But,  on  the 
other  hand,  that  language  plainly  implies  that  the  joy  of  the 
immature  disciple  is  necessarily  precarious,  and  that  the  joy 
which  is  stable  and  full  comes  only  with  spiritual  maturity. 
This  is  a  great  practical  truth,  which  it  concerns  all  disciples 
to  bear  in  mind.  Joy  in  the  highest  sense  is  one  of  the  ripe 
fruits  of  the  Holy.  Spirit ;  it  is  the  reward  of  perseverance  and 
fidelity.  Eejoicing  at  the  outset  is  good,  so  far  as  it  goes ; 
but  all  depends  on  the  sequel  If  .we  stop  short  and  grow  not, 
woe  to  us  ;  for  failure  in  all  things,  and  specially  in  religion, 
is  misery.  If  we  be  comparatively  unfruitful,  we  may  not  be 
absolutely  unhappy ;  but  we  can  never  know  the  fulness  of 
joy :  for  it  is  only  to  the  faithful  servant  that  the  words  are 
spoken,  "  Enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord."  The  perfect 
measure  of  bliss  is  for  the  soldier  who  hath  won  the  victory, 
for  the  reaper  celebrating  harvest-home,  for  the  athlete  who 
hath  gained  the  prize  of  strength,  skill,  and  swiftness. 

The  two  last  considerations  by  which  Jesus  sought  to  im- 
press on  His  disciples  the  duty  of  being  fruitful,  were :  the 
honourable  nature  of  their  apostolic  calling,  and  the  debt  of 
gratitude  they  owed  to  Him  who  had  called  them,  and  who 
was  now  about  to  die  for  them.  The  dignity  of  the  apostle- 
ship,  in  contrast  to  the  menial  position  of  the  disciple.  He 
described  in  these  terms :  "  Henceforth  I  call  you  not  servants ; 
for  the  servant  knoweth  not  what  his  lord  doeth  :  but  I  have 
called  you  friends ;  for  all  things  that  I  have  heard  of  my 
Father  I  have  made  known  imto  you."^  In  other  words :  the 
disciples  had  been  apprentices,  the  apostles  would  be  partners ; 
the  disciples  had  been  as  government  clerks,  the  apostles  would 
be  confidential  ministers  of  the  king ;  the  disciples  had  been 
pupils  in  the  school  of  Jesus,  the  apostles  would  be  the  trea- 

^  John  XT.  15. 


DTIKG  CHABGE :   THE  VINE  AND  ITS  BRANCHES.  427 

surers  of  Christian  truth,  the  reporters  and  expositors  of  their 
Master's  doctrine,  the  sole  reliable  sources  of  information  con- 
cerning the  letter  and  the  spirit  of  His  teaching.  What  office 
could  possibly  be  more  important  than  theirs,  and  how  needful 
that  they  should  realize  their  responsibilities  in  connection 
with  it  I 

While  endeavouring  to  walk  worthy  of  so  high  a  voca- 
tion, it  would  become  the  apostles  also  to  bear  in  mind  their 
obligations  to  Him  who  had  caUed  them  to  the  apostoUc 
office.  The  due  consideration  of  these  would  be  an  additional 
stimulus  to  diligence  and  fidelity.  Hence  Jesus  is  careful  to 
impress  on  His  disciples  that  they  owe  all  they  are  and  will 
be  to  Him.  "  Ye  have  not  chosen  me,  but  I  have  chosen 
you,"  ^  He  tells  them.  He  wishes  them  to  understand  that 
they  had  conferred  no  benefit  on  Him  by  becoming  His  dis- 
ciples; the  benefit  was  all  on  their  side.  He  had  raised 
them. from  obscurity  to  be  the  lights  of  the  world,  to  be  the 
present  companions  and  future  friends  and  representatives  of 
the  Christ.  Having  done  so  much  for  them.  He  was  entitied 
to  ask  that  they  would  eamestiy  endeavour  to  realize  the  end 
for  which  He  had  chosen  them,  and  to  fulfil  the  ministry  to 
which  they  were  ordained 

One  thing  more  is  noteworthy  in  this  discourse  on  the 
true  vine :  the  reiteration  of  the  commandment  to  love  one 
another.  At  the  commencement  of  the  farewell  address,  Jesus 
enjoined  on  the  disciples  brotherly  love  as  a  source  of  conso- 
lation imder  bereavement ;  here  He  re-enjoins  it  once  and 
again  as  a  condition  of  fruitfulness.*  Though  He  does  not  say 
it  in  so  many  words,  He  evidently  means  the  disciples  to 
understand,  that  abiding  in  each  other  by  love  is  just  as 
necessary  to  their  success  as  their  common  abiding  in  Him  by 
faith.  Division,  party  strife,  jealousy,  will  be  simply  fatal  to 
their  influence,  and  to  the  cause  they  represent.  They  must 
be  such  fast  friends,  that  they  will  even  be  willing  to  die  for 
each  other. 

There  are  some  who  think  that  the  apostles  did  not  pay 
that  respect  to  the  will  of  their  Lord  on  this  point  which  He 
demanded  of  them  ere  He  left  the  world.     The  existence  of 

1  John  XV.  16.  «  Vers.  12,  17. 


428  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

dissension  and  ill  feeling  in  the  apostolic  cabinet  is  confi- 
dently asserted  by  negative  criticism/  But  the  progress  of 
the  apostolic  church  gives  the  lie  to  this  assumption.  When 
a  community,  wherein  confessedly  many  weak  and  weakening 
passions  prevail,  is  kept  together  and  even  prospers  notwith- 
standing, there  must  be  some  men  of  a  better  spirit  at  the 
head,  who  rise  superior  to  the  vices  of  the  multitude,  and  rule 
their  weaker  brethren  because  they  have  already  learned  to 
rule  themselves.  K  there  were  such  men  in  the  infant  Chris- 
tian community,  who  were  they  ?  who  but  the  men  who  had 
been  with  Jesus,  and  had  learned  in  His  school  to  subordi- 
nate seK  to  duty,  and  to  put  the  good  of  the  whole  before  the 
interest  of  a  party  1 

Would  that  Christians  in  aU  subsequent  ages  had  remem- 
bered the  commandment  of  love  as  well  as  the  apostles  !  The 
history  of  the  church  abundantly  explains  the  urgency  with 
which  Jesus  insisted  on  brotherly  concord  in  connection  with 
a  demand  for  fruitfulness.  Divisions  and  alienations  have 
been  one  main  cause  of  the  church's  barrenness.  What  an 
arrest,  for  example,  was  put  on  the  progress  of  the  Reforma- 
tion by  the  misunderstandings  which  arose  between  the  lead- 
ing refoimers  —  Luther,  Calvin,  and  Zwingle !  And  how 
impotent  and  spiritually  imfniitful  is  the  church  now  from 
a  similar  cause !  How  scanty  are  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit 
on  the  vine ;  how  abimdant  the  works  of  the  flesh — ^hatreds, 
variances,  emulations,  unseemly  heats  of  anger,  strifes,  sedi- 
tions, heresies,  not  to  speak  of  grosser  sins  into  which  care- 
less professors  frequently  fall  in  an  evil  and  adulterous  time  ! 
"  Eeturn,  we  beseech  Thee,  0  God  of  hosts  :  Look  down  from 
heaven,  and  behold,  and  visit  this  vine." 

^  Tbe  dissension  is  alleged  to  have  existed  not  so  much  among  the  twelre,  as 
between  them  and  Paul  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  Renan,  however,  does  not 
hesitate  to  ascribe  to  John  jealousy  of  Peter,  and  to  find  traces  thereof  in  his 
Gospel.     Vid.  Vie  de  Jeaua,  Introduction,  p.  xxvii. 


DYING  CHARGE :   TRIBULATIONS  AND  ENCOUKAGEMENTS.    429 


Section  n. — Apostolic  TribulcUions  and  Encouragements. 

John  xv.  18-27,  xvi.  1-15. 

From  apostolic  duties  Jesus  passed  on  to  speak  of  apostolic 
tribulations.  The  transition  was  natural :  for  all  great  actors 
in  God's  cause,  whose  fruit  remains,  are  sure  to  be  more  or 
less  men  of  sorrow.  To  be  hated  and  evil-entreated  is  one 
of  the  penalties  of  moral  greatness  and  spiritual  power;  or, 
if  you  please,  one  of  the  privileges  Christ  confers  on  His 
"  friends." 

Hatred  is  very  hard  to  bear,  and  the  desire  to  escape  it  is 
one  main  cause  of  unfaithfulness  and  unfruitfulness.  Good 
men  shape  their  conduct  so  as  to  keep  out  of  trouble,  and 
through  excess  of  cowardly  prudence  degenerate  into  spiritual 
nonentities.  It  was  of  the  first  importance  that  the  apostles  of 
the  Christian  faith  should  not  become  impotent  through  this 
cause.  For  this  reason  Jesus  introduces  the  subject  of  tribu- 
lation here.  He  would  fortify  His  disciples  for  the  endurance 
of  sufferings,  by  speaking  of  them  befprehand.  "  These  things," 
saith  He,  in  the  course  of  His  address  on  the  impleasant 
theme,  as  if  apologizing  for  its  introduction,  "  have  I  spoken 
unto  you,  that  ye  should  not  be  scandalized,"^  that  is,  be  taken 
by  surprise  when  the  time  of  trouble  came. 

To  nerve  the  yoimg  soldiers  of  the  cross,  the  Captain  of 
salvation  has  recourse  to  various  expedients,  among  which  the 
first  is  to  tell  them,  without  disguise,  what  they  have  to 
expect,  that  familiarity  with  the  dark  prospect  may  make  it 
less  terrible.  Of  the  world's  hatred  Jesus  speaks  as  an 
absolutely  certain  matter,  not  even  deeming  it  necessary  to 
assert  its  certainty,  but  assuming  that  as  a  thing  of  course : 
"  If  the  world  hate  you"  ^ — as  of  course  it  will  Further  on 
He  describes,  without  euphemism  or  circumlocution,  the  kind 
of  treatment  they  shall  receive  at  the  world's  hands  :  "  They 
shall  put  you  out  of  the  synagogues ;  yea,  the  time  cometh, 
that  whosoever  killeth  you  will  think  that  he  doeth  Grod  ser- 
vice." *  Harsh,  appalling  words ;  but  since  such  things  were 
to  be,  it  was  well  to  know  the  worst 

^  John  xvi  1 ;  see  also  yer.  4.  '  John  zv.  18.  '  John  xvL  2. 


430  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

Jesus  further  tells  His  disciples,  that  whatever  they  may 
have  to  suffer,  they  can  he  no  wo^se  off  than  He  has  heeJ 
before  them.  "  K  the  world  hate  you,  ye  know  that  it  has 
hated  me  before  you."  Poor  comfort,  one  is  disposed  to  say ; 
yet  it  is  not  so  poor  when  you  consider  the  relative  position 
of  the  parties.  He  who  has  already  been  hated  is  the  Lord ; 
they  who  are  to  be  hated  are  but  the  servants.  Of  this  Jesus 
reminds  His  disciples,  repeating  and  recalling  to  their  remem- 
brance a  word  He  had  already  spoken  the  same  evening.^ 
The  consideration  ought  at  least  to  repress  murmuring ;  and 
duly  laid  to  heart,  it  might  even  become  a  source  of  heroic 
inspiration.  The  servant  should  be  ashamed  to  complain  of 
a  lot  from  which  his  Master  is  not,  and  does  not  wish  to  be, 
exempted ;  hp  should  be  proud  to  be  a  companion  in  tribula- 
tions with  One  who  is  so  much  his  superior,  and  regard  his 
experience  of  the  cross  not  as  a  fate,  but  as  a  privilege. 

A  third  expedient  employed  by  Jesus  to  reconcile  the 
apostles  to  the  world's  hatred  is  to  represent  it  as  a  necessary 
accompaniment  of  their  election.*  This  thought,  well  weighed, 
has  great  force.  Love  ordinarily  rests  on  a  community  of 
interest.  Men  love  those  who  hold  the  same  opinions,  occupy 
the  same  position,  follow  the  same  fashions,  pursue  the  same 
ends  with  themselves ;  and  they  regard  all  who  differ  firom 
them  in  these  respects  with  indifference,  dislike,  or  positive 
animosity,  according  to  the  degree  in  which,  they  are  made 
sensible  of  the  contrast.  Hence  arises  a  dilemma  for  the 
chosen  ones.  Either  they  must  forfeit  the  honour,  privil^es, 
and  hope  of  their  election,  and  descend  into  the  dark  world 
which  is  without  God  and  without  hope ;  or  they  must  be 
content,  while  retaining  their  position  as  called  out  of  dark- 
ness, to  accept  the  drawbacks  which  adhere  to  it,  and  to  be 
hated  by  those  who  love  the  darkness  rather  than  the  light, 
because  their  life  is  evil  What  true  child  of  light  will 
hesitate  in  his  choice  ? 

To  show  the  disciples  that  they  have  no  alternative  but  to 
submit  patiently  to  their  appointed  lot  as  the  chosen  ones, 
Jesus  enters  yet  more  deeply  into  the  philosophy  of  the 
world's  hatred.     He  explains  that  what  in  the  first  place  will 

^  John  XT.  20 ;  comp.  xiiL  16,  also  xiL  26.  '  John  zv.  19. 


DYING  CHARGE:   TBIBULATIONS  AND  ENCOUEAGEMENTS.     431 

be  hatred  to  them,  will  mean  in  the  second  place  hatred  to 
HimseK,  and  in  the  last  place,  and  radically,  ignorance  of  and 
hostility  to  God  His  Father.^  In  setting  forth  this  truth, 
He  takes  occasion  to  make  some  severe  reflections  on  the 
unbelieving  world  of  Judsea,  in  which  He  had  HimseK  la- 
boured. He  puts  the  worst  construction  on  its  unbelief,  de- 
clares it  to  be  utterly  without  excuse,  accuses  those  who 
have  been  guilty  of  it  of  hating  Him  without  a  cause,  that 
is,  of  hating  one  whose  whole  character  and  conduct,  words 
and  works,  should  have  won  their  faith  and  love ;  and  in  their 
hatred  of  Him,  He  sees  revealed  a  hatred  of  that  very  God 
for  whose  glory  they  professed  to  be  so  zealous.^ 

How  painful  is  the  view  here  given  of  the  world's  enmity 
to  truth  and  its  witnesses !  One  would  like  to  see,  in  the 
bitterness  with  which  the  messengers  of  truth  have  been 
received  (not  excepting  the  case  of  Jesus),  the  result  of  a 
pardonable  misimderstanding.  And  without  doubt  this  is 
the  origin  of  not  a  few  religious  animosities.  There  have 
been  many  sins  committed  against  the  Son  of  man,  and  those 
like-minded,  which  were  only  in  a  very  mitigated  degree  sins 
against  the  Holy  Ghost.  Were  it  otherwise,  alas  for  us  all ! 
For  who  has  not  persecuted  the  Son  of  man  or  His  interest, 
cherishing  ill-feeling  and  uttering  bitter  words  against  His 
members,  if  not  against  Him  personally,  under  the  influence 
of  prejudice ;  yea,  it  may  be,  going  the  length  of  inflicting 
material  injury  on  the  aposties  of  unfamiliar,  imwelcome 
truths,  in  obedience  to  the  blind  impulses  of  panic  fear,  or 
selfish  passion  ? 

If  there  be  few  who  have  not  in  one  way  or  another  per- 
secuted, there  are  perhaps  also  few  of  the  persecuted  who 
have  not  taken  too  sombre  views  o'f  the  guilt  of  their  per- 
secutors. Men  who  suffer  for  their  convictions  are  greatly 
tempted  to  regard  their  opponents  as  in  equal  measure  the 
opponents  of  God.  The  wrongs  they  endure  provoke  them  to 
think  and  speak  of  the  wrong-doers  as  the  very  children  of 
the  deviL  Then  it  gives  importance  to  one's  cause,  and 
dignity  to  one's  suflferings,  to  conceive  of  the  former  as  God's, 
and  of  the  latter  as  endured  for  God's  sake.     Finally,  broadly 

1  John  XV.  21.  •  Vers.  22-25. 


f 


432  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE, 

to  state  the  question  at  stake  as  one  between  God's  friends  ani 
Grod's  foes,  satisfies  both  the  intellect  and  the  conscience  ;  tfa 
former  demanding  dk  status  questumis  which  is  simply  and  easLt 
understood ;  the  latter,  one  which  puts  you  obviously  in  tfa 
right,  and  your  adversaries  obviously  in  the  wrong. 

All  this  shows  that  much  candour,  humility,  and  patienc 
of  spirit  is  needed  before  one  can  safely  say,  "  He  that  hatet 
me  hateth  God."  Nevertheless  it  remains  true  that  a  man' 
real  attitude  towards  Grod  is  revealed  by  the  way  in  which  h 
treats  God's  present  work  and  His  living  servants.  On  thi 
principle  Jesus  judged  His  enemies,  though  He  cherished  n 
resentment,  and  was  ever  ready  to  make  due  allowance  fc 
ignorance.  In  spite  of  His  charity,  He  believed  and  sai< 
that  the  hostility  He  had  encountered  sprang  from  an  evi 
*  will,  and  a  wicked,  godless  heart     He  had  in  view  mainl; 

the  leaders  of  the  opposition  who  organized  the  mob  of  th 
ignorant  and  the  prejudiced  into  a  hostile  army.  These  me 
He  unhesitatingly  denounced  as  haters  of  Grod,  truth,  an 
righteousness ;  and  He  pointed  to  their  treatment  of  Himse] 
as  the  conclusive  evidence  of  the  fact.  His  appearance  an 
ministry  among  them  had  stript  ofT  the  mask,  and  shown  thei 
in  their  real  character  as  hypocrites,  pretending  to  sanctilr 
but  inwardly  full  of  baseness  and  impiety,  who  hated  genmn 
goodness,  and  could  not  rest  till  they  had  got  it  flung  out  < 
the  world  and  nailed  to  a  cross.  With  the  history  and  tfa 
sayings  of  Christ  before  our  eyes,  we  must  beware  lest  w 
carry  apologies  for  unbelief  too  far. 

Jesus  having  spoken,  as  in  a  brief  digression,  of  His  bitt< 

experience  in  the  past,  very  naturally  goes  on  next  to  expre^ 

the  hope  which  He  cherishes  of  a  brighter  future.      Hitheii 

He  has  been  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  but  He  believes 

jj  will  not  always  be  so.      The  world,  Jewish  and  Gentile,  wi 

I  ere  long  begin  to  change  its  mind,  and  the  Crucified  One  wi 

;  become  an  object  of  faith  and  reverence.    This  hope  He  builc 

^  on  a  strong  and  sure  foundation,  even  the  combined  test 

mony  of  the  Spirit  of  truth  and  of  His  own  apostle 
"  But,**  saith  He,  His  face  brightening  as  He  speaks,  "  whc 
the  Comforter  (of  whom  He  had  spoken  to  His  little  ones,  ai 
to  whom  He  now  alludes  as  His  own  Comforter  not  less  tlu 


I 


DYING  CHABGE :   TBIBUULTIOKS  AND  ENCOUBAGSMENTS.    433 

theirs)  is  come,  whom  I  will  send  unto  you  from  the  Father, 
even  the  Spirit  which  proceedeth  from  the  Father,  He  shall 
testify  of  me."^  What  results  the  Spirit  would  bring  about 
by  His  testimony.  He  does  not  here  state.  To  that  point  He 
speaks*  shortly  after,  on  discovering  that  His  hearers  have  not 
apprehended  His  meaning,  or  at  least  have  failed  to  find  in 
His  words  any  comfort  for  themselves.  Meantime  He  hastens 
to  intimate  that  the  disciples  as  well  as  the  Spirit  of  truth 
will  have  a  share  in  the  honourable  work  of  redeeming  fix)m 
disgrace  their  Master^s  name  and  character.  They  also  should 
bear  witness,  as  they  were  well  qualified  to  do,  having  been 
with  Him  from  the  beginning  of  His  ministry,^  and  knowing 
fully  His  doctrine  and  manner  of  life. 

In  this  future  witness-bearing  of  the  Spirit  and  of  the 
apostles,  Jesus  sought  comfort  to  His  own  heart  under  the 
depressing  weight  of  a  gloomy  retrospect,  and  the  immediate 
prospect  of  crucifixioa  But  not  the  less  did  He  mean  the 
disciples  also  to  seek  fix)m  the  same  quarter  strength  to 
encounter  their  tribulations.  In  truth,  no  considerations 
could  tend  more  efiTectually  to  reconcile  generous  minds  to  a 
hard  lot  than  those  implied  in  what  Jesus  had  just  said, — 
viz.  that  the  apostles  would  suffer  in  a  cause  favoured  by 
Heaven,  and  tending  to  the  honour  of  Him  whom  they  loved 
more  than  life.  Who  would  not  choose  to  be  on  the  side  for 
which  the  Divine  Spirit  fights,  even  at  the  risk  of  receiving 
wounds  ?  Who  would  not  be  happy  to  be  reproached  and 
evil-entreated  for  a  name  which  is  worthy  to  be  above  every 
name,  especially  if  assured  that  the  sufferings  endured  con- 
tributed directly  to  the  exaltation  of  that  blessed  name  to  its 
rightful  place  of  sovereignty  ? 

It  was  just  these  considerations  which  more  than  anything 
else  supported  the  apostles  imder  their  great  and  manifold 
triala  They  learned  to  say :  "  For  Christ's  sake  we  are  killed 
all  the  day  long ;  we  are  accounted  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter. 
But  what  does  it  matter  ?     The  church  is  spreading,  believers 

*  John  XV.  26. 

*  John  XT.  27.  Hoffisian  takes  /MfrvftTrt  in  yer.  27  as  an  imperatiYe :  And  do 
ye  alflo  bear  witness  of  me  :  tell  the  world  what  I  am. — Schriftbcweii,  2te  Hiilfte, 
2te  Abtheilung,  p.  19. 

SI 


434  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

are  multipljdng  on  every  side,  springing  up  an  hundred-fold 
from  the  seed  of  the  martyrs'  blood ;  the  name  of  our  Lord  is 
being  magnified.  We  wiU  gladly  suffer,  therefore,  bearing 
witness  to  the  tnitL" 

Having  premised  these  observations  concerning  the  aids  to 
endurance,  Jesus  proceeded  at  length  to  state  distinctly,  in 
words  already  quoted,  what  the  apostles  would  have  to  endure.^ 
On  these  words  we  make  only  one  additional  remark,  viz.  that 
the  disciples  would  learn  from  them  not  only  the  nature  of 
their  future  tribulations,  but  the  quarter  whence  they  were  to 
come.  The  world,  against  whose  hatred  their  Master  fore- 
warns them  in  this  part  of  His  discourse,  is  not  the  irreligious, 
sceptical,  easy-going,  gross-living  world  of  paganism.  It  is 
the  world  of  antichristian  Judaism ;  of  synagogue-frequenting 
men,  accustomed  to  distinguish  themselves  from  "  the  world" 
as  the  people  of  God,  very  zealous  afber  a  fashion  for  God's 
glory,  fanatically  in  earnest  in  their  religious  opinions  and 
practices,  utterly  intolerant  of  dissent,  relentlessly  excommu- 
nicating all  who  deviated  from  established  belief  by  a  hair^s- 
breadth,  and  deeming  their  death  no  murder,  but  a  religious 
service,  an  acceptable  sacrifice  to  the  Almighty.  To  this 
Jewish  world  is  assigned  the  honour  of  representing  the  entire 
koamos  of  men  alienated  from  God  and  truth ;  and  if  hatred 
to  the  good  be  the  central  characteristic  of  worldliness,  the 
honour  was  well  earned,  for  it  was  among  the  Jews  that  the 
power  of  hating  attained  its  maximum  degree  of  intensity. 
No  man  could  hate  like  a  religious  Jew  of  the  apostolic  age : 
he  was  renowned  for  his  diabolic  capacity  of  hating.  Even  a 
Boman  historian,  Tacitus,  commemorates  the  ''  hostile  odium" 
of  the  Jewish  race  against  all  mankind ;  and  the  experience  of 
the  Christian  apostles  fully  justified  the  prominence  given  to 
the  Jew  by  Jesus  in  discoursing  on  the  world's  hatred.  It 
was  to  the  imbelieving  Jews  they  m£tinly  owed  their  know- 
ledge of  what  the  world's  hatred  meant  The  pagan  world 
despised  them  rather  than  hated  them.  The  Greek  laughed, 
and  the  Boman  passed  by  in  contemptuous  indifference,  or  at 
most  opposed  temperately,  as  one  who  would  rather  not  But 
the  persevering,  implacable,  malignant  hostility  of  the  Jewish 

'  John  xyi.  2. 


DYING  CHABGE:   TBIBX7LATI0NS  AND  ENCOURAGEMENTS.     435 

religionist ! — it  was  bloodthirsty,  it  was  pitiless,  it  was  worthy 
of  Satan  himself.  Truly  might  Jesus  say  to  the  Jews,  witli 
reference  thereto,  "  Ye  are  of  your  father  the  devil,  and  the 
lusts  of  your  father  ye  will  do." 

What  a  strange  firuit-  was  this  wicked  spirit  of  hatred,  to 
grow  upon  the  goodly  vine  which  God  had  planted  in  the 
holy  land !  Chosen  to  be  the  vehicle  of  blessing  to  the  world, 
Israel  ends  by  becoming  the  enemy  of  the  world,  *'  contrary 
to  all  men,"  so  as  to  provoke  even  the  humane  to  regard  and 
treat  her  as  a  nuisance,  whose  destruction  fix)m  the  face  of  the 
earth  would  be  a  common  cause  of  congratidation.  Behold  tlie 
result  of  election  abused !  Peculiar  favours  minister  to  pride, 
instead  of  stirring  up  the  favoured  ones  to  devote  themselves 
to  their  high  vocation  as  the  benefactors  of  mankind ;  and  a 
divine  commonwealth  is  turned  into  a  Sjnaagogue  of  Satan, 
and^Grod's  most  deadly  foes  are  those  of  His  own  house.  Alas, 
the  same  phenomenon  has  reappeared  in  the  Christian  church. 
The  world  that  is  most  opposed  to  Christ,  Antichrist  itself, 
is  to  be  found,  not  in  heathendom,  but  in  Christendom ;  not 
among  the  irreligious  and  the  sceptical,  but  among  those  who 
account  themselves  the  peculiar  people  of  God. 

The  annoimcement  made  by  Jesus  concerning  their  future 
tribulations,  produced,  as  was  to  be  expected,  a  great  sensation 
among  the  disciples.  The  dark  prospect  revealed  by  the 
momentary  lifting  of  the  veil  utterly  appalled  them.  Conster- 
nation appeared  in  their  faces,  and  sorrow  filled  their  hearts. 
To  be  forsaken  by  their  Master  was  bad  enough,  but  to  be 
left  to  such  a  fate  was  stiU  worse,  they  thought  Jesus 
noticed  the  impression  He  had  produced,  and  did  what  He 
could  to  remove  it,  and  help  the  poor  disciples  to  recover  their 
composure. 

First,  He  makes  a  sort  of  apology  for  speaking  of  such 
painful  matters,  to  this  efiTect :  "  I  would  gladly  have  been 
silent  concerning  your  coming  troubles,  and  I  have  been 
silent  as  long  as  possible ;  but  I  could  not  think  of  leaving 
you  without  letting  you  know  what  was  before  you,  which 
accordingly  I  have  done  now,  as  the  hour  of  my  departure  is 
at  hand."^     The  kind  feeling  which  dictated  the  statement 

'  John  zvi  i. 


436  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

thus  paraphrased  is  manifest^  but  the  statement  itself  appears 
inconsistent  with  the  records  of  the  other  Gospels,  from  which 
we  learn  that  the  hardships  connected  with  discipleship  in 
general,  and  with  the  apostleship  in  particular,  were  a  frequent 
subject  of  remark  in  the  intercourse  of  Jesus  with  the  twelve. 
The  difficulty  has  been  variously  dealt  with  by  commentators. 
Some  admit  the  contradiction,  and  assume  that  such  earlier 
discourses  concerning  persecutions  as  are  found,  e.g.,  in  the 
tenth  chapter  of  Matthew,  are  introduced  by  the  evangelist 
out  of  their  chronological  order.  Others  insist  on  the  differ- 
ence between  the  earlier  utterances  and  the  present  in  respect 
to  plainness:  representing  the  former  as  vague  and  general, 
like  the  early  aUusions  made  by  Jesus  to  His  own  death ;  the 
latter  as  particular,  definite,  and  unmistakeable,  like  the  an- 
nouncements which  Jesus  made  respecting  His  passion  towards 
the  end  of  His  ministry.  A  third  class  of  expositors  make 
the  novelty  of  this  discourse  on  the  world's  hatred  lie  in  the 
explanation  given  therein  of  its  cause  and  origin  ;^  while  a 
fourth  class  insist  that  the  grand  distinction  between  this  dis- 
course and  all  that  went  before  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that 
it  is  a  farewell  discourse,  and  therefore  one  which,  owing  to 
the  situation,  made  quite  a  novel  impression.* 

Where  so  much  difference  of  opinion  prevails,  it  would  be 
unbecoming  to  dogmatize.  Our  own  opinion,  however,  is,  that 
the  peculiarity  of  the  present  utterance  concerning  apostolic 
tribulations  lies  in  the  manner  or  style  rather  than  in  the 
matter.  On  former  occasions,  especially  on  the  occasion  of 
the  trial  mission  of  the  twelve,  Jesus  had  said  much  the  same 
things :  He  had  spoken  of  scourging  in  sjnaagogues  at  least, 
if  not  of  excommunication  from  them,  and  had  alluded  to 
death  by  violence  as  at  least  a  possible  fate  for  the  apostles 
of  the  kingdom.  But  He  had  said  all  things  in  a  different 
way.  There  He  preached  concerning  persecution;  here  He 
makes  an  awfully  real  announcement.  There  is  all  the  differ- 
ence between  that  discourse  and  the  present  communication, 
that  there  would  be  between  a  sermon  on  the  text,  "  It  is 
appointed  unto  men  once  to  die,"  and  a  special  intimation  to 
an  individual,  "  This  year  thou  shalt  die."     The  sermon  may 

» Stier.  «  Luthardt 


DYING  CHARGE  :   TBIBULATIONS  AND  ENCOURAGEMENTS.     437 

say  far  more  about  death  than  the  intimation,  but  in  how 
different  a  manner,  and  with  what  a  different  effect ! 

The  next  expedient  for  curing  grief  to  which  Jesus  has 
recourse  ia  friendly  remonstrance.  He  gently  taimts  the  dis- 
ciples for  their  silence,  which  He  regards  as  a  token  of  hope- 
less, despairing  sorrow.  "  But  now  I  go  my  way  to  Him  that 
sent  me ;  and  none  of  you  asketh  me,  Whither  goest  Thou  ?  But 
because  I  have  said  these  things  imto  you,  sorrow  hath  filled 
your  heart."  ^  "  Why,"  He  means  to  say,  "  are  you  so  utterly 
cast  down  ?  have  you  no  questions  to  ask  me  about  my  de- 
parture ?  You  were  full  of  questions  at  the  first  You  were 
curious  to  know  whither  I  was  going.  I  would  be  thankful 
to  have  that  question  asked  over  again,  or  indeed  to  have  any 
question  put  to  me,  whether  wise  or  foolish.  The  most  childidi 
interrogations  would  be  better  than  the  gloom  of  speechless 
despair." 

As  the  question,  "  Whither  goest  Thou  V  had  been  suffi- 
ciently answered  already,  it  might  have  been  superfluous  to 
ask  it  again.  There  were,  however,  other  questions  neither 
superfluous  nor  impertinent,  which  the  disciples  might  have 
taken  occasion  to  ask  from  the  communication  just  made  to 
them  concerning  their  future  lot,  and  which  they  probably 
would  have  asked  had  they  not  been  so  depressed  in  spirits. 
"  If,"  they  might  have  said,  "  If  it  is  to  fare  so  ill  with  us  after 
you  go,  why  do  not  you  stay  ?  While  you  have  been  with  us 
you  have  sheltered  us  fix)m  the  world's  hatred,  and  you  tell 
us  that  when  you,  our  leader  and  head,  are  gone,  that  hatred 
will  be  directed  against  us,  your  followers.  If  so,  how  can  we 
possibly  regard  your  departure  as  anything  but  a  calamity  ?" 

These  imspoken  questions  Jesus  proceeds  in  the  next  place 
to  answer.  He  boldly  asserts,  that  whatever  they  may  think, 
it  is  for  their  good  that  He  should  go  away.'  The  assertion, 
true  in  other  respects  also,  is  made  with  special  reference  to 
the  work  of  the  apostleship.  In  the  early  part  of  His  fare- 
well address,  Jesus  had  explained  to  His  disciples  how  His 
departure  would  affect  them  as  private  persons  or  individual 

^  John  zyL  5,  6.    Olflhaiuen  joins  the  first  part  of  yer.  6  to  the  preceding, 
and  supposes  a  pause  alter  the  words  were  uttered. 
'  John  XYL  7. 


438  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE.    . 

believers.  He  had  assured  them,  that  when  "  the  Comforter" 
came,  He  would  make  them  feel  as  if  their  departed  Master 
were  returned  to  them  again ;  yea,  as  if  He  were  more  really 
present  to  them  than  ever  He  had  beea  Here  His  object  is 
to  show  the  bearing  of  His  departure  on  their  work  as  apostles, 
and  to  make  them  understand  that  His  going  away  would  be 
good  for  them  as  public  functionaries. 

The  proof  of  this  assertion  follows  :^  its  substance  is  to  this 
effect :  "  When  I  leave  you  and  go  to  my  Father,*  two  desi- 
derata  of  essential  importance  for  the  success  of  your  work 
as  apostles  will  be  supplied  Then  you  will  have  receptive 
hearers,  and  you  yourselves  will  be  competent  to  preach. 
Neither  of  these  desiderata  exists  for  the  present  The  world 
has  rejected  me  and  my  words ;  and  you,  though  sincere,  are 
very  ignorant,  and  understand  not  what  I  have  taught  you. 
After  my  ascension  there  will  be  a  great  alteration  in  both 
respects :  the  world  will  be  more  ready  to  hear  the  truth,  and 
you  will  be  able  to  declare  it  intelligently.  The  change  cannot 
come  till  then ;  for  it  will  be  brought  about  by  the  work  of 
the  Comforter,  the  Spirit  of  truth,  and  He  cannot  come  till 

I  go." 

In  the  section  of  His  discourse  of  which  we  have  given 
the  general  meaning,  Jesus  sketches  in  rapid  outline,  first 
the  Spirit's  converting  work  in  the  world,*  and  then  His 
enlightening  work  in  the  minds  of  the  apostles.*  The  former 
He  describes  in  these  terms :  "  When  He  is  come.  He  will 
convince  (produce  serious  thought  and  conviction  in)  the  world 
about  sin,  righteousness,  and  judgment."  Then  He  explains 
in  what  special  aspects  the  Spirit  will  bring  these  great  moral 
realities  before  men's  minds ;  and  here  He  but  expounds  what 
He  has  already  said  concerning  the  Spirit's  testimony  in  His 
own  behalf.*  He  tells  His  disciples  that  the  Comforter,  wit- 
nessiog  for  Himself  in  the  hearts  and  consciences  of  men,  will 
convince  them  of  sin  specially  as  unbelievers  in  Him  ;  of 
righteousness  in  connection  with  His  departure  to  the  Father ; 
and  of  judgment  (to  come),  because  the  prince  of  this  world  is 

^  John  xri.  7-15.  '  ttitixJm^  it0^»S£, 

•  John  xvi.  8-11.  *  John  xvL  12-16. 

■  John  XV.  26. 


DYING  CHARGE  :   TBIBULATIONS  AND  ENCOURAGEMENTS.    439 

judged  already  (that  is,  shall  have  been,  when  the  Comforter 
commences  His  work). 

The  second  and  third  explanatory  remarks  are  enigmatical, 
and  instead  of  throwing  light  on  the  subject  in  hand,  seem 
rather  to  involve  it  in  darkness.  They  have  given  rise  to  so 
much  dispute  and  diversity  of  opinion,  that  to  expatiate  on 
them  were  vain,  and  to  dogmatize  presumption.  One  great 
point  of  dispute  has  been :  What  righteousness  does  Jesus 
allude  to — His  own,  or  that  of  sinners  ?  Does  He  mean  to 
say  that  the  Spirit  will  convince  the  world  after  He  has  left 
the  earth  that  He  was  a  righteous  man  ?  or  does  He  mean  that 
the  Spirit  will  teach  men  to  see  in  the  Crucified  One  the  Lord 
their  righteousness  ?  Our  own  opinion  is,  that  He  means 
neither,  and  both.  Bighteousness  is  to  be  taken  in  its  imde- 
fined  generality ;  and  the  idea  is,  that  the  Spirit  will  make  use 
of  the  exaltation  of  Christ  to  make  men  think  earnestly  on  the 
whole  subject  of  righteousness :  to  show  them  the  utterly 
rotten  character  of  their  own  righteousness,  whose  crowning 
feat  was  to  crucify  Jesus,  to  bring  home  to  their  hearts  the 
solemn  truth,  that  the  Crucified  One  was  the  Just  One,  and 
ultimately  to  put  them  on  a  track  for  finding  in  Jesus  their  true 
righteousness,  by  raising  in  their  minds  the  question,  Why  then 
did  the  Just  One  suffer  ? 

The  meaning  of  the  third  explanatory  remark  we  take  to 
be  to  this  effect :  "  When  I  am  crucified,  the  god  of  this  world 
shall  have  been  judged.  Both  the  world  and  its  god  indeed, 
but  the  latter  only  finally  and  irreversibly ;  the  world,  though 
presently  following  Satan,  being  convertible.  When  I  am 
ascended,  the  Spirit  will  use  the  then  past  judgment  of  Satan 
to  convince  men  of  a  judgment  to  come ;  teaching  them  to  see 
therein  a  prophecy  of  a  final  separation  between  me  and  all 
who  obstinately  persist  in  imbelief,  and  so,  by  the  terrors  of 
perdition,  bringing  them  to  repentance  and  faith." 

What  Jesus  says  of  the  enlightening  work  of  the  Spirit  on 
the  minds  of  the  disciples,  amoimts  to  this :  He  will  fit  you 
to  be  intelligent  and  trustworthy  witnesses  to  me,  and  to  be 
guides  of  the  church  in  doctrine  and  practice.  For  these  high 
purposes  two  things  would  be  necessary :  that  they  should 
understand  Christian  truth,  and  that  they  should  possess  the 


440  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

gift  of  prophecy,  so  as  to  be  able  to  foretell  in  its  general  out- 
lines the  future,  for  the  warning  and  encouragement  of  be- 
lievers. Both  these  advantages  Jesus  promises  them,  as  fruits 
of  the  Spirit's  enlightening  influence.  He  assures  them  that, 
when  the  Comforter  is  come.  He  will  guide  them  into  all  the 
truth  He  had  Himself  taught  them,  recalling  things  foi^tten, 
explaining  things  not  imderstood,  developing  germs  into  a 
system  of  doctrine  which  was  entirely  above  their  present 
power  of  comprehensioa^  He  further  informs  them  that  this 
same  Spirit  will  show  them  things  to  come :  such  as  the  rise 
of  heresies  and  apostasies,  the  coining  of  Antichrist,  the  con- 
flict between  light  and  darkness,  and  their  final  issue,  as 
described  in  the  book  of  Revelation. 

Such  were  the  changes  to  be  brought  about  in  the  world 
and  in  the  disciples  by  the  advent  of  the  Comforter.  Great 
beneficent  changes  truly ;  but  why  cannot  they  take  place 
before  Jesvs  leaves  the  world  ?  The  answer  to  this  question 
is  hinted  at  by  Jesus,  when  He  says  of  the  Spirit :  "  He  shall 
not  speak  of  Himself,"  ^  and  "  He  shall  receive  of  mine,  and 
shall  show  it  unto  you"*  The  personal  ministry  of  Jesus 
behoved  to  come  to  an  end  before  the  ministry  of  the  Spirit 
began,  because  the  latter  is  merely  an  application  of  the  for- 
mer. The  Spirit  does  not  speak  as  from  Himself ;  He  simply 
takes  of  the  things  relating  to  Christ,  and  shows  them  to  men : 
to  unbelievers,  for  their  conviction  and  conversion ;  to  be- 
lievers, for  their  enlightenment  and  sanctificatioa  But  tiU 
Jesus  had  died,  risen,  ascended,  the  essentials  about  Him 
would  remain  incomplete :  the  materials  for  a  gospel  would 
not  be  ready  to  hand.  There  could  be  neither  apostolic  preach- 
ing nor  the  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  with  power  accom- 
pan}dng  it.  It  must  be  possible  for  the  apostles  and  the 
Spirit  to  bear  witness  of  One  who,  though  perfectly  holy,  had 
been  crucified,  to  show  the  world  the  heinousness  of  its  sin. 
They  must  have  it  in  their  power  to  declare  that  God  hath 
made  that  same  Jesus  whom  they  have  crucified  both  Lord 
and  Christ,  exalted  to  heavenly  glory,  before  their  hearers  can 
be  pricked  in  the  heart,  and  made  to  exclaim  in  terror,  "  Men 
and  brethren,  what  shall  we  do  ?  '*     Only  after  Jesus  had 

'  John  XYL  12.  *  John  zvi  18.  '  John  xyl  14. 


DYING  CHABGE  :   TRIBULATIONS  AND  ENCOURAGEMENTS.     441 

ascended  to  glory,  and  become  invisible  to  mortal  eyes/  conld 
men  be  made  to  understand  that  He  was  not  only  personally 
a  righteous  man,  but  the  Lord  their  righteousness.  Then  the 
question  would  force  itself  upon  their  minds  :  What  could  be 
the  meaning  of  the  Lord  of  glory  becoming  man,  and  dying 
on  the  cross  ?  and  by  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit  they  would 
learn  to  reply,  not  as  in  the  days  of  their  ignorance,  "  He 
suffers  for  His  own  offences,"  but,  "Surely  He  hath  borne 
our  griefs  and  carried  our  sorrows  ;  He  was  woimded  for  our 
transgressions." 

Finally,  not  till  the  apostles  were  in  a  position  to  say  that 
their  Lord  was  gone  to  heaven,  could  they  bring  to  bear  with 
fall  effect  on  the  impenitent  the  doctrine  of  a  judgment. 
Then  they  could  say,  Christ  ia  seated  on  the  heavenly  throne, 
a  Prince  and  a  Saviour  to  all  who  believe,  but  also  a  Judge 
to  those  who  continue  in  rebellion  and  unbelief.  "  Eiss  the 
Son,  lest  He  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way,  when  His 
wrath  is  kindled  but  a  littla  Blessed  are  all  they  that  put 
their  trust  in  Him." 

All  this  the  disciples  for  the  present  did  not  understand. 
Of  the  Spirit's  work  on  the  conscience  of  the  world  and  in 
their  own  minds,  and  of  the  relation  in  which  the  third  per- 
son of  the  Trinity  ^  stood  to  the  second,  they  had  simply  no 
conceptioa  Hence  Jesus  does  not  enlarge  on  these  topics, 
but  restricts  Himself  to  what  is  barely  necessary  to  indicate  the 
trutL  But  the  time  came  when  the  disciples  di4  get  to  imder- 
stand  these  matters,  and  then  they  fully  appreciated  the  eulo- 
gium  of  their  Lord  on  the  dispensation  of  the  Comforter.  Then 
they  acknowledged  that  the  assertion  was  indeed  true,  that  it 
was  expedient  for  them  that  He  should  go  away,  and  smiled 
when  they  remembered  that  they  had  once  thought  otherwise; 
yea,  they  perceived  that  the  word  "  expedient,"  far  from  being 
too  strong,  was  rather  a  weak  expression,  chosen  in  gracious 
accommodation  to  their  feeble  spiritual  capacity,  instead  of  the 

^  John  xri.  10,  "  And  ye  see  me  no  more,"  =  I  am  no  longer  seen  on  earth ; 
suggesting  the  idea  that  earth  was  Christ's  place  of  sojourn,  heaven  His  home, 
therefore  inferentiaUy  asserting  His  divinity. 

'  The  personality  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  assumed  throughont  this  discourse. 
See  yer.  18,  U«7Mf. 


\ 


442  THE  TBAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

stronger  one  "  indispensable."  Then  they  felt,  as  we  imagine 
good  men  feel  about  death  when  they  have  got  to  heaven. 
On  this  side  the  grave, 

"  Timorous  mortals  start  and  shrink 
To  cross  the  narrow  sea  ; 
And  linger,  shivering,  on  the  brink, 
And  fear  to  launch  away." 

But  to  those  on  the  other  side  how  insignificant  a  matter 
must  death  seem,  and  how  strange  must  it  appear  to  their 
purged  vision,  that  it  should  ever  have  been  needful  to  prove 
.to  them  that  it  was  better  to  depart  to  heaven  than  to  remain 
in  a  world  of  sin  and  sorrow ! 


'  Section  hi. — ITie  Little  While,  and  the  End  of  the  Discourse, 

John  xvi.  16-S8. 

The  eulogium  on  the  dispensation  of  the  Comforter  winds 
up  with  a  paradox.  Jesus  has  been  telling  His  disciples 
that  His  departure  will  be  beneficial  for  them  in  various 
respects,  but  particularly  in  this,  that  they  shall  attain  there- 
after to  a  clear,  full  comprehension  of  Christian  truth.  In 
effect,  what  He  has  said  is :  It  is  good  for  you  that  I  go,  for 
not  till  I  become  invisible  physically  shall  I  be  visible  to  you 
spiritually — I  must  be  withdrawn  from  the  eye  of  your  flesh, 
before  I  can  be  seen  by  the  eye  of  your  mind.  Hence  He 
fitly  ends  His  discourse  on  the  Comforter  by  repeating  a 
riddle,  which  He  had  propounded  in  a  less  pointed  form  in 
His  first  farewell  address :  "  A  little  while,  and  ye  shaU  not 
see  me  :  and  again  a  little  while,  and  ye  shall  see  me  ;  because 
I  go  to  the  Father." 

This  riddle,  like  all  riddles,  is  very  simple  when  we  have 
the  key  to  it.  As  in  that  other  paradoxical  saying  of  Jesus, 
concerning  losing  and  saving  life,^  the  principal  word — "  see  " — 
is  used  in  two  senses ;  *  first  in  a  physiad,  and  then,  in  the 
second  clause,  in  a  spiritual  sense.  Hence  the  possibility  of 
one  event,  the  departure  of  Christ  to  the  Father,  becoming  a 

^  Matt.  xvi.  25.  '  There  are  two  words  in  the  Greek — hmfitrt,  ••^^%04t. 


\ 


DYING  CHARGE  :   THE  LITTLE  WHILE.  443 

cause  at  once  of  not  seeing  and  of  seeing.  When  Jesus 
ascended  to  heaven,  the  disciples  saw  Him  no  more  as  they 
saw  Him  then  in  the  supper-chamber.  But  immediately 
thereafter  they  began  to  see  Him  in  another  way.  The 
idea  of  His  life  did  sweetly  creep  into  the  eye  and  prospect 
of  their  souL  And  the  sight  was  satisfying  :  it  justified  the 
glowing  language  in  which  their  Master  had  spoken  of  it 
before  He  left  them.  Though  they  saw  Him  no  more  in 
the  flesh,  yet  believing  in  Him,  to  quote  the  words  of  the 
Apostle  Peter,  they  rejoiced  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full 
of  glory. 

For  the  present,  however,  the  disciples  have  no  conception 
of  the  vision  and  the  joy  which  await  them.  Their  Lord's 
words  have  no  meaning  for  them ;  they  are  a  riddle  indeed, 
yea,  a  contradiction.  Standing  aroimd  the  inspired  speaker, 
they  whisper  remarks  to  each  other  concerning  the  strange 
enigmatical  words  He  has  just  uttered,  about  a  little  while, 
and  about  seeing  and  not  seeing,  and  about  going  to  the 
Father.  The  riddle  has  evidently  served  one  purpose  at  least ; 
it  has  roused  the  disciples  out  of  the  stupor  of  grief,  and 
awakened  for  a  little  their  curiosity.  That,  however,  is  the 
amoimt  of  the  service  it  has  rendered ;  it  has  created  surprise, 
but  it  has  conveyed  no  sense :  the  hearers  are  constrained  to 
confess,  "  We  cannot  tell  what  He  saitL"  ^ 

Yet,  we  observe,  they  ask  no  questions  at  Jesus.  They 
would  like  to  do  so  at  this  point,  but  they  do  not  feel  able  to 
take  the  liberty ;  restrained,  we  imagine,  by  respect  for  the 
lofty  sustained  tone  in  which  their  Master  has  been  address- 
ing them  in  the  second  part  of  His  farewell  discourse.  Jesus, 
however,  reads  a  question  in  their  coimtenances,  and  kindly 
favours  them  with  a  word  of  explanatioa^ 

That  word  does  not,  strictly  speaking,  explain  the  riddle. 
Jesus  does  not  tell  His  disciples  what  the  little  while  means, 
nor  does  He  distinguish  the  two  kinds  of  seeing :  He  leaves 
the  enigma  to  be  solved,  as  it  only  can  be,  hy  experience. 
AH  He  attempts  is  to  make  it  conceivable  how  the  same 
event  which  in  immediate  prospect  causes  sorrow,  may,  after 
its  occurrence,  be  a  cause  of  joy.     For  this  purpose  He  oom- 

1  John  zyL  18.  *  John  xyi  1»-2L 


444  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

pares  the  crisis  through  which  the  disciples  are  about  to  pass, 
not,  as  we  have  already  done,  to  the  solemn  event  by  which  a 
Christian  makes  his  exit  out  of  this  world  into  a  better,  but 
to  the  event  with  which  human  life  begins.^ 

The  comparison  is  apt  to  the  purpose  for  which  it  is  intro- 
duced; but  we  cannot  with  certainty,  not  to  say  propriety, 
pursue  it  into  detaiL  Interpreters  who  aspire  to  understand 
all  mysteries  and  aU  knowledge,  have  raised  many  questions 
thereanent,  such  as :  Who  is  represented  by  the  mother  in  the 
parable — Christ  or  the  disciples  ?  When  does  the  sorrow  begin, 
and  when  and  in  what  does  it  end  ?  The  answers  given  to  these 
questions  are  very  various.  According  to  one,  Jesus  Himself 
is  the  new  man,  and  the  sorrow  He  aUudes  to  is  His  own  death, 
viewed  as  the  painful  birth-hour  for  the  redemption  of  sinful 
humanity.  Another  will  have  it  that  Jesus  represents  His 
own  disciples  as  with  child  of  a  spiritual  Christ,  who  will  be 
bom  when  the  Comforter  comes.  Most  make  the  time  of 
sorrow  begin  with  Christ's  passion,  but  there  is  much  differ- 
ence of  opinion  as  to  when  it  ends.  One  makes  the  joy  date 
from  the  resurrection,  which,  after  a  little  while  of  painful 
separation,  restored  Jesus  to  His  sorrowing  disciples  ;  another 
extends  the  "  little  while  "  to  Pentecost,  when  the  church  was 
bom  into  the  world  a  new  man  in  Christ ;  a  third  makes  the 
little  while  a  long  whUe  indeed,  by  making  the  words  "I 
will  see  you  again "  refer  to  Christ's  second  coming,  and  to 
the  blessed  era  when  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth 
wherein  dwelleth  righteousness,  for  which  the  whole  creation 
groans,  shall  at  length  come  into  being.^ 

We  do  not  think  it  necessary  to  pronounce  on  these  disputed 
points.  As  little  do  we  think  it  necessary  to  give  the  analogy 
a  doctrinal  turn,  and  find  in  it  a  reference  to  regeneratioa 
What  Jesus  has  in  view  throughout  this  part  of  His  discourse 
is  not  the  new  birth  either  of  the  disciples  or  of  the  church, 
but  the  spiritual  illumination  of  the  apostles ;  their  transition 
from  the  chrysalis  into  the  winged  state,  from  an  ignorant 
implicit  faith  to  a  faith  developed  and  intelligent ;  their  initia- 

'  John  xvi  20-22. 

'  See,  for  the  yarious  opinioiiB  on  these  points,  Stier,  Lnthardt,  Lange, 
OlflhaaBeny  Alford,  etc. 


^ 


DTING  CHABGE  :   THE  LITTLB  WHILE.  445 

tion  into  the  highest  grade  of  the  Christian  mysteries^  when 
they  should  see  clearly  things  presently  unintelligible,  and  be 
Epopts  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.^  For  them,  as  for  Chris- 
tians generally  (for  there  is  a  sense  in  which  the  experience 
of  the  apostles  repeats  itself  in  the  spiritual  history  of  many 
believers),  this  crisis  is  not  less  important  than  the  initial  one 
by  which  men  pass  from  death  into  life.  It  is  a  great  thing 
to  be  regenerated,  but  it  is  a  not  less  great  thing  to  be  illumi- 
nated. It  is  a  great,  ever-memorable  time  that,  when  Christ 
first  enters  the  heart,  an  object  of  faith  and  love ;  but  it  is  an 
equally  important  crisis  when  Christ,  after  having  departed  per- 
haps for  a  season,  leaving  the  mind  clouded  with  doubt  and  the 
heart  oppressed  with  sorrow,  returns  never  to  depart,  driving 
away  wintry  frosts  and  darkness,  and  bringing  light,  gladness, 
summer  warmth,  and  spiritual  fruitfulness  to  the  souL  Verily 
one  might  be  content  that  Christ,  as  he  first  knew  Him,  should 
depart,  for  the  sake  of  having  his  sorrow  after  a  little  while 
turned  into  such  joy ! 

Having  shown,  by  a  familiar  and  pathetic  analogy,  the 
possibility  of  present  sorrow  being  transmuted  into  great  joy, 
Jesus  proceeds  next  to  describe,  by  a  few  rapid  strokes,  the 
characteristics  of  the  state  at  which  the  apostles  will  ere  long 
arrive.^  First  among  these  He  mentions  an  enlarged  compre- 
hension of  truth ;  for  it  is  to  this  He  refers  when  He  says, 
"  In  that  day  ye  shall  ask  me  nothing."  He  means  that  they 
wiU  then  ask  Him  no  questions  such  as  they  had  been  asking 
all  along,  and  especially  that  night ;  child's  questions,  asked 
with  a  child's  curiosity,  and  also  with  a  child's  incapacity  to 
understand  the  answers.  The  questioning  spirit  of  childhood 
would  be  replaced  by  the  imderstanding  spirit  of  manhood. 
The  truths  of  the  kingdom  would  no  longer,  as  heretofore,  be 
inscrutable  mysteries  to  them ;  they  should  have  an  unction 
from  the  Holy  One,  and  should  know  all  things. 

Some  think  this  too  much  to  be  said  of  any  Christian,  not 
even  excepting  the  apostles  themselves,  while  in  the  earthly 

1  One  who  had  been  introduced  into  the  higheit  (third)  grade  of  the  Elensinian 
mysteries  was  called  itri^mt.  See  Plato,  Ctmvwmm  (Socrates  reporting  disconrse 
of  Diotime  on*^f). 

>  John  XTL  23,  24. 


446  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

state,  and  therefore  argue  that  the  day  alluded  to  here  is  that 
of  Christ's  second  coming,  or  of  His  happy  reunion  with  His 
own  in  the  kingdom  of  His  Father.*  And,  without  doubt,  it 
is  true  that  in  that  final  day  only  shaU  Christians  know  as 
they  are  known,  and  have  absolutely  no  need  to  ask  any 
questions.     Then, 

"  'MidBt  power  that  knows  no  limit, 
And  wisdom  free  from  bound. 
The  beatific  vision 
ShaU  glad  the  saints  aroimd," 

as  it  can  never  gladden  them  here  below.  Still  the  statement 
before  us  has  a  relative  truth  in  reference  to  this  present  lifa 
While,  in  comparison  with  the  perfect  state,  the  clearest  vision 
of  any  Christian  is  but  a  seeing  in  a  glass  darkly,  the  degree 
of  illumination  attained  by  the  apostles  might  be  described, 
without  exaggeration,  in  contrast  to  their  ignorance  as  dis- 
ciples, as  that  of  men  who  needed  not  any  longer  to  ask 
questions.  In  promising  His  disciples  that  they  would  ere 
long  attain  this^  high  degree,  Jesus  was  but  saying  in  effect^ 
that  as  apostles  they  would  be  teachers,  not  scholars — doctors 
of  divinity,  with  titles  conferred  by  heaven  itself— -capable  of 
answering  questions  of  young  disciples,  similar  to  those  which 
they  once  asked  themselves. 

The  second  feature  of  the  apostolic  illumination  mentioned 
by  Jesus  is  unlimited  influence  with  Grod  through  prayer. 
Of  this  He  speaks  with  much  emphasis :  *'  Verily,  verily,  I 
say  unto  you.  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the  Father  in  my 
name.  He  will  give  it  you." '  That  is  to  say :  The  apostles 
were  to  have  at  command  the  whole  power  of  Gkxl;  the 
power  of  miracles,  to  heal  diseases;  of  prophecy,  to  foretell 
things  to  come  bearing  on  the  church's  interest,  and  which  it 
was  desirable  that  believers  should  know;  of  providence,  to 

'  So  Luthardt,  ii  848,  who  holds  that  the  first  clause  of  ver.  23  refers  to  the 
final  condition  of  the  church,  and  the  second  to  its  imperfect  state,  on  the 
ground  that  the  two  cannot  be  contemporaneous.  He  says  where  there  is  pray^ 
ing  there  is  asking,  and  vice  versa.  Yet  it  is  also  true  that  the  less  a  man  needs 
to  ask  questions,  that  is,  the  more  enlightened  he  is,  the  more  he  willjproy. 

'  John  xvL  28.    The  yerb  translated  ouik  in  this  clause  is  not  the  same  as  that 
rendered  by  the  same  English  word  in  the  first    In  the  first  clause  it  is  i/ 
rsn;  in  the  second,  mlrn^nru 


\ 


DYING  CHAB6E  :    THE  LITTLE  WHILE.  447 

make  all  events  subservient  to  their  well-being,  and  that  of 
the  canse  in  which  they  laboured. 

Bating  the  miraculous  elements,  which  most  Protestants 
agree  in  regarding  as  peculiar  to  the  apostolic  age,  this  magni- 
ficent promise  of  Jesus  is  made  to  all  who  aspire  to  Christian 
manhood,  and  is  fulfilled  to  all  who  reach  it  The  secret  of 
the  Lord  is  open  to  such.  In  a  sense,  they  can  divine.  Pos- 
sessing clear  insight  into,  and  firm  faith  in,  the  laws  which 
govern  the  moral  world,  they  foresee  and  predict  events  which 
to  other  men  are  unsuspected,  or  at  most  problematicaL  In 
this  way  we  are  to  account  for  the  remarkable  predictions  of 
Savonarola,  Knox,  Peden,  and  many  others,  eminent  for  spiri- 
tual discernment  and  imwavering  faith  in  the  reality  of  a 
divine  providence  in  human  affairs.  Then,  further,  the  friends 
of  Gk)d  not  only  know  in  part  His  secrets,  but  have  power  by 
prayer  to  influence  the  future.  The  effectual  fervent  prayer  of 
righteous  men  availeth  much  to  bring  down  from  heaven  the 
blessing  of  the  Spirit,  and  to  secure  the  favourable  disposal 
of  all  events  to  promote  the  interests  of  the  divine  kingdom. 

In  the  next  sentence,  Jesus,  if  we  mistake  not,  particularizes 
a  third  feature  in  the  state  of  spiritual  maturity  to  which  He 
would  have  His  disciples  aspire.  It  is  a  heart  enlarged  to 
desire,  ask,  and  expect  great  things  for  themselves,  the  church, 
and  the  world.  "  Hitherto,"  He  says  to  them,  "  have  ye  asked 
nothing  in  my  nama''  Of  course  there  was  a  reason  for  this, 
distinct  from  the  spiritual  state  of  the  twelva  The  time  had 
not  yet  come  for  asking  anything  in  Christ's  name :  they  could 
not  fitly  or  naturally  make  ''  Christ's  sake "  their  plea  till 
Christ's  work  was  completed,  and  He  was  glorified.  But 
Jesus  meant  more  than  this  by  His  remark.  He  meant  to 
say,  what  was  in  fact  most  true,  that  hitherto  His  disciples 
had  asked  little  in  any  name.  Their  desires  had  been  petty, 
their  ideas  of  what  to  ask  obscure  and  crude ;  any  wishes  of 
large  dimensions  they  had  cherished  had  been  of  a  worldly 
character,  and  therefore  such  as  God  could  not  grant  They 
had  been  like  children,  to  whom  a  penny  appears  greater  than 
a  thousand  poimds  does  to  a  wealthy  man.  But  Jesus  hints, 
though  He  does  not  plainly  say,  that  it  will  be  otherwise  with 
the  apostles  after  the  advent  of  the  Comforter.     Then  they 


448  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

will  be  poor  boys  grown  to  rich  merchants,  whose  ideas  of 
enjoyment  have  enlarged  with  their  outward  fortunes.  Then 
they  will  be  able  to  pray  such  prayers  as  that  of  Paul  in  his 
Soman  prison  in  behalf  of  the  Ephesian  church,  and  of  the 
church  in  all  ages;  able  to  pray  the  Lord's  Prayer,  and 
especially  to  say  "  Thy  kingdom  come,"  with  a  comprehen- 
siveness of  meaning,  a  fervency  of  desire,  and  an  assurance  of 
faith,  whereof  at  present  they  have  simply  no  conception. 
Hitherto  they  have  been  but  as  children,  asking  of  their  father 
trifles,  toys,  pence ;  then  they  shall  make  large  demands  on 
the  riches  of  God's  grace,  for  themselves,  the  church,  and  the 
world. 

Along  with  this  enlargement,  Jesus  promises,  will  come 
fulness  of  joy.  What  is  asked,  the  Father  will  grant ;  and 
the  answer  to  prayer  will  fill  the  cup  of  joy  to  the  brim.  Hope 
may  be  deferred  for  a  season,  but  in  the  end  will  come  the 
unspeakable  joy  of  hope  fulfilled.  "  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive, 
that  your  joy  may  be  fulL" 

So  it  turned  out  in  the  experience  of  the  apostles.  They 
had  fulness  of  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  His  work  in  their 
own  hearts  and  in  the  world.  Does  the  law  hold  good  still  ? 
"Why  should  it  not  ?  But  why,  then,  is  the  work  of  the  Spirit 
at  a  stand-still  in  individual  Christians,  and  in  the  church 
generally  ?  Why  is  the  cause  of  Christianity  not  progressing, 
but  rather,  one  might  almost  say,  retrograding  ?  We  must 
answer  these  questions  by  asking  others:  How  many  have 
large  hearts,  cherishing  comprehensive  desires  ?  How  many 
with  their  whole  soul  desire  for  themselves  above  all  things 
sanctifioation  and  illumination  ?  How  many  earnestly,  pas- 
sionately desire  the  conversion  of  the  heathen,  the  unity  and 
peace  and  purity  of  the  church,  the  prevalence  of  righteous- 
ness in  society  at  large  ?  Verily  we  are  straitened  in  our  own 
hearts,  not  in  God  ! 

The  farewell  discourse  ia  now  at  an  end.  Jesus  has  said 
to  His  disciples  what  time  permits,  and  what  they  are  able  to 
hear.  He  does  not  imagine  that  He  has  conveyed  much  in- 
struction to  their  minds,  or  that  He  has  done  much  for  them 
in  the  way  of  consolation.     He  has  a  very  humble  idea  of  the 


i 


DTmO  CHABGE  :   END  OF  THE  DISCOURSE.  449 

character  and  practical  effect  of  the  address 'He  has  just  de- 
livered. Casting  a  glance  backwards  at  the  whole,  while  per- 
haps specially  alluding  to  what  had  been  said  just  before.  He 
remarks :  "  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you  in  proverbs." 
A  few  parables  or  figurative  sayings  about  the  house  of  many 
mansions,  and  about  the  Divine  Trinity  coming  to  make  their 
abode  with  the  faithful,  and  about  the  vine  and  its  branches, 
and  about  maternal  sorrows  and  <joys :  such,  in  the  speaker's 
view,  is  the  sum  of  His  discourse. 

Conscious  of  the  inevitable  deficiency  not  only  of  the  pre- 
sent discourse,  but  of  His  whole  past  teaching,  Jesus  takes  occa- 
sion for  the  third  time  to  repeat  the  promise  of  future  spiritual 
illumination;  this  time  speaking  of  Himself  as  the  illumi- 
nator, and  representing  the  doctrine  of  the  Father  as  the  great 
subject  of  illuminatioa  "  The  time  cometh  when  /  shall  no 
more  speak  unto  you  in  proverbs,  but  /  shall  show  you  plainly 
of  the  Father."  The  time  referred  to  is  still  the  era  dating 
from  the  ascension.  Shortly  thereafter  the  disciples  would 
begin  to  experience  the  fulfilment  of  Philip's  prayer,  to  under- 
stand what  their  Lord  meant  by  His  going  to  the  Father,  and 
to  realize  its  blessed  consequences  for  themselves.  Then 
would  their  exalted  Lord,  through  the  Spirit  of  truth,  speak 
to  them  plainly  of  these  and  all  other  matters ;  plainly  in 
comparison  with  His  present  mystic,  hidden  style  of  speech, 
if  not  so  plainly  as  to  falsify  the  statements  in  other  places  of 
Scripture  concerning  the  partiality  and  dimness  of  all  spiritual 
knowledge  in  this  earthly  state  of  being. 

Of  the  good  time  coming  Jesus  has  yet  another  thing  to 
say ;  not  a  new  thing,  but  an  old  thing  said  in  a  new, 
wondrously  kind,  and  pathetic  way.  It  has  reference  to  the 
hearing  of  prayer,  and  is  to  this  effect :  "  In  the  day  of  your 
enlightenment  you  will,  as  I  have  already  hinted,  pray  not  less 
than  heretofore,  but  far  more,  and  you  will  use  my  name  as 
your  plea  to  be  heard.  Let  me  once  more  assure  you  that 
you  shall  be  heard.  In  support  of  this  assurance,  I  might 
remind  you  that  I  will  be  in  heaven  with  the  Father,  ever 
ready  to  speak  a  word  in  your  behalf,  saying :  '  Father,  hear 
them  for  my  sake,  whose  name  they  plead  in  their  petitions.' 
But  I  do  not  insist  on  this,  not  only  because  I  believe  you  do 

2  F 


450  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

not  need  to  be  assured  of  my  continued  interest  in  your  welfiare, 
but  more  especially  because  my  intercession  will  not  be  neces- 
sary. My  Father  will  not  need  to  be  entreated  to  hear  you,  the 
men  who  have  been  with  me  in  all  my  temptations/  who  have 
loved  me  with  leal-hearted  affection,  who  have  believed  in  me 
as  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  Grod,  while  the  world  at 
large  has  regarded  me  as  an  impostor  and  a  blasphemer.  For 
these  services  to  His  Son  my  Father  loves  you,  is  grateful  to 
you — in  a  sense,  accounts  Himself  your  debtor."  * 

What  heart,  what  humanity,  what  poetry,  is  in  all  this  I 
Yes,  poetry,  but  also  truth :  truth  unspeakably  comforting  not 
only  to  the  eleven  faithful  companions  of  Jesus,  but  to  all 
sincere  believers  in  Him.  For,  all  Popish  notions  of  merit 
apart,  it  is  undoubtedly  true  that  God  loves  all  in  this  world 
who  love  and  ser\'e  His  Son.  The  eyes  of  God  run  to  and  bo 
throughout  the  whole  earth,  to  show  Himself  gracious  to  those 
who  are  perfect  in  heart  towards  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
honestly  believing  that  He  came  out  from  the  bosom  of  the 
Eternal,  and  returned  thither  again,  ever  careful  for  the 
honour  of  His  name,  ever  zealous  in  His  cause,  willingly  en- 
during hardship  for  His  sake, — ^in  one  word,  true  Christians. 

Having  alluded  to  the  faith  of  His  disciples — so  merito- 
rious, because  so  rare — Jesus  takes  occasion  in  closing  His 
discourse,  and  at  the  close  of  His  life,  solemnly  to  declare  its 
truth.  "  I  came  forth  from  the  Father,  and  am  come  into  the 
world  :  again  I  leave  the  world,  and  go  to  the  Father."'  The 
first  part  only  of  this  statement  the  disciples  believed ;  the 
second  they  did  not  yet  understand;  but  Jesus  puts  both 
together,  as  the  two  halves  of  one  whole  truth,  either  of  which 
necessarily  implies  the  other.  The  declaration  is  a  most 
momentous  one :  it  sums  up  the  history  of  Christ ;  it  is  the 
substance  of  the  Christian  faith ;  it  asserts  doctrines  utterly 
incompatible  with  a  merely  human  view  of  Christ's  person,  and 
makes  His  divinity  the  fundamental  article  of  the  creed. 

These  last  words  of  Jesus  burst  on  the  disciples  like  a  star 
suddenly  shining  out  from  the  clouds  in  a  dark  night.  At 
length  one  luminous  utterance  had  pierced  through  the  haze 
of  their  Master's  mysterious  discourse,  and  they  fancied  that 

*  Luke  xxii.  28.  "  John  xvL  26,  27.  »  John  xtL  28. 


DYING  CHARGE  :   END  OF  THE  DISCOURSE.  45 1 

now  at  last  they  understood  its  import  Jesus  had  just  told 
them  that  He  came  forth  from  the  Father  into  the  world. 
That,  at  least,  they  understood ;  it  was  because  they  believed 
it  that  they  had  become  disciples.  Delighted  to  have  heard 
something  to  which  they  could  give  a  hearty  response,  they 
make  the  most  of  it,  and  inform  their  Master  that  the  intel- 
ligible, plain  speaking  on  His  part,  and  the  intelligent  appre- 
hending on  theirs  which  He  had  projected  into  the  future, 
were  already  in  existence.  "  Lo,"  said  they,  with  emphasis  on 
the  temporal  particle,  "  now  Thou  speakest  plainly,  and  speakest 
no  proverb.  Now  are  we  sure  that  Thou  knowest  all  things, 
and  needest  not  that  any  man  should  ask  Thee :  in  this  we 
believe  that  Thou  camest  forth  from  Grod." 

Alas,  how  impossible  it  is  for  children  to  speak  otherwise 
than  as  children !  The  disciples,  in  the  very  act  of  professing 
their  knowledge,  betray  their  utter  ignorance.  The  statement 
beginning  with  the  second  **  now "  indicates  an  almost  ludi- 
crous misapprehension  of  what  Jesus  had  said  about  their  asking 
Him  no  questions  in  the  day  of  their  enlightenment.  He  meant 
they  would  not  then  need  to  ask  questions  as  learners ;  they 
took  Him  to  mean  that  He  Himself  had  no  need  to  be  asked 
questions  as  to  who  He  was  and  whence  He  came.  His  claim 
to  a  heavenly  descent  being  already  admitted  at  least  by  them. 
And  as  to  the  inference  drawn  from  that  statement,  "  By  this 
we  believe,"  we  can  make  nothing  of  it.  After  many  attempts 
to  imderstand  the  logic  of  the  disciples,  we  must  confess  our- 
selves utterly  ba£3ed.  The  only  way  by  which  we  can  put  a 
tolerable  sense  on  the  words  is  to  regard  the  phrase  translated 
"  by  this  "  as  an  adverb  of  time,  and  to  read  "  at  this  present 
moment:"  Meanwhile,  whatever  additional  light  may  be  in 
store  for  us  in  the  future,  we  even  now  believe  that  Thou  camest 
forth  from  God.  This  translation,  however,  is  not  favoured, 
or  even  suggested,  by  any  of  the  critics.^ 

That  the  disciples  did  honestly  believe  what  they  professed 
to  believe,  was  true.  Jesus  had  just  before  admitted  as  much. 
But  they  did  not  understand  what  was  involved  in  their  belief. 

'  Winer,  NetUest.  OrammaHk,  states  that  he  knows  no  clear  example  of  the  use 
of  l»  rsvr^ = by  this,  or  because  of.  Of  its  use = mtered  he  gives  several  examples 
from  ckssic  authors,  pp.  861-2  (Moulton's  translation,  p.  484). 


452  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

They  did  not  comprehend  that  the  coining  of  Jesus  from  the 
Father  implied  a  going  thither  again.  They  had  not  compre- 
hended that  at  the  b^inning  of  the  discourse ;  they  did  not 
comprehend  it  when  the  discourse  was  finished ;  they  would 
not  comprehend  it  till  their  Lord  had  taken  His  departure^ 
and  the  Spirit  had  come  who  should  make  all  things  plain. 
In  consequence  of  this  ignorance,  their  faith  would  not  carry 
them  through  the  evil  hour  that  was  now  very  near.  The 
death  of  their  Master,  the  first  step  in  the  process  of  His 
departure,  would  take  them  by  surprise,  and  make  them  flee 
panic-stricken  like  sheep  attacked  by  wolves.  So  Jesus 
plainly  told  them.  "  Do  ye  now  believe  ? "  He  said ;  "  behold, 
the  hour  cometh,  yea,  is  now  come,  that  ye  shall  be  scattered, 
every  man  to  his  own,  and  shall  leave  me  alone."  ^ 

Stem  fact  sternly  announced ;  but  however  stem,  Jesus  is 
not  afraid  to  look  it  in  the  face.  His  heart  is  in  perfect 
peace,  for  He  has  two  great  consolations.  He  has  a  good 
conscience:  He  can  say,  "I  have  overcome  the  world."  He 
has  held  fast  His  moral  integrity  against  incessant  temptation. 
The  prince  of  this  world  has  found  none  of  his  spirit  in  Him, 
and  for  that  very  reason  is  going  to  crucify  Him.  But  by  that 
proceeding  the  devil  will  not  nullify,  but  rather  seal.  His  vic- 
tory. Outward  defeat  by  worldly  power  will  be  but  the  index 
and  measure  of  His  spiritual  conquest  The  world  itself 
knows  well,  that  putting  Him  to  death  is  but  the  second  best 
way  of  overcoming  Him.  His  enemies  would  have  been 
much  better  pleased  if  they  had  succeeded  in  intimidating  or 
bribing  Him  into  compromise.  The  ungodly  powers  of  the 
world  always  prefer  corruption  to  persecution  as  a  means  of 
getting  rid  of  truth  and  righteousness ;  only  after  failing  in 
attempts  to  debauch  conscience,  and  make  men  venal,  do 
they  have  recourse  to  violence. 

Christ's  other  source  of  consolation  in  prospect  of  death  is 
the  approval  of  His  Father :  "  I  am  not  alone,  because  the 
Father  is  with  me."      The  Father  has  been  with  Him  all 

^  The  commentators  tell  ha  that  Sifrt  rirnvirf  is  not  a  question.  If  not,  whj 
is  there  no  ad^ersatiye  particle  In  ^ett  elause  {Ifp^trmt  h)  ?  The  claoae  is  un- 
donbtedly  interrogative  in  effect.  Christ  calls  in  question  not  the  reality  indeed, 
but  the  sufficiency,  of  the  faith  of  Hia  disciples. 


DTINO  CHARGE  :   END  OF  THE  DISCOURSE.  453 

along.  On  three  critical  occasions — at  the  baptism,  on  the 
hill  of  transfiguration,  in  the  temple  a.  few  days,  ago — ^the 
Father  had  encouraged  Him  with  an,  approving  voice.  He 
feels  that  the  Father  is  with  Him  stilL  He  expects  that  He 
will  be  with  Him  when  He  is  deserted  by  His  chosen  ones, 
and  all  through  the  awful  crisis  at  hand,  even  in  that  darkest, 
bitterest  moment,  when  the  loss  of  His  Father's  sensible  pre- 
sence wiU  extort  from  Him  the  cry :  "  My  Gk)d,  my  Grod,  why 
hast  Thou  forsaken  me  ? "  He  expects  that  His  Father  will  be 
with  HiTTi  then,  not  to  save  Him  from  the  serise  of  desertion 
(He  does  not  wish  to  be  saved  from  that,  for  He  would  know 
by  experience  that  sorest  of  aU  sorrows,  that  in  this  as  in  all 
other  respects  He  might  be  like  His  brethren,  and  be  able  to 
succour  them  when  they  are  tempted  to  despair),  but  to  sustain 
Him  under  the  sore  afUction,  and  enable  Him  with  filial  faith 
to  cry  "my  God"  even  when  complaining  of  being  forsaken. 

Free  from  all  anxiety  for  Himself,  Jesus  bids  His  disciples 
also  be  of  good  cheer ;  and  for  the  same  reason  why  He  Him- 
seK  is  without  fear,  viz.  because  He  has  overcome  the  world. 
He  will  have  them  understand  that  His  victory  is  theirs  too. 
"  Be  of  good  cheer ;  I  have  overcome  the  world,  therefore  so 
have  ye  in  effect," — such  is  His  meaningr 

Men  of  Socinianizing  tendencies  would  interpret  the  words 
differently.  They  would  read::  I  have  overcome  the  world, 
therefore  so  may  ye.  Follow  my  example,  and  manfully  fight 
the  battle  of  righteousness  in  spite  of  tribulations.  The  mean- 
ing is  good  enough,  so  far  as  it  goes.  It  does  nerve  one  for 
the  battle  of  life,  to  know  that  the  Lord  of  glory  has  been 
through  it  before  him.  It  is  an  inspiring  thought  that  He 
has  even  been  a  combatant  at  all ;  for  who  would  not  foUow 
when  the  divine  Captain  of  salvation  leads  through  suffering 
to  glory  ?  Then,  when  we  think  that  this  august  combatant 
has  been  completely  victorious  in  the  fight.  His  example  be- 
comes still  more  cheering.  His  victory  shows  that  the  Grod  of 
this  world  is  not  omnipotent,  that  it  is  always  in  the  power  of 
any  one  to  overcome  him  simply  by  being  willing  to  bear  the 
cross.  Looking  at  Jesus  enduring  the  contradiction  of  sinners 
even  unto  death,  and  despising  the  shame  of  crucifixion.  His 
followers  get  more  heart  to  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith. 


454  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

But  while  this  is  tme,  it  is  the  smallest  part  of  the  trath. 
The  grand  fiact  is,  that  Christ's  victoiy  is  the  victoiy  of  His 
followers,  and  ensures  that  they  too  shall  conquer.  Jesus 
fought  His  battle  not  as  a  private  person,  but  as  a  public 
character,  as  a  representative  man.  And  all  are  welcome  to 
claim  the  benefits  of  His  victory — the  pardon  of  sin,  power 
to  resist  the  evil  one,  admission  into  the  everlasting  kingdom. 
Because  Christ  hath  overcome,  we  may  say  to  all.  Be  of  good 
cheer.  The  victory  of  the  Son  of  God  in  human  nature  is  an 
available  source  of  consolation  for  all  who  partake  of  that 
nature.  It  is  the  privilege  of  every  man  (as  well  as  the  duty) 
to  acknowledge  Christ  as  His  representative  in  this  great 
battle.  "  The  Head  of  every  man  is  Christ"  All  who  sin- 
cerely recognise  the  relationship  will  get  the  benefit  of  it 
Claim  kindred  with  the  High  Priest,  and  you  shall  receive 
from  Him  mercy  and  grace  to  help  in  your  hour  of  need. 
Lay  it  to  heart  that  men  are  not  isolated  units,  eveiy  one 
fighting  his  own  battle  without  help  or  encouragement  We 
are  members  one  of  another,  and  above  all,  we  have  in  Christ 
an  elder  brother.  We  have  at  least  a  human  relationship  to 
Him,  if  not  a  r^enerate  ona  Let  us  therefore  look  up  to 
Him  as  our  Head  in  all  things :  as  our  King,  and  lay  down 
the  weapons  of  our  rebellion ;  as  our  Priest,  and  receive  from 
Him  the  pardon  of  our  sins ;  as  our  Lord,  to  be  ruled  by  His 
will,  defended  by  His  might,  and  guided  by  His  grace.  If  we 
do  this,  the  accuser  of  the  biethren  will  have  no  chance  of 
prevailing  against  us.  The  words  of  St  John  in  the  Apocalypse 
will  be  fulfilled  in  our  history :  "  They  overcame  him  by  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  by  the  word  of  their  testimony ;  and 
they  loved  not  their  lives  unto  the  deatL" 


CHAPTER    XXVI. 

THE    INTERCESSORY   PRAYER. 
John  xtil 

THE  prayer  uttered  by  Jesus  at  the  close  of  His  farewell 
address  to  His  disciples,  of  unparalleled  sublimity, 
whether  we  regard  its  contents  or  the  circumstances  amid 
which  it  was  offered  up,  it  was  for  years  our  fixed  purpose 
to  pass  over  in  solemn,  reverent  silence,  without  note  or 
comment.  "We  reluctantly  depart  from  our  intention  now, 
constrained  by  the  considerations  that  the  prayer  was  not 
offered  up  mentally  by  Jesus,  but  in  the  hearing  and  for  the 
instruction  of  the  eleven  men  present;  that  it  has  been 
recorded  by  one  of  them  for  the  benefit  of  the  church  in  all 
ages ;  and  that  what  it  hath  pleased  Grod  to  preserve  for  our 
use,  we  must  endeavour  to  understand,  and  may  attempt  to 
interpret 

The  prayer  falls  naturally  into  three  divisions  ;  in  the  first 
of  which  Jesus  prays  for  Himself,  in  the  second  for  His  dis- 
ciples, and  in  the  third  for  the  church  which  was  to  be 
brought  into  existence  by  their  preaching. 

The  prayer  of  Jesus  for  Himself  (vers.  1-5)  contains 
just  one  petition,  with  two  reasons  annexed.  The  petition  is, 
**  Father,  the  hour  is  come,  glorify  thy  Son ; "  in  which  the 
manner  of  address,  simple,  familiar,  confidential,  is  noteworthy. 
"  Father !" — such  is  the  first  word  of  the  prayer,  six  times 
repeated  in  its  course,  with  or  without  epithet  attached,  and 
the  name  which  Jesus  gives  to  Him  to  whom  His  prayer  is 
addressed.  He  speaks  to  God  as  if  He  were  already  in  heaven, 
as  indeed  He  expressly  says  He  is  a  little  farther  on :  '*  Now 
I  am  no  more  in  the  world." 

The  significant  phrase,  ''the  hour  is  come,"  is  not  less 
worthy  of  notice.     How  much  it  expresses  I — ^filial  obedience, 


456  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

filial  intimacy,  filial  hope  and  joy.  The  hour !  It  is  the  hour 
for  which  He  has  patiently  waited,  which  He  has  looked  for- 
ward to  with  eager  expectation,  yet  has  never  sought  to  hurry 
on ;  the  hour  appointed  by  His  Father,  about  which  Father 
and  Son  have  always  had  an  understanding,  and  of  which 
none  but  they  have  had  any  knowledge.  That  hour  is  come, 
and  its  arrival  is  intimated  as  a  plea  in  support  of  the 
petition.  "  Thou  knowest.  Father,  how  patiently  I  have  waited 
for  what  I  now  ask,  not  wearying  in  well-doing,  nor  shrinking 
from  the  hardships  of  my  earthly  lot  Now  that  my  work  is 
finished,  grant  me  the  desire  of  my  heart,  and  glorify  me." 

"  Glorify  me,"  that  is,  "  take  me  to  be  with  Thyself"  The 
prayer  of  Jesus  is,  that  His  Father  would  be  pleased  now  to 
translate  Him  from  this  world  of  sin  and  sorrow  into  the 
state  of  glory  He  left  behind  when  He  became  man.  Thus 
He  explains  His  own  meaning  when  He  repeats  His  request 
in  a  more  expanded  form,  as  given  in  the  fifth  verse :  "  And 
now,  0  Father,  glorify  Thou  me  with  Thine  own  self,  with  the 
glory  I  had  with  Thee  before  the  world  was,"  ie.  with  the 
glory  He  enjoyed  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father  before  His 
incarnation  as  God's  eternal  Son. 

It  is  observable  that,  in  this  prayer  for  Himself,  Jesus 
makes  no  allusion  to  His  approaching  sufferings.  Very 
shortly  after,  in  Gethsemane,  He  prayed  :  "  0  my  Father,  if  it 
be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me!"  But  here  is  no 
mention  of  the  cup  of  sorrow,  but  only  of  the  crown  of  glory. 
For  the  present,  heaven  is  in  full  view,  and  its  anticipated 
glories  make  Him  oblivious  of  everything  elsa  Not  till  He  is 
gone  out  into  the  night  do  the  sulphurous  clouds  begin  to 
gather,  which  overshadow  the  sky  and  shut  out  the  celestial 
world  from  sight 

Yet  the  coming  passion,  though  not  mentioned,  is  virtually 
included  in  the  prayer.  Jesus  knows  that  He  must  pass 
through  suffering  to  glory,  and  that  He  must  behave  Himself 
worthily  under  the  last  trial,  in  order  to  reach  the  desired 
goal  Therefore  the  uttered  prayer  includes  this  unuttered 
one :  "  Carry  me  well  through  the  approaching  struggle ;  let 
me  pass  through  the  dark  valley  to  the  realms  of  light  with- 
out flinching  or  fear." 


THE  mXERCESSORT  PRATEB.  457 

The  first  reason  annexed  to  the  prayer  is,  **  That  Thy  Son 
also  may  glorify  Thee."  Jesus  seeks  His  own  glorification 
merely  as  a  means  to  a  higher  end,  the  glorification  of  God 
the  Father.  And  in  so  connecting  the  two  glorifyings  as 
means  and  end,  He  but  repeats  to  the  Father  what  He  had 
said  to  His  disciples  in  His  farewell  address.  He  had  told 
them  that  it  was  good  for  them  that  He  should  go,  as  not  till 
His  departure  would  any  deep  impression  be  made  on  the 
world's  conscience  with  respect  to  Himself  and  His  doctrine. 
He  now  teUs  His  Father  in  effect :  "  It  is  good  for  Thy  glory 
that  I  leave  the  earth  and  go  to  heaven ;  for  henceforth  I  can 
promote  Thy  glory  in  the  world  better  there  than  by  a  pro- 
longed sojourn  here." 

To  enforce  the  reason,  Jesus  next  declares  that  what  He 
desires  is  to  glorify  the  Father,  in  His  of&ce  as  the  Saviour  of 
sinners :  "  As  Thou  hast  given  Him  power  over  all  flesh,  that 
He  should  give  eternal  life  to  as  many  as^  Thou  hast  given 
Him."^  Interpreted  in  the  light  of  this  sentence,  the  prayer 
means :  "  Thou  sentest  me  into  the  world  to  save  sinners, 
and  hitherto  I  have  been  constantly  occupied  in  seeking 
the  lost,  and  communicating  eternal  life  to  such  as  would 
receive  it  But  the  time  has  come  when  this  work  can  be 
best  carried  on  by  me  lifted  up.  Therefore  exalt  me  to  Thy 
throne,  that  from  thence,  as  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,  I  may 
dispense  the  blessings  of  salvation." 

It  is  important  to  notice  how  Jesus  defines  His  commission 
as  the  Saviour.  He  represents  it  at  once  as  concerning  all 
flesh,  and  as  specially^  concerning  a  select  class,  thus  ascribing 
to  His  work  a  general  and  a  particular  reference,  in  accordance 
with  the  teaching  of  the  whole  New  Testament,  which  sets 
forth  Christ  at  one  time  as  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  at  another 
as  the  Saviour  of  His  people,  of  the  electa  of  His  sheep,  of 
those  who  believe.  This  style  of  speaking  concerning  the 
redeeming  work  of  our  Saviour  it  is  our  duty  and  our  privi- 
lege to  imitate ;  avoiding  extremes,  both  that  of  denying  or 
ignoring  the  omiversal  aspects  of  Christ's  mission,  and  that 
of  maintaining  that  He  is  in  the  same  sense  the  Saviour  of 
all,  or  that  He  will  eventually  save  alL     Both  extremes  are 

1  John  zviL  2. 


458  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

excluded  by  the  carefully  selected  words  of  Jesus  in  His  in- 
tercessory prayer.  On  the  one  hand.  He  speaks  of  all  flesh  as 
belonging  to  His  jurisdiction  as  the  Saviour,  of  humanity  at 
large  as  the  mass  into  which  the  leaven  is  to  be  deposited,  with 
a  view  to  leavening  the  whole  lump.  On  the  other  hand,  there 
is  an  obvious  restriction  on  the  universality  of  the  first  clause 
in  the  terms  of  the  second.  The  advocates  of  universal 
restoration  have  no  support  for  their  tenet  here.  They  may 
indeed  ask :  If  Jesus  has  power  over  all  flesh,  is  it  credible 
that  He  will  not  use  it  to  the  uttermost  ?  In  reply,  we  shall 
not  seek  to  evade  the  question,  by  resolving  the  power  claimed 
into  a  mere  mediatorial  sovereignty  over  the  whole  solely  for 
the  sake  of  a  part,  because  we  know  that  the  elect  part  is 
chosen  not  merdy  for  its  own  sake,  but  also  for  the  sake 
of  the  whole,  to  be  the  salt  of  the  earth,  the  light  of  the 
world,  and  the  leaven  to  leaven  the  corrupt  mass.^  We  simply 
observe  that  the  power  of  the  Saviour  is  not  compulsory. 
Men  are  not  saved  by  force  as  machines,  but  by  love  and 
grace  as  free  beings ;  and  there  are  many  whom  brooding 
love  would  gather  under  its  wings,  who  prefer  remaining  out- 
side to  their  own  destructioiL 

The  essence  of  eternal  life  is  defined  in  the  next  sentence 
of  the  prayer,  and  represented  as  consisting  in  the  knowledge 
of  the  only  true  God,  and  of  Jesus  Christ  His  messenger: 
knowledge  being  taken  comprehensively  as  including  faith, 
love,  and  worship,  and  the  emphasis  lying  on  the  objects  of 
such  knowledge.  The  Christian  religion  is  here  described  in 
opposition  to  paganism  on  the  one  hand,  with  its  many  gods, 
and  to  Judaism  on  the  other,  which,  believing  in  the  one  true 
Gk)d,  rejected  the  claims  of  Jesus  to  be  the  Christ  It  is 
further  so  described  as  to  exclude  by  anticipation  Aiian  and 
Socinian  views  of  the  person  of  Christ.  The  names  of  God 
and  of  Jesus  are  put  on  a  level  as  objects  of  religious  regard, 
whereby  an  importance  is  assigned  to  the  latter  incompatible 
with  the  dogma  that  Jesus  is  a  mere  man.  For  eternal  life 
cannot  depend  on  knowing  any  man,  however  wise  and  good : 
the  utmost  that  can  be  said  of  the  benefit  derivable  from  such 

>  On  this  see  Martensen,  DU  Ckristlkhe  Dogmaiik,  §  215  (translated  in  Foreign 
Theological  Library). 


THE  INTERCESSORT  FRIYER.  459 

knowledge  is,  that  it  is  helpful  towards  knowing  Grod  better, 
which  can  be  affirmed  not  only  of  Jesus,  but  of  Moses,  Paul, 
John,  and  all  the  apostles. 

It  may  seem  strange  that,  in  addressing  His  Father,  Jesus 
should  deem  it  needful  to  explain  wherein  eternal  life  consists ; 
and  some,  to  get  rid  of  the  difficulty,  have  supposed  that  the 
sentence  is  an  explanatory  reflection  interwoven  into  the  prayer 
by  the  evangelist.  Yet  the  words  were  perfectly  appropriate 
in  the  mouth  of  Jesus  Himself.  The  first  clause  is  a  confes- 
sion by  the  man  Jesus  of  His  own  faith  in  Grod  His  Father 
as  the  supreme  object  of  knowledge ;  and  the  whole  sentence 
is  really  an  argument  in  support  of  the  prayer.  Glorify  Thy 
Son.  The  force  of  the  declaration  lies  in  what  it  implies 
respecting  the  existing  ignorance  of  men  concerning  the  Father 
and  His  Son.  It  is  as  if  Jesus  said :  Father,  Thou  knowest 
that  eternal  life  consists  in  knowing  Thee  and  me.  Look 
around,  then,  and  see  how  few  possess  such  knowledga  The 
lieathen  world  knoweth  Thee  not — it  worships  idols:  the 
Jewish  world  is  equally  ignorant  of  Thee  in  spirit  and  in  truth ; 
for,  while  boasting  of  knowing  Thee,  it  rejects  me.  The 
whole  world  is  overspread  with  a  dark  veil  of  ignorance  and 
superstition.  Take  me  out  of  it  therefore,  not  because  I  am 
weary  of  its  sin  and  darkness,  but  that  I  may  become  to  it  a 
sun.  Hitherto  my  efforts  to  illuminate  the  darkness  have  met 
with  small  success.  Grant  me  a  position  from  which  I  can 
send  forth  light  over  all  the  eartL 

But  why  does  the  Saviour  here  alone,  in  the  whole  Grospel 
history,  caU  Himself  Jmn^  Christ  ?  Some  see  in  this  com- 
pound name,  common  in  the  apostolic  age,  another  proof  that 
this  verse  is  an  interpolation.  Again,  however,  without  reason, 
for  the  style  in  which  Jesus  designates  Himself  exactly  suits 
the  object  He  has  in  view.  He  is  pleading  with  the  Father 
to  take  Him  to  glory,  that  He  may  the  more  effectually  pro- 
pagate the  true  religion.  What  more  appropriate  in  this  con- 
nection than  to  speak  of  Himself  objectively  under  the  name 
by  which  He  should  be  known  among  the  professors  of  the 
true  reUgion  ? 

The  second  reason  pled  by  Jesus  in  support  of  His  prayer  is 
that  His  appointed  service  has  been  faithfully  accomplished,  and 


I 


f^^  :'zm  itAaassi' ^'^w 


f 


'*?fC-<*i?#fa*Wf     .fit  tJip-  -rtn#r 

^?«»«f    >^r       Jc   viui  npiijwm'  ^hflft   ^^SBK  'BoaiiL  ?«-  mitt-  ^a 

"K^    «»»|v«»-  's9i«f    inLi>  "iiP'  -vfinie   ">mTT*n  -iamiBii-  "ft*»^ 

:tfc^  ^/^i^vqMa  '  Wyf  dtv!'  Miwct  ^  :iie-  diec  -±81^  -^^aea  Zbna^ 
1^   \^,  n^npA  noAants^  nf  :c     £a  TrncEacBSSHL  ±aK  ]&  ois 

(^^M^  ^A  pfTf^  finr  STm  iueipieji  ic  ^mck  jiijauff  Ico^xii;  ^ 
th«t  fV>l1/>«rcr  ^sw^,n%  .f»fi»n*nee  ai  dieiL  aiKniy:  md.  xnmL  die 

TH^.  ^^f^mmtir^  in  mivie  hy  ^  ^wsaaL  ieeiacicxom  JDiiIyiiiir  dte 
iffm^T^\  f^VkP!,  (^  t^  pn^pMinq  ^KDXxmi»  da  liiasc  pore  «]t  Chzzsifs 
jy»iN6n»i  TT^)!^  ^hinh  ^>mmi9(eri  in  die rjaniTiig  -if  dieK  mfflL:  **  I 
h^f^.  mimifit^M  Tny  sutme  tuiC5  die  hisl  whonL  TboiL  gsir^esc 
m^  ^vntr  ''if  th^  w^rlii.""^  After  diia  inczoducGarr  jtayniFnt 
tMW^4  A  ^H#wt  <i^^j9;^peuvfi  ^  die  pezaoiia  ahoixc  oa  be  pcsrai 
^  /f^innv  0v^  Hin  difidple^  a  good  cftarat^ftFT  ilrst^ 
^ffr^Vm<a(l/  A^«r^l  not  &>  ex;K;g;e!r2te  die  impactiaee  of  die 
p^7M^  tf^  Mff  f^;n<kred  hi  traxmog  them  (or  die  aprwtohte. 


THE  INTEBCESSORT  PRATEB.  46 1 

He  acknowledges  that  they  were  good  when  He  got  them : 
"Thine  they  were,  and  Thou  gavest  them  me:"  they  were 
pious,  devout  men,  God-taught,  God-drawn,  Grod-given.  Then 
He  testifies,  that  since  they  had  been  with  Him  they  had  sus- 
tained the  character  they  had  when  they  joined  His  company : 
"  They  have  kept  Thy  word."  And  finally.  He  bears  witness 
that  the  men  whom  His  Father  had  given  Him  had  been  true 
believers  in  Himself,  and  had  received  all  His  words  as  the 
very  truth  of  God,  and  Himself  as  One  sent  forth  into  the  world 
by  God.^  Here,  surely,  is  a  generous  eulogy  on  disciples,  who, 
while  sincere  and  devoted  to  their  Master,  were,  as  we  know, 
exceedingly  fiaulty  in  conduct  and  slow  to  learn. 

Having  thus  generously  praised  His  humble  companions, 
Jesus  intimates  His  intention  to  pray  for  them :  "  I  pray  for 
them."  But  the  prayer  comes  not  just  yet ;  for  some  prefatory 
words  must  be  premised,  to  give  the  prayer  more  emphasis 
when  it  does  come.  Firsts  the  persons  prayed  for  are  singled 
out  as  for  the  moment  the  sole  objects  of  a  concentrated  solici- 
tude. "I  pray  for  them:  I  pray  not  for  the  world."*  The  design 
of  Jesus  in  making  this  statement  is  not,  of  course,  to  intimate 
the  absolute  exclusion  of  the  world  from  His  sympathie& 
Not  exclusion,  but  concentration  in  order  to  eventual  inclusion, 
is  His  purpose  here.  He  would  have  His  Father  fix  His 
special  regards  on  this  small  band  of  men,  with  whom  the 
fortunes  of  Christianity  are  bound  up.  He  prays  for  them  as 
a  mother  dying  might  pray  exclusively  for  her  children;  not 
that  she  is  indifferent  to  the  interest  of  all  beyond,  but  that 
her  family,  in  her  solemn  situation,  is  for  her  the  natural  legiti- 
mate object  of  an  absorbing,  all-engrossing  solicitude.  He  prays 
for  them  as  the  precious  fruit  of  His  life  labour,  the  hope  of 
the  future,  the  founders  of  the  church,  the  Noah's  ark  of  the 
Christian  faith,  the  missionaries  of  the  truth  to  the  whole 
world :  for  them  cdone,  lut  for  the  world's  sake ;  it  being  the 
best  thing  He  can  do  for  the  world  meantime  to  commend 
them  to  the  Fathers  care. 

What  Jesus  means  to  ask  for  the  men  thus  singled  out,  we 
can  now  guess  for  ourselves.  It  is  that  His  Father  would 
keep  them,  now  that  He  is  about  to  leave  them.     But  before 

^  John  xyii  7,  8.  '  John  zviL  9. 


462  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

the  request,  come  the  reasons  why  it  should  be  granted.  The 
first  is  expressed  in  these  terms :  "  They  are  Thine :  and  all 
mine  are  Thine,  and  Thine  are  mine ;  and  I  am  glorified  in 
them,"^ — ^and  means  in  eflfect  this :  "  It  ia  Thy  business.  Thy 
interest,  to  keep  these  men.  They  are  Thine :  Thou  gavest 
them  me ;  keep  Thine  own.  Although,  since  they  became 
my  disciples,  they  have  been  mine,  that  makes  no  difference : 
they  are  still  Thine;  for  between  me  and  Thee  is  no  dis- 
tinction of  Tneum  and  tuum.  Then  I  am  glorified  in  them : 
my  cause,  my  name,  my  doctrine,  are  to  be  henceforth  identi- 
fied with  them ;  and  if  they  miscarry,  my  interest  will  be  ship- 
wrecked. Therefore,  as  Thou  valuest  the  honour  of  Thy  Son, 
keep  these  men." 

Another  reason  why  the  request  about  to  be  proffered  should 
be  granted  foUows  in  the  next  verse  :  "  And  now  I  am  no  more 
in  the  world."*  The  Master,  about  to  depart  from  the  earth, 
commends  to  His  Father's  care  those  whom  He  is  leaving 
behind  without  a  head. 

And  now  at  length  comes  the  prayer  for  the  eleven,  ushered 
in  with  due  solemnity  by  a  new  emphatic  address  to  the 
Hearer  of  prayer :  "  Holy  Father,  keep  in  Thine  own  name 
those  whom  Thou  hast  given  me,  that  they  may  be  one,  as 
we  are."'  The  epithet  "  holy"  suits  the  purport  of  the  prayer, 
which  is,  that  the  disciples  may  be  kept  pure  in  faith  and 
practice,  separate  from  aU  existing  error  and  sin.  that  they 
may  be  eventually  a  salt  to  the  corrupt  world  in  which  their 
Lord  is  about  to  leave  them. 

The  prayer  embraces  two  particulars.  The  first  is,  that 
the  disciples  may  be  kept  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  which 
Jesus  has  manifested  to  them ;  that  is,  that  they  may  con- 
tinue to  believe  what  He  had  taught  them  of  Grod,  and  so 
become  His  instruments  for  diffusing  the  knowledge  of  the 
true  God  and  the  true  religion  throughout  the  earth.  The 
second  is,  that  they  may  be  one,  that  is,  that  they  may  be 
kept  in  love  to  each  other,  as  well  as  in  the  faith  of  the 
Divine  Name;  separate  from  the  world,  but  not  divided 
among  themselves.*  These  two  things,  truth  and  love,  Jesus 
asks  for  His  own,  as  of  vital  moment :  truth  as  the  badge  of 

1  John  xvii.  10.  «  Ver.  11.  »  Ver.  11.  *  Ver.  11. 


THE  INTEBCESSOBT  PRATER.  463 

distinction  between  His  church  and  the  world;  love  as  the 
bond  which  unites  believers  of  the  truth  into  a  holy  brother- 
hood of  witness-bearers  to  the  truth.  These  two  things  the 
church  should  ever  keep  in  view  as  of  co-ordinate  importance : 
not  sacrificing  love  to  truth,  dividing  those  who  should  be 
one,  by  insisting  on  too  minute  and  detailed  a  testimony; 
nor  sacrificing  truth  to  love,  making  the  church  a  very  broad 
comprehensive  society,  but  a  society  without  a  vocation,  or 
raison  cPitre,  having  no  truth  to  guard  and  teach,  nor  testi- 
mony to  bear. 

Having  commended  His  disciples  to  His  Father's  care, 
Jesus  next  gives  an  account  of  His  own  stewardship  as 
their  Master,  and  protests  that  He  has  faithfully  kept  them 
in  divine  truth.^  He  claims  to  have  done  His  duty  by  them 
all,  not  even  excepting  Judas;  in  whose  case  He  admits 
failure,  but  at  the  same  time  clears  Himself  of  blame.  The 
reference  to  the  false  disciple  shows  how  conscientious  He 
is  in  rendering  His  account  He  feels,  as  it  were,  put  on  His 
defence  with  reference  to  the  apostate ;  and  supposing  Himself 
to  be  asked  the  question.  What  have  you  to  say  about  this 
man  ?  He  replies  in  effect :  ''  I  admit  I  have  not  been  able  to 
keep  him  from  falling,  but  I  have  done  all  I  could.  The  son 
of  perdition  is  not  lost  through  my  fault."*  We  know  how 
well  entitled  Jesus  was  to  make  this  protestation. 

In  the  next  part  of  the  prayer  ^  Jesus  defines  the  sense  in 
which  He  asks  that  His  disciples  may  be  kept,  and  in  doing 
this  virtually  offers  new  reasons  why  the  petition  should  be 
heard.  He  commends  them  to  His  Father's  care  as  the  de- 
positaries of  truth,  worth  keeping  on  that  account,  and  needing 
to  be  kept,  because  of  the  world^s  dislike  of  the  truth.*  And 
He  explains  that  by  keeping  He  means  not  translation  out  of 
the  world,  but  preservation  in  the  world  from  its  moral  evil ; 
their  ♦presence  there  as  a  salt  being  necessary,  and  their  purity 
not  less  needful,  that  the  salt  might  not  be  without  savour 
and  virtue.  This  explanation  He  meant  not  for  the  ear  of 
His  Father  alone,  but  also  for  the  ears  of  His  disciples.  He 
wished  them  to  understand  that  two  things  were  equally  to 

>  John  xvii.  12.  •  Ver.  12. 

»  Vers.  14-20.  *  Ver.  14. 


464  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 


0t 


be  shunned^-eonformity  to  the  world,  and  weariness  of  the 
world.  They  must  abide  in  the  truth,  and  they  must  abide 
in  the  world  for  the  truth's  sake ;  mindful  for  their  consolation, 
that  when  they  felt  the  world's  hatred  most,  they  were  doing 
most  good,  and  that  the  weight  of  their  cross  was  the  measure 
of  their  influence. 

The  keeping  asked  by  Jesus  for  His  own  is  but  the  con- 
tinuance and  perfecting  of  an  existing  moral  condition.  He 
needs  not  to  ask  His  Father  now  for  the  first  time  to  separate 
His  disciples  in  spirit  and  character  from  the  world.  That 
they  are  already ;  that  they  were  when  first  they  joined  His 
society;  that  they  have  continued  to  be.  This,  in  justice  to 
them,  their  Master  is  careful  to  state  twice  over  in  this  portion 
of  His  prayer.  "  They,"  He  testifies,  "  are  not  of  the  world, 
even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world  ;"^  putting  them  on  a  level  with 
Himself  with  characteristic  magnanimity,  and  not  without 
truth;  for  the  persons  thus  described,  though  in  many  re- 
spects defective,  were  very  unworldly,  caring  nothing  for  the 
world's  trinity — riches,  honours,  and  pleasures — but  only  for 
the  words  of  eternal  life. 

Yet,  notwithstanding  their  sincerity,  the  eleven  still  needed 
not  only  keeping,  but  perfecting ;  and  therefore  their  Master 
went  on  to  pray  for  their  sanctification  in  the  truth,  having 
in  view  not  only  their  perseverance,  growth,  and  maturity  in 
grace  as  private  Christians,  but  more  especially  their  spiritual 
equipment  for  the  office  of  the  apostleship.  Hence  He  goes 
on  in  the  next  breath  to  make  mention  of  their  apostolic 
vocation,  showing  that  that  is  principally  in  His  eye :  "  As 
Thou  hast  sent  me  into  the  world,  even  so  have  I  also  sent 
them  into  the  world.""*  That  they  may  be  fitted  for  their 
mission  is  His  intense  desira  Hence  He  proceeds  to  speak 
of  His  own  sanctification  as  a  means  towards  their  apostolic 
sanctification  as  the  end,  as  if  His  own  ministry  were  merely 
subordinate  to  theirs.  "  For  their  sakes  I  sanctify  myself,  that 
they  also  might  be  sanctified  through  the  trutL"  *  Remark- 
able words,  whose  meaning  is  obscure,  and  has  been  much 
debated,  but  in  which  we  may  at  least  with  confidence  discover 
a  singular  display  of  condescension  and  lova     Jesus  talks 

»  John  xviL  14,  16.  »  Ver.  18.  »  Ver.  19. 


^^      THE  mTERCESSORY  PRAYER.  '    ^  465 

here  like  a  parent  who  lives  for  the  sake  of  his  children, 
having  a  regard  to  their  moral  training  in  aU  His  personal 
habits,  denying  Himself  pleasures  for  their  benefit,  and  mak- 
ing it  His  chief  end  and  care  to  form  their  characters,  perfect 
their  education,  and  fit  them  for  the  duties  of  the  position 
which  they  are  destined  to  fill 

The  remainder  of  the  prayer  (with  exception  of  the  two 
closing  sentences  ^)  respects  the  church  at  lai^e — those  who 
should  believe  in  Christ  through  the  word  of  the  apostles, 
heard  from  their  lips,  or  reported  in  their  writings.  What 
Jesus  desires  for  the  body  of  believers  is  partly  left  to  be  in- 
ferred ;  for  when  He  says,  " I  pray  not  for  these  alone**  He 
intimates  that  He  desires  for  the  parties  next  to  be  prayed 
for  the  same  things  He  has  already  asked  for  His  disciples : 
preservation  in  the  truth,  and  from  the  evil  in  the  world,  and 
sanctification  by  the  truth.  The  one  blessing  He  expressly 
asks  for  the  church  is  "  Unity."  His  heart's  desire  for  be- 
lievers in  Him,  is  "  that  they  all  may  be  one."  His  ideal  of 
the  church's  unity  is  very  high,  its  divine  exemplar  being  the 
unity  subsisting  between  the  persons  in  the  Godhead,  and 
specially  between  the  Father  and  the  Son,  and .  its  ground  the 
same  divine  unity :  "  one  as  we  are  one,  and  in  us  who  are 
one,"  bound  together  as  closely  and  harmoniously  by  the 
common  name  into  which  they  are  baptized,  and  by  which 
they  are  called.' 

This  unity,  desirable  for  its  own  sake,  Jesus  specially  de- 
siderates because  of  the  moral  power  which  it  will  confer  on 
the  church  as  an  institute  for  propagating  the  Christian  faith : 
"  That  the  world  may  believe  that  Thou  hast  sent  me."*  Now 
this  end  is  one  which  cannot  be  promoted  unless  the  unity 
of  believers  be  in  some  way  made  manifest.  A  unity  which 
is  not  apparent  can  have  no  effect  on  the  world,  but  must 
needs  be  as  a  candle  under  a  bushel,  which  gives  no  light, 
nay,  ceases  to  be  a  light,  and  goes  out.  There  can  be  no 
doubt,  therefore,  that  our  Lord  had  a  visible  unity  in  view, 
and  the  only  question  is  how  that  is  to  be  reached. 

The  first  and  most  obvious  way  is  by  union  in  one  church 
organization,  with  appointed  means  for  representing  the  whole 

1  John  xviL  20-24.  •  Ver.  21.  »  Vera.  21,  23. 

2  G 


466  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

body,  and  expressing  its  united  mind ;  such,  e,g,,  as  the  oecu- 
menical councils  of  the  early  centuries.  This,  the  most  com- 
plete manifestation  of  imity,  was  exhibited  in  the  primitiye 
church. 

In  our  day  incorporating  union  on  a  great  scale  is  not  pos- 
sible, and  other  methods  of  expressing  the  feeling  o(  catho- 
licity must  be  resorted  to.  One  method  that  might  be  tried 
is  that  of  confederation,  whereby  independent  church  orgaDiza- 
tions  might  be  united  after  the  fashion  of  the  United  States 
of  America,  or  of  the  Greek  republics,  which  found  a  centre  of 
unity  in  the  legislative  and  judicial  assembly  caUed  the  Am- 
phictyonic  Council  But  whatever  may  be  thought  of  that, 
one  thing  is  certain,  that  the  unity  of  believers  in  Christ  must 
be  made  more  manifest  as  an  undeniable  fEict  somehow,  if 
the  church  is  to  realize  her  vocation  as  a  holy  nation  called 
out  of  darkness  to  show  forth  the  virtues  of  Him  whose  name 
she  bears,  and  win  for  Him  the  world's  homage  and  faith.  It 
is  true,  indeed,  that  the  imity  of  the  church  does  find  expression 
in  its  creed ;  by  which  we  mean  not  the  sectional  creed  of 
this  or  that  denomination,  but  the  creed  within  the  creeds, 
expressive  of  the  catholic  orthodoxy  of  Christendom,  luid  em- 
bracing the  fondamentals,  and  only  the  fundamentals,  of  the 
Christian  faith.  There  is  a  church  within  all  the  churches  to 
which  this  creed  is  the  thing  of  value,  all  else  being,  in  the 
esteem  of  its  members,  but  the  husk  contaioing  the  precious 
kernel  But  the  existence  of  that  church  is  a  fact  known  by 
faith,  not  by  sight :  its  influence  is  little  felt  by  the  world ; 
and  however  thankful  we  may  be  for  the  presence  in  the  midst 
of  ecclesiastical  organizations  of  this  holy  commonwealth,  we 
cannot  accept  it  as  the  realization  of  the  ideal  which  the 
Saviour  had  in  His  mind  when  He  uttered  the  words,  "  That 
they  aU  may  be  one." 

In  the  next  two  sentences^  Jesus  fondly  lingers  over  this 
prayer,  repeating,  expanding,  enforcing  the  petition  in  language 
too  deep  for  our  fathoming  line,  but  which  plainly  conveys  the 
truth,  that  without  unity  the  church  can  neither  glorify  Christy 
commend  Christianity  as  divine,  nor  have  the  glory  of  Christ 
abiding  on  herself     And  this  is  a  truth  which,  on  reflection, 

1  John  xriL  22,  28. 


THE  INTERCESSOBT  PRAYEB.  467 

approves  itself  to  reason.  Wrangling  is  not  a  divine  tiling, 
and  it  needs  no  divine  influence  to  bring  it  about.  Anybody 
can  quarrel ;  and  the  world  knowing  that,  has  little  respect  for 
a  quarrelling  church.  But  the  world  opens  its  eyes  in  wonder 
at  a  community  in  which  peace  and  concord  prevail,  saying : 
Here  is  something  out  of  the  common  course ;  selfishness  and 
self-will  rooted  out  of  human  nature :  nothing  but  a  divine 
influence  could  thus  subdue  the  centrifugal  forces  which 
separate  men  from  each  other. 

The  endearing  name  Father,  with  which  the  next  sentence 
begins,  marks  the  commencement  of  a  new  final  paragraph  in 
the  prayer  of  the  great  High  Priest.^  Jesus  at  this  point  casts 
a  glance  forward  to  the  end  of  things,  and  prays  for  the  final 
consunmiation  of  God's  purpose  with  regard  to  the  church ; 
that  the  church  militant  may  become  the  church  triumphant ; 
that  the  body  of  saints,  imperfectly  sanctified  on  earth,  may 
become  perfectly  sanctified  and  glorified  in  heaven,  with  Him- 
self  where  He  will  be,  beholding  His  glory,  and  changed  into 
the  same  image  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 

Then  comes  the  condu^on,  in  which  Jesus  returns  from  the 
distant  future  to  the  present,  and  gathers  in  His  thoughts  from 
the  church  at  large  to  the  company  assembled  in  the  supper- 
chamber.  Himself  and  His  disciples.*  These  two  closing  sen- 
tences serve  the  same  use  in  Christ's  prayer  that  the  phrase  "  for 
Christ's  sake  "  serves  in  ours.  They  contain  two  pleas — the 
service  of  the  parties  prayed  for,  and  the  righteousness  of  the 
Being  prayed  to  :  the  last  coming  first,  embodied  in  the  title 
"  0  righteous  Father."  The  services,  merits,  and  claims  of 
Jesus  and  His  disciples  are  specifically  mentioned  as  matters 
to  which  the  righteous  Father  will  doubtless  attach  the  due 
weight.  The  world's  ignorance  of  God  is  alluded  to,  to  en- 
hance the  value  of  the  acknowledgment  which  He  has  received 
from  His  Son  and  His  Son's  companions.  That  ignorance 
explains  why  Jesus  deems  it  necessary  to  say, "  I  have  known 
Thee."  Even  His  knowledge  was  not  a  thing  of  course  in 
such  a  world.  It  was  an  effort  for  the  man  Jesus  to  retain 
God  in  His  knowledge,  quite  as  much  as  to  keep  Himself 
imspotted  from  the  world's  corruptions.     It  was  as  hard  for 

1  John  xidL  24.  «  Vera.  25,  26. 


468  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

Him  to  know  and  confess  God  as  Father  in  a  world  that  in  a 
thousand  ways  practically  denied  that  Fatherhood,  as  to  live 
a  life  of  love  amid  manifold  temptations  to  self-seeking.  In 
truth,  the  two  problems  were  one.  To  be  light  in  the  midst 
of  darkness,  love  in  the  midst  of  selfishness,  holiness  in  the 
midst  of  depravity,  axe  in  effect  the  same  thing. 

While  pleading  His  own  merit,  Jesus  forgets  not  the  claims 
of  His  disciples.  Of  them  He  says  in  effect :  They  have  known 
Thee  at  second-hand  through  me,  as  I  have  known  Thee  at 
first-hand  by  direct  intuition.^  Not  content  with  this  state- 
ment, He  expatiates  on  the  importance  of  these  men  as  objects 
of  divine  care ;  representing  that  they  are  worth  keeping,  as 
already  possessing  the  knowledge  of  God's  name,  and  destined 
ere  long  to  know  it  yet  more  perfectly,  so  that  they  shall  be 
able  to  make  it  known  as  an  object  of  homage  to  others, 
and  God  shall  be  able  to  love  them  even  as  He  loved  His 
own  Son,  when  He  was  in  the  world  faithfully  serving  His 
heavenly  Father.  "And  I  have  declared  unto  them  Thy 
name,  and  will  declare  it ;  that  the  love  wherewith  Thou  hast 
loved  me  may  be  in  them,  and  I  in  them."*  Wonderful 
words  to  be  uttered  concerning  mere  earthen  vessels ! 

1  John  xvii.  256.  •  Ver.  26. 


CHAPTER    XXVIL 

THE  SH££P  SCATTERED. 

Section  i. — "All  the  IHsciples  forsook  Him,  and  fled.** 

Matt.  xxvi.  86-41,  65-6,  69-76,  et  paralL ;  John  xviii.  15-18. 

FROM  the  supper-chamber,  in  which  we  have  lingered  so 
long,  we  pass  into  the  outside  world,  to  witness  the 
behaviour  of  the  eleven  in  the  great  final  crisis.  The  pas- 
sages cited  describe  the  part  they  played  in  the  solemn  scenes 
connected  with  their  Master's  end.  That  part  was  a  sadly 
unheroic  one.  Faith,  love,  principle,  all  gave  way  before  the 
instincts  of  fear,  shame,  and  self-preservation.  The  best  of 
the  disciples — the  three  who,  as  most  reliable,  were  selected  by 
Jesus  to  keep  Him  company  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane — 
utterly  failed  to  render  the  service  expected  of  them.  While 
their  Lord  was  passing  through  His  agony  they  fell  asleep,  as 
they  had  done  before  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration.  Even 
the  picked  men  thus  proved  themselves  to  be  raw  recruits, 
unable  to  shake  off  drowsiness  while  they  did  duty  as  sentinels. 
"  What !  could  ye  not  watch  with  me  one  hour  ?"  Then  when 
the  enemy  appeared,  both  these  three  and  the  other  eight  ran 
away  panic-stricken.  "  All  the  disciples  forsook  Him,  and  fled." 
And,  finally,  that  one  of  their  number  who  thought  himself 
bolder  than  his  brethren,  not  only  forsook,  but  denied  his  be- 
loved Master,  declaring  with  an  oath,  "  I  know  not  the  man." 

The  conduct  of  the  disciples  at  this  crisis  in  their  history, 
so  weak  and  so  unmanly,  naturally  gives  rise  to  two  ques- 
tions :  How  should  they  have  acted  ?  and  why  did  they  act  as 
they  did — what  were  the  causes  of  their  failure  ? 

Now,  to  take  up  the  former  of  these  questions  first,  when 
we  try  to  form  to  ourselves  a  distinct  idea  of  the  course  of 


470  THE  TRAINIK6  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

action  demanded  hy  fidelity,  it  is  not  at  once  quite  apparent 
wherein  the  disciples,  Peter  of  course  excepted,  were  at  faulL 
What  could  they  do  when  their  Lord  was  apprehended,  but 
run  away  ?  Offer  resistance  ?  Jesus  had  positively  forbidden 
that  just  immediately  before.  On  the  appearance  of  the  band 
of  armed  men,  "  when  they  which  were  about  Him  saw  what 
would  follow,  they  said  unto  Him,  Lord,  shall  we  smite  with 
the  sword  ?"^  Without  waiting  for  a  reply,  one  of  them  smote 
the  servant  of  the  high  priest,  and  cut  off  his  right  ear.  The 
fighting  disciple,  John  informs  us,  'was  Simon  Peter.  He  had 
brought  a  sword  with  him,  one  of  two  in  the  possession  of  the 
company,  from  the  supper-chamber  to  Oethsemane,  thinking 
it  might  be  needed,  and  fully  minded  to  use  it  if  there  was 
occasion ;  and,  coward  as  he  proved  himself  afterwards  among 
the  serving-men  and  maids,  he  was  no  such  arrant  coward  in 
the  garden.  He  used  his  weapon  boldly  if  not  skilfully,  and 
did  some  execution,  though  happily  not  of  a  deadly  character. 
Thereupon  Jesus  interposed  to  prevent  further  bloodshed, 
uttering  words  variously  reported,  but  in  all  the  different 
versions  clearly  inculcating  a  policy  of  non-resistanca  *'  Put 
up  again  thy  sword  into  his  place,*'  he  said  to  Peter,  adding 
as  His  reason, ''  for  all  they  that  take  the  sword  shall  perish 
with  the  sword ;"  which  was  as  much  as  to  say,  "  In  this  kind 
of  warfare  we  must  necessarily  have  the  worst  of  it"  Then 
He  went  on  to  hint  at  higher  reasons  for  non-resistance  than 
mere  considerations  of  prudence  or  expediency.  "  Thinkest 
thou,"  he  asked  the  warlike  disciple,  "  that  I  cannot  now  pray 
to  my  Father,  and  He  shall  presently  give  me  more  than 
twelve  legions  of  angels  ?  But  how  then  shall  the  Scriptures 
be  fulfilled,  that  thus  it  must  be  ?"*  He  could  meet  human 
force  by  superior,  divine,  celestial  force  if  He  chose,  but  He 
did  not  choose ;  for  to  overpower  His  enemies  would  be  to 
defeat  His  own  purpose  in  coming  to  the  world,  which  was  to 
conquer,  not  by  physical  force,  but  by  truth  and  love  and  god- 
like patience :  by  drinking  the  cup  which  His  Father  had  put 
into  His  hands,  bitter  though  it  was  to  flesh  and  blood.' 

Quite  in  harmony  with  these  utterances  in  Gethsemane  are 
the  statements  made  by  Jesus  on  the  same  subject  ere  He  left 

^  Lnke  xxii.  49.  '  Matt  zxvi  52>54.  '  John  xviiL  11. 


^ 


THE  SHEEP  SCATTERED  :   ALL  FOBSOOE  HIM,  AND  FLED.      471 

the  supper-room,  as  recorded  by  Luke.^  In  the  letter,  indeed, 
these  statements  seem  to  point  at  a  policy  the  very  opposite  of 
non-resistance.  Jesus  seems  to  say  that  the  great  business 
and  duty  of  the  hour,  for  all  who  are  on  HHs  side,  is  to  furnish 
themselves  with  swords  :  so  urgent  is  the  need,  that  he  who 
wants  a  weapon  must  sell  his  garment  to  buy  one.  But  the 
very  emphasis  with  which  He  speaks  shows  that  His  words 
are  not  to  be  taken  in  the  literal  prosaic  sense.  It  is  very 
easy  to  see  what  He  means.  His  object  is  by  graphic  lan- 
guage to  convey  to  His  disciples  an  idea  of  the  gravity  of 
the  situation.  "Now,"  He  would  say,  "now  is  the  day,  yea, 
the  hour  of  battle :  if  my  kingdom  be  one  of  this  world,  as  ye 
have  imagined,  now  is  the  time  for  fighting,  not  for  dreaming : 
now  matters  have  come  to  extremities,  and  ye  have  need  of 
all  your  resources ;  equip  yourselves  with  shoes  and  purse  and 
knapsack,  and  above  all,  with  swords  and  W£u*like  courage." 

The  disciples  did  not  understand  their  Lord's  meaning.  They 
put  a  stupid,  prosaic  interpretation  upon  this  part,  as  upon  so 
many  other  parts,  of  His  farewell  discoursa  So,  with  ridi- 
culous seriousness,  they  said:  "Lord,  behold,  here  are  two 
swords."  The  foolish  remark  provoked  a  reply  which  should 
surely  have  opened  their  eyes,  and  kept  Peter  fix)m  carrying 
the  matter  so  far  as  to  take  one  of  the  swords  with  him.  "  It 
is  enough,"  said  Jesus,  probably  with  a  melancholy  smile  on 
His  face,  as  He  thought  of  the  stupid  simplicity  of  those  dear 
childish  and  childlike  men :  "  It  is  enough."  Two  swords : 
well,  they  are  enough  only  for  one  who  does  not  mean  to  fight 
at  alL  What  were  two  swords  for  twelve  men,  and  against  a 
hundred  weapons  of  oflfence  ?  The  very  idea  of  fighting  in 
the  circumstances  was  preposterous :  it  had  only  to  be  broadly 
stated  to  appear  an  absurdity. 

The  disciples,  then,  were  not  called  on  to  fight  for  their 
Master,  that  He  nught  tiot  be  delivered  to  the  Jews.  What 
else,  then,  should  they  have  done  ?  Was  it  their  duty  to 
suffer  with  Him,  and,  carrying  out  the  professions  of  Peter,  to 
go  with  Him  to  prison  and  to  death  ?  This  was  not  required 
of  them  either.  When  Jesus  surrendered  Himself  into  the 
hands  of  His  captors.  He  proffered  the  request  that,  while 

^  Lnke  zxu.  85-88. 


472  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVK 

taking  Him  into  custody,  they  should  let  His  followers  go 
their  way.^  This  He  did  not  merely  out  of  compassion  for 
them,  but  as  the  Captain  of  salvation  making  the  best  terms 
for  Himself  and  for  the  interests  of  His  kingdom ;  for  it  was 
not  less  necessary  to  these  that  the  disciples  should  live  than 
that  He  Himself  should  die.  He  gave  Himself  up  to  death, 
that  there  might  be  a  gospel  to  preach ;  He  desired  the  safety 
of  His  disciples,  that  there  might  be  men  to  preach  it  Mani- 
festly, therefore,  it  was  not  the  duty  of  the  disciples  to  expose 
themselves  to  danger :  their  duty  lay  rather,  one  would  say, 
in  the  direction  of  taking  care  of  their  life  for  future  use- 
fulness. 

Where,  then,  if  not  in  failing  to  fight  for  or  suflTer  with 
their  Lord,  did  the  fault  of  the  eleven  lie  ?  It  lay  in  their 
lack  of  faith.  "  Believe  in  Grod,  and  believe  in  me,"  Jesus  had 
said  to  them  at  the  commencement  of  His  farewell  address, 
and  at  the  critical  hour  they  did  neither.  They  did  not  be- 
lieve that  all  would  yet  end  well  both  with  them  and  their 
Master,  and  especially  that  God  would  provide  for  their  safety 
without  any  sacrifice  of  principle,  or  even  of  dignity,  on  their 
part.  They  put  confidence  only  in  the  swiftness  of  their  feet 
Had  they  possessed  faith  in  God  and  in  Jesus,  they  would 
have  witnessed  their  Lord's  apprehension  without  dismay, 
assured  both  of  His  return  and  of  their  own  safety ;  and,  as 
feeling  might  incline,  would  either  have  followed  the  oflScers 
of  justice  to  see  what  happened,  or,  averse  to  exciting  and 
painful  scenes,  would  have  retired  quietly  to  their  dwellings 
until  the  tragedy  was  finished.  But  wanting  faith,  they  neither 
calmly  followed  nor  calmly  retired ;  but  faithlessly  and  igno- 
miniously  forsook  their  Lord,  and  fled.  The  sin  lay  not  so 
much  in  the  outward  act,  but  in  the  inward  state  of  mind  of 
which  it  was  the  index.  They  fled  in  unbelief  and  despair, 
as  men  whose  hope  was  blasted,  from  a  man  whose  cause  was 
lost,  and  whom  God  had  abandoned  to  his  enemies. 

Having  ascertained  wherein  the  disciples  were  at  fault,  we 
have  now  to  inquire  into  the  causes  of  their  misconduct ;  and 
here,  at  the  outset,  we  recall  to  mind  that  Jesus  anticipated 
the  breakdown  of  His  followers.     He  did  not  count  on  their 

*  John  xviii.  8. 


THE  SHEEP  SCATTEKED  :  ALL  FORSOOK  HIM,  AND  FLED.   473 

fidelity,  but  expected  desertion  as  a  matter  of  course.  When 
Peter  offered  to  follow  Him  wheresoever  He  might  go.  He  told 
him  that  ere  cock-crowing  next  morning  he  would  deny  Him 
thrice.  At -the  close  of  the  farewell  address.  He  told  all  the 
disciples  that  they  would  leave  Him  alone.  On  the  way  to 
the  Mount  of  Olives  He  repeated  the  statement  in  these 
terms :  "  All  ye  shall  be  offended  because  of  me  this  night ; 
for  it  is  written,  I  will  smite  the  shepherd,  and  the  sheep 
of  the  flock  shall  be  scattered  abroad."^  And  on  aU  these 
occasions  the  tone  in  which  He  spoke  was  rather  prophetic 
than  reproachful  He  expected  His  disciples  to  be  panic- 
stricken,  just  as  one  should  expect  sheep  to  flee  on  the  appear- 
ance of  a  wolf,  or  women  to  faint  in  presence  of  a  scene  of 
carnage. 

From  this  leniency  we  should  infer  that,  in  the  view  of 
Jesus,  the  sin  of  the  disciples  was  one  of  infirmity ;  and  that 
this  was  the  view  which  He  took  thereof,  we  know  from  the 
words  He  addressed  to  the  three  drowsy  brethren  in  Gethse- 
mane.  "  Watch  and  pray,"  He  said  to  them,  "  that  ye  enter 
not  into  temptation :  the  spirit  indeed  is  willing,  but  the  flesh 
is  weak."  *  The  kind  judgment  thus  expressed,  though  pro- 
nounced with  special  reference  to  the  shortcoming  of  Peter, 
James,  and  John  in  the  garden,  manifestly  applies  to  the 
whole  conduct  of  all  the  disciples  (not  even  excepting  Peter's 
denial)  throughout  the  terrible  crisis.  Jesus  regarded  the 
eleven  as  men  whose  attachment  to  Himself  was  above  sus- 
picion, but  who  were  liable  to  fall,  through  the  weakness  of 
their  flesh,  on  being  exposed  to  sudden  temptation. 

But  what  are  we  to  understand  by  the  weakness  of  the 
flesh  ?  Mere  instinctive  love  of  life,  dread  of  danger,  fear  of 
man  ?  No ;  for  these  instincts  continued  with  the  apostles 
through  life,  without  leading,  except  in  one  instance,  to  a 
repetition  of  their  present  misconduct.  Not  only  the  flesh  of 
the  disciples,  but  even  the  willing  spirit,  was  weak.  Their 
spiritual  character  at  this  season  was  deficient  in  certain 
elements  which  give  steadiness  to  the  good  impulses  of  the 
heart,  and  mastery  over  the  infirmities  of  sentient  nature. 
The  missing  elements  of  strength  were :  forethought,  dear 

1  Matt,  xxvi  31.  •  Ver.  i\. 


474  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVR 

perceptions  of  truth,  self-knowledge,  and  the  discipline  of  ex- 
perience. 

For  want  of  forethought,  it  came  to  pass  that  the  appre- 
hension of  their  Lord  took  the  eleven  by  surprise.  This 
may  seem  hardly  credible,  after  the  frequent  intimations 
Christ  had  given  them  of  His  approaching  death ;  after  the 
institution  of  the  Supper,  the  farewell  address,  the  refer- 
ence to  the  traitor,  the  prophetic  announcement  concerning 
their  own  frailty,  and  the  discourse  about  the  sword,  which 
was  like  a  trumpet-peal  calling  to  battle.  Yet  there  can  be 
no  doubt  that  such  was  the  fact  The  eleven  went  out  to 
Gethsemane  without  any  definite  idea  of  what  was  coining. 
These  raw  recruits  actually  did  not  know  that  they  were  on 
the  march  to  the  battle-field.  The  sleep  of  the  three  dis- 
ciples in  the  garden  is  sufficient  proof  of  this.  Had  the  three 
sentinels  been  thoroughly  impressed  with  the  belief  that  the 
enemy  was  at  hand,  weary  and  sad  though  they  were,  they 
would  not  have  fallen  asleep.  Fear  would  have  kept  them 
awake.  "  Know  this,,  that  if  the  goodman  of  the  house  had 
known  in  what  watch  the  thief  would  come,  he  would  have 
watched,  and  would  not  have  suffered  his  house  to  be  broken  up." 

The  breakdown  of  the  disciples  at  the  final  crisis  W€w  due 
in  part  also  to  the  want  of  clear  perceptions  of  truth.  They  did 
not  imderstand  the  doctrine  concerning  Christ.  They  believed 
their  Master  to  be  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  Gk)d ;  but 
their  faith  was  twined  wound  a  false  theory  of  Messiah's  mis- 
sion and  career.  In  that  theory  the  cross  had  no  place.  So 
long  as  the  cross  was  only  spoken  about,  their  theory  remained 
firmly  rooted  in  their  minds,  and  the  words  of  their  Master 
were  speedily  forgotten.  But  when  the  cross  at  length 
actually  came,  when  the  things  which  Jesus  had  foretold 
began  to  be  fulfilled,  then  their  theory  went  down  like  a  tree 
suddenly  smitten  by  a  whirlwind,  carrjring  the  woodbine 
plant  of  their  faith  along  with  it  From  the  moment  that 
Jesus  was  apprehended,  all  that  remained  of  faith  in  their 
minds  was  simply  a  regret  that  they  had  been  mistaken :  "  We 
trusted  that  it  had  been  He  who  should  have  redeemed 
Israel"  How  could  any  one  act  heroically  in  such  circum- 
stances? 


i 


THE  SHEEP  SCATTEBED :   ALL  FOBSOOE  HIM,  AND  FLED.       475 

A  third  radical  defect  in  the  character  of  the  disciples  was 
self-ignorance.  One  who  knows  his  weakness  may  become 
strong  eVen  at  the  weak  point ;  but  he  who  knows  not  his 
weak  points  cannot  be  strong  at  any  point  Now  the  fol- 
lowers of  Jesus  did  not  know  their  weakness.  They  credited 
themselves  with  an  amoimt  of  fidelity  and  valour  which  ex- 
isted only  in  their  imagination ;  all  adopting  as  their  own  the 
sentiment  of  Peter :  "  Though  I  should  die  with  Thee,  yet 
wiU  I  not  deny  Thee."  ^  Alas,  they  did  not  know  how  much 
fear  of  man  was  in  them,  how  much  abject  cowardice  in  pre- 
sence of  danger.  Of  course,  when  danger  actually  appeared, 
the  usual  consequence  of  self-conscious  valour  followed.  All 
these  stout-hearted  disciples  forsook  their  Master,  and  fled. 

The  last,  and  not  the  least,  cause  of  weakness  in  the  dis- 
ciples was  their  inexperience  of  such  scenes  as  they  were  now 
to  pass  through.  Experience  of  war  is  one  great  cause  of  the 
coolness  and  courage  of  veteran  soldiers  in  the  midst  of  danger. 
Practical  acquaintance  with  the  perils  of  military  life  makes 
them  callous  and  fearless.  But  Christ's  disciples  were  not 
yet  veterans.  They  were  now  but  entering  into  their  first 
engagement.  Hitherto  they  had  experienced  only  such  trials 
as  befall  even  the  rawest  recruits.  They  had  been  called  on 
to  leave  home,  friends,  fishing-boats,  and  their  earthly  all,  to 
follow  Jesus.  But  these  initial  hardships  do  not  make  a 
soldier.  No  ;  nor  even  the  discipline  of  the  drill-sergeant,  or 
the  donning  of  a  imiform.  For  behold  the  green  soft  youth 
with  his  bright  uniform  brought  face  to  face  with  the  stem 
reality  of  battle.  His  knees  smite  each  other,  his  heart 
sickens,  perchance  he  faints  outright,  and  is  carried  to  the 
rear,  imable  to  take  any  part  in  the  fight.  Poor  lad,  pity 
him,  do  not  scorn  him ;  he  may  turn  out  a  brave  soldier  yet 
Even  Frederick  the  Great  ran  away  from  his  first  battle.  The 
bravest  of  soldiers  probably  do  not  feel  very  heroic  the  first 
time  they  are  under  fire. 

These  observations  help  us  to  understand  how  it  came  to 
pass  that  the  little  flock  was  scattered  when  Jesus  their  shep- 
herd was  smitten.  The  explanation  amounts  in  substance  to 
a  proof  that  the  disciples  were  sheep,  not  yet  fit  to  be  shep- 

1  Matt  xxri  85. 


476  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVk 

herds  of  men.  That  being  so,  we  do  not  wonder  at  the 
leniency  of  Jesus,  to  which  reference  has  already  been  made. 
No  one  expects  sheep  to  do  anything  else  than  flee  when  the 
wolf  Cometh.  Only  in  shepherds  is  craven  fear  severely  re- 
prehensibla  Bearing  this  in  mind,  we  shall  more  readily  for- 
give Peter  for  denying  his  liOrd  in  an  unguarded  moment,  than 
for  his  cowardice  at  Antioch  some  years  after,  when  he  gave 
the  cold  shoulder  to  his  Gentile  brethren,  through  fear  of  the 
Jewish  sectaries  from  Jerusalem.  Peter  was  a  shepherd  then, 
and  it  was  his  duty  to  lead  the  sheep,  or  even  to  carry  them 
against  their  inclination  into  the  wide  green  pastures  of  Chris- 
tian liberty,  instead  of  tamely  following  those  who,  by  their 
scrupulosity,  showed  themselves  to  be  but  lambs  in  Christ's 
flock.  His  actual  behaviour  was  very  culpable  and  very  mis- 
chievous. For  though  in  reality  not  leading,  but  led,  he,  as 
an  apostle,  enjoyed  the  reputation  and  influence  of  a  chief 
shepherd,  and  therefore  had  no  option  but  either  to  lead  or  to 
mislead ;  and  he  did  mislead  to  such  an  extent,  that  even  Bar- 
nabas was  carried  away  by  his  dissimulation.  It  is  a  serious 
thing  for  the  church,  when  those  who  are  shephei'ds  in  office 
and  influence  are  sheep  in  opinion  and  heart ;  leaders  in  name, 
led  in  fact. 


Section  n. — Sifted  as  Wheat. 

Luke  xxii.  31,  82. 

This  fragment  of  the  conversation  at  the  supper-table  is 
important,  as  showing  us  the  view  taken  by  Jesus  of  the  crisis 
through  which  His  disciples  were  about  to  pass.  In  form  an 
address  to  Peter,  it  is  really  a  word  in  season  to  all,  and  con- 
cerning all.  This  is  evident  from  the  use  of  the  plural  pro- 
noun in  addressing  the  disciple  directly  spoken  to.  "  Satan," 
says  Jesus,  "  hath  desired  to  have  (not  thee,  but)  you : "  thee, 
Simon,  and  also  all  thy  brethren  along  with  thee.  The  same 
thing  appears  from  the  injunction  laid  on  Peter,  to  turn  his 
fall  to  account  for  the  benefit  of  his  brethren.  The  brethren, 
of  course,  are  not  the  other  disciples  then  present  alone,  but 


1^ 


THE  SHEEP  SCATTERED  :    SIFTED  AS  WHEAT.  477 

all  who  should  believe  as  well.  The  apostles,  however,  are  not 
to  be  excluded  fix)m  the  brotherhood  who  were  to  be  benefited 
by  Peter's  experience  ;  on  the  contrary,  they  are  probably  the 
parties  principally  and  in  the  first  place  intended. 

Looking,  then,  at  this  utterance  as  expressive  of  the  judg- 
ment of  Jesus  on  the  character  of  the  ensuing  crisis  in  the 
history  of  the  future  apostles,  we  find  in  it  three  noticeable 
particulars. 

1.  First,  Jesus  regards  the  crisis  as  a  sifting  time  for  the 
disciples.  Satan,  the  accuser  of  the  brethren,  sceptical  of 
their  fidelity  and  integrity,  as  of  Job's  and  of  all  good  men's, 
was  to  sift  them  as  wheat,  hopeful  that  they  would  turn 
out  mere  chaff,  and  become  apostates  like  Judas,  or  at  least 
that  they  would  make  a  miserable  and  scandalous  break- 
down. In  this  respect,  this  final  crisis  was  like  the  one 
at  Capernaum  a  year  before.  That  also  was  a  sifting  time 
for  Christ's  discipleship.  Chaff  and  wheat  were  then,  too, 
separated ;  the  chaff  proving  to  be  out  of  all  proportion  to 
the  wheat,  for  "  many  went  back,  and  walked  no  more  with 
Him." 

But  alongside  of  this  general  resemblance  between  the  two 
crises  —  the  minor  and  the  major  we  may  call  them  —  an 
important  difference  is  to  be  observed.  In  the  minor  crisis, 
the  chosen  few  were  the  pure  wheat,  the  fickle  multitude 
being  the  chaff ;  in  the  major,  they  are  both  wheat  and  chaff 
in  one,  and  the  sifting  is  not  between  man  and  man,  but  be- 
tween the  good  and  the  bad,  the  precious  and  the  vile,  in 
the  same  man.  The  hearts  of  the  eleven  faithful  ones  are  to 
be  searched,  and  all  their  latent  weakness  discovered ;  the  old 
man  is  to  be  divided  asunder  from  the  new ;  the  vain,  self- 
confident,  self-willed,  impetuous  Simon  son  of  Jonas,  from  the 
devoted,  chivalrous,  heroic,  rock-like  Peter. 

This  "distinction  between  the  two  crises  implies  that  the 
later  was  of  a  more  searching  character  than  the  earUer ;  and 
that  it  was  so  indeed,  is  obvious  on  a  moment's  reflection. 
Consider  only  how  different  the  situation  of  the  disciples  in 
the  two  cases !  In  the  minor  crisis,  the  multitude  go,  but 
Jesus  remains;  in  the  major,  Jesus  Himself  is  taken  from 
them,  and  they  are  left  as  sheep  without  a  shepherd.     A 


478  THE  TEAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

mighty  diflference  truly ;  suflBlciently  explaining  the  diflference 
in  the  conduct  of  the  same  men  on  the  two  occasions.  It 
was  no  doubt  very  disappointing  and  disheartening  to  see  the 
mass  of  people  who  had  lately  followed  their  Master  with 
enthusiasm,  dispersing  like  an  idle  mob  after  seeing  a  show. 
But  while  the  Master  remained,  they  would  not  break  their 
hearts  about  the  defection  of  spurious  disciples.  They  loved 
Jesus  for  His  own  sake,  not  for  His  popularity  or  for  any 
other  by-end.  He  was  their  teacher,  and  could  give  them 
the  bread  of  eternal  truth,  which,  and  not  the  bread  that 
perisheth,  was  what  they  were  in  quest  of;  He  was  their  Head, 
their  Father,  their  Elder  Brother,  their  spiritual-Husband,  and 
they  would  cling  to  Him  through  aU  fortunes,  with  filial, 
brotherly,  wifely  fidelity.  He  being  more  to  them  than  the 
whole  world  outside.  If  their  prospects  looked  dark  even 
with  Him,  where  could  they  go  to  be  any  better  ?  They  had 
no  choice  but  to  remain  where  they  were. 

Eemain  accordingly  they  did,  faithfully,  manfully ;  kept 
stedfast  by  sincerity,  a  clear  perception  of  tiiie  alternatives,  and 
ardent  love  to  their  Lord.  But  now,  alas,  when  it  is  not  the 
multitude,  but  Jesus  Himself,  that  leaves  them,  not  forsaking 
them  indeed,  but  torn  from  them  by  the  strong  hand. of  worldly 
power,  what  are  they  to  do  ?  Now  they  may  well  ask  Peter's 
question,  "  To  whom  shall  we  go  ? "  despairing  of  an  answer. 
He  whose  presence  was  their  solace  at  a  trying,  discouraging 
season,  who  at  the  worst,  even  when  His  doctrine  was  myste- 
rious and  His  conduct  incomprehensible,  was  more  to  them 
than  all  else  in  the  world  at  its  best ;  even  He  is  reft  from 
their  side,  and  now  they  are  utterly  forlorn,  without  a  master,  a 
champion,  a  guide,  a  friend,  a  father.  Worse  stUl,  in  losing  TTim 
they  lose  not  merely  their  best  friend,  but  their  faith.  They 
could  believe  Jesus  to  be  the  Christ,  although  the  multitude 
apostatized ;  for  they  could  regard  such  apostasy  as  the  effect  of 
ignorance,  shallowness,  insincerity.  But  how  can  they  believe 
in  the  Messiahship  of  one  who  is  led  away  to  prison  in  place 
of  a  throne ;  and  instead  of  being  crowned  a  king,  is  on  his 
way  to  be  executed  as  a  felon  ?  Bereft  of  Jesus  in  this  fashion, 
they  are  bereft  of  their  Christ  as  welL  The  imbelieving  world 
asks  them, ''  Where  is  thy  Grod?"  and  they  can  make  no  reply. 


THE  SHEEP  SCATTERED  :   SIFTED  AS  WHEAT.  479 

"  Christ  and  we  against  the  world ;"  "  Christ  in  the  worid's 
power,  and  we  left  alone :"  such,  in  brief,  was  the  diflference 
between  the. two  sifting  seasons.  The  results  of  the  sifting 
process  were  correspondingly  diverse.  In  the  one  case,  it 
separated  between  the  sincere  and  the  insincere ;  in  the  other, 
it  discovered  weakness  even  in  the  sincere.  The  men  who 
on  the  earlier  occasion  stood  resolutely  to  their  colours,  on 
the  later  fled  panic-stricken,  consulting  for  their  safety  with- 
out dignity,  and,  in  one  case  at  least,  with  shameful  disregard 
of  truth.  Behold  how  weak  even  good  men  are  without  faith ! 
With  faith,  however  crude  or  ill-informed,  you  may  overcome 
the  whole  worid  ;  without  the  faith  that  places  God  consciously 
at  your  side,  you  have  no  chance.  Satan  will  get  possession 
of  you  and  sift  you,  and  cause  you  to  equivocate  with  Abra- 
ham, feign  madness  with  David,  dissemble  and  swear  falsely 
or  profanely  with  Peter.  No  one  can  tell  how  far  you  may 
fall  if  you  lose-  faith  in  God.  The  just  live  justly,  nobly,  only 
by  their  faith. 

2.  Jesus  regards  the  crisis  through  which  His  disciples  are 
to  pass  as  one  which,  though  perilous,  shall  not  prove  deadly 
to  their  faitL  His  hope  is,  that  though  they  fall,  they  shall 
not  fall  away ;  though  the  sun  of  faith  be  eclipsed,  it  shall  not 
be  extinguished.  He  has  this  hope  even  in  regard  to  Peter, 
having  taken  care  to  avert  so  disastrous  a  catastrophe.  "  I 
have  prayed  for  thee,  that  thy  faith  fail  not." 

The  result  was  what  Jesus  anticipated.  The  disciples 
showed  themselves  weak  in  the  final  crisis,  but  not  wicked. 
Satan  .tripped  them  up,  but  he  did  not  enter  into  and  possess 
them.  In  this  respect  they  differed  toto  ccelo  from  Judas,  who 
not  only  lost  his  faith,  but  cast  away  his  love,  and  abandoning 
his  Lord,  went  over  to  the  enemy,  and  became  a  tool  for  the 
accomplishment  of  their  wicked  designs.  The  eleven,  at  their 
worst,  continued  faithful  to  their  Master  in  heart.  .  They 
neither  committed,  nor  were  capable  of  committing,  acts  of 
perfidy,  but  even  in  fleeing  identified  themselves  with  the 
losing  side. 

But  Peter ;  what  of  him  ?  was  not  he  an  exception  to  this 
statement  ?  Well,  he  certainly  did  more  than  fail  in  faith ; 
and  we  have  no  wish  to  extenuate  the  gravity  of  his  offence^ 


480  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

but  would  rather  see  in  it  a  solemn  illustration  of  the  close 
proximity  into  which  the  best  men  may  be  brought  with  the 
worst.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  only  just  to  remark,  that  there 
is  a  wide  difference  between  denjdng  Christ  among  the  ser- 
vants of  the  high  priest,  and  betraying  Him  into  the  hands 
of  the  high  priest  himself  for  a  sum  of  money.  The  latter 
act  is  the  crime  of  a  traitor  knave  ;  the  former  might  be  com- 
mitted by  one  who  would  be  true  to  his  master  on  all  occa- 
sions in  which  his  interests  seemed  seriously  involved.  In 
denying  Jesus,  Peter  thought  that  he  was  saving  himself  by 
dissimulation,  without  doing  any  material  injury  to  his  Lord. 
His  act  resembled  that  of  Abraham,  when  he  circulated  the 
lying  story  about  his  wife  being  his  sister,  to  protect  himself 
from  the  violence  of  licentious  strangers.  That  was  certainly 
a  very  mean,  selfish  act,  most  imworthy  of  the  father  of  the 
faithful  Peter's  act  was  not  less  mean  and  selfish,  but' 
also  not  more.  Both  were  acts  of  weakness  rather  than  of 
wickedness,  for  which  few,  even  among  good  men,  can  afford 
to  throw  stones  at  the  patriarch  and  the  disciple.  Even 
those  who  play  the  hero  on  great  occasions,  will  at  other 
times  act  very  unworthily.  Many  men  conceal  and  belie 
their  convictions  at  the  dinner -table,  who  would  boldly 
proclaim  their  sentiments  from  the  pulpit  or  the  platform. 
Standing  in  the  place  where  Christ's  servants  are  expected  to 
speak  the  truth,  they  draw  their  swords  bravely  in  defence  of 
their  Lord ;  but  mixing  in  society  on  equal  terms,  they  too 
often  say  in  effect,  "  I  know  not  the  man."  Peter's  offence, 
therefore,  if  grave,  is  certainly  not  uncommon.  It  is  com- 
mitted virtually,  if  not  formally,  by  multitudes  who  are  utterly 
incapable  of  public  deliberate  treason  against  truth  and  GkxL 
The  erring  disciple  was  much  more  singular  in  his  repent- 
ance than  in  his  sin.  Of  all  who  in  mere  acts  of  weakness 
virtually  deny  Christ,  how  few,  like  him,  go  out  and  weep 
bitterly  ! 

That  Peter  did  not  fall  as  Judas  fell,  utterly  and  irrevo- 
cably, was  due  in  part  to  a  radical  difference  between  the  two 
men,  Peter  was  at  heart  a  child  of  God ;  Judas,  in  the  core 
of  his  being,  had  been  all  along  a  child  of  Satan.  Therefore 
we  may  say,  that  Peter  could  not  have  sinned  as  Judas  sinned. 


l\ 


THE  SHEEP  SCATTERED  :   SIFTED  AS  WHEAT.  481 

nor  could  Judas  have  repented  as  Peter  repented.  Yet,  while 
we  say  this,  we  must  not  forget  that  Peter  was  kept  from 
falling  away  by  special  grace  granted  to  him  in  answer  to  his 
Master's  prayers.  The  precise  terms  in  which  Jesus  prayed 
for  Peter  we  do  not  know ;  for  the  prayer  in  behalf  of  the  one 
disciple  has  not,  like  that  for  the  whole  eleven,  been  recorded. 
But  the  drift  of  these  special  intercessions  is  plain,  from  the 
account  given  of  them  by  Jesus  to  Peter.  The  Master  had 
prayed  that  His  disciple's  faith  might  not  fail  He  had  not 
prayed  that  he  might  be  exempt  from  Satan's  sifting  process, 
or  even  kept  from  falling ;  for  He  knew  that  a  fall  was  neces- 
sary, to  show  the  seK-confident  disciple  his  own  weakness. 
He  had  prayed  that  Peter's  fall  might  not  be  ruinous ;  that 
his  grievous  sin  might  be  followed  by  godly  sorrow,  not  by 
hardening  of  heart,  or,  as  in  the  case  of  the  traitor,  by  the 
sorrow  of  the  world,  which  worketh  death :  the  remorse  of  a 
guilty  conscience,  which,  like  the  furies,  drives  the  sinner  head- 
long to  damnation.  And  in  Peter's  repentance,  immediately 
after  his  denials,  we  see  the  fulfilment  of  his  Master's  prayer, 
special  grace  being  given  to  melt  his  heart,  and  overwhelm 
him  with  generous  grief,  and  cause  him  to  weep  out  his  soul  in 
tears.  Not  by  his  piety  or  goodness  of  heart  was  the  salutary 
result  produced,  but  by  God's  Spirit  and  God's  providence  con- 
spiring to  that  end.  But  for  the  cook-crowing,  and  the  warning 
words  it  recalled  to  mind,  and  the  glance  of  Jesus'  eye,  and  the 
tender  mercy  of  the  Father  in  heaven,  who  can  tell  what  sullen 
devilish  humours  might  have  taken  possession  of  the  guilty 
disciple's  heart  ?  Remember  how  long  even  the  godly  David 
gave  place  to  the  devil,  and  harboured  in  his  bosom  the  demons 
of  pride,  falsehood,  and  impenitence,  after  his  grievous  fall ; 
and  see  how  far  it  was  from  being  a  matter  of  course  that 
Peter,  immediately  after  denying  Christ,  should  come  imder 
the  blessed  influence  of  a  broken  and  contrite  spirit,  or  even 
that  the  spiritual  crisis  through  which  he  passed  had  a  happy 
issue  at  alL     By  grace  he  was  saved,  as  are  we  all 

3.  Jesus  regards  the  crisis  about  to  be  gone  through  by  His 
disciples  as  one  which  shall  not  only  end  happily,  but  result 
in  spiritual  benefit  to  themselves,  and  qualify  them  for  being 
helpful  to  others.     This  appears  from  the  injunction  He  lays 

2  H 


482  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

on  Peter :  "  When  thou  art  converted,  strengthen  thy  brethren." 
Jesus  expects  the  frail  disciple  to  become  strong  in  grace,  and 
so  able  and  willing  to  help  the  weak.  He  cherishes  this 
expectation  with  respect  to  aU,  but  specially  in  regard  to  Peter, 
assuming  that  the  weakest  might  and  ought  eventually  to  be- 
come the  strongest ;  the  last  first,  the  greatest  sinner  the 
greatest  saint ;  the  most  foolish  the  wisest,  most  benignant, 
and  sympathetic  of  men. 

How  encouraging  this  genial,  kindly  view  of  moral  short- 
coming to  such  as  have  erred  !  The  Saviour  says  to  them  in 
effect :  There  is  no  cause  for  despair  :  sin  can  not  only  be  for- 
given, but  it  can  even  be  turned  to  good  account  both  for  your- 
selves and  for  others.  Falls,  rightly  improved,  may  become 
stepping-stones  to  Christian  virtue,  and  a  training  for  the  office 
of  a  comforter  and  guida  How  healing  such  a  view  to  the 
troubled  conscience  !  Men  who  have  erred,  and  who  take  a 
serious  thought  of  their  sin,  are  apt  to  consume  their  hearts 
and  waste  their  time  in  bitter  reflections  on  their  past  mis- 
conduct. Christ  gives  them  more  profitable  work  to  do. 
"  When  thou  art  converted,"  He  says  to  them,  "  strengthen 
thy  brethren  :'*  cease  from  idle  regrets  over  the  irrevocable  past, 
and  devote  thyself  heart  and  soul  to  labours  of  love  ;  and  let 
it  help  thee  to  forgive  thyself,  that  from  thy  very  faults  and 
follies  thou  mayest  learn  the  meekness,  patience,  compassion, 
and  wisdom  necessary  for  carrying  on  such  labours  with 
success. 

But  while  very  encouraging  to  those  who  have  sinned, 
Christ's  words  to  Simon  contain  no  encouragement  to  sin.  It 
is  a  favourite  doctrine  with  some,  that  we  may  do  evil  that 
good  may  come ;  that  we  must  be  prodigals  in  order  to  be  good 
Christians ;  that  a  mud  hath  must  precede  the  washing  of 
regeneration  and  the  baptism  of  the  soul  in  the  Bedeemer's 
blood.  This  is  a  false,  pernicious  doctrine,  of  which  the  holy 
One  could  not  be  the  patron.  Do  evil  that  good  may  come, 
say  you  ?  And  what  if  the  good  come  not  ?  It  does  not 
come,  as  we  have  seen,  as  a  matter  of  course ;  nor  is  it  the 
likelier  to  come,  that  you  make  the  hope  of  its  coming  the 
pretext  for  sinning.  If  the  good  ever  come,  it  will  come 
through  the  strait  gate  of  repentance.     You  can  become  wise. 


THE  SHEEP  SCATTEKED :   SIFTED  AS  WHEAT.  483 

gracious,  meek,  sympathetic,  a  burden-bearer  to  the  weak, 
only  by  going  out  first  and  weeping  bitterly.  But  what  chance 
is  there  of  such  a  penitential  melting  of  heart  appearing  in 
one  who  adopts  and  acts  on  the  principle,  that  a  curricidum 
of  sin  is  necessary  to  the  attainment  of  insight,  self-know- 
ledge, compassion,  and  all  the  humane  virtues  ?  The  probable 
issue  of  such  a  training  is  a  hardened  heart,  a  seared  con- 
science, a  perverted  moral  judgment,  the  extirpation  of  all 
earnest  convictions  respecting  the  diflference  between  right  and 
wrong ;  the  opinion  that  evil  leads  to  good  insensibly  trans- 
forming itself  into  the  idea  that  evil  is  good,  and  fitting  its 
advocate  for  committing  sin  without  shame  or  compunction. 

'  And  dare  we  to  this  fancy  give. 
That  had  the  wild  oat  not  been  sown, 
The  soil  left  barren  scarce  had  grown 
The  grain  by  which  a  man  may  live? 

Oh,  if  we  held  the  doctrine  sound. 
For  life  outliving  heats  of  youth  ; 
Yet  who  would  preach  it  as  a  truth 
To  those  that  eddy  round  and  round  f 

Hold  thou  the  good :  define  it  well : 
For  fear  divine  Philosophy 
Should  push  beyond  her  mark,  and  be 
Procuress  to  the  lords  of  hell. '  ^ 

In  Peter^s  case,  good  did  come  out  of  evil  The  sifting 
time  formed  a  turning-point  in  his  spiritual  history :  the 
sifting  process  had  for  its  result  a  second  conversion,  more 
thorough  than  the  first — ^a  turning  from  sin,  not  merely  in 
general,  but  in  detail :  from  besetting  ^ins,  in  better  informed 
if  not  more  fervent  repentance,  and  with  a  purpose  of  new 
obedience  less  self-reliant,  but  just  on  ,that  account  more 
reliable.  A  child  hitherto — ^a  child  of  God  indeed,  yet  only 
a  child — Peter  became  a  man  strong  in  grace,  and  fit  to  bear 
the  burden  of  the  weak  Yet  it  is  worthy  of  notice,  as  show- 
ing how  little  S3rmpathy  the  Author  of  our  faith  had  with  the 
doctrine  that  evil  may  be  done  for  the  sake  of  good,  that 
Jesus,  while  aware  how  Peter's  fall  would  end,  did  not  on 
that  account  regard  it  as  desirable.     He  said  not,  "  I  have 

^  Tennyson^  In  Memoriam,  liiL 


484  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

desired  to  sift  thee,"  but  assigns  the  task  of  sifting  the  dis- 
ciple to  the  evil  spirit  who  in  the  beginning  tempted  our  first 
parent  to  sin  by  the  specious  argument,  "  Ye  shall  be  as  gods, 
knowing  good  and  evil ;"  reserving  to  Himself  the  part  of  an 
intercessor,  who  prays  that  the  evil  permitted  may  be  over- 
ruled for  good.  "  Satan  hath  desired  to  have  you:"  "  I  have 
prayed  for  thee."  What  words  could  more  strongly  convey 
the  idea  of  guilt  and  peril  than  these,  which  intimate  that 
Simon  is  about  to  do  a  deed  which  is  an  object  of  desire  to 
the  evil  one,  and  which  makes  it  necessary  that  he  should  be 
specially  prayed  for  by  the  Saviour  of  souls  ?  Men  must  go 
elsewhere  in  quest  of  support  for  apologetic  or  Pantheistic 
views  of  sin. 

But  it  may  be  thought  that  the  reference  to  Satan  tends 
in  another  way  to  weaken '  moral  earnestness,  by  encouraging 
men  to  throw  the  blame  of  their  falls  on  him,  TheoreticysJly 
plausible,  this  objection  is  practically  contrary  to  fact ;  for 
the  patrons  of  lax  notions  of  sin  are  also  the  unbelievers  in 
the  personality  of  the  devil.  "  The  further  the  age  has  re- 
moved from  the  idea  of  a  devil,  the  laxer  it  has  become  in 
the  imputation  and  punishment  of  sin.  The  older  time,  which 
did  not  deny  the  temptations  and  assaults  of  the  devil,  was 
yet  so  little  inclined  on  that  account  to  excuse  men,  that  it 
regarded  the  neglect  of  resistance  against  the  evil  spirit,  or  the 
yielding  to  him,  as  the  extreme  degree  of  guilt,  and  exercised 
against  it  a  judicial  severity  from  which  we  shrink  with  horror. 
The  opposite  extreme  to  this  strictness  is  the  laxity  of  recent 
criminal  jurisprudence,  in  which  judges  and  physicians  are  too 
much  inclined  to  excuse  the  guilty  from  physical  or  psychical 
grounds,  while  the  moral  judgment  of  public  opinion  is  slack 
and  indulgent.  It  is  undeniable,  that  to  every  sin  not  only 
a  bad  wiU,  but  also  the  spell  of  some  temptation,  contributes ; 
and  when  temptation  is  not  ascribed  to  the  devil,  the  sinner 
does  not  on  that  account  impute  blame  to  his  bad  will,  but  to 
temptations  springing  from  some  other  quarter,  which  he  does 
not  derive  from  sin,  but  from  nature,  although  nature  tempts 
only  when  under  the  influence  of  sin.  The  world  and  the  flesh 
are  indeed  powers  of  temptation,  not  through  their  natural 
substance,  but  through  the  influence  of  the  bad  with  whidi 


THE  SHEEP  SCATTERED  :    PETER  AND  JOHN.  485 

they  are  infected  But  when,  as  at  present,  the  seduction  to 
evil  is  referred  to  sensuality,  temperament,  physical  lusts  and 
passions,  circumstances  or  fixed  ideas,  monomanias,  etc.,  guilt 
is  taken  off  the  sinner's  shoulders,  and  laid  upon  something 
ethically  indifferent  or  simply  natural"  ^ 

The  view  presented  by  Jesus  of  His  disciple's  fall  cannot 
therefore  be  chaiged  with  weakening  the  sense  of  responsi- 
bility :  on  the  contrary,  it  is  a  view  tending  at  once  to  inspire 
hatred  of  sin  and  hope  for  the  sinner.  It  exhibits  sin  about 
to  be  committed  as  an  object  of  fear  and  abhorrence ;  and, 
already  committed,  as  not  only  forgiveable,  being  repented  of, 
but  as  capable  of  being  made  serviceable  to  spiritual  progress. 
It  says  to  us,  on  the  one  hand :  Trifle  not  with  temptation,  for 
Satan  is  near,  seeking  thy  soul's  ruin — "  fear,  and  sin  not ; " 
and,  on  the  other  hand  :  "  If  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  Advocate 
with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  Eighteous" — despair  not: 
forsake  thy  sins,  and  thou  shalt  find  meroy. 


Section  m. — Fder  and  John, 

John  xviii.  16-18,  xix.  26-27. 

Though  all  the  disciples,  without  exception,  forsook  Jesus  at 
the  moment  of  His  apprehension,  two  of  them  soon  recovered 
their  courage  sufficiently  to  return  from  flight,  and  follow  after 
their  Master  as  He  was  being  led  away  to  judgment  One  of 
these  was  Simon  Peter,  ever  original  both  in  good  and  in  evil, 
who,  we  are  told,  followed  Jesus  "  afar  off,  unto  the  high  priest's 
palace,  to  see  the  end."*  The  other,  according  to  the  general, 
and  we  think  correct,  opinion  of  interpreters,  was  John.  He 
is  indeed  not  named,  but  merely  described  as  another,  or 
rather  the  other,  disciple ;  but  as  John  himself  is  our  infor- 
mant, the  fact  is  almost  certain  evidence  that  he  is  the  person 
alluded  to.  "  The  other  disciple,"  who  "  was  known  unto  the 
high  priest,  and  went  in  with  Jesus  into  the  palace  of  the 
high  priest,"*  is  the  well-known  unnamed  one  who  so  often 

^  Sartorius,  Die  Lehre  von  der  heiUgeii  lAAe^  pp.  79,  80. 
'  Matt  xzvi  58.  '  John  zyiii  16. 


486  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

meets  us  in  the  fourth  GospeL  Had  the  man  whose  conduct 
was  so  outstanding  been  any  other  than  the  evangelist,  he 
would  certainly  not  have  remained  nameless  in  a  narrative  so 
minutely  exact,  that  even  the  name  of  the  servant  whose  ear 
Peter  cut  off  is  not  deemed  too  insignificant  to  be  recorded.^ 

These  two  disciples,  though  very  different  in  character,  seem 
to  have  had  a  friendship  for  each  other.  On  various  occasions 
besides  the  present,  we  find  their  names  associated  in  a  manner 
suggestive  of  a  special  attachment.  At  the  supper-table,  when 
the  announcement  concerning  the  traitor  had  been  made,  Peter 
gave  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  a  sign  that  he  should  ask 
who  it  should  be  of  whom  He  spake.  Three  times  in  the 
interval  between  the  resurrection  and  the  ascension  the  two 
brethren  were  linked  together  as  companions.  They  ran 
together  to  the  sepulchre  on  the  resurrection  morning.  They 
talked  together  confidentially  concerning  the  stranger  who 
appeared  at  early  dawn  on  the  shores  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee, 
when  they  were  out  on  their  last  fishing  expedition;  the 
disciple  whom  Jesus  loved,  on  recognising  the  Risen  One, 
saying  unto  Peter,  "  It  is  the  Lord."  They  walked  together 
shortly  after  on  the  shore,  following  Jesus — Peter  by  command- 
ment, John  by  the  voluntary  impulse  of  his  own  loving  heart 
An  intimacy  cemented  by  such  sacred  associations  was  likely 
to  be  permanent,  and  we  find  the  two  disciples  still  companions 
after  they  had  entered  on  the  duties  of  the  apostleship.  They 
went  up  together  into  the  temple  at  the  hour,  of  prayer ;  and 
having  got  into  trouble  through  the  healing  of  the  lame  man 
at  the  temple  gate,  they  appeared  together  before  the  eccle- 
siastical tribunal,  to  be  tried  by  the  very  same  men,  AnTn« 
and  Caiaphas,  who  had  sat  in  judgment  upon  their  Lord,  com- 
panions now  at  the  bar,  as  they  had  been  before  in  the  palace, 
of  the  high  priest. 

Such  a  friendship  between  the  two  disciples  as  these  facts 
point  at  is  by  no  means  surprising.  As  belonging  to  the  narrow 
circle  of  three  whom  Jesus  honoured  with  His  confidence  on 
special  occasions,  they  had  opportunities  for  becoming  intimate, 
and  were  placed  in  circumstances  tending  to  unite  them  in  the 
closest  bonds  of  spiritual  brotherhood.     And,  notwithstanding 

*  John  xyiii.  10. 


THE  SHEEP  SCATTERED  :    PETEE  AND  JOHN.  487 

their  characteristic  diflTerences,  they  were  fitted  to  be  special 
friends.  They  were  both  men  of  marked  originality  and  force  of 
character,  and  they  would  find  in  each  other  more  sources  of 
interest  than  in  the  more  commonplace  members  of  the  apos- 
tolic band.  Their  very  peculiarities,  too,  far  from  keeping  them 
apart,  would  rather  draw  them  together.  They  were  so  consti- 
tuted, that  each  would  find  in  the  other  the  complement  of 
himself  Peter  was  masculine,  John  was  feminine,  in  tempera- 
ment ;  Peter  was  the  man  of  action,  John  the  man  of  thought 
and  feeling ;  Peter's  part  was  to  be  a  leader  and  a  champion, 
John's  was  to  ding,  and  trust,  and  be  loved ;  Peter  was  the 
hero,  and  John  the  admirer  of  heroism. 

In  their  respective  behaviour  at  this  crisis,  the  two  friends 
were  at  once  like  and  unlike  each  other.  They  were  like  in 
this,  that  they  both  manifested  a  generous  solicitude  about  the 
fate  of  their  Master.  While  the  rest  retired  altogether  from 
the  scene,  they  followed  to  see  the  end.  The  common  action 
proceeded  in  both  probably  from  the  same  motives.  What 
these  motives  were  we  are  not  told,  but  it  is  not  difficult  to 
guess.  A  certain  influence  may  be  assigned,  in  the  first  place, 
ix)  natural  activity  of  spirit.  It  was  not  in  the  nature  either 
of  Peter  or  of  John  to  be  listless  and  passive  while  such  grave 
events  were  going  on.  They  could  not  sit  at  home  doing 
nothing,  while  their  Lord  was  being  tried,  sentenced,  and  treated ' 
as  a  malefactor.  K  they  cannot  prevent,  they  will  at  least 
witness.  His  last  sufferings.  The  same  irrepressible  energy  of 
mind  which,  three  days  after,  made  these  two  disciples  run 
to  see  the  empty  grave,  now  impels  them  to  turn  their  steps 
towards  the  judgment-haU  to  witness  the  transactions  there. 

Besides  activity  of  mind,  we  perceive  in  the  conduct  of  the 
two  disciples  a  certain  spirit  of  daring  at  work.  We  learn 
from  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  that  when  Peter  and  John 
appeared  before  the  council  in  Jerusalem^  the  rulers  were 
struck  with  their  boldness.  Their  boldness  then  was  only 
what  was  to  be  expected  from  men  who  had  behaved  as  they 
did  at  this  crisis.  By  that  time,  it  is  true,  they  had,  in  conmion 
with  all  their  brethen,  experienced  a  great  spiritual  change ; 
but  yet  we  cannot  fail  to  recognise  the  identity  of  the  cha- 
racters.    The  apostles  had  but  grown  to  such  spiritual  man- 


488  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

hood  as  they  gave  promise  of  in  the  days  of  their  discipleship. 
For  it  was  a  brave  thing  in  them  to  follow,  even  at  a  distance, 
the  band  which  had  taken  Jesus  a  prisoner.  The  rudiments 
at  least  of  the  martyr  character  were  in  men  who  could  do 
that.  Mere  cowards  would  not  have  acted  so.  They  would 
have  eagerly  availed  themselves  of  the  virtual  sanction  given 
by  Jesus  to  flight,  comforting  their  hearts  with  the  thought 
that,  in  consulting  for  their  safety,  they  were  but  doing  the 
duty  enjoined  on  them. 

But  the  conduct  of  the  two  brethren  sprang,  we  believe, 
mainly  fi-om  their  ardent  love  to  Jesus.  When  the  first 
paroxysm  of  fear  was  past,  solicitude  for  personal  safety  gave 
place  to  generous  concern  about  the  fate  of  one  whom  they 
really  loved  more  than  life.  The  love  of  Christ  constrained 
them  to  think  not  of  themselves,  but  of  Him  whose  hour  of 
sorrow  was  come.  First  they  slacken  their  pace,  then  they 
halt,  then  they  look  round ;  and  as  they  see  the  armed  band 
nejiring  the  city,  they  are  cut  to  the  heart,  and  they  say 
within  themselves,  "  We  cannot  leave  our  dear  Master  in  His 
time  of  peril ;  we  must  see  the  issue  of  this  painful  business." 
And  so  with  anguished  spirit  they  set  out  towards  Jerusalem, 
Peter  first,  and  John  after  him. 

The  two  brethren,  companions  thus  far,  diverged  widely  on 
arriving  at  the  sce^e  of  trial  and  suffeAng.  John  dung  to 
his  beloved  Lord  to  the  last  He  was  present,  it  would 
appear,  at  the  various  examinations  to  which  Jesus  was  sub- 
jected, and  heard  with  his  own  ears  the  judicial  process  of 
which  he  has  given  so  interesting  an  account  in  his  Gospel 
When  the  iniquitous  sentence  was  executed,  he  was  a  spec- 
tator. He  took  his  stand  by  the  foot  of  the  cross,  where  he 
could  see  all,  and  not  only  be  seen,  but  even  be  spoken  to,  by 
his  dying  Master.  There  he  saw,  among  other  things,  the 
strange  phenomenon  of  blood  and  water  flowing  from  the  spear- 
woimd  in  the  Saviour's  side,  which  he  so  carefully  records  in 
his  narrative.  There  he  heard  Christ's  dying  words,  and 
among  them  those  addressed  to  Mary  of  Nazareth  and  him- 
self: to  her,  "Woman,  behold  thy  son;"  to  him,  "Behold 
thy  mother." 

John  was  thus  persistently  faithful  throughout    And  Peter, 


THE  SHEEP  SCATTERED  :   PETER  AND  JOHN.  489 

what  of  him  ?  Alas  !  what  need  to  tell  the  familiar  story  of 
his  deplorable  weakness  in  the  hall  or  inner  court  of  the  high 
priest's  palace ;  how,  having  obtained  an  entrance  through  the 
street  door  by  the  intercession  of  his  brother  disciple,  he  first 
denied  to  the  porteress  his  connection  with  Jesus ;  then  re- 
peated his  denial  to  other  parties,  with  the  addition  of  a  solemn 
oath ;  then,  irritated  by  the  repetition  of  the  charge,  and  per- 
haps by  the  consciousness  of  guilt,  a  third  time  declared,  not 
with  a  solemn  oath,  but  with  the  degrading  accompaniment 
of  profane  swearing,  "  I  know  not  the  man ; "  then,  finally, 
hearing  the  cock  crow,  and  catching  Jesus'  eye,  and  remem- 
bering the  words,  "  Before  the  cock  crow  thou  shalt  deny  me 
thrice,"  went  out  to  the  street  and  wept  bitterly ! 

What  became  of  poor  Peter  after  this  melancholy  exhibi- 
tion, we  are  not  informed.  In  all  probability  he  retired  to 
his  lodging  humbled,  dispirited,  crushed,  there  to  remain  over- 
whelmed with  grief  and  shame  tiU  he  was  roused  from  stupor 
by  the  stirring  tidings  of  the  resurrection  mom. 

This  difference  in  conduct  between  the  two  disciples  cor- 
responded to  a  difference  in  their  characters.  Each  acted 
according  to  his  nature.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  the  circum- 
stances were  not  the  same  for  both  pcuties,  being  favourable 
for  one,  unfavourable  for  the  other.  John  had  the  advantage 
of  a  friend  at  court,  being  somehow  known  to  the  high  priest 
This  circumstance  gained  him  admission  into  the  chamber  of 
judgment,  and  gave  hiTn  security  against  aU  personal  risk. 
Peter,  on  the  other  hand,  not  only  had  no  friends  at  court,  but 
might  not  unnaturally  fear  the  presence  there  of  personal 
foes.  He  had  made  himseK  obnoxious  by  his  rash  act  in  the 
garden,  and  might  be  apprehensive  of  getting  into  trouble  in 
consequence.  That  such  fears  would  not  have  been  alto- 
gether groimdless,  we  learn  from  the  fact  stated  by  John,  that 
one  of  the  persons  who  charged  Peter  with  being  a  disciple  of 
Jesus,  was  a  kinsman  of  the  man  whose  ear  Peter  had  cut  off, 
and  that  he  brought  his  charge  against  the  disciple  in  this 
form :  "  Did  I  not  see  thee  in  the  garden  with  him  ? "  It  is 
therefore  every  way  likely  that  the  consciousness  of  having 
committed  an  offence,  which  might  be  resented,  made  Peter 
anxious  to  escape  identification  as  one  of  Christ's  disciples. 


490  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

His  unseasonable  courage  in  the  garden  helped  to  make  him 
a  coward  in  the  palace-yard. 

Making  all  due  allowance  for  the  effect  of  circumstances^ 
however,  we  think  that  the  difference  in  the  behaviour  of  the 
two  disciples  was  mainly  due  to  a  difference  in  the  men  them- 
selves. Though  he  had  been  giiilty  of  no  imprudence  in  the 
garden,  Peter,  we  fear,  would  have  denied  Jesus  in  the  hall ; 
and,  on  the  other  hand,  supposing  John  had  been  placed  in 
Peter's  position,  we  do  not  believe  that  he  would  have  com- 
mitted Peter's  sin.  Peter's  disposition  laid  him  open  to 
temptation,  while  John's,  on  the  other  hand,  was  a  protection 
against  temptation.  Peter  was  frank  and  familiar,  John 
was  dignified  and  reserved:  Peter's  tendency  was  to  be  on 
hail-fellow-well-met  terms  with  everybody ;  John  could  keep 
his  own  place,  and  make  other  people  keep  theirs.  It  is  easy 
to  see  what  an  important  effect  this  distinction  would  have 
on  the  conduct  of  parties  placed  in  Peter's  position.  Sup- 
pose John  in  Peter's  place,  and  let  us  see  how  he  might  have 
acted.  Certain  persons  about  the  court,  possessing  neither 
authority  nor  influence,  interrogate  him  about  his  connection 
with  Jesus.  He  is  neither  afraid  nor  ashamed  to  acknow- 
ledge his  Lord ;  but,  nevertheless,  he  turns  away  and  gives 
the  interrogators  no  answer.  They  have  no  right  to  question 
him.  The  spirit  which  prompts  their  questions  is  one  with 
which  he  has  no  sympathy,  and  he  feels  that  it  will  serve 
no  good  purpose  to  confess  his  discipleship  to  such  people. 
Therefore,  like  his  Master  when  confronted  with  the  false 
witnesses,  he  holds  his  peace,  and  withdraws  from  company 
with  which  he  has  nothing  in  common,  and  for  which  he 
has  no  respect. 

To  protect  himself  from  inconvenient  interrogation  by  such 
dignified  reserve  is  beyond  Peter's  capacity.  He  cannot  keep 
people  who  are  not  fit  company  for  him  at  their  distance ;  he 
is  too  frank,  too  familiar,  too  sensitive  to  public  opinion,  with- 
out respect  to  its  quality.  If  a  servant-maid  ask  him  a  ques- 
tion about  his  relation  to  the  Prisoner  at  the  bar,  he  cannot 
brush  past  her  as  if  he  heard  her  not  He  must  give  her  an 
answer ;  and  as  he  feels  instinctively  that  the  animus  of  the 
question  is  against  his  Master,  his  answer  must  needs  be  a 


THE  SHEEP  8CATTEBED  :   PETEB  AND  JOHN.  491 

lie.  Then,  unwarned  by  this  encounter  of  the  danger  arising 
from  too  close  contact  with  the  hangers  on  about  the  palace, 
the  foolish  disciple  must  involve  himself  more  inextricably 
into  the  net,  by  mingling  jauntily  with  the  servants  and 
ofQcers  gathered  around  the  fire  which -has  been  kindled  on 
the  pavement  of  the  open  court.  Of  course  he  has  no 
chance  of  escape  here;  he  is  like  a  poor  fly  caught  in  a 
spider's  web.  H  these  men,  with  the  insolent  tone  of  court 
menials,  charge  him  with  being  a  follower  of  the  man  whom 
their  masters  have  now  got  into  their  power,  he  can  do 
nothing  else  than  blunder  out  a  mean,  base  denial  Poor 
Peter,  he  is  manifestly  not  equal  to  the  situation.  It  would 
have  been  wiser  in  him  to  have  stayed  at  home,  restraining 
his  curiosity  to  see  the  end.  Sut  he,  like  most  men,  was  to 
learn  wisdom  only  by  bitter  experience. 

The  contrast  we  have  drawn  between  the  characters  of  the 
two  disciples  suggests  the  thought.  What  different  things 
growth  in  grace  may  signify  for  different  Christians !  Neither 
John  nor  Peter  was  mature  as  yet,  but  immaturity  showed 
itself  in  them  in  opposite  ways.  Peter's  weakness  lay  in  the 
direction  of  indiscriminate  cordiality.  His  tendency  was  to 
be  friends  with  everybody.  John,  on  the  other  hand,  was  in 
no  danger  of  being  on  familiar  terms  with  aU  and  sundry. 
It  was  rather  too  easySor  him  to  make  a  difference  between 
friends  and  foes.  He  could  take  a  side,  and  keep  it ;  he  could 
even  hate  with  fanatical  intensity,  as  well  as  love  with  beau- 
tiful womanly  devotion.  Witness  his  proposal  to  call  down 
fire  from  heaven  to  consimie  the  Samaritan  villagers !  That 
was  a  proposal  which  Peter  could  not  have  made ;  it  was  not 
in  his  nature  to  be  so  truculent  against  any  human  being. 
So  far,  his  good  nature  was  a  thing  to  be  conmiended,  if  in 
other  respects  it  laid  him  open  to  temptation.  The  faults 
of  the  two  brethren  being  so  opposite,  growth  in  grace 
would  naturally  assume  two  opposite  forms  in  their  re- 
spective experiences.  In  Peter,  it  would  take  the  form  of 
concentration;  in  John,  of  expansion.  Peter  would  become 
less  charitable ;  John  would  become  more  charitable.  Peter 
would  advance  from  indiscriminate  goodwill  to  a  moral  decided- 
ness  which  should  distinguish  between  friends  and  foes,  the 


492  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

church  and  the  world;  John's  progress,  on  the  other  hand, 
would  consist  in  ceasing  to  be  a  bigot,  and  in  becoming  im- 
bued with  the  genial,  humane,  sympathetic  spirit  of  his  Lord. 
Peter,  in  his  mature  state,  would  care  much  less  for  the 
opinions  and  feelings  of  men  than  he  did  at  the  present  time ; 
John,  again,  would  care  much  more. 

We  add  a  word  on  the  question.  Was  it  right  or  was  it 
wrong  in  these  two  disciples  to  follow  their  Lord  to  the  place 
of  judgment  ?  In  our  view,  it  was  neither  right  nor  wrong  in 
itseK.  It  was  right  for  one  who  was  able  to  do  it  without 
spiritual  harm ;  wrong  for  one  who  had  reason  to  believe 
that,  by  doing  it,  he  was  exposing  himself  to  hann.  The 
latter  was  Peter's  case,  as  the  former  seems  to  have  been 
John's.  Peter  had  been  plainly  warned  of  his  weakness ;  and 
had  he  laid  the  warning  to  heart,  he  would  have  avoided  the 
scene  of  temptation.  By  disregarding  the  warning,  he  wil- 
fully rushed  into  the  tempter's  arms,  and  of  course  he  caught 
a  fall.  His  fall  reads  a  lesson  to  all  who,  without  seeking 
counsel  of  God,  or  disregarding  counsel  given,  enter  on  under- 
takings beyond  their  strength. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

THE  SHEPHERD  RESTORED. 

Section  l — Too  good  News  to  he  true. 

Matt,  xxviii.  17 ;  Make  xvi.  11-15 ;  Lttke  xxrv.  11,  13-22,  86-42  ; 

John  xx.  20,  24-29. 

THE  black  day  of  the  crucifixion  is  past ;  the  succeeding 
day,  the  Jewish  Sabbath,  when  the  Weary  One  slept 
in  His  rock-hewn  tomb,  is  also  past :  the  first  day  of  a  new 
week  and  of  a  new  era  ha8  daled.  and  the  lid  is  risen 
from  the  dead  The  Shepherd  has  returned  to  gather  His 
scattered  sheep.  Surely  a  happy  day  for  hapless  disciples ! 
What  rapturous  joy  must  have  thrilled  their  hearts  at  the 
thought  of  a  reunion  with  their  beloved  Lord  !  with  what 
ardent  hope  must  they  have  looked  forward  to  that  resurrection 
mom! 

So  one  might  think,  but  the  real  state  of  the  case  was  not 
so.  Such  ardent  expectations  had  no  place  in  the  minds  of 
the  disciples.  The  actual  state  of  their  mind  at  the  resurrec- 
tion of  Christ  rather  resembled  that  of  the  Jewish  exiles  in 
Babylon,  when  they  heard  that  they  were  to  be  restored  to 
their  native  land.  The  first  effect  of  the  good  news  was,  that 
they  were  as  men  that  dreamed.  The  news  seemed  too  good 
to  be  true.  The  captives  who  had  sat  by  the  rivers  of  Baby- 
lon, and  wept  when  they  remembered  Zion,  had  ceased  to  hope 
for  a  return  to  their  own  coimtry,  and  indeed  to  be  capable  of 
hoping  for  anything.  *'  Grief  was  calm,  and  hope  was  dead  " 
within  them.  Then,  when  the  exiles  had  recovered  from  the 
stupor  of  surprise,  the  next  teffect  of  the  good  tidings  was  a  fit 


494  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

of  over-joy.     They  burst  intx)  hysteric  laughter  and  irrepres- 
sible song.^ 

Very  similar  was  the  experience  of  the  disciples  in  con- 
nection with  the  rising  of  Jesus  from  the  dead.  Their  grief 
was  not  indeed  calm,  but  their  hope  was  dead.  The  resurrec- 
tion of  their  Master  was  utterly  imexpected  by  them,  and 
they  received  the  tidings  with  surprise  and  incredulity.  This 
appears  from  the  statements  of  all  the  four  evangelists. 
Matthew  states,  that  on  the  occasion  of  Christ's  meeting  with 
His  followers  in  Galilee  after  He  was  risen,  some  doubted, 
while  others  worshipped.  Mark  relates  that,  when  the  disciples 
heard  from  Mary  Magdalene  tiiat  Jesus  was  alive,  and  had 
been  seen  of  her,  "they  beUeved  not;"*  and  that  when  the 
two  disciples  who  journeyed  toward  Enmiaus  told  their 
brethren  of  their  meeting  with  Jesus  on  the  way,  "neither 
believed  they  them."*  He  further  relates  how,  on  a  sub- 
sequent occasion,  when  Jesus  Himself  met  with  the  whole 
eleven  at  once.  He  "  upbraided  them  with  their  unbelief  and 
hardness  of  heart,  because  they  believed  not  them  which  had 
seen  Him  after  He  was  risen."* 

In  fuU  accordance  with  these  statements  of  the  two  first 
evangelists  are  those  of  Luke,  whose  representation  of  the 
mental  attitude  of  the  disciples  towards  the  resurrection  of 
Jesus  is  very  graphic  and  animated.  According  to  him,  the 
reports  of  the  women  seemed  to  them  *'  as  idle  tsJes,  and  they 
believed  them  not."^  The  two  brethren  vaguely  alluded  to  by 
Mark  as  walking  into  the  country  when  Jesus  appeared  to 
them,  are  represented  by  Luke  as  sad  in  countenance,  though 
aware  of  the  rumours  concerning  the  resurrection ;  yea,  as  so 
depressed  in  spirits,  that  they  did  not  recognise  Jesus  when 
He  joined  their  company  and  entered  into  conversation  with 
them.^     The  resurrection  was  not  a  fact  for  them :  all  they 

^  Ps.  cxxxviL     The  experience  of  the  exiles  and  of  the  apostles  recalls  the 
lines  of  the  Greek  poet  Euripides  : 

«  Matt.  xxviiL  17.  ^  Mark  xvi.  11.  *  Mark  xvi  18. 

*  Mark  xvi.  14.  '  Luke  xxiv.  11.  ^  Luke  xziy.  16. 


1^ 


THE  SHEPHERD  RESTORED :   TOO  GOOD  NEWS  TO  BE  TRUE.      495 

knew  was  that  their  Master  was  dead,  and  that  they  had 
vainly  trusted  that  it  had  been  He  who  should  have  redeemed 
IsraeL  The  same  evangelist  also  informs  us,  that  on  the  first 
occasion  when  Jesus  presented  Himself  in  the  midst  of  EKs 
disciples,  they  did  recognise  the  resemblance  of  the  apparition 
to  their  deceased  Lord,  but  thought  it  was  only  His  ghost, 
and  accordingly  were  terrified  and  aflfrighted,  insomuch  that, 
in  order  to  charm  away  their  fear,  Jesus  showed  them  His 
hands  and  feet,  and  besought  them  to  handle  His  body,  and 
so  satisfy  themselves  that  He  was  no  ghost,  but  a  substantial 
human  being,  with  flesh  and  bones  like  another  man.^ 

Instead  of  general  statements,  John  gives  an  example  of  the 
incredulity  of  the  disciples  concerning  the  resurrection  as 
exhibited  in  its  extreme  form  by  Thomas.  This  disciple  he 
represents  as  so  incredulous,  that  he  refused  to  believe  until 
he  should  have  put  his  finger  into  the  prints  of  the  nails,  aud 
thrust  his  hand  into  the  wound  made  by  the  spear  in  the 
Saviour's  side.  .  That  the  other  disciples  shared  the  incredulity 
of  Thomas,  though  in  a  less  degree,  is  implied  in  the  statement 
made  by  John  in  a  previous  part  of  his  narrative,  that  when 
Jesus  met  His  disciples  on  the  evening  of  the  day  on  which 
He  rose,  *'  He  showed  unto  them  His  hands  and  His  side."* 

The  women  who  had  believed  in  Christ  had  no  more 
expectation  of  His  resurrection  than  the  eleven.  They  set 
forth  towards  the  sepulchre,  on  the  morning  of  the  first  day  of 
the  week,  with  the  intention  of  embalming  the  dead  body  of 
Him  whom  they  loved.  They  sought  the  living  among  the 
dead.  When  the  Magdalene,  who  was  at  the  tomb  before  the 
rest,  found  the  grave  empty,  her  idea  was  that  some  one  had 
carried  away  the  dead  body  of  her  Lord.' 

When  the  incredulity  of  the  disciples  did  at  length  give 
place  to  faith,  they  passed,  Uke  the  Hebrew  exiles,  from 
extreme  depression  to  extravagant  joy.  When  the  doubt  of 
Thomas  was  removed,  he  exclaimed  in  rapture,  *'  My  Lord  and 
my  God!"*  Luke  relates,  that  when  they  recognised  their 
risen  Lord,  the  disciples  "  believed  not  for  joy,"*  as  if  toying 
with  doubt  as  a  stimulus  to  joy.     The  two  disciples  with 


>  Luke  zziy.  86,  87.        *  John  xz.  20.        '  John  xz.  2. 
*  John  xz.  28.  '  Lake  zziy.  41. 


0 


496  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE.  ' 

whom  Jesus  conversed  on  the  way  to  Emmaiia,  said  to  each 
other  when  He  left  them,  **  Did  not  our  heart  bom  within 
US  while  He  talked  with  ns  by  the  way,  and  while  He  opened 
to  us  the  Scriptures  ?"* 

In   yet  another   most  important  respect  did  the   eleven 
resemble  the  ancient  Hebrew  exiles  at  the  time   of  their 
recalL     While  their  faith  and  hope  were  palsied  during  the 
interval  between  the  death  8uid  the  resurrection  of  Jesus, 
their  love  remained  in  imabated  vitality.     The  expatriated 
Jew   did   not   forget  Jerusalem   in    the   land  of   strangers. 
Absence  only  made  his  heart  grow  fonder.     As  he  sat  by  the 
rivers  of  Babylon,  listless,  motionless,  in  abstracted  dreamy 
mood,  gazing  with  glassy  eyes  on  the  sluggish  waters,  the 
big  round  tears  stole  quietly  down  his  cheeks  because  he  had 
been  thinking  of  Zion.    The  exile  of  poetic  soul  did  not  forget 
what  was  due  to  Jerusalem's  honour.     He  was  incapable  of 
singing  the  Lord's  songs  in  the  hearing  of  a  heathen  audience, 
who  cared  nothing  for  their  meaning,  but  only  for  the  style 
of  execution.     He  disdained  to  prostitute  his  talents  for  the 
entertainment  of  the  voluptuous  oppressors  of  Israel,  even 
if  thereby  he  could  procure  his  restoration  to  the  beloved 
country  of  his  birth,  as  the  Athenian  captives  in  Sicily  are  said 
to  have  done  by  reciting  the  strains  of  their  favourite  poet 
Euripides  in  the  hearing  of  their  Sicilian  masters.' 

The  disciples  were  not  less  true  to  the  memory  of  their 
Lord.  They  were  like'  a  widow  indeed,  who  remains  faithful 
to  her  deceased  husband,  and  dotes  on  his  virtues,  though  his 
reputation  be  at  zero  in  the  general  esteem  of  the  world. 
Call  Him  a  deceiver  who  might,  they  could  not  believe  that 
Jesus  had  been  a  deceiver.  Mistaken  He  as  well  as  they 
might  have  been,  but  an  impostor — never  !  Therefore,  though 
He  is  dead  and  their  hope  gone,  they  still  act  as  men  who 
cherish  the  fondest  attachment  to  the  Master  whom  they  have 
lost.  They  keep  together  like  a  bereaved  family,  with  blinds 
down,  so  to  speak,  shutting  and  barring  their  doors  for  fear 
of  the  Jews,  identifying  themselves  with  the  Crucified,  and  as 

^  Luke  xxiv.  32. 

'  The  story  is  told  by  Plutarch  in  his  lUtftixxnXa  (Nikkui),  and  quoted  and 
commented  on  by  Gillies,  History  of  Oreece,  cap.  xx. 


i 


*r  ■ 

THE  BHEPHERD  RESTORED:   TOO  GOOD  NEWS  TO  BE  TRUE.     497 

His  friends  dreading  the  ill-will  of  the  unbelieving  world. 
Admirable  example  to  all  Christians  how  to  behave  themselves 
in  a  day  of  trouble,  rebuke,  and  blasphemy,  when  the  cause  of 
Christ  seems  lost,  and  the  powers  of  darkness  for  the  moment 
have  aU  things  their  own  way.  Though  faith  be  eclipsed  and 
hope  extinguished,  let  the  heart  ever  be  loyal  to  its  true  Lord ! 

The  state  of  mind  in  which  the  disciples  were  at  the  resur- 
rection of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead  is  of  great  moment  in 
an  apologetic  point  of  view.  Their  despair  after  their  Lord's 
crucifixion  gives  great  weight  to  the  testimony  borne  by  them 
to  the  fdd  of  His  resurrection.  Men  in  such  a  mood  were 
not  likely  to  believe  in  the  latter  event  except  because  it  could 
not  reasonably  be  disbelieved.  They  would  not  be  lightly 
satisfied  of  its  truth,  as  men  are  apt  to  be  in  the  case  of  events 
both  desired  and  expected ;  but  would  sceptically  exact  super- 
abundant evidence,  as  men  do  in  the  case  of  events  desirafble 
but  hot  expected.  They  would  be  slow  to  believe  on  the  testi- 
mony of  others,  and  might  even  hesitate  to  believe  their  own 
eyes.  They  would  not  be  able,  as  M.  Eenan  supposes,  to  get  up 
a  belief  in  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  from  the  simple  fact  that 
His  grave  was  found  empty  on  the  third  day  after  EKs  death  by 
the  women  who  went  to  embalm  His  body.  That  circumstance, 
on  being  reported,  might  make  a  Peter  and  a  John  run  to  the 
sepulchre  to  see  how  mattera  stood ;  but  after  they  had  found 
the  report  of  the  women  confirmed,  it  would  stiU  remain  a  ques- 
tion how  the  fact  was  to  be  explained ;  8uid  Mary  Magdalene's 
theory,  that  some  one  had  carried  off  the  corpse,  would  not 
appear  at  all  improbable. 

These  inferences  of  ours,  from  what  we  know  concerning  the 
mental  condition  of  the  disciples,  are  fully  borne  out  by  the 
Gospel  accounts  of  the  reception  they  gave  to  the  risen  Jesus 
at  His  first  appearances  to  them.  One  and  all  of  them  regarded 
these  appearances  sceptically,  and  took  pains  to  satisfy  them- 
selves, or  made  it  necessary  that  Jesus  should  take  pains  to 
satisfy  them,  that  the  visible  object  was  no  ghostly  apparition, 
but  a  living  man,  6uid  that  man  none  other  than  He  who  had 
died  on  the  cross.  The  disciples  doubted  now  the  substantiality, 
now  the  identity,  of  the  person  who  appeared  to  them.  They 
were  therefore  not  content  with  seeing  Jesus,  but  at  His 

2  I 


498  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

own  request  handled  Him.  One  of  their  number  not  only 
handled  the  body  to  ascertain  that  it  possessed  the  incom- 
pressibility  of  matter^  but  insisted  on  examining  3¥ith  sceptical 
curiosity  those  parts  which  had  been  injured  by  the  nails  and 
the  spear.  All  perceived  the  resemblance  between  the  object 
in  view  8uid  Jesus,  but  they  could  not  be  persuaded  of  the 
identity,  so  utterly  unprepared  were  they  for  seeing*  the  dead 
One  alive  again;  and  their  theory  at  first  was  just  that  of 
Strauss,  that  what  they  saw  was  a  ghost  or  mere  vision.  And 
the  very  fact  that  they  entertained  that  theory  makes  it  im- 
possible for  us  to  entertain  it.  We  cannot,  in  the  face  of  that 
fact,  accept  the  Straussian  dogma,  that "  the  faith  in  Jesus  as  the 
Messiah,  which  by  His  violent  death  had  received  an  apparently 
fatal  shock,  was  subjectively  restored  by  the  instrumentality  of 
the  mind,  the  power  of  imagination,  and  nervous  excitement" 
Th6  power  of  imagination  and  nervous  excitement  we  know 
can  do  mucL  It  has  often  happened  to  men  in  an  abnormal, 
excited  state,  to  see  projected  into  outward  space  the  creations 
of  a  heated  brain.  But  persons  in  a  crazy  state  like  that — ^sub- 
ject to  hallucination — are  not  usually  cool  and  rational  enough 
to  dovit  the  reality  of  what  they  see ;  nor  is  it  necessary  in  their 
case  to  take  pains  to  overcome  such  doubts.  What  they  need 
rather,  is  to  be  made  aware  that  what  they  think  they  see  is 
not  a  reality  :  the  very  reverse  of  what  Christ  had  to  do  for  the 
disciples,  and  did,  by  solemn  assertion  that  He  was  no  spirit, 
by  inviting  them  to  handle  Him,  and  so  satisfy  themselves  of 
His  material  substantiality,  and  by  partaking  of  food  in  their 
presence. 

When  we  keep  steadily  before  our  eyes  the  mental  condition 
of  the  eleven  at  the  time  of  Christ's  resurrection,  we  see  the 
transparent  falsehood  and  absurdity  of  the  theft  theory  invented 
by  the  Jewish  priests.  The  disciples,  according  to  this  theory, 
came  by  night,  while  the  guards  were  asleep,  and  stole  the 
dead  body  of  Jesus,  that  they  might  be  able  to  circulate  the 
belief  that  He  was  risen  again.  Matthew  tells  that  even 
before  the  resurrection  the  murderers  of  our  Lord  were  afraid 
this  might  be  done ;  and  then,  to  preVent  any  fraud  of  this  kind, 
they  applied  to  Pilate  to  have  a  guard  put  upon  the  grave,  who 
accordingly  contemptuously  granted  them  permission  to  take 


I 
THE  SHEPHEBD  BESTOBED :   TOO  GOOD  NEWS  TO  BE  TBUE.     499 

what  steps  they  pleased  to  prevent  all  resurrectionary  proceed- 
ings on  the  part  either  of  the  dead  or  of  the  living ;  scornfully 
replying :  "  Ye  have  a  watch ;  go  your  way ;  make  it  as  sure 
as  ye  can."  This  accordingly  they  did,  sealing  the  stone  and 
setting  a  watch.  Alas,  their  precautions  prevented  neither  the 
resurrection  nor  belief  in  it,  but  only  supplied  an  illustration 
of  the  folly  of  those  who  attempt  to  manage  providence,  and 
to  control  the  course  of  the  world's  history.  They  gave  them- 
selves much  to  do,  and  it  all  came  to  nothing,  Not  that  we 
are  disposed  to  deny  the  astuteness  of  these  ecclesiastical  politi- 
cians. Their  scheme  for  preventing  the  resurrection  was  very 
prudent,  and  their  mode  of  explaining  it  away  afterhand  very 
plausible.  The  story  they  invented  was  really  a  very  respect- 
able fabrication,  and  was  certain  to  satisfy  all  who  wanted 
a  decent  theory  to  justify  a  foregone  conclusion,  as  in  fact 
it  seems  to  have  done;  for,  according  to  Matthew,  it  was 
commonly  reported  in  after  yeara^  It  was  not  improbable 
that  soldiers  should  fall  asleep  by  night  on  the  watch, 
especially  when  guarding  a  dead  body,  which  was  not  likely 
to  give  them  any  trouble ;  and  in  the  eyes  of  the  unbelieving 
world,  the  followers  of  the  Nazarene  were  capable  of  using  any 
means  for  promoting  their  ends. 

But  granting  all  this,  and  even  granting  that  the  Sanhedrists 
had  been  right  in  their  opinion  of  the  character  of  the  disciples, 
their  theft  theory  is  ridiculous.  The  disciples,  feven  if  capable 
of  such  a  theft,  so  far  as  scruples  of  conscience  were  concerned, 
were  not  in  a  state  of  mind  to  think  of  it,  or  to  attempt  it. 
They  had  not  spirit  left  for  such  a  daring  action.  Sorrow  lay 
like  a  weight  of  lead  on  their  hearts,  and  made  them  almost 
as  inanimate  as  the  corpse  they  are  supposed  to  have  stolen. 
Then  the  motive  for  the  theft  is  one  which  could  not  have 
influenced  them  then.  Steal  the  body  to  propagate  a  belief  in 
the  resurrection !  What  interest  had  they  in  propagating  a 
belief  which  they  did  not  entertain  themselves ?  "As  yet 
they  knew  not  the  Scriptures,  that  He  must  rise  again  &om  the 
dead;'''  nor  did  they  remember  aught  that  their  Master  had 
said  on  this  subject  before  His  decease.  To  some  this  latter 
statement  has  appeared  hard  to  believe ;  and  to  get  over  the 

^  Matt  xzyiiL  16.  *  John  zz.  9. 


500  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

difficulty,  it  has  been  snggested  that  the  predictions  of  our 
Lord  respecting  Hia  resurrection  may  not  have  been  ao  d^nite 
as  they  appear  in  the  Grospels,  but  may  have  assnined    this 
definite  form  after  the  event,  when  their  meaning  was  clearly 
understood.^       We  see  no  occasion  far  such  a  supposition. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Jesus  spoke  plainly  enou^  about 
His  death  at  least ;  and  yet  His  death,  when  it  happened,  took 
the  disciples  as  much  by  surprise  as  did  the  resurrection.     One 
explanation  suffices  in  both  cases.     The  disciples  were  not 
clever,  quick-witted,  sentimental  men,  such  as  Eenan  makes 
them.     They  were  stupid,  slow-minded  persona ;  very  honest, 
but  very  unapt  to  take  in  new  ideas.     They  were  liVe  horses 
with  blinders  on,  and  could  see  only  in  one  direction, — that, 
namely,  of  their  prejudices.    It  required  the  surgery  of  events 
to  insert  a  new  truth  into  their  minds.    Ifothing  would  change 
the  current  of  their  thoughts  but  a  damwork  of  undeniable  tact 
They  could  be  convinced  that  Christ  must  die  only  by  His 
dying,  that  He  would  rise  only  by  Hia  rising,  that  Hia  kii^- 
dom  was  not  to  be  of  tins  world,  only  by  the  outpouring  of  the 
Spirit  at  Pentedost  and  the  vocation  of  the  Gentilea.     Let  us 
be  thankful  for  the  honest  stupidity  of  these  men.     It  gives 
great  value  to  their  testimony.     We  know  that  nothing  but 
facts  could  make  such  men  believe  that  which  now-a-days 
they  get  credit  for  inventing. 

The  apologetic  use  which  we  have  made  of  the  doubts  of 
the  disciples  concerning  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  not  only 
legitimate,  but  manifestly  that  which  was  intended  by  their 
being  recorded.  The  evangelists  have  carefully  chronicled 
these  doubts,  that  we  might  have  no  doubt  These  things 
were  written,  that  we  might  believe  that  Jesus  really  did  rise 
from  the  dead ;  for  the  apostles  attached  supreme  importance 
to  that  fact,  which  they  had  doubted  in  the  days  of  their 
disciplehood.  It  was  the  foundation  of  their  doctrinal  edifice, 
an  essential  part  of  their  gospeL  The  Apostle  Paul  correctly 
summed  up  the  gospel  preached  by  the  men  who  had  been 
with  Jesus,  as  well  as  by  himself,  in  these  three  items :  "  that 
Christ  died  for  our  sins  according  to  the  Scriptures;  and 
that  He  was  buried ;  and  that  He  rose  again  the  third  day, 

'  See  Neander,  Life  qfJenu, 


THE  SHEPHERD  RESTORED :   TOO  GOOD  NEWS  TO  BE  TRUE.    501 

according  to  the  Scriptures."  All  the  eleven  thoroughly  agreed 
with  Paul's  sentiment,  that  if  Christ  were  not  risen,  their 
preaching  was  vain,  and  the  faith  of  Christians  was  also  vain. 
There  was  no  gospel  at  all,  unless  He  who  died  for  men's  sins 
rose  again  for  their  justification.  With  this  conviction  in 
their  minds,  they  constantly  bore  witness  to  the  resurrection 
of  Jesus  wherever  they  went.  So  important  a  part  of  their 
work  did  this  witness-bearing  seem  to  them,  that  when  Peter 
proposed  the  election  of  one  to  fill  the  place  of  Judas,  he 
singled  it  out  as  the  characteristic  function  of  the  apostolic 
office.  "  Of  these  men,"  he  said, "  which  have  companied  with 
us  all  the  time  that  the  Lord  Jesus  went  in  and  out  among 
us,  .  .  .  must  one  be  ordained  to  be  a  witness  with  us  of  His 
resurrection." 

With  this  supreme  value  attached  to  the  fact  of  Christ's 
rising  again  in  apostolic  preaching,  it  is  our  duty  most  heartily 
to  sympathize.  Modem  unbelievers,  like  some  in  the  Corin- 
thian church,  would  persuade  us  that  it  does  not  matter 
whether  Jesus  rose  or  not,  all  that  is  valuable  in  Christianity 
being  quite  independent  of  mere  historical  truth.  With  these 
practically  agree  many  believers  addicted  to  an  airy  spiri- 
tualism, who  treat  mere  supernatural  facts  with  contemptuous 
neglect,  deeming  the  high  doctrines  of  the  faith  as  alone 
worthy  of  their  regard.  To  persons  of  this  temper,  such 
studies  as  those  which  have  occupied  us  in  this  chapter  seem 
a  mere  waste  of  time ;  and  if  they  spoke  as  they  feel,  they 
would  say,  "  Let  these  trifles  alone,  and  give  us  the  pure  and 
simple  gospeL"  Intelligent,  sober,  and  earnest  Christians 
differ  toto  ccdo  from  both  these  classes  of  people.  In  their 
view,  Christianity  is  in  the  first  place  a  religion  of  superna- 
tural facts.  These  facts  occupy  the  principal  place  in  their 
creed.  They  know  that  if  these  facts  are  honestly  believed, 
all  the  great  doctrines  of  the  faith  must  sooner  or  later  be 
accepted ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  they  clearly  understand  that 
a  religion  which  despises,  not  to  say  disbelieves,  these  facts, 
is  but  a  cloud-land  which  must  soon  be  dissipated,  or  a  house 
built  on  sand  which  the  storm  will  sweep  away.  Therefore, 
while  acknowledging  the  importance  of  all  revealed  truth, 
they  lay  very  special  stress  on  revealed  facts.     Believing  with 


i 


502  THE  TBAININ6  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

the  heart  the  precious  tmth  that  Christ  died  for  our  sins^  thej 
are  careful  with  the  apostles  to  include  in  their  gospel  these 
items  of  fact,  that  He  was  buried,  and  that  He  rose  again  the 
third  day. 


Section  il — The  Eyes  of  the  Understanding  opened, 

ILiRK  rvx  14  ;  LvKX  xxiY.  25-32,  44-46 ;  John  xx.  20-23. 

Jesus  showed  Himself  alive  after  His  passion  to  His  dis- 
ciples in  a  body,  for  the  first  time,  on  the  evening  of  His 
resurrection  day.  It  was  the  fourth  tLoae  He  had  made  Him- 
self visible  since  He  rose  from  the  dead.  He  had  appeared 
in  the  morning  first  of  all  to  Mary  of  Magdala.  She  had 
earned  the  honour  thus  conferred  on  her  by  her  pre-eminent 
devotion.  Of  kindred  spirit  with  Mary  of  Bethany,  she  had 
been  foremost  among  the  women  who  came  to  Joseph's  tomb 
to  embalm  the  dead  body  of  the  Saviour.  Finding  the  grave 
empty,  she  wept  bitter  tears,  because  they  had  taken  away  her 
Lord,  and  she  knew  not  where  they  had  laid  Him.  Those 
tears,  sure  sign  of  deep  true  love,  had  not  been  unobserved 
of  the  Eisen  One.  The  sorrows  of  this  faithful  soul  touched 
His  tender  heart,  and  brought  Him  to  her  side  to  comfort  her. 
Turning  roimd  in  distress  from  the  sepulchre,  she  saw  Him 
standing  by,  but  knew  Him  not  "  Jesus  saith  to  her,  Woman, 
why  weepest  thou  ?  whom  seekest  thou  ?  She,  supposing  Him 
to  be  the  gardener,  replies.  Sir,  if  thou  hast  borne  Him 
hence,  tell  me  where  thou  hast  laid  Him,  and  I  will  take 
Him  away.  Jesus  saith  unto  her,  Mary."  Startled  with  the 
familiar  voice,  she  looks  more  attentively,  and  forthwith 
returns'  the  benignant  salutation  with  an  expressive  word  of 
recognition,  *'  Eabboni"  Thus  "  to  holy  tears,  in  lonely 
hours,  Christ  risen  appears." 

The  second  appearance  was  vouchsafed  to  Peter.  Concern- 
ing this  private  meeting  between  Jesus  and  His  erring  dis- 
ciple we  have  no  details :  it  is  simply  mentioned  by  Paul  in 
his  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  and  by  Luke  in  his  Gospel ; 
but  we  can  have  no  doubt  at  all  as  to  its  object.     The  Risen 


THE  SHEPHERD  RESTORED  :   EYES  OF  UNDERSTANDING  OPENED.    503 

Master  remembered  Peter's  sin;  He  knew  how  troubled  he 
was  in  mind  on  account  of  it ;  He  desired  without  delay  to 
let  him  know  he  was  forgiven ;  and  out  of  delicate  considera- 
tion for  the  offender's  feelings,  He  contrived  to  meet  him  for 
the  first  time  after  his  fall,  alone. 

In  the  course  of  the  day  Jesus  appeared,  for  the  third  time, 
to  the  two  brethren  who  journeyed  to  Emmaus.  Luke  has 
given  greater  prominence  to  this  third  appearance  than  to 
any  other  in  his  narrative,  probably  because  it  was  one  of  the 
most  interesting  of  the  anecdotes  concerning  the  resurrection 
which  he  found  in  the  collections  out  of  which  he  compiled 
his  GospeL  And,  in  truth,  anything  more  interesting  than 
this  beautiful  story  cannot  well  be  imagined.  How  vividly 
is  the  whole  situation  of  the  disciples  brought  before  us  by 
the  picture  of  the  two  friends  walking  along  the  way,  and 
talking  together  of  the  things  which  had  happened,  the  suffer- 
ings of  Jesus  three  days  ago,  and  the  rumours  just  come  to 
their  ears  concerning  His  resurrection ;  and  as  they  talked, 
vibrating  between  despair  and  hope,  now  brooding  disconso- 
lately on  the  crucifixion  of  Him  whom  till  then  they  had  re- 
garded as  the  Redeemer  of  Israel,  anon  wondering  if  it  were 
possible  that  He  could  have  risen  again !  Then  how  unspeak- 
ably pathetic  the  behaviour  of  Jesus  throughout  this  scene ! 
By  an  artifice  of  love  He  assumes  the  incognito,  and,  joining 
the  company  of  the  two  sorrowful  men,  asks  them  in  a  care- 
less way  what  is  the  subject  about  which  they  are  talking  so 
sadly  and  seriously ;  and  on  receiving  for  reply  a  question 
expressive  of  surprise  that  even  a  stranger  in  Jerusalem 
should  not  know  the  things  which  have  come  to  pass,  again 
asks  dryly  and  indifferently,  *'  What  things  ?"  Having  thereby 
drawn  out  of  them  their  story.  He  proceeds  in  turn  to  show 
them  that  an  intelligent  reader  of  the  Old  Testament  ought 
not  to  be  surprised  at  such  things  happening  to  one  whom 
they  believed  to  be  Christ,  taking  occasion  to  expound  unto 
them  '*  in  all  the  Scriptures  the  things  concerning  Himself," 
without  saying  that  it  is  of  Himself  He  speaks.  On  the 
arrival  of  the  travellers  at  the  village  whither  the  two  bre- 
thren were  bound,  the  unknown  One  assumes  the  air  of  a 
man  who  is  going  farther  on,  as  it  would  not  become  a 


504  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

stranger  to  thrast  himself  into  company  uninvited ;  but  re- 
ceiving a  pressing  invitation.  He  accepts  it,  and  at  last  the 
two  brethren  discover  to  their  joy  whom  they  have  been 
entertaining  unawarea 

This  appearing  of  Jesus  to  the  two  brethren  by  the  way 
was  a  sort  of  prelude  to  that  which  He  made  on  the  evening 
of  the  same  day  in  Jerusalem  to  the  eleven,  or  rather  the  ten. 
As  soon  as  they  had  discovered  whom  they  had  had  for  a 
guest,  Cleopas  and  his  companion  set  out  from  Emmaus  to 
the  Holy  City,  eager  to  tell  the  friends  there  the   stirring 
news.     And,  behold,  while  they  are  in  the  very  act  of  telling 
what  things  were  done  in  the  way,  and  how  Jesus  became 
known  to  them  in  the  breaking  of  bread,  Jesus  Himself  ap- 
peared in  the  midst  of  them,  uttering  the  kindly  salutation, 
"  Peace  be  imto  you ! "      He  is  come  to  do  for  the  future 
apostles  what  He  has  already  done  for  the  two  friends :  to 
show  Himself  alive  to  them  after  His  passion,  and  to  open 
their  understandings  that  they  might  understand  the  Scriptures, 
and  see  that,  according  to  what  had  been  written  before  of 
the  Christ,  it  behoved  Him  to  suffer,  and  to  rise  from  the 
dead  the  third  day. 

While  the  general  design  of  the  two  appearances  is  the 
same,  we  observe  a  difference  in  the  order  of  procedure  fol- 
lowed by  Jesus.  In  the  one  case  He  opened  the  eyes  of  the 
imderstanding  first,  and  the  eyes  of  the  body  second ;  in  the 
other  He  reversed  this  order.  In  His  coUoquy  with  the  two 
brethren,  He  first  showed  them  that  the  crucifixion  and  the 
rumoured  resurrection  were  in  perfect  accordance  with  Old 
Testament  Scriptures,  and  then  at  the  close  made  Himself 
visible  to  their  bodily  eyes  as  Jesus  risen.  In  other  words.  He 
first  taught  them  the  true  scriptural  theory  of  Messiah's  earthly 
experience,  and  then  He  satisfied  them  as  to  the  matter  of 
fact.  In  the  meeting  at  night  with  the  ten;  on  the  other 
hand,  He  disposed  of  the  matter  of  fact  first,  and  then  took 
up  the  theory  afterwards.  He  convinced  His  disciples,  by 
showing  them  His  hands  and  His  feet,  6uid  by  eating  food, 
that  He  really  was  risen;  and  then  He  proceeded  to  show 
that  the  fact  was  only  what  they  ought  to  have  expected  as 
the  fulfilment  of  Old  Testament  prophecy. 


THE  SHEPHERD  RESTORED  :   EYES  OF  UNDERSTANDING  OPENED.    505 

In  thus  varjring  the  order  of  revelation,  Jesus  was  but 
adapting  His  procedure  to  the  different  circumstances  of  the 
persons  with  whom  He  had  to  deal  The  two  Mends  who 
journeyed  to  Emmaus  did  not  notice  any  resemblance  between 
the  stranger  who  joined  their  company  and  their  beloved 
Lord,  of  whom  they  had  been  thinking  and  speaking.  "  Their 
eyes  were  holden,  that  they  should  not  know  Him.'*  The 
main  cause  of  this,  we  believe,  was  sheer  heaviness  of  heart. 
Sorrow  made  them  unobserving.  They  were  so  engrossed  with 
their  own  sad  thoughts,  that  they  had  no  eyes  for  outward 
things.  They  did  not  take  the  trouble  to  look  who  it  was 
that  had  come  up  with  them ;  it  would  have  made  no  dif- 
ference though  the  stranger  had  been  their  own  father.  It  is 
obvious  how  men  in  such  a  mood  must  be  dealt  witL  They  can 
get  outward  vision  only  by  getting  the  inward  eye  first  opened. 
The  diseased  mind  must  be  healed,  that  they  may  be  able  to 
look  at  what  is  before  them,  and  see  it  as  it  is.  On  this  prin- 
ciple Jesus  proceeded  with  the  two  brethren.  He  accommo- 
dated Himself  to  their  humour,  and  led  them  on  from  despair 
to  hope,  and  then  the  outward  senses  recovered  their  percep- 
tive power,  and  told  who  the  stranger  was.  "You  have 
heard,"  He  said  in  effect,  *'  a  rumour  that  He  who  was  crucified 
three  days  ago  is  risen.  You  regard  this  rumour  as  an  in- 
credible story.  But  why  should  you  ?  You  believe  Jesus  to 
be  the  Christ.  If  He  was  the  Christ,  His  rising  ^ain  was  to 
be  expected  as  much  as  the  passion,  for  both  alike  are  foretold 
in  the  Scriptures  which  ye  believe  to  be  the  word  of  God." 
These  thoughts  having  taken  hold  of  their  minds,  the  hearts 
of  the  two  brethren  begin  to  bum  with  the  kindling  power  'of 
a  new  truth ;  the  day-dawn  of  hope  breaks  on  their  spirit ;  they 
waken  up  as  fix)m  an  oppressive  dream ;  they  look  outward, 
and,  lo,  the  man  who  has  been  discoursing  to  them  is  Jesus 
Himself! 

With  the  ten  the  case  was  different.  When  Jesus  iq)peared 
in  the  midst  of  them,  they  were  struck  at  once  with  the  re- 
semblance to  their  deceased  Master.  They  had  been  listening 
to  the  story  of  Cleopas  and  his  companion,  and  were  in  a 
more  observing  mood.  But  they  could  not  believe  that  what 
they  saw  really  waa  JeBus.    They  were  terrified  and  aflWghted, 


i 


506  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

and  supposed  that  they  had  seen  a  spirit— the  ghost  or  spectre 
of  the  Crucified.  The  first  thing  to  be  done  in  this  case,  there- 
fore, manifestly  was  to  allay  the  fear  awakened,  and  to  con- 
vince the  terrified  disciples  that  the  being  who  had  suddenly 
appeared  was  no  ghost,  but  a  man :  the  very  man  He  seemed 
to  be :  even  Jesus  Himself.  Not  till  that  has  been  done  can 
any  discourse  be  profitably  held  concerning  the  teaching  of 
the  Old  Testament  on  the  subject  of  Messiah's  earthly  history. 
To  that  task  accordingly  Jesus  forthwith  addressed  Himself, 
and  only  when  it  was  successfully  accomplished  did  He  pro- 
ceed to  expound  the  true  Messianic  theory. 

Something  analogous  to  the  difference  we  have  pointed 
out  in  the  experience  of  the  two  and  the  ten  disciples  in 
connection  with  belief  in  the  resurrection,  may  be  found  in 
the  ways  by  which  different  Christians  now  are  brought  to 
faith.  The  evidences  of  Christianity  are  divisible  into  two 
great  categories :  the  external  and  the  internal ;  the  one  drawn 
from  outward  historical  facts,  the  other  from  the  adaptation 
of  the  gospel  to  man*s  nature  and  needs.  Both  sorts  of  evi- 
dence are  necessary  to  a  perfect  faith,  just  as  both  sorts  of 
vision,  the  outward  and  the  inward,  were  necessary  to  make 
the  disciples  thorough  believers  in  the  fact  of  the  resurrection. 
But  some  begin  with  the  one,  some  with  the  other.  Some  are 
convinced  first  that  the  gospel  story  is  true,  8uid  then  perhaps 
long  after  waken  up  to  a  sense  of  the  importance  and  pre- 
ciousness  of  the  things  which  it  relates.  Others,  again,  are 
like  Cleopas  and  his  companion;  so  engrossed  with  their 
own  thoughts,  as  to  be  incapable  of  appreciating  or  seeing 
facts,  reqiuring  first  to  have  the  eyes  of  their  understanding 
enlightened  to  see  the  beauty  and  the  worthiness  of  the  truth 
as  it  is  in  Jesus.  They  inay  at  one  time  have  had  a  kind  of 
traditional  faith  in  the  facts  as  sufficiently  well  attested.  But 
they  have  lost  that  faith,  it  may  be  not  without  regret.  They 
are  sceptics,  and  yet  they  are  sad  because  they  are  so,  and 
feel  that  it  was  better  with  them  when,  like  others,  they 
believed.  Yet,  though  they  attempt  it,  they  cannot  restore 
their  faith  by  a  study  of  mere  external  evidences.  They 
read  books  dealing  in  such  evidences,  but  they  are  not  much 
impressed  by  them.     Their  eyes  are  holden,  and  they  know 


THE  SHEPHERD  BESTORED :  EYES  OF  UNDERSTANDING  OPENED.    507 

not  Christ  coming  to  them  in  that  outward  way.  But  He 
reveals  Himself  to  them  in  another  manner.  By  hidden  dis- 
course with  their  spirits.  He  conveys  into  their  minds  a 
poweri^ul  sense  of  the  moral  grandeur  of  the  Christian  faith, 
making  them  feel  that,  true  or  not,  it  is  at  least  ^orOiy  to 
he  true.  Then  their  hearts,  begin  to  bum;  they  hope  that 
what  is  so  beautiful  may  turn  out  to  be  all  objectively  true ; 
the  question  of  the  external  evidences  assumes  a  new  interest 
to  their  minds ;  they  inquire,  they  read,  they  look ;  and,  lo, 
they  see  Jesus  revived,  a  true  historical  pei-son  for  them :  risen 
out  of  the  grave  of  doubt  to  live  for  evermore  the  sun  of  their 
souls,  more  precious  for  the  temporary  loss ;  coming 

**  AppareUed  in  more  precioos  habit, 
More  moving,  delicate,  and  fuU  of  life, 
Into  the  eye  and  prospect  of  their  soul," 

than  ever  He  did  before  they  doubted. 

From  these  remarks  on  the  order  of  the.  two  revelations 
made  by  Jesus  to  His  disciples, — of  Himself  to  the  eye  of  their 
body,  8uid  of  the  scriptural  doctrine  of  the  Messiah  to  the 
eye  of  their  mind, — we  pass  to  consider  the  question.  What 
did  the  latter  revelation  amount  to  ?  What  was  the  precise 
effect  of  those  expositions  of  Scripture  with  which  the  risen 
Christ  favoured  His  hearers  ?  Did  the  disciples  derive  there- 
from such  an  amoimt  of  light  as  to  supersede  the  necessity  of 
any  further  illumination  ?  Had  Jesus  Himself  done  the  work 
of  the  Spirit  of  truth,  whose  advent  He  had  promised  before  He 
suffered,  and  led  them  into  all  truth  ?  Certainly  not.  The 
opening  of  the  understanding  which  took  place  at  this  time, 
did  not  by  8Uiy  means  amount  to  a  full  spiritual  enlighten- 
ment in  Christian  doctrine.  The  disciples  did  not  yet  compre- 
hend the  moral  grounds  of  Christ's  sufferings  and  resurrection. 
Why  He  imderwent  these  Experiences  they  knew  not:  the 
words  "  ought "  and  "  behoved  "  meant  for  them  as  yet  nothing 
more  than  that,  according  to  Old  Testament  prophecies  rightly 
understood,  the  things  which  had  happened  might  and  should 
have  been  anticipated.  They  were  in  the  same  state  of  mind 
as  that  in  which  we  can  conceive  the  Jewish  Christians  to 
whom  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  was  addressed  to  have 
been,  after  perusing  the  contents  of  that  profound  writing. 


I 


508  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

These  Christians  were  ill  grounded  in  gospel  truth :  they  saw 
not  the  glory  of  the  gospel  dispensation,  nor  its  harmony  with 
that  which  went  before,  and  under  which  they  had  been  them- 
selves educated.  In  particular,  the  divine  dignity  of  the 
Author  of  the  Christian  faith  seemed  to  them  incompatible 
with  His  earthly  humiliation.  Accordingly,  the  writer  of 
the  epistle  sets  himself  to  prove  that  the  divinity,  the  tem- 
porary humiliation,  and  the  subsequent  glorification  of  the 
Christ  are  all  taught  in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  quot- 
ing these  liberally  for  that  purpose  in  the  early  chapters  of 
his  epistle.  He  does,  in  fact,  by  his  written  expositions  for 
his  readers,  what  Jesus  did  by  His  oral  expositions  for  His 
hearers.  And  what  shall  we  say  was  the  immediate  effect  of 
the  writer's  argument  on  the  minds  of  those  who  attentively 
perused  it?  This,  we  imagine,  that  the  crude  believer  on 
laying  down  the  book  would  be  constrained  to  admit :  "  "Well, 
he  is  right :  these  things  are  all  written  in  the  Scriptures  of 
the  Messiah;  and  therefore  no  one  of  them,  not  even  the 
humiliation  and  suffering  at  which  I  stumble,  can  be  a  reason 
for  rejecting  Jesus  as  the  Christ."  A  very  important  result, 
yet  a  very  elementary  one.  From  the  bare  concession  that 
the  real  life  of  Jesus  corresponded  to  the  ideal  life  of  the 
Messiah  as  portrayed  in  the  Old  Testament,  to  the  admiring, 
enthusiastic,  and  thoroughly  intelligent  appreciation  of  gospel 
truth  exhibited  by  the  writer  himself  in  every  page  of  his 
epistle,  what  a  vast  distance ! 

Not  less  was  the  distance  between  the  state  of  mind  of  the 
disciples  after  Jesus  had  expounded  to  them  the  things  in  the 
law,  and  the  prophets,  and  the  psalms  concerning  Himself, 
and  the  state  of  enlightenment  to  which  they  attained  as 
apostles  after  the  advent  of  the  Comforter.  Now  they  knew 
the  alphabet  merely  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ ;  then  they  had 
arrived  at  perfection,  and  were  thoroughly  initiated  into  the 
mystery  of  the  gospel.  Now  a  single  ray  of  light  was  let  into 
their  dark  minds ;  then  the  daylight  of  truth  poured  its  full 
flood  into  their  souls.  Or  we  may  express  the  difference  in 
terms  suggested  by  the  narrative  given  by  John  of  the  events 
connected  with  this  first  appearance  of  the  risen  Jesus  to  His 
disciples.     John  relates  that,  at  a  certain  stage  in  the  proceed- 


1^ 


THE  SHEPHERD  B£STOB£D:   EYES  OF  UNDERSTANDING  OPENED.    509 

ings,  Jesus  breathed  on  the  disciples,  and  said  unto  them, 
"  Eeceive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost"  We  are  not  to  understand 
that  they  then  and  there  received  the  Spirit  in  the  promised 
fulness.  The  breath  was  rather  but  a  sign  and  earnest  of  what 
was  to  come.  It  was  but  an  emblematic  renewal  of  the  pro- 
mise, and  a  first  instalment  of  its  fulfilment.  It  was  but  the 
little  cloud  like  a  man's  hand,  that  portended  a  plenteous  rain, 
or  the  first  gentle  puflf  of  wind  which  precedes  the  mighty 
gale.  Now  they  have  the  little  breath  of  the  Spirit's  influence, 
but  not  till  Pentecost  shall  they  feel  the  rushing  wind.  So 
great  is  the  difference  between  now  and  then :  between  the 
spiritual  enlightenment  of  the  disciples  on  the  first  Christian 
Sabbath  evening,  and  that  of  the  apostles  in  after  days. 

It  was  but  the  day  of  small  things  with  these  disciples  yet 
The  small  things,  however,  were  not  to  be  despised.  Nor 
were  they.  What  value  the  ten  set  on  the  light  they  had 
received  we  are  not  indeed  told,  but  we  may  safely  assume 
that  their  feelings  were  much  of  kin  to  those  of  the  two 
brethren  who  journeyed  towards  Emmaus.  Conversing  to- 
gether on  the  discourse  of  Jesus  after  His  departure,  they 
said  one  unto  another,  "Did  not  our  heart  bum  within  us 
while  He  talked  with  us  by  the  way,  and  while  He  opened 
to  us  the  Scriptures  ? "  The  light  they  had  got  might  be 
small,  but  it  was  new  light,  and  it  had  all  the  heart-kindling, 
thought-stirring  power  of  new  truth.  That  conversation  on 
the  road  formed  a  crisis  in  their  spiritual  history.  It  was 
the  dawn  of  the  gospel  day ;  it  was  the  little  spark  which 
kindles  a  great  fire ;  it  deposited  in  their  minds  a  thought 
which  was  to  form  the  germ  or  centre  of  a  new  system  of 
belief;  it  took  away  the  veil  which  had  been  upon  their 
faces  in  the  reading  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  was  thus  the 
first  step  in  a  process  which  was  to  issue  in  their  behold- 
ing with  open  face,  as  in  a  glass,  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  and 
in  their  being  changed  into  the  same  image,  from  glory  to 
glory,  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  Happy  the  man  who  has 
got  even  so  &?  as  these  two  disciples  at  this  time  ! 

Some  disconsolate  soul  may  say.  Would  that  happiness 
were  mine  !  For  the  comfort  of  such  a  forlorn  brother,  let  us 
note  the  circumstances  in  which  this  new  light  arose  for  the 


510  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

disciples.  Their  heaxts  were  set  a-b\iming  when  they  had 
become  very  dry  and  withered ;  hopeless,  sick,  and  life- weary, 
through  sorrow  and  disappointment  It  is  always  so :  the 
fuel  must  be  dry  that  the  spark  may  take  hold.  It  was 
when  the  people  of  Israel  complained,  "  Our  bones  are  dried 
and  our  hope  is  lost,  we  are  cut  off  for  our  parts,"  that  the 
word  went  forth :  "  Behold,  0  my  people,  I  will  open  your 
graves,  and  cause  you  to  come  up  out  of  your  graves,  and 
bring  you  into  the  land  of  Israel"  So  with  these  disciples  of 
Jesus.  It  was  when  every  particle  of  the  sap  of  hope  had 
been  bleached  out  of  them,  and  their  faith  had  been  reduced 
to  this,  "  We  trusted  that  it  had  been  He  which  should  have 
redeemed  Israel,"  that  their  hearts  were  set  burning  by  the 
MndliBg  power  of  a  new  truth.  So  it  has  been  in  many  an 
instance  since  then.  The  fire  of  hope  has  been  kindled  in  the 
heart,  never  to  be  extinguished,  just  at  the  moment  when  men 
were  settling  down  into  despair ;  faith  has  been  revived  when 
a  man  seemed  to  himself  to  be  an  infidel ;  the  light  of  truth 
has  arisen  to  minds  which  had  ceased  to  look  for  the  dawn ; 
the  comfort  of  salvation  has  returned  to  souls  which  had 
begun  to  think  that  God's  mercy  was  clean  gone  for  ever. 

There  is  nothing  strange  in  this.  The  truth  is,  the  heart 
needs  to  be  dried  by  trial  before  it  can  be  made  to  bum. 
Till  sorrow  comes,  human  hearts  won't  catch  the  divine  fire  ; 
there  is  too  much  of  this  world's  life-sap  in  them.  That  was 
what  made  the  disciples  so  slow  of  heart  to  believe  all  that 
the  prophets  had  spoken.  Their  worldly  ambition  prevented 
them  from  learning  the  spirituality  of  Christ's  kingdom,  and 
pride  made  them  blind  to  the  glory  of  the  cross.  Hence 
Jesus  justly  upbraided  them  for  their  unbelief  and  their 
mindless  stupidity.  Had  their  hearts  been  pure,  they  might 
have  known  beforehand  what  was  to  happea  As  it  was,  they 
comprehended  nothing  till  their  Lord's  death  had  blighted 
their  hope  and  blasted  their  ambition,  and  bitter  sorrow  had 
prepared  them  for  receiving  spiritual  instruction 


1^ 


THE  SHEPHERD  RESTORED  ;    THE  DOUBT  OF  THOMAS.       511 


Section  iil — The  Doubt  of  Thomas, 

John  xx.  24-29. 

"  Thomas,  one  of  the  twelve,  called  Didjnniis,  was  not  with 
them  when  Jesns  came  "  on  that  first  Christian  Sabbath  even- 
ing, and  showed  Himself  to  His  disciples.  One  hopes  he  had 
a  good  reason  for  his  absence ;  but  it  is  at  least  possible  that 
he  had  not  In  his  melancholy  humour,  he  may  simply  have 
been  indulging  himself  in  the  luxury  of  solitary  sadness,  just 
as  some  whose  Christ  is  dead  do  now  spend  their  Sabbaths  at 
home  or  in  rural  solitudes,  shunning  the  oflfensive  cheerfulness 
or  the  drowsy  dulness  of  social  worship.  Be  that  as  it  may, 
in  any  case  he  missed  a  good  sermon ;  the  only  one,  so  far 
as  we  know,  in  the  whole  course  of  our  Lord's  ministry,  in 
which  He  addressed  Himself  formally  to  the  task  of  expound- 
ing the  Messianic  doctrine  of  the  Old  Testament.  Had  he 
but  known  that  such  a  discourse  was  to  be  delivered  that 
night !  But  one  never  knows  when  the  good  things  will  come, 
and  the  only  way  to  make  sure  of  getting  them  is  to  be 
always  at  our  post 

The  same  melancholy  humour  which  probably  caused 
Thomas  to  be  an  absentee  on  the  occasion  of  Christ's  first 
meeting  with  His  disciples  after  He  rose  from  the  dead,  made 
him  also  sceptical  above  all  the  rest  concerning  the  tidings 
of  the  resurrection.  When  the  other  disciples  told  him  on 
his  return  that  they  had  just  seen  the  Lord,  he  replied  with 
vehemence :  ''  Except  I  shall  see  in  His  hands  the  print  of 
the  nails,  and  put  my  fingers  into  the  print  of  the  nails,  and 
thrust  my  hand  into  His  side,  I  will  not  believe."  He  was 
not  to  be  satisfied  with  the  testimony  of  his  brethren ;  he  must 
have  palpable  evidence  for  himself.  Not  that  he  doubted  their 
veracity ;  but  he  could  not  get  rid  of  the  suspicion,  that  what 
they  said  they  had  seen  was  but  a  mere  ghostly  appearance 
by  which  their  eyes  had  been  deceived. 

The  scepticism  of  Thomas  was,  we  think,  mainly  a  matter 
of  temperament,  and  had  little  in  common  with  the  doubt  of 
men  of  rationalistic  proclivities,  who  are  inveterately  incredu- 


512  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

Ions  respecting  the  supernatural,  and  stumble  at  everything 
savouring  of  the  miraculous.  It  has  been  customary  to  call 
Thomas  the  Eationalist  among  the  twelve,  and  it  has  even  been 
supposed  that  he  had  belonged  to  the  sect  of  the  Sadducees 
before  he  joined  the  society  of  Jesus.  On  mature  considera- 
tion, we  are  constrained  to  say  that  we  see  very  little  foun- 
dation for  such  a  view  of  this  disciple's  character,  while  we 
certainly  do  not  grudge  modem  doubters  any  comfort  they 
may  derive  from  it.  We  are  quite  well  aware  that  among 
the  sincere,  and  even  the  spiritually-minded,  there  are  men 
whose  minds  are  so  constituted  that  they  find  it  very  difficult 
to  believe  in  the  supernatural  and  the  miraculous :  so  difficult, 
that  it  is  a  question  whether,  if  they  had  been  in  Thomas'  place, 
the  freest  handling  and  the  minutest  inspection  of  the  wounds 
in  the  risen  Saviour's  body  would  have  availed  to  draw  forth 
from  them  an  expression  of  unhesitating  faith  in  the  reality 
of  His  resurrection.  Nor  do  we  see  any  reason  a  priori  for 
asserting  that  no  disciple  of  Jesus  cotdd  have  been  a  person  of 
such  a  cast  of  mind.  All  we  say  is,  there  is  no  evidence  that 
Thomas,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  was  a  man  of  this  stamp.  No- 
where in  the  Gospel  history  do  we  discover  any  unreadiness 
on  his  part  to  believe  in  the  supernatural  or  the  miraculous 
as  such.  We  do  not  find,  e.g.,  that  he  was  sceptical  about  the 
raising  of  Lazarus :  we  are  only  told  that,  when  Jesus  pro- 
posed to  visit  the  afflicted  family  in  Bethany,  he  regarded  the 
journey  as  fraught  with  danger  to  his  beloved  Master  and  to 
them  all,  and  said,  "Let  us  also  go,  that  we  may  die  with 
Him."  Then,  as  now,  he  showed  himself  not  so  much  the 
Eationalist  as  the  man  of  gloomy  temperament,  prone  to  look 
upon  the  dark  side  of  things ;  living  in  the  pensive  moon- 
light rather  than  in  the  cheerful  sunlight.  His  doubt  did  not 
spring  out  of  his  system  of  thought,  but  out  of  the  state  of  his 
feelings. 

Another  thing  we  must  say  here  concerning  the  doubt  of 
this  disciple.  It  did  not  proceed  from  unwillingness  to  be- 
lieve. It  was  the  doubt  of  a  sad  man,  whose  sadness  was 
due  to  this,  that  the  event  whereof  he  doubted  was  one  of 
which  he  would  most  gladly  be  assured.  Nothing  could  give 
Thomas  greater  delight  than  to  be  certified  that  his  Master  was 


THE  SHEPHEBD  RESTORED  :    THE  D0T7BT  OF  THOMAS.       513 

indeed  risen.  This  is  evident  from  the  joy  he  manifested 
when  he  was  at  length  satisfied.  "  My  Lord  and  my  God  I" 
that  is  not  the  exclamation  of  one  who  is  forced  reluctantly 
to  admit  a  fact  he  would  rather  deny.  It  is  common  for  men, 
who  never  had  any  doubts  themselves,  to  trace  all  doubt  to 
bad  motives,  and  denounce  it  indiscriminately  as  a  crima 
Now,  unquestionably,  too  many  doubt  from  bad  motives,  be- 
cause they  do  not  wish  and  cannot  afford  to  believe.  Many 
deny  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  because  it  would  be  to  them 
a  resurrection  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt.  But  this 
is  by  no  means  true  of  alL  Some  doubt  who  desire  to  believe ; 
nay,  their  doubt  is  due  to  their  excessive  anxiety  to  believe. 
They  are  so  eager  to  know  the  very  truth,  and  feel  so  keenly 
the  immense  importance  of  the  interests  at  stake,  that  they 
cannot  take  things  for  granted,  and  for  a  time  their  hand  so 
trembles,  that  they  cannot  seize  firm  hold  of  the  great  objects 
of  faith, — a  living  God ;  an  incarnate,  crucified,  risen  Saviour ; 
a  glorious  eternal  future.  Theirs  is  the  doubt  peculiar  to 
earnest,  thoughtful,  pure -hearted  men,  wide  as  the  poles 
asunder  from  the  doubt  of  the  frivolous,  the  worldly,  the 
vicious :  a  holy,  noble  doubt,  not  a  base  and  unholy ;  if  not 
to  be  praised  as  positively  meritorious,  still  less  to  be  harshly 
condemned  and  excluded  from  the  pale  of  Christian  sympathy, 
— a  doubt  which  at  worst  is  but  an  infirmity,  and  which  ever 
ends  in  strong,  unwavering  faith. 

That  Jesus  regarded  the  doubt  of  the  heavy-hearted  disciple 
as  of  this  sort,  we  infer  from  His  way  of  dealing  with  it 
Thomas  having  been  absent  on  the  occasion  of  His  first  appear- 
ing to  the  disciples,  the  risen  Lord  makes  a  second  appearance 
for  the  absent  one's  special  benefit,  and  offers  him  the  proof 
desiderated.  The  introductory  salutation  being  over.  He  turns 
Himself  at  once  to  the  doubter,  and  addresses  him  in  terms 
fitted  to  remind  him  of  his  own  statement  to  his  brethren, 
saying :  "  Reach  hither  thy  finger,  and  behold  my  hands ;  and 
reach  hither  thy  hand,  and  thrust  it  into  my  side :  and  be  not 
faithless,  but  believing."  There  may  be  somewhat  of  reproach 
here,  but  there  is  far  more  of  most  considerate  sympathy. 
Jesus  speaks  as  to  a  sincere  disciple,  whose  faith  is  weak,  not 
as  to  one  who  hath  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief.     When  demands 

2  K 


514  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

for  evidence  were  made  by  men  who  merely  wanted  an  excuse 
for  unbelief,  He  met  them  in  a  very  diflferent  manner.  "  A 
wicked  and  adulterous  generation,"  He  was  ^^ont  to  say  in  such 
a  case,  ''  seeketh  after  a  sign,  and  there  shall  no  sign  be  given 
unto  it  but  the  sign  of  the  prophet  Jonas." 

Having  ascertained  the  character  of  Thomas'  doubt,  let  us 
now  look  at  his  faith. 

The  melancholy  disciple's  doubts  were  soon  removed.  But 
how  ?  Did  Thomas  avail  himself  of  the  oflFered  facilities  for 
ascertaining  the  reality  of  his  Lord's  resurrection  ?  Did  he 
actually  put  his  fingers  and  hand  into  the  nail  and  spear 
wounds  ?  Opinions  differ  on  this  point,  but  we  think  the 
probability  is  on  the  side  of  those  who  maintain  the  negative. 
Several  things  incline  us  to  this  view.  First,  the  narrative  seems 
to  leave  no  room  for  the  process  of  investigation.  Thomas 
answers  the  proposal  of  Jesus  by  what  appears  to  be  an  im- 
mediate profession  of  faith.  Then  the  form  in  which  that 
profession  is  made  is  not  such  as  we  should  expect  the  result 
of  a  deliberate  inquiry  to  assume.  "  My  Lord  and  my  Grod"  is 
the  warm,  passionate  language  of  a  man  who  has  undergone 
some  sudden  change  of  feeling,  rather  than  of  one  who  has 
just  concluded  a  scientific  experiment.  Further,  we  observe 
there  is  no  allusion  to  such  a  process  in  the  remark  made  by 
Jesus  concerning  the  faith  of  Thomas.  The  disciple  is  repre- 
sented  a^  beUeving  because  he  has  seen  the  wounds  shown, 
not  because  he  has  handled  them.  Finally,  the  idea  of  the 
process  proposed  being  actually  gone  through  is  inconsistent 
with  the  character  of  the  man  to  whom  the  proposal  was 
made.  Thomas  was  not  one  of  your  calm,  cold-blooded  men, 
who  conduct  inquiries  into  truth  with  the  passionless  impar- 
tiality of  a  judge,  and  who  would  have  examined  the  wounds 
in  the  risen  Saviour's  body  with  all  the  coolness  with  which 
anatomists  dissect  dead  carcases.  He  was  a  man  of  pas- 
sionate, poetic  temperament,  vehement  alike  in  his  belief  and 
in  his  unbelief,  and  moved  to  faith  or  doubt  by  the  feelings  of 
his  heart  rather  than  by  the  reasonings  of  his  intellect. 

The  truth,  we  imagine,  about  Thomas  was  something  like 
this.  When,  eight  days  before,  he  made  that  threat  to  his 
brother  disciples,  he  did  not  deliberately  mean  all  he  said. 


THE  SHEPHERD  RESTORED  :   THE  DOUBT  OF  THOMAS.       515 

It  was  the  whimsical  utterance  of  a  melancholy  man,  who  was 
in  the  humour  to  be  as  disconsolate  and  miserable  as  possible. 
"  Jesus  risen !  the  thing  is  impossible,  and  there's  an  end  of  it 
I  won't  believe  except  I  do  so  and  so.  I  don't  know  if  I  shall 
believe  when  all's  done."  But  eight  days  have  gone  by,  and 
lo,  there  is  Jesus  in  the  midst  of  them,  visible  to  the  disciple 
who  was  absent  on  the  former  occasion  as  well  as  to  the 
rest.  Will  Thomas  still  insist  on  applying  his  rigorous  test  ? 
No,  no !  His  doubts  vanish  at  the  very  sight  of  Jesus,  like 
morning  mists  at  sunrise.  Even  before  the  Eisen  One  has  laid 
bare  His  wounds,  and  uttered  those  half-reproachful  yet  kind, 
sympathetic  words,  which  evince  intimate  knowledge  of  all 
that  has  been  passing  through  His  doubting  disciple's  mind, 
Thomas  is  virtually  a  believer;  and  after  he  has  seen  the 
ugly  wounds  and  heard  the  generous  words,  he  is  ashamed  of 
his  rash,  reckless  speech  to  his  brethren,  and  overcome  with  joy 
and  with  tears,  exclaims,  "  My  Lord  and  my  God !" 

It  was  a  noble  confession  of  faith ;  the  most  advanced,  in 
fact,  ever  made  by  any  of  the  twelve  during  the  time  they 
were  with  Jesus.  The  last  is  first;  the  greatest  doubter 
attains  to  the  fullest  and  firmest  belief.  So  has  it  often 
happened  in  the  history  of  the  church.  Baxter  records  it  as 
his  experience,  that  nothing  is  so  firmly  believed  as  that  which 
hath  once  been  doubted.  Many  Thomases  have  said,  or  could 
say,  the  same  thing  of  themselves.  The  doubters  have  even- 
tually become  the  soundest  and  even  the  warmest  believers. 
Doubt  in  itself  is  a  cold  thing,  and,  as  in  the  case  of  Thomas, 
it  often  utters  harsh  and  heartless  sayings.  No  wonder ;  for 
when  the  mind  is  in  doubt  the  soul  is  in  darkness,  and  during 
the  chiUy  night  the  heart  becomegf  frozen.  But  when  the 
daylight  of  faith  comes  the  frost  melts,  and  hearts  which  once 
seemed  hard  and  stony  show  themselves  capable  of  generous 
enthusiasm  and  ardent  devotion. 

Socinians,  whose  system  is  utterly  overthrown  by  Thomas' 
confession  naturally  interpreted,  tell  us  that  the  words  "  My 
Lord  and  my  God"  do  not  refer  to  Jesus  at  all,  but  to  the 
Deity  in  heaven.  They  are  merely  an  expression  of  astonish- 
ment on  the  part  of  the  disciple,  on  finding  that  what  he  had 
doubted  was  really  come  to  pass.     He  lifts  up  his  eyes  and 


516  THE  TRAINIHG  OF  THB  TWELVE. 

his  hands  to  heaven,  as  it  were,  and  exclaims :  My  Lord  and 
my  God !  it  is  a  fact :  The  crucified  Jesus  is  restored  to  life 
again.  This  interpretation  is  utterly  desperate.  It  disregards 
the  statement  of  the  text,  that  Thomas,  in  uttering  these  words, 
was  answering  and  speaking  to  Jesus,  and  it  makes  a  man 
bursting  with  emotion  speak  frigidly ;  for  while  the  one  ex- 
pression "  My  God  "  might  have  been  an  appropriate  utterance 
of  astonishment,  the  two  phrases,  "  My  Lord  and  my  God," 
are  for  that  purpose  weak  and  imnaturaL 

We  have  here,  therefore,  no  mere  expression  of  surprise,  but 
a  profession  of  faith  most  appropriate  to  the  man  and  the  cir- 
cumstances; as  pregnant  with  meaning  as  it  is  pithy  and 
forcible.  Thomas  declares  at  once  his  acceptance  of  a  mira- 
culous fact,  and  his  belief  in  a  momentous  doctrine.  In  the 
first  part  of  his  address  to  Jesus  he  recognises  that  He  who 
was  dead  is  alive  :  My  Lord,  my  beloved  Master !  it  is  even 
He ;  the  very  same  person  with  whom  we  enjoyed  such  blessed 
fellowship  before  He  was  crucified.  In  the  second  part  of 
his  address  he  acknowledges  Christ's  divinity,  if  not  for  the 
first  time,  at  least  with  an  intelligence  and  an  emphasis  alto- 
gether new.  From  the  fact  he  rises  to  the  doctrine :  My  Lord 
risen,  yea,  and  therefore  my  God ;  for  He  is  divine  over  whom 
death  hath  no  power.  And  the  doctrine  in  turn  helps  to  give 
to  the  fact  of  the  resurrection  additional  certainty;  for  if 
Christ  be  God,  death  covld  have  no  power  over  Him,  and  His 
resuiTection  was  a  matter  of  course.  Thomas  having  reached 
the  sublime  affirmation,  "  My  God,"  has  made  the  transition 
from  the  low  platform  of  faith  on  which  he  stood  when  he 
demanded  sensible  evidence,  to  the  higher,  on  which  it  is  felt 
that  such  evidence  is  superfluous. 

We  have  now  to  notice,  in  the  last  place,  the  remark  made 
by  the  Lord  concerning  the  faith  just  professed  by  His  dis- 
ciple. "Jesus  saith  unto  him,  Thomas,  because  thou  hast 
seen  me,  thou  hast  believed :  blessed  are  they  that  have  not 
seen,  and  yet  have  believed." 

This  reflection  on  the  blessedness  of  those  who  believe 
without  seeing,  though  expressed  in  the  past  tense,  really 
concerned  the  future.  The  case  supposed  by  Jesus  was  to  be 
the  case  of  all  believers  after  the  apostolic  age.     Since  then 


THE  SHEPHERD  RESTORED  :    THE  DOUBT  OP  THOMAS.       517 

no  one  has  seen,  and  no  one  can  believe  because  he  has  seen, 
as  the  apostles  saw.  They  saw,  that  we  might  be  able  to  do 
without  seeing,  believing  on  their  testimony. 

But  what  does  Jesus  mean  by  pronouncing  a  beatitude  on 
those  who  see  not,  yet  believe  ? 

He  does  not  mean  to  commend  those  who  believe  without 
any  inquiry.  It  is  one  thing  to  believe  without  seeing, 
another  thing  to  believe  without  consideration.  To  believe 
without  seeing  is  to  be  capable  of  being  satisfied  with  some- 
thing less  than  absolute  demonstration,  or  to  have  such  an 
inward  illumination  as  renders  us  to  a  certain  extent  inde-> 
pendent  of  external  evidence.  Such  a  faculty  of  faith  is 
most  needful ;  for  if  faith  were  possible  only  to  those  who 
see,  belief  in  Christianity  could  not  extend  beyond  the  apos- 
tolic age.  But  to  believe  without  consideration  is  a  different 
matter  altogether.  It  is  simply  not  to  care  whether  the  thing 
believed  be  true  or  false.  There  is  no  merit  in  doing  that. 
Such  faith  has  its  origin  in  what  is  base  in  men,  in  their 
ignorance,  sloth,  and  spiritual  indifference ;  and  it  can  bring 
no  blessing  to  its  possessors.  Be  the  truths  credited  ever  so 
high,  holy,  blessed,  what  good  can  a  faith  do  which  receives 
them  as  matters  of  course  without  inquiry,  or  without  even 
so  much  as  knowing  what  the  truths  believed  mean  ? 

The  Lord  Jesus,  then,  does  not  here  bestow  a  benediction 
on  credulity. 

As  little  does  He  mean  to  say  that  all  the  felicity  falls  to 
the  lot  of  those  who  have  never,  like  Thomas,  doubted.  The 
fact  is  not  so.  Those  who  believe  with  facility  do  certainly 
enjoy  a  blessedness  all  their  own.  They  escape  the  torment 
of  uncertainty,  and  the  current  of  their  spiritual  life  flows  on 
very  smoothly.  But  the  men  who  have  doubted,  and  now  at 
length  believe,  have  also  their  peculiar  joys,  with  which  no 
stranger  can  intermeddle.  Theirs  is  the  joy  experienced  when 
that  which  was  dead  is  alive  again,  and  that  which  was  lost 
is  found.  Theirs  is  the  rapture  of  Thomas  when  he  exclaimed, 
with  reference  to  a  Saviour  thought  to  be  gone  for  ever,  "  My 
Lord  and  my  God."  Theirs  is  the  bliss  of  the  man  who, 
having  dived  into  a  deep,  deep  sea,  brings  up  a  pearl  of  very 
great  price.    Theirs  is  the  comfort  of  having  their  very  bygone 


< 


518  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

doubts  made  available  for  the  furtherance  of  their  faith,  every 
doubt  becoming  a  stone  in  the  hidden  foundation  on  which 
the  superstructure  of  their  creed  is  built,  the  perturbations  of 
faith  being  converted  into  confirmations,  just  as  the  pertur- 
bations in  the  planetary  motions,  at  first  supposed  to  throw 
doubt  on  Newton's  theory  of  gravitation,  were  converted  by 
more  searching  inquiry  into  the  strongest  proof  of  its  truth. 

What,  then,  does  the  Lord  Jesus  mean  by  these  words? 
Simply  this.  He  would  have  those  who  must  believe  without 
seeing,  understand  that  they  have  no  cause  to  envy  those  who 
had  an  opportunity  of  seeing,  and  who  believed  only  after 
they  saw.  We,  who  live  so  far  from  the  events,  are  very  apt 
to  imagine  that  we  are  placed  at  a  great  disadvantage  as 
compared  with  the  disciples  of  Jesus.  So  in  some  respects 
we  are,  and  especially  in  this,  that  faith  is  more  difl&cult  for 
us  than  for  them.  But  then  we  must  not  forget  that^  in 
proportion  as  faith  is  difficult,  it  is  meritorious,  and  precious 
to  the  heart.  It  is  a  higher  attainment  to  be  able  to  believe 
without  seeing,  than  to  believe  because  we  have  seen ;  and  if 
it  cost  an  efifort,  the  trial  of  faith  but  enhances  its  valua 
We  must  remember,  further,  that  we  never  reach  the  full 
blessedness  of  faith  till  what  we  believe  shines  in  the  light  of 
its  own  self-evidence.  Think  you  the  disciples  were  happy 
men  because  they  had  seen  their  risen  Lord  and  believed  ? 
They  were  far  happier  when  they  had  attained  to  such  clear 
insight  into  the  whole  mystery  of  redemption,  that  proof  of 
this  or  that  particular  fact  or  doctrine  was  felt  to  be  quite 
unnecessary. 

To  that  felicity  Jesus  wished  His  doubting  disciple  to 
aspire ;  and  by  contrasting  his  case  with  that  of  those  who 
believe  without  seeing.  He  gives  us  to  know  that  it  is  attain- 
able for  us  also.  We,  too,  may  attain  the  blessedness  of  a 
faith  raised  above  all  doubt  by  its  own  clear  insight  into 
divine  truth.  If  we  are  faithful,  we  may  rise  to  this  £rom 
very  humble  things.  We  may  begin,  in  our  weakness,  with 
being  Thomases,  clinging  eagerly  to  every  spar  of  external 
evidence  to  save  ourselves  from  drowning,  and  end  with  a 
faith  amounting  almost  to  sight,  rejoicing  in  Jesus  as  our  Lord 
and  God,  with  a  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory. . 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

THE  UNDER-SHEPHERDS  ADMONISHED. 

Section  l — Pastoral  Duty, 

John  xxi.  16-17. 

"  T  GO  a-fishing,"  said  Simon  to  his  companions^  some  time 
JL  after  they  and  he  had  returned  from  Jerusalem  to  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  Galilean  lake.  "  We  also  go  with 
thee/'  replied  Thomas  and  Nathanael,  and  James  and  John, 
and  two  others  unnamed,  making  with  Peter  seven,  probably 
all  of  the  eleven  who  were  fishennen  by  trade.  One  and 
all  went  on  that  fishing  expedition  con  amort.  It  was  an 
expedition,  we  presume,  in  the  first  place,  in  quest  of  food, 
but  it  was  something  more.  It  was  a  return  to  dear  old 
ways,  amid  familiar  scenes,  which  called  up  pleasing  remi- 
niscences of  bygone  times.  It  was  a  recreation  and  a  solace, 
most  welcome  and  most  needful  to  men  who  had  passed 
through  very  painful  and  exciting  experiences ;  a  holiday  for 
men  fatigued  by  sorrow,  and  surprise,  and  watching.  Every 
student  with  overtasked  brain,  every  artisan  with  over- 
strained sinews,  may  conceive  the  abandon  with  which  those 
seven  disciples  threw  themselves  into  their  boats,  and  sailed 
out  into  the  depths  of  the  Sea  of  Tiberias  to  ply  their  old 
crafL 

Out  on  the  waters  that  night,  what  were  these  men's 
thoughts  ?  From  the  significant  allusion  made  by  Jesus  to 
Peter's  youth  in  the  colloquy  of  next  morning,  we  guess  they 
were  something  like  the  following : — "  After  all,  were  it  not 
better  to  be  simple  fiishermen  than  to  be  apostles  of  the  Chris- 
tian religion  ?  What  have  we  got  by  following  Jesus  ?  Cer- 
tainly not  what  we  expected.     And  have  we  any  reason  to 


520  THE  TRAINING  OP  THE  TWELVE. 

expect  better  things  in  the  future  ?  Our  Master  has  told  us 
that  our  future  lot  will  be  very  much  like  His  own — a  life  of 
sorrow,  ending  probably  in  martyrdom.  But  here,  in  our 
native  province  of  Galilee,  pursuing  our  old  calling,  we  might 
think,  believe,  act  as  we  pleased,  shielded  by  obscurity  firom 
all  danger.  Then  how  delightfully  free  and  independent  this 
rustic  life  by  the  shores  of  the  lake !  In  former  days,  ere  we 
left  our  nets  and  followed  Jesus,  we  girded  ourselves  with  our 
fishermen's  coats,  and  walked  whither  we  would.  When  we 
shall  have  become  apostles,  all  that  will  be  at  an  end.  We 
shall  be  burdened  with  a  heavy  load  of  responsibility ;  obliged 
continually  to  think  of  others,  and  not  to  please  ourselves ; 
liable  to  have  our  personal  liberty  taken  away,  yea,  even  our 
very  life." 

In  putting  such  words  into  the  mouths  of  the  disciples,  we 
do  not  violate  probability;  for  such  feelings  as  the  words 
express  are  both  natural  and  common  in  view  of  grave  respon- 
sibilities and  perib  about  to  be  incurred.  Perhaps  no  one 
ever  put  his  hand  to  the  plough  of  an  arduous  enterprise, 
without  indulging  for  at  least  a  brief  space  in  such  a  looking 
back.     It  is  an  infirmity  which  easily  besets  human  nature. 

Yet,  natural  as  it  comes  to  men  to  look  back,  it  is  not  wisa 
Begretful  thoughts  of  the  past  are  for  the  most  part  delusive : 
they  were  so  certainly  in  the  case  of  the  disciples.  If  the 
simple  life  they  left  behind  them  was  so  very  happy,  why  did 
they  leave  it  ?  Why  so  prompt  to  forsake  their  nets  and  their 
boats,  and  to  follow  after  Jesus  ?  Ah,  fishing  in  the  blue 
waters  of  the  Sea  of  GalUee  did  not  satisfy  the  whole  man. 
Life  is  more  than  meat,  and  the  kingdom  of  God  is  man's 
chief  end.  Besides,  the  fisherman's  life  has  its  drawbacks, 
and  is  by  no  means  so  romantic  as  it  seems  at  the  distance  of 
years.  You  may  sometimes  go  out  with  your  nets,  and  toil  all 
night,  and  catch  nothing. 

This  was  what  actually  happened  on  the  present  occasion. 
"  That  night  they  caught  nothing."  ^  The  circumstance  pro- 
bably helped  to  break  the  spell  of  romance,  and  to  waken  the 
seven  disciples  out  of  a  fond  dream.  Be  that  as  it  may,  there 
was  One  who  knew  all  their  thoughts,  and  who  would  see  to 

^  John  xzi.  3. 


THE  UNDEE-SHBPHERDS  ADMONISHED:   PASTORAL  DUTY.      521 

it  that  they  did  not  indulge  long  in  the  luxury  of  reactionar}' 
feeling.  "  When  the  morning  was  now  come,  Jesus  stood  on 
the  shore."  ^  He  is  come  to  show  Himself  for  the  third  time' 
to  His  disciples,  not,  as  before,  to  convince  them  that  He  is 
risen,  but  to  induce  them  to  dedicate  their  whole  minds  and 
hearts  to  their  future  vocation  as  fishers  of  men,  and  as  under- 
shepherds  of  the  flock,  preparatory  to  His  own  departure  from 
the  world.  B^s  whole  conduct  on  this  occasion  is  diiected 
to  that  object.  First,  He  gives  them  directions  for  catching  a 
great  haul  of  fish,  to  remind  them  of  their  former  call  to  be 
His  apostles,  and  to  be  an  encouraging  sign  or  symbol  of  their 
success  in  their  apostolic  work.  Then  He  invites  them  to 
dine  on  fish  which  He  had  procured,'  roasted  on  a  fire  of  His 
own  kindling  on  the  shore,  to  cure  them  of  earthly  care,  and 
to  assure  them  that,  if  they  seek  to  serve  the  kingdom  with 
undivided  heart,  all  their  wants  will  be  attended  to.  Finally, 
when  the  morning  meal  is  over.  He  enters  into  conversation, 
in  the  hearing  of  all,  with  the  disciple  who  had  been  the 
leader  in  the  night  adventure  on  the  lake,  and  addresses  him 
in  a  style  fitted  to  call  forth  all  his  latent  enthusiasm,  and 
intended  to  have  a  similar  effect  on  the  minds  of  all  present. 
On  the  surface,  the  words  spoken  by  Jesus  to  Peter  seem 
to  concern  that  disciple  alone ;  and  the  object  aimed  at  appears 
to  be  to  restore  him  to  a  position  as  an  apostle,  which  he 
might  not  unnaturally  think  he  had  forfeited  by  his  conduct 
in  the  high  priest's  palace.  This,  accordingly,  is  the  view  com- 
monly taken  of  this  impressive  scene  on  the  shore  of  the  lake. 
And  whether  we  agree  with  that  view  or  not,  we  must  admit 
that,  for  some  reason  or  other,  the  Lord  Jesus  wished  to  recall 
to  Peter*s  remembrance  his  recent  shortcomings.  Traces  of 
allusion  to  past  incidents  in  the  disciple's  history  during  the 
late  crisis  are  unmistakeable.  Even  the  time  selected  for  the 
conversation  is  significant.  It  was  when  they  had  dined  that 
Jesus  asked  Peter  if  he  loved  Him ;  it  was  after  they  had 
supped  Jesus  gave  His  disciples  His  new  commandment  of 
love,  and  that  Peter  made  his  vehement  protestation  of  devo- 

^  John  xxi.  4.  '  The  sixth  appearance  since  He  was  risen. 

'  When  the  disciples  landed,  they  saw  the  fire  and  fish  already  laid  on  it,  and 
bread  set  near  by. 


522  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

tion  to  his  Master's  cause  and  person.  The  name  by  which 
the  risen  Lord  addressed  His  disciple — not  Peter,  but  Simon 
son  of  Jonas — ^was  fitted  to  remind  hihi  of  his  weakness,  and 
of  I  that  other  occasion  on  which,  calling  him  by  the  same 
name,  Jesus  warned  him  that  Satan  was  about  to  sift  him  as 
wheat.  The  thrice-repeated  question,  "  Lovest  thou  me  ?  '* 
could  not  fail  padnfully  to  remind  Peter  of  his  threefold  denial, 
and  so  to  renew  his  grief  The  form  in  which  the  question 
was  first  put — "  Lovest  thou  me  more  than  these  ?  " — contains 
a  manifest  allusion  to  Peter^s  declaration, ''  Though  all  shall 
be  offended  because  of  Thee,  yet  will  I  never  be  offended." 
The  injunction,  "  Feed  my  sheep,"  points  back  to  the  prophetic 
announcement  made  by  Jesus  on  the  way  to  the  Mount  of 
Olives,  "  All  ye  shall  be  offended  because  of  me  this  night ; 
for  it  is  written,  I  will  smite  the  Shepherd,  and  the  sheep  of 
the  flock  shall  be  scattered  abroad,"  and  means :  Suffer  not 
the  sheep  to  be  scattered,  as  ye  were  for  a  season  scattered 
yourselves.  The  injunction,  " Feed  my  lamis"  associated  with 
the  first  question,  "  Lovest  thou  me  more  than  these  ? "  makes 
us  think  of  the  charge,  "  When  thou  art  converted,  strengthen 
thy  brethren;"  the  idea  suggested  in  both  cases  being  the 
same,  viz.  that  the  man  who  has  fallen  most  deeply,  and 
learned  most  thoroughly  his  own  weakness,  is,  or  ought  to  be, 
best  qualified  for  strengthening  the  weak — ^for  feeding  the 
lambs. 

Notwithstanding  all  these  allusions  to  Peter*s  fall,  we  are 
unable  to  acquiesce  in  the  view,  that  the  scene  here  recorded 
signified  the  formal  restoration  of  the  erring  disciple  to  his 
position  as  an  apostle.  We  do  not  deny  that,  after  what  had 
taken  place,  that  disciple  needed  restoration  for  his  own  comfort 
and  peace  of  mind.  But  our  dif&culty  is  this :  Had  he  not 
been  restored  already  ?  What  was  the  meaning  of  that  private 
meeting  between  him  and  Jesus,  and  what  its  necessary  result  ? 
Who  can  doubt,  that  after  that  meeting  the  disciple's  mind 
was  at  ease,  and  that  thereafter  he  was  at  peace,  both  with 
himself  and  with  his  Master  ?  Or  if  evidence  is  wanted  of 
the  fact,  look  at  Peter's  behaviour  on  recognising  Jesus  from 
the  boat,  as  He  stood  on  the  shore  in  the  grey  morning,  casting 
himself  as  he  was  into  the  sea,  in  his  haste  to  get  near  his 


THE  UNDER-SHEPHEBDS  ADMONISHED  :   PASTORAL  DUTT.      523 

beloved  Lord.  Was  that  the  behaviour  of  a  man  afflicted  with 
a  guilty  conscience  ?  But  it  may  be  replied,  there  was  still 
need  for  a  formal  public  restoration,  the  scandal  caused  by 
Peter's  sin  being  public.  This  we  doubt ;  but  even  granting 
it,  what  then  ?  Why  did  the  restoration  not  take  place  sooner, 
at  the  first  or  second  meeting  in  Jerusalem  ?  Then,  does  the 
scene  by  the  shores  of  the  lake  really  look  like  a  formal  trans- 
action ?  Can  we  regard  that  casual,  easy,  familiar  meeting  and 
colloquy  after  breakfast  with  two-thirds  of  the  disciples  as  an 
ecclesiastical  diet,  for  the  solemn  purpose  of  restoring  a  fallen 
brother  to  church  fellowship  and  standing  ?  The  idea  is  too 
frigid  and  pedantic  to  be  seriously  entertained.  Then  one  more 
objection  to  this  theory  remains  to  be  stated,  viz.  that  it  fails 
to  give  unity  to  the  various  parts  of  the  scene.  It  may  ex- 
plain the  questioning  to  which  Jesus  subjected  Peter ;  but  it 
does  not  explain  the  prophetic  reference  to  his  future  history 
with  which  He  followed  it  up.  Between  "  I  allow  you,  not- 
withstanding past  misdemeanours,  to  be  an  apostle,"  and  ''  I 
forewarn  you,  that  in  that  capacity  you  shall  not  have  the 
freedom  of  action  in  which  you  rejoiced  in  former  dajrs,"  there 
is  no  connection  traceable.  Peter's  fall  did  not  suggest  such 
a  turn  of  thought ;  for  it  sprang  not  from  the  love  of  jfreedom, 
but  from  the  fear  of  man. 

Not  the  restoration  of  Peter  to  a  forfeited  position,  but  his 
recall  to  a  more  solenm  sense  of  his  high  vocation,  do  we  find 
in  this  scene.  Not  "  I  allow  you,"  but  "  I  urge  you,"  seems 
to  us  to  be  the  burthen  of  Christ's  words  to  this  disciple,  and 
through  him  to  all  his  brethren.  By  all  considerations  he 
would  move  them  to  address  themselves  heart  and  soul  to  their 
apostolic  work,  and  let  boats,  and  nets,  and  everything  else 
alone  for  ever.  "  By  the  memory  of  thine  own  weakness," 
He  would  say  to  Simon  for  that  end ;  "  by  my  forgiving  love, 
and  thy  gratitude  for  it ;  by  the  need  of  brother  disciples, 
which  thine  own  past  frailty  may  teach  thee  to  understand 
and  compassionate ;  by  the  ardent  attachment  which  I  know 
you  cherish  towards  myself :  by  these  and  all  kindred  con- 
siderations, I  charge  thee,  on  the  eve  of  my  departure,  be  a 
hero,  play  the  man,  be  strong  for  others,  not  for  thyself,  '  feed 
the  flock  of  6od^  taking  the  oversight  thereof^  not  by  con- 


524  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

straint,  but  willingly/  Shrink  not  from  responsibility,  covet 
not  ease,  bend  thy  neck  to  the  yoke,  and  let  love  make  it 
light  Sweet  is  liberty  to  thy  human  heart ;  but  patient, 
burden-bearing  love,  though  less  pleasant,  is  far  more  noble." 

Such  being  the  message  which  Jesus  meant  for  all  present, 
Peter  was  most  appropriately  selected  as  the  medium  for  con- 
veying it.  He  was  an  excellent  text  on  which  to  preach  a 
sermon  on  self-consecration.  His  character  and  conduct  sup- 
plied all  the  poetry,  and  argument,  and  illustration  necessary 
to  give  pathos  and  point  to  the  theme.  How  dear  to  his 
impetuous,  passionate  spirit,  unrestrained  freedom  !  And  what 
heart  is  not  touched  by  the  thought  of  such  a  man  schooling 
his  high,  mettlesome  soul  into  patience  and  submission  ?  The 
young,  frolicsome,  bounding  fisherman,  girding  on  his  coat, 
and  going  hither  and  thither  at  his  own  sweet  will ;  the  aged 
saintly  apostle,  meek  as  a  lamb,  stretching  forth  his  arms  to 
be  bound  for  the  martyr^s  doom :  what  a  moving  contrast  ! 
Had  that  passionate  man,  in  some  senses  the  strongest  cha- 
racter among  the  twelve,  been  in  other  senses  the  weakest, 
then  who  could  better  illustrate  men's  need  of  shepherding  ? 
Had  he  learnt  his  own  weakness,  and  through  his  knowledge 
thereof  grown  strong  ?  Then  how  better  state  the  general 
duty  of  the  strong  to  help  the  weak,  than  by  assigning  to  this 
particular  disciple  the  special  duty  of  taking  care  of  the 
weakest  ?  To  say  to  Peter,  '*  Feed  my  lambs,"  was  to  say  to 
all  the  apostles,  "  Feed  my  sheep." 

In  requiring  Peter  to  show  his  love,  by  performing  the  part 
of  shepherd  to  the  little  flock  of  believers,  Jesus  adapted  His 
demand  to  the  spiritual  capacity  of  the  disciple.  Love  to  the 
Saviour  does  not  necessarily  take  the  form  of  feeding  the  sheep ; 
in  immature  and  inexperienced  disciples,  it  rather  takes  the 
form  of  being  sheep.  It  is  only  after  the  weak  have  become 
strong,  and  established  in  grace,  that  they  ought  to  become 
shepherds,  charging  themselves  with  the  care  of  others.  In 
laying  on  Peter  and  his  brethren  pastoral  duties,  therefore, 
Jesus  virtually  announces  that  they  have  now  passed,  or  are 
about  to  pass,  out  of  the  category  of  the  weak  into  the  cate- 
gory of  the  strong.  "  Hitherto,"  He  virtually  says  to  them, 
"  ye  have  been  as  sheep,  needing  to  be  guided,  watched  over. 


THE  UNDER-SHEPHERDS  ADMONISHED  :    PASTORAL  DUTY.      525 

and  defended  by  the  wisdom  and  courage  of  another.  Now, 
however,  the  time  is  arrived  when  ye  must  become  shepherds, 
able  and  willing  to  do  for  the  weak  what  I  have  done  for  you. 
Hitherto  ye  have  left  me  to  care  for  you ;  henceforth  you 
must  accustom  yourselves  to  be  looked  to  as  guardians,  even 
as  I  have  been  by  you.  Hitherto  ye  have  been  as  children 
under  me,  your  parent ;  henceforth  ye  must  yourselves  be 
parents,  taking  charge  of  the  children,  ffitherto  ye  have  been 
as  raw  recruits,  liable  to  panic,  and  fleeing  from  danger ;  hence- 
forth ye  must  be  captains  superior  to  fear,  and  by  your  calm 
determination  inspire  the  soldiers  of  the  cross  with  heroic 
daring."  In  short,  Jesus  here  in  effect  announces  to  Peter 
and  to  the  rest,  that  they  are  now  to  make  the  transition  from 
boyhood  to  manhood,  from  pupillage  to  self-government,  from 
a  position  of  dependence  and  exemption  from  care  to  one  of 
influence,  authority,  and  responsibility,  as  leaders  and  com- 
manders in  the  Christian  community,  doing  the  work  for  which 
they  have  been  so  long  under  training.  Such  a  transition 
and  transformation  did  accordingly  take  place  shortly  after  in 
the  history  of  the  disciples.  They  assumed  the  position  of 
Christ's  deputies  or  substitutes  after  His  ascension,  Peter  being 
the  leading  or  representative  man,  though  not  the  Pope,  in  the 
infant  church ;  and  their  character  was  altered  to  fit  them  for 
their  high  functions.  The  timid  disciples  became  bold  apostles. 
Peter,  who  weakly  denied  the  Lord  in  the  judgment-hall, 
heroically  confessed  Him  before  the  Sanhedrim.  The  ignorant 
and  stupid  disciples,  who  had  been  continually  misunder- 
standing their  Master's  words,  became  filled  with  the  Spirit 
of  wisdom  and  understanding,  so  that  men  listened  to  their 
words  as  they  had  been  wont  to  listen  to  the  words  of  Jesus 
Himself 

We  have  said  that  love  to  Christ  does  not  impose  on  all 
His  disciples  the  duty  of  a  shepherd ;  showing  itself  rather 
in  by  far  the  larger  number  in  simply  hearing  the  shepherd's 
voice  and  following  him,  and  generally  in  a  willingness  to  be 
guided  by  those  who  are  wiser  than  themselves.  We  must 
add,  that  all  who  are  animated  by  the  spirit  of  love  to  the 
Sedeemer  will  be  either  shepherds  or  sheep,  actively  useful 
in  caring  for  the  souls  of  others,  or  thankfully  using  the  pro- 


I 


526  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

• 

vision  made  for  the  caxe  of  their  own  souls.  Too  many,  however, 
come  under  neither  designation.     Some  are  sheep  indeed,  but 
sheep  going  astray:  others  are  neither  sheep  nor  shepherds, 
being  self-reliant,  yet  indisposed  to  be  helpful ;  too  self-willed 
to  be  led,  yet  disinclined  to  make  their  strength  and  experi- 
ence available  for  their  brethren,  utilizing  all  their  talents  for 
the  exclusive  service  of  their  own  private  interests.       Such 
men  are  to  be  found  "in  Church  and  State,  sedulously  holding 
back  from  office  and  responsibility,  and  severely  criticising 
those  who  have  come  under  the  yoke ;  animadverting  on  their 
timidity  and  bondage,  as  unbroken  colts,  if  they  could  speak, 
might  animadvert  on  the  tameness  of  horses  in  harness ;  the 
bits  and  bridles  that  form  a  part  of  church  harness,  in  the 
shape  of  formulas  and  confessions,  coining  in  for  a  double 
share  of  censure.^ 

Now,  it  is  all  veiy  well  to  be  wild  colts,  rejoicing  in  un- 
restrained liberty,  for  a  season  in  youth ;  but  it  will  not  do  to 
be  spuming  the  yoke  all  one's  lifetime.  "  Ye,  then,  that  are 
strong  ought  to  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak,  and  not  to 
please  yourselves."  It  is,  no  doubt,  most  agreeable  to  be  free 
from  care,  and  to  walk  about  unfettered  in  opinion  and  action, 
and,  shaking  off  those  who  would  hang  on  our  skirts,  to  live 
the  life  of  gods,  careless  of  mankind.  But  it  is  not  the  chief 
end  of  any  man,  least  of  all  of  a  wise  and  strong  man,  to  be 
free  from  care  or  trouble.  He  who  has  a  Christian  heart  must 
feel  that  he  is  strong  and  wise  for  the  sake  of  others  who  want 
strength  and  wisdom ;  and  he  will  undertake  the  shepherd's 
office,  though  shrinking  with  fear  and  trembling  from  its 
responsibilities,  and  though  conscious  also  that  in  so  doing 
he  is  consenting  to  have  his  liberty  and  independence  greatly 
circumscribed.  The  yoke  of  love  which  binds  us  to  our 
fellows  is  sometimes  not  easy,  and  the  burden  of  caring  for 
them  not  light ;  but,  on  the  whole,  it  is  better  and  nobler  to 

^  It  is  a  fair  qu^ion  whether  our  venerable  Confession  is  not  too  minute  and 
stringent,  a  sort  of  double  bridle,  even  for  ministers ;  and  whether  subscription 
should  be  required  at  all  for  lay  elders,  who  do  not  teach,  want  the  professional 
knowledge  necessary  to  intelligent  subscription  to  all  details,  and  are  as  amen- 
able to  discipline  for  belief  as  for  conduct  without  subscription.  No  man  signs 
an  obligation  to  keep  the  ten  commandments,  in  order  to  be  subject  to  dis- 
cipline  for  immorality. 


THE  UNDEB-SHEPHERDS  ADMONISHED  :   PASTORAL  DUTY.      527 

be  a  drudge  and  a  slave  at  the  bidding  of  love,  than  to  be 
a  free  man  through  the  emancipating  power  of  selfishness. 
Better  Peter  a  prisoner  and  martyr  for  the  gospel,  than  Simon 
inculcating  on  his  Lord  the  selfish  policy,  "  Save  Thyself,"  or 
lying  in  luxurious  ease  on  the  hill  of  Transfiguration,  exclaim- 
ing, "  Lord,  it  is  good  to  be  here."  Better  Peter,  bound  by 
others,  and  led  whither  he  would  not,  as  a  good  shepherd  to 
be  sacrificed  for  the  sheep,  than  Simon  girding  on  his  own 
garment,  and  walking  along  with  the  careless  jaunty  air  of  a 
modem  pococurantist,  A  life  on  the  ocean  wave,  a  life  in 
the  woods,  a  life  in  the  mountains  or  in  the  clouds,  may  be 
fine  to  dream  and  sing  of;  but  the  only  life  out  of  which 
genuine  heroism  and  poetry  comes,  is  that  which  is  spent  on 
this  solid  prosaic  earth  in  the  lowly  work  of  doing  good. 

Note  now,  finally,  the  evidence  supplied  in  Peter's  answers 
to  his  Lord's  questions,  that  he  is  indeed  fitted  for  the  respon- 
sible work  to  which  he  is  summoned.  It  is  not  merely  that 
he  can  appeal  to  Jesus  Himself,  as  one  who  knows  all  things, 
and  say,  "Thou  knowest  that  I  love  Thee;"  for,  as  we  have 
already  hinted,  every  sincere  disciple  can  do  that.  Two 
specific  marks  of  spiritual  maturity  are  discernible  here,  not 
to  be  found  in  those  who  are  weak  in  grace,  not  previously 
found  in  Peter  himself.  There  is,  first,  marked  modesty :  very 
remarkable  in  so  forward  a  man.  Peter  does  not  now  make 
any  comparisons  between  himself  and  his  brethren  as  he  had 
done  previously.  In  spite  of  appearances,  he  still  protests  that 
he  does  love  Jesus ;  but  he  takes  care  not  to  say,  "  I  love  Thee 
more  than  those."  He  not  only  does  not  say  this,  but  he 
manifestly  does  not  think  it :  the  bragging  spirit  has  left 
him;  he  is  a  humble,  subdued,  wise  man,  spiritually  equipped 
for  the  pastorate,  just  because  he  has  ceased  to  think  himself 
supremely  competent  for  it. 

The  second  mark  of  maturity  discernible  in  Peter's  replies 
is  godly  sorrow  for  past  shortcoming:  "Peter  was  grieved 
because  He  (Jesus)  said  unto  him  the  third  time,  Lovest  thou 
me  ? "  He  was  grieved,  because  by  the  threefold  interrogation 
he  was  reminded  that  the  threefold  denial  of  which  he  had 
been  guilty  afforded  ground  for  calling  his  love  in  question. 
Observe  particularly  the  feeling  produced  by  this  delicate 


528  THE  TRAINING  OF  TWBYWELVE. 

reference  to  his  former  sins.  It  was  grief,  not  irritation,  anger, 
or  shame.  There  is  no  pride,  passion,  vanity  in  this  man's  soul, 
but  only,  holy  meek  contrition  ;  no  sudden  colouring  is  observ- 
able in  his  countenance,  but  only  the  gracious  softened  expres- 
siou  of  a  penitent,  chastised  spirit.  The  man  who  can  so  take 
allusions  to  his  sins  is  not  only  fit  to  tend  the  sheep,  but  even 
to  nurse  the  lambs.  He  will  restore  those  who  have  fallen 
in  a  spirit  of  meekness.  He  will  be  tender  towards  offenders, 
not  with  the  spurious  charity  which  cannot  afford  to  condemn 
sin  strongly,  but  with  the  charity  of  one  who  has  himself 
received  mercy  for  sins  sincerely  repented  of.  By  his  benignant 
sympathy,  sinners  will  be  converted  unto  God  in  unfeigned 
sorrow  for  their  offences,  and  in  humble  hope  of  pardon ;  and 
by  his  watchful  care  many  sheep  will  be  kept  from  ever  stray- 
ing from  the  fold. 


Section  vl — Pastor  Pastorum, 

John  xxi.  19-22. 

To  be  a  dutiful  under-shepherd  is,  in  another  view,  to  be 
a  faithful  sheep,  following  the  Chief  Shepherd  whithersoever 
He  goes.  Pastors  are  not  lords  over  God's  heritage,  but 
mere  servants  of  Christ,  the  great  Head  of  the  church,  bound 
to  regard  His  will  as  their  law,  and  His  life  as  their  model 
In  the  scene  by  the  lake,  Jesus  took  pains  to  make  His  disciples 
imderstand  this.  He  did  not  allow  them  to  suppose  that,  in 
committing  to  their  pastoral  charge  His  flock.  He  was  abdi- 
cating His  position  as  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  soids.  Having 
said  to  Peter,  "  Feed  my  lambs,"  "  Feed  my  sheep,"  He  said 
to  him,  as  His  final  word,  "  Follow  me." 

It  is  implied  in  the  narrative,  that  while  Jesus  said  this.  He 
arose  and  walked  away  from  the  spot  where  the  disciples  had 
just  taken  their  morning  meal  Whither  He  went  we  are  not 
told,  but  it  may  have  been  towards  that  "  mountain  in  Galilee," 
the  pre-appointed  rendezvous  where  the  risen  Saviour  met 
"  above  five  hundred  brethren  at  once."  The  sheep  have  doubt- 
less been  wending  thither  to  meet  their  Divine  Shepherd,  as  in  a 


tr 


THE  X7KDER-SHEPHERD8  'ADH&mBHED  :   PASTOR  PASTORUM.     529 

secluded  upland  fold ;  and  it  is  more  than  possible  that  the 
object  of  the  journey  in  which  Peter  is  invited  to  join  his 
Master,  is  to  introduce  him  to  the  flock  which  hsA  just  been 
committed  to  his  care. 

Be  this  as  it  may,  Peter  obeyed  the  smnmons,  and  rose  at 
once  to  follow  Jesus.  His  first  impression  probably  was  that 
he  was  to  be  the  solitary  attendant  of  his  Lord,  and  a  natural 
wish  to  ascertain  the  state  of  the  case  led  him  to  look  behind 
to  see  what  his  companions  were  doing.  On  turning  round, 
he  observed  the  disciple  whom  JesiLS  loved,  and  whom  he  too 
loved,  following  close  in  his  footsteps ;  and  the  question  forth- 
with rose  to  his  lips  :  "  Lord,  and  what  of  this  man  ?"  The 
question  was  elliptical,  but  it  meant :  John  is  coming  after  us : 
Is  the  same  lot  in  store  for  him  that  you  have  prophesied  for 
me  ?  Shall  he,  too,  be  bound  and  led  whither  he  would  not ; 
or  shall  he,  as  the  disciple  most  dearly  beloved,  be  exempted 
from  the  hardships  I  am  fated  to  endure  ? 

That  another  and  a  happier  fortune  was  reserved  for  John, 
seemed,  we  believe,  probable  to  Peter.  He  could  not  but  re- 
call to  mind  that  memorable  scene  in  which  John's  mother 
made  her  ambitious  request  for  her  two  sons ;  and  in  spite  of 
what  Jesus  hsui  said  to  them  about  tasting  of  His  cup,  and 
being  baptized  with  His  baptism,  he,  Peter,  might  weU  imagine 
that  John's  desire  would  be  fulfilled,  and  that  he  would  live  to 
see  the  kingdom  come,  and  to  share  its  glories ;  especially  as 
one  and  all  of  the  disciples,  down  to  the  very  last  day  of  their 
Lord's  sojourn  on  earth,  still  expected  the  kingdom  to  be  re- 
stored to  Israel  very  soon. 

If  such  was  Peter's  thought,  it  is  not  surprising  that  he 
should  ask,  if  not  with  envy,  at  least  with  a  sadder  sense  of 
his  own  loss  :  "  Lord,  what  of  this  man  ?"  Adversity  is  hard 
to  bear  at  best,  but  hardest  of  all  when  personal  ill-fortune 
stands  in  glaring  contrast  with  the  prosperity  of  a  brother  who 
started  on  his  career  at  the  same  time,  and  with  no  better 
prospects  than  the  man  whom  he  has  far  outstripped  in  the 
race. 

To  such  considerations,  however,  Jesus  paid  little  respect  in 
His  reply  to  Peter's  questioa  "If  I  will,"  He  said,  "that  he  tarry 
till  I  come,  what  is  that  to  thee  ?  Follow  thou  me."     "  How 

2  L 


\ 
I 


530  THE  TBAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

stem  and  unfeeling  !"  one  is  tempted  to  exclaim.     Might  not 
Jesus  at  least  have  reminded  Simon,  for  his  comfort,  of  the 
words  He  once  uttered  to  James  and  John :  "  Ye  shall  drink 
of  my  cup  ?"    Would  it  not  have  helped  Peter  more  cheerfully 
to  follow  his  Master  in  the  arduous  path  of  the  cross,  to  have 
told  him  that,  in  whatever  manner  John  might  die,  he  too 
would  have  to  suffer  for  the  gospel ;  that  his  life,  whether 
long  or  short,  would  be  full  of  tribulation ;  that  participation 
in  the  glory  of  the  kingdom  did  not  depend  on  longevity  ; 
that,  in  fact,  the  first  to  die  would  be  the  first  to  enter  into 
glory  ?     But  no  ;  it  might  not  be.     To  administer  such  com- 
fort would  have  been  to  indulge  the  disciple's  weakness.     One 
who  is  to  play  a  soldier's  part  must  be  trained  with  military 
rigour.     EffeiLacy,  sighixTg  after  happiness,  brooding  overTS 
felicity  we  have  missed,  are  out  of  place  in  an   apostle's 
character ;  and  Jesus,  to  whom  such  dispositions  are  most  ab- 
horrent, will  take  good  care  not  to  give  then^  any  countenance. 
He  will  have  all  His  followers,  and  specially  the  heads  of  His 
people,  to  be  heroes,  "  Ironsides,"  prompt  to  do  bidding,  fear- 
less of  danger,  patient  of  fatigue,  without  a  trace  of  selfish 
softness.     He  will  give  no  quarter  even  to  natural  weaknesses, 
disregards  present  pain,  cares  not  how  we  smart  under  rebuke, 
provided  only  He  gain  His  end — ^ihe  production  of  character 
temptation-proof. 

Having  this  end  in  view,  Jesus  took  no  trouble  to  correct 
Peter's  misapprehensions  about  his  brother  disciple.  Misap- 
prehensions, we  say,  for  such  they  indeed  were.  John  did  not 
tarry  till  the  Lord  came,  in  the  sense  in  which  Peter  under- 
stood the  words.  He  hved,  indeed,  till  the  close  of  the  first 
Christian  century ;  therefore  long  after  the  Lord's  coming  to 
execute  judgment  on  Jerusalem.  But  except  for  the  longevity 
he  enjoyed,  the  last  of  the  aposties  was  in  no  respect  to  be 
envied.  The  church  was  militant  all  his  days  :  l^e  took  part 
in  many  of  its  battles,  and  received  therein  many  scars.  Com- 
panion with  Peter  in  the  church's  first  conflict  with  the  world, 
he  was  a  prisoner  in  Patmos  for  the  word  of  God,  and  for  the 
testimony  of  Jesus  Christ,  after  Peter  had  fallen  asleep.  One 
might  perhaps  say  that,  owing  to  temperament,  the  life  of 
John  was  less  stirring  than  that  of  his  brother  apostla     He 


THE  UNDEE-SHEPHEBDS  ADMONISHED  :   PASTOR  PASTORUM.     531 

was  a  man  of  less  impetuosity,  though  not  of  less  intensity ; 
and  there  was,  perhaps,  not  so  much  in  his  character  pro- 
vocative of  the  world's  opposition.  Both  by  his  virtues  and 
by  his  infirmities,  Peter  was  predestined  to  be  the  champion  of 
the  faith :  the  Luther  of  the  apostolic  age,  giving  and  receiv- 
ing the  hardest  blows,  and  bearing  the  brunt  of  the  battle, 
John,  again,  was  the  Melancthon  among  the  apostles,  without, 
however,  Melancthon's  tendency  to  yield ;  and  as  such,  enjoyed 
probably  a  quieter,  and  on  the  whole  more  peaceful  life.  But 
this  difference  between  the  two  men  was,  after  all,  quite  sub- 
oi*dinate ;  and,  all  things  considered,  we  may  say  that  John 
drank  not  less  deeply  of  Christ's  cup  than  did  Peter.  There 
was  nothing  glorious  or  enviable  in  his  lot  on  earth,  except 
the  vision  in  Patmos  of  the  glory  yet  to  be  revealed. 

Yet,  while  all  this  was  clear  to  His  prescient  eye,  Jesus  did 
not  condescend  to  give  any  explanations  concerning  the  ap- 
pointed lot  of  the  beloved  disciple,  but  allowed  Peter  to  think 
what  he  pleased  about  the  future  of  his  friend.  "  If  I  will," 
He  said,  "  that  he  tarry  till  I  come,  what  is  that  to  thee  ?" 
not  meaning  to  give  any  information,  as  contemporary  believers 
imagined,  but  rather  refusing  to  give  any,  in  the  bluntest  and 
most  peremptory  manner.  "  Suppose,"  such  is  the  import  of 
the  words,  "  Suppose  it  were  my  pleasure  that  John  should 
remain  on  the  earth  till  I  return  to  it,  what  is  that  to  thee  ? 
•Suppose  I  were  to  grant  him  to  sit  on  my  right  hand  in  my 
Messianic  kingdom,  what,  I  ask  again,  is  that  to  thee  ?  Sup- 
pose John  were  not  to  taste  of  death,  but,  surviving  till  my 
second  advent,  were,  like  another  Elijah,  to  be  wafted  directly 
into  heaven,  or  to  be  endowed  in  his  body  with  the  power  of 
an  endless  life,  still  what  is  that  to  thee  ?  Follow  thou  me." 

"  Follow  thou  me."  The  emphatic  repetition  of  this  injunc- 
tion is  very  significant.  It  shows,  for  one  thing,  that  when 
Jesus  said  to  Peter,  "  Feed  my  sheep,"  He  had  no  intention  of 
making  him  a  pastor  of  pastors,  a  shepherd  or  bishop  over  his 
fellow-disciples.  The  Bomanists  will  have  it  that  the  lambs 
are  the  lay  members  of  the  church,  and  that  the  sheep  are 
the  under-shepherds — the  whole  body  of  the  clergy,  the  Pope 
excepted.  How  strange,  if  this  be  true,  that  Peter  should  be 
checked  for  looking  after  one  of  the  flock,  and  asking  so  simple 


532  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

a  question  as  that :  "  Lord,  and  what  shall  this  man  do  ?* 
Jesus  replies  to  him  as  if  he  were  a  busybody,  meddling  with 
matters  with  which  he  had  no  concern.  And,  indeed,  busy- 
bodyism  was  one  of  Peter's  faults.  He  was  fond  of  looking 
after  and  managing  other  people ;  he  tried  once  and  again  to 
manage  the  Lord  Himself.  Curious  enough,  it  is  from  this 
apostle  that  the  church  gets  the  needful  warning  against  the 
too  common  vice  just  named.  "  Let  none  of  you,"  he  writes 
in  his  first  epistle,  "  suffer  as  a  murderer,  or  as  a  thief,  or  as 
an  evil-doer,  or  as  a  husyhody  in  other  men*s  Toattera  ;"  literally, 
as  a  bishop  intruding  into  another's  diocese.  Evidently  the 
frequent  rebukes  administered  to  Peter  by  his  Master  had 
made  a  lasting  impression  on  him. 

Heavy  as  wsw  the  load  of  responsibility  laid  upon  this  dis- 
ciple at  this  time,  it  did  not  amount  to  anything  so  formid- 
able as  that  involved  in  being  a  visible  Christ,  so  to  speak,  to 
the  whole  church.  Neither  Peter  nor  any  other  man  is  able 
to  bear  that  burden,  and  happily  no  one  is  required  to  do  so. 
The  responsibility  of  even  the  highest  in  the  church  is  restricted 
within  comparatively  narrow  limits.  The  main  business  even 
of  the  chief  imder-shepherds  is  not  to  make  others  follow 
Christ,  but  to  follow  Him  themselves.  It  is  well  that  our 
Lord  made  this  plain  by  the  words  addressed  to  the  represen- 
tative man  among  the  apostles ;  for  Christians  of  active,  ener- 
getic, and  earnest  natures  are  very  apt  to  have  very  exaggerated 
ideas  of  their  responsibilities,  and  to  take  on  themselves  the 
care  of  the  whole  world,  and  impose  on  themselves  the  duty 
of  remedying  every  evil  that  is  done  under  the  sun.  They 
would  be  defenders-general  of  the  faith  wherever  assailed, 
redressers-general  of  all  wrongs,  curates-general  of  all  souls. 
There  is  something  noble  as  well  as  quixotic  in  this  temper ; 
and  it  were  not  the  best  sign  of  a  man's  moral  earnestness  if 
he  had  not  at  some  time  of  his  life  known  somewhat  of  this 
fussy,  over-zealous  spirit.  Still  it  should  be  understood  that 
the  Head  of  the  church  imposes  on  no  man  such  unlimited 
responsibility,  and  that,  when  self-imposed,  it  does  not  conduce 
to  a  man's  real  usefulness.  No  one  man  can  do  all  other 
men's  work,  and  no  one  man  is  responsible  for  all  other  men's 
errors  and  failures ;  and  each  man  contributes  most  effectually 


THE  UNDER-SHEPHERDS  ADMONISHED  :    PASTOR  PASTORUM.     533 

and  surely  to  the  good  of  the  whole,  by  conducting  his  own 
life  on  godly  principles.  The  world  is  fuU  of  evils — scepticism, 
superstition,  ignorance,  immorality,  on  every  side — a  sight 
saddening  in  the  extreme.  What,  then,  am  I  to  do  ?  This 
one  thing  above  all :  Follow  thou  Christ.  Be  thou  a  believer, 
let  who  will  be  infidels.  Let  thy  religion  be  reasonable,  let 
who  will  pin  their  faith  to  a  fallible  human  authority,  and 
place  their  religion  in  fantastic  ritualisms  and  gross  idolatries. 
Be  thou  holy,  an  example  of  sobriety,  justice,  and  godliness, 
though  all  the  world  should  become  a  sweltering  chaos  of 
impurity,  fraud,  and  impiety.  Say  with  Joshua  of  old,  "  If  it 
seem  good  unto  you  to  serve  the  Lord,  choose  you  this  day 
whom  ye  will  serve ;  but  as  for  me  and  my  house,  we  will 
serve  the  Lord." 

The  repeated  injunction,  *'  Follow  thou  me,"  whilst  restrict- 
ing individual  responsibility,  prescribes  imdivided  attention  to 
personal  duty.  Christ  demands  of  His  disciples  that  they 
follow  Him  with  integrity  of  heart,  without  distraction,  with- 
out murmuring,  envy,  or  calculations  of  consequences.  Peter 
was,  it  is  to  be  feared,  not  yet  quite  up  to  the  mark  in  this 
respect.  There  was  yet  lingering  in  his  heart  a  vulgar  hanker- 
ing after  happiness  as  the  chief  end  of  man.  Exemption  from 
the  cross  still  appeared  to  him  supremely  desirable,  and  he 
probably  fancied  that  special  favour  on  Christs  part  towards 
a  particular  disciple  would  show  itself  in  granting  such  exemp- 
tion. He  did  not  yet  imderstand  that  Christ  oftenest  shows 
special  favour  to  His  followers  by  making  them  in  a  remark- 
able degree  partakers  of  His  bitter  cup  and  His  bloody  bap- 
tism. The  grand  enthusiasm  of  Paul,  which  made  him  desire 
to  know  Jesus  in  the  fellowship  of  His  suflferings,  had  not 
yet  taken  possession  of  Simon's  breast  When  an  arduous 
and  perilous  piece  of  service  was  to  be  done,  those  who  were 
selected  to  be  the  forlorn  hope  seemed  to  him  objects  of  pity 
rather  than  of  envy.  Far  from  volimteering  for  such  a  ser- 
vice, he  would  rather  congratulate  himself  on  having  escaped 
it ;  and  the  highest  conceivable  virtue,  in  case  one  were  so 
unlucky  as  not  to  escape,  would,  in  his  opinion,  be  submission 
to  the  inevitable. 

Peter  was  deficient  also  as  yet  in  the  military  virtue  of  un- 


534  THE  TKAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

questioning  obedience  to  orders,  wliicli  is  the  secret  of  an  army's 
strength.  A  general  saith  to  one,  Go,  and  he  goeth ;  to  another. 
Come,  and  he  cometh :  he  appoints  to  one  corps  its  station  here, 
and  to  another  its  station  there ;  and  no  one  ventures  to  ask 
why,  or  to  make  envious  comparisons.  There  is  an  absolute 
surrender  of  the  individual  will  to  the  will  of  the  commander ; 
and  so  far  as  thoughts  of  preference  are  concerned,  each  man 
is  a  machine,  having  a  will,  a  head,  a  hand,  a  heart,  only  for 
the  effective  performance  of  his  own  appointed  task.  Peter 
had  not  yet  attained  to  this  pitch  of  self-abnegation.  He 
could  not  do  simply  what  he  was  bidden,  but  must  needs  look 
round  to  see  what  another  was  doing.  Nor  let  us  think  this 
a  small  oflfence  in  him.  It  was  a  breach  of  discipline  which 
could  not  be  overlooked  by  the  Commander  of  the  faithful 
Implicit  obedience  is  as  necessary  in  the  church  as  it  is  in  the 
army.  The  old  soldier  Loyola  understood  this,  and  hence  he 
introduced  a  system  of  military  discipline  into  the  constitution 
of  the  so-called  "  Society  of  Jesus."  And  the  history  of  that 
society  shows  the  wisdom  of  the  founder ;  for  whatever  we 
may  think  of  the  quality  of  the  work  done,  we  cannot  deny 
the  energy  of  the  Jesuitic  fraternity,  or  the  devotion  of  its 
members.  Such  devotion  as  the  Jesuit  renders  to  the  will  of 
his  spiritual  superior,  Christ  demands  of  all  His  people ;  and 
to  none  but  He  can  it  be  rendered  without  impiety.  He  would 
have  every  believer  give  himseK  up  to  His  will  in  cheerful, 
exact,  habitual  obedience,  deeming  all  His  orders  wise,  all  His 
arrangements  good,  acknowledging  His  right  to  dispose  of  us 
as  He  pleases,  content  to  serve  Him  in  a  little  place  or  in  a 
large  one,  by  doing  or  by  suffering,  for  a  long  period  or  a 
short,  in  life  or  by  death,  so  He  be  glorified. 

This  is  our  duty,  and  it  is  also  our  blessedness.  So 
minded,  we  shall  be  delivered  from  all  care  of  consequences, 
from  ambitious  views  of  our  responsibilities,  from  imaginary 
grievances,  from  envy,  fretfulness,  and  the  restlessness  of  self- 
will.  We  shall  no  longer  be  distracted  or  tormented  with 
incessant  looking  round  to  see  what  is  become  of  this  or  that 
fellow-disciple,  but  be  able  to  go  on  with  our  own  work  in 
composure  and  peace.  We  shall  not  trouble  ourselves  either 
about  our  own  future  or  about  any  other  body's,  but  shall 


THE  UNDER-SHEPHERDS  ADMONISHED  :   PASTOR  PASTORUM.     535 

healthily  and  happily  live  in  the  present  We  shall  get  rid 
for  ever  of  fear,  and  care,  and  scheming,  and  disappointment, 
and  chagrin,  and  like  larks  at  heaven's  gate  sing : 

**  Father,  I  know  that  all  my  life 

Is  portioned  out  by  Thee, 
And  the  changes  that  wiU  surely  come 

I  do  not  fear  to  see  ; 
But  I  ask  Thee  for  a  present  mind. 

Intent  on  serving  Thee. 

I  would  not  have  the  restless  will 

That  hurries  to  and  fro, 
Seeking  for  some  great  thing  to  do, 

Or  secret  thing  to  know  ; 
I  would  be  treated  as  a  child. 

And  guided  where  I  go." 

Thus,  brother,  "  go  thou  thy  way  till  the  end  be ;"  and  "  thou 
shalt  rest,  and  stand  in  thy  lot  at  the  end  of  the  days.*' 


CHAPTER    XXX. 

POWER   FROM   ON    HIGH. 
Matt,  xxviii.  18-20  ;  Mabk  xvi.  15 ;  Luke  xxiv.  47-53 ;  Acts  i.  1-8. 

FROM  Galilee,  the  disciples,  of  their  own  accord  or  by 
direction,  found  their  way  back  to  Jerusalem^  where 
their  risen  Lord  showed  Himself  to  them  once  more,  and  for 
the  last  time,  to  give  them  their  final  instructions,  and  to  bid 
them  farewelL 

Of  this  last  meeting  no  distinct  notice  is  taken  in  the 
Gospels.  Each  of  the  synoptical  evangelists,  however,  has 
preserved  some  of  the  last  words  spoken  by  Jesus  to  His  dis- 
ciples ere  He  ascended  to  heaven.  Among  these  we  reckon  the 
closing  verses  of  Matthew's  Gospel,  where  we  read :  "  All  power 
is  given  unto  me  in  heaven  and  in  earth.  Go  ye  therefore, 
and  teach  all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the 
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost;  teaching 
them  to  observe  all  things  whatsoever  I  have  commanded 
you :  and,  lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the 
world."  ^  Of  this  last  word  Mark  gives,  in  the  close  of  his 
Gospel,  an  abbreviated  version,  in  these  terms :  "  Go  ye  into 
all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."'  In 
Luke's  narrative,  the  words  spoken  by  Jesus,  on  the  occasion 
of  His  final  appearance  to  the  eleven,  are  so  interwoven  with 
those  which  He  spoke  to  them  on  the  evening  of  His  resur- 
rection day,  that,  but  for  the  supplementary  and  more  circum- 
stantial account  given  by  the  same  author  in  the  book  of  the 
Acts,  we  should  never  have  thought  of  making  a  distinction, 
far  less  have  known  where  to  phice  the  boimdary  line.      On 

1  Matt  xxviii.  18-20. 

'  Mark  xvi.  15.    We  enter  not  here  into  the  authenticity  of  the  closing  verses 
of  Mark's  GospeL 


POWER  FROM  ON  fflGH.  537 

coiDparing  the  two  accounts,  however,  we  can  see  that  words 
spoken  at  two  different  times  are  construed  together  into  one 
continuous  discourse ;  and  we  have  no  great  difficulty  in  deter- 
mining what  belongs  to  the  first  appearance  and  what  to  the 
last.  According  to  the  book  of  Acts,  Jesus,  in  His  last  con- 
versation with  His  disciples,  spoke  to  them  of  their  apostolic 
duties  as  witnesses  unto  Himself  and  preachers  of  His  gospel ; 
of  the  promise  of  the  Spirit,  whose  descent  was  to  fit  them  for 
their  work ;  and  of  what  they  should  do  till  the  promise  should 
be  fulfilled.  Now  these  are  just  the  topics  adverted  to  in  the 
verses  cited  from  the  last  chapter  of  Luke's  GospeL  There  is 
first  the  apostolic  commission  to  preach  repentance  and  remis- 
sion of  sins  in  the  name  of  Jesus  among  all  nations,  beginning 
at  Jerusalem ;  and  a  virtual  injunction  laid  on  the  disciples  to 
be  faithful  witnesses  to  all  things  they  had  seen  and  heard  in 
.  their  Lord's  company,  and  especially  to  His  resurrection  from 
the  dead.  Then  there  is  the  renewal  of  this  promise,  here 
called  the  "  promise  of  my  Father."  Then,  finally,  there  is 
the  direction  to  wait  for  the  promised  blessing  in  the  holy 
city :  "  But  tarry  ye  at  Jerusalem  imtil  ye  be  endued  with 
power  from  on  high." 

All  these  sayings  bear  internal  evidence  of  being  last  words, 
from  their  fitness  to  the  situation.  It  was  natural  and  need- 
ful that  Jesus  should  thus  speak  to  His  chosen  agents  at  the 
hour  of  His  final  departure,  giving  them  instructions  for  their 
guidance  in  their  future  apostolic  labours,  and  in  the  short 
interval  that  was  to  elapse  before  those  labours  began.  Even 
the  business-like  brevity  and  matter-of-fact  tone  of  these  last 
words  betray  the  occasion  on  which  they  were  uttered.  On 
first  thoughts,  we  should  perhaps  have  expected  a  more 
pathetic  style  of  address  in  connection  with  a  farewell  meet- 
ing'; but,  on  reflection,  we  perceive  that  everything  savouring 
of  sentimentality  would  have  been  beneath  the  dignity  of  the 
situation  In  the  farewell  address,  before  the  passion,  pathos 
was  in  place ;  but  in  the  farewell  words,  before  the  ascension, 
it  would  have  been  misplaced.  In  the  former  case,  Jesus  was 
a  parent  speaking  His  last  words  of  coimsel  and  comfort  to 
His  sorrowing  children;  in  the  latter.  He  was  "as  a  man 
taking  a  far  journey,  who  left  his  house,  and  gave  authority 


538  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

to  his  servants,  and  to  every  man  his  work,  and  commanded 
the  porter  to  watch ;"  and  EEis  manner  of  speech  was  adapted 
to  the  character  He  sustained. 

And  yet  the  tone  adopted  by  Jesus  in  His  last  interview 
with  the  eleven  was  not  purely  magisterial  The  Friend  was 
not  altogether  lost  in  the  Master.  He  had  kind  words  as  well 
as  commands  for  His  servants.  What  could  be  kinder  and 
more  encouraging  than  that  word :  "  And,  lo,  I  am  with  you 
alway,  even  imto  the  end  of  the  world  ?"  And  is  there  not 
an  accent  of  friendship  in  that  utterance,  in  which  Jesus,  now 
about  to  ascend  to  glory,  seems  by  anticipation  to  resume 
the  robe  of  divine  majesty,  which  He  laid  aside  when  He 
became  man :  *'  All  power  is  given  unto  me  in  heaven  and 
in  earth  V*  Why  does  He  say  that  now  ?  Not  for  the  pur- 
pose of  self-exaltation ;  not  to  put  a  distance  between  Himself 
and  His  quondam  companions,  and,  as  it  were,  degrade  them 
from  the  position  of  friends  to  that  of  mere  servants.  No ; 
but  to  cheer  them  on  their  way  through  the  world  as  the 
messengers  of  the  kingdom ;  to  make  them  feel  that  the  task 
assigned  them  was  not,  as  it  might  well  seem,  an  impossible 
one.  "I  have  all  power,"  saith  He  in  effect,  "in  heaven, 
and  jurisdiction  over  all  the  earth ;  go  ye  therefore^  into  all 
the  world,  making  disciples  of  all  the  nations,  nothing  doubt- 
ing that  all  spiritual  influences  and  all  providential  agencies 
will  be  made  subservient  to  the  great  errand  on  which  I  send 
you." 

Jesus  had  kind  actions  as  well  as  kind  words  for  His  Mends 
at  parting.  There  was  indeed  no  farewell  kiss,  or  shaking  of 
hands,  or  other  symbolic  act  in  use  among  men  who  bid  each 
other  adieu.  But  the  manner  of  the  ascension  was  most 
gracious  and  benignant  towards  those  whom  the  ascending 
One  left  behind.  Jesus  moved  upwards  as  if  lifted  from  the 
earth  by  some  celestial  attraction,  with  His  face  looking  down- 
wards upon  His  beloved  companions,  and  with  His  hand 
stretched  out  in  an  attitude  of  benediction.  Hence  the  eleven 
grieved  not  for  their  Lord's  disappearance.  They  marvelled 
indeed,  and  gazed  eagerly  and  wonderingly  towards  the  skies, 

^  Ovir  is  a  disputed  reading,  but  the  idea  it  expresses  is  impHed  in  the  con- 
nection. 


POWER  FROM  ON  moH.  539 

as  if  trying  to  penetrate  the  cloud  whicli  received  their 
Master's  person ;  but  the  parting  left  no  sadness  behind.  They 
bowed  their  heads  in  worship  towards  the  ascended  Christ, 
and  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  great  joy,  as  if  they  had 
gained,  not  lost  a  friend,  and  as  if  the  ascension  were  not  a 
swnset,  but  a  sunrise — as  indeed  it  was,  not  for  them  alone,  but 
for  the  whole  world. 

Of  that  miraculous  event,  by  which  our  High  Priest  passed 
within  the  veil  into  the  celestial  sanctuary,  we  may  not  speak. 
Like  the  transfiguration,  it  is  a  topic  on  which  we  know  not 
what  to  say ;  an  event  not  to  be  explained,  but  to  be  devoutly 
and  joyfully  believed,  in  company  with  the  kindred  truth  de- 
clared by  the  two  men  in  white  apparel  to  the  disciples,  who 
said :  "  Ye  men  of  (Jalilee,  why  stand  ye  gazing  into  heaven  ? 
This  same  Jesus,  which  was  taken  up  from  you  into  heaven, 
shall  so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  Him  go  into 
heaven."^  Wherefore  we  pass  from  the  ascension,  to  make 
some  observations  on  the  great  commission  given  by  the  Lord 
to  His  apostles  for  the  last  time,  just  before  He  was  taken  up 
into  glory. 

That  commission  was  worthy  of  Him  from  whom  it  ema- 
nated, whether  we  regard  Him  as  Son  of  God  or  as  Son  of 
man.  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  the 
whole  creation."  Surely  this  is  the  language  of  a  Divine 
Being.  What  mere  man  ever  entertained  a  plan  of  benefi- 
cence embracing  the  whole  human  race  within  its  scope  ?  and 
who  but  one  possessing  all  power  in  heaven  and  on  earth 
could  dare  to  hope  for  success  in  so  gigantic  an  imdertaking  ? 
Then  how  full  of  grace  and  love  the  matter  of  the  commission  I 
The  errand  on  which  Jesus  sends  His  apostles  is  to  j»*each 
repentance  and  remission  of  sins  in  His  name,  and  to  make  a 
peaceful  conquest  of  the  world  to  God  by  the  word  of  recon- 
ciliation through  His  death.  Such  philanthropy  approves 
itself  to  be  at  once  divine  and  most  intensely  human.  Ancl 
mark,  as  specially  characteristic  of  the  gracious  One,  the  direc- 
tion, "  beginning  at  Jerusalem."  The  words  indicate  a  plan 
of  operations  adapted  at  once  to  the  circumstances  of  the  world, 
and  to  the  capacities  and  idiosyncrasies  of  the  agents ;  but 

1  Acts  L  11. 


540  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

they  do  more.  They  open  a  window  into  the  heart  of  Jesus, 
and  show  Him  to  be  the  same  who  prayed  on  the  cross : 
*'  Father,  forgive  them ;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do." 
Why  begin  at  Jerusalem  ?  Because  "  Jerusalem  sinners"  most 
need  to  repent  and  to  be  forgiven  ;  and  because  Jesus  would 
show  forth  in  them  at  the  outset  the  full  extent  of  His  long- 
suffering,  for  a  pattern  to  them  who  should  afterwards  believe, 
in  Samaria,  Antioch,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth. 

It  was  in  every  way  a  commission  worthy  of  Jesus,  as  the 
Son  of  God  and  Saviour  of  sinners,  to  give.  But  what  a  com- 
mission for  poor  Galilean  fishermen  to  receive  !  what  a  burden 
of  responsibility  to  lay  upon  the  shoulders  of  any  poor  mortal ! 
Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things  ?  Jesus  knew  the  insuffi- 
ciency of  His  instruments.  Therefore,  having  invested  them 
with  official  authority.  He  proceeded  to  speak  of  an  invest- 
ment with  another  kind  of  power,  without  which  the  official 
must  needs  be  utterly  ineffectuaL  "  And,  behold,"  He  said,  "  I 
send  the  promise  of  my  Father  upon  you ;  but  tarry  ye  at 
Jerusalem  tQl  ye  be  clothed  with  power  from  on  high." 

"  Power  from  on  high."  The  expression  has  a  mystical 
sound,  and  its  sense  seems  difficult  to  define ;  yet  the  general 
meaning  is  surely  plain  enough.  The  thing  signified  is  not 
altogether  or  chiefly  a  power  to  work  miracles,  but  just  what 
Jesus  had  spoken  of  at  such  length  in  His  farewell  address 
before  His  death.  "  Power  from  on  high"  means :  All  that  the 
apostles  were  to  gain  from  the  mission  of  the  Comforter, — 
enlightenment  of  mind,  enlargement  of  heart,  sanctification  of 
their  faculties,  and  transformation  of  their  characters,  so  as  to 
jnake  them  whetted  swords  and  polished  shafts  for  subduing 
the  world  unto  the  truth :  these,  or  the  effect  of  these  com- 
bined, constituted  the  power  for  which  Jesus  directed  the 
eleven  to  wait.  The  power,  therefore,  was  a  spiritual  power, 
not  a  magical ;  an  inspiration,  not  a  possession ;  a  power  which 
was  not  to  act  as  a  blind  fanatical  force,  but  to  manifest  itself 
as  a  spirit  of  love  and  of  a  sound  mind.  After  the  power 
descended,  the  apostles  were  to  be  not  less  rational,  but  more ; 
not  mad,  but  sober-minded ;  not  excited  rhapsodists,  but  ccdm, 
clear,  dignified  expositors  of  divine  truth,  such  as  they  appear 
in  Luke's  history  of  their  ministry.     In  a  word,  they  were  to 


POWER  FROM  ON  HIGH.  541 

be  less  like  their  past  selves,  and  more  like  their  Master :  no 
longer  ignorant,  childish,  weak,  carnal,  but  initiated  into  the 
mysteries  of  the  kingdom,  and  habitually  under  the  guidance 
of  the  Spirit  of  grace  and  holiness. 

Such  being  the  power  promised,  it  was  evidently  indis- 
pensable to  success.  Vain  were  oflBcial  titles — apostles,  evan- 
gelists, pastors,  teachers,  rulers :  vain  clerical  robes,  without 
this  garment  of  divine  power  to  clothe  the  souls  of  the  eleven. 
Vain  then,  and  equally  vain  now.  The  world  is  to  be  evan- 
gelized, not  by  men  invested  with  ecclesiastical  dignities  and 
with  parti-coloured  garments,  but  with  men  who  have  expe- 
rienced the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  who  are  visibly 
endued  with  the  divine  power  of  wisdom,  and  love,  and  zeaL 

As  the  promised  power  was  indispensable,  so  it  was  in  its 
nature  a  thing  simply  to  be  waited  for.  The  disciples  were 
directed  to  tarry  till  it  came.  They  were  neither  to  attempt 
to  do  without  it,  nor  were  they  to  try  to  get  it  up.  And  they 
were  wise  enough  to  follow  their  instructions.  They  fully 
understood  that  the  power  was  needful,  and  that  it  could  not 
be  got  up,  but  must  come  down.  All  are  not  equally  wise. 
Many  virtually  assume  that  the  power  Christ  spake  of  can 
be  dispensed  with,  and  that  in  fact  it  is  not  a  reality,  but  a 
chimera.  Others,  more  devout,  believe  in  the  power,  but  not 
in  man's  impotence  to  invest  himself  with  it.  They  try  to  get 
the  power  up,  by  working  themselves  and  others  into  a  frenzy 
of  excitement.  Failure  sooner  or  later  convinces  both  parties 
of  their  mistake,  showing  the  one,  that  to  produce  spiritual 
results,  something  more  than  eloquence,  intellect,  money,  and 
Organization  are  required;  and  showing  the  other,  that  true 
spiritual  power  cannot  be  produced,  like  electric  sparks,  by  the 
friction  of  excitement,  but  must  come  sovereignly  and  gra- 
ciously down  from  on  high. 


CHAPTER   XXXI. 

WAITING. 
Acts  i.  12-14. 

AFTER  that  the  Lord  was  parted  from  them,  and  carried 
up  into  heaven,  the  eleven  returned  to  Jerusalem,  and 
did  as  they  had  been  commanded.     They  assembled  together 
in  an  upper  room  in  the  city,  and,  in  company  with  the  be- 
lieving women,  and  Mary  the  mother  of  Jesus,  and  His  kins- 
men and  other  brethren,  amounting  in  all  to  one  hundred  and 
twenty,  waited  for  Power  and  for  light,  as  men  who  wait  for 
the  dawn,  or  as  men  who  have  come  to  see  a  panorama  wait 
for  the  lifting  of  the  curtain  that  hides  from  view  scenes  which 
their  eyes  have  not  seen,  nor  their  ears  heard  of,  nor  hath  it 
entered  into  their  hearts  to  conceive.     These  verses  from  the 
first  chapter  of  the  "  Acts"  show  us  the  disciples  and  the  rest 
in  the  act  of  so  waiting. 

How  solemn  is  the  situation  of  these  men  at  this  crisis  in 
their  history  !  They  are  about  to  undergo  a  spiritual  trans- 
formation ;  to  pass,  so  to  speak,  from  the  chrysalis  to  the 
winged  state.  They  are  on  the  eve  of  the  great  illumination 
promised  by  Jesus  before  His  death.  The  Spirit  of  truth  is 
about  to  come  and  lead  them  into  all  Christian  truth.  Thi 
day-star  is  about  to  arise  in  their  hearts,  after  the  dreary 
pitchy  night  of  mental  perplexity  and  despairing  sorrow  Uirough 
which  they  have  recently  passed  They  are  about  to  be  en- 
dowed with  power  of  utterance  and  of  character  proportional 
to  their  enlarged  comprehension  of  the  words  and  work  of 
Christ,  so  that  men  hearing  them  shall  be  amazed,  and  say 
one  to  another:  "  Behold,  are  not  all  these  which  speak  Gali- 
leans ?  And  now  hear  we  every  man  in  our  own  tongue 
wherein  we  were  bom  the  wonderful  works  of  God."  With  a 
dim  presentiment  of  what  is  comii^,  with  hearts  which  throb 


WAiTiNa  543 

and  swell  under  the  excitement  of  expectation,  and  heaving 
with  wondering  thoughts  of  the  great  things  about  to  be  re- 
vealed, they  sit  there  in  that  upper  room  for  ten  long  days, 
and  wait  for  the  promise  of  the  Father.  Verily  it  is  an  im- 
pressive, a  sublime  scene. 

But  how  do  they  wait  ?  Do  they  sit  still  and  silent,  Quaker 
fashion,  all  that  time  expecting  the  descent  of  the  Power  ? 
No  ;  the  meeting  in  the  upper  room  was  not  a  Quaker  meet- 
ing. They  prayed,  they  even  transacted  business ;  for  in 
those  days  Peter  stood  up  and  proposed  the  election  of  a  new 
apostle  in  the  room  of  Judas,  gone  to  his  own  place.  Nor 
was  their  meeting  a  dull  one,  as  those  may  imagine  who  have 
never  passed  through  any  great  spiritual  crisis,  and  to  whom 
waiting  on  God  is  a  synonym  for  listless  indolence.  The 
himdred  and  twenty  believers  did  not,  you  may  be  sure,  suffer 
from  ennui.  Prayers  and  supplications  alone  filled  up  many 
blessed  hours.  For  to  men  in  the  situation  of  the  disciples, 
prayer  is  not  the  dull  "  devotional"  form  with  which  we,  in 
these  degenerate  days,  are  too  familiar.  It  is  rather  a  wrest- 
ling with  God,  during  which  hours  pass  unobserved,  and  the 
day  breaks  before  one  is  aware.  "  These  all  continued  with  ' 
one  accord  in  prayer  and  supplication."  They  prayed  without 
fkinting,  without  wearying,  with  one  heart  and  mind. 

Besides  praying,  the  waiting  disciples  doubtless  spent  part 
.  of  their  time  in  reading  the  Scriptures.  This  is  not  stated  ; 
but  it  may  be  assumed  as  a  matter  of  course,  and  it  may  also 
be  inferred  from  the  manner  in  which  Peter  handled  Old  Tes- 
tament texts  in  his  address  to  the  people  on  the  day  of  Pente- 
.  cost.  That  Pentecostal  sermon  of  his  bears  marks  of  previous 
•  B^paration.  It  was  in  one  sense  an  extempore  effusion,  under 
the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  in  another  it  was  the 
fruit  of  careful  study.  Peter  and  his  brethren  had,  without 
doubt,  reperused  all  (hose  passages  which  Jesus  had  expounded 
on  the  evening  of  the  day  on  which  He  rose  from  the  dead, 
and  among  them  that  psalm  of  David,  whose  words  the  apostle 
quoted  in  his  first  gospel  sermon,  in  support  of  the  doctrine 
of  Christ's  resurrection.  We  may  find  evidence  of  the  minute, 
careful  attention  bestowed  on  that  and  other  Messianic  portions 
of  Scripture^  in  the  exactness  with  which  the  quotation  is 


{ 


544  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE. 

given.  The  four  verses  of  the  psalm  stand  word  for  word  in 
Peter's  discourse  as  they  do  in  the  original  text, — a  fact  all  the 
more  remarkable,  that  New  Testament  speakers  and  writers  do 
not,  as  a  rule,  slavishly  adhere  to  the  ipsissima  pmia  in  their 
Old  Testament  citations,  but  quote  texts  somewhat  freely. 

The  spiritual  exercises  of  those  ten  days  would  be  further 
diversified  by  religious  conversation.  The  reading  of  Scripture 
would  naturally  give  rise  to  comments  and  queries.  The 
brethren  who  had  been  privileged  to  hear  Jesus  expound  the 
things  which  were  written  in  the  law,  and  in  the  prophets, 
and  in  the  psahns  concerning  Himself,  on  the  night  of  His 
resurrection-day,  would  not  fail  to  give  their  fellow-believers 
the  benefit  of  instructions  through  which  their  own  under- 
standings  had  been  opened.  Peter,  who  was  so  prompt  to 
propose  the  election  of  a  new  witness  to  the  resurrection  of 
Jesus,  would  be  not  less  prompt  to  tell  the  company  in  the 
upper  room  what  the  risen  Jesus  had  said  about  these  Old 
Testament  texts.  He  would  freely  speak  to  them  of  the  mean- 
ing Jesus  taught  him  to  find  in  the  sixteenth  Psalm,  just  as 
he  took  the  liberty  of  doing  afterwards  in  addressing  the  mul- 
titude in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem.  When  that  psalm  had 
been  read,  he  would  say  :  "  Men  and  brethren,  thus  and  thus 
did  the]  Lord  Jesus  interpret  these  words ;"  just  as,  when 
the  109th  Psalm  had  been  read,  he  stood  up  and  said :  "  Men 
and  brethren,  this  Scripture  must  needs  have  been  fulfilled, 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  by  the  mouth  of  David  spake  before  con- 
cerning Judas  :  for  it  is  written,  Let  his  habitation  be  desolate, 
and  let  no  man  dweU  therein ;  and  his  bishopric  let  another 
take.     Wherefore" — ^let  us  choose  another  to  fill  his  placa 

Thus  did  the  brethren  occupy  themselves  during  these  ten 
days.  They  prayed,  they  read  the  Scriptures,  they  conferred 
together  on  what  they  read  and  on  what  they  expected  to  see. 
So  they  continued  waiting  with  one  accord  in  one  place  tiD 
the  day  of  Pentecost  was  fully  come,  when  suddenly  there 
came  a  soimd  from  heaven  as  of  a  rushing  mighty  wind,  filling 
all  the  house  where  they  were  sitting ;  and  there  appeared  unto 
them  cloven  tongues  like  as  of  fire,  and  they  were  all  filled 
with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  began  to  speak  with  other  tongues, 
as  the  Spirit  gave  them  utterance.    Then  the  promise  was  fiil- 


WAITING.  545 

filled :  the  power  had  come  down  from  on  high,  in  a  manner 
illnBtrating  the  words  of  the  prophet :  "  Since  the  beginning 
of  the  world  men  have  not  heard,  nor  perceived  by  the  ear, 
neither  hath  the  eye  seen,  0  God,  beside  Thee,  what  He  hath 
prepared  for  him  tiiat  waiteth  for  Him." 

The  events  of  Pentecost  were  the  answer  to  the  prayers 
offered  up  during  those  ten  days,  which  we  may  call  the  in- 
cubation period  of  the  Christian  church.  And  that  the  lesson 
of  encouragement  to  be  learned  from  this  fact  may  not  be  lost, 
be  it  remarked  that  the  prayers  of  those  assembled  in  the 
upper  room  were  not  essentially  different  from  the  prayers  of 
saints  at  any  other  period  in  the  church's  history.  They  had 
reference  to  much  the  same  objects.  The  eleven  and  the 
others  prayed  for  the  promised  power,  for  additional  light  on 
the  meaning  of  Scripture,  for  the  coming  of  the  divine  king- 
dom on  earth.  And  while  they  prayed  for  these  things,  we 
believe,  with  peculiar  fervour,  they  did  not  pray  for  them  with 
extraordinary  intelligence.  Of  them,  perhaps  more  emphati- 
cally than  of  most,  it  might  be  said,  that  they  knew  not  what 
to  pray  for  as  they  ought.  They  had  very  indistinct  ideas, 
we  believe,  of  the  "  power,"  of  its  nature,  and  of  the  effects 
it  was  to  produce.  That  they  had  crude,  and  even  erroneous 
ideas  of  the  "  kingdom,"  we  know ;  for  it  is  recorded,  that  on 
the  very  day  of  His  ascension  they  asked  Jesus  the  question, 
"  WUt  Thou  at  this  time  restore  the  kingdom  to  Israel  ?"  In 
this  brief  question  three  gross  misconceptions  are  contained. 
It  is  assumed  that  Christ  was  to  reign  personally  on  the  earth, 
a  great  king,  like  David.  The  disciples  had  no  idea  whatever 
of  «an  ascension  into  heaven.  Then  the  kingdom  they  expect 
is  merely  a  national  Jewish  ona  "Wilt  Thou,"  they  ask, 
"  restore  the  kingdom  to  Israd  /"  Finally,  the  kingdom  looked 
jEor  by  them  is  political,  not  spiritual :  it  is  not  a  new  crea- 
tion, but  a  kingdom  of  earth  restored  fr(Hn  a  present  prostrate 
oondition  to  former  power  and  splendour. 

The  notions  of  the  eleven  concerning  the  kingdom  con- 
tinued to  be  much  the  same  to  the  day  of  Pentecost  as  they 
had  been  on  the  day  of  the  ascension.  It  is  true  that  Jesus 
had,  in  His  reply  to  their  question,  made  a  statement  which,  if 
rightly  understood,  was  fitted  to  correct  their  miscQnception& 

2  M 


i 


546  THB  TRAIHIKG  OF  THE  TWELYS. 

Formally  a  dedinature  to  give  infomiation  on  the  subject 
aboiit  which  ttip  disciples  were  curious,  that  reply  afforded  a 
sufficiently  cledi^  and  full  explanation  of  the  real  state  of  the 
case.  When  He  i^ke  of  the  power  which  they  should 
receive,  Jesus  not  obscurely  hinted  that  the  work  of  inaugu- 
rating the  kingdom  was  to  be  done  by  the  apostles  as  His 
commissioners,  not  by  Himself  in  person.  And  the  same 
thing  is  implied  in  the  words,  ^  Ye  shall  be  witnesses  unto 
me,"  for  witnesses  would  be  needed  only  for  one  who  was 
himself  unseen.  By  connecting  the  "  power  "  with  the 
descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  Jesus  in  effect  corrected  the  thfaxi 
mistake  of  the  eleven  concerning  the  kingdom, — ^the  notion,  viz., 
that  it  was  to  be  of  a  political  nature.  Power  arising  out  of 
a  baptism  of  the  Spirit  is  moral,  not  political,  in  its  character ; 
and  a  kingdom  foimded  through  such  power  is  not  a  kingdom 
of  this  world,  but  one  whose  subjects  and  citizens  consist  of 
men  believing  the  truth:  "of  the  truth,"  as  Jesus  Himself 
put  it  in  speaking  of  His  kingdom  before  Pilate.  And,  in  the 
last  place,  the  words,  "  Witnesses  unto  me,  both  in  Jerusalem, 
and  in  all  Judaea,  and  in  Samaria,  and  unto  the  uttermost 
parts  of  the  earth,"  were  certainly  fitted  to  banish  from  the 
minds  of  the  eleven  the  dream  of  a  merely  national  Jewish 
kingdom.  If  it  was  but  the  kingdom  of  Israel  that  was  to  be 
restored,  to  what  purpose  bear  witness  to  Jesus  to  the  world's 
end  ?  Such  witness-bearing  speaks  to  a  kingdom  of  a  uni- 
versal nature,  embracing  people  of  every  tongue  and  kindred 
under  heaven. 

From  the  reply  of  their  Lord,  the  disciples  might  thus 
have  gathered  the  true  idea  of  the  kingdom,  as  one  founded  on 
faith  in  Christ ;  presided  over  by  a  king,  no  longer  present 
bodily,  but  omnipresent  spiritually  ;  not  limited  to  one 
country,  but  embracing  all  who  were  of  the  truth  in  all  parts 
of  the  world.  This  great  idea,  however,  they  did  not  take  out 
of  the  words  on  which  we  have  been  commenting.  They 
were  to  learn  the  nature  of  the  kingdom,  not  from  the  teach- 
ing of  Jesus,  but  from  the  events  of  providence.  The  pano- 
rama of  the  kingdom  of  God  was  to  be  hid  from  their  eyes 
till  the  curtain  was  lifted  in  three  distinct  historical  move- 
ments,— ^the  ascensian,  the  descent  of  the  Spirit  at  Pentecost  on 


WAITING.  '  547 

the  multitude  who  had  oome  to  keep  the  feaat,  and  the  coti- 
version  of  the  Samaritans  and  (he  OerUiUs.  The  first  of  these 
moveinents  had  ahready  taken  place  whto  the  disciples  assem- 
bled themselves  together  in  the  upper  room  to  wait  for  the 
promise  of  the  Father.  Jesus  had  ascended,  so  that  they  now 
knew  that  the  seat  of  empire,  the  capital  of  the  kingdom,  was 
to  be  in  heaven,  not  in  Jerusalem.  This  was  a  valuable  piece 
of  knowledge,  but  it  was  not  all  that  was  needed.  Only  a 
small  part  of  the  panorama  was  yet  visible  to  the  spectators, 
and  they  were  still  in  the  dark  as  to  the  nature  and  extent  of 
the  coming  kingdom.  They  expected  to  see  a  panorama  of  a 
new  Palestine,  not  of  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  wherein 
should  dwell  righteousness ;  and  they  doubtless  continued  to 
cherish  this  expectation  tUl  the  curtain  was  uplifted,  and  facts 
showed  what  they  had  im wittingly  been  praying  for,  when  they 
at  length  learned  that  the  Hearer  of  prayer  not  only  does  for 
His  people  what  they  ask,  but  far  above  what  they  even  think. 

And  now,  in  taking  leave  of  these  men  with  whom  we 
have  long  held  goodly  fellowship,  let  us  make  two  further 
observations  concerning  this  waiting  scene,  in  which  they 
occupy  the  prominent  place. 

First  look  at  that  scene  in  relation  to  the  subsequent  events 
recorded  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  not  to  say  the  whole 
history  of  the  church,  and  learn  what  significance  may  lie  in 
things  apparently  very  insignificant.  We  had  occasion  to  make 
this  remark  in  connection  with  the  first  meeting  of  Jesus  with 
five  of  those  who  afterwards  became  members  of  the  chosen 
band  of  twelve,  and  we  think  it  seasonable  to  repeat  it  here 
now.  To  *the  contemporary  Jewish  world,  that  meeting  in  the 
upper  room,  if  they  knew  of  its  existence,  would  appear  a  very 
contemptible  matter ;  yet  it  was  the  only  thing  of  perennial 
interest  in  Judaea  at  the  time.  The  hope  of  Israel,  yea,  of  the 
world,  lay  in  that  small  congregation.  For,  small  as  it  was, 
Grod  was  with  those  who  formed  it.  Infidels  who  believe  not 
in  supernatural  influence  smile  at  such  words  ;  but  even  they 
must  acknowledge  that  some  source  of  power  was  centred  in 
that  little  community,  for  they  multiplied  with  a  rapidity 
surpassing  that  of  the  Israelites  in  Egypt.  Those  who  reject 
divine  influence,  impose  on  themselves  the  burden  of  a  veiy 


548  '     THE  TRAIHIKG  OF  THE  TWELVE. 


pt 


k      ■! 


laborious  explanation  of  the  fjEict.  •  For  those  who  believe  in 
that  influence^  it  is  enou^  to  say,  the  little  flock  grew  great, 
not  by  might,  ^  nor  by  power  et  this  world,  but  by  Gkxi's 
Spirit  It  was  their  Fatjdei^s  good  pleasure  to  give  them  the 
Idngdom.  * 

Look  against  that  soene  in  the  ^pper  ipom,  in  relation  to 
the  past  history  ot  the  AisciplgB,  and  leam.how  utterly  incom- 
|C(teiJ(  M^the,  tasbas^gned  theml^ey  are,  witkout  some  such 
light  and  'poWer  froih  oh  hig&  as  Jesus  encouraged  them  to 
•jb^p^ibr.  These  men  have  been  some  three  years  in  CSiriflflfB 
company,  passing  through  a  theological  curriculum  in  the  hest 
of  all  colleges.  From  Christ's  own  lips  they  have  heard  the 
Words  of  divine  wisdom  concerning  all  things  pertaining  to  the 
kingdom  of  God.  Yet  here  are  they  still,  after  their  Lord's 
ascension,  almost  as  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  the  kingdom 
as  they  were  the  day  they  became  disciples.  And  they  are 
as  devoid  of  spiritual  power  as  of  spiritual  light.  They  are 
still  well-meaning,  but  rustic,  imdignified,  morally  ineffectual 
Galileans,  needing  some  influence  to  descend  upon  them  and 
transform  them  into  apostles  indeed. 

Look  forward  a  few  days,  and  behold  all  is  changed  !  The 
eleven  have  got  other  hearts,  other  minds,  other  tongues, 
and  have  become  enlightened,  eloquent,  powerful  men.  The 
change  is  obvious  to  all,  but  whence  did  it  come  ?  Some 
•  may  reply,  from  natural  causes.  Philosophers  may  tell  us 
tltat  mqn  of  ^l^onest  purposiB  must  grow  wise  and  strong  some- 
time, and'  that  persons  who  have  been  ciphers  while  Over- 
shadowed by  •  gssat  character,  do  often  suddenly  dei^plope  into 
distinguished  ^^n, 'whan  called  to  act  on  their  ^y%n  respon- 
sibility as  leadocB'in  a  gfeat  movemevt  To  our  mind,  the 
experience  of  the  apostles  is  a  demonstration  that  the  Light 
and  the  Power  fronsr  on*  high,  whereof  Jeaus  spoke  so  often, 
were  realities,  not  fanciea  If  jrh'at  we  have  written  should 
create  or  confirm  this  conviction  in  other  minds,  our  labour 
shall  not  have  been  in  vain. 


THE  END. 


