Class  _i 

Book M 


N°_ 


COPYRIGHT  DEPOSIT. 


OR 

WHAT  ARE  WE  TO  BELIEVE  ? 


BY 

JOHN   URQUHART, 

AUTHOR  OF 

The  Inspiration  and  Accuracy  of  the  Holy  Scriptures \  The  Bibley 

its  Structure  and  Purpose,  The  New  Biblical  Guide ,  etc. 
r 

Member,  of  the  Victoria  Institute,  etc. 


GbfrD  BDitfon,  IRevfeed 

Fifteenth  Thousand. 


44  Under  the  Christian  religion  I  find  actual  prophecy,  and 

I   FIND     IT   IN   NO   OTHER."-P(J5W/. 


Hew  l£orfc: 

GOSPEL  PUBLISHING  HOUSE, 

D.  T.  Bass,  Manager, 

54  West  Twenty-Second  Street. 


OCT    1    )906 
QLMS  4  XX«J.  N» 


CONTENTS.  U' 


CONTENTS, 


CHAPTER  I.— A  Serious  Question. 

Sometimes  asked  in  Despair — Trials  of  Wtly 
Faith — Ministerial  Difficulties— The  Demand  fov  -an 
Answer  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  c 

CHAPTER   II. — Can  the  Question  be  An5.*vei*/j>? 

Certainty  sometimes  attained — Bishop  Newton  jmd 
Marshal  Wade — The  future  completely  hid  from  hu- 
man view — What  is  proved  if  the  future  has  neverthe- 
less   been    fully    read  ?  . .  . .  . ,  8 

CHAPTER.,  III. — Predictions  Regarding  1  yle  and 
Sidon:  *.-. 

Illustration  of  the  kind  of  evidence  available :  *he 
Stones,  and  Dust  of  Tyre  to  be  laid  in  the  S';a — We 
limit  oiirselves  to  Prophecies  fulfilled  at  and  smce  the 
beginning  of  the  Christian  era — Tyre  to  be  built  no 
more — Sidon  to  continue  but  to  suffer — What  if  tne 
two  Names  had  changed  places?  ..  ..  15 

CHAPTER  IV. — Predictions  Regarding  Egypt. 

Fate  of  Thebes — Egypt's  Doom  of  Decline — The 
Kingdom  not  to  be  Extinguished — Its  Degradation — 
To  have  no  Native  Ruler  . .  . .  . .  . .     22 

CHAPTER  V. — Predictions  Regarding  Egypt. 
(Continued.) 

Fate  of  Memphis — The  Rivers  and  the  Canals  of 
Egypt — The  Verdure  on  the  River  Banks — The  Fish- 
eries of  Egypt — Its  remaining  Industries — The  Deso- 
lation of  the  surrounding  Countries — The  Desolation 
of  Egypt  itself — The  Character  of  its  Masters — -Their 
Nationality — Their  Work — Summary  .  .  .  .     44 


IV  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER   VI. — Idumea   and  the   Sea-Coast   of 
Palestine. 

The  Commerce  of  Idumea  to  cease — The  Race  to 
become  extinct — The  Land  to  be  a  Desolation — The 
Doom  of  the  Philistines — The  Remnant  of  the  Sea- 
Coast  to  be  Destroyed — The  Country  to  be  Desolate, 
while  its  Fruitfulness  is  to  remain — The  Present 
Aspect  of  the  Land  and  the  Purpose  which  it  serves 
described  in  Prophecy — Predictions  regarding  Asca- 
lon,  Ekron,  and  Gaza       , .  , ,  . ,  . .     93 


CHAPTER  VII.— Judea  and  Babylon. 

The  cessation  of  the  Jewish  Worship,  and  the  deso- 
lation of  the  Jewish  sanctuaries — The  Israelites  up- 
rooted from  the  land — Their  enemies  to  dwell  in  it — 
Its  cities  to  be  a  waste  and  the  land  a  desolation — 
The  duration  of  the  desolation — Judea  to  be  a  land 
of  pilgrimages — The  doom  of  Bethel,  of  Samaria,  of 
Capernaum,  and  of  Jerusalem — Fate  of  Mount  Mor- 
iah  and  of  Zion — The  destruction  of  the  Temple 
and  the  continued  oppression  of  Jerusalem — Julian's 
attempt  to  defeat  the  prophecy — Babylon:  Its  deso- 
lation to  be  utter  and  lasting — The  process  of  its 
demolition  described — A  burnt  mountain — To  become 
the  prey  of  many  nations — All  that  spoil  her  to  be 
satisfied — The  awful  desolation  of  Chaldea  ..        ..   in 


CHAPTER  VIII. — A  Prophetic  Forecast  of  the 
World's  Entire  History. 

The  Book  of  Daniel — Supposed  critical  triumph — 
Nebuchadnezzar's  dream — Interpretation  of  the  para- 
ble^— The  four  empires  named  in  Scripture — The 
Roman  to  be  the  last  merely  human  world-dominion 
— The  character  of  the  fourth  kingdom— Its  novelty, 
terribleness,  strength,  and  tyranny — The  division  of 
the  empire — Its  continuance — The  number  of  its  frag- 
ments— A  miracle  of  insight:  The  childhood,  boy- 
hood, youth,  manhood,  and  old  age  of  history       ,.   151 


CONTENTS.  V 

CHAPTER   IX. — Prophecies    Fulfilled    in    the 
Coming,  the  History,  and  the  Work  of  Christ. 

The  age  of  the  Old  Testament  writings — The  Mes- 
sianic prophecies — The  nations  to  cast  away  their 
idols — The  revolution  to  be  the  work  of  one  man — 
And  He  to  be  a  Jew — The  time  of  His  death  predicted 
— His  history  foretold — His  lowliness  and  poverty — 
Rejected  by  Israel — Dies  by  violence,  and  under  a 
judicial  sentence — His  work  described — He  lives  and 
saves  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .  . .   193 


CHAPTER   X. — Predictions     Fulfilled    in     the 
History  of  the  Jews. 

Their  importance — The  Jews'  rejection  of  Jesus — 
Its  long  continuance — Their  punishment — The  instru- 
ments of  it — The  mercilessness  of  the  instruments 
of  vengeance — The  Jews  to  be  taken  back  to  Egypt 
"in  ships" — Characteristics  of  the  war:  its  sieges;  the 
method  of  attack — The  Jews  to  suffer  the  extremities 
of  famine,  and  to  be  left  few  in  number — Their  uni- 
versal dispersion — Their  preservation — Their  separ- 
ateness — Their  treatment  in  the  lands  of  their  sojourn 
— To  be  compelled  to  pollute  themselves  with  idolatry 
— To  have  no  rest — To  be  deprived  of  any  central 
government — To  be  deprived  of  sacrifice,  and  holy- 
place,  and  priest — Conclusion      ..  ,.  ..215 


CHAPTER   I. 

A    SERIOUS    QUESTION. 

It  is  sometimes  asked  in  petulant  indolence.  The 
writer  has  a  vivid  recollection  of  its  being  put  by  a 
rather  feeble,  and  not  very  worthy,  member  of  a  country 
church.  He  possessed  a  copy  of  "Brown's  Bible/' 
and  it  was  a  favourite  exercise  with  him  to  spend 
Sunday  afternoon  in  comparing  the  exposition  he 
had  heard  in  the  morning  with  the  remarks  in  the 
commentary.  These  did  not  always  agree,  and 
disagreement  was  never  noted  without  annoyance. 
One  Sunday  there  chanced  to  be  a  more  than  ordinarily 
wide  divergence.  The  minister  happened  to  call  a  day 
or  two  afterwards,  and,  having  spent  his  strength  in 
explaining  and  defending  the  position  he  had  dared  to 
take  in  defiance  of  "Brown,"  he  was  rewarded  by  the 
exclamation :  "What  are  we  to  believe !" 

It  might  be  well  for  all  men,  and  it  would  certainly 
be  more  agreeable  to  many,  were  there  no  divergent 
opinions.  But  it  is  not  well  for  any  man,  when  he 
discovers  that  all  do  not  think  alike,  to  faint  amid  the 
strife  of  tongues  and  to  "throw  the  whole  thing  up." 
There  are  few  truths  which  have  not  had  to  run  the 
gauntlet  of  controversy ;  and  those  truths  are  our  pos- 
session to-day  solely  because  there  happened  to  be  men 
who,  while  thev  loved  peace,  would  not  part  with  con- 
viction though  the  holding  to  it  meant  war.  Science  as 
well  as  faith  has  had  its  martyrs.     They  were  brave 


2  A   SERIOUS    QUESTION. 

enough  to  leave  the  beaten  track  in  search  of  truth; 
and,  when  they  found  it,  they  were  not  to  be  frightened 
from  their  possession  by  the  chorus  of  doubt  and  con- 
demnation with  which  they  were  assailed.  That  man 
will  do  little  in  the  world  who  can  be  terrified  by 
clamour,  or  who  surrenders  convictions  because  all  are 
not  agreed  as  to  their  truth.  The  manly  man  feels  that, 
in  such  differences,  there  is  a  call  to  inquire  and  to 
make  his  own  decision.  The  rest,  though  it  pains  one 
to  say  it,  are  no  great  loss.  The  wind  that  sweeps 
across  the  threshing-floor  takes  only  the  chaff  away; 
or,  if  it  take  with  it  too  the  light,  withered,  heartless, 
grain,  the  wheat  that  is  left  clean  and  sound  is  all  the 
worthier  of  the  garner. 

Were  such  the  only  lips  to  ask  the  question  we 
might  pass  it  lightly  by.  But  it  is  sometimes  asked  in 
despair.  There  is  many  a  tragedy  in  these  last  days 
which  never  gets  into  the  newspapers ;  which  is  played 
out  to  the  bitter  end  in  obscurity  and  silence ;  which  no 
eye  witnesses,  and  neither  tongue  nor  pen  relates.  Let 
us  glance  at  a  few  typical  instances.  A  lad  leaves  a 
northern  village,  in  which  he  had  been  born  and 
brought  up,  for  one  of  our  large  southern  cities.  He 
has  come  from  a  pious  home  where  impressions  had 
been  made  which  fond  parents  hoped  would  be  an  abid- 
ing protection  against  the  temptations  which  he  went 
forth  to  meet.  And  at  first  it  was  so.  He  sought  and 
found,  in  his  new  home,  associations  similar  to  those 
with  which  he  had  so  long  been  familiar.  He  breathed 
a  kindred  social,  intellectual,  and  spiritual  atmosphere. 
He  was  found  at  prayer-meetings,  and  he  rejoiced  in 
young  men's  religious  societies.  Between  him  and 
heresy,  or  unbelief,  there  lay  a  great  gulf  of  pious 
horror,  which  shut  off  all  communication,  and  which, 
one  would  have  imagined,  effectually  disposed  of  any 
dread  of  infection. 

Some  years  passed  and  then  there  came  a  change. 
He   began  to  read.     The  pleasures  of  "the   Pierian 


TRIALS   OF   EARLY   FAITH.  3 

spring"  allured  him  on.  He  wandered  in  new,  and 
hitherto  undreamt  of,  fields.  And,  as  the  centre  of  in- 
terest changed  its  place,  there  was  a  corresponding 
transfer  of  affection.  The  old  resorts  were  less  fre- 
quented. The  limitations  of  old  companionships  be- 
came painfully  apparent.  They  were  judged  of  more 
by  what  they  lacked  than  by  what  they  had. 

By-and-bye  another  stage  was  reached.  His  reading 
had  hitherto  been  of  a  colourless  character  so  far  as 
Christianity  was  concerned.  But  now  in  the  course  of 
his  journeying  he  lighted  upon  a  country  whose 
thought  and  speech  were  diverse  from  all  he  had  hith- 
erto known.  The  beliefs  which  he  had  till  then  cher- 
ished were  regarded  with  pitying  contempt,  or  were 
spoken  of  as  if  no  sane  man  could  have  patience  with 
them.  All  this  he  read  with  pain,  but  also  with  increas- 
ing curiosity.  There  must  surely  be  some  grounds, 
real  or  supposed,  for  the  position  which  was  assumed. 
What  were  they  ?  From  Matthew  Arnold  he  passed  to 
the  Leben  Jesu  of  David  Frederic  Strauss.  The  dead- 
lier potion  seemed  at  first  less  objectionable  than  the 
other.  It  was  a  relief  to  turn  from  the  pretentiousness 
of  Arnold  to  the  studied  fairness  and  the  transparent 
frankness  of  Strauss.  But  it  was  still  a  thorny  path- 
way. With  grief  and  deepening  sadness,  one  convic- 
tion after  another  was  laid  aside,  till  all  were  buried 
in  a  grave  for  which  it  seemed  no  resurrection  morn 
was  possible.  It  was  a  terrible  awaking.  The  holy 
tenderness  and  glowing  hopes  of  his  earlier  faith  died 
as  the  day  dies  when  the  sun  has  sunk  beneath  the 
western  horizon.  Deep  darkness  settled  down  on  past, 
present,  and  future.  He  wrote  to  a  friend  "I  have 
ceased  to  believe  in  Christ,  Christianity,  or  the  Bible." 

Part  of  another  life-drama  was  enacted  in  the  same 
city,  a  few  years  earlier.  It  was  that  of  a  youth  from 
another  district  and  with  a  very  different  preparation 
for  the  struggle.  No  religious  training  had  either 
biased  or  blessed  his  boyhood.  Religion  belonged  to  a 


4  A   SERIOUS    QUESTION. 

world  with  which  he  had  nothing  whatever  to  do,  and 
with  which  he  desired  no  closer  connection.  He  had 
gone  to  church  just  as  he  had  gone  to  school,  from 
compulsion  rather  than  choice,  and  the  Sunday  exer- 
cises had  made  still  less  impression  than  the  other.  He 
must  have  heard  the  texts  given  out ;  and,  though  his 
thoughts  were  wandering  far  away,  he  must  have  heard 
parts  at  least  of  many  a  sermon ;  but  they  were  remem- 
bered quite  as  little  as  the  humming  of  the  bees  in  the 
fields,  through  which  he  passed  to  reach  his  home. 

A  guest  came  one  evening,  who,  for  lack  of  better 
accommodation,  had  to  share  the  boy's  bedroom,  and 
the  stranger  seized  the  opportunity  to  speak  to  him 
about  that  of  which  he  had  never  thought — his  soul. 
The  result  could  not  have  been  encouraging  to  the  good 
man,  and  the  circumstance  was  long  remembered  by  the 
subject  of  his  solicitude  with  anything  but  gratitude. 
Why  people  should  take  such  dire  offence  at  plain  deal- 
ing in  this  of  all  matters — why  they  should  be  more 
indignant  at  the  question  whether  they  are  bound  for 
heaven  than  at  the  inquiry  whether  they  think  of  going 
to  New  Zealand,  is  a  matter  which  philosophers  have 
yet  to  explain. 

Some  time  after  his  arrival  in  the  city,  conscience 
began  to  assert  itself ;  but  to  religion  he  was  as  indif- 
ferent as  ever.  A  friend  of  the  people,  with  whom  he 
boarded,  used  occasionally  to  spend  an  evening  with 
him  and  them.  He  was  a  Secularist,  and  belief  in  the 
existence  of  God  was  argued  against  and  scoffed  at. 
The  youth  was  unable  to  refute  the  arguments  ad- 
vanced, but  he  recoiled  from  the  dark  abyss  of 
Atheism.  The  story  is  told  of  a  lady  who,  having 
fallen  into  a  trance  and  having  been  buried  alive,  re- 
gained consciousness  as  the  grave-digger,  who  had 
afterwards  unearthed  the  supposed  corpse,  was  sever- 
ing a  finger  in  order  to  obtain  the  ring  which  had  been 
left  upon  it.  And  so  the  attempt  to  rob  him  of  this 
last  conviction  seemed  to  arouse  his  long-slumbering 


MINISTERIAL   DIFFICULTIES.  5 

mental  and  moral  nature.  The  question  was  now  eager- 
ly asked  which  had  never  passed  those  lips  before — 
"What  are  we  to  believe  ?"  An  advertisement  regard- 
ing The  Defender,  a  periodical  edited  by  Dr.  Ruther- 
ford, of  Newcastle,  was  noticed.  The  magazine  was 
regularly  purchased  and  eagerly  read.  It  met  his  need. 
A  spirit  that  was  willing  to  believe  if  it  only  could, 
was,  so  to  speak,  taken  by  the  hand  and  led  onward 
into  brightening  light. 

We  may  cite  one  case  more.  Two  clergymen,  sta- 
tioned in  a  University  town,  are  walking  out  into  the 
country,  as  they  often  do,  on  Monday  morning.  Both 
are  young  men  and  in  their  first  pastorates,  the  elder 
of  the  two  having  had  a  couple  of  years'  more  exper- 
ience of  ministerial  life  than  his  companion.  There  is 
a  sadness,  however,  in  this  morning's  conversation. 
In  the  confidence  of  a  very  sincere  and  close  friendship, 
the  elder  is  relating  some  of  his  difficulties.  He  pro- 
fesses himself  unable  any  longer  to  accept  the  ordinary 
representations  of  the  Atonement.  His  friend  is  sym- 
pathetic but  astonished.  To  him  everything  is  clear. 
He  refers  to  one  passage  of  Scripture  after  another, 
but  the  other  is  neither  convinced  nor  helped. 

A  few  years  have  passed.  The  friends  are  now  sep- 
arated by  distance,  but  the  younger  has  reason  to 
remember  that  morning's  conversation.  He  compre- 
hends the  doubts  to-day,  the  strength  and  misery  of 
which  were  hid  from  him  a  year  or  two  ago.  The 
ground  is  now  slipping  from  beneath  his  own  feet.  He 
has  been  increasingly  attracted  to  a  literature,  the 
one  grand  dogma  of  which  is  the  Fatherhood  of  God. 
It  was  a  belief  which,  as  he  grasped  it,  had  more  of 
sentiment  than  of  strength,  but  it  had  become  to  him 
practically  the  whole  evangel.  Deductions  are  some- 
times made  slowly  even  by  a  logical  mind,  but  once 
made  they  are  bound  on  the  soul  with  bands  of  iron. 
Looked  at  from  the  new  standpoint,  old  beliefs  lost 
their  reasonableness,  and  even  their  credibility.     His 


6  A    SERIOUS    QUESTION. 

faith  in  the  central  doctrine  of  the  Scripture  went  as 
completely  as  his  friend's  had  formerly  done. 

He  did  his  work  as  best  he  could ;  but  he  was  not  at 
rest.  The  gospel  message,  as  he  now  viewed  it,  had 
lost  much  of  its  urgency.  There  was  an  uneasy  feeling, 
too,  that  he  was  at  war  with  the  Book  which  he  profes- 
sed to  accept  wholly,  and  all  the  counsels  of  which  he 
acknowledged  it  his  duty  to  declare.  Then  there  came  to 
him  a  period  of  enforced  leisure.  He  had  time  to  look 
back  upon  the  past,  to  weigh  his  work,  to  judge  his  life. 
The  retrospect  seemed  ghastly.  He  asked  himself  what 
had  been  the  outcome  of  his  toil,  and  confessed  that  the 
answer,  if  stated  truly,  was — a  salary.  Measured  by 
spiritual  result  it  was  nothing,  and  less  than  nothing. 
He  was  interested  in  the  special  truth  on  which  he 
might  happen  to  preach  on  the  Sunday,  and  he  believed 
that  the  people  were  also  interested ;  but,  when  Monday 
came,  he  and  they  were  just  where  they  had  been  be- 
fore. The  studying  and  preaching  led  neither  him  nor 
them  to  anything  that  satisfied  and  saved.  Theirs  was 
a  wandering,  not  a  progress.  Then  came  a  time  of  ter- 
rible darkness,  and  of  soul  wrestling.  But  there  was 
hope  in  the  ordeal,  for  the  wrestling  was,  like  his  of 
old,  a  wrestling  with  God.  Light  dawned,  and  it  found 
him  humbled  and  willing  to  be  led.  It  gave  him  a  truer 
hold  on  Christ,  a  deeper  and  more  childlike  trust  in 
God's  word.  He  still  serves,  and  not  without  re- 
sult.     The    other    lies    to-day    in   a    suicide's    grave. 

These  are  no  fancy  sketches ;  they  are  photographs. 
They  remind  us  in  how  many  ways  and  by  how  many 
lips  this  question  is  being  asked — what  are  wrE  to 
believe?  Is  there  any  answer?  Is  there  anything 
which  will  put  dark  doubts  to  rest,  and  leave  the  heart 
with  certainty  and  God?  The  old  ideas  regarding  in- 
spiration are  not,  generally  speaking,  the  ideas  of  to- 
day. "Verbal  inspiration"  is  spoken  of  as  a  contradic- 
tion in  terms,  and  rejected  as  a  superstition  and  an 
absurdity.     The  clear  and  sharply-defined  defence  of 


CAN    OLD    POSITIONS    BE    MAINTAINED?  J 

former  times  has  given  place  to  wavering  and  apology. 
We  are  told  that  the  language  of  scripture  is  not  to  be 
too  closely  pressed.  We  are  taught  rather  to  expect 
mistakes  in  science  and  in  history,  till  we  begin  to 
wonder  wherein  the  inspiration  of  the  Bible  lies.  Is 
there  anything  which  will  settle  these  questions — - 
which  will  show  whether  we  have  a  Book  that  is  not 
man's  but  God's,  and  which  will  prove  once  for  all 
how  its  words  are  to  be  taken  ?    I  believe  there  is. 


CHAPTER  II. 

CAN     THE    QUESTION     BE    ANSWERED? 

We  can  imagine  no  graver  position  than  that  o± 
the  man  who  takes  his  seat  in  the  Jury-box  at  a 
criminal  trial.  He  is  bound  by  his  oath  and  by  his 
duty  to  his  country,  not  only  "to  well  and  truly  try," 
but  also  to  declare  his  judgment.  It  is  his  to  decide 
whether  he  shall  brand  a  man  with  lasting  infamy  and 
crush  the  hearts  of  parents,  wife,  children,  friends,  be- 
neath a  load  which  nothing  can  remove.  He  is  asked 
to  say  whether  a  man,  whose  good  name,  liberty,  and 
life,  are  as  sacred  as  his  own,  shall  be  consigned  to 
years  of  a  stern  and  terrible  prison  discipline,  or,  it 
may  be,  to  death  at  the  hands  of  the  executioner. 

And  yet  it  sometimes  happens  that  one  piece  of  evi- 
dence impresses  the  mind  of  the  Jury  with  such  over- 
whelming conviction  that  they  cannot  hesitate,  though 
the  gravest  of  all  issues  depends  upon  their  decision.  A 
large  employer  of  labour,  for  example,  has  been  found 
dead  on  the  way  to  his  own  home.  The  cause  of  death 
was  a  gun-shot  wound,  and  it  was  evident  that  he  had 
been  murdered.  One  of  his  workmen,  whom  he  had  dis- 
charged after  a  personal  altercation,  is  suspected,  and 
placed  upon  his  trial.    The  quarrel,  and  the  consequent 


CERTAINTY    SOMETIMES   ATTAINED.  g 

discharge  are  proved.  Witnesses  also  testify  that  the 
prisoner  threatened  to  be  revenged;  that  he  was  seen 
in  the  neighbourhood  at  the  time  of  the  murder;  and 
that  a  gun,  which  had  been  recently  fired,  was  found 
in  his  house.  So  far  there  is  ground  for  strong  sus- 
picion. But,  when  it  is  proved  that  the  wadding  used 
in  loading  the  gun  was  found  in  an  adjacent  hedge, 
was  unrolled,  and  discovered  to  be  part  of  a  letter 
addressed  to  the  prisoner,  and  that  the  letter  itself,  from 
which  the  piece  had  been  torn,  was  found  in  his  posses- 
sion, suspicion  becomes  certainty.  Both  parts  are  laid 
before  the  Jury,  and  in  that  moment  every  hope  of  the 
murderer's  escape  vanishes.  Have  we  anything  in  the 
whole  range  of  the  Christian  evidences  which  will 
prove  the  claims  of  Scripture  as  convincingly  as  the 
fragments  of  the  letter  prove  the  man's  guilt  ?  I  believe 
we  have.  I  believe  the  evidence  placed  in  our  hands  by 
the  fulfilled  predictions  of  Scripture  does  more. 

In  the  dedication  to  his  book  on  the,  Prophecies, 
'Bishop  Newton  refers  to  some  conversations  he  had 
with  Marshal  Wade.  The  latter  laughed  at  the  alleged 
proof  of  Christianity  from  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy, 
and  all  argument  was  set  aside  with  the  observation 
that  the  predictions  were  written  after  the  events.  The 
Bishop  urged  in  reply  that  there  were  several  proph- 
ecies wdiich  were  not  fulfilled  till  recent  times,  and 
several  more  which  were  beyond  doubt  written  cen- 
turies before  the  events  happened.  The  Marshal  was 
startled,  "and  said  he  must  acknowledge  that,  if  this 
point  could  be  proved  to  satisfaction,  there  would  be  no 
argument  against  such  plain  matter  of  fact;  it  would 
certainly  convince  him,  and,  he  believed,  would  be 
the  readiest  way  to  convince  every  reasonable  man  of 
the  truth  of  revelation." 

That  judgment  is  one  which  all  must  endorse.  If  it 
is  possible  to  produce  evidence  pf  the  kind  referred  to 
by  Bishop  Newton,  then  the  inspiration  of  the  Scrip- 


10  CAN    THE    QUESTION    BE   ANSWERED? 

tures  is  no  longer  open  to  doubt,  nor  is  the  existence 
of  Him  from  whom  they  are  said  to  have  come.  As 
this  is  a  point  of  such  vast  importance  let  us 

WEIGH    THE    ARGUMENT 

for  a  moment.  None  have  better  information  in  regard 
to  our  own  families  than  we  ourselves  possess.  We 
know  the  present  condition  and  the  past  history  of  each 
member  of  them.  We  are  aware  of  the  circumstances 
which  will  largely  influence  their  future,  and  we  see 
even  now  how  these  circumstances  are  likely  to  affect 
them.  Say,  then,  that  we  are  asked  to  go  forward  in 
thought  only  ten  years,  and  to  state  distinctly  what  the 
condition  of  each  member  of  the  family  will  be  at  the 
end  of  that  time ;  to  say  who  will  be  alive,  if  any ;  who, 
if  any,  dead ;  in  what  place  each  will  then  be  residing ; 
who  will  be  in  prosperous  circumstances,  who  in  cir- 
cumstances the  reverse.  How  should  we  meet  the 
demand?  Should  we  entertain  the  questions  seriously* 
even  for  a  moment  ?  Much  as  we  do  know,  none  but  a 
madman  or  a  fool  could  suppose  us  capable  of  resolv- 
ing such  points  as  these. 

Again :  we  all  have  some  acquaintance  with  the  city, 
town,  or  place,  in  which  we  dwell.  We  can  say 
whether  there  is  promise  of  increased  population  and 
prosperity,  or  whether  a  decrease  of  both  is  threatened. 
But,  thoroughly  as  we  know  the  place  and  its  prospects, 
will  any  one  of  us  venture  to  leave  the  region  of  opin- 
ion and  surmise,  and  speak  minutely  and  positively 
of  what  its  condition  will  be  a  hundred  years  hence? 
Or,  to  take  another  illustration:  there  are  men  now 
guiding  the  destinies  of  Europe  who  have  studied  pol- 
itics for  half  a  century.  Many  of  them  have  had  long 
and  accurate  knowledge  of  the  tendencies  and  re- 
sources of  the  various  countries,  and  of  the  dangers 
which  threaten  them  from  without  and  from  within. 


THE    FUTURE    HID    FROM    HUMAN    VIEW.  II 

Ask  the  man,  who  has  the  keenest  vision  of  them  all, 
what  will  be  the  condition  at  the  close  of  the  next  half 
century  of  India,  or  Germany,  or  France,  or  Great 
Britain.  Ask  whether  Switzerland,  for  example,  will 
then  retain  her  independence,  or  have  been  seized  by 
one  of  her  bigger  neighbors,  and  in  the  latter  event,  by 
which.  Suppose  these  questions  gravely  put,  and 
gravely  entertained,  will  not  the  answer  be,  that  the 
things  which  we  wish  to  know  lie  far  beyond  the  range 
of  the  keenest  sight  possessed  by  man — that  the  wisest, 
though  he  may  shrewdly  conjecture,  cannot  write  a 
single  page,  nor  pen  a  single  line,  of  the  story  of  the 
future  ? 

It  is,  perhaps,  scarcely  necessary  to  emphasize  this 
by  further  illustrations.  But  literature  abounds  with 
proofs  of  how  completely,  notwithstanding  all  we  say 
about  insight  and  foresight,  the  future  is  hid  from  us. 
Malte  Brun  in  his  description  of  Prussia,  says  that 
"from  its  proximity  to  Russia  it  must  be  in  many  re- 
spects a  secondary  power"  little  anticipating  the  polit- 
ical developments  of  present  times.  "It  is  curious," 
Henry  Greville  writes  under  date  March  20,  1848, 
"that  Lord  Hardinge,  who  arrived  here  on  Thursday, 
passed  two  hours  at  Vienna,  and  saw  Metternich,  who 
spoke  of  passing  events  without  the  slightest  apprehen- 
sion, and  said  that  it  was  possible  there  might  be  some 
disturbances  in  different  parts  of  the  Empire,  but  that 
they  would  be  put  down  without  any  difficulty,  and 
that  he  had  no  intention  of  making  any  concessions 
at  this  time.  Four  days  afterwards  lie  was  obliged  to 
fly  from  Vienna,  and  his  house  was  sacked  and 
burnt."* 

Instances  of  similar  blindness  might  easily  be  mul- 
tiplied, but  I  mention  three  only  which  have  a  common 
bearing  on  one  of  the  greatest  events  of  modern  times 

*  Leaves  from  the  Dairy  of  Henry  Greville,  Vol.  I.,  p.  243. 


12  CAN   THE   QUESTION    BE   ANSWERED? 

— the  regeneration  of  Italy.  Macaulay  concludes  his, 
essay  on  Machiavelli  with  the  words:  "In  the  church 
of  Santa  Croce  a  monument  was  erected  to  his  memory 
.  .  .  .  which  will  be  approached  with  still  deeper 
homage  when  the  object  to  which  his  public  life  zvas 
devoted  shall  be  attained,  zvhen  the  foreign  yoke  shall 
be  broken,  when  a  second  Procida  shall  avenge  the 
wrongs  of  Naples,  when  a  happier  Rienzi  shall  restore 
the  good  estate  of  Rome,  when  the  streets  of  Florence 
and  Bologna  shall  again  resound  with  their  ancient 
war-cry,  'Popolo;  popolo;  mnoiano  i  tiranni!  "  This 
was  written  in  1827.  Who  knew  that  in  the  days  of 
men  then  living  all  these  aspirations  would  be  fulfilled 
— that  every  tyrant  should  have  fled,  and  that  the  land 
be  no  more  darkened  with  the  shadow  of  an 
oppressor? 

In  185 1,  Mr.  Gladstone  published  his  letter  regard- 
ing the  condition  of  Naples.  Between  twenty  and 
thirty  thousand  political  prisoners  lay  crowded  to- 
gether in  the  fortresses  and  jails.  No  man  raised  his 
voice  on  behalf  of  liberty,  or  even  fell  under  suspicion 
of  holding  liberal  opinions,  but  was  sent  into  exile  or 
cast  into  a  dungeon.  Mr.  Gladstone  published  his 
indignant  appeal  to  the  public  opinion  of  Europe, 
thinking,  perhaps,  that  the  Neapolitan  Government 
might  be  shamed  into  humanity,  but  seeing  no  other 
hope  for  a  cruelly  oppressed  people.  Who  could  have 
foreseen  that  before  another  ten  years  had  passed 
that  land  should  be  free — free  as  it  had  not  been  for 
ages ;  and  that  a  fugitive  from  his  beloved  Italy,  then 
wandering  on  the  far-distant  shores  of  America,  was 
the  man  through  whom  the  deliverance  should  come? 
Who  was  then  able,  with  his  hand  upon  these  facts,  to 
warn  the  tyrant,  or  to  console  the  down-trodden  ? 

The  last  and  not  least  startling  instance,  which  I  cite, 
of  man's  ignorance  of  the  future,  is  found  in  a  letter 
written  on  the  eve  of  Italy's  complete  deliverance  As 


THE   UNEXPECTED   HAPPENS.  1 3 

late  as  the  Spring  of  1866  George  A.  Sala  wrote  as 
follows  regarding  Venice :  "When  is  the  day  of  her 
deliverance  to  come,  and  when  are  the  tears  which, 
with  but  twelve  months'  intermission,  have  flowed  for 
half  a  century,  to  be  dried  ?  She  waits  and  waits,  and 
the  Italians  wait  too,  clenching  their  hands,  and  grind- 
ing their  teeth.  ...  It  is  impossible  to  cross  the 
frontier,  or  to  be  half-an-hour  in  the  Austro- Venetian 
territory,  without  becoming  aware  that  the  Austrian 
'Autograph' — as  Mr.  Thackeray  called  the  double- 
headed  eagle — has  got  a  very  tight  grip  of  the  country. 
.  .  As  he  is  a  very  powerful  eagle,  strong  on  the 
wing  and  adamantine  in  the  talons,  the  contingency  of 
his  giving  up  his  Venetian  quarry  is,  to  say  the  least, 
remote.  It  is  not  impossible."*  To  these  words  he 
has  appended  the  following  note:  "This  was  written 
in  the  Spring.  In  the  Summer  came  Sadowa,  and  the 
Austrians  gave  up  Venice." 

"It  is,"  as  a  veteran  statesman  once  said,  "the  unex- 
pected that  happens."  The  anticipations  of  the  most 
far-seeing,  and  the  precautions  of  the  wisest  are 
mocked  again  and  again  by  the  bitter  irony  of  events. 
We  might  as  soon  think  to  pluck  the  stars  from  heaven 
as  to  wrest  its  secrets  from  the  future.  The  king, 
when  he  bade  the  advancing  waves  retire,  was  not 
more  powerless  than  we,  when  we  command  the  ap- 
proaching days  to  appear  and  tell  what  things  they 
bring.  We  cannot  foresee  even  dimly  the  events  of  to- 
morrow, or  of  the  next  hour.  We  stand  before  a  wall 
of  impenetrable  darkness.  We  have  hopes  and  fears, 
but  no  certainties.  Thoughts  rise  up  within  our 
bosom,  but  from  the  future  there  comes  neither  voice 
nor  sign.  If,  then,  this  feat,  which  we  rightly  declare 
is  impossible  for  man  to  perform,  has  been  achieved — 
if  the  future  has  been  read,  and,  not  only  years,  but 

*  Rome  and  Venice,  pp.  33-36. 


14  CAN    THE    QUESTION    BE   ANSWERED? 

centuries  have  yielded  up  their  secrets — if  we  produce 
a  book  in  which  predictions,  so  numerous,  and  varied, 
and  minute  as  to  preclude  all  possibility  of  chance, 
were 

RECORDED  CENTURIES  BEFORE 

the  events  occurred  in  which  they  were  startlingly  ful- 
filled— will  it  be  any  longer  possible  to  doubt  that  God 
is,  and  that  this  is  His  word  to  us  ?  If  evidence  of  this 
kind  can  really  be  produced,  doubt  will  be  an  impossi- 
bility. And  whether  our  evidence  be  of  this  kind  the 
reader  will  now  be  able  to  judge. 


CHAPTER    III. 

PREDICTIONS  REGARDING  TYRE  AND  SIDON. 

To  show  the  nature  of  the  evidence  we  have  to  offer 
we  take  the  case  of 

TYRE. 

Its  doom  is  predicted  in  the  twenty-sixth  chapter  of 
Ezekiel.  A  graphic  picture  is  drawn  of  its  siege  and 
capture  by  Nebuchadnezzar  (verses  7-11).  The  pow- 
erful fleet  of  Tyre  swept  the  sea,  and  prevented  the 
complete  investment  of  the  city;  but,  after  a  siege  of 
thirteen  years,  it  was  at  last  taken  by  the  Chaldean 
army.  With  this  part  of  the  prophecy,  however,  we 
do  not  concern  ourselves.  The  genuineness  of  the 
book  of  Ezekiel  will  not  be  questioned,  but  still  it 
would  be  difficult  to  prove  that  the  prophecy  was 
uttered  before  this  event  took  place. 

More,  however,  was  predicted.  After  describing  the 
vengeance  which  the  king  of  Babylon  will  inflict,  the 
prophecy  proceeds :  "And  they  shall  lay  thy  stones, 
and  thy  timber,  and  thy  dust  in  the  midst  of  the 
waters"  (verse  12).  Let  the  change  of  person  be 
noted.  Having  spoken  of  what  Nebuchadnezzar  will 
do,  it  is  added,  "And  they  shall,"  etc.,  as  if  others  were 
to  be  joined  with  him  in  the  work  of  destruction. 
Light  is  thrown  upon  this  distinction  in  the  third  and 
fourth  verses.  God  will  cause  many  nations  to  come 
up  against  Tyre,  "as  the  sea  causes  his  waves  to  come 


1 6  TYRE  AND    SIDON. 

up"  (verse  3).  Shock  will  succeed  to  shock,  till  she  is 
utterly  desolate;  "and  they  shall  destroy  the  walls  of 
Tyrus,  and  break  do\vn  her  towers ;  I  will  also  scrape 
her  dust  from  her,  and  make  her  like  the  top  of  a  rock" 
(verse  4). 

Previous  to  the  fall  of  their  ancient  city,  the  Tyrians 
had  removed  the  bulk  of  their  treasure  to  an  island  in 
their  possession,  half  a  mile  from  the  shore.  Taught 
now  by  bitter  experience,  they  resolved  to  trust  them- 
selves no  more  within  walls,  which  had  not  round  them 
the  defence  of  a  watery  girdle.  Tyre  was  mistress  of 
the  sea,  and  could  defend  herself  there.  The  old  city 
was  therefore  deserted,  and  no  attempt  was  made  to 
rebuild  it  after  the  Babylonian  army  had  retired.  So 
far  the  prophecy  had  been  fulfilled,  but  only  so  fan 
Tyre  was  overthrown  and  spoiled;  the  noise  of  her 
songs  had  ceased ;  the  sound  of  her  harps  was  no  more 
heard  (verse  13)  ;  the  great  and  joyous  city  was  abased 
and  desolate.  But  the  ruins  still  stood.  The  words 
which  declared  that  the  stones  and  the  timber  should 
be  cast  into  the  sea,  and  the  very  dust  be  scraped  from 
the  city's  site,  had  not  been  fulfilled;  and  it  seemed 
most  improbable  that  they  ever  would.be.  What  could 
the  words  mean?  Nebuchadnezzar  had  taken  a  full 
vengeance,  but  he  had  never  thought  of  this.  Even  in 
his  case,  furious  though  he  might  be  at  the  long-con- 
tinued resistance,  it  would  have  been  the  very  frenzy 
of  revenge.  Who  then  would  be  found  to  wreak  such 
unheard-of  vengeance  upon  the  unoffending  ruins? 

More  than  two  hundred  and  forty  years  rolled  on, 
and  there  was  no  answer.  For  two  and  a  half  cen- 
turies those  words  of  Scripture  seemed  a  vain  menace. 
Then  the  fame  of  Alexander's  swift  and  all-conquer- 
ing career  sent  a  thrill  of  alarm  through  the  East. 
The  Tyrian  ambassadors,  who  hastened  to  meet  him, 
were  favourably  received.  It  seemed  as  if  this  storm- 
cloud  were  about  to  pass  harmlessly  over  them.  But 
suddenly  the  conqueror  expressed  a  desire  to  worship 


LIMITS   OF   THE    INQUIRY.  17 

within  their  city.  They  knew  only  too  well  what  that 
request  meant.  Alexander  would  not  enter  alone; 
and,  once  there,  those  who  came  as  worshippers  would 
remain  as  masters.  The  Tyrians  resolved  to  abide  the 
issue  of  war,  'rather  than  tamely  hand  over  their  city 
to  the  Macedonian  king.  Alexander's  army  marched 
to  the  sea-shore,  and  there,  with  half  a  mile  of  blue 
waters  between  them  and  it,  stood  the  city  they  had 
come  to  attack.  How  could  it  be  taken?  Alexander's 
plan  was  speedily  formed.  He  determined  to  construct 
a  solid  causeway  through  the  sea,  over  which  his  forces 
might  advance  to  the  assault.  And  now  this  word, 
which  had  waited  so  long,  was  at  last 

LITERALLY   FULFILLED. 

The  walls,  and  the  towers,  and  the  ruined  houses,  and 
palaces,  and  temples,  of  the  ancient  city  were  pulled 
down,  and  the  stones  and  the  timber  of  Tyre  were  laid 
"in  the  midst  of  the  water."  Her  mounds  of  ruins 
were  cleared  away;  and  so  great  was  the  demand  for 
material  in  this  vast  undertaking,  that  the  very  dust 
seems  to  have  been  scraped  from  the  site  and  laid  in 
the  sea.  Though  centuries  had  passed  after  the  word 
was  spoken,  and  had  seen  no  fulfilment,  it  was  not  for- 
gotten; and  the  event  declared  that  it  was  His  word 
whose  judgments,  though  they  may  linger  long,  come 
surely,  and  fall  at  last  with  resistless  might. 

I  have  dwelt  upon  this  instance  simply  as  an  ex- 
ample of  the  kind  of  evidence  we  are  able  to  bring 
forward.  Indubitable  though  the  prophecy  is,  I  press 
for  no  conclusion  from  its  fulfilment.  It  is  of  the 
utmost  importance,  in  this  inquiry,  to  place  it  beyond 
the  possibility  of  doubt  that  we  are  dealing  with  ver- 
itable prophecies,  and  that  the  prediction  is  separated 
from  the  event  by  such  an  interval  as  must  exclude  the 
possibility  of  human  foresight.    It  could  be  proved  sat- 


1 8  TYRE  AND   SIDON. 

isfactorily  to  most  minds  that  the  book  of  Ezekiel  was 
in  existence  long  before  the  time  of  Alexander;  but 
still  doubt  might  creep  in.  The  suggestion  might  be 
made  that  this  particular  prediction  was  added,  or 
amended,  by  a  later  hand. 

We  shall  therefore  limit  the  present  inquiry  to  those 
prophecies,  regarding  whose  pre-existence  to  the 
events  of  w7hich  they  speak,  there  can,  in  no  mind,  be 
any  doubt  whatever.  I  enter  into  no  argument  as  to 
the  age  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures.  I  ask  no 
admission  to  be  made  in  regard  to  the  antiquity  of  any 
one  of  the  prophetical  books.  We  shall  come  down  to 
a  time  later  than  any  that  has  ever  been  named  for 
their  origin,  and  our  argument  shall  stand  or  fall  by 
the  prophecies  which  have  been  fulfilled  since  then. 
Everyone  is  fully  satisfied  that  all  the  Books  of  the  Old 
Testament  were  in  existence  before  the  time  of  our 
Lord.  It  is  also  known,  that  since  that  time,  the  Old 
Testament  has  been  in 

A  TWOFOLD  CUSTODY. 

It  has  been  in  the  hands  of  both  Jews  and  Christians, 
between  whom  there  could  be  no  collusion.  There  is 
therefore  absolute  certainty  that  the  prophecies  are  as 
old  as  the  coming  of  Christ,  and  that,  as  they  existed 
then,  we  possess  them  now.  If  then  we  take  only  such 
predictions  as  have  been  fulfilled  at,  or  since,  the 
beginning  of  the  Christian  era,  every  doubt  will  be 
removed  and  every  cavil  prevented  in  regard  to  the 
interval  between  the  prophecy  and  the  event;  and 
within  these  limits  we  shall  confine  our  present  argu- 
ment. 

We  have  spoken  of  Tyre.  There  is  one  part  of  the 
prophecy  which  falls  within  the  limits  we  have  now 
set  ourselves.  We  read  (Ezek.  xxvi.  13,  14)  :  "I  will 
cause  the  noise  of  thy  songs  to  cease;  and  the  sound 


DOOM    OF    SIDON.  1 9 

of  thy  harps  shall  be  no  more  heard  .  .  .  Thou 
shalt  be 

BUILT     NO     MORE." 

This  sentence  of  the  divine  judgment  stands  as  a  chal- 
lenge to  all  time.  It  has  been  unanswered,  save  by  the 
silence  of  generations.  It  is  unanswered  still.  Palse- 
Tyrus,  the  continental  Tyre,  which  was  captured  by 
Nebuchadnezzar,  and  the  ruins  of  which  were  cleared 
away  by  Alexander,  has 

NEVER    BEEN    REBUILT. 

The  site  remains  to-day  without  even  a  mound  to  mark 
it,  and  has  to  be  determined  solely  by  the  notices  in 
ancient  writers  which  give  its  distance  from  the  island 
Tyre. 

Let  us  now  turn  for  a  moment  from  Tyre  to 

SIDON. 

a  neighboring  and  still  more  ancient  city,  which  had 
fallen  into  comparative  decay  when  Tyre  was  in  its 
splendour.  Sidon  still  remains,  possessing  even  now 
about  ten  thousand  inhabitants.  It  has  its  walls,  its 
castle,  and  its  mounds  of  ruins,  which  testify  to  the 
city's  ancient  extent  and  greatness.  It  is  still,  in  that 
wretched  country,  a  place  of  importance  and  strength. 
But  inEzekiel  (xxviii.  20-23)  there  is  a  prediction 
regarding  Sidon  also:  "And  the  word  of  the  Lord 
came  unto  me,  saying,  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face  toward 
Zidon,  and  prophesy  against  it,  and  say,  Thus  saith 
the  Lord  God;  Behold,  I  am  against  thee,  O  Zidon; 
and  I  will  be  glorified  in  the  midst  of  thee:  and  they 
shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord,  when  I  shall  have 
executed  judgments  in  her,  and  shall  be  sanctified  in 
her.     For  I  will  send  into  her  pestilence,  and  blood 

IN    HER   STREETS;    AND    THE    WOUNDED    SHALL    FALL    IN 


\ 


20  TYRE  AND   SIDON. 

THE    MIDST   OF    HER    WITH   THE   SWORD   UPON    HER   ON 

every  side/'  Observe  the  peculiar  judgment  of  Sidon. 
Blood  will  be  sent  into  her  streets ;  her  wounded  -shall 
fall  in  the  midst  of  her;  the  sword  is  to  be  upon  her 
on  every  side.  No  doom  of  extinction  is  pronounced 
against  her.  She  is  to  be  spared,  but  she  is  to  suffer. 
One  or  two  facts  from  her  long  history  will  show  how 
the  words  have  been  fulfilled.  Under  the  Persian 
dominion,  when  Tyre  was  deserted,  Sidon  was  still 
great  and  populous.  It  rebelled  under  Artaxerxes 
Ochus,  and,  after  a  successful  resistance,  was  betrayed 
to  the  enemy.  When  all  hope  of  saving  their  city  was 
gone,  40,000  citizens  chose  to  die  rather  than  submit 
to  Persian  vengeance.  They  shut  themselves  up  with 
their  wives  and  children,  set  fire  to  their  dwellings, 
and  perished  amid  the  flames.  The  ashes  of  the  city 
were  sold  for  an  immense  sum.  It  was  soon  rebuilt 
by  the  citizens  who  had  been  absent  at  the  time  of  the 
siege;  but  the  doom  of  suffering  still  rested  on  it. 
During  the  Crusades  it  was  taken  several  times  and 
sacked.  It  was  finally  retaken  from  the  Crusaders  by 
Bibars,  Sultan  of  Egypt  and  Syria,  in  1290.  But,  in 
every  commotion  which  has  troubled  that  unhappy 
land,  Sidon  has  had  her  share.  It  has  been  the  scene 
of  struggles  between  the  Druses  and  the  Turks,  and, 
again,  between  the  Turks  and  the  French.  So  late  as 
1840,  when  Ibrahim  Pasha  was  driven  out  of  Syria,  it 
was  bombarded  by  the  combined  fleets  of  England, 
Austria,  and  Turkey,  and  captured  b~  Admiral  Napier, 
when  again  blood  was  sent  into  her  streets,  and  her 
wounded  fell  in  the  midst  of  her.  Suppose  now  that 
the  names  of  Tyre  and  Sidon  had 

CHANGED  PLACES 

■ — that  it  had  been  said  Tyre  was  to  live,  and  Sidon  to 
be  utterly  destroyed  and  never  to  be  rebuilt,  how  com- 
plete would  have  been  the  refutation  of  Ezekiel's  claim 


FATE   OF    SIDON.  21 

to  speak  the  word  of  the  Lord !  But  how  is  it  that  this 
interchange  of  names  did  not  take  place?  How  is  it 
that  the  city  which  has  never  been  rebuilt  is  that  of 
which  this  very  thing  and  no  other  is  prophesied,  and 
that  the  city  which  has  continued  to  exist  is  that  which 
by  the  prophet  is  beheld  as  existing?  And,  even 
though  this  could  be  explained,  a  harder  question  re- 
mains. Sidon,  like  many  another  ancient  city,  might 
have  dwindled  into  insignificance,  so"  that,  in  its  misery 
and  defencelessness,  it  should  have  offered  no  resis- 
tance to  any,  and  have  tempted  no  one's  cupidity. 
How  has  it  happened  that  these  words  of  the  prophet 
paint  her  as  she  has  been,  and  as  she  is  to-day — a 
place  of  strength  which  age  after  age  has  been  fought 
for,  and  has  been  passed  on,  wet  with  blood,  from  one 
possessor  to  another?  There  is  one  explanation  in 
which  alone,  far  though  it  takes  us,  the  mind  will  rest 
with  perfect  satisfaction.  It  is,  that  He  speaks  here 
whose  thought  grasps  the  ages,  and  before  whom  the 
future  has  no  veil,  and  who,  in  these  proofs  of  His 
faithfulness,  writes  on  man's  heart  the  assurance, 
"Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  My  words 
shall  not  pass  away." 


CHAPTER  IV. 


EGYPT. 


Were  we  asked  to  say  what  country  it  is  which  is 
celebrated  alike  for  the  highest  antiquity  as  for  early,  and 
unequaled,  and  long-continued,  eminence  in  science,  in 
the  arts,  in  an  enlightened  and  refined  civilization,  in 
luxury  and  magnificence — which  has  continued  through 
all  history  a  realm  of  wonder,  and  which  still  plays  a 
part  in  the  commerce  and  in  the  politics  of  the  world — 
there  could  be  but  one  answer.  It  is  the  land  of  Egypt. 
Like  its  own  monuments,  which,  in  their  colossal  great- 
ness, bid  a  calm  but  proud  defiance  to  the  ravages  of 
time,  this  land  lives  on.  It  is  still  the  home  of  the  de- 
scendants of  its  ancient  masters.  It  still  possesses  the 
blessing  of  that  rare  fertility  which  proved  the  founda- 
tion of  its  past  splendour.  And  if  it  does,  like  its  mon- 
uments, show  that  in  the  struggle  with  time  it  has  not 
come  off  unscathed,  if  the  hand  of  decay  has  left  its  im- 
press, it  may  find  some  satisfaction  in  the  thought  that 
to  its  long  and  proud  career  there  is  no  parallel  in  the 
whole  world  beside. 

But  Egypt  has  also  another  claim  to  attention.  In  no 
land  have  the  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament  received 
a  more  striking  fulfilment  than  in  this.  In  the  misery 
of  its  people  and  the  ruin  of  its  cities  it  bears  over- 
whelming, though  involuntary,  testimony  to  the  claims 


PREDICTION    REGARDING    ITS   ANCIENT    CAPITAL.      23 

of  Scripture.  To  part  of  this  testimony  we  shall  now 
listen. 

THEBES, 

the  ancient  capital  of  Egypt,  was  called  by  the  Greeks 
Diospolis  (the  city  of  Jupiter).  This  appears  to  have 
been  a  literal  translation  of  the  Egyptian  name  No- 
Amon  which  appears  in  Nahum  iii.  8.  The  latter  name 
signifies  the  portion,  or  abode,  of  the  god  Amon,  in 
whom  the  Greeks  believed  they  recognized  their  own 
Zeus,  the  Roman  Jupiter.  The  first  part  of  this  name, 
No,  is  that  by  which  the  city  is  generally  designated 
in  the  Scriptures.  The  praises  of  the  city  with  its 
hundred  gates  were  sung  of  old  by  Homer;  and  the 
graphic  picture  which  the  poet  presents  of  its  populous- 
ness  is  outshone  by  the  sober  statement  of  Tacitus  that 
it  could  send  into  the  field  an  army  of  seven  hundred 
thousand  men.  Diodorus  Siculus,  who  visited  Egypt 
about  50  b.  a,  and  who  saw  Thebes  only  in  its  ruin, 
cannot  restrain  his  admiration.  The  sun  had  never 
seen,  he  says,  so  magnificent  a  city.  "Never  was  there 
a  city,"  he  exclaims,  "which  received  so  many  offer- 
ings in  silver,  gold,  and  ivory,  colossal  statues,  and 
obelisks,  each  cut  from  a  single  stone.  Four  principal 
temples  are  especially  admired  there,  the  most  ancient 
of  which  was  surpassingly  grand  and  sumptuous.  It 
was  thirteen  stadia  (one  mile  and  three-quarters)  in 
circumference,  and  surrounded  by  walls  twenty-four 
feet  in  thickness,  and  forty-five  cubits  high.  The  rich- 
ness and  workmanship  of  its  ornaments  were  corres- 
pondent to  the  majesty  of  the  building,  which  many 
kings  contributed  to  embellish." 

The  testimony  of  Diodorus  is  amply  confirmed  by 
the  remains.  The  stupendous  ruins  of  Luxor  and 
Carnac,  parts  of  the  ancient  No  which  are  still  inhab- 
ited, excite  to-day  the  same  feelings  of  admiration  and 
amazement.  The  great  temple  of  Carnac  "is  the 
largest  and  most  splendid  ruin  of  which,  perhaps,  either 


24  £GYPt. 

ancient  or  modern  times  can  boast."*  "All  here  is  sub- 
lime, all  majestic.  With  pain  one  tears  oneself  from 
Thebes.  Her  monuments  fix  the  traveller's  eyes,  and 
fill  his  mind  with  vast  ideas.  Beholding  colossal 
figures  and  stately  obelisks  which  seem  to  surpass 
human  powers,  he  says,  'Man  has  done  this/  and  feels 
himself  and  his  species  ennobled. "t 

Of  the  Great  Hall  Miss  Amelia  B.  Edwards  writes : 
"It  is  a  place  that  has  been  much  written  about  and 
often  painted ;  but  of  which  no  writing  and  no  art  can 
convey  more  than  a  dwarfed  and  pallid  impression. 
To  describe  it,  in  the  sense  of  building  up  a  recog- 
nizable image  by  means  of  words,  is  impossible.1  The 
scale  is  too  vast ;  the  effect  too  tremendous ;  the  sense 
of  one's  own  dumbness,  and  littleness,  and  incapacity, 
too  complete  and  crushing.  It  is  a  place  that  strikes 
you  into  silence ;  that  empties  you,  as  it  were,  not  only 
of  words,  but  of  ideas.  Nor  is  this  a  first  effect  only. 
Later  in  the  year,  when  we  came  back  and  moored 
close  by,  and  spent  long  days  among  the  ruins,  I  found 
I  never  had  a  word  to  say  in  the  Great  Hall,  .  ,  . 
I  could  only  look  and  be  silent. 

"Yet  to  look  is  something  if  one  can  but  succeed  in 
remembering.  ...  I  stand  once  more  among 
those  mighty  columns,  which  radiate  into  avenues  from. 
whatever  point  one  takes  them.  I  see  them  swathed  in 
coiled  shadows  and  broad  bands  of  light.  I  see  them 
sculptured  and  painted  with  shapes  of  Gods  and  Kings, 
with  blazonings  of  royal  names,  with  sacrificial  altars, 
and  forms  of  sacred  beasts  and  emblems  of  wisdom 
and  truth.  The  shafts  of  these  columns  are  enormous. 
I  stand  at  the  foot  of  one — or  of  what  seems  to  be  the 
foot ;  for  the  original  pavement  seems  to  be  buried 
seven  feet  below.  Six  men  standing  with  outstretched 
arms,  finger  tip  to  finger  tip,  could  barely  span  it 
round.    It  casts  a  shadow  twelve  feet  in  breadth — such 

*  Wilkinson.  f  Savary. 


GLORIES   OF    THEBES.  25 

a  shadow  as  might  be  cast  by  a  tower.  The  capital 
that  juts  out  so  high  above  my  head  looks  as  if  it 
might  have  been  put  there  to  support  the  heavens.  It 
is  carved  in  the  semblance  of  a  full-blown  lotus,  and 
glows  with  undying  colours — colours  that  are  still  fresh, 
though  laid  on  by  hands  that  have  been  dust  these 
three  thousand  years  and  more."* 

The  impression  produced  by  another  of  these  struc- 
tures is  equally  overpowering.  "The  temple  of  Luxor 
presents  to  the  traveller  at  once  one  of  the  most 
splendid  groups  of  Egyptian  grandeur.  The  extensive 
propylaeori,  with  two  obelisks  and  colossal  statues  in 
front,  the  thick  groups  of  enormous  columns,  the 
variety  of  apartments  and  the  sanctuary  it  contains, 
the  beautiful  ornaments  which  adorn  every  part  of  the 
walls  and  columns  described  by  Mr.  Hamilton,  cause 
in  the  astonished  traveller  an  oblivion  of  all  he  has  seen 
before.  If  his  attention  be  attracted  to  the  north  side 
of  Thebes  by  the  towering  remains  that  project  a  great 
height  above  the  wood  of  palm  trees,  he  will  gradually 
enter  that  forest-like  assemblage  of  ruins  and  temples, 
columns,  obelisks,  colossi,  sphinxes,  portals,  and  an 
endless  number  of  other  astonishing  objects  that  will 
convince  him  at  once  of  the  impossibility  of  a  descrip- 
tion. ...  It  is  absolutely  impossible  to  imagine 
the  scene  displayed  without  seeing  it.  The  most  sub- 
lime ideas  that  can  be  formed  from  the  most  magnifi- 
cent specimens  of  our  present  architecture  would  give 
a  very  incorrect  picture  of  these  ruins ;  for  such  is  the 
difference,  not  only  in  magnitude,  but  in  form,  propor- 
tion, and  construction,  that  even  the  pencil  can  convey 
but  a  faint  idea  of  the  whole.  It  appeared  to  me  like 
entering  a  city  of  giants,  who,  after  a  long  conflict, 
were  all  destroyed,  leaving  the  ruins  of  their  various 
temples  as  the  only  proofs  of  their  former  existence. "t 
The  tombs  of  the  kings,  excavated  in  the  rugged,  barren 

*  A  Thousand  Miles  Up  the  Nile,  pp.  219-220.     t  Belzoni. 


26  EGYPT. 

mountains  which  skirt  the  city  on  the  west  have  added 
to  the  astonishment  with  which  travellers  have  sur- 
veyed this  crowning  marvel  of  the  wonders  of  Egypt. 
"Nothing  that  has  ever  been  said  about  them  had 
prepared  me  for  their  extraordinary  grandeur.  You 
enter  a  sculptured  portal  in  the  face  of  these  wild  cliffs, 
and  find  yourself  in  a  long  and  lofty  gallery,  opening 
or  narrowing,  as  the  case  may  be,  into  successive  halls 
and  chambers,  all  of  which  are  covered  with  white 
stucco,  and  this  white  stucco  brilliant  with  colors  fresh 
as  they  were  thousands  of  years  ago.  .  .  .  They 
are,  in  fact,  gorgeous  palaces."* 

But  on  these  ruins  another  truth  is  written  besides 
that  of  man's  greatness,  or  the  vanity  of  earthly  glory. 
"Such  vast  and  surprising  remains  are  still  to  be  seen," 
says  Pococke,  "of  such  magnificence  and  solidity,  as 
may  convince  any  one  who  beholds  them  that,  without 
some  extraordinary  accident,  they  must  have  lasted 
for  ever ;  which  seems  to  have  been  the  intention  of  the 
founders  of  them."  Of  this  "extraordinary  accident" 
the  Scriptures  have  something  quite  as  extraordinary 
to  say. 

In  Ezekiel  xxx.  14-16  there  is  mention  made  of  No 
in  each  of  the  three  verses.  The  story  of  her  then 
future  is  told  in  three  brief  sentences :  "I  will  execute 
judgments  in  No" — "I  will  cut  off  the  multitude  of 
No" — "And  No  shall  be  broken  up."  "I  will  execute 
judgments  in  No,"  seems  to  point  to  something  more 
than  an  ordinary  tale  of  siege  and  capture.  Does  the 
after-fate  of  Thebes  stand  out,  then,  as  singular  on  the 
page  of  Egyptian  history?  The  judgments  were  so 
marked  and  awful  that  historians  have,  unbidden,  sup- 
plied the  answer.  Thebes  sank  beneath  two  of  the 
most  terrible  blows  ever  dealt  by  the  hand  of  man,  and 
both  fell  after  the  prediction  was  uttered.  The  proph- 
ecies of  Ezekiel  were  written  in  the  time  of  Nebuchad- 

*  Dean  Stanley. 


THE  JUDGMENT  OF  THEBES.  2>] 

nezzar :  and,  thirteen  years  after  his  dynasty  was  over- 
thrown and  Chaldea  had  passed  into  the  hands  of  the 
Persians,  Cambyses,  during  his  invasion  of  Egypt 
(about  525  B.C.),  captured  Thebes,  and  poured  out 
upon  its  devoted  head  the  wrath  of  his  insane  ferocity. 
Its  majestic  temples  were  consumed  with  fire;  and  the 
power  of  the  victorious  host  was  bent  to  overthrow,  or 
mar,  its  colossal  statues.  Although  the  city  sprang  up 
again,  it  never  regained  its  ancient  splendour.  The 
hand  of  an  irreversible  judgment  was  laid  also  upon 
the  sources  of  its  wealth  and  greatness.  It  ceased  to  be 
Egypt's  chief  city.  The  capital  was  removed  in  turn 
to  Memphis,  Sais,  and  Alexandria.  After  the  Greek 
conquest,  the  streams  of  commerce  by  which  it  had 
been  fed  were  turned  in  other  directions.  "Commer- 
cial wealth,  on  the  accession  of  the  Ptolemies,  began  to 
flow  in  other  channels.  Coptos  and  Appollinopolis 
succeeded  to  the  lucrative  trade  of  Arabia,  and 
Ethiopia  no  longer  contributed  to  the  revenues  of 
Thebes."*  Yet,  notwithstanding  its  long  decline,  when 
the  second  stroke  fell,  in  the  beginning  of  the  first  cen- 
tury preceding  the  Christian  era,  Thebes  was  even 
then  one  of  the  wealthiest  cities  in  the  land.  The  blow 
was  dealt  by  one  of  Egypt's  own  princes,  Ptolemy 
Lathyrus,  the  grandfather  of  Cleopatra,  about  the  year 
89  B.C. ;  and  the  greatness  that  still  remained  to  the 
ancient  city  can  be  measured  by  the  fact  that  for  three 
Years  it  defied  all  the  efiforts  of  the  besiegers.  But 
the  victor  exacted  a  terrible  vengeance.  It  was  almost 
entirely  levelled  to  the  ground,  and  the  words  of  the 
fourteenth  and  fifteenth  verses  fouhd  a  complete  fulfil- 
ment. God  had  executed  judgments  in  No ;  its  multi- 
tude was  cut  oflf,  and  has  never  returned. 

It  may  seem  that,  in  dealing  with  this  prophecy,  we 
are  overstepping  the  limits  we  set  ourselves  when  we 
promised  to  bring  forward  only  such  prophecies  as 

*  Wilkinson. 


28  EGYPT. 

have  been  fulfilled  since  the  beginning  of  the  Christian 
era;  but,  if  in  this  instance  we  had  had  to  go  beyond 
our  self-imposed  boundary,  the  case  is  so  clear  and 
striking  that  it  would  have  been  difficult  to  have  passed 
it  over  in  silence.  The  third  part  of  the  prophecy, 
however,  portraying  as  it  does  the  after  and  permanent 
condition  of  the  great  city,  falls  most  assuredly  within 
our  limits.  "And  No,"  the  prophet  continues,  "shall 
be  broken  up."  Too  much  stress,  it  might  be  thought, 
should  not  be  laid  upon  the  words ;  but  the  student  of 
the  fulfilled  prophecies  of  Scripture  learns  that  their 
words  need  no  screen  nor  apology — that  the  very  heart 
of  the  wonder  lies  in  their  complete  and  minute  accom- 
plishment. The  prediction  finds  its  interpretation  in 
the  event.  No  was  literally  broken  up.  Strabo  visited 
the  ruins  about  25  B.C.,  and  found  the  city,  which  only 
sixty  years  before  still  retained  its  majestic  unity, 
divided  into  many  separate  villages.  As  Strabo  found 
it,  it  has  remained  ever  since ;  and  the  ruins  are  to-day 
portioned  out  between  nine  hamlets.  Thebes  was  to 
endure,  but  only  in  fragments.  How  came  the  prophet 
to  pen  the  words :  "And  No  shall  be  broken  up  ?"  In 
summing  up  the  destiny  of  Egypt's  great  and  ancient 
capital,  how  did  it  happen  that  the  finger  was  laid  upon 
the  very  condition  which  it  has  maintained  for  twenty 
centuries  ? 

The  Old  Testament  contains  so  many  distinct  predic- 
tions regarding  Egypt  generally,  that  we  may  say  they 
have  written  its  history,  and  described  the  present  posi- 
tion of  the  country  and  the  condition  of  its  people. 
Jeremiah  foretells  that,  with  the  overthrow  of  Pharaoh 
by  Nebuchadnezzar,  a  decline  will  set  in  which  will 
deepen  evermore,  and  for  which  no  remedy  shall  be 
found.  "Go  up  into  Gilead,"  he  says,  "and  take  balm, 
O  virgin  daughter  of  Egypt:  in  vain  dost  thou  use 
manv  medicines ;  there  is  no  healing  for  thee"  (Jer. 
xlvi.  11).  We  shall  confine  ourselves,  however,  to  the 
prophecies  concerning  Egypt  contained  in  the  twenty- 


ITS   DECLINE    PREDICTED.  29 

ninth  and  thirtieth  chapters  of  Ezekiel,  and  the  nine- 
teenth chapter  of  Isaiah.  In  Ezekiel  xxix.  the  ap- 
proaching conquest  of  Egypt  by  Nebuchadnezzar  is 
foretold.  The  Egyptians  are  to  be  led  away  into  cap- 
tivity and  the  land  is  to  be  desolate  for  forty  years. 
At  the  end  of  that  time  they  are  to  return,  but  their 
greatness  is  not  to  be  restored.  In  accordance  with  the 
words  we  have  quoted  from  Jeremiah,  Egypt  will  in 
vain  seek  healing  for  her  wound.    This 

DOOM     OF    DECLINE 

is  repeated  again  and  again.  It  shall  not  "any  more 
lift  itself  up  above  the  nations;  and  I  will  diminish 
them  that  they  shall  no  more  rule  over  the  nations" 
(Ezek.  'xxix.  15);  "her  foundations  shall  be  broken 
down.  .  .  .  The  pride  of  her  power  shall  come 
down"  (xxx.  4,  6).  This  great  country  is,  therefore, 
depicted  as  undergoing  a  gradual  and  total  decay. 

To  be  convinced  that  this  prediction  was  not  due  to 
human  foresight,  we  have  only  to  remember  what 
Egypt  was  at  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era,  and 
for  ages  after.  Even  then  she  seemed  worthy  of  the 
fame  which  fixed  the  World's  gaze  upon  her  in  admir- 
ing reverence.  She  had  been  the  mother  of  science 
and  letters  and  art.  At  the  fire  which  burned  upon  her 
hearth,  the  nations  had  kindled  the  lamp  of  knowledge, 
which  has  burned  on  age  after  age,  and  which  now 
flames  so  brightly.  Her  greatness  was  unique.  It  was 
more  true  and  human  than  that  of  any  other  ancient 
land  save  Greece ;  and  she  had  the  unity,  and  repose, 
and  calm  majesty,  which  Greece  lacked.  She  stood 
alone  among  the  nations,  great,  wise,  self-respecting; 
around  her  the  choicest  treasures  of  earth ;  her  land 
filled  with  imperishable  monuments  of  might  and  skill, 
and  genius ;  her  people,  in  their  order  and  enlighten- 
ment and  civilization,  a  marvel  to  all  time.  The  foun- 
dation of  her  greatness  was  not  her  military  power,  but 


30  EGYPT. 

the  exhaustless  wealth  of  her  soil.  That  still  remained ; 
and,  though  she  had  felt  the  touch  of  decay,  there  was 
nothing  in  the  time  of  our  Lord  to  indicate  that  Egypt's 
day  was  past.  It  was  within  the  range,  not  only  of 
possibility,  but  of  probability  that  she  might  yet 
again  be  mistress  of  her  destiny,  and  that  her  old 
splendour  might  return.  Her  fertility  won  for  her 
even  then  the  title  of  "the  granary  of  the  world." 
Augustus,  after  the  defeat  of  Antony,  found  so 
great  wealth  in  Egypt  that  with  it  he  paid  all 
the  arrears  due  to  his  army,  and  the  debts 
which  he  had  incurred  to  meet  the  expenses  of 
the  war.  "It  is  said,  too,  that  after  all  the  spoliations 
the  wealth  and  resources  of  Egypt  appeared  to  him  so 
formidable,  that  he  was  afraid  to  intrust  that  province 
to  the  charge  of  any  man  of  rank  or  interest,  lest  he 
should  raise  up  a  rival  to  himself.  He  therefore  com- 
mitted the  government  of  the  country  to  Cornelius 
Gallus,  a  citizen  of  the  equestrian  order,  and  a  person 
of  very  low  extraction ;  he  would  not  allow  the  city  of 
Alexandria  to  possess  any  municipal  council ;  and  he 
declared  all  Egyptians  incapable  of  being  admitted  into 
the  Senate  at  Rome."*  "Till  the  moment  of  the 
Arabian  conquest,"  says  Dr.  Vincent,  "Alexandria  con- 
tinued the  second  city  in  the  (Roman)  empire  in  rank, 
and  the  first,  perhaps,  in  wealth,  commerce,  and  pros- 
perity." 

Even  in  the  seventh  century  of  our  era  Egypt  was 
still  so  powerful  that  the  Mohammedan  hosts, 
though  flushed  with  victory,  hesitated  to  attack  it. 
The  event  showed  that  their  caution  was  not  un- 
called for.  Babylon  of  Egypt,  on  the  ruins  of  which 
the  town  of  Fostat  was  built,  detained  them  seven 
months.  The  siege  of  Alexandria  lasted  fourteen 
months,  and  the  Arabs  lost  before  it  twenty-three 
thousand  men ;  and,  after  all,  its  capture  was  due  to 

*  Dr.  Arnold, 


THE   DOOM    OF   DECLINE.  3 1 

internal  treachery,  and  not  to  the  superior  power  of 
the  assailants.  The  sight  of  its  magnificence  and 
wealth  filled  the  children  of  the  East  with  amaze- 
ment. "  T  have  taken/  said  Amrou  to  the  caliph, 
'the  great  city  of  the  West.  It  is  impossible  for  me 
to  enumerate  the  variety  of  its  riches  and  beauty, 
and  I  content  myself  with  observing  that  it  con- 
tains 4,000  palaces,  400  theatres  or  places  of  amuse- 
ment, 12,000  shops  for  the  sale  of  vegetable  food, 
and  40,000  tributary  Jews/  "*  The  destruction  of 
the  royal  library,  which  was  distributed  among  the 
baths  of  the  city,  and  which  supplied  them  with  fuel 
for  six  months,  has  been  regarded  as  one  of  the 
greatest  of  the  world's  calamities.  Alexandria  did 
not  stand  alone.  Its  condition  was  an  indication  of 
the  riches  and  strength  of  the  whole  country.  It 
would  have  been  impossible  for  the  Arabs  to  have 
conquered  Egypt,  or  to  have  afterwards  held  it,  had 
not  the  people,  groaning  under  the  oppression  of 
their  Greek  masters,  thrown  themselves  into  the 
arms  of  the  invaders. 

So  late,  then,  as  the  year  638,  as  far  as  human 
foresight  is  concerned,  the  fulfilment  of  this  predic- 
tion could  not  have  been  foretold  as  even  probable. 
What  have  the  after-history  of  Egypt  and  its  present 
condition  to  say  regarding  it?  Have  the  last  twelve 
and  a  half  centuries  proved  or  disproved  the  Scrip- 
ture ?    Here  is  the  answer : — 

There  has  been,  as  was  predicted,  a  constant  de- 
cline. From  the  time  of  the  Babylonian  invasion 
there  was  no  revival  of  Egypt's  greatness  and  pre- 
eminence among  the  nations.  Many  medicines  were 
tried,  but  she  was  not  healed.  In  the  Egypt  of  the 
Pharaohs,  of  the  Persian  dominion,  of  the  Ptolemies, 
of  the  Roman  Empire,  of  the  Mohammedans,  we 
have  a  gradual  but  continuous  descent.     After  the 

*  Gibbon. 


$2  EGYPT. 

Arab  conquest  the  degeneration  proceeded  with 
rapid  strides,  till  Egypt  has  become  what  it  is  to- 
day. Its  science,  and  learning,  and  art,  no  less  than 
its  magnificence,  and  power,  and  prestige,  have 
Wholly  perished.  Along  that  pathway  of  the  past 
everything  that  made  the  Egyptians  what  they  were 
has  been  wholly  lost. 

It  was  believed  by  many  that  a  change  for  the 
better  had  set  in  under  the  present  dynasty.  The 
improvement  was  certainly  not  to  be  seen  in  hope- 
lessly embarrassed  finances,  or  in  the  character  of 
the  reigning  class ;  and,  what  had  a  still  more  im- 
portant bearing  on  the  question  of  the  prospects  of 
Egypt,  no  improvement  could  be  discerned  in  the 
mass  of  the  people.  A  letter  which  appeared  in 
The  Times  in  the  beginning  of  1875,  and  gave  to 
capitalists  and  others  a  needed  note  of  warn- 
ing, presented  a  view  of  the  state  of  the  country 
which  no  one  who  knew  Egypt  could  dispute: — "No 
one,  however,  can  say  that,  amid  the  material  progress 
which  has  been  made,  any  perceptible  change  in  the 
feelings  or  condition  of  the  great  bulk  of  the  people  has 
been  effected ;  and  here,  unfortunately,  lies  the  element 
of  instability  in  the  new  order  of  things.  A  little  more 
Manchester  calico  is  worn  by  the  Arab  population,  a 
few  more  of  the  upper  class  of  Arabs  wear  black  cloth 
and  French  kid  boots,  and  there  is  less  repugnance 
among  the  pashas  to  champagne  or  claret ;  but  in  the 
essential  features  and  characteristic  habits  of  the  people 
there  is  no-  real  change  or  improvement  whatever.  .  . 
Such  a  thorough  change  in  the  external  features  of 
any  nation  in  so  short  a  time  has  probably  never  been 
witnessed.  But  it  is  much  more  remarkable,  it  is 
almost  pathetic,  when  it  is  remembered  that  the  great 
mass  of  the  people  are  utterly  rude  and  unlettered,  and 
only  very  slightly  removed  from  barbarism.  It  is  here, 
indeed,  that  the  unstable  foundation ;  upon  which  the 
Khedive  has  built  his  splendid  superstructure  discovers 


ITS   PRESERVATION.  33 

its  weakness."*  Every  friend  of  humanity  would  re- 
joice had  the  degradation  of  Egypt  reached  its  limit, 
and  had  the  dawn  of  a  brighter  day  risen  upon  it.  But 
the  advance  was  not  the  offspring  of  awakening  life 
and  prosperity  among  the  people ;  it  was  solely  due  to 
the  late  Khedive's  aspirations,  and  strenuous,  but  in- 
dividual, efforts.  The  improvement  did  not  penetrate 
to  the  people,  and  the  only  result  for  them  was  the 
increased  pressure  of  their  burdens. 

The  British  occupation,  which  began  in  1882,  has 
undoubtedly  brought  a  large  measure  of  relief.  The 
following,  originally  contributed  to  The  New  York 
Nation  by  its  correspondent,  Mr.  Woodruff,  in  1892, 
is  a  testimony  of  which  Great  Britain  may  well  be 
proud:  "The  reforms  which  England  has  wrought  in 
Egypt  during  the  past  nine  years  are  simply  astound- 
ing. A  looted  treasury,  a  disorganised  and  almost 
hopelessly  corrupt  administration,  a  rebellious  and 
cowardly  army,  and  a  people  crushed  with  unbearable 
taxation,  have  in  this  short  space  of  time,  and  in  the 
face  of  Oriental  apathy  and  French  obstruction,  been 
metamorphosed  into  order,  plenty,  and  content."t  But 
while  all  this  is  true,  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  conclude 
that  Egypt's  trouble  was  ended  and  that  those  predic- 
tions ceased  to  find  fulfilment.  These  reforms  are  in 
no  sense  of  native  growth.  They  are  imposed  by 
external  pressure,  and  when  the  pressure  is  with- 
drawn they  will  disappear.  And  even  now  the  burdens 
are  huge.  In  1903  the  funded  debt  of  Egypt  amounted 
to  103  millions  sterling.  The  annual  interest  and  other 
charges  on  that  sum,  with  the  payment  of  a  standing 
army,  and  of  an  extensive  civil  administration,  have  all 
to  be  met  by  taxation  imposed  upon  a  people  struggling 
with  poverty.  It  is  equally  true  also  that  the  British 
occupation  has  produced  no  regeneration  of  the  people 
nor  the  faintest  promise  of  returning  greatness. 

*  James  Shaw. 
f  W.  Fraser  Rae,  Egypt  To-day ,  pp.  131-132. 


34  EGYPT. 

This  second  point,  then,  in  the  prophetic  picture  of 
Egypt  has  been  strikingly  fulfilled.  There  has  been 
"no  healing"  for  Egypt.  "The  pride  of  her  power"  has 
"come  down."  She  has  been  diminished  and  has  no 
more  ruled  over  the  nations.  We  now  turn  to  a  third 
feature.  Though  there  is  to  be  decline,  the  Scripture 
assures  us  there  will  be 

NO  EXTINCTION 

either  of  the  people  or  of  the  kingdom.  "They,"  we 
read,  "shall  be  there  (that  is,  in  their  own  land)  a  base 
kingdom"  (Ezek.  xxix.  14).  Had  this  deepening  de- 
cay been  foreseen  by  the  wise,  had  it  been  accepted  as 
certain  that  Egypt  should  pass  down  step  by  step  from 
prosperity  and  greatness,  the  prediction  would  inevit- 
ably have  been  ventured  that  at  some  point  of  that 
career  of  degradation  her  existence  as  a  nation,  or  at 
least  as  a  separate  dominion,  should  cease.  This  must 
have  seemed  the  surest  of  all  possible  deductions.  The 
national  extinction  of  the  Egyptians  is  an  event  which 
in  itself  would  have  occasioned  little  surprise.  On  the 
contrary,  it  was  to  be  expected  that  Egypt  should 
share  the  general  fate  of  Eastern  greatness.  The 
nations,  the  waves  on  this  great  unresting  sea  of  human 
life,  have  their  rise  and  fall.  They  come  towering  on 
in  swelling  strength  and  pride  toward  that  strong 
barrier  which  a  Divine  hand  has  set ;  but  they  are  only 
hurrying  on  to  the  moment  when,  brought  utterly  low 
and  broken,  they  will  be  lost  in  the  great  ocean  whence 
they  sprang.  A  people  cannot  continue  at  the  summit 
of  power  for  ever.  And  when  their  supremacy  is  over- 
thrown, they  are  gradually  merged  in  the  conquering 
race,  and  lost  among  them ;  and  their  territory,  becom- 
ing a  province  of  a  wider  empire,  loses,  so  far  as 
nature  will  permit,  its  special  character,  and  its  old 
traditional  boundaries. 

It  seemed  highly  improbable,  therefore,  altogether 


ITS   HUMILIATION.  35 

apart  from  the  prediction  regarding  its  decline,  that  the 
national  existence  of  Egypt  should  continue.  But, 
with  the  full  assurance  that  this  prediction  should  be 
fulfilled,  its  continuance  must  have  seemed,  to  human 
reason,  an  utter  impossibility.  And  yet  to  this  paradox 
the  Scripture  from  of  old  pledged  itself.  Egypt 
should  be  brought  low;  it  should  be  set  among  the 
basest;  and  nevertheless  it  should  be  preserved.  "It 
shall  be  there  a  base  kingdom."  And,  as  the  Scripture 
has  said,  so  has  it  been.  Down  through  every  age, 
even  to  our  own  times,  the  name  of  Egypt  has  lived 
on  men's  lips.  The  "kingdom"  still  exists,  possessing 
its  distinctive  character  and  its  ancient  boundaries.  Its 
ruler  bears  the  title  to-day  of  "Khediv-el-Misr,"  King 
of  Egypt,  while  by  the  Egyptians  he  is  spoken  of  as  the 
Effendina,  "the  Great  Lord."  Its  people  have  con- 
tinued, though  for  two  thousand  years  they  have  ceased 
to  be  lords  of  the  soil.  Fierce  persecutions  and  cease- 
less grinding  oppression  have  neither  driven  them 
from  their  fatherland,  nor  extinguished  them  as  a  sep- 
arate race  among  their  masters.  The  fellahin  (the  cul- 
tivators of  the  soil)  form  more  than  four-fifths  of  the 
entire  population  of  Egypt ;  and  according  to  the  esti- 
mate of  a  recent  writer,*  two-thirds  of  these  may  be 
set  down  as  descendants  of  the  ancient  Egyptians  who 
embraced  Mohammedanism  at  the  time  of  the  Arab 
conquest,  or  who  have  since  apostatized.  In  addition 
to  these  there  are  the  Copts,  who,  along  with  their 
Christianity,  retain  the  proud  conviction  that  they  are 
the  lineal  descendants  of  Egypt's  ancient  masters. 
Their  number  is  variously  stated,  Lane  giving  it  as 
150,000,  and  IVL'Coan  as  500,000.  The  estimates  of 
both  writers  agree,  however,  in  representing  them  as 
about  one-twelfth  of  the  whole  population. 

People    and    kingdom,    therefore,    alike    continue. 
Through-  all  her  many  changes  Egypt  has  preserved 

*  M'Coan,  Egypt  as  It  Is,  p.  23. 


$6  EGYPT. 

her  identity.  Downtrodden  and  oppressed,  she  has 
never  ceased  to  hold  some  place  in  the  commonwealth 
of  nations,  small  though,  in  these  latter  days,  that  place 
has  been.  If  to  have  foreseen  the  long  and  steady 
decay,  of  which  the  records  of  Egypt  are  the  prolonged 
story,  was  marvellous,  then,  in  the  face  of  this,  to  have 
predicted  its  preservation  was  still  more  astounding. 

Let  us  now  examine  two  other  parts  of  the  prophetic 
forecast.  The  greatest  emphasis  is  laid  upon  the  then 
future 

DEGRADATION  OF   EGYPT: 

"They  shall  be  there  a  base  kingdom.  It  shall  be  the 
basest  of  kingdoms;  neither  shall  it  exalt  itself  any 
more  above  the  nations ;  for  I  will  diminish  them  that 
they  shall  no  more  rule  over  the  nations.,,  Confronted 
as  men  then  were,  and  were  still  to  be  for  long  ages 
after  the  Christian  era  had  begun,  by  the  fame,  and  the 
wisdom,  and  the  strength,  of  Egypt,  this  must  have  been 
one  of  the  most  astounding  features  in  the  whole  of  the 
prophetic  vision. 

It  is  striking  to  mark  how  this  astonishment  is  re- 
echoed by  the  on-lookers  of  modern  times.  "It  is 
melancholy/'  says  Lane,  "to  compare  the  present  state 
of  Egypt  with  its  ancient  prosperity,  when  the  variety, 
elegance,  and  exquisite  finish  displayed  in  its  manufac- 
tures attracted  the  admiration  of  surrounding  nations, 
and  its  inhabitants  wrere  in  no  need  of  foreign  com- 
merce to  increase  their  wealth  or  to  add  to  their  com- 
forts. Antiquarian  researches  show  us  that  not  only 
the  Pharaohs  and  the  priests  and  military  chiefs,  but 
also  a  great  proportion  of  the  agriculturists,  even  in 
the  age  of  Moses  and  at  a  yet  earlier  period,  passed 
a  life  of  the  most  refined  luxury,  were  clad  in  linen  of 
the  most  delicate  fabric,  and  reclined  on  couches  and 
chairs  which  have  served  as  models  for  the  furniture 
of  our  modern  saloons.  Nature  is  as  lavish  as  she  was 
of  old  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  valley  of  the  Nile ;  but 


ITS   HUMILIATION.  37 

for  many  centuries  they  have  ceased  to  enjoy  the  bene- 
fit of  a  steady  government.  Each  of  their  successive 
rulers  during  this  long  lapse  of  time,  considering  the 
uncertain  tenure  of  his  power,  has  been  almost  wholly 
intent  upon  increasing  his  own  wealth ;  and  thus  a  large 
portion  of  the  nation  has  gradually  perished,  and  the 
remnant,  in  general,  has  been  reduced  to  a  state  of  the 
most  afflicting  poverty."* 

The  splendour  and  luxury  of  ancient  Egypt  were 
proverbial,  and  the  monuments  prove  that  refinement 
and  luxury  extended,  as  Lane  has  said,  even  to  the 
cultivators.  But  where  the  children  of  Mizraim  were 
once  clothed  in  fine  linen,  and  fared  sumptuously  every 
day,  they  now  know  nakedness  and  want.  The  fathers 
called  forth  the  world's  admiration,  and  the  children 
now  awaken,  in  almost  as  great  a  degree,  its  pity  and 
contempt.  Every  thing  that  made  Egypt  what  it  was 
has  perished.  Its  once  endless  wealth  has  long  ago 
disappeared.  Its  arm  of  power  is  withered.  Its  indus- 
tries, which  were  its  glory,  have  become  a  shame  and 
a  reproach.  "When  Bonaparte's  savants  entered  Cairo 
they  found  its  handicrafts,  as  its  learning,  at  the  lowest 
ebb  of  decadence."  "With  a  few  exceptions,  these  are 
still  as  backward  as  they  were  a  hundred  years  ago." 
Mehemet  AH  made  an  attempt  to  revive  them,  and 
"costly  failure"  was  the  only  result.  M'Coan  finds  a 
main  cause  of  this  in  "the  low  level  of  material  civil- 
ization  among   nine-tenths    of  the   population."  t 

There  is  as  little  promise  in  its  commerce  as  in  its 
manufactures.  Its  trade  received  a  fatal  blow  when 
the  discovery  was  made  of  an  ocean  passage  to  India 
by  the  Cape;  and  it  has  sustained  another  stroke  in 
that  great  triumph  of  modern  engineering  which  has 
given  to  Egypt  nearly  the  whole  of  its  present  im- 
portance. The  Suez  Canal  "represents  a  distinct  and 
more  or  less  permanent  loss.    Not  only  has  it  cost  the 

*  Modern  Egyptians,  Vol.  II.,  p.  I.         t  Egypt  as  It  Is. 


38  EGYPT. 

treasury  in  all  more  than  £  17,000,000  in  money  outlay, 
but  it  has  diverted  from  the  Egyptian  ports  and  rail- 
ways a  large  and  increasing  transit  traffic  of  great 
revenue  value."  * 

To  some  extent  the  fruitfulness  of  Egypt  remains,  it 
is  true ;  but  a  fertile  soil  will  not  in  itself  make  a  people 
great,  and  from  this  people  all  the  elements  of  national 
greatness  seem  to  have  passed  away.  Polybius,  in  giv- 
ing an  account  of  the  various  nationalities  represented 
in  Alexandria,  speaks  of  the  Egyptians  as  a  keen  and 
civilized  race.  To  measure  the  depth  to  which  they 
have  fallen  we  have  only  to  set  against  this  the  words 
of  Niebuhr :  "If  an  ancient  origin  and  illustrious  ances- 
tors could  confer  merit,  the  Copts  would  be  a  highly 
estimable  people.  They  are  descended  from  the  ancient 
Egyptians ;  and  the  Turks  on  this  account  call  them  in 
derision  'the  posterity  of  Pharaoh/  But  their  uncouth 
figure,  ignorance,  and  wretchedness  do  little  credit  to 
the  sovereigns  of  ancient  Egypt."  The  hopeless  bond- 
age of  centuries  has  quenched  every  spark  of  ambition 
in  the  breasts  of  the  descendants  of  the  Pharaohs ;  and, 
under  the  iron  heel  of  oppression,  genius  and  talent, 
and  even  intellect  itself,  seem  to  have  been  extin- 
guished. The  race,  still  physically  sound,  is  mentally 
effete.  The  Egyptians  are  now,  what  for  long  ages 
they  were  held  to  be,  a  race  of  slaves. 

And  it  is  not  on  the  people  only  that  this  doom  has 
pressed.  The  fulfilment  of  the  decree,  "They  shall  be 
there  a  base  kingdom,"  can  be  read  beneath  the  glitter 
of  the  throne  itself.  The  schemes  and  improvements  of 
Ismail  Pasha  have  resulted,  as  is  well-known,  in  hope- 
less bankruptcy.  Sir  George  Campbell  says :  "The  debt 
incurred  by  usurious  interest  had  well-nigh  swamped 
the  state.  It  continually  increased,  and  finally  the 
Khedive  placed  himself  in  distinguished  European 
Hands.    He  put  his  income  in  trust,  as  it  were,  for  the 

*  Ibid. 


ITS  HUMILIATION.  39 

benefit  of  his  creditors,  and  it  has  been  so  administered 
under  European  control  for  the  last  year.  Let  us  see 
the  result.  .  .  .  The  Khedive  was  to  be  put  on  an 
allowance,  as  he  expressed  it  at  the  time;  £4,500,000 
being  allowed  for  the  expenses  of  the  administration, 
and  the  rest  applied  for  the  benefit  of  the  creditors. 
...  By  dint  of  whipping  and  spurring  and  getting  all 
that  it  was  possible  to  get  by  any  means,  the  engage- 
ments to  the  creditors  for  the  first  two  half-years — 
that  is,  those  due  in  the  beginning  and  middle  of  1877 
— have  been  satisfied ;  but  that  part  of  the  engagement 
which  affected  the  Egyptian  administration  and  people 
has  not  been  carried  out.  The  allowances  stipulated 
to  carry  on  the  government  have  not  been  paid ;  and, 
from  the  Khedive  downwards,  all  the  officials  have 
been  kept  out  of  their  salaries,  till  the  thing  has  become 
past  endurance."  Has  Egypt  ever  presented  a  more 
humiliating  spectacle? 

But  worse  remains  behind.  Few  things  show  the 
weakness  of  the  government  more  than  the  existence 
of  the  mixed  courts  forced  upon  the  viceroy,  and  which 
exercise  uncontrolled  authority  over  the  whole  country 
in  every  case  in  which  a  foreigner  is  concerned.  "The 
Khedive  and  all  his  government  officers  and  belongings 
have  been  made  subject  to  the  new  courts,  and  a  very 
large  proportion  of  their  larger  business — in  fact,  it 
seemed  to  me  the  main  staple  of  it — is  hearing  cases 
and  passing  decrees  against  the  Khedive.  ...  I 
hardly  see  how  a  government  of  this  kind  can  be  car- 
ried on  in  such  subjection  to  courts  in  which  the 
foreign  element  is  wholly  and  absolutely  dominant, 
which  have  claimed  to  decide  on  the  illegality  of  the 
formal  decrees  of  the  ruling  power,  and  which  are 
under  no  control  whatever."*  "The  English  Consul," 
says  Miss  Amelia  B.  Edwards,  "came  to  breakfast  with 
us  by  invitation.    He  told  us  of  some  of  the  incon- 

*  *An  Inside  View  of  'Egypt 


40  EGYPT. 

veniences  of  the  international  muddle  which  is  made  up 
of  consular  tribunals,  international  tribunals,  capitula- 
tions, et  hoc  genus  omne,  and  which  has  gone  far  to 
render  government  almost  impossible  in  Egypt.  The 
laws  of  naturalization  there  are  such  that  Turkish  sub- 
jects, and  even  native  Egyptians,  can  now  obtain  the 
privileges  of  foreigners,  and  evade  the  jurisdiction  of 
the  Egyptian  Government;  and  Italians,  Greeks,  and 
Levantines  may  outrage  the  criminal  and  civil  laws  of 
the  country  they  are  residing  in  almost  with  im- 
punity/' * 

With  all  the  enterprise  and  eclat  of  the  reign  of 
Ismail  Pasha,  the  degradation  of  Egypt  was  perhaps 
never  so  evident  before.  "While  we  hear  much  of  the 
higher  titles,  higher  prerogatives,  and  more  independent 
position  of  the  Khedive  of  these  days,  it  is  curious  to 
look  back  a  little  into  history  and  see  how  far  there  has 
been  a  practical  decadence.  Ever  since  independent 
Mohammedan  Egypt  submitted  to  the  Turks,  it  has 
never  been  so  dependent  as  it  is  nozu.  Till  the  begin- 
ning of  the  present  century  it  was  a  suzerainty,  and 
nothing  more,  that  it  acknowledged.  Then  came 
Mehemet  Ali,  not  really  appointed  by  the  Porte,  but 
rising  to  power  by  his  own  energy.  It  need  not  be 
recited  how,  during  his  long  reign,  he  and  his  son 
Ibrahim  set  the  Porte  at  defiance,  and  foreign  powers 
as  well.  Now  all  that  has  changed.  The  ruler  of 
Egypt  has  been  obliged  to*  surrender  his  fleet,  and  in 
all  things  to  submit  to  the  corruption  of  the  Constanti- 
nople offices.  He  feels  himself  so  weak  in  the  presence 
of  foreign  powers,  and  foreign  financial  corporations, 
that  he  yields  many  things  that  he  knows  he  ought  not 
to  yield,  all  to  the  detriment  of  his  country. "t  The 
events  which  have  transpired  since  those  words  were 
written,  have  onlv  more  fully  revealed  the  misery  of 
Egypt.    She  is  still  preserved,  but  she  is  there  "a  base 

*  A   Thousand  Miles  Up  the  Nile,  pp.  64,  65.        t  Ibid. 


ITS  HUMILIATION.  41 

kingdom ;"  she  is  "the  basest  of  the  kingdoms."  As 
Egypt  mingles  in  the  politics  of  the  present  time,  the 
question  is  not,  What  will  she  do?  but,  What  will  be 
done  with  her?  I  have  already  spoken  of  the  effects 
of  the  British  occupation,  but  it  has  been  able  to  achieve 
its  reforms  only  through  deeper  abasement  of  the 
Egyptian  sovereignty.  We  have  had  to  assume  the 
entire  control  of  the  Egyptian  finances.  The  Khedive 
cannot  impose  or  receive  a  single  tax.  He,  his  min- 
isters, and  the  entire  body  of  the  officials  of  Egypt, 
receive  their  salaries  from  the  representative  of  the 
British  government.  Some  time  ago  the  Khedive,  not 
unnaturally  restive  under  such  iron  control,  dismissed 
his  prime  minister  and  replaced  him  by  one  less  sub- 
servient to  the  British  government.  The  Khedive  was 
immediately  informed  by  Lord  Cromer  that  the  new 
minister  must  be  dismissed  and  the  old  minister  rein- 
stated within  four  and  twenty  hours.  The  Khedive 
obeyed.  "According  to  the  official  Directory,"  says 
Mr.  Curtis,  "Lord  Cromer  is  merely  Consul -General 
and  diplomatic  agent  of  Great  Britain  at  Cairo,  but  the 
Khedive  is  allowed  to  do  nothing  without  his  consent 
or  approval.  In  the  official  lists  he  ranks  with  the 
Consul-General  of  the  United  States  and  other  coun- 
tries, and  on  ceremonial  occasions  he  appears  with  his 
colleagues  of  the  Consular  corps  and  makes  his  bow 
to  the  man  on  the  throne.  And  the  man  on  the  throne 
returns  the  salute  of  his  master,  and  is  conscious  that 
the  quiet-looking  gentleman  with  unostentatious  man- 
ners and  a  pleasant  smile  controls  his  thoughts  as  well 
as  his  acts,  for  it  is  a  waste  of  time  for  His  Highness 
to  suggest  or  plan  or  even  imagine  things  that  Lord 
Cromer  does  not  approve/'* 

In  the  face  of  these  things  need  we  ask  whose  word 
this  is  which  said  from  of  old — "They  shall  be  there 

A  BASE  KINGDOM.  ,  .  .  FOR  I  WILL  DIMINISH 
THEM?" 

*  Egypt,  Burmafi  and  British  Malaysia  (1905),  p.  64. 


42  EGYPT. 

The  last  point  in.  the  prediction  to  which  we  now 
draw  attention  is  that,  though  the  kingdom  was  to  con- 
tinue, there  should  be 

NO  NATIVE  PRINCE 

of  Egypt.  "There  shall  be  no  more  a  prince  out  of  the 
land  of  Egypt"  (Ezek.  xxx.  13).  On  this  a  few  words 
will  suffice.  The  prophecy  has  been  completely  and 
literally  fulfilled.  It  is  evident  that  the  words  did  not 
mean  that  Egypt  should  be  without  a  government. 
The  "kingdom"  was  to  continue.  She  was  to  have 
possessors  and  masters,  but  these  were  not  to  arise 
from  among  her  own  children.  There  was  to  be  no 
longer  a  native  ruler;  but  the  land,  with  all  that  was 
its  glory  and  its  strength,  was  to  be  made  waste  under 
the  disastrous  dominion  of  those  who  were  bound  to 
the  people  by  no  ties  of  kindred  or  of  country.  In 
525  B.  C.  Egypt  was  conquered  by  the  Persians  un- 
der Cambyses,  and  its  king,  Psammetik  III.,  was 
made  prisoner.  The  country  became  a  province  of 
the  Persian  empire;  but,  unlike  their  degenerate 
offspring,  the  Egyptians  of  that  period  did  not  tame- 
ly bow  under  the  foreign  yoke.  For  the  next  one 
hundred  and  seventy  years  their  history  is  simply 
a  tale  of  rebellions,  more  or  less  temporarily  suc- 
cessful, until  they  were  finally  subdued  by  Ochus  in 
350  B.  C.  From  that  time  to  the  present  no  native 
prince  has  ruled  the  land.  Again  and  again  has 
Egypt  changed  masters,  but  among  them  all  no 
son  of  hers  is  numbered.  There  has  Been  "no  more 
a  prince  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt." 

Put  together  these  five  things :  (1)  the  picture  of 
the  final  condition  of  Thebes,  Egypt's  ancient  capi- 
tal ;  (2)  that  the  greatness  of  Egypt  should  not  re- 
turn, but  that,  on  the  contrary,  it  should  sink  into 
deepening  decay;  (3)  that,  notwithstanding  clecay, 
it    should    still    have    its    sovereign    and    continue    a 


THE  END  OF  THE  MATTER.  43 

kingdom;  but  (4)  that  it  should  exist  in  deep  hu- 
miliation and  be  the  basest  of  the  kingdoms ;  and 
(5)  that,  though  the  throne  should  continue^  it 
should  never  be  filled  by  one  of  Egypt's  own  sons. 
Place  these  predictions  in  the  light  of  Egypt's  pres- 
ent condition  and  past  history,  and  what  do  they 
tell  us?  Surely,  not  merely  that  this  is  God's  Book. 
That  they  do  say;  for  these  words  were  never  man's, 
but  "Holy  men  of  God  spake  as  they  were  moved 
by  the  Holy  Ghost."  But  they  tell  also  that  God 
is  Judge,  that  He  will  rebuke  pride,  and  punisE 
sin.  The  Lord  ruleth,  and  forgets  neither  His 
threatenings  nor  His  promises, 


CHAPTER  V. 

egypt   {Continued). 

I  again  ask  attention  to  this  land  of  fame  and  mys- 
tery, and  it  may  be  well  to  say  in  one  word  why  I  do 
so.  In  order  to  leave  no  room  for  the  suspicion  that 
the  predictions  were  written  after  the  event,  we  have 
agreed  not  to  press  for  a  verdict  from  any  fulfilment 
which  took  place  before  the  beginning  of  the  Christian 
era.  But,  if  we  are  to  succeed  in  banishing  every 
suspicion,  we  must  do  something  more.  I  can  under- 
stand someone  saying — not  from  any  desire  to  oppose, 
but  from  a  hesitancy  which  is  in  the  circumstances 
perfectly  natural — "Yes,  the  fulfilment  you  speak  of  is 
indeed  marvellous.  But  quite  as  marvellous  things 
have  sometimes  been  brought  about  by  chance,  and  it 
is  perhaps  no  more  than  we  might  expect  that,  out  of 
so  many  hundreds  of  predictions,  some  should  come 
true."  But  the  Scriptures  enable  us  to  meet  this  diffi- 
culty as  easily  as  the  other.  They  contain  what  I  may 
call  prophetic  pictures.  They  do  not  merely  indicate 
one  feature  among  the  many  after-characteristics  of 
peoples  and  of  countries :  they  describe  one  feature 
after  another  till  their  condition  is  fully  portrayed. 
With  the  fulfilment  of  one,  or  perhaps  two,  of  these  it 
might  be  imagined  that  chance  had  had  to  do,  but,  as 
one  after  another  is  added,  the  suspicion  becomes  more 
and  more  unreasonable,  till,  before  the  accumulating 
evidence,  it  is  swept  away  completely  and  for  ever. 


THE   DESTRUCTION  OF    MEMPHIS.  45 

Such  a  picture  we  have  in  the  prophecies  concerning 
Egypt.    We  have  already  marked  the  fulfilment  of 

FIVE    PREDICTIONS. 

Let  me  now  ask  the  reader  to  look  with  me  at  the 
fulfilment  of 

TEN  OTHERS. 

1.  We  began  the  previous  chapter  with  a  prediction 
concerning  Thebes,  the  most  ancient  capital  city  of 
Egypt.  Another  famous  city,  which,  as  capital,  took  in 
time  the  place  of  Thebes,  is  mentioned  in  Ezekiel  xxx. 
13:  "Thus  saith  the  Lord  God:  I  will  also  destroy  the 
idols,  and  I  will  cause  the  images  to  cease  from  Noph." 
This  name  preserves  the  designation  Pa-Nouf  by 
which  the  Egyptians  named  the  ancient  city  known  to 
us  as 

MEMPHIS. 

It  is  said  to  have  been  founded  by  Menes,  and  that 
there  the  first  regulations  were  made  for  the  worship 
of  the  gods  and  the  service  of  the  temples.  It  is  cer- 
tain that  it  was  regarded  with  the  deepest  veneration. 
The  monuments  enumerate  its  gods  and  its  temples, 
and  Brugsch  Bey  speaks  of  it  in  his  book,  Egypt 
Under  the  Pharaohs,  as  "the  great  temple-city  of 
Egypt- 
It  was  not  unfitting,  therefore,  that  He  who  was  to 
judge  Egypt  for  its  idolatry,  as  well  as  for  its  sin, 
should  say  of  Memphis  that  He  would  destroy  its 
idols  and  cause  the  images  to  cease  from  it.  But, 
though  it  might  prove  a  fitting  judgment,  it  was  a 
most  unlikely  fate.  The  idols  have  not  been  destroyed 
elsewhere  nor  have  the  images  ceased.  Both  are  found 
to-day  in  Thebes,  which  was  in  ruins  when  Memphis 
still  retained  its  splendour.  They  are  found  elsewhere, 
and,  from  what  we  know  of  the  general  condition  of 
Egypt,  we  should  say  it  was  highly  probable  they 
would  be  found  here  also. 


46  EGYPT. 

To  those  who  looked  upon  Memphis  at  the  begin- 
ning of  the  Christian  era  this  fate  must  have  seemed 
more  improbable  still.  Strabo  found  the  city  "large 
and  populous,  next  to  Alexandria  in  size,"  and  speaks 
of  its  gods  and  temples  and  statues.  In  the  beginning 
of  the  seventh  century  it  was  the  residence  of  the 
Governor  of  Egypt,  who  made  terms  there  with  the 
Arab  invaders.  The  city  of  Cairo  having  been  founded 
in  the  neighbourhood,  the  population  drifted  away 
from  the  old  city,  and  its  materials  were  taken  to  build 
and  extend  the  new.  The  vast  mass  of  Memphis,  how- 
ever, seemed  to  defy  all  attempts  at  destruction.  Abd- 
ul-Latif,  an  Arab  traveller,,  who  visited  it  in  the  13th 
century,  says:  "its  ruins  still  offer  to  the  eyes  of  the 
spectator  a  collection  of  wonderful  works  which  con- 
found the  intellect,  and  to  describe  which  the  most 
eloquent  man  would  labour  in  vain.  The  longer  we 
look  upon  the  scene,  the  higher  rises  the  admiration  it 
inspires;  and  every  new  glance  that  we  cast  upon  the 
ruins  reveals  a  new  charm.  Scarcely  have  they  awak- 
ened a  distinct  idea  in  the  soul  of  the  spectator,  than  a 
still  more  admirable  idea  suggests  itself;  and  just  as 
you  believe  you  have  gained  complete  knowledge  of 
them,  at  that  very  moment  the  conviction  forces  itself 
on  the  mind,  that  what  you.  think  you  know  is  still  very 
far  from  the  truth." 

And  now  what  of  to-day?  So  completely  has  the 
doom  been  accomplished  that  a  century  ago  the  very 
site  of  Memphis  was  a  matter  of  dispute.  Later  in- 
vestigations have  settled  that  question,  but  they  have 
also  verified  the  truth  of  the  prediction.  With  the  ex- 
ception of  one  colossal  statue  (the  property  of  the 
English  nation,  but  which  has  never  been  removed, 
and  which  Wilkinson  says,  will  some  day  be  burned 
by  the  Arabs  for  lime),  and  a  small  figure  of  red 
granite,  both  of  extraordinary  beautv,  but  broken  and 
laid  on  the  ground — with  the  exception  of  these,  the 
idols  and  the  images  and  the  temples— the  city  and  all 


THE  DESTRUCTION   OF    MEMPHIS.  47 

it  contained  have  passed  away.  Wilkinson  writes: 
"there  is  very  little  else  worthy  of  remark  amidst  the 
mounds  of  Memphis/'  "We  are  surprised  to  find  so 
few  remains  of  this  vast  city."  Brugsch  Bey  says: 
"All  that  remains  of  this  celebrated  city  at  the  present 
time  consists  of  heaps  of  fragments  of  columns  and 
altars,  and  carvings  which  once  belonged  to  the  temples 
of  Memphis — a  far-stretching  mass  of  mounds,  out  of 
which  shine  in  the  clear  sunlight  the  remains  of  the 
half-destroyed  chambers  and  halls  of  ancient  houses. 
Those  travellers  who  visit  the  remains  of  Memphis  in 
the  hope  of  recognising  some  vestiges  worthy  of  its 
fame,  will  be  little  satisfied  with  the  sad  prospect  which 
meets  the  eye."  Miss  Amelia  B.  Edwards  thus  de- 
scribes a  visit  to  Memphis:  "We  are  all  gathered 
round  the  brink  of  a  muddy  pool  in  the  midst  of 
which  lies  a  shapeless  block  of  blackened  and  corroded 
limestone.     This,   it   seems,   is  the   famous   prostrate 

colossus  of  Rameses  the  Great So  here 

it  lies,  face  downwards  and  drowned  once  a  year  by 
the  Nile;  visible  only  when  the  pools  left  by  the  in- 
undation have  evaporated  and  all  the  muddy  hollows 
are  dried  up 

"Where,  however,  is  the  companion  colossus? 
Where  is  the  Temple  itself?  Where  are  the  pylons  of 
the  obelisks,  of  the  avenues  of  sphinxes?  Where,  in 
short,  is  Memphis? 

"The  dragoman  shrugs  his  shoulders  and  points  to 
the  barren  mounds  among  the  palms.  .  .  .  And  is 
this  all?  No — not  quite  all.  There  are  some  mud 
huts  yonder,  in  among  the  trees ;  and  in  front  of  one 
of  these  we  find  a  number  of  sculptured  fragments — 
battered  sphinxes,  torsos  without  legs,  sitting  figures 
without  heads — in  green,  black,  and  red  granite. 
Ranged  in  an  irregular  semicircle  on  the  sward,  they 
seem  to  sit  in  forlorn  conclave,  half  solemn,  half  ludi- 
crous, with  the  goats  browsing  round,  and  the  little 
Arab  children  hiding  behind  them. 


48  EGYPT, 


<c 


fNear  this,  in  another  pool,  lies  another  colossus— 
not  the  fellow  to  that  which  we  saw  first ;  but  a  smaller 
one — also  face  downwards,  of  red  granite. 

"And  this  is  all  that  remains  of  Memphis,  eldest  of 
cities;  a  few  large  rubbish-heaps^ a  dozen  or  so  of 
broken  statues,  and  a  name !  .  .  .  Where  are  those 
stately  ruins  that  even  in  the  middle  ages  extended 
over  a  space  estimated  at  'half  a  day's  journey  in  every 
direction?'  One  can  hardly  believe  that  a  great  city 
ever  flourished  on  this  spot,  or  understand  how  it 
should  have  been  effaced  so  utterly."* 

2.  We  turn  once  more  to  the  general  aspect  and  for- 
tunes of  the  entire  country.  The  hand  of  decay  was 
also  to  be  placed  upon 

THE  RIVERS  AND  THE  CANALS. 

We  read:  "I  will  make  the  rivers  dry"  (Ezek.  xxx. 
12)  ;  and  again,  "The  waters  shall  fail  from  the  sea  and 
the  river  shall  be  wasted  and  become  dry.  And  the 
rivers  shall  stink:  the  streams  (or  canals)  of  Egypt 
shall  be  minished  and  dried  up"  (Isaiah  xix.  5,  6).  By 
"the  sea"  is  in  all  probability  meant  the  Nile.  It  was 
named  oceanos  by  Homer,  and  has  been  called  the  sea, 
or  the  sea  of  the  Nile,  by  both  ancient  and  modern 
Egyptians.  "The  rivers"  which  were  to  "become  dry" 
and  to  "stink"  were  the  arms  of  the  Nile  which,  passing 
through  the  plain  of  the  Delta,  poured  the  waters  of 
this  gigantic  stream  into  the  Mediterranean.  Part  of 
this  prediction  is  as  yet  unfulfilled.  The  waters  have 
not  as  yet  failed  from  the  sea,  but  nevertheless  we 
trace  even  here  fulfilments  as  wonderful  as  those 
which  startle  us  in  other  parts  of  the  prophetic  descrip- 
tion. The  hand  of  decay  has  made  a  deepening  impress 
on  the  rivers  and  the  canals  of  Egypt.  In  his  article 
on  the  Nile  in  Smith's  Bible  Dictionary,  Mr.  Reginald 

*  A  Thousand  Miles  Up  the  Nile,  pp.  97-99- 


THE  RIVERS  AND   CANALS.  49 

Stuart  Poole  says :  "The  great  difference  between  the 
Nile  of  Egypt  in  the  present  day  and  in  ancient  times  is 
caused  by  the  failure  of  some  of  its  branches.  .  .  . 
The  river  was  famous  for  its  seven  branches,  and 
under  the  Roman  dominion  eleven  were  counted,  of 
which,  however,  there  were  but  seven  principal  ones. 
Herodotus  notices  that  there  were  seven,  of  which  he 
says  that  two,  the  present  Damietta  and  Rosetta 
branches,  were  originally  artificial,  and  he  therefore 
speaks  of  'the  five  mouths.'  Now,  as  for  a  long  period 
past,  there  are  no  riavi gable  and  unobstructed  branches 
but  these  two  that  Herodotus  distinguishes  as  the 
work  of  man."  Even  these  are  accessible  only  to 
small  vessels.  "The  five  other  ancient  mouths  of  the 
river  have  long  ago  silted  up,  and  their  course  can  now 
be  hardly  traced  over  the  great  alluvial  plain  and 
through  the  network  of  canals  and  lakes  which  inter- 
pose between  the  sea  and  this  point."* 

The  rivers  then  have  been  made  dry,  and  instead  of 
flowing  in  their  ancient  course  have  become  stinking 
pools  and  marshes.  What  had  formerly  ministered  to 
health  and  pleasure  was  changed  into  a  danger  and  an 
offence.  For  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  what  is  shown 
here  in  the  vivid  picture  of  prophecy  was  a  condition 
through  which  they  actually  passed.  Referring  to  one 
of  the  canals  of  Cairo,  Wilkinson  says  that  to  close  it, 
and  turn  its  bed  into  a  street  would  have  the  "advant- 
age of  freeing  the  houses  on  its  banks  from  the  noxious 
vapours  that  rise  when  the  water  has  retired  and  left 
a  bed  of  liquid  mud/'  What  now  of  the  canals? 
Amrou,  the  MJahommedan  conqueror  of  Egypt,  wrote 
to  the  caliph  that  it  was  necessary  that  one-third  of  the 
entire  revenues  of  the  country  should  be  devoted  to 
the  maintenance  of  the  canals.  This  has  never  been 
done,  and  the  result  has  been  that  the  canals  also  have 
been  "minished  and  dried  up."     The  predecessors  of 

*  Egypt  as  It  Is,  p.  5. 


50  EGYPT. 

the  present  dynasty  seem  to  have  specially  sinned  in 
this  respect.  "The  Mameluke  Beys/'  says  Malte  Brun, 
"applied  to  their  own  private  use  the  funds  destined  to 
the  support  of  these  public  works,  on  which  the  fer- 
tility of  Egypt  depends.  Many  canals  were  even 
abandoned  by  these  barbarians,  who  thus  destroyed 
the  sources  of  their  own  revenues."  Mehemet  Ali  and 
Ismail  Pasha  have  undoubtedly  tried  to  atone  for  the 
neglect  of  the  past.  The  resources  of  the  country  -and 
the  lives  of  her  children  have  been  lavished  in  the  at- 
tempt to  undo  the  mischief  which  has  resulted  from 
former  negligence.  But  their  efforts  have  been  only 
partially  successful.  The  Menoufieh  Canal,  for  ex- 
ample, used  formerly  to  communicate  with  the  Rosetta 
branch  of  the  Nile,  but  is  now  dammed  up.  Mr.  Vil- 
liers  Stuart,  who  was  deputed  to  examine  and  report 
upon  the  state  of  Egypt  in  1882  says:  "One  complaint 
often  made  to  me  on  the  subject  of  irrigation  in  the 
Delta,  is  that  the  canals  run  dry  at  the  critical  season 
of  the  year,  and  when  the  quantity  and  quality  of  the 
cotton  crop  are  most  seriously  affected  by  any  defic- 
iency in  the  water  supply."* 

Of  the  Said,  or  Upper  Egypt,  he  writes :  If  "there 
were  a  canal  system  as  perfect  as  in  the  Delta,  it  would 
far  exceed  it  in  richness  of  vegetation  and  in  wealth- 
producing  power. "f  As  it  is  at  present  it  depends  for 
its  one  crop  on  the  annual  overflow  of  the  Nile.  Were 
a  system  of  canal-irrigation  introduced  "it  could  grow 
three  crops  where  it  now  grows  but  one."  But  is  this 
a  modern  discovery?  Did  the  wise  Egyptians  live  for 
centuries  in  the  country  without  suspecting  that  there 
was  so  easy  a  method  of  multiplying  its  fertility?  No, 
this  part  of  the  country  now  condemned  to  comparative 
barrenness  and  poverty  for  the  lack  of  irrigation,  was 
once  covered  with  canals.  The  following  extracts  ex- 
plain how  the  change  has  come  about:    "Canals  exist, 

*  Egypt  After  the  War,  p.  51.         f  Ibid.  p.  241. 


THE   RIVER    SCENERY.  SI 

but  many  have  been  allowed  to  silt  up.  They  all  want 
deepening,  and  they  ought  to  be  connected  together  on 
a  scientific  system."*  "The  shallownesss  of  the  canals 
is  partly  due  to  the  fact  that  the  late  Khedive  diverted 
to  his  sugar  estates  and  to  other  purposes  the  forced 
labour  that  ought  to  have  been  applied  to  keep  them 
clean."t  "There  seems  no  doubt  that  the  ancient 
Egyptians  kept  the  canals  in  Upper  Egypt  full;  this 
accounts  for  the  much  larger  population  in  the  time 
of  the  Pharaohs."f  "We  could  irrigate  our  land  much 
better,"  the  peasants  said  to  him,  "and  more  of  it,  if  the 
canals  had  water  in  them,  but  they  are  dry;  if  they 
were  deepened,  there  would  be  water  in  them  always. "§ 
The  canals,  as  the  Scripture  predicted,  have  been  min- 
ished  and  dried  up. 
3.  Another  feature  is 

THE    RIVER   SCENERY 

of  Egypt  as  presented  in  the  prophetic  picture  indicated 
a  further  remarkable  change.  Mr.  Reginald  Stuart 
Poole,  formerly  of  the  British  Museum,  writes :  "The 
monuments  and  the  narratives  of  ancient  writers  show 
us  in  the  Nile  of  Egypt  in  old  times,  a  stream  bordered  by 
flags  and  reeds,  the  covert  of  abundant  wild-fowl,  and 
bearing  on  its  waters  the  fragrant  flowers  of  the  vari- 
ous-coloured lotus.  Now  in  Egypt  scarcely  any  reeds 
or  water-plants — the  famous  papyrus  being  nearly  if 
not  quite  extinct,  and  the  lotus  almost  unknown — are 
to  be  seen  except  in  the  marshes  near  the  Mediterran- 
ean. This  also  was  prophesied  by  Isaiah :  "The 
papyrus-reeds  in  the  river  and  everything  growing  (lit 
'sown')  in  the  river  shall  be  dried  up,  driven  away  (by 
the  wind)  and  (shall)  not  be'  (xix.  7).  When  it  is 
recollected  that  the  water-plants  of  Egypt  were  so 
abundant  as  to  be  a  great  source  of  revenue  in  the 

*  Ibid.  p.  241.         t  P.  243.         i  P.  261.       §  P.  277. 


52  EGYPT. 

prophet's  time  and  much  later,  the  exact  fulfilment  of 
his  predictions  is  a  valuable  evidence  of  the  truth  of  the 
old  opinion  as  to  'the  sure  word  of  prophecy/  " 

This  was  indeed  no  small  part  of  the  burden  of  loss 
and  decay  which  was  to  lay  the  pride  of  Egypt  in  the 
dust.  An  inscription  speaks  of  an  Egyptian  Queen  as 
having  reigned  over  the  land  of  the  papyrus  and  the 
lotus.  These  plants  formed  so  striking  a  feature  of 
Upper  and  Lower  Egypt  respectively  that  they  became 
the  symbols  of  the  districts.  They  were  also  a  boon  to 
the  people  and  a  source  of  considerable  revenue  to  the 
crown.  "The  lotus,  the  papyrus,  and  other  similar 
productions  of  the  land,  during  and  after  the  inunda- 
tion, were,  for  the  poor,  one  of  the  greatest  blessings 
nature  ever  provided  for  any  people."*  They  were 
largely  used  as  food.  The  lotus  flowers  were  in  con- 
stant demand  for  the  bouquets  and  garlands  which  the 
Egyptian  host  presented  to  and  with  which  he  adorned 
his  guests.  The  seeds  were  pounded  and  made  into 
bread.  The  papyrus  was  put  to  many  uses.  "They 
employ  the  roots/'  Pliny  writes,  "as  firewood,  and  for 
making  various  utensils.  They  even  construct  small 
boats  of  the  plant;  and  out  of  the  rind  sails,  mats, 
clothes,  bedding,  and  ropes/'  But  that  which  made  it 
famous,  and  which  has  preserved  the  name  to  our  own 
time,  was  the  use  made  of  it  as  a  writing  material.' 
Pliny,  who  wrote  in  the  latter  half  of  the  first  century 
of  our  era,  describes  the  appearance  and  the  growth 
of  the  plant  and  the  various  kinds  of  paper  which  were 
formed  from  it.  We  know  that  papyrus  was  in  use  till 
the  seventh  century,  and  until  that  time  the  plant  was 
still  found  in  its  ancient  home.  But  then  as  now  it 
stood  written:  "The  reeds  and  the  flags  shall  wither 
away.  The  meadow  ("here  used,"  says  Gesenius,  "of 
the  grassy  places  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile")  by  the 
Nile,  by  the  brink  of  the  Nile,  and  all  that  is  sown  by 

*  Wilkinson.     Ancient  Egyptians,  L,  p.  168. 


EXTINCTION  OF  ITS  FISHERIES.  53 

the  Nile  shall  become  dry,  be  driven  away,  and  be  no 
more"  (Isaiah  xix.  6,  7).  And  to-day  all  is  fulfilled. 
'The  plant  is  now  unknown  in  Egypt."*  The  pink  and 
the  blue  lotus,  which  appear  so  frequently  in  the  paint- 
ings, have  also  passed  away.  The  traveller  is  struck 
by  the  absence  of  verdure  on  the  Nile  banks.  "It  is  a 
curious  fact  that  no  water-plants  or  weeds  grow  on 
the  banks  of  the  Nile;  a  sedgy  margin  is  never  to  be 
met  with  in  this  country."! 

4.  A  similar  prediction  is  made  regarding 

THE  FISHERIES. 

"Herodotus  says  that  a  certain  number  of  the  poorer 
Egyptians  'lived  almost  entirely  on  fish.'  It  was  so 
abundant  that  it  was  necessarily  cheap.  The  Nile  pro- 
duced several  kinds  which  were  easily  caught;  and  in 
Lake  Moeris  the  abundance  of  fish  was  such  that  the 
Pharaohs  are  said  to  have  derived  from  the  sale  a 
revenue  of  above  £94,000  a  year.  .  .  .  The  fish- 
ermen of  Egypt  formed  a  numerous  class,  and  the 
salting  and  drying  of  fish  furnished  occupation  to  a 
large  number  of  persons."t  Diodorous  refers  to  the 
fisheries  of  Egypt  in  similar  terms,  showing  that  the 
industry  within  fifty  years  of  the  beginning  of  the 
Christian  era  had  suffered  no  diminution.  Fish  con- 
stituted even  then  a  large  portion  of  the  daily  food  of 
the  people,  and  dried  fish  formed  a  large  item  in  Egypt- 
ian exports.  But  it  stood  written:  "The  fishers  also 
shall  lament,  and  all  they  that  cast  angle  into  the  Nile 
shall  mourn,  and  they  that  spread  nets  upon  the  waters 
shall  languish"  (Isaiah  xix.  8).  And  this  too  has 
been  accomplished.  In  the  decline  of  Egypt  the  fish- 
pools  and  their  conduits  were  neglected  and  ruined, 
and  the  fishers  lamented,  mourned,  and  languished. 
"Having  once  been  very  productive,  and  a  main  source 

*  Ibid.  II.,  p.  97.  t  Irby  and  Mangles. 

t  Rawlinson's  Egypt  and  Babylon,  pp.  318,  319. 


54  EGYPT. 

of  revenue  as  well  as  of  sustenance,  the  fisheries  are 
now  scarcely  of  any  moment,  excepting  about   Lake 
Menzaleh,  and  in  some  few  places  elsewhere,  chiefly 
in  the  North  of  Egypt/'* 
But 

5.    THE  REMAINING  INDUSTRIES 

of  Egypt  were  also  to  suffer.  The  prophet  continues : 
"Moreover  they  that  work  in  combed  flax,  and  they 
that  weave  white  cloth  shall  be  ashamed.  And  her 
pillars  shall  be  broken  in  pieces,  and  all  they  that 
work  for  hire  shall  be  grieved  in  soul.  .  .  .  Neither 
shall  there  be  for  Egypt  any  work  which  head  or  tail, 
palm  branch  or  rush,  may  do"  (xix.  9,  10,  15).  "The 
pillars"  are  the  support  of  the  social  fabric,  the  rich 
and  noble  by  whose  patronage  the  industries  of  the 
country  were  encouraged.  "Head"  and  "tail"  are  ex- 
pressive figures  of  those  who  lead  and  those  who  fol- 
low, as  are  the  lofty  palm-branch  and  the  humble  rush 
of  high  and  low,  the  aristocracy  and  the  masses  of  the 
people.  It  is.  implied  that  these  are  bound  together  in 
a  fellowship  of  labour,  and  we  are  told  that  a  day  was 
to  come  when  their  occupation  should  be  gone  and  the 
fellowship  should  cease. 

That  the  hand  is  laid  here  upon  what  formed  a  special 
feature  of  Egyptian  life  we  shall  immediately  see.  But 
to  understand  how  heavy  this  doom  was,  and  the  im- 
probability of  its  fulfilment,  we  have  to  recall  the  fact 
that  the  greatness  of  Egypt  lay  not  so  much  in  her 
military  power,  as  in  her  civilization.  Her  arts  and  her 
industries  were  her  chief  glories.  Before  showing 
that  their  lustre  is  undimmed  by  modern  achievements 
I  may  say  that  they  were  well  and  long  sustained  by 
"the  pillars."  "Considerable  sums  were  expended  in 
furnishing  houses,  and  in  many  artificial  caprices.  Rich 
jewels  and  costly  works  of  art  were  in  great  request, 

*  Reginald  Stuart  Poole. 


EXTINCTION    OF    ITS    INDUSTRIES.  55 

as  well  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  provincial  capitals, 
as  at  Thebes  and  Memphis :  they  delighted  in  splendid 
equipages,  elegant  and  commodious  boats,  numerous 
attendants,  horses,  dogs,  and  other  requisites  for  the 
chase;  and  besides,  their  houses,  their  villas,  and  their 
gardens  were  laid  out  with  no  ordinary  expense."* 
"The  rich  frequently  had  ornamental  works,  statues, 
and  furniture  of  solid  gold."f  Expense  was  lavished 
upon  them  even  to  the  tomb.  The  embalming  of  a 
corpse  sometimes  cost,  according  to  Diodorous,  £250 
sterling. 

That  the  Palm-branch  and  the  Rush,  the  higher  and 
the  lower  classes,  alike  shared  in  the  vast  and  continu- 
ous labours  which  were  characteristic  of  Egyptian 
civilization  has  been  abundantly  proved  by  the  monu- 
ments. The  priests,  who  were  bound  by  an  exacting 
ritual,  held  the  first  position  in  the  state ;  they  were 
also  charged  with  the  administration  of  the  law.  The 
chief  architects  were  princes,  and  were  permitted  to 
intermarry  with  the  royal  family.  The  military  force 
consisted  of  410,000  men,  exclusive  of  the  large  force 
of  mercenaries,  and  the  commands  were  held  by  the 
nobility.  These  last  occupied  posts  also  in  the  royal 
household,  in  the  government  of  the  country,  in  the 
management  of  the  royal  estates,  and,  notwithstanding 
that  a  shepherd  was  an  abomination  to  the  Egyptians, 
even  the  office  of  superintendent  of  the  herds  was  filled 
by  men  of  rank. 

This  union  of  classes  is  an  indication  of  the  place 
which  art  and  industry  held  in  the  public  estimation. 
Excellence  was  their  constant  aim,  we  may  say  their 
passion;  and  the  utmost  care  was  taken  to  secure  the 
highest  efficiency  in  every  department.  "No  trades- 
man," says  Diodorous,  "was  permitted  to  meddle  in 
political  affairs,  or  to  hold  any  civil  office  in  the  state, 

*  Wilkinson.     The  Ancient  Egyptians,  II.,  pp.  218-219. 
f  Ibid.,  p.  167. 


56  EGYPT. 

lest  His  thoughts  should  be  distracted  by  the  incon- 
sistency of  his  pursuits.  .  .  .  They  feared  that 
without  such  a  law  .  .  .  their  proper  occupations 
would  be  neglected.  .  .  .  They  also  considered 
that  to  follow  more  than  one  occupation  would  be 
detrimental  to  their  own  interests  and  to  those  of  the 
community;  and  that,  when  men,  from  a  motive  of 
avarice,  are  induced  to  engage  in  numerous  branches 
of  art,  the  result  generally  is  that  they  are  unable  to 
excel  in  any." 

The  results  of  this  care  have  secured  for  Egypt  its 
undying  fame.  The  byssus,  woven  in  the  looms  of 
those  who  worked  "in  combed  flax,"  was  sold  for  its 
weight  in  gold;  and  Pliny,  accounting  for  the  large 
quantity  of  flax  cultivated  in  Egypt  explains  that  the 
Egyptians  exported  linen  to  Arabia  and  India,  and 
adds  that  the  quality  of  that  produced  by  Egyptian 
looms  was  far  superior  to  any  other.  "Nor  was  the 
praise  bestowed  upon  that  manufacture  unmerited; 
and  the  quality  of  one  piece  of  linen  found  near  Mem- 
phis fully  justifies  it,  and  excites  equal  admiration  at 
the  present  day,  being  to  the  touch  comparable  to  silk, 
and  not  inferior  in  texture  to  our  finest  cambric.  .  . 
Some  idea  may  be  given  of  its  texture  from  the  num- 
ber of  threads  in  the  inch,  which  is  540  (270  double 
threads)  in  the  warp,"  and  no  in  the  woof.  "It  is 
covered  with  small  figures  and  hieroglyphics,  so  finely 
drawn  that  here  and  there  the  lines  are  with  difficulty 
followed  by  the  eye.  .  .  .  The  perfection  of  its 
threads  is  equally  surprising;  the  knots  and  breaks, 
seen  in  our  best  cambric,  are  not  found  in  holding  it  to 
the  light."* 

Their  superiority  was  as  marked  in  spinning  as  in 
weaving.  The  threads  employed,  for  example,  in  the 
manufacture  of  nets  astonished  the  ancients  by  their 
fineness  and  strength.    Some  of  the  nets,  Pliny  says, 

*  Ibid.,  pp.  75-8o. 


EXTINCTION    OF    ITS    INDUSTRIES.  57 

"were  so  delicate  that  they  would  pass  through  a  man's 
ring,  and  a  single  person  could  carry  a  sufficient  num- 
ber of  them  to  surround  a  whole  wood.  Julius  Lupus, 
who  died  while  Governor  of  Egypt,  had  some  of  these 
nets,  each  string  of  which  consisted  of  150  threads;  a 
fact  perfectly  surprising  to  those  who  are  not  aware 
that  the  Rhodians  preserve  to  this  day  in  the  temple 
of  Minerva  a  linen  corslet  presented  to  them  by  Ama- 
sis,  King  of  Egypt,  whose  threads  are  composed  each 
of  365  fibres."  Herodotus  mentions  another  presented 
by  the  same  king  to  the  Lacedaemonians.  "It  was  of 
linen/'  he  says,  "ornamented  with  numerous  figures  of 
animals  worked  in  gold  and  cotton.  Each  thread  of 
the  corslet  was  worthy  of  admiration.  For,  though 
very  fine,  every  one  was  composed  of  360  other  threads, 
all  distinct." 

The  "combing"  of  the  flax  was  a  marked  feature  in 
the  manufacture.  The  cloth  was  subjected  to  a  pro- 
cess of  smoothing,  or  calendering.  They  also  anti- 
cipated the  moderns  in  the  use  of  dyes.  "Another  very 
remarkable  discovery  of  the  Egyptians  was  the  use  of 
mordants.  They  were  acquainted  with  the  efTect  of 
acids  on  colour,  and  submitted  the  cloth  they  dyed  to 
one  of  the  same  processes  adopted  in  our  modern 
manufactories ;  and  while,  from  his  account,  we  per- 
ceive how  little  Pliny  understood  the  process  he  was 
describing,  he  at  the  same  time  gives  us  the  strongest 
evidence  of  its  truth.  'In  Egypt,'  he  says,  'they  stain 
clothes  in  a  wonderful  manner.  They  take  them  in 
their  original  state,  quite  white,  and  imbue  them,  not 
with  a  dye,  but  with  certain  drugs  which  have  the 
power  of  absorbing  and  taking  colour.  When  this  is 
done  there  is  still  no  appearance  of  change  in  the 
cloths ;  but  so  soon  as  they  are  dipped  into  a  bath  of 
the  pigment,  which  has  been  prepared  for  the  purpose, 
they  are  taken  out  properly  coloured.  The  singular 
thing  is,  that  though  the  bath  contains  only  one  colour, 


58  EGYPT. 

several  hues  are  imparted  to  the  fjiece  .  .  .  nor 
can  the  colour  be  afterward  washed  off."* 

This  is  not  the  only  indication  presented  by  their 
manufactures  that  they  were  acquainted  with  the 
secrets  of  modern  science.  "That  the  Egyptians  pos- 
sessed considerable  knowledge  of  chemistry  and  the 
use  of  metallic-oxides,  is  evident  from  the  nature  of 
the  colours  applied  to  their  glass  and  porcelain."f 
Glass  cutting  was  supposed  to  have  been  first  invented 
in  the  17th  century  by  Lehmann  at  Prague.  "But  the 
specimens  of  ancient  glass,  cut,  engraved,  and  ground, 
discovered  in  Egypt  suffice  to  prove  it  was  practised 
there  of  old.  .  .  .  Emery  powder  and  the  lapi- 
dary's wheel  were  also  used  in  Egypt."J 

The  manufacture  of  glass  itself  has  also  been  re- 
garded as  an  invention  of  modern  times.  "They  were 
well  acquainted,"  says  Wilkinson,  to  whose  great  work 
I  mainly  confine  myself  for  testimony  as  to  the  char- 
acter of  Egyptian  industries,  "not  only  with  the  manu- 
facture of  common  glass  for  beads  and  bottles  of  or- 
dinary quality,  but  with  the  art  of  staining  it  of  divers 
colours.  .  .  .  And  so  skilful  were  they  in  this 
complicated  process,  that  they  imitated  the  most  fanci- 
ful devices,  and  succeeded  in  counterfeiting  the  rich 
hues  and  brilliancy  of  precious  stones.  The  green 
emerald,  the  purple  amethyst,  and  other  expensive 
gems  were  successfully  imitated.  .  .  .  Some  mock 
pearls  (found  by  me  at  Thebes)  have  been  so  well 
counterfeited  that  even  now  it  is  difficult  with  a  strong 
lens  to  detect  the  imposition."§  Winckelmann  speaks 
of  two  pieces  of  glass  mosaic  which  show  the  perfec- 
tion attained  by  the  workers  in  glass.  One  of  the 
pieces,  "though  not  quite  an  inch  in  length,  and  a  third 
of  an  inch  in  breadth  exhibits,  on  a  dark  and  variegated 
ground,  a  bird  resembling  a  duck  in  very  bright  and 

*  Ibid.  II.,  p.  83.    t  Ibid.  II.,  p.  66.    %  Ibid.  II.,  p.  67. 
§  Ibid.  II.,  p.  64. 


EXTINCTION    OF   ITS    INDUSTRIES.  59 

varied  colours.  .  .  .  The  outlines  are  bold  and  de- 
cided, the  colours  beautiful  and  pure,  and  the  effect 
very  pleasing;  in  consequence  of  the  artist  having  al- 
ternately introduced  an  opaque  and  a  transparent  glass. 
The  most  delicate  pencil  of  a  miniature  painter  could 
not  have  traced  with  greater  sharpness  the  circle  of  the 
eyeball,  or  the  plumage  of  the  neck  and  wings,  at  which 
part  this  specimen  has  been  broken.  But  the  most  sur- 
prising thing  is  that  the  reverse  exhibits  the  same  bird, 
in  which  it  is  impossible  to  discover  any  difference  in 
the  smallest  details;  whence  it  may  be  concluded  that 
the  figure  of  the  bird  continues  through  its  thickness." 

Nor  was  glass  merely  used  for  ornamental  purposes. 
Vases  and  bottles  were  manufactured,  the  latter  being 
sometimes  protected  by  wickerwork  or  encased  in 
leather.  They  also  manufactured  porcelain.  "Many 
of  the  porcelain  cups  discovered  at  Thebes  present  a 
tasteful  arrangement  of  varied  hues,  and  show  the  skill 
of  the  Egyptians  and  the  great  experience  they  pos- 
sessed in  this  branch  of  art."*  They  were  famed  also 
for  their  tanning  and  their  work  in  leather.  In  cut- 
ting the  leather  they  made  use  of  the  semi-circular 
knife,  and  "what  we  term  'the  circular  cut'  was  known 
to  the  ancient  Egyptians  3,300  years  ago.  .  .  .  The 
fine  quality  of  the  straps  placed  across  the  bodies  of 
mummies,  discovered  at  Thebes,  and  the  beauty  of  the 
figures  stamped  upon  them  satisfactorily  prove  the  skill 
of  'the  leather  cutters'  as  well  as  the  antiquity  of  em- 
bossing  Many  of  the  occupations  of  their 

trade  are  portrayed  on  the  painted  walls  of  the  tombs 
of  Thebes.  They  made  shoes,  sandals,  the  coverings 
of  seats  of  chairs  or  sofas,  bow-cases,  and  most  of  the 
ornamental  furniture  of  the  chariot."t  So  great  was 
the  consumption  of  leather  that  skins  were  largely  im- 
ported from  foreign  countries. 

It  is  impossible  to  present  in  a  cursory  notice  like 

*  Ibid.  II.,  pp.  65-66.  f  Ibid.  II.,  pp.  93-102. 


60  EGYPT. 

the  present  any  adequate  picture  of  the  manifold  in- 
dustries of  this  land.  "Many  arts  and  inventions  were 
in  common  use  in  Egypt  for  centuries  before  they  are 
generally  supposed  to  have  been  known;  and  we  are 
now  and  then  as  much  surprised  to  find  that  certain 
things  were  old  3,000  years  ago,  as  the  Egyptians 
would  be  if  they  could  hear  us  talk  of  them  as  late 
discoveries."*  They  were  acquainted  with  mining,  with 
the  crushing  of  auriferous  quartz  to  obtain  the  gold, 
with  gold-refining,  with  gold-beating  in  which  they 
manufactured  leaf  of  great  fineness,  and  with  the  mak- 
ing of  gold  and  silver  wire  which  they  used  in  weaving 
patterns  in  which  the  details  were  sometimes  so  minute 
as  to  be  scarcely  visible  to  the  naked  eye.  From  this  it 
appears  that  they  were  acquainted  with  the  use  of  the 
magnifying  glass.  "Among  the  remarkable  inventions 
of  a  remote  era  among  the  Egyptains  may  be  mentioned 
bellows  and  siphons."  They  also  used  the  syringe. 
They  seem  to  have  excelled  the  moderns  in  their 
knowledge  of  metallurgy.  "The  labour  experienced 
by  the  French  engineers,  who  removed  the  obelisk  of 
Luxor  from  Thebes,  in  cutting  a  space  less  than  two 
feet  deep  along  the  face  of  its  partially-decomposed 
pedestal,  suffices  to  show  that  even  with  our  excellent 
modern  implements  we  find  considerable  difficulty  in 
doing  what  to  the  Egyptians  would  have  been  one  of 
the  least  arduous  tasks."  There  is  good  ground  for 
supposing  that  "the  Egyptians  must  have  possessed 
certain  secrets  in  hardening  or  tempering  copper  with 

which  we  are  totally  unacquainted They 

had  even  the  secret  of  giving  to  bronze,  or  brass  blades 
a  certain  degree  of  elasticity.  .  .  .  Another  re- 
markable feature  in  their  bronze  is  the  resistance  it 
offers  to  the  effect  of  the  atmosphere,  some  continuing 
smooth  and  bright  though  buried  for  ages  and  since 
exposed  to  the  damp  of  European  climates.    They  had 

*  Ibid.  II.,  p.  57. 


EXTINCTION    OF   ITS    INDUSTRIES.  6l 

also  the  secret  of  covering  the  surface  with  a  rich 
patina  of  dark  or  light  green,  or  other  colour,  by  ap- 
plying acids  to  it;  as  was  done  by  the  Greeks  and 
Romans,  and  as  we  do  to  the  iron  guns  on  board  our 
men-of-war."* 

The  moving  of  immense  masses  of  stone  hundreds 
of  miles  "shows  that  the  Egyptians  were  well  acquaint- 
ed with  mechanical  powers,  and  the  mode  of  applying 
a  locomotive  force  with  the  most  wonderful  success." 
But  their  skill  "was  not  confined  to  the  mere  moving 
of  immense  weights;  their  wonderful  knowledge  of 
mechanism  is  shown  in  the  erection  of  obelisks,  and  in 
the  position  of  large  stones,  raised  to  a  considerable 
height,  and  adjusted  with  the  utmost  precision;  some- 
times, too,  in  situations  where  the  space  will  not  admit 
the  introduction  of  the  inclined  plane."f 

In  referring  to  Egyptian  carpentry,  Wilkinson  speaks 
of  "the  perfection  to  which  they  had  arrived  in  the 
construction  of  the  chairs  and  ottomans  of  their 
rooms."  With  the  elegant  designs  of  these,  which 
have  been  reproduced  in  the  furniture  of  modern  draw- 
ing rooms,  all  are  familiar.  Of  their  architecture, 
sculpture,  and  painting  I  need  not  speak,  nor  of  the 
embalming  which  has  preserved  the  human  body,  and 
kept  intact  every  feature,  and  the  very  expression  of 
the  face  for  thousands  of  years.  It  is  enough  to  say 
that  the  superiority  we  have  already  remarked  dis- 
tinguished every  industry  from  the  highest  to  the 
lowest.  "So  wisely,"  says  Herodotus,  "was  medicine 
managed  by  them  that  no  doctor  was  permitted  to  prac- 
tise any  but  his  own  peculiar  branch.  Some  were 
oculists,  who  only  studied  diseases  of  the  eye;  others 
attended  solely  to  complaints  of  the  head;  others  to 
those  of  the  teeth.  .  .  .  And  it  is  a  singular  fact, 
that  their  dentists  adopted  a  method,  not  very  long 
practised  in  Europe,  of  stopping  teeth  with  gold,  proofs 

*  Ihld,  II.,  pp.  156-159.  t  II.,  pp.  309-311. 


62  EGYPT. 

of  which  have  been  obtained  from  some  mummies  of 
Thebes."*  Even  in  the  meanest  employments  the  same 
excellence  was  shown.  The  skill  of  the  shepherds  in 
rearing  animals  of  different  kinds  was  the  result,  says 
Diodorous,  of  the  experience  they  had  inherited  from 
their  parents,  and  subsequently  increased  by  their  own 
observation;  and  the  spirit  of  emulation,  which  is 
natural  to  all  men,  constantly  adding  to  their  stock  of 
knowledge,  they  introduced  many  improvements  un- 
known to  other  people.  Their  sheep  were  twice  shorn, 
and  twice  brought  forth  lambs  in  the  course  of  one 
year ;  and  though  climate  was  the  chief  cause  of  these 
phenomena,  the  skill  and  attention  of  the  shepherd 
were  also  necessary ;  nor,  if  the  animals  were  neglected, 
would  unaided  nature  alone  suffice  for  their  continu- 
ance."! 

Now,  in  the  face  of  this  stupendous  and  varied  ac- 
tivity, in^the  face  of  the  arts  and  industries  into  which 
the  strength  of  the  entire  population  was  put  and  in 
which  they  had  attained  unrivalled  excellence,  it  was 
declared  that  all  should  pass  away.  The  pillars  of  the 
state,  it  was  said,  should  be  broken,  and  the  workers 
for  hire  should  be  grieved  in  soul.  There  should  be 
no  work  which  either  high  or  low  should  do.  If  the 
people  were  to  continue  and  the  kingdom  to  remain  it 
seemed  most  unlikely  that  any  such  fate  could  ever 
befall  them.  And  long  after  the  prophecy  was  uttered 
there  seemed  to  be  no  sign  of  its  fulfilment.  When  Alex- 
ander conquered  Egypt  new  markets  were  opened  up 
for  her  products,  and  the  destruction  of  Tyre  and 
Sidon  gave  new  life  to  her  commerce.  Diodorous, 
who  has  been  so  often  quoted  in  the  above  description, 
completed  his  history  within  a  few  years  of  the  birth 
of  our  Lord,  and  he  speaks  not  of  what  had  been,  but 
of  what  was  still  a  feature  of  his  own  time.  Pliny 
wrote  ioo  years  later  and  his  testimony  is  the  same. 

*  Ibid,  II.,  p,  169.        f  Ibid.  II.,  p.  350, 


EXTINCTION    OF    ITS    INDUSTRIES.  63 

Till  Christianity  became  the  religion  of  the  Roman 
empire  the  priests  ministered  in  the  temples,  though 
with  diminished  lustre.  But  with  this  change  that  work 
for  head  and  palm-branch  passed  away.  In  the  decline 
which  followed  and  which  deepened  so  rapidly  under 
the  Arab  and  Turkish  dominions,  the  glory  and  the 
wealth  of  Egypt  perished.  "In  the  three  centuries  of 
mixed  Turkish  and  Mamlouk  misrule  which  followed 
the  Ottoman  conquest,  Arab  art  of  every  kind  lost  its 
cunning,  and  when  Bonaparte's  savants  entered  Cairo 
they  found  its  handicrafts,  as  its  learning,  at  the  lowest 
ebb  of  decadence.  Twenty  years  later  Mehemet  AH 
began  a  series  of  efforts  to  revive  the  old  mechanical 
skill  for  which  Egyptian  workmen  had  once  been  fam- 
ous, but  the  special  aim  and  the  methods  of  his  reforms 
in  this  direction  were  alike  unsound,  and  costly  failure 
was  the  result."*  "Regardless  of  expense,  he  im- 
ported large  quantities  of  costly  machinery  with  skilled 
operatives  at  high  wages,  erecting  vast  mills  all  over 
the  Delta."  The  ruins  of  these  and  of  others  erected 
by  his  successors  in  their  attempt  to  succeed  where  he 
had  failed  have  proved  how  irreversible  is  this  doom 
pronounced  from  of  old.  The  attempt  has  resulted 
"only  in  a  great  waste  of  time,  money,  machinery,  and 
labour."f  Relics  of  former  skill  which  remained  even 
till  comparatively  recent  times  have  also  passed  away. 
Speaking  of  Damietta  M'Coan  says :  "It  was  formerly 
famous  for  its  manufacture  of  leather,  and  for  the 
striped  linen  cloths  called  Dimity  (from  Dimyat  the 
Arab  name  of  the  town)  but  both  these  have  long 
ceased  to  be  specialties  of  the  place. "t  Her  agricul- 
ture still  remains  the  one  employment  and  stay  of  her 
people,  but  it  is  not  the  agriculture  of  the  past.  Its 
unskilfulness  and  poverty  awaken  alike  the  scorn  and 
the  pity  of  the  nations  who  admired  and  envied  the 

*  De  Leon,  The  Khedive's  Egypt,  p.  200. 
t  M'Coan,  Egypt  as  It  Is,  p.  296.    J  Egypt  as  It  Is,  pp.  64,  65. 


64  EGYPT. 

agriculture  which  once  bore  the  stamp  of  Egyptian 
greatness. 

6.  We    have    now    to    notice    another    remarkable 
feature  in  the  prophetic  picture. 

THE  CONDITION   OF   ALL   THE   SURROUNDING 
COUNTRIES 

is  vividly  portrayed.  In  describing  the  effects  of  the 
Babylonian  inroad,  God,  speaking  by  Ezekiel,  says :  "I 
will  make  the  land  of  Egypt  desolate  in  the  midst  of 
the  countries  that  are  desolate,  and  her  cities  among 
the  cities  that  are  laid  waste  shall  be  desolate  forty 
years"  (xxix.  12).  But  the  ruin  of  that  time  was  in 
itself  a  prophecy;  for  in  the  description  of  her  after 
and  permanent  condition  the  same  words  recur :  "They 
shall  be  desolate  in  the  midst  of  the  countries  that  are 
desolate,  and  her  cities  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  the 
cities  that  are  wasted"  (xxx.  7).  The  first  judgment 
was  but  the  type  of  the  desolation  which  was  yet  to 
fall.  It  was  the  blighting  touch  of  the  early  frost 
which  told  of  the  setting  in  of  a  dark  and  bitter  winter. 
The  prediction,  it  will  be  noticed,  takes  a  wide  range. 
It  foretells  disaster  not  for  Egypt  only,  but  also  for  all 
the  surrounding  countries.  It  is  to  be  a  desolation  in 
the  midst  of  desolations.  A  hurried  glance  at  the 
countries  bordering  on  Egypt  will  show  that  the  words 
have  been  made  good,  and  that  even  at  the  beginning 
of  our  era  it  was  utterly  impossible  that  their  fulfil- 
ment could  have  been  foreseen.  On  the  north  Egypt 
is  bounded  by  the  waters  of  the  Mediterranean ;  but  on 
the  west,  south,  and  partly  on  the  east,  she  looked  out 
upon  other  countries  which,  long  after  the  beginning 
of  the  Christian  era,  were  great  and  populous.  On 
the  north-west  lies  the  province  of  Barca,  the  eastern 
division  of  Tripoli.  It  includes  the  ancient  Cyrenai'ca, 
sometimes  called  Pentapolis  from  the  five  great  Cities 
of  Cyrene,  Apollonia,  Ptolemais,  Arsinoe,  and  Beren- 


CONDITION    OF  ALL   SURROUNDING   COUNTRIES.      65 

ice.  Readers  of  the  New  Testament  are  familiar  with 
its  mention  of  Cyrene,  and  the  "parts  of  Libya  about 
Cyrene."  Over  the  whole  country  were  scattered 
wealthy  and  spendid  cities,  which  retained  their  pros- 
perity at  the  time  of  our  Lord.  In  the  year  115  a.  d. 
the  Jews,  great  numbers  of  whom  dwelt  in  Cyrenaica, 
broke  out  into  rebellion.  During  the  insurrection  and 
its  suppression  the  country  suffered  greatly ;  but  it  was 
colonized  afresh  by  the  Emperor  Hadrian.  Under  the 
fostering  care  of  the  Romans  it  revived,  and,  though  it 
afterwards  suffered  much  from  the  oppression  of  its 
Greek  governors,  it  continued  to  prosper.  In  the  fourth 
century  it  was  overrun  by  barbarous  hordes  from  the 
south,  and  the  city  of  Cyrene  was  destroyed.  Three 
centuries  afterwards  a  heavier  blow  fell.  The  Per- 
sians under  Khosroo  Purveez  invaded  Egypt,  and  then 
poured  into  Cyrenaica,  committing  such  dreadful  havoc 
that  the  country  was  almost  depopulated.  Under  the 
Saracens  the  work  of  devastation  was  completed. 
Cyrenaica  was  so  oppressed  that  the  inhabitants  of 
Barca,  for  example,  emigrated  in  a  body,  and  that  city 
has  since  wholly  disappeared.  The  entire  country 
gradually  succumbed,  and  its  cities  have  remained  in 
ruins  ever  since.  There  are  now  only  two  places  which 
deserve  the  name  of  towns ;  and  the  rest  of  the  coun- 
try is  inhabited  solely  by  wandering  Arabs.  Cyrenaica 
still  deserves  the  name  "Jebel  Akhbar"  (the  green 
mountain),  but  the  luxurious  and  pleasure-loving 
Cyrenians  have  long  since  passed  away.  Their  cities, 
once  filled  with  the  noise  of  busy,  joyous,  life,  are  silent 
as  the  grave,  save  when  the  Arabs  chance  to  rest  for 
a  while  within  their  ruined  walls.  On  that  side  of 
Egypt  there  is  certainly  desolation. 

To  the  south-west  of  Barca  is  Fezzan,  the  ancient 
Phazania,  the  great  oasis  of  the  Sahara  which  bounds 
Egypt  on  the  west.  In  19  b.  c.  Cornelius  Balba  ob- 
tained a  triumph  for  the  conquest  of  the  country,  and 
representations  of  its  cities  formed  part  of  the  proces- 


66  EGYPT. 

sional  display.  This  country  also  has  been  desolated. 
Its  great  cities  have  long  since  crumbled  into  ruin; 
and  the  entire  population  for  a  territory  of  three  hun- 
dred miles  in  length  and  two  hundred  in  breadth,  does 
not  exceed  twenty-six  thousand,  or  the  number  of  in- 
habitants in  one  of  our  minor  towns.  Within  the  past 
century  its  trade  has  almost  wholly  disappeared.  "The 
inhabitants  formerly  depended  to  a  great  extent  on 
the  caravans  which  passed  through  the  country;  but 
this  trade  has  been  almost  wholly  lost,  and  Fezzan  has 
in  consequence  become  greatly  impoverished  and  de- 
populated. The  oases  are  capable  of  yielding  an  ample 
supply  of  the  necessaries  of  life,  but  cultivation  is 
neglected,  and  several  oases  have  been  altogether  aban- 
3oned." 

We  turn  to  the  south.     The  southern  boundary  of 
Egypt  was  drawn  at  Philse,  above  the  first  cataract. 
Beyond  this  stretched  the  great  kingdom  of  Ethopia, 
sharing  with   Egypt  itself  the   blessing  of  the   same 
mighty  stream  which  rolls  onward  its  sea-like  waters 
from  the  Equator  to  the  Mediterranean.     For  about 
fifteen  miles  below  the  junction  of  the  Blue  and  the 
White  Nile,  the  river  flows  through  a  gloomy  pass 
between  the  mountains,  and  then  sweeps  out  into  broad 
plains  covered  with  vegetation  as  far  as  the  eye  can 
reach.     In  this  fertile  district  lay  Meroe,  the  ancient 
capital  of  Ethiopia.     It  has  been  supposed  by  some 
that  Egypt  itself  was  colonized  from  Ethiopia;  and  it 
is  certain  that  the  latter  was  at  a  very  early  period 
characterized  by  order,  civilization,  and  strength.   He- 
rodotus tells  us  that  Ethiopia  was  never  conquered  by 
a  foreign  power,  and  yet  we  know  that  as  early  as 
the  twelfth  dynasty,  at  least  two  thousand  years  be- 
fore our  era,  the  Ethiopians  were  reckoned  among  the 
most  formidable  enemies  of  Egypt.    Their  power  must 
have  remained  unbroken,  therefore,  for  many  centuries. 
About  711  B.C.  they  became  masters  of  Egypt  under 
their  king  Sabacon,  the  So  of  Scripture,  by  whom  and 


CONDITION    OF   ALL  SURROUNDING   COUNTRIES.      67 

his  successors  it  was  held  for  more  than  fifty  years. 
Cambyses,  incited  by  the  ambition  to  extend  his  con- 
quests farther  than  had  been  done  by  any  who  had 
gone  before  him,  resolved  upon  the  subjugation  of 
Ethiopia.  He  sent  ambassadors  into  the  country  with 
presents,  whose  real  mission  was  to  act  as  spies.  The 
king,  reading  the  purpose  which  lay  bexieath  the  show 
of  respect  and  friendship,  bade  the  ambassadors  carry 
back  his  bow,  with  the  message  that  when  their  master 
could  bend  it  as  easily  as  he  himself  could  he  might 
begin  the  war.  Cambyses  was  filled  with  rage.  He 
invaded  the  country,  but,  in  attempting  to  lead  his  army 
by  a  shorter  route  across  the  desert,  he  was  com- 
pelled, after  his  troops  had  endured  the  most  terrible 
sufferings,  to  make  an  ignominious  retreat. 

To  such  inroads  Ethiopia  was  frequently  subjected, 
but  it  was  never  annexed  to  Egypt.  It  was  never  con- 
quered even  by  the  Romans,  and  it  was  still  formidable 
in  the  time  of  Diocletian,  at  the  close  of  the  third  cen- 
tury. He  persuaded  the  Noubas  to  remove  from  the 
deserts  of  Libya,  and  to  occupy  a  district  on  the  fron- 
tier of  Egypt,  extending  seven  days  march  towards 
Ethiopia.  They  held  this  territory  on  the  condition  of 
their  protecting  the  empire  from  the  inroads  of  the  Blem- 
myes  and  the  Ethiopians.  "The  treaty/'  says  Gibbon, 
"long  subsisted ;  and  till  the  establishment  of  Christian- 
ity introduced  stricter  notions  of  religious  worship,  it 
was  annually  ratified  by  a  solemn  sacrifice  in  the  isle 
of  Elephantine,  in  which  the  Romans,  as  well  as  the 
barbarians,  adored  the  same  visible  or  invisible  powers 
of  the  universe. "  This  kingdom  was  afterwards  greatly 
extended,  and  its  capital  was  fixed  as  far  south  as 
Dongola.  When  the  Arabs  entered  Egypt  in  638, 
they  found  the  Noubas  a  strong  Christian  kingdom. 
It  retained  its  independence  till  the  thirteenth  century. 
But  the  repeated  inroads  of  the  Mohammedans  sapped 
the  foundations  of  its  strength.  The  formerly  strong 
government   was   overthrown,   and  the  country  was 


68  EGYPT. 

broken  up  into  various  small  states.  The  Mohamme- 
dans poured  in,  and  Christianity  was  gradually  ex- 
tinguished from  the  south  of  Egypt  to  the  borders  of 
Abyssinia.  This  country  also  is  a  desolation.  Its 
empire  and  its  strength  are  gone.  The  sites  of  its 
ancient  cities  are  matter  of  conjecture.  The  conquest 
of  the  country  by  the  Egyptian  government  was 
as  fruitless  in  wealth  as  it  was  in  glory.  The  eye 
seeks  in  vain  for  any  present  token  of  greatness  or 
prosperity.  That  it  once  was  great  its  ruins  and  the 
page  of  history  alone  declare.  But  it  was  simply  im- 
possible that  its  desolation  could  have  been  foreseen  by 
man  even  seven  centuries  after  the  beginning  of  the 
Christian  era. 

Of  the  countries  to  the  east  of  Egypt  we  need  say 
nothing  now.  These  prophecy  has  singled  out  by  name, 
and  their  condition  and  story  will  come  before  us  again. 
It  is  enough  to  say  that  desolation  has  fallen  upon 
them  all ;  a  desolation  which,  though  predicted  from 
of  old,  yet  lingered  long  before  it  fell,  and  which,  even 
at  the  beginning  of  our  era,  could  not  have  been  re- 
garded as  even  probable. 

7.    EGYPT  HERSELF  WAS  TO  SHARE  IN  THE  GENERAL 

DECAY. 

Her  kingdom  was  to  continue,  but  her  fulness  and 
might  were  to  pass  away.  "They  shall  be  desolate 
among  the  countries  that  are  desolate."  Contrast  the 
Egypt  of  to-day  with  the  Egypt  of  the  Roman  con- 
quest ;  compare  the  luxury  and  magnificence  of  the  one 
with  the  meanness  and  wretchedness  of  the  other,  and 
no  further  proof  will  be  required  that  she  has  shared 
the  fate  of  her  sister  countries.  The  doom  has  fallen 
upon  her  fertile  fields,  as  well  as  upon  her  civilization 
and  her  cities.  The  total  area  of  Egypt  was  ascer- 
tained, by  the  French  survey  in  1798,  to  be  115,200 
square  miles.    Only  9,582,  "including  the  Nile  bed  and 


THE  DESOLATION   OF   EGYPT.  69 

the  islands  within  it,"*  were  watered  by  the  river,  and 
fit,  therefore,  for  cultivation.  Under  recent  improve- 
ments the  land  capable  of  being  tilled  amounts  to  11,351 
square  miles,  less  than  a  tenth  of  the  entire  surface  of 
the  country.  But  all  is  not  told  when  this  is  said. 
More  than  a  third  of  this,  though  irrigated,  is  not  tilled, 
and  the  land  at  present  under  cultivation  is  only  about 
one-sixteenth  of  the  whole  area  of  the  country. 

The  desolation  is  not  proved  by  statistics  alone.  It 
is  painfully  obvious.  Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson  says: 
"The  plain  of  San"  (the  ancient  Zoan)  "is  very  ex- 
tensive, but  thinly  inhabited;  no  village  exists  in  the 
immediate  vicinity  of  ancient  Tanis ;  and  when  looking 
from  the  mounds  of  this  once  splendid  city  towards  the 
distant  palms  of  indistinct  villages,  we  cannot  fail  to  be 
struck  by  the  desolation  spread  around  it.  The  'field 
of  Zoan'  is  now  a  barren  waste :  a  canal  passes  through 
it  without  being  able  to  fertilize  the  soil."f  Speaking 
of  the  Fyoom,  a  district  above  Cairo,  on  the  other  side 
of  the  Nile,  he  says  the  mounds  of  towns  "occur  in 
many  parts  of  the  Fyoom ;  and  though  we  cannot  cred- 
it the  tradition  of  the  people  that  it  formerly  contained 
366  towns  and  villages,  it  is  evident  that  it  was  a  popu- 
lous nome  of  Ancient  Egypt,  and  that  many  once 
existed  both  in  the  centre  and  on  the  now  barren  skirts 
of  the  Fyoom.  Indeed,  the  cultivated  land  extended 
far  beyond  its  present  limits :  a  great  portion  of  the 
desert  plain  was  then  taken  into  cultivation,  and  I  have 
seen  several  places  where  canals  and  the  traces  of 
cultivated  fields  are  still  discernible  to  a  considerable 
distance  east  and  west  of  the  modern  irrigated  lands. "% 

But  the  special  feature  in  the  desolation  of  Egypt, 
and  that  which  was  to  make  her  continuance  consistent 
with  her  decay,  was  this:  "Her  cities  shall  be  in  the 
midst  of  the  cities  that  are  wasted."    No  words  can 

*  Egypt  as  It  Is,  p.  19. 
t  Murray's  Handbook  of  Egypt,  p.  234.        $  Ibid.  p.  256. 


JO  EGYPT. 

more  graphically  set  before  us  Egypt  as  it  is.  She  is 
indeed  "the  land  of  ruins ;"  she  is  one  vast  burial-place 
of  the  art  and  magnificence  of  the  past,  and  her  present 
homes  are,  as  it  were,  dwellings  among  the  tombs.  She 
cannot  be  said  to  have  preserved  one  ancient  city.  "The 
present  town  of  Assouan  has  been  built  a  little  to  the 
north  of  the  former  town  of  Saracenic  origin,  the  ruins 
of  which  are  seen  above  it,  and  which  was  itself  built 
upon  the  ruins  of  the  Roman  city.  The  whole  town  is 
encompassed  with  vestiges  of  buildings. "  Alexandria 
cannot  be  reckoned  among  the  ancient  cities  of  Egypt. 
It  was  unknown  to  the  Pharaohs.  But  the  city  of 
Alexander,  of  the  Ptolemies,  of  the  Romans,  of  the 
lower  empire,  even  of  the  Arab  conquest,  will  now  be 
sought  in  vain.  "The  site  of  the  ancient  city,  which  is 
to  the  south  of  the  present  town,  presents  an  immense 
field  of  confused  ruins;  over  a  space  of  from  six  to 
seven  miles  in  circuit  is  spread  an  assemblage  of  broken 
columns,  obelisks,  and  shapeless  masses  of  architecture, 
rising  frequently  to  a  greater  height  than  the  surround- 
ing houses.  Here,  amid  the  heaps  of  rubbish,  are  seen 
some  churches,  mosques,  and  monasteries,  and  three 
small  clusters  of  dwellings,  formerly  three  towns. 
Traces  are  discernible  of  ancient  streets  in  straight 
lines,  and  some  ruins  of  colonnades  mark  the  sites  of 
palaces."*  These  ruins  have  been  still  further  "wast- 
ed." "Little  now  remains,"  says  Wilkinson,  "of  the 
splendid  edifices  of  Alexandria;  and  the  few  columns 
and  traces  of  walls  which  a  few  years  ago  rose  above 
the  mounds,  are  now  no  longer  seen." 

Even  the  Damietta  of  the  crusades,  the  ancient  Tam- 
iathis,  has  passed  away.  In  1249  it  was  taken  by 
the  Christians,  and  surrendered  soon  after.  In  1250  it 
was  destroyed  by  the  Mohammedans  themselves,  be- 
cause of  its  exposed  position,  and  a  new  Damietta  was 
built  five  and  a  half  miles  farther  south.    Nor  is  it  only 

*  Modern  Traveller  (published  1827),  Vol.  I,  pp.  189,  190. 


ITS  CITIES  THAT  ARE   WASTED.  J I 

in  the  wasting  of  its  ancient  cities  that  the  fulfilment 
of  the  prediction   is   seen.     Geezeh   was   a   favourite 
summer  resort  of  the  Memlooks  and  the  inhabitants  of 
Cairo.     "It  is  now  a  mere  village,  with  a  few  cafes, 
ruined  bazaars,  and  the  wrecks  of  houses     .... 
Leo  Africanus"   (writing  about  the  beginning  of  the 
sixteenth  century)    "calls  it  a  city,  beautified  by  the 
palaces  of  the  Memlooks,  who  there  sought  retirement 
from  the  bustle  of  Cairo,  and  frequented  by  numerous 
merchants  and  artisans.    ...    The  mosks  and  beauti- 
ful buildings  at  the  river  side  are  no  longer  to  be  seen 
at  Geezeh;  and  the  traveller,  as  he  leaves  his  boat, 
wanders  amidst  uneven  heaps  of  rubbish,  and  the  ill- 
defined  limits  of  potters'  yards,  till  he  issues  from  a 
breach  in  the  crumbling  Memlock  walls  into  the  open 
plain."*    One  more  instance  may  suffice.    "Rosetta  has 
always  been   considered  the  most  agreeable  and   the 
prettiest  town  of  Egypt,   celebrated   for  its  gardens, 
and  looked  upon  by  the  Cairenes,  as  well  as  Alexan- 
drians, as  a  most  delightful  retreat  during  summer. 
It  has  still  its  gardens,  which  surround  it  on  three 
sides,  and  the  advantages  of  situation;  but  it  has  lost 
much  of  its  importance  as  a  town,  and  has  ceased  to  be 
the   resort  of  strangers.     The  population,  too,   is   so 
much  diminished  that  a  great  proportion  of  its  houses 
are   completely   deserted   and   falling,   if  not  already 
fallen,  into  ruins."f 

There  is  no  sign,  therefore,  that,  though  the  ancient 
ruins  were  wholly  swept  away,  the  cities  of  Egypt 
should  not  still  be  among  the  cities  that  are  wasted. 
This  burden  of  decay  Egypt  has  never  thrown  aside. 
It  cannot  remove  it  now,  and  beneath  it  its  cities  are 
crumbling  still.  And  no  words  can  give  us  a  truer 
and  more  vivid  picture  of  its  desolation  than  is  given 
in  this  brief  but  clear  utterance  of  prophecy:  "Her 
cities  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  the  cities  that  are  wasted." 

*  Murray's  Handbook  of  Egypt,  p.  173.       f  Ibid,  p.  104. 


J2  EGYPT. 

The  traveller  cannot  turn  in  any  direction  without  en- 
countering mounds  of  ruins  which  mark  the  sites  of 
ancient  cities,  more  or  less  "wasted."  Like  sheaves 
on  the  harvest-field  they  lie  thickly  strewn  over  the 
whole  country ;  and  its  attraction  and  wonder  are  not 
the  Egypt  of  the  present,  but  what  is  still  found  in 
these  heaps  of  the  Egypt  of  the  past. 

8.  Let  us  now  glance  at  what  is  said  of  the  possess- 
ors of  Egypt. 

THE  CHARACTER   OF  ITS   MASTERS 

is  first  of  all  described  in  one  clear,  emphatic  word :  "I 
will  sell  the  land  into  the  hand  of  the  wicked''  (Ezek. 
xxx.  12).  It  may  be  noticed  in  passing  that  the  phrase, 
"I  will  sell  the  land,"  denotes,  in  the  language  of  Scrip- 
ture, its  unresisting  surrender  into  the  hand  of  an 
enemy.  As  slaves  are  sold  into  the  hand  of  a  master, 
so  will  they  be  sold  into  the  hand  of  "the  wicked."  The 
dominion  foreshadowed  is  one  of  irresponsible  un- 
scrupulousness  and  ferocity.  The  slave  has  no  rights, 
and  the  wicked  has  no  mercy.  It  is  strange  to  find  that 
almost  the  very  words  of  the  prophecy  have  been  un- 
consciously repeated  by  those  who  have  weighed  the 
condition  of  this  unhappy  country.  Volney,  for  example, 
calls  it  "the  country  oi  slavery  and  tyranny/'  and  Malte 
Brun  speaks  of  "the  arbitrary  sway  of  the  ruffian 
masters  of  Egypt."  Of  AH  Bey  (who  reigned  from 
1766  to  1772)  it  has  been  said:  "Like  his  predecessors, 
he  considered  Egypt  as  his  private  property  or  life 
estate,  and  the  natives  as  the  live-stock  disposable  at  his 
pleasure?'*  De  Leon  says  of  Abbas  Pasha  that  he 
"was  arbitrary,  rapacious,  and  cruel  to  the  last  degree." 
To  show  fully  how  strikingly  these  words,  "I  will  sell 
the  land  into  the  hand  of  the  wicked"  have  been  ful- 
filled, we  should  have  to  write  the  history  of  Egypt. 
The  sum  of  its  story  in  every  period  throughout  all  its 

*  Modem  Traveller — Egypt,  I.,  p.  138. 


THE   CHARACTER  OF   ITS   MASTERS.  *JZ 

changes,  from  the  prophet's  time  to  the  present,  is 
rightly  told  in  those  words  alone — the  land  has  been 
sold  into  the  hand  of  the  wicked.     We  name  a  few 
facts.     The  first  governor  of  Egypt  under  the  Roman 
Empire,  Cornelius  Gallus,  was  guilty  of  such  extortion 
and  oppression  that  he  was  disgraced,  and  died  by  his 
own  hand.    A  revolt  was  crushed  by  Diocletian  in  286 
with  remorseless  severity.     Alexandria  surrendered  at 
discretion,  but  was  shown  no  mercy.     "Many  thou- 
sands of  the  citizens  perished  in  a  promiscuous  slaugh- 
ter; and  there  were  few  obnoxious  persons  in  Egypt 
who  escaped  a  sentence  of  death,  or  at  least  of  exile. 
The  fate  of  Busiris  and  Coptos  was  still  more  melan- 
choly than  that  of  Alexandria.     Those  proud  cities, 
the  former  distinguished  by   its  antiquity,  the   latter 
enriched  by  the  passage   of  the   Indian   trade,   were 
utterly  destroyed  by  the  arms  and  by  the  severe  order 
of  Diocletian."*    The  oppression  of  the  Greek  Empire 
became  so  intolerable  to  the  Egyptians  that  the  Arabs, 
burning  though  they  were  with  the  first  fervour  of 
their  fierce  and  intolerant  fanaticism,  were  everywhere 
hailed  by  them   as  deliverers.     For  a  short  time   it 
seemed  as  if  a  change  had  been  made  for  the  better. 
But  it  was  impossible  that  the  Christianity  of  Egypt 
and  the  Mohammedanism  of  its  new  lords  could  long 
share  the  same  land  in  peace.     The  Egyptians,  per- 
secuted and  oppressed,  rose  in  insurrection,  and  were 
subdued   with   immense   bloodshed.     The  persecution 
was  continued  with  circumstances  of  grosser  outrage. 
A  special  tax  was  imposed  upon  the  monks,  and  as 
each  one  paid  the  tax  he  was  branded  upon  the  hand. 
Any  monk,  who  was  afterwards  unable  to  show  this 
barbarous  tax-receipt,  had  his  hand  cut  off.     Subse- 
quently, every  Copt  had  his  hand  similarly  branded ; 
and  the  whole  community  was  so  oppressed  that  another 
rebellion  was  the  result,  which,  like  the  former,  was 

*  Gibbon. 


74  EGYPT.  l1   '    '" 

crushed  and  followed  by  another  terrible  persecution. 
The  Copts  were  compelled  to  wear  a  distinguishing 
dress,  and  their  proud  spirits  were  borne  down  under 
other  marks  of  shame.  About  the  end  of  the  tenth 
century  they  were  made  to  wear,  suspended  from  their 
necks,  a  wooden  cross  of  five  pounds  weight,  and  to 
go  clothed  in  deep  black,  a  colour  peculiarly  odious  to 
the  Egyptian  Mohammedans.  In  the  beginning  of  the 
fourteenth  century  they  were  so  overwhelmed  by  Mos- 
lem hatred  that  multitudes  of  them,  wearied  of  a  hope- 
less struggle,  embraced  Mohammedanism.  The  small 
remnant  who  still  clung  to  Christianity,  though  now 
less  oppressed,  pay  a  heavier  tribute  than  is  imposed 
upon  their  Mohammedan  countrymen. 

But  those  who  apostatized  did  not  escape  from  their 
evil  destiny  by  the  simple  expedient  of  changing  their 
religion.    They  form  by  far  the  largest  portion  of  the 
fellaheen,  the  cultivators  of  the  soil,  and  these  "the 
hand  of  the  wicked"  has  long  held  in  its  savage  grip. 
"How  is  agriculture  to  improve,"  Miss  Martineau  asks, 
"under   such   arrangements   as    the    following? — The 
cultivator  undertakes  to  till  a  certain  quantity  of  land, 
all  the  land,  it  is  understood,  being  the  Pasha's  prop- 
erty, except  such  as  he  pensions  or  gratifies  certain 
parties  with.     The  cultivator  engages,  in  return  for 
being  furnished  with  all  that  is  needed  for  its  cultiva- 
tion, to  hand  over  a  certain  amount  (in  proportion  to 
the  produce)  after  harvest.    He  receives,  among  other 
requisites,  an  order  for  a  good  and  sufficient  quantity 
of  seed-corn  from  the  government  granary.     When 
he  presents  the  order,  the  great  official  gentleman  at 
the  granary  directs  a  subordinate  officer  to  supply  the 
applicant  with  three-quarters  of  the  specified  quantity, 
he  retaining  the  other  quarter  for  his  own  fee.     The 
second   officer   subtracts    a   second   quarter;   and   the 
cultivator  sows  his  field  with  half  the  proper  seed !" 

Wilkinson  found,  as  the  result  of  a  careful  calcula- 
tion, that,  in  the  most  favourable  circumstances,  the 


THE   CHARACTER  OF   ITS   MASTERS.  75 

peasant  had  only  two  and  two-fifths  farthings  a  day 
on  which  to  support  himself  and  his  family.*  The 
consequence  is  that,  to  keep  themselves  from  actual 
starvation,  the  peasants  have  to  convey  grain  secretly 
from  the  fields  to  their  houses,  and  have  thus,  while 
labouring  with  their  hands  most  diligently,  to  secure 
their  bread  by  theft.  It  is  impossible  to  extort  the 
enormous  taxes  which  the  poor  fellaheen  have  to  pay 
without  the  torture  of  the  bastinado,  or  what  an  apolo- 
gist for  the  government  of  Ismail  Pasha  gaily  calls 
"stick  logic."f  But  it  is  not  government  oppression 
alone  which  shows  how  terribly  true  are  the  words, 
"the  hand  of  the  wicked,"  as  a  description  of  the  power 
which  holds  this  unhappy  country.  The  land  groans 
under  the  ravages  of  a  whole  army  of  plunderers. 
"Every  Verres  is  enriched  by  the  spoliation  of  the 
peasant,  from  the  Mahmour  to  the  Mukuddem,  or 
beadle,  of  the  lowest  governor/'J  Lane  says,  "It 
would  be  scarcely  possible  for  them"  (the  peasants) 
"to  suffer  more  and  live."§ 

We  know  how  unenviable  is  the  condition  of  the 
Christian  peasant  under  Turkish  rule.  But,  comparing 
him  with  the  fellah  of  Egypt,  Sir  George  Campbell 
says :  "If  the  Bulgarian  were  content  to  be  a  political 
slave  and  to  submit  to  occasional  outrage,  he  might 
have  been  in  many  respects  tolerably  well  to  do.  Far 
otherwise  is  the  lot  of  the  Egyptian  fellah.  .  .  .  The 
taxation  is  enormously  higher ;  the  methods  of  squeez- 
ing more  severe;  the  personal  treatment  more  uni- 
formly degrading;  the  bastinado  and  the  corvee  are 
in  full  force.  If  a  man  has  anything  he  dare  not  show 
it,  and  the  very  beginnings  of  material  improvement 
are  thus  cut  off  to  the  fellah."  The  Right  Honourable 
S.  Cave,  who  was  sent  out  by  our  Government  to  in- 

*  Modem  Egypt  and  Thebes,  Vol.  I.,  p.  468. 

t  M'Coan,  Egypt  as  It  Is,  p.  26. 
t  Modern  Egypt  and  Thebes,  Vol.  I.,  p.  469. 

§  Modern  Egyptians,  Vol.  I.,  178. 


j6  EGYPT. 

quire  into  the  Egyptian  finances,  endeavours  in  his  re- 
port, presented  in  1876,  to  account  for  the  corruption 
which  pervades  the  whole  administration.  "From  the 
pashas  downwards/'  he  says,  "every  office  is  a  tenancy 
at  will ;  and  experience  shows  that,  while  dishonesty 
goes  wholly  or  partially  unpunished,  independence  of 
thought  and  action,  resolution  to  do  one's  duty  and  to 
resist  the  peculation  and  neglect  which  pervade  every 
department,  give  rise  to  intrigues  which,  sooner  or 
later,  bring  about  the  downfall  of  honest  officials." 

Volumes  might  be  written  on  the  text,  "I  will  sell 
the  land  into  the  hand  of  the  wicked."  The  terrible 
impress  of  that  hand  is  visible  everywhere.  The  hor- 
rors of  the  conscription,  to  escape  which  parents  sys- 
tematically mutilate  their  children,  and  of  the  corvees, 
or  forced  labour  levies  (in  which  the  peasants  are 
driven  in  herds  from  their  fields,  no  matter  though  the 
harvest  is  wasted  on  which  their  own  and  their  fami- 
lies' bread  depends,  and  guarded  by  the  military  like 
convicts  till  their  enforced  task  is  done),  are  well 
known.  The  following  words  may  give  us  some  con- 
ception of  what  these  things  mean  for  the  people. 
"This  afternoon,"  writes  Lord  Haddo,  "we  witnessed 
a  distressing  scene.  Some  men  had  been  forcibly  im- 
pressed at  a  village,  and  were  lying  bound  in  the  boats 
which  were  to  convey  them  to  Cairo,  and  which,  the 
wind  being  contrary,  were  slowly  hauled  along  the 
shore,  while  the  wives  and  mothers  of  the  men  from 
whom  they  were  thus  separated  for  life,  followed  howl- 
ing and  shrieking  for  many  miles."  Attentions  were 
paid  to  him  as  the  eldest  son  of  the  Premier  of  Eng- 
land (Lord  Aberdeen),  and  he  says:  "The  worst  of  it 
is,  that  the  sheikh  of  each  village  is  ordered  to  come 
down  to  the  water  with  fifty  men  to  haul  the  boat  in 
case  the  wind  should  fail ;  and  the  violence,  and  even 
cruelty,  with  which  the  unfortunate  fellahs  are  driven 
from  their  fields  with  the  sticks  and  whips  of  the 
cavasses,  interferes  with  my  enjoyment." 


THE    CHARACTER   OF    ITS    MASTERS.  JJ 

Mehemet  Ali,  in  one  of  his  instructions  to  the  provin- 
cial governors,  said  of  his  conscripts:  "Some  draw 
their  teeth,  some  put  out  their  eyes,  and  others  break 
their  arms,  or  otherwise  maim  themselves. "  And  in 
order  to  put  a  stop  to  the  practice,  largely  indulged 
in  by  Egyptian  mothers,  of  putting  out  one  of  the  eyes 
of  their  male  children  to  save  them  from  the  conscrip- 
tion, he  formed  a  one-eyed  regiment  for  garrison  duty. 
Were  any  consideration  or  care  shown  for  the  soldiers, 
military  service  could  not  possibly  be  the  terror  it  is 
to  the  fellaheen.  But  the  tender  mercies  of  the  wicked 
are  cruel.  The  spirit  in  which  the  people  are  treated 
may  be  understood  from  the  following  extracts  from 
the  work  of  Mir.  Villiers  Stuart,  which  is  in  substance 
a  government  report,  and  which  we  may  therefore  ac- 
cept as  written  calmly  and  after  due  investigation.  He 
found  40,000  men  making  a  canal  in  Upper  Egypt  to 
irrigate  the  lands  of  some  rich  Pashas.  No  food  was 
supplied  to  them,  nor  was  sleeping  or  other  accom- 
modation provided,  nor  tools  with  which  to  do  the 
work  of  excavation.  They  worked  from  sunrise  to 
sunset,  with  no  intermission  save  the  few  moments 
during  which  they  rushed  down  to  the  river  to  soak 
the  hard  bread,  their  only  food,  which  their  friends 
had  sent  from  their  distant  homes.  The  great  majority 
of  them  had  to  tear  up  the  soil  and  stones  and  to 
fill  their  baskets  with  their  hands.  He  adds :  "Ophthal- 
mia is  one  evil  that  results ;  I  cannot  imagine  a  better 
receipt  for  the  wholesale  manufacture  of  this  malady 
than  to  work  men  to  exhaustion  in  fiery  heat,  glare, 
and  dust  all  day,  and  then  to  expose  them  at  night  to 
the  heavy  dew  and  frosty  temperature,  with  the  bare 
ground  for  their  couch,  and  their  calico  rags  for  their 
only  covering."* 

"Forced  labour  in  the  factories  has  been  abolished 
An  paper,  but  in  Upper  Egypt  it  is  still  in  full  swing. "t 

*  Egypt  After  the  War,  p.  288.         t  Ibid.,  p.  319. 


78  EGYPT. 

There  the  fellahs  are  subjected  to  the  hardest  slavery. 
Guards  are  placed  at  the  doors  who  prevent  all  egress 
and  the  labourers  are  kept  in  the  building  day  and 
night,  being  compelled  to  sleep  on  the  stone  floor  and 
amid  the  noise  of  the  machinery.  "In  1879  we  were 
witnesses  of  the  following  incident  at  one  of  the  sugar 
factories.  While  we  were  there  there  was  a  sudden 
commotion,  and  we  found  that  one  of  the  men  had 
fallen  from  a  gallery  and  was  mortally  injured;  he  was 
carried  out  in  a  dying  state.  On  emerging  we  inquired 
for  him,  and  were  shocked  to  find  him  lying  in  the  sun 
and  covered  with  flies — left  there  to  die  like  a  dog. 
No  man  had  had  the  charity  to  moisten  his  lips  or  to 
carry  him  into  the  shade,  or  to  fan  the  flies  away,  or 
to  alleviate  his  sufferings  in  any  way."* 

On  some  of  the  corvees,  not  only  are  able-bodied 
men  compelled  to  toil,  but  even  "small  children,  boys 
and  girls  as  young  as  seven  or  eight  years,"  who  are 
kept  "walking  all  day  up  and  down  the  banks  with 
their  baskets  of  earth. "f  As  showing  further  the  char- 
acter of  those  into  whose  hands  Egypt  has  been  sold 
we  may  note  that  under  the  present  dynasty,  which  has 
been  lauded  as  having  done  so  much  for  the  country, 
the  wretched  fellaheen  have  been  subjected  to  repeated 
acts  of  spoliation.  At  Thebes  the  Government  took 
part  of  the  land  arbitrarily  at  £7  an  acre,  and  relet  it 
at  more  than  a  third  of  that  sum  annually.  The  con- 
sequence has  been  that  the  people  there  have  been 
plunged  into  poverty.  Some  of  them  have  rented  por- 
tions from  the  Government,  but  "it  too  often  happens 
that  after  digging  and  sowing  the  land  they  in  the 
end  get  no  reward  but  a  beating.":):  We  have  heard 
much  in  connection  with  the  debt  of  the  Daira  lands 
— the  property  of  the  state,  and  the  private  property 
of  the  late  Khedive.    They  are  simply  the  fruit  of  the 

*  Ibid.,  pp.  319,  320.    f  De  Leon,  The  Khedive's  Egypt,  p.  214. 
%  Egypt  After  the  War,  p.  306. 


THE    CHARACTER   OF    ITS    MASTERS.  79 

most  unblushing  and  unscrupulous  robbery.  "Both  of 
them/'  says  Mr.  Villiers  Stuart,  "represent  an  enor- 
mous amount  of  injustice,  tyranny,  and  oppression."* 

"Like  master,  like  man/'  The  example  of  those  in 
high  places  has  been  only  too  closely  followed  by  their 
subordinates.  "During  this  portion  of  my  tour," 
says  Mr.  Stuart,  "I  happened  to  be  witness  of  an  inci- 
dent which  is  highly  instructive,  and  serves  as  a  typi- 
cal instance  of  the  behaviour  of  the  subordinate  officials 
towards  the  rank  and  file  of  the  people.  As  I  passed, 
a  gang  of  men  in  chains,  probably  for  non-payment  of 
taxes,  were  drawn  up  in  front  of  the  Post  Office.  One 
of  these  presented  a  docket  to  the  postmaster.  He 
answered  roughly,  'You  have  had  your  letter.'  At 
the  same  time  he  tore  up  the  docket  and  threw  it  out 
of  the  window.  I  took  up  the  torn  pieces  and  found 
that  they  were  a  warrant  for  the  delivery  of  a  registered 
letter.  I  asked  the  postmaster  how  it  came  that  if  the 
man  had  received  his  letter  he  had  been  allowed  to  re- 
tain the  voucher.  The  postmaster,  seeing  that  I  was 
disposed  not  to  let  the  matter  drop,  now  changed  his 
tone  and  said  to  the  claimant,  Tf  you  will  get  two  re- 
spectable townspeople  to  certify  your  identity,  you 
shall  have  your  letter/  It  appeared,  therefore,  that  his 
first  assertion  that  the  man  had  received  his  letter  was 
a  positive  falsehood.  This  incident  furnishes  one  more 
illustration  of  how  corrupt  and  dishonest  the  official 
classes  are,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest."t 

Even  the  courts  of  justice,  where  the  oppressed 
might  plead  their  cause,  are  simply  additional  instru- 
ments of  extortion  and  wrong.  "It  is  bad  enough  in 
any  country  to  be  occupied  in  lawsuits;  but  nowhere 
does  a  poor  man  find  so  much  difficulty  in  obtaining 
justice  as  in  Egypt.  He  is  not  only  put  ofif  from  day  to 
day,  but  obliged  to  run  from  one  person  to  another,  to 
no  purpose,  for  days,  weeks,  or  months;  and  unless 

*  Ibid.,  p.  306.  f  Ibid.,  p.  262. 


80  EGYPT. 

he  can  manage  to  collect  sufficient  to  bribe  the  bash- 
kateb  and  other  employes  of  the  court,  he  may  hope  in 
vain  to  obtain  justice,  or  even  attention  to  his  com- 
plaints."* The  spirit  of  high-handed  and  cruel  mas- 
tery marks  the  procedure  of  all  the  tribunals.  "Crim- 
inal cases  are  dealt  with  by  the  Mahmours  and  Mudirs 
in  despotic  and  arbitrary  fashion ;  the  use  of  the  'cour- 
bashT  (hippopotamus-hide  whip)  and  of  the  stick  has 
increased  since  the  rebellion,  as  also  imprisonment  in 
heavy  chains.  These  punishments  often  fall  upon  the 
innocent ;  for  instance,  if  a  fellah,  selected  for  military 
service,  runs  away  to  the  desert,  his  relatives  are 
chained  and  thrown  into  prison,  although  in  no  way 
accessory  to  the  offence."t 

"How  is  justice,"  Mr.  Villiers  Stuart  asks  an  in- 
telligent farmer,  "administered  in  your  district?  It  is 
all  by  bribery;  a  poor  man  has  no  chance.  If  he  is 
wronged,  if  it  is  a  small  debt,  or  if  he  has  been  mal- 
treated, or  beaten,  or  robbed,  there  is  a  small  local 
tribunal;  the  constable  of  the  village  reports  the  case 
to  the  Mahmour,  who  if  he  deems  it  sufficiently  im- 
portant reports  it  to  the  Mudir.  If  it  is  a  land  dis- 
pute, e.  g.y  about  boundaries  or  successions,  it  goes 
to  Tantah ;  three  or  four  years,  or  five  years  may  elapse 
before  it  is  settled.  If  he  has  a  buffalo  or  a  cow,  he 
must  sell  it  to  make  presents  for  chief  clerks  and  their 
subordinates  and  even  high  officials.  He  is  soon 
ruined.  In  other  cases  which  are  reported  to  the 
Mahmour,  and  by  the  Mahmour  to  the  Mudir,  the 
man  who  can  afford  to  bribe  the  highest  gets  the  most 
favourable  reports."$ 

This  corruption  taints  the  entire  official  body.  The 
Mudirs  and  Mahmours  are  removed  with  every  change 
of  ministry.     And  hence  "they  only  try,"  says  Mr. 

*  Wilkinson;  Murray's  Handbook  of  Egypt,  p.  156. 
t  Egypt  After  the  War,  p.  158.  X  Ibid.,  pp.  21,  22. 


THE   CHARACTER  OF   ITS   MASTERS.  8l 

Stuart,  "to  make  the  most  of  their  opportunity  and  to 
enrich  themselves  as  fast  as  they  can  during  their 
precarious  term  of  office.  I  have  known  Egypt  for 
many  years,  ana  I  fear  I  must  come  to  the  conclu- 
sion that  venality  and  corruption  are  so  universal,  so 
ingrained  in  the  social  fabric,  from  the  highest  to  the 
lowest"  that  he  believes  the  only  hope  of  Egypt  lies 
in  having  an  entirely  new  set  of  officials,  and  English- 
men if  possible.*  Nor  is  this  all.  "Egyptian  prisons 
are  Bastilles  in  which  men  in  power  immure  arbitrarily 
those  who  have  offended  them,  or  whom  they  have 
any  motive  in  getting  out  of  the  way.  They  are  sent 
there  without  trial  or  enquiry  under  letters  de  cachet; 
and  there  they  may  remain  for  years,  forgotten  perhaps 
by  the  tyrant  who  sent  them  thither,  and  without 
means  or  opportunity  of  bringing  their  case  to  the 
notice  of  those  who  might  obtain  tardy  justice  and 
release  for  them."t 

The  masters  of  Egypt  have  been  increased  within 
our  own  times.  We  know  what  the  bondholders  are, 
and  whether  the  terms  on  which  the  loans  were  ad- 
vanced, or  the  demands  which  are  to-day  insisted  upon, 
deserve  the  epithet  which  the  Scripture  has  applied  to 
the  other  lords  of  this  unhappy  people.  But  the  land  has 
been  of  late  years  covered  with  a  flood  of  usurers,  and 
between  them  and  the  bondholders  the  very  heart's 
blood  of  the  people  is  being  wrung  out.  The  debt  of 
the  fellahs  is  estimated  to  amount  to  two-thirds  of 
the  national  debt,  "and  upon  this  vast  sum  interest, 
varying  from  3  to  5,  8  and  even  10  per  cent,  per 
month  is  either  paid  or  is  accumulating,  and  increasing 
the  indebtedness  at  an  alarming  rate."  The  fellahs, 
unable  to  meet  their  debts,  are  being  deprived  of  their 
land.  "A  rapid  process  of  transfer  is  taking  place  of 
the  propertv,  i.  e.,  the  land,  of  the  native  Egyptians  to 
Greeks,  and  Syrians,  and  other  Christian  (  !)  usurers."t 

*  Ibid.,  pp.  158,  159.  t  Ibid.,  p.  42.  t  Ibid.,  pp.  39,  41. 


82  EGYPT.  . 

These  usurers  are  as  unscrupulous  as  the  rest  into 
whose  hands  this  people  have  been  sold,  and  we,  as  a 
nation,  have  unfortunately  and  unwittingly  played  into 
the  usurers'  hands.  It  was  the  custom  of  Egypt  that 
no  land  could  be  seized  for  debt,  and  this  was  one 
excuse  for  the  exorbitant  interest,  sometimes  amount- 
ing to  130  per  cent,  per  annum.  But  we  have  been 
accessory  to  the  change  which  removed  this  last  barrier 
which  stood  between  the  fellahs  and  spoliation.  "We 
have  converted  these  ill-secured  debts  into  first-class 
land  mortgages.  Arabi  drove  out  these  pauperizers  of 
the  people,  but  we  have  brought  them  back  by  force 
of  arms/'* 

Mr.  Stuart  thus  describes  the  palaces  of  these  Egyp- 
tian Shylocks.  "Just  outside  many  of  the  Delta  vil- 
lages may  be  observed  a  superior  house  built  in  Euro- 
pean style :  the  walls  stained  cream  color,  or  pale  blue, 
or  rose  pink,  with  bright  green  Venetian  blinds;  a 
great  improvement  on  the  raw  mud-brick  structures 
which  form  the  staple  of  native  dwellings.  These 
e3ifices  will  always  be  found  on  enquiry  to  belong  to 
the  local  money-lender — Greek,  Syrian,  Armenian,  or 
Jewish.  He  is  sure  to  plant  himself  wherever  the 
soil  is  extra  fertile,  and  the  neighbourhood  extra  ad- 
vantageous."! He  visited  one,  and  found  it  "fitted  up 
with  European  furniture  and  French  mirrors/'  "Every- 
thing around  betokened  prosperity  and  abundance. 
.  .  .  There  could  scarcely  be  a  more  striking  con- 
trast than  the  condition  presented  by  the  neighbouring 
village."  The  villagers  informed  him  that  all  the 
usurer's  lands  had  belonged  to  them.  He  adds,  "It 
had  now  come  to  this  that  while  the  foreign  usurer  had 
become  a  wealthy  landed  proprietor,  not  one  of  the 
natives  had  more  than  a  dozen  acres  left.  ...  I 
took  a  sad  and  sympathetic  leave  of  the  poor  fellows : 
decidedly  that  was  not  a  flourishing  community.    That 

*  Ibid.,  p.  60.  t  Ibid.,  p.  54- 


THE  CHARACTER  OF  ITS  MASTERS.  83 

Christian  establishment  close  by  was  sucking  out  their 
very  life-blood,  like  a  tumour  or  a  wen,  which  draws 
to  itself  the  juices  of  the  whole  body  until  all  is  ex- 
hausted. The  time  could  not  be  far  off  when  every 
peasant  proprietor  there  will  be  reduced  to  the  position 
of  a  labourer  on  the  Greek's  all-devouring  estate.  The 
process  of  adding  house  to  house  and  field  to  field 
.  .  .  has  been  brought  into  vigorous  life  in  Egypt 
of  late  years  by  the  operation  of  the  International 
Tribunals.  No  feature  of  the  social  condition  of  the 
Delta  forced  itself  more  prominently  on  my  notice 
throughout  my  tour  of  inquiry  in  its  provinces,  than 
this  question  of  the  indebtedness  of  the  fellahs  in  con- 
nection with  the  new  tribunals ;  and  I  may  as  well  take 
this  opportunity  of  summing  up  the  conclusions  it 
forced  upon  me. 

"All  the  witnesses  agreed  that  the  usurers — Greek, 
Syrian,  and  Jewish — have  been  the  main  cause  of  the 
hatred  with  which  the  Christians  were  regarded  dur- 
ing the  rebellion  of  Arabi ;  that  they  have  dealt  most 
mercilessly  with  the  fellahs,  entangling  them  in  a 
hopeless  net  of  indebtedness,  and  using  their  power 
to  possess  themselves  of  their  lands.  .  .  .  They 
have  woven  round  them  a  tangled  network  of  debt 
which  no  Colenso  could  unravel — the  moderate  sum 
originally  advanced,  compound  interest  at  exorbitant 
rates,  sums  advanced  successively  since,  with  their 
interests,  the  reckoning  further  complicated  by  sums 
paid  on  account,  no  receipts  being  given.  The  fellahs 
have  long  ago  abandoned  in  despair  the  task  of  com- 
prehending their  financial  position,  with  its  hopeless 
intricacies,  and  only  feel  that  they  have  nothing  which 
they  can  call  their  own."* 

Everywhere  there  is  the  same  unscrupulous  rapacity, 
the  same  disregard  of  right  and  justice,  which  show 
how  marvellous  are  these  words,  "I  will  sell  the  land 

*  Ibid,  pp.  55-57- 


84  EGYPT. 

into  the  hands  of  the  wicked."  Take  them  simply  as  a 
description.  Are  there  any  other  words  that  can  so 
clearly  mirror  the  condition  of  this  unhappy  land,  and 
that  will  state  it  with  such  brevity  yet  fullness,  with 
such  deep  insight  and  pathos?  As  a  description  it  is 
marvellous ;  but  what  shall  we  say  of  it  as  a  prophecy  ? 
But  not  only  is  the  character  of  the  masters  of  Egypt 
foretold ; 

9.    THEIR  NATIONALITY 

is  also  strictly  defined ;  "I  will  make  the  land  waste  and 
all  that  is  therein,  by  the  hand  of 

STRANGERS." 

(Ezek.  xxx.  12).  It  might  be  supposed  that  this  is 
merely  a  re-statement  of  the  prediction  which  declared 
that  there  should  no  more  be  a  native  prince  upon  the 
throne  of  Egypt.  But  it  really  carries  us  farther.  The 
latter  prophecy  would  have  been  fulfilled  had  one  race 
— the  Persians,  or  the  Greeks,  for  example — continued 
age  after  age  to  lord  it  over  Egypt.  It  is  intimated  now, 
however,  that  the  Egyptians  will  know  the  mastery  of 
more  than  one  people.  The  inheritance  will  pass  from 
race  to  race  who,  all  of  them,  will  stand  in  this  rela- 
tionship of  strangers  to  the  people  over  whom  they 
exercise  their  cruel  mastery.  We  have  only  to  call 
to  mind  the  well-known  antipathy  of  the  Egyptians 
to  foreigners,  the  contempt  in  which  they  held  them, 
and  their  treatment  of  their  captives  in  compelling 
them  to  toil  under  the  lash  of  the  taskmaster  upon 
their  public  works,  to  see  the  fitness  of  the  doom. 
They  boasted  that  upon  their  mighty  monuments  no 
Egyptian  had  laboured ;  and  now  it  is  foretold  that  by 
the  hand  of  races,  such  as  they  had  loathed  and  de- 
spised and  enslaved,  they  themselves  will  be  judged 
for  their  cruelty  and  pride. 

When  we  turn  from  the  prophecy  which  says  who 
Egypt's  masters  will  be,  and  ask  of  history  who  they 


THE  NATIONALITY  OF  ITS   MASTERS.  85 

have  been,  we  are  answered  in  the  very  words  of  Scrip- 
ture. They  have  been  strangers.  The  Persians  were 
succeeded  by  the  Macedonians,  these  by  the  Romans, 
and  latterly  by  the  Greeks  of  the  Eastern  Empire.  The 
Empire  fell,  in  Egypt  and  the  East,  before  the  Arabian 
Caliphs.  "About  the  year  887,  the  power  of  the  caliphs 
was  succeeded  by  the  reign  of  the  Turcomans,  their 
own  janizaries,  whom  they  had  called  to  their  aid. 
The  dynasties  of  the  Tolonides,  the  Fatimites,  and  the 
Aioobites,  ruled  over  Egypt  till  the  year  1250.  The 
Mamelukes,  or  military  slaves  of  the  Turcoman  sultans 
of  Egypt,  then  massacred  their  masters  and  took  pos- 
session of  the  sovereignty.  The  Turkish  dynasty,  or 
that  of  the  Bassarite  Mamelukes,  reigned  till  1382. 
The  Circassian  race,  or  that  of  the  Bordjite  Mamelukes, 
ruled  here  till  within  these  very  few  years.  ...  In 
1798  the  French  abolished  the  Mameluke  aristocracy, 
and  made  themselves  masters  of  the  whole  of  Egypt."* 
After  two  short  years  the  French  retired,  when  the 
Mamelukes  strove  for  the  sovereignty  with  the  Turks 
of  Constantinople  by  intrigue  and  assassination.  Me- 
hemet  Ali  foiled  both  with  their  own  weapons  and 
founded  the  present  dynasty.  An  Albanian  Turk  and 
a  soldier  of  fortune,  he  entered  Egypt  in  command  of 
300  men,  sent  from  his  native  town  to  assist  in  ex- 
pelling the  French  from  Egypt,  and,  step  by  step, 
through  wiles  and  blood,  he  fought  his  way  to  the 
throne.  And  not  only  is  it  true  that  foreigners  have 
filled  the  throne,  they  have  held  almost  every  office 
of  emolument  and  trust.  Mehemet  Ali  among  his 
many  reforms  attempted  to  change  this  practice.  He 
appointed  native  governors  "with  the  very  liberal  in- 
tention of  allowing  the  peasants  to  be  ruled  by  their 
compatriots,  instead  of  the  more  humiliating  custom 
of  subjecting  them  to  foreigners. "f  The  change  had 
continued   for  only  five  years,  when  it  was   "found 

*  Malte  Brun.  t  Wilkinson. 


86  ~      EGYPT. 

necessary  to  return  to  the  old  system ;"  and  to-day  it 
is  as  true  as  ever  that  the  country  is  in  the  hands  of 
"strangers." 

The  last  point  we  name  is 

10.   THE  WORK  OF  EGYPT'S  MASTERS. 

"I  will  make  the  land  waste  and  all  that  is  therein  by 
the  hands  of  strangers"  (Ezek.  xxx.  12).  The  desola- 
tion, which  we  have  already  seen  was  to  fall,  might 
have  come  in  many  ways.  It  might  have  sprung  from 
causes  over  which  man  had  no  control,  and  it  might 
have  fallen  in  spite  of  the  best  efforts  of  the  foreign 
successors  of  the  Pharaohs.  But  here  the  story  of  the 
desolation  is  fully  told.  It  will  be  the  result  of  long 
and  increasing  oppression.  It  will  not  happen  in  spite 
of  the  efforts  of  these  strangers:  it  is  the  work  for 
which  they  are  to  come,  and,  when  they  have  passed 
away,  this  will  remain  as  the  token  that  they  have 
been.  Egypt's  native  rulers  were  remembered  by  the 
advancement  of  their  country's  weal,  and  by  public 
works  and  monuments  which  filled  the  breast  of  pos- 
terity with  a  noble  pride  and  emulation:  but  the  me- 
morial of  these  masters  will  be  waste  and  deepening 
desolation. 

Has  the  work  been  done  ?  Is  the  desolation  of  Egypt 
distinctly  traceable  to  the  strangers?  From  every  side 
witnesses  arise  which  testify  to  the  truth  of  the  pre- 
diction. The  strangers  have  wasted  the  land.  I  have 
already  referred  to  the  neglect  of  the  canals.  The 
revenues  which  ought  to  have  been,  and  which 
would  have  been  but  for  the  most  unprincipled  voracity, 
applied  to  their  maintenance  have  been  withheld,  and 
what  might  have  been  fruitful  fields  have  become  a 
desert.  What  has  been  already  said  of  the  steadily 
deepening  desolation  of  Egypt  has  been  shown  to  be 
the  work  of  its  foreign  masters.  And  other  strangers 
than  its  masters  have  aided  in  the  work  of  destruction. 
In  1 801  the  English,  in  order  to  protect  their  camp 


THE  WORK  OF   ITS   MASTERS.  87 

from  an  attack  by  the  French,  cut  through  the  em- 
bankment between  the  Bay  of  Aboukir  and  the  basin 
of  the  former  Lake  Mareotis,  and  the  salt  waters  now 
roll  over  forty  villages  and  the  cultivated  lands  which 
surrounded  them. 

The  people  have  been  wasted.  Clot  Bey,  writing  in 
1840,  calculates  that  one-half  the  population  has  per- 
ished since  the  time  of  the  Persian  conquest.  There 
is  no  reason  whatever,  save  the  continued  oppression 
of  the  people,  why  the  population  should  not  even  now 
spread  out  to  its  ancient  dimensions.  Were  all  the  land 
cultivated,  which  can  still  be  sown,  the  produce  would 
be  sufficient  to  maintain,  a  population  of  8,000,000 — 
about  twice  the  number  of  the  present  inhabitants. 
The  people  do  not  perish,  therefore,  for  lack  of  room ; 
their  decrease  is  not  simply  the  consequence  of  the 
lands  being  wasted.  It  is  wrought  by  the  hand  of  the 
strangers.  The  villages  are  depopulated  first  of  all 
by  the  conscription.  Lane  calculated  that,  under  Me- 
hemet  Ali,  every  second  man  out  of  the  whole  num- 
ber fit  for  military  service  was  taken  for  the  army 
and  navy;  and  M'Coan  admits  that  the  conscription 
is  still  out  of  all  proportion  to  the  military  necessities 
of  the  country,  and  a  serious  hindrance  to  the  progress 
of  agriculture.  Another  cause  of  the  decrease  is  the 
corvee — compulsory  labour  upon  public  works,  and 
on  the  estates  of  the  Khedive  and  others  whose  de- 
mands the  poor  fellaheen  can  neither  resist  nor  gain- 
say. Some  notion  of  what  this  means  for  the  peasant 
may  be  gained  from  the  story  of  the  Mahmoudieh 
canal,  as  told  by  Mr.  Stuart.  "The  important  water- 
way between  the  Nile  and  Egypt's  greatest  sea-port 
has  a  sad  history,  and  furnishes  a  terrible  illustration 
of  the  abuses  to  which  the  corvee  is  liable.  It  was 
constructed  entirely  by  forced  labour,  and  the  sacrifice 
of  life  was  frightful;  those  who  perished  were  buried 
in  the  enbankment  as  the  work  progressed.  Mehemet 
Ali  had  commanded  all  the  sheiks  in  the  Delta  to 


83  EGYPT. 

bring  the  flower  of  the  population  from  their  villages 
for  the  work  of  excavating  a  waterway  from  the  Nile 
to  Alexandria.  In  obedience  to  this  call  313,000  per- 
sons were  assembled  along  its  future  course,  i.  e.,  at 
the  rate  of  7,825  per  mile.  But  the  Government  had, 
as  usual  with  forced  labour,  provided  neither  food 
nor  tools;  the  poor  wretches  had  to  dig  out  the  canal 
with  their  fingers,  and  to  remove  the  soil  in  baskets 
provided  by  themselves.  As  the  work  progressed, 
and  they  got  below  the  level  of  Lake  Mareotis  the 
water  oozed  in,  and  they  toiled  in  fetid  mud.  They 
were  kept  at  the  work  by  soldiers  who  lined  the  banks 
with  bayonets  fixed;  they  had  no  respite  from  sunrise 
to  sunset,  and  they  lay  in  their  cotton  rags  on  the 
banks  from  sunset  to  sunrise,  half-starved,  maltreated, 
with  festering  fingers,  and  fever-stricken  frames.  The 
tyrant's  commands  were  urgent;  in  ten  months  his 
wishes  were  accomplished,  and  a  canal,  40  miles  long 
and  200  feet  wide,  was  excavated  with  men's  hands, 
but  23,000  of  the  poor  wretches  perished  in  that  time 
from  exhaustion  and  the  cruelty  of  their  taskmasters, 
and  were  covered  up  in  the  mud  of  the  embankments. 
If  placed  lengthways  along  its  course  there  would  be 
throughout  the  route  but  an  interval  of  2  yards  be- 
tween the  feet  of  one  corpse  and  the  skull  of  the  next 
— a  grim  line  of  sentinels. 

"I  once  travelled  by  boat  through  the  Mahmoudieh 
canal  from  Alexandria  to  Atfeh,  a  distance  of  forty 
miles,  but  during  the  entire  trip  I  could  not  divest 
myself  of  the  feeling  that  I  was  between  walls  into 
which  the  bodies  of  23,000  human  beings  had  been 
built.  As  I  sailed  along,  the  banks  seemed  to  my  mind 
to  grow  transparent,  and  I  saw  nothing  but  those 
miles  of  skeletons,  awful  trophies  of  tyranny  and 
cruelty  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  human  suffering  and 
misery  on  the  other."* 

The  resources  of  the  country  have  been  wasted.    We 

*  Egypt  After  the  War,  pp.  108-109. 


THE   WORK  OF   ITS   MASTERS.  89 

have  seen  that  its  skilled  industries  have  gone.  All 
attempts  to  revive  them  have  failed.  The  wealth  of 
the  country  has  disappeared,  and  in  its  stead  there 
stands  a  liability  which  it  is  utterly  unable  to  dis- 
charge. Ismail  Pasha  found  the  finances  burdened 
with  a  small  debt  of  about  three  millions  and  a  quarter. 
It  soon  swelled  to  the  enormous  amount  of  more  than 
91  millions.  The  history  of  the  loans  reveals  the 
terrible  recklessness  of  the  "strangers."  None  of 
them  were  negotiated  for  less  than  12  per  cent.,  and 
the  railway  loan  with  its  sinking  fund  cost  more  than 
29.  As  much  as  36  per  cent,  per  annum  has  been 
paid  for  the  renewal  of  bills.  Out  of  five  loans, 
amounting  in  nominal  value  to  nearly  56  millions,  only 
35  millions  reached  the  Egyptian  Treasury.  Mr.  Cave 
reports  that  on  this  amount  the  Egyptian  Government 
had  paid,  by  the  end  of  1875,  in  interest  and  sinking 
funds,  nearly  30  millions,  and  that  notwithstanding 
these  huge  payments  nearly  47  millions — that  is,  12 
millions  more  than  the  Government  originally  re- 
ceived— remained  to  be  redeemed. 

If  we  ask  how  the  money  has  been  expended,  we 
merely  open  another  chapter  in  the  story  of  the  "waste." 
Of  "the  barrage,"  a  scheme  for  damning  up  the  Nile, 
which  cost  three  millions,  and  which  has  been  in 
process  from  the  days  of  Mehemet  Ali  to  our  time,  Mr. 
Stuart  says :  "Instead  of  traversing  the  stream  higher 
up  where  it  is  confined  within  a  single  channel,  the 
(French)  engineers  had  chosen  a  site  below  the  point 
at  which  the  mighty  flood  divides,  thus  augmenting 
the  expense  of  construction  and  ensuring  heavier  com- 
missions and  percentages.  .  .  .  The  costly  structure 
is  more  picturesque  than  useful ;  the  foundations  are 
not  deep  enough  to  withstand  the  enormous  pressure 
of  the  waters  when  the  sluices  are  closed,  and  conse- 
quently it  has  served  to  irrigate  the  contractors'  pockets 
more  than  anything  else."* 

*  Ibid.  15. 


90  EGYPT. 

And  that  which  is  more  precious  than  land,  or  skill, 
or  wealth — the  patriotism,  the  national  sentiment  of 
the  people,  has  also  been  wasted.  I  place  two  state- 
ments together.  Of  the  Egyptians  as  they  entered 
upon  their  long  ordeal  of  suffering  Wilkinson  says : — 
"Though  far  better  pleased  with  the  rule  of  the 
Macedonian  kings  than  of  the  Persians,  the  Egyptians 
were  never  thoroughly  satisfied  to  be  subject  to  for- 
eigners. ...  To  the  Romans  they  were  equally 
troublesome.  .  .  .  Proud  of  the  former  greatness 
of  their  nation  they  could  never  get  over  the  disgrace  of 
their  fallen  condition;  and,  so  strong  was  their  bias 
towards  their  own  institutions  and  ancient  form  of  gov- 
ernment, that  no  foreign  king,  whose  habits  differed 
from  their  own,  could  reconcile  them  to  his  rule.  For 
no  people  were  more  attached  to  their  own  country,  to 
their  own  peculiar  institutions,  and  to  their  own  reputa- 
tion as  a  nation."*  Such  was  the  Egyptian  of  the  Persian 
the  Macedonian  and  even  of  the  Roman  occupation. 
With  that  picture  compare  the  following  of  the  Egypt 
of  to-day.  "I  have  not  been  able  to  discover  any  trace 
whatever  of  Nationalism.  Arabi  did  not  attempt  to 
appeal  to  any  such  sentiment;  it  would  not  have  been 
understood.  ...  I  came  out  to  Egypt  sanguine 
as  to  the  possibility  of  establishing  representative  insti- 
tutions upon  a  popular  basis,  but  a  careful  and  anxious 
inquiry  into  the  actual  state  of  feeling,  into  the  political 
elements,  into  the  fitness  of  the  great  bulk  of  the 
people,  and  as  to  any  wish  that  may  exist  among  them 
to  possess  them,  has  satisfied  me  that  an  interval  of 
reformed  administration  must  elapse  before  such  a 
change  could  be  either  prudently  or  successfully  car- 
ried out  "t 

There  is  light  beyond  the  darkness  for  Egypt.  The 
Lord  is  smiting  that  He  may  heal.  He  has  brought 
them  low;   He  may  yet  bring  them  lower:   for   it 

*  The  Ancient  Egyptians,  Vol.  I.,  p.  310. 
f  Egypt  After  the  War,  pp.  298,  299. 


AN  IMPORTANT  QUESTION.  91 

stands  written  "They  shall  cry  unto  the  Lord  because 
of  the  oppressors/'  But  He  humbles  that  He  may 
in  due  time  exalt  them.  "He  shall  send  them  a 
Saviour  and  a  defender,  and  he  shall  deliver  them. 
And  the  Lord  shall  be  known  to  Egypt,  and  the 
Egyptians  shall  know  the  Lord  in  that  day.  .  .  . 
In  that  day  shall  Israel  be  the  third  with  Egypt  and 
with  Assyria,  a  blessing  in  the  midst  of  the  earth: 
for  that  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  blessed  them  saying, 
Blessed  be  Egypt  my  people,  and  Assyria  the  work  of 
my  hands,  and  Israel  mine  inheritance"  (Isaiah  xix. 
20-25). 

But  the  point  before  us  now  is  this.  We  have  viewed 
in  its  length  and  breadth  this  prophetic  picture  of  the 
Egypt  of  the  present.  We  have  tested  it  in  its  minute 
details.  We  have  taken  them  one  after  another,  five 
in  the  preceding  chapter,  ten  in  this.  We  have  laid 
down  each  with  the  same  feeling  of  astonishment. 
The  fate  of  Egypt's  two  ancient  capitals  is  described 
and  discriminated.  Thebes  is  to  be  "broken,"  to  be 
"rent  asunder."  The  idols  of  Memphis  are  to  be  de- 
stroyed, its  images  are  to  cease.  And  for  nineteen 
centuries  Thebes  has  continued  in  fragments,  while 
Memphis  has  perished.  The  temples  and  images  of 
Thebes  remain;  those  of  Memphis  have  disappeared. 
The  earlier  capital  still  attracts  the  traveller,  and  still 
affords  a  shelter  to  the  children  of  the  soil:  the  later 
capital  has  neither  inhabitant  nor  memorial.  And  as 
it  is  with  the  capitals  so  it  is  with  the  country  and  the 
people.  It  was  declared  that  from  the  time  of  the 
Babylonian  conquest  Egypt's  story  should  be  a  story 
of  decay;  and  from  that  time  to  the  present  hour  the 
career  of  loss  and  degradation  has  continued.  Not- 
withstanding all  our  own  efforts  as  a  nation  it  is  not  ar- 
rested even  now.  Egypt  was  still,  however,  to  be 
preserved,  to  continue  as  a  kingdom  though  the  basest 
of  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth.  Her  degradation  was 
to  be  marked  in  another  way:  she  was  never  again 


92  EGYPT. 

to  have  a  native  ruler.  A  blight  was  also  to  settle  upon 
the  land.  The  rivers  and  the  canals  were  to  be  dried 
up.  The  papyrus  reeds  and  the  verdure  of  the  river 
banks  were  to  be  swept  away.  The  fisheries,  one  of 
the  chief  sources  of  the  people's  food,  were  to  fail ; 
the  industries,  which  were  Egypt's  glory  and  the 
fountain  of  her  wealth,  were  to  perish.  She  herself 
was  to  be  a  desolation  in  the  midst  of  desolations,  and 
her  cities  were  to  be  in  the  midst  of  cities  that  are 
wasted.  The  instruments  of  her  degradation  and  her 
misery  were  described.  She  was  to  be  the  prey  of  a 
rapacious,  cruel,  and  foreign  mastery.  She  was  to 
be  sold  into  the  hand  of  the  wicked :  the  land  and  all 
that  is  therein  was  to  be  made  waste  by  strangers. 
Whose  eye  saw  these  things  ?  Whose  word  declared 
them?  One  prediction  might  have  been  fulfilled  by 
some  happy  chance,  and,  perhaps,  a  second;  but  what 
of  all  these?  Can  the  thought  that  their  fulfilment 
is  due  to  accident  be  entertained  for  a  moment?  And 
if  not,  whose  is  the  Book  on  which  this  seal  is  set? 
Is  it  man's  Book?  Or  is  it  His  "in  whose  hand  thy 
breath  is,  and  whose  are  all  thy  ways"  ? 


CHAPTER  VI. 

IDUMEA    AND    THE    SEA    COAST    OF    PALESTINE. 

The  seeker  after  certainty  in  religion  will  be 
grateful  for  the  multiplicity,  as  well  as  for  the  min- 
uteness and  distinctness,  of  Scripture  prophecy. 
One  or  two  lights  in  a  chamber  may  not;  entirely 
sweep  away  its  gloom.  But  the  remedy  is  simple. 
The  lights  have  only  to  be  multiplied  and  the  place 
will  at  last  be  brighter  than  the  day  could  make  it. 
When  the  first  of  those  proofs  from  fulfilled  proph- 
ecy are  read,  the  darkness  of  the  heart,  though 
smitten,  may  not  be  dispersed.  The  very  mar- 
velousness  of  the  evidence  awakens  suspicion.  It 
seems  too  wonderful,  it  appears  to  give  too  ready 
and  too  full  a  satisfaction,  to  be  true.  The  whisper 
may  be  heard,  when  the  first  cry  of  wonder  has  died 
away,  that  we  are  mistaking  for  design  what  is 
after  all  the  work  of  chance;  or  that  what  has  as- 
tonished us  is  an  enthusiastic  reading  of  the  words 
of  Scripture,  which  sober  inspection  will  not  con- 
firm. The  best  answer  to  all  this  is  to  show  how 
wide  is  the  field  which  the  fulfilments  of  prophecy 
cover;  and  that  the  soberest  investigation  cannot 
be  blind  to  the  fact  that  the  pages  of  Scripture  are 
studded  with  predictions,  as  the  heaven  with'  stars, 
or  the  earth  with  flowers — predictions  that  have 
been,  and  are  being,  slowly  but  surely  fulfilled.  The 
remedy  here,  too,  is  to  multiply  the  lights  till  in  the 


94  IDUMEA. 

brightening  splendour  no  room  is  left  for  the  shadow 
of  doubt. 

We  have  already  noticed  the  prediction  regard- 
ing Egypt  that  it  should  "be  desolate  in  the  midst 
of  the  countries  that  are  desolate."  On  the  west, 
and  on  the  south  we  have  seen  how  fully  the  prophecy 
has  been  fulfilled.  Let  us  now  turn  to  the  only  other 
side  on  which  Egypt  was  bounded  by  other  lands. 
Travelling  eastward  from  Egypt,  and  crossing  the  des- 
ert of  Sinai,  we  come  to  what  was  the  ancient  Idumea, 
or  Edom,  the  possession  of  the  children  of  Esau. 
The  wilderness  is  bounded  on  the  east  by  the 
Wadi  Arabah,  a  long  and  wide  valley  which  ex- 
tends from  the  Dead  Sea  to  the  Gulf  of  Akabah, 
and  on  the  eastern  side  of  that  valley  rises  like  a 
mighty  wall  the  mountain  range  of  Seir.  The 
Edomites  and  the  Israelites  had  sprung  from  the 
same  stock,  the  one  being  the  descendants  of  Esau, 
the  other  the  children  of  Jacob.  The  latter  were 
riot  permitted  to  forget  the  claims  of  brotherhood, 
being  forbidden  to  dispossess  either  the  Edomites 
or  the  Moabites.  But,  from  the  time  the  Israelites 
sought  a  passage  to  the  land  promised  to  their 
fathers,  till  Jerusalem  was  laid  in  ashes  and  Judah 
was  carried  captive  to  Babylon,  there  was  neither 
goodwill  nor  peace  between  these  common  descend- 
ants of  Abraham.  "Moses  sent  messengers  from 
Kadesh  unto  the  king  of  Edom,  Thus  saith  thy 
brother  Israel,  Thou  knowest  all  the  travail  that 
hath  befallen  us:  how  our  fathers  went  down  into 
Egypt,  and  we  dwelt  in  Egypt  a  long  time ;  and  the 
Egyptians  evil  entreated  us,  and  our  fathers:  and 
when  we  cried  unto  the  Lord,  He  heard  our  voice, 
and  sent  an  angel,  and  brought  us  forth  out  of 
Egypt ;  and,  behold,  we  are  in  Kadesh,  a  city  in  the 
uttermost  of  thy  border:  let  us  pass,  I  pray  thee, 
through  thy  land"  (Num.  xx.  14-17). 

To  this  appeal  the  only  answer  was  a  drawn 


THE  SIN   OF   EDOM.  95 

sword.  The  Edomites  massed  their  forces  on  their 
western  frontier,  and  the  Israelites  were  compelled 
to  choose  another  way.  The  enmity  did  not  end 
there.  Edom  watched  his  opportunity,  and,  spring- 
ing from  his  mountain  lair,  again  and  again  drank 
blood.  When  Israel  was  weak  and  oppressed,  it 
could  always  reckon  that  in  him  it  had  one  foe 
more.  "He  did  pursue  his  brother  with  the  sword, 
and  did  cast  of?  all  pity,  and  his  anger  did  tear  per- 
petually, and  he  kept  his  wrath  for  ever"  (Amos  i. 
n).  In  that  last  sore  distress  Judah  had  no  more 
bitter  and  insulting  foe  than  Edom.  The  Psalmist 
cries,  "Remember,  O  Lord,  against  the  children  of 
Edom,  the  day  of  Jerusalem ;  who  said,  Rase  it, 
rase  it,  even  to  the  foundation  thereof"  (Ps.  cxxxvii* 
7).  For  the  man  who  is  deaf  to  the  pleadings  of 
brotherhood  and  of  pity  the  Scripture  has  its  threat- 
enings.  It  has  also  its  judgments  for  nations.  "Thus 
saith  the  Lord  God:  Behold,  I  am  against  thee,  O 
mount  Seir.  .  .  .  because  thou  hast  had  a  per- 
petual enmity,  and  hast  given  over  the  children  of 
Israel  to  the  power  of  the  sword  in  the  time  of  their 
calamity,  in  the  time  of  the  iniquity  of  the  end: 
therefore  as  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God,  I  will  pre- 
pare thee  unto  blood,  and  blood  shall  pursue  thee. 
.  .  Thus  will  I*  make  mount  Seir  an  astonishment 
and  a  desolation ;  and  I  will  cut  off  from  it  him  that 
passeth  through  and  him  that  returneth"  (Ezek. 
xxxv.  3-7). 

In  this  and  other  predictions  we  are  presented 
with  another  prophetic  picture.  No  forecast  could 
have  been  made  whose  fulfilment  seemed  less  likely. 
When  the  words  were  penned,  and  for  ages  after- 
wards, Edom  was  strong  and  populous.  The  num- 
ber of  ruined  towns  and  cities  show  that  the  land 
was  thickly  peopled;  while  there  are  numerous  indi- 
cations, both  in  the  vestiges  of  ancient  cultivation 
and    in    the    present    condition    of   the   soil,   that   the 


9&  IDUMEA. 

language  of  Scripture  has  not  exaggerated  its  great 
fertility.    "The  whole  of  the  fine  plains  in  this  quar- 
ter'3'   (the  neighbourhood   of   Kerak)    "are   covered 
with  sites  of  towns  on  every  eminence  or  spot  con- 
venient for  the  construction  of  one,  and  all  the  land 
is    capable    of    rich    cultivation:    there    can    be    little 
doubt  that  this  country,  now  so  deserted,  once  pre- 
sented a  continued  picture  of  plenty  and  fertility"* 
Wherever  springs  "are  met  with/'  says  Burckhardt, 
"vegetation  readily  takes  place,  even  among  barren 
sand  and  rocks."    He  speaks  in  warm  terms  of  the 
superiority  of  the  climate,  of  the  purity  of  the  air, 
and  the  refreshing  breezes,  and  remarks  that  in  no 
other  part  of  Syria  had   he   met  so  few   invalids. 
Speaking  of  the  plains  at  the  foot  of  mount  Hor 
Dean  Stanley  says :  "Instead  of  the  absolute  naked- 
ness   of    the    Sinaitic    valleys,    we    found    ourselves 
walking   on    grass    sprinkled    with    flowers,    and    the 
level  platforms  on  each  side  were  filled  with  sprout- 
ing corn."  f     Petra,  the  great   rock  city,  the   Selah 
of  the  Scripture  (2  Kings  xiv.  7),  and  the  capital  of 
Edom,  was  a  place  of  immense  strength,  and  one 
of  the  wonders  of  the  world.     The  country  was  en- 
riched by  the  gains  of  a  large  and  lucrative  trade. 
To  Petra  the  caravans  from  the  east  and  the  south 
turned  as  to  a  common  centre ;  and  from  it  the  trade 
branched  out  again  to  Egypt,  Palestine  and  Syria. 
In  the  time  of  our  Lord,  Idumea  was  still  populous, 
and    these    prophecies    were    unfulfilled.      Judgments 
had  indeed  fallen  upon  the  land.    It  stood  written  in 
Ezekiel :  "I  will  lay  My  vengeance  upon  Edom  by  the 
hand  of  My  people  Israel ;  and  they  shall  do  in  Edom 
according  to  Mine  anger  and  according  to  My  fury." 
The  words  were  fulfilled  in  the  time  of  the  Macca- 
bees.   They  were  conquered  by  Hyrcanus  in  129  b.  c, 
and  being  compelled  either  to  adopt  the  Jewish  religion 

*  Irby  and  Mangles.  t  Syria  and  Palestine,  p.  87. 


THE  DESTRUCTION  OF  ITS  TRADE.  97 

or  to  leave  the  country,  they  chose  rather  to  part 
with  their  idolatry.  But  the  sun  of  Edom  did  not 
go  down  at  cnce  in  blood  and  darkness.  Herod,  an 
Idumean  by  descent,  sat  upon  the  throne  of  Israel. 
When  the  Roman  armies  were  closing  around  Jerusa- 
lem, an  Idumean  army  throw  itself  into  the  devoted 
city,  and  shared  with  the  Jews  the  toils  and  the  suf- 
ferings of  that  terrible  siege.  The  prosperity  of  Petra, 
and  of  Edom  generally,  continued  long  after  Zion's 
fall.  From  the  fourth  to  the  sixth  century  Petra  was 
the  seat  of  one  of  the  three  metropolitan  sees  of  Pales- 
tine, and  the  names  of  its  bishops  appear  from  time  to 
time  in  the  records  of  the  Councils.  An  Arab  host 
was  led  by  Mohammed  in  person  against  the  south 
of  Idumea  in  630.  In  636  it  was  conquered,  along 
with  the  rest  of  Syria,  by  the  Mohammedan  forces. 
With  this  last  notice  Edom,  even  then  fertile  and 
populous,  passes  from  the  page  of  history  for  more 
than  four  and  a  half  centuries.  The  Crusaders  in- 
vaded the  country  in  1100,  but  were  finally  driven  out 
before  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century.  And  then 
the  curtain,  raised  as  it  were  for  a  moment,  fell  again 
only  to  be  drawn  aside  in  what  we  may  name  our  own 
times. 

Let  us  now  return  to  the  picture  presented  in  the 
mirror  of  prophecy.    We  notice  first  of  all  that 

ITS  COMMERCE  WAS  TO  CEASE. 

"I  will  cut  off  from  it  him  that  passeth  through,  and 
him  that  returneth"  (Ezek.  xxxv.  7).  It  was  famed, 
as  we  have  seen,  for  its  trade.  Petra  was  the  terminus, 
Strabo  tells  us,  of  one  of  the  great  commercial  routes 
of  Asia.  It  was  the  market  of  the  Arabians  for  their 
spice  and  frankincense.  A  great  fair  was  held  in  its 
neighbourhood,which  on  one  occasion  Demetrius  Polior- 
cetes,  incited  by  the  value  of  the  merchandise  brought 
together  for  sale,  attempted  to  surprise,  but  failed. 
Such  was  the  Edom,  not  only  of  the  prophet's  day, 


98  IDUMEA. 

but  of  the  first  ages  of  the  Christian  era.  And  now 
that  the  curtain  is  lifted  there  is  no  more  awful  testi- 
mony to  the  sureness  of  God's  word  than  this  land 
presents.  The  desolation  is  appalling.  Its  commerce 
has  utterly  passed  away.  We  do  not  know  the  story, 
but  the  great  market  of  Petra  has  long  since  ceased  to 
exist.  Edom  is  no  longer  sought  by  those  who  desire 
to  sell  or  by  those  who  desire  to  buy.  None  go  forth 
from  it  laden  with  the  merchandise  which  once  made 
its  name  famous  in  the  earth.  No  echo  of  its  once 
noisy  traffic  breaks  the  brooding  silence  of  death. 
"Him  that  passeth  through  and  him  that  returneth" 
God's  hand  has  alike  "cut  off." 
Another  prophecy  declared  that 

THE  RACE  OF  THE  EDOMITES  SHOULD  BECOME  EXTINCT. 

"There  shall  not  be  any  remaining  to  the  house  of 
Esau"  (Obadiah,  18).  That  they  were  not  extinct 
in  the  year  70  of  our  era  we  know,  for  they  made 
common  cause  with  their  Jewish  kindred  in  the  de- 
fence of  Jerusalem.  They  were  afterwards  Christian- 
ised with  the  Christianity  characteristic  of  the  Greek 
Empire,  and  which  received  its  fitting  judgment  at 
the  hands  of  the  Arab  hordes.  With  the  Mohammedan 
invasion  the  Idumeans  pass  from  sight,  and  now,  when 
we  search  for  them,  they  cannot  be  found.  The  doom 
has  fallen;  the  nation  is  extinct;  there  is  "none  re- 
maining to  the  house  of  Esau."  Dr.  Wilson  found 
among  the  Arabs  a  tribe  (the  fellahin  of  the  Wadi 
Musa),*  whom  he  suspected  to  be  descendants  of  the 
ancient  masters  of  the  country.  He  learned,  on  in- 
quiry, that  they  claimed  indeed  to  be  descendants  of 
the  Beni-Israel,  that  is,  of  Jewish  settlers  or  refugees ; 
but  no  mention  was  made  of  any  connection  with  Esau. 
The  very  name  has  been  forgotten. 

*  The  Lands  of  the  Bible,  I.,  p.  333, 


THE  DESTRUCTION  OF  THE  LAND  AND  PEOPLE,        99 

Then  we  are  told  that 

THEIR  LAND  WAS  TO  BE  A  DESOLATION. 

"Thus  saith  the  Lord  God :  Behold  I  am  against  thee, 
O  mount  Seir,  and  I  will  stretch  out  Mine  hand  against 
thee,  and  I  will  make  thee  a  desolation  and  an  astonish- 
ment.    I  will  lay  thy  cities  waste  and  thou  shall  be 
desolate.     .     .     .     Thou  shalt  be  desolate,  O  mount 
Seir,  and  all  Edom,  even  all  of  it"  (Ezek.  xxxv.  3,  4, 
15).    This  doom  too  has  been  accomplished.    Volney 
was  the  first  to  call  attention  to  the  country,  recording 
the    information    given   him    by   Arabs,    that   within 
three  days'  journey  upwards  of  thirty  ruined  towns, 
absolutely  deserted,  were  to  be  met  with.    It  was  first 
explored  by  Burckhardt,  and  since  his  time  many  trav- 
ellers have  made  us  familiar  with  the  wonders  of  Petra 
and  the  general  aspect  of  Edom.     Its  cities  are  laid 
waste.     Even  from  Petra  with  its  rock-hewn  dwell- 
ings, fit,  as   Miss   Martineau   has   said,   to  receive   a 
multitude  to-day,  every  inhabitant  has  long  since  de- 
parted.    And  the  entire  land  is  now,  as  it  has  been 
for  ages,  a  desolation.     Here  and  there  a  cultiyated 
patch  is  seen,  sown  by  the  Bedouin;  but  as  a  solitary 
cry  in  its  desert  silence  makes  the  awful  stillness  more 
deeply  felt,  so  those  few  green  spots  oppress  the  heart 
with  a  deeper  sense  of  the  terribleness  of  Edom's  judg- 
ment.   The  terraces,  which  of  old  clad  the  mountain 
sides  with  beauty  and  fruitfulness,  are  in  ruins.    Their 
walls  lie  scattered  in  fragments  upon  the  ground,  and 
the  rains  are  year  by  year  washing  down  the  remnants 
of  the  soil  from  the  rocks.    The  town  of  Maan,  on  the 
east  of  Edom,  alone  has  escaped  the  general  desola- 
tion.   It  owes  its  exemption  to  the  possession  of  some 
springs,  and  to  its  lying  upon  the  route  of  the  Moham- 
medan pilgrimage  to  Mecca.     This  Maan  is  the  The- 
man    mentioned    by    Eusebius,    and    the    Teman    of 
Scripture.     Can  any  one   fail  to  be  struck  with  the 
coincidence  that  it  was  from  this  point  the  desolation 

L  OF  C, 


TOO  THE  SEA-COAST  OF  PALESTINE. 

was  to  begin,  and,  as  it  were,  overflow  the  entire 
land?  The  prophet  wrote  as  the  word  of  the  living 
God,  "I  will  make  it  desolate  from  Teman"  (Ezek. 
xxv.  13)  ;  and  in  the  end  of  days  come  like  an  answer- 
ing testimony  these  words  of  Burckhardt :  "At  present 
all  this  country  is  a  desert,  and  Maan  is  the  only  in- 
habited place  in  it !" 

Edom  has  not  yet  touched  its  lowest  depth.  Not  only 
is  it  written,  "I  will  make  thee  perpetual  desolations 
and  thy  cities  shall  not  be  inhabited"  (Ezek.  xxxv.  9), 
and  that  "from  generation  to  generation  it  shall  lie 
waste,  none  shall  pass  through  it  for  ever  and  ever" 
(Isaiah  xxxiv.  10)  ;  but  it  has  also  been  said,  "As  in 
the  overthrow  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  and  the  neigh- 
bour cities  thereof,  saith  the  Lord,  no  man  shall  dwell 
there,  neither  shall  any  son  of  man  sojourn  there." 
These  last  words  are  not  yet  fulfilled.  The  solitude  is 
broken  here  and  there  by  fellaheen  in  the  north  and  by 
Arabs  in  the  south.  But  her  deserted  capital,  her 
ruined  cities,  her  lost  people,  are  the  pledge  that  these 
words  too  will  find  their  fulfilment,  and  that  the  time 
will  surely  come  when  no  man  shall  dwell  tllfere  nor 
any  son  of  man  sojourn  therein. 

Let  us  now  pass  from  Idumea  to  the  southern  part 
of  the  sea-coast  of  Palestine,  the  ancient  land  of  the 
Philistines.  The  scanty  notices  of  this  people,  sup- 
plied by  ancient  history  and  the  recently  deciphered 
monuments  of  Egypt  and  Assyria,  agree  with  those  of 
Scripture  in  representing  them  as  an  enterprising  and 
martial  race.  More  than  1,200  years  before  the  Chris- 
tian era  we  find  them  engaged  in  a  successful  war  with 
the  Sidonians,  and  about  the  same  time  they,  in  con- 
junction with  other  Mediterranean  nations,  attacked 
the  naval  forces  of  Egypt.  Every  reader  of  the  Old 
Testament  is  acquainted  with  their  persistent  hostility 
towards  the  Israelites,  a  hostility  which  seems  to  have 
culminated  in  the  hour  of  Israel's  deepest  distress, 
when   her  armies   were   defeated   and   dispersed,   her 


THE  PHILISTINES  WERE  TO  PERISH.  IOI 

strongholds  taEen,  and  the  majority  of  her  people 
carried  captive  to  Babylonia.  When  the  doom  was  pro- 
nounced against  Edom,  Philistia  was  not  forgotten. 
"Thus  saith  the  Lord  God:  Because  the  Philistines 
have  dealt  by  revenge,  and  taken  vengeance  with  despite 
of  soul  to  destroy  it  with  perpetual  enmity;  therefore 
thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  Behold,  I  will  stretch  out 
mine  hand  upon  the  Philistines,  and  I  will  cut  off  the 
Cherethites,  and  destroy  the  remnant  of  the  sea-coast" 
(Ezek.  xxv.  15,  16)  ;  "Gather  yourselves  together,  yea 
gather  together  O  nation  that  hath  no  shame.  .  .  . 
Woe  unto  the  inhabitants  of  the  sea-coast,  the  nation  of 
the  Cherethites!  The  word  of  the  Lord  is  against 
you,  O  Canaan,  the  land  of  the  Philistines:  I  will  de- 
stroy thee  that  there  shall  be  no  inhabitant.  And  the 
sea-coast  shall  be  pastures,  with  cottages  for  shep- 
herds and  folds  for  flocks"  (Zephaniah  ii.  1,  5,  6). 

Let  us  look,  then,  at  this  other  picture  drawn  by  the 
pen  of  prophecy.  We  note  first  of  all  that  upon  this 
race,  which  like  that  of  Esau  sought  to  blot  out  Israel, 
there  also  rests 

THE  DOOM  OF  EXTINCTION. 

The  Cherethites  were  to  be  cut  off,  and  even  the  rem- 
nant of  the  sea-coast  was  to  be  destroyed.  In  the  face 
of  the  desolation  which  has  descended  on  all  these  lands, 
it  may  seem  as  if  there  was  nothing  wonderful  in  this 
prediction.  We  may  regard  it  as  an  inevitable  feature 
in  their  decay  that  their  ancient  peoples  should  pass 
away  and  leave  no  trace.  But  their  kindred,  the  Egyp- 
tians, have  not  perished,  nor  have  the  Israelites,  though 
bereft  of  a  home  for  eighteen  centuries,  ceased  to 
exist.  Even  the  Amorites,  more  ancient  foes  of  Israel, 
have  descendants  who  can  still  be  distinguished  among 
the  Arabs  of  Mount  Seir.  The  Philistines — so  power- 
ful of  old  that  the  Greeks  have  applied  their  name  to 
the  whole  country  and  called  it  Palestine — the  land 
of  the   Philistines — these   might   also   have   endured 


102  THE   SEA-COAST   OF   PALESTINE. 

either  in  Philistia  or  elsewhere.  But  its  plains  will  be 
searched  in  vain  for  the  descendants  of  its  ancient 
and  war-like  masters.  Their  merchantmen  no  longer 
plough  the  sea  or  crowd  their  ports.  No  more  do 
the  hosts  sweep  out  from  under  the  frowning  battle- 
ments  of  their  own  mighty  cities  to  defend  the  land,  or 
to  carry  fire  and  sword  into  the  country  of  the  foe. 
The  strife,  which  of  old  stained  with  blood  those 
hills  and  plains,  still  adds  to  their  misery;  but  none 
of  that  once  proud  and  mighty  race  have  part  in  it, 
nor  are  there  any,  however  lowly,  who,  there  or  else- 
where, bear  their  name.  The  Cherethites  have  been 
cut  off :  the  remnant  of  the  sea-coast  has  perished. 
Then  this  land  also  was  to  be 

A  DESOLATION. 

It  extended  from  Jaffa  to  Gaza,  being  bounded  on  the 
north  by  the  plain  of  Sharon,  on  the  west  by  the 
Mediterranean,  on  the  south  by  the  desert,  and  on  the 
east  by  the  hills  of  Judah.  It  contained  the  five  great 
cities  of  Ekron,  Ashdod,  Ascalon,  Gath,  and  Gaza. 
We  find  the  names  of  its  strong  cities  appearing  in 
the  stories  inscribed  on  the  monuments  which  tell  of 
the  Assyrian  and  Egyptian  invasions  of  Syria.  Ash- 
dod defied  the  might  of  Egypt  for  29  years — the  long- 
est siege  on  record.  Though  one  wave  after  another 
had  passed  over  Philistia,  as  over  the  rest  of  Syria — 
though  Persian,  and  Egyptian,  and  Greek,  and  Roman 
had  wasted  with  fire  and  sword,  the  country  remained 
great  and  populous,  and  still  possessed  her  great  cities 
long  after  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era.  Even 
in  the  twelfth  century  the  word  was  still  unfulfilled. 
The  country  was  then  full  of  strong  cities  which  were 
taken  and  retaken  during  the  wars  of  the  crusades. 
But  during  the  last  six  centuries  the  judgment  has 
slowly  but  surely  fallen;  it  is  deepening  even  now. 
"Gath  has  entirely  disappeared."  Ascalon  is  now 
"without  inhabitant."    "Akir,"  the  ancient  Ekron,  "is 


ITS  DESOLATION.  103 

a  wretched  village,  containing  some  40  or  50  mud 
hovels;  its  narrow  lanes  are  encumbered  with  heaps 
of  rubbish  and  filth.  It  stands  on  a  bare  slope,  and 
the  ground  immediately  around  it  has  a  dreary  and 
desolate  look,  heightened  by  a  few  stunted  trees  here 
and  there  round  the  houses.  Yet  this  is  all  that  marks 
the  site  and  bears  the  name  of  the  royal  city  of 
Ekron."*  Gaza,  not  the  Gaza  of  the  Philistines  as  we 
shall  afterwards  see,  is  still  the  seat  of  a  considerable 
population.  It  forms  the  first  resting-place  on  the 
caravan  route  from  Egypt,  and  has  about  15,000  in- 
habitants. But  notwithstanding  its  position  it  has 
hardly  retained  the  shadow  of  its  ancient  strength  and 
greatness.  "-The  town  resembles  a  cluster  of  large 
villages.  The  principal  one  stands  on  the  top  of  a 
low  hill,  and  the  others  lie  on  the  plain  at  its  base.  The 
hill  appears  to  be  composed,  in  a  great  measure,  of 
the  accumulated  ruins  of  successive  cities.  We  can 
see  portions  of  massive  walls  and  the  ends  of  old  col- 
umns cropping  up  everywhere  from  the  rubbish.  There 
are  no  walls  or  defences  of  any  kind."f  The  once 
mighty  Ashdod  is  a  village  "wretched  in  the  extreme." 
"The  temples,  palaces,  and  houses  are  all  gone."  "All 
that  is  left  is  a  confused  group  of  mud  hovels."} 

Nor  is  it  that  the  population  of  the  country  has 
merely  changed  its  dwelling-places.  With  the  excep- 
tions named  and  a  few  more  it  has  ceased  to  exist. 
"Along  the  whole  sea-board  are  white,  sandy  downs. 
Within  these  is  the  broad  undulating  plain  with  its 
rich  deep  soil  and  low  mounds  at  intervals 
oyer  whose  summits  the  grey  ruins  of  great 
cities  are  now  strewn  in  the  dust.  .  .  .  Ruins 
were  visible  everywhere;  but  the  villages  were  few, 
small,  and  far  between." ||     The  depopulation  of  the 

*  J.  L.   Porter;   Giant  Cities  of  Bashan  and  Syria's  Holy 

Places,  p.  191. 
f/Wtf.,  p.  204.     %Ibid.     \\Ibid.,  pp.  186,  190. 


104  THE  SEA-COAST  OF  PALESTINE. 

country  is  largely  due  to  "the  insecurity  of  these  parts 
at  the  present  day  from  the  unchecked  incursions  of 
the  Bedouin  tribes."*  Many  of  the  people  whose  fields 
are  on  the  plains  of  Philistia,  have,  for  security,  fixed 
their  dwellings  on  the  hillsides  of  Judah.  The  word, 
in  short,  has  been  fulfilled,  which  said,  "O  Canaan, 
the  land  of  the  Philistines,  I  will  destroy  thee  that 
there  shall  be  no  inhabitant"  (Zephaniah  ii.  5).  The 
population,  which  even  now  could  be  sustained  by  its 
exuberant  fertility,  has  long  since  passed  away.  No 
invading  host  need  dread  the  resistance  of  Philistia. 
It  has  ceased  to  defend  itself  even  from  the  inroads 
of  the  robbers  of  the  desert. 

But  it  will  be  said  the  words  uthere  shall  be  no  in- 
habitant" are  not  literally  fulfilled,  and  the  present  con- 
dition of  the  country  sprinkled  as  it  is  with  its  miser- 
able villages  does  not  answer  to  the  picture  which  is 
mirrored  in  the  prophecy.  This  seeming  difficulty, 
however,  only  brings  out  the  more  the  wonderful  ac- 
curacy with  which  the  present  condition  of  Philistia 
was  portrayed.  Philistia  as  it  then  was,  a  land  of 
great  cities,  famed  for  its  wealth  and  splendour,  its 
wisdom  and  martial  prowess,  its  armies  and  navies,  its 
nobles  and  warriors,  its  merchants  and  artificers,  was 
to  be  destroyed.  And  all  have  passed  away.  We  look 
in  vain  for  the  Philistia  of  the  past.  Some  ruins  of  its 
cities  remain,  but  not  a  vestige  of  what  was  once  its 
strength  and  glory  can  now  be  found.  Yet,  though 
the  land  was  to  be  bereft  of  those  inhabitants,  it  was 
not  to  be  tenantless.  The  prophecy  reads,  "I  will  de- 
stroy thee  that  there  shall  be  no  inhabitant.  And  the 
sea-coast  shall  be  pastures,  with  cottages  for  shepherds 
and  folds  for  Hocks"  (Zeph.  ii.  5,  6). 

The  former  life  was  to  be  replaced  by  this.  And 
here  our  attention  is  called  to  two  other  predictions. 
Though  the  aspect  of  the  country  was  to  be  changed, 

*  Stanley ;  Syria  and  Palestine,  p.  259. 


THE   DESTINY    OF    THE    LAND.  105 

ITS  FRUITFULNESS  WAS  TO  REMAIN. 

"The  sea-coast  shall  be  for  pastures."  It  is  to  attract 
and  sustain  its  new  possessors.  This  is  perhaps  the 
most  striking  feature  of  the  country.  One  traveller 
calls  it  "the  garden  of  Palestine."*  All  travellers 
speak  of  its  rich  corn  fields.  "The  most  striking  and 
characteristic  feature  of  Philistia,"  says  Stanley,  "is 
its  immense  plain  of  corn  fields,  stretching  from  the 
edge  of  the  sandy  tract  right  up  to  the  very  wall  of 
the  hills  of  Judah,  which  look  down  its  whole  length 
from  north  to  south.  These  rich  fields  must  have  been 
the  great  source  at  once  of  the  power  and  the  wealth 
of  Philistia,  and  of  the  unceasing  efforts  of  Israel  to 
master  the  territory.  It  was  in  fact  a  little  Egypt. 
As  these  plains  form  the  point  of  junc- 
tion and  contrast  with  the  hills  of  Judah  on  the  west, 
so  they  form  a  point  of  junction  and  similarity  with 
the  wide  pastures  of  the  desert  on  the  south."f  The 
"plain,"  says  another,  "now  opened  up  before  us,  roll- 
ing away  to  the  southern  horizon  in  graceful  undula- 
tions, clothed  with  a  rich  mantle  of  green  and  gold — 
harvest  field  and  pasture  land.  .  .  .  The  plain  was 
all  astir  with  bands  of  reapers,  men  and  women.  .  .  . 
Leaving  this  low-lying  plain  we  ascended  the  bleak 
downs  where  vast  flocks  of  sheep  and  camels  were 
browsing ;  and  away  on  our  left,  nearly  a  mile  distant, 
we  saw  the  black  tents  of  their  Arab  owners."  He 
speaks  of  "the  noble  plain"  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
the  ancient  Ashdod,  "stretching  away  to  the  foot  of 
Judah's  mountains,  here  and  there  cultivated,  but 
mostly  neglected  and  desolate,  yet  all  naturally  rich 
as  in  the  palmiest  days  of  Philistia' s  power."J 

The   fertility  of  the  land,  therefore,  remains,   and 
the  words  which  describe 

*  Porter:  Giant  Cities  of  Bashan,  &c,        t  Syria  and  Pales- 

tine,  pp.  258,  259. 
$  Porter;  Giant  Cities  of  Bashan,  &c,  pp.  190-195. 


106  THE  SEA-COAST  OF  PALESTINE. 

THE  PRESENT  ASPECT  OF  THE  LAND  AND  THE  PURPOSE  IT 

SERVES 

are  also  fulfilled.     The  sea-coast  has  literally  become 
"pastures  and  cottages  for  shepherds,  and  folds  for 
flocks."     Volney   thus   describes    the   country   as   he 
found  it  in  1785: — "In  the  plain  between  Ramla  and 
Gaza  we  met  with  a  number  of  villages  badly  built  of 
dried  mud,   and   which,  like  the  inhabitants,  exhibit 
every  mark  of  poverty  and  wretchedness.    The  houses, 
on  a  nearer  view,  are  only  so  many  huts,  sometimes 
detached,  at  others  ranged  in  the  form  of  cells,  around 
a  courtyard  enclosed  by  a  mud  wall.     In  winter  they 
and  their  cattle  may  be  said  to  live  together,  the  part 
of  the  dwelling  allotted  to  themselves  being  only  raised 
about  two  feet  above  that  in  which  they  lodge  their 
beasts.     Except  the  environs  of  these  villages,  all  the 
rest  of  the  country  is  a  desert,  and  abandoned  to  the 
Bedouin  Arabs,  who  feed  their  flocks  on  it."     What 
the  country  then  was  it  still  remains.     Dr.  Thomson 
gives   the   following   graphic    description   of   a   large 
village  in  one  of  the  most  flourishing  districts.    After 
riding  for  nearly  two  hours  "through  an  ocean  of  ripe 
wheat,"  he  came  to  Mesmia  just  as  the  sun  set.    "There 
I  pitched   for  the  night.     It  is   a  large  agricultural 
village,  mud  hovels  packed  together  like  stacks  in  a 
barn-yard,  and  nearly  concealed  by  vast  mounds  of 
manure  on  all  sides  of  it.    During  the  night  a  dense 
fog   settled   down   flat   upon   the   face   of  the  plain, 
through  which  you  could  not  see  ten  steps,  and  the 
scene  in  the  morning  was  extraordinary  and  highly 
exciting.    Before  it  was  light  the  village  was  all  abuzz 
like  a  bee-hive.    Forth  issued  party  after  party  driving 
camels,   horses,   mules,   donkeys,   cows,   sheep,   goats, 
and   even  poultry  before  them.     To   everybody   and 
thing  there  was  a  separate  call,  and  the  roar  and  up- 
roar was  prodigious."*     Referring  to  the  Temple  of 

*  The  Land  and  the   Book,   I.,   p.    161. 


ASCALON,  EKRON,  GAZA.  107 

Dagon,  one  of  th£  glories  of  ancient  Ashdod,  Porter 
says :  "Not  a  vestige  of  the  temple  is  there  now.  Along 
the  southerly  declivity  old  building  stones  with  frag- 
ments of  columns  and  sculptured  capitals  are  piled  up 
in  the  fences  of  little  fields,  and  in  the  walls  of  goat 
and  sheep  pens,  showing  how  time  and  God's  un- 
changeableness  have  converted  prophecy  into  history: 
'and  the  sea-coast  shall  be  dwellings,  and  cottages  for 
shepherds  and  folds  for  flocks!  "* 

We  may  notice  in  connection  with  this  country  some 
startling  instances  of  the  minute  fulfilment  of  prophecy. 
They  are  presented  in  the  diverse  fates  of  three  of  its 
great  cities.  The  prophet  Zechariah  declares,  "Ash- 
kelon  shall  not  be  inhabited"  (ix.  5)  ;  and  Zephaniah, 
"Ashkelon"  shall  be  "a 'desolation"  (ii.  4).  The  latter 
prophet  immediately  after  the  prediction  wre  have  just 
noticed,  continues:  "And  the  coast  shall  be  for  the 
remnant  of  the  house  of  JudaTi;  they  shall  feed  theij 
flocks  thereupon :  in  the  houses  of  Ashkelon  shall  they 
lie  'down  in  the  evening :  for  the  Lord  their  God  shall 
visit  them,  and  turn  away  their  captivity."  It  would 
seem,  therefore,  that  though  the  inhabitant  should 
cease  from  Ascalon,  the  place  should  remain  even  till 
the  ingathering  of  Israel.  What,  then,  is  the  fact? 
Till  nearly  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century  Ascalon 
retained  its  strength  and  greatness,  when  its  fortifica- 
tions were  demolished  by  the  Sultan  Bibars,  and  its 
harbour  was  filled  up  with  stones.  The  walls  present 
evidence  of  their  having  been  rebuilt,  and  it  was  held 
by  a  Turkish  garrison  so  late  as  the  beginning  of  the 
seventeenth  century.  Since  that  time  it  has  been  totally 
deserted.  The  modern  village  is  to  the  north  of  the 
old  site,  and  not  even  those  who  own  orchards  within 
the  walls  plant  their  dwellings  there.  The  walls  of 
the  town,  with  their  ruined  towers  and  battlements, 
still  remain,  and  in  this  respect  Ascalon  stands  alone 

*  Giant  Cities  of  Bashan,  &c,  p.  195. 


Io8  THE  SEA-COAST  OF   PALESTINE. 

among  the  ancient  cities  of  Philistia.  "The  topography 
of  this  place/'  writes  Dr.  Thomson,  "is  very  peculiar. 
A  lofty  and  abrupt  ridge  begins  near  the  shore,  runs 
up  eastward,  bends  round  to  the  south,  then  to  the 
west,  and  finally  north-west  to  the  sea  again,  form- 
ing an  irregular  amphitheatre.  On  the  top  of  this 
ridge  ran  the  wall,  which  was  defended  at  its  salient 
angles  by  strong  towers.  The  specimens  which  still 
exist  show  that  it  was  very  high  and  thick.  .  .  .  The 
position  is  .one  of  the  fairest  along  this  part  of  the 
Mediterranean  coast.  .  .  .  The  walls  must  have 
been  blown  to  pieces  by  powder,  for  not  even  earth- 
quakes could  toss  these  gigantic  masses  of  masonry 
into  such  extraordinary  attitudes.  No  site  in  this  coun- 
try has  so  deeply  impressed  my  mind  with  sadness."* 
Ascalon  is  a  desolation,  but  it  waits  to  render  a  final 
service.  Ibrahim  Pasha  in  1840  cleared  part  of  the 
ruins  to  bivouac  the  Egyptian  troops,  and  in  so  doing 
uncovered  no  fewer  than  20  wells  of  water.  The 
cleared  space  has  since  been  occupied  as  gardens,  and 
Dr.  Thomson  says:  "Ashkelon  will  surely  be  rebuilt 
at  some  future  day  of  prosperity  for  this  unhappy  land. 
The  position  is  altogether  too  advantageous  to  allow 
it  to  sink  into  total  neglect."f 

In  the  same  prediction  of  Zephaniah  we  read:  "Ek- 
ron"  (more  correctly  Akkaron)  "shall  be  rooted  up" 
(ii.  4).  The  words  are  unusual  and  striking,  yet  few 
would  think  of  laying  special  stress  upon  them.  Let 
the  event  instruct  us.  The  site  is  still  called  Akir, 
and  there  still  remain  upon  it  a  few  inhabitants.  But 
round  the  small  village  no  mounds  are  seen  such  as 
mark  the  sites  of  other  ancient  cities.  Ekron  has  liter- 
ally  been  rooted  up.  The  place  where  it  once  stood 
is  now  ploughed  fields,  and  the  only  evidence  that  a 
city  ever  existed  there  is  found  in  the  stones  of  hand- 
mills  and  the  ancient  cisterns  which  are  occasionally 
met  with  by  the  cultivators. 

*  The  Land  and  the  Book,  pp.  545,  546.    f  Ibid.,  p.  546. 


ASCALON,    EKRON,    GAZA.  IOQ 

It  is  also  said  in  Zephaniah,  "Gaza  shall  be  for- 
saken" (ii.  4)  ;  and  in  Jeremiah,  "Baldness  is  come 
upon  Gaza"  (xlvii.  5).  There  is  still  a  town  of  this 
name,  as  we  have  seen,  which  has  at  present  a  popula- 
tion of  about  fifteen  thousand.  Dr.  Keith,  in  the 
earlier  editions  of  his  large  and  valuable  work  on 
Prophecy,  found  this  a  difficulty.  It  seemed  plain  that 
either  the  time  had  not  yet  come  for  the  fulfilment  of 
the  predictions,  or  that  the  language  of  the  prophets 
was  not  to  be  taken  quite  literally,  and  that  the  once 
great  city  of  Gaza  might  be  regarded  as  offering  in 
its  present  fallen  condition  a  comparatively  close  ful- 
filment. But  meanwhile  the  prophecies  had  been  so 
fully  accomplished  that  the  ancient  Gaza  could  lift  no 
protest  against  the  mistake  which  was  being  made. 
The  modern  town  is  not  built,  as  Dr.  Keith  after- 
wards discovered,  on  the  site  of  the  old,  and  is  there- 
fore not  the  subject  of  the  prophecies.  The  great 
Gaza  of  the  Philistines  lay  two  miles  nearer  the  shore, 
and  is  now  a  series  of  sand-hills,  covered  with  minute 
but  manifold  remains.  It  is  so  forsaken  that  there  is 
not  a  single  hut  resting  upon  its  site.  It  is  so  bald 
that  neither  pillar  nor  standing  stone  marks  the  place 
where  the  city  stood,  nor  is  there  a  single  blade  of 
grass  on  which 'the  weary  eye  can  rest. 

Every  one  will  feel  how  startlingly  clear  and  minute 
these  prophetic  pictures  are.  Were  they  mere  de- 
scriptions we  should  admire  their  accuracy  and  happy 
fitness  of  expression.  But  our  wonder  is  intensified  as 
we  mark  how  accurately  the  fate  of  those  three  allied 
cities  is  discriminated.  The  description  of  Ascalon, 
desolate  and  tenantless,  awaiting  a  day  of  restoration 
when  it  may  receive  wanderers  to  its  shelter,  can  be 
applied  to  neither  Ekron  nor  Gaza.  Gaza  though  for- 
saken and  bald,  has  not  been  rooted  up.  Its  mounds 
remain,  bald  though  they  are ;  their  stones  are  some- 
times quarried  to  meet  the  wants  of  the  neighbouring 
town,  and  it  is  possible  that  the  foundations  of  the 


110  ASCALON,  EKRON,  GAZA. 

ancient  city  may  yet  be  laid  bare.  Only  to  Ekron  does 
that  briefest  but  truest  of  all  possible  descriptions 
apply — it  alone  has  been  "rooted  up."  The  traveller 
who  would  to-day  apply  these  y^ords  for  the  first  time, 
we  should  judge  to  be  possessed  of  clear  observation, 
and  of  that  rarer  penetration  and  sympathy  of  genius 
which  grasp  to  its  inmost  depths  the  thing  with  which 
they  deal.  Add  to  this,  what  we  know,  that  the  words 
stood  upon  the  page  of  Scripture  for  long  centuries 
before  any  sign  appeared  of  their  fulfilment,  and  then 
say  what  we  are  to  think  of  such  things.  Very  high 
claims  have  been  made  on  behalf  of  the  Scriptures ; 
but  if  we  test  them  by  these  three  words,  we  think 
the  highest  claim  of  all  will  be  amply  sustained. 


a 


CHAPTER  VII. 

JUDEA  AND  BABYLON. 

From  the  sea-coast  of  Palestine  we  now  pass  over  to 
the  land  of  Israel.  We  have  some  remarkable  prophe- 
cies regarding  Judea,  as  well  as  regarding  the  Jews, 
in  the  Books  of  Leviticus  and  Deuteronomy.  They 
are  predictions  the  fulfilment  of  which  was  to  be  con- 
tingent on  the  prolonged  disobedience,  the  persistent 
rebellion,  oT  the  Israelites.  After  having  spoken  of 
milder  chastisements  the  Scripture  proceeds:  "And  if 
ye  will  not  for  all  this  hearken  unto  Me,  but  walk  con- 
trary unto  Me,  then  I  will  walk  contrary  unto  you  in 
fury,  and  I  will  also  chastise  you  seven  times  for  your 
sins.  .  .  .  And  I  will  destroy  your  high  places. 
.  .  .  And  I  will  make  your  cities  a  waste,  and  will 
bring  your  sanctuaries  unto  desolation,  and  I  will  not 
smell  the  savour  of  your  sweet  odours,  and  I  will 
bring  the  land  into  desolation,  and  your  enemies  which 
dwell  therein  shall  be  astonished  at  it.  And  you,  will  I 
scatter  among  the  nations,  and  I  will  draw  out  the 
sword  after  you,  and  your  land  shall  be  a  desolation 
and  your  cities  shall  be  a  waste.  Then  shall  the  land 
enjoy  her  sabbaths,  as  long  as  it  lieth  desolate  and  ye 
be  in  your  enemies'  land,  even  then  shall  the  land  have 
rest  and  enjoy  her  sabbaths"  (Levit.  xxvi.  27-34). 

These  words  were  written  before  the  Israelites  en- 
tered Palestine.    There  were  partial  and  temporary  ful- 


112  JUDEA.  / 

filments  before  tfie  Christian  era,  such  as  ffie  removal 
to  Babylon,  from  the  consideration  of  which  we  are 
precluded  by  the  limits  which  we  have  assigned  our- 
selves. But  if  these  words  ever  were  to  be  fulfilled  they 
ought  to  be  fulfilled  now.  They  are  a  statement  of  what 
God  is  to  do  in  the  event  of  Israel's  stubborn  resistance 
to  His  will.  Their  continued  unbelief,  their  persistent 
disobedience,  are  to  be  followed  by  these  judgments 
whlcli  are  to  mark  them  as  the  objects  of  God's  dis- 
pleasure. Now,  if  Christianity  is  of  God  and  these 
words  are  His,  this  must  be  beyond  every  other,  the 
time  of  their  fulfilment.  For  if  Christ  is  indeed  the 
Saviour  promised  from  of  old  and  the  King  whom 
God  has  anointed  over  Zion,  then  there  is  nothing 
which  Israel  has  ever  done  which  has  equalled  the 
rebellion  of  these  nearly  19  centuries.  It  has  been  high- 
handed and  utter.  There  has  not  been  the  slightest 
attempt,  or  pretence  of  an  attempt,  even  to  make  a 
compromise.  They  have  wholly  rejected  God's  cove- 
nant. For  that  covenant,  as  made  with  Abraham, 
spoke  of  Him  in  whom  all  nations  of  the  earth  were 
to  be  blessed.  When  it  was  reinstituted  under  Moses, 
it  made  mention  of  the  Prophet  like  unto  him.  When 
the  one  King  of  God's  appointment  was  set  over  Israel, 
they  were  pointed  to  David's  son,  wThose  sceptre  should 
rule  the  nations  and  whose  dominion  should  be  ever- 
lasting; and  this  Anointed  One  was  ever  more  clearly 
set  forth  by  the  prophets  who,  according  to  the  Jews' 
own  admission,  w°re  the  inspired  exponents  of  the 
'Divine  will.  And  yet,  when  He  came,  they  said  "we 
will  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over  us."  They  cruci- 
fied Him.  They  blasphemed  His  name.  They  perse- 
cuted His  followers.  They  tried  to  stamp  out  the 
acknowledgment,  and  even  the  remembrance,  of  Him, 
from  the  earth.  And  to-day,  though  powerless — we 
may  also  say  unwishful — to  injure  Christianity,  their 
rejection  of  it  is  still  sullen  and  contemptuous.  If, 
in  the  face  of  all  this,  nothing  which  the  servant  of 


THE  DESOLATION  OF  ITS  HOLY  PLACES.  113 

God  spoke  of  had  been  done,  I  can  conceive  of  no 
stronger  argument  against  Christianity  than  those  very- 
words  of  his  would  supply.  It  would  then  be  clearly 
proved  either  that  the  words  were  not  true,  or  that, 
in  rejecting  Christ,  the  Jews  were  not  rejecting  any- 
thing which  could  be  called  the  covenant,  or  the  will, 
of  God.  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  words  have 
all  been  fulfilled  to  the  letter,  are  not  both  claims  fully 
proved  ?  If  the  punishment  has  been  contemporaneous 
with  the  rebellion ;  if  the  punishment  has  been  as  pro- 
longed as  the  rebellion  has  been  enduring ;  what  then  ? 
Shall  we  not  read  there  that  these  are  God's  words 
and  that  Jesus  is  God's  gift  to  us  ? 

Let  us  see,  then,  whether  the  prophecy  has  been 
made  good.  We  confine  ourselves  at  present  to  what 
is  said  of  the  land — the  story  of  the  people  will  come 
before  us  again.  We  notice  first  of  all  that  there  was 
to  be 

A  CESSATION  OF  JEWISH  WORSHIP  AND  THE  DESOLATION 
OF  THEIR  SANCTUARIES. 

"I  will  not  smell  the  savour  of  your  sweet  odours,"  "I 
will  destroy  your  high  places  .  .  .  and  will  bring 
your  sanctuaries  unto  desolation"  (Levit.  xxvi.  30, 
31).  We  know  what  Jewish  worship  was  in  the  time 
of  our  Lord.  The  prescribed  service  of  the  law  was 
celebrated  with  pomp  and  splendour  by  a  fully  equipped 
and  richly-sustained  priesthood.  The  temple  tax  of 
two  drachmae  was  paid  not  only  by  the  Jews  in  Judea 
and  Galilee.  Wherever  the  Jew  was  found  through- 
out the  known  world  the  tax  was  collected  and  for- 
warded to  Jerusalem.  The  Temple  itself  was  one  of 
the  wonders  of  the  world.  "High  above  the  whole 
city  rose  the  Temple,  uniting  the  commanding  strength 
of  a  citadel  with  the  splendour  of  a  sacred  edifice. 
According  to  Josephus  the  esplanade  on  which  it  stood 
had  been  considerably  enlarged  by  the  accumulation 
of  fresh  soil  since  the  days  of  Solomon,  particularly  on 


114  JUDEA. 

the  north  side.  It  now  covered  a  square  of  a  furlong 
each  side."*  Of  the  internal  splendours  of  the  edifice, 
the  beauty  and  magnificence  of  the  colonnades  and 
courts  and  gates,  we  need  not  speak.  "The  outward 
face  of  the  Temple  in  its  front  wanted  nothing  that 
was  likely  to  surprise  either  men's  minds  or  their  eyes, 
for  at  the  first  rising  of  the  sun  it  reflected  back  a  very 
fiery  splendour,  and  made  those  who  forced  themselves 
to  look  upon  it,  to  turn  their  eyes  away,  just  as  they 
would  have  done  at  the  sun's  own  rays.  It  appeared 
to  strangers  when  they  were  at  a  distance  like  a  moun- 
tain covered  with  snow,  for  those  parts  of  it  that  were 
not  covered  with  gold  were  exceeding  white."  "Vast 
and  splendid,"  says  Hosmer,  "the  Temple  certainly  was. 
The  Romans  were  then  at  the  height  of  power,  and 
familiar  with  all  the  magnificence  of  the  earth,  yet  it 
seemed  to  them  one  of  the  wonders  of  the  world.  No 
doubt  it  far  surpassed  in  greatness  and  beauty  the 
structure  of  Solomon,  upon  whose  foundations  it  was 
reared.  The  Herods  had  lavished  upon  it  vast  treas- 
ures."! 

Such  then  was  the  worship,  and  the  "Holy  Place"  of 
the  Jew  at  the  time  of  our  Lord.  But,  as  we  have  seen, 
it  stood  written  from  the  time  they  passed  out  of  Egypt 
that,  if  they  consummated  their  sin  and  completed  their 
rebellion  by  the  rejection  of  God's  covenant,  their  Holy 
Places  would  be  brought  into  desolation  and  their  wor- 
ship should  cease.  About  the  year  26  of  our  era  Jesus, 
the  Messiah,  was  manifested.  After  three-and-a-half 
years  of  opposition  and  persecution  the  Roman  Gover- 
nor was  compelled  by  the  Jewish  Rulers  to  do  their 
will,  and  Jesus  was  crucified.  Then  the  Gospel'  of  a 
crucified  and  risen  Redeemer  was  preached.  And  now 
in  their  turn  the  heralds  of  the  Cross  were  rejected, 
maligned,  imprisoned,  scourged,  and  slain.  Then  in 
the  year  70  the  blow  fell.    The  Roman  armies  swept 

*  Milman,  History  of  the  Tews,  II.,  p.  331. 
t  The  Jews,  p.  104. 


THE  JEWS  TO  BE  DRIVEN  FROM  THE  COUNTRY.      115 

the  land  with  fire  and  sword,  the  bitter  opposition  they 
met  with  fanning  their  rage  to  tenfold  fierceness.  The 
priesthood  perished.  The  Holy  Places  were  literally 
brought  into  desolation.  The  Temple  was  burned  and 
ruthlessly  demolished.  Jerusalem  was  dedicated  to 
Jupiter  Capitolinus,  and  the  figure  of  a  sow  was  placed 
over  the  gate  leading  to  Bethlehem,  so  that  under  its 
polluting  shadow  no  Jew  might  pass.  Never  since 
then  has  the  Jew  offered  a  single  sacrifice  prescribed  by 
the  Law.  From  that  day  to  this  the  multitudes  who 
from  every  quarter  under  heaven  went  up  to  keep 
holy-day  have  ceased.  To  this  hour  the  doom  of  deso- 
lation remains,  and  these  18  centuries  are  the  witnesses 
to  the  truth  of  the  words,  "I  will  not  smell  the  savour 
of  your  sweet  odours.  I  will  destroy  your  high  places 
.  .  .  and  will  bring  your  sanctuaries  into  desola- 
tion." 

But  terrible  as  this  punishment  was,  there  were  to  be 
still  other  tokens  of  the  Divine  displeasure. 

THE  ISRAELITES  WERE  TO  BE  DRIVEN  FROM  THEIR  LAND. 

"You,  will  I  scatter  among  the  nations"  (Levit.  xxvi. 
33).  Men  were  to  say  of  them,  "The  Lord  rooted 
them  out  of  their  land  in  anger,  and  in  wrath,  and  in 
great  indignation,  and  cast  them  into  another  land 
as  at  this  day"  (Deut.  xxix.  28).  The  dispersion  of 
the  Jews  is  one  of  the  common-places  of  history.  Their 
story  is  one  more  proof  how  the  words  of  Scripture 
are  filled  to  the  brim,  so  to  speak,  with  meaning.  Not 
only  was  the  race  cut  down  like  a  tree  and  its  branches 
scattered  abroad:  it  was  literally  "rooted  out."  The 
work  was  not  wholly  done  in  the  first  conquest  under 
Vespasian  and  Titus,  when  Jerusalem  was  taken,  and 
one  stronghold  after  another  went  down,  and  all  re- 
sistance was  trampled  under  foot.  It  is  true  that  multi- 
tudes perished  then,  and  that  many  more  were  carried 
away  to  be  slain  in  Roman  amphitheatres  or  to  spend 


Il6  JUDEA. 

their  lives  in  slavery.  But  it  would  appear  that  many 
of  the  dwellers  in  the  villages  and  in  the  cities  were 
allowed  to  remain  in  the  land.  It  was  not  till  60 
years  afterwards  (135  a.  d.)  that  the  ruin  of  the  people 
was  completed.  A  false  Messiah,  named  Barcochebas 
(the  son  of  a  star),  inflamed  their  desire  for  venge- 
ance, and  their  hope  that  God  would  regard  them  in 
their  misery.  The  remnant  left  in  the  land  was  now 
strong  enough  to  garrison  50  castles  and  985  villages. 
Their  first  efforts  seem  to  have  been  attended  with 
success.  The  Romans  were  defeated,  and  Julius 
Severus,  the  most  distinguished  general  of  the  time, 
was  summoned  from  Britain  to  take  command  of  the 
Roman  forces.  The  suppression  of  the  rebellion  was 
a  work  of  time  and  skill,  and  was  attended  with  losses 
so  severe  that  that  war  was  ever  afterwards  remem- 
bered as  one  of  the  most  disastrous  in  which  the 
Romans  had  ever  engaged.  Terrible  stories  are  told 
by~the  Rabbins  of  the  carnage  which  marked  the  final 
triumph  of  Rome,  and  a  Roman  historian  records  that 
during  the  war  580,000  fell  by  the  sword,  not  includ- 
ing those  who  perished  by  famine,  disease,  or  fire. 
The  people  who  remained  were  gathered  together  in 
droves,  driven  to  markets,  and  sold  as  slaves.  The 
land  was  wholly  depopulated :  the  people  were  "rooted 
out/'  and  have  never  been  planted  again  in  the  land 
promised  to  their  fathers.  Nearly  6,000  are  found  in 
Jerusalem,  and  about  5,000  in  other  parts  of  their 
ancient  territory.  That  the  Jews  will  eventually  re- 
turn to  Palestine,  we  know.  The  fulfilment  of  the 
predictions  which  foretold  judgment  are  the  pledge 
that  those  also  will  be  accomplished  which  promise* 
mercy.  But  meanwhile  the  doom  remains.  Rabbi- 
no  witz,  who  went  in  1882.  to  Palestine  with  the  view 
of  determining  whether  the  "tribes  of  the  wandering 
foot  and  weary  breast"  might  not  find  a  refuge  in  their 
ancient  home,  had  to  abandon  the  idea.  He  was  com- 
pelled to  admit  that  the  poverty  of  the  soil  and  the 


ITS  CITIES  TO  BE  WASTE.  II? 

oppression  of  the  Turkish  government  make  return 
an  impossibility. 

But,  though  deprived  of  her  ancient  masters,  the 
land  was  not  to  be  without  inhabitant. 

THEIR  ENEMIES  WERE  TO  DWELL  IN  IT. 

"I  will  bring  the  land  into  desolation,  and  your  enemies 
who  dwell  therein  shall  be  astonished  at  it"  (Levit. 
xxvi.  32).  The  Israelites  were  to  be  rooted  out,  but 
others  were  to  be  planted  in  their  stead.  And  the 
words  were  fulfilled.  After  the  suppression  of  the 
outbreak  in  135  a.d.,  the  whole  of  the  land  was  put  up 
to  sale  by  command  of  the  Emperor  Hadrian,  and  was 
bought  by  Gentiles,  who  flocked  in  to  settle  in  the 
country  from  which  the  Jews  had  been  swept  out. 
From  that  time  to  this  their  enemies  have  dwelt 
therein.  The  races  who  originally  purchased  the  land 
have  long  ago  been  supplanted  by  others,  but  all  have 
been  alike  in  this  that  they  were  and  are  aliens  and 
hostile  to  the  Jew. 
Then 

THE  CITIES  WERE  TO  BE  A  WASTE. 

This  was  largely  fulfilled  in  70,  and  still  more  fully  in 
J35-  We  are  told  that  then  "the  whole  of  Judea  was 
a  desert:  wolves  and  hyenas ^went  howling  along  the 
streets  of  the  desolate  cities."  It  might  be  supposed, 
however,  that,  if  the  preceding  prediction  were  ful- 
filled and  the  land  were  inhabited  by  the  enemies  of 
the  Jews,  this  desolation  could  not  be  a  permanent 
feature  of  the  country.  And  yet  this  was  to  be  one 
of  the  enduring  marks  of  the  Divine  indignation — 
"Your  cities  shall  be  a  waste"  (Levit.  xxvi.  33).  For 
a  time  the  doom  seemed  to  be  successfully  withstood. 
The  fulfilment  of  the  one  prophecy  appeared  to  pre- 
vent the  fulfilment  of  the  other.  The  ruined  cities 
were  peopled  and  re-built  by  the  new  settlers.  And, 
when  Christianity  had  triumphed  in  its  long  warfare 


Il8  JUDEA. 

with  the  heathenism  of  the  Roman  Empire,  and  Con- 
stantine  sat  upon  the  throne  of  the  Caesars,  Palestine 
was  made  to  feel  the  change.  Magnificent  churches 
were  reared  on  every  spot  hallowed  by  Old  or  New 
Testament  story.  It  became  a  holy  land  to  the  whole 
Roman  Empire.  When  the  Persians  under  Chosroes 
II.  invaded  the  country  in  the  beginning  of  the  seventh 
century,  Galilee  and  the  district  on  the  other  side  of 
the  Jordan  were  so  full  of  strong  cities  that  the  pro- 
gress of  the  Persian  hosts  was  seriously  delayed.  A 
few  years  afterwards  the  Arab  invaders  were  occupied 
four  months  in  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  siege 
then  ended  only  because  the  Christians  capitulated 
upon  their  own  terms.  Four  centuries  later  the  Cru- 
saders found  Palestine  still  possessed  of  strong  cities 
— so  long  did  the  word  of  God  wait,  or  rather  so  slow 
are  the  harvests  of  judgment.  But  the  word  did  not 
wait  in  vain.  The  threat,  "Your  cities  shall  be  a 
waste,"  has  long  since  been  abundantly  fulfilled.  Trav- 
ellers speak  of  its  desolation  with  positive  amazement. 
Captain  Conder  refers  to  Judea  as  "this  ruined  land."* 
Of  the  Shephelah,  or  western  lowlands,  the  most  fertile 
and  thickly  populated  district  of  the  land  of  Israel,  he 
says:  "The  ruins  are  so  thickly  spread  over  hill  and 
valley  that  in  some  parts  there  are  as  many  as  three 
ancient  sites  to  two  square  miles."f  Dean  Stanley 
speaks  of  "the  countless  ruins  of  Palestine/'^  He  else- 
where draws  attention  to  the  "peculiarity  of  the  present 
aspect  of  Palestine,  which  though  not,  properly  speak- 
ing, a  physical  feature,  is  so  closely  connected  both 
with  its  outward  imagery  and  with  its  general  situa- 
tion that  it  cannot  be  omitted.  Above  all  other 
countries  in  the  world  it  is  a  Land  of  Ruins  "\\  "It  is 
not  that  the  particular  ruins  are  on  a  scale  equal  to 

*  Tent  Work  in  Palestine,  p.  7.  t  Ibid.,  p.  2. 

X  Syria  and  Palestine,  p.  119.    ||  The  Italics  and  Capitals  are 

the  Dean's. 


THE   LAND   TO   BE   DESOLATE.  II9 

those  of  Greece  or  Italy,  still  less  to  those  of  Egypt. 
But  there  is  no  country  in  which  they  are  so  numerous, 
none  in  which  they  bear  so  large  a  proportion  to  the 
villages  and  towns  still  in  existence.  In  Judea  It  is 
hardly  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  whilst  for  miles  ancl 
miles  there  is  no  appearance  of  present  ITEe  or  habita- 
tion, except  the  occasional  goat-herd  on  the  hill-side, 
or  gathering  of  women  at  the  wells,  there  is  yet  hardly 
a  hill-top  of  the  many  within  sight  which  is  not  cov- 
ered by  the  vestiges  of  some  fortress  or  city  of  former 
ages.  Sometimes  they  are  fragments  of  ancient  walls, 
sometimes  mere  foundations  and  piles  of  stone,  but 
always  enough  to  indicate  signs  of  human  habitation 
and  civilisation."*  Of  Jerusalem,  which,  according 
to  another  prediction,  has  continued  from  generation 
to  generation,  this  is  nevertheless  also  true.  The  chief 
of  Israel's  cities  has  not  escaped  the  general  doom. 
Dean  Stanley  says:  "If,  as  we  have  before  observed, 
Palestine  is  a  land  of  ruins,  still  more  emphatically 
may  it  be  said  that  Jerusalem  is  a  city  of  ruins.  Here 
and  there  a  regular  street,  or  a  well-built  European 
house  emerges  from  the  general  crash,  but  the  general 
appearance  is  that  of  a  city  which  has  been  burnt  down 
in  some  great  conflagration."  f 

We  have  now  to  mark  a  kindred  feature  in  the  pro- 
phetic picture. 

THE  LAND  WAS  ALSO  TO  BE  DESOLATE. 

Here,  again,  it  might  be  supposed  that  the  possession 
of  the  country  by  the  enemies  of  the  Jews  would  have 
made  the  accomplishment  of  the  prophecy  impossible. 
If  industrious  settlers  took  the  place  of  those  whom 
God  had  swept  away,  why  should  not  the  land  have  re- 
mained as  fertile  and  populous  under  them  as  under 
their  predecessors?  There  is  no  doubt  that  for  ages 
its  fertility  and  populousness  did  remain.    But  it  was 

*Ibid.,  p.  117.  -flbid.,  p.  183. 


120  JUDEA. 

written  from  of  old  that  this  should  be  another  mark 
of  God's  displeasure  against  His  people:  "I  will  bring 
the  land  into  desolation ;  and  your  enemies  who  dwell 
therein  shall  be  astonished  at  it.  .  .  .  Your  land 
shall  be  a  desolation.N  .  .  .  Then  shall  the  land 
enjoy  her  Sabbaths,  as  long  as  it  lieth  desolate,  and 
ye  be  in  your  enemies'  land;  even  then  shall  the  land 
rest  and  enjoy  her  Sabbaths.  As  long  as  it  lieth  deso- 
late it  shall  have  rest;  even  the  rest  which  it  had  not 
in  your  Sabbaths,  when  ye  dwelt  upon  it"  (Levit.  xxvi. 

32-35)- 

The  reiteration  will  be  marked.  The  desolation  of 
the  land  is  as  prominent  a  feature  in  the  prophetic  pic- 
ture as  the  scattering  of  Israel  among  the  nations.  And 
this  judgment  too  has  fallen.  Henry  Maundrell,  who 
visited  the  country  in  1697,  says :  "All  along  this  day's 
travel  from  Khan  Leban  to  Beer,  and  also  as  far  as  we 
could  see  around,  the  country  discovered  a  quite  differ- 
ent face  from  what  it  had  before,  presenting  nothing 
to  the  view,  in  most  places,  but  bare  rocks,  mountains, 
and  precipices.  .  .  .  Leaving  Beer,  we  proceeded 
as  before  in  a  rude2  stony  country."  I  have  already 
quoted  the  words  of  Dean  Stanley,  that  "for  miles  and 
miles  there  is  no  appearance  of  present  life  or  habita- 
tion, except  the  occasional  goat-herd  on  the  hill-side, 
or  gathering  of  women  at  the  wells."  Elsewhere  he 
speaks  of  "the  present  depressed  and  desolate  state" 
of  the  land.  To  "the  question  which  Eastern  travellers 
so  often  ask  and  are  asked,  on  their  return,  'Can  these 
stony,  these  deserted  valleys,  be  indeed  the  Land  of 
Promise,  the  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey?'  "  he 
quotes  in  answer  the  words  of  Dr.  Olin :  "The  entire 
destruction  of  the  woods  which  once  covered  the  moun- 
tains, and  the  utter  neglect  of  the  terraces  which  sup- 
ported the  soil  on  steep  declivities,  have  given  full 
scope  to  the  rains  which  have  left  many  traces  of  bare 
rock  where  formerly  were  vineyards  and  cornfields." 
And  he  adds :    "The  very  labour  which  was  expended 


THE    LAND    TO    BE    DESOLATE,  121 

on  these  sterile  hills  in  former  times  has  increased 
their  present  sterility.  The  natural  vegetation  has  been 
swept  away,  and  no  human  cultivation  now  occupies 
the  terraces  which  once  took  the  place  of  forests  and 
pastures."  *  Speaking  of  the  district  about  Lake 
Huleh,  Mark  Twain  says :  "Stirring  scenes  like  these 
occur  in  this  valley  no  more.  There  is  not  a  solitary 
village  throughout  its  whole  extent — nor  for  thirty 
miles  in  either  direction.  There  are  two  or  three  small 
clusters  of  Bedouin  tents,  but  not  a  single  permanent 
habitation.  One  may  ride  ten  miles  hereabouts  and  not 
see  ten  human  beings.  To  this  region  one  of  the 
prophecies  is  applied.  T  will  bring  the  land  into  deso- 
lation ;  and  your  enemies  which  dwell  therein  shall  be 
astonished  at  it.  And  I  will  scatter  you  among  the 
heathen,  and  I  will  draw  out  a  sword  after  you ;  and 
your  land  shall  be  desolate  and  your  cities  waste.'  No 
man  can  stand  here  by  deserted  Ain  Mellahah  and  say 
the  prophecy  has  not  been  fulfilled."  And  again :  "It 
is  seven  in  the  morning,  and  as  we  are  in  the  country, 
the  grass  ought  to  be  sparkling  with  dew,  the  flowers 
enriching  the  air  with  their  fragrance,  and  the  birds 
singing  in  the  trees.  But  alas,  there  is  no  dew  here, 
nor  flowers,  nor  birds,  nor  trees.  There  is  a  plain  and 
an  unshaded  lake,  and  beyond  them  some  barren 
mountains,  "f 

"The  valley  (of  Shechem),"  writes  Captain  Conder, 
"is  the  most  luxuriant  in  Palestine.  .  .  But  as  at 
Damascus  the  oasis  is  set  in  a  desert,  and  the  stony, 
barren  mountains  contrast  strongly  with  the  green 
orchards  below. "J  The  Rev.  J.  L.  Porter  says:  "I 
climbed  a  peak  which  commands  the  lake,  and  the  Jor- 
dan valley  up  to  the  waters  of  Merom.  The  principal 
scene  of  Christ's  public  labours  lay  around  me — a  re- 

*  Syria  and  Palestine,  pp.  120,  121. 
t  The  New  Pilgrim's   Progress,  pp.    123,    124.     %  Tent   Work 

in  Palestine,  p.  7. 


122  JUDEA. 

gion  some  tKirty  miles  long  by  ten  wide.  When  He 
had  His  home  at  Capernaum,  the  whole  country  was 
teeming  with  life,  and  bustle,  and  industry.  No  less 
than  ten  cities,  with  numerous  villages,  studded  the 
shores  of  the  lake,  and  the  plains,  and  the  hill-sides 
around.  The  water  was  all  speckled  with  the  dark 
boats  and  white  sails  of  Galilee's  fishermen.  Eager 
multitudes  followed  the  footsteps  of  Jesus  through 
the  city  streets,  over  the  flower-strewn  fields,  along  the 
pebbly  beach.  What  a  woeful  change  has  passed  over 
the  land  since  that  time !  The  Angel  of  destruction  has 
been  there.  From  that  commanding  height,  through 
the  clear  Syrian  atmosphere,  I  was  able  to  distinguish, 
by  the  aid  of  my  glass,  every  spot  in  that  wide  region 
celebrated  in  sacred  history  or  hallowed  by  sacred  as- 
sociation. .  .  Not  a  city,  not  a  village,  not  a  house, 
not  a  sign  of  settled  habitation  was  there  except  the 
few  huts  of  Magdala,  and  the  shattered  houses  of 
Tiberias.  A  mournful  and  solitary  silence  reigned 
triumphant.  Desolation  keeps  unbroken  Sabbath  in 
Galilee  now."  * 

An  equally  graphic  description  is  given  of  another 
district.  "Geba,  the  ancient  city  of  Canaan,  the  strong- 
hold of  Benjamin,  is  now  represented  by  a  few  ruinous 
huts,  in  which  some  half-dozen  shepherds  find  a  home. 
A  shattered  tower,  and  the  foundations  of  an  old 
church,  with  heaps  of  hewn  stones  and  rubbish,  are 
the  only  vestiges  of  former  greatness.  Standing  there 
all  solitary  on  its  bare  rocky  ridge,  looking  down  over 
barren  hills  and  naked  ravines  upon  the  scathed  valley 
of  tfie  Jordan,  it  is  the  very  type  of  desolation.  The 
curse  has  fallen  heavily  upon  'Geba  of  Benjamin., 
When  Elisha  came  up  the  defile  from  Jericho  to  Bethel, 
forests  clothed  the  surrounding  heights ;  now  there  is 
not  a  tree  (II.  Kings  ii.  24).  Vineyards  then  covered 
the  terraced  sides  of  glen  and  hill  from  base  to  sum- 

*  Giant  Cities  of  Bashan,  &c,  pp.  107,  108. 


TO  BE  A  LAND  OF  PILGRIMAGES.  123 

mit.  Cities  and  fortresses,  in  the  days  of  Israel's 
power,  crowned  every  peak  and  studded  every  ridge ; 
shapeless  mounds  now  mark  their  deserted  sites.  From 
the  site  of  Geba_no  less  than  nine  ruined  towns  and 
villages  were  pointed  out  to  me.  How  wonderfully 
have  the  predictions  of  Moses  been  fulfilled!  'I  will 
destroy  your  high  places.  .  .  I  will  make  your 
cities  waste,  and  bring  your  sanctuaries  into  desola- 
tion. .  .  And  I  will  bring  the  land  into  desolation ; 
and  your  enemies  which  dwell  therein  shall  be  aston- 
ished at  it'  (Levit.  xxvi.  30,  32)."* 

But  not  only  was  it  predicted  that  the  land  should 
be  desolate; 

THE    DURATION    OF    THE    DESOLATION 

was  also  foretold.  It  is  a  plain  inference  from  the 
passages  we  have  referred  to  in  Levit.  xxvi.  and  Deut. 
xxix.  that,  so  long  as  the  rebellion  continued,  this  mark 
of  God's  anger  would  remain.  But  the  Scripture  has 
not  left  us  to  inferences.  The  duration,  both  of  the 
rebellion,  and  of  its  punishment,  has  been  distinctly 
foretold.  Isaiah,  the  Evangelist  of  prophecy,  was  sent 
on  a  mission  which,  he  was  forewarned,  would  be  fruit- 
less of  any  immediate  result.  Instead  of  awaking  Israel 
to  repentance,  he  and  those  whom  he  preceded  would 
only  deepen  their  slumber.  The  prophet  asks  how 
long  this  blindness  and  death  will  remain.  And  he  is 
answered:  "Until  cities  be  waste  without  inhabitant 
and  houses  without  man,  and  the  land  become  utterly 
waste,  and  the  Lord  have  removed  men  far  away,  and 
the  forsaken  places  be  many  in  the  midst  of  the  land" 
(Isaiah  vi.  II,  12).  That  was  the  answer  to  the 
prophet's  cry  "Lord,  how  long?"  Israel  should  refuse 
to  hear  till  deepening  judgment  had  brought  the  land 
into  the  condition  pictured  in  those  words — the  con- 
dition in  which  it  lies  to-day. 

*Ibid.,  pp.  179,  180. 


124  JUDEA. 

We  haVe  now  to  notice  what  seems  to  me  one  of  the 
most  surprising  touches  in  this  prophetic  description. 
The  land  of  Israel,  bereft  of  her  ancient  people,  ruined, 
desolate,  was  nevertheless  to  be 

A    LAND    OF    PILGRIMAGES! 

The  prophecy  (Deut.  xxix.  22)  foretells  that  among 
those  who  will  draw  attention  to  the  land  and  its  judg- 
ments will  be  "the  foreigner  that  shall  come  from 
a  far  land/''  Let  it  be  noted  that  the  judgments 
which  were  to  fall  were  such  as  should  rob  Judea  of 
everything  which  might  attract  the  foreigner  from  a 
far  land.  The  cities  were  to  be  a  waste ;  the  land  a 
desolation.  There  could  be  no  commerce  to  allure, 
nor  beauty  to  attract.  And  what  could  it  matter  to  the 
nations  that  this  had  once  been  the  home  of  the  scat- 
tered Israelites?  Their  exclusiveness,  their  arrogance 
and  turbulence,  sowed  everywhere  a  plentiful  harvest 
of  hatred  and  scorn.  The  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy 
depended,  in  short,  upon  the  triumph  of  Christianity, 
If  the  covenant  which  the  Jews  rejected  were  once 
accepted  by  the  Gentiles,  and  the  God  of  Israel  became 
the  God  of  the  nations,  then  would  Judea  be  indeed  "a 
holy  Land."  A  consecration,  deeper  than  priestly  rites 
could  give,  would  then  rest  on  every  spot  hallowed  by 
Old  or  New  Testament  story.  But  who  could  have 
foreseen  that  the  fall  of  Israel  should  be  "the  riches 
of  the  world,  and  their  loss  their  riches  of  the  Gen- 
tiles ?"  When  the  last  remnant  of  the  Jewish  nation 
was  swept  from  the  land  by  Hadrian  in  135  a.  r>: 
Christianity  was  still  struggling  against  fearful  odds ; 
and,  if  men  were  to  judge  by  what  they  saw,  it  had 
not  even  then  the  remotest  chance  of  succeeding  in  the 
conflict.  Rome  was  at  the  height  of  its  power.  In  the 
days  of  its  comparative  weakness  it  had  subdued  one 
mighty  nation  after  another:  it  had  stamped  out  pow- 
erful and  wide-spread  conspiracies.    What  chance  had 


DESOLATION  OF  SAMARIA.  1 25 

Christianity,  devoid  of  political  influence  and  without 
so  much  as  Peter's  sword  to  aid  it — what  chance  had 
it,  where  all  else  had  failed,  of  succeeding  or  even  of 
existing,  in  the  teeth  of  the  determined  hostility  of  the 
entire  Roman  Empire?  And  yet,  right  through  the 
heart  of  these  improbabilities,  those  words  advanced  to 
their  accomplishment.  Christianity  has  long  since 
triumphed.  Osiris,  Bel  and  Baal,  Zeus  and  Jupiter, 
Thor  and  Odin,  and  the  entire  pantheon  of  the  Roman 
Empire,  as  well  as  of  nations  on  whose  neck  the 
Roman  yoke  was  never  set,  have  given  place  to  the 
God  of  Israel.  The  land  of  Judea  has  long  since  be- 
come more  sacred  to  the  Gentile  than  it  ever  was  to 
the  Jew,  for  it  has  been  the  scene  of  the  life  and  min- 
istry and  suffering  of  the  Son  of  God.  From  the 
Fourth  century  to  the  present  hour  "the  foreigner  from 
a  far  land"  has  never  ceased  to  tread  its  soil  and  to 
wonder  at  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  perhaps  uncon- 
scious that  his  own  presence  there  is  as  wonderful  a 
fulfilment  as  any. 

Before  we  pass  from  the  Land  of  Israel,  we  may 
glance  at  some  predictions  regarding  four  of  its  cities. 
We  notice  first 

THE    DOOM    OF    BETHEL. 

This  was  one  of  the  most  ancient  sanctuaries  of  the 
land,  and  its  situation  within  the  territory  of  the  ten 
tribes  was  taken  advantage  of  by  Jeroboam.  To  pre- 
vent the  tribes  going  to  worship  at  Jerusalem  he  reared 
a  temple  around  its  ancient  altar,  and  that  semi-idola- 
trous worship  was  instituted  which  prepared  the  way 
for  the  after  service  of  Baal.  When  God  visited  the 
ten  tribes  for  their  iniquity,  Bethel  was  also  to  bear  the 
mark  of  His  indignation.  Its  altars  were  to  be  smitten 
(Amos  iii.  14).  Its  grandeur  was  to  pass  away:  "I 
will  smite  the  winter  house  with  the  summer  house; 
and  the  houses  of  ivory  shall  perish,  and  the  great 
houses  shall  have  an  end  saith  the  Lord"   (iii.  15). 


126  SAMARIA. 

And  the  desolation  was  to  be  still  more  complete : 
"Bethel  shall  come  to  nought"  (v.  5).  This  judgment 
was  no  doubt  partly  executed  by  King  Josiah.  But 
the  words  had  not  then,  nor  for  ages  after,  reached 
their  fulfilment.  It  was  still  a  city  in  the  days  of 
Josephus.  In  the  time  of  Jerome  it  existed  as  a  small 
village.  The  last  notice  of  it  is  met  with  in  the  sixth 
century.  From  that  time  till  the  beginning  of  the  nine- 
teenth century  we  have  no  further  reference  to  it.  In 
the  middle  ages  travellers  pass  over  the  site  without 
remark,  and  it  is  only  in  recent  times  that  it  has  been 
identified.  And  now  the  veil  is  lifted  only  to  show 
how  fully  the  word  has  been  fulfilled.  "Bethel  is  at 
present  represented  by  a  hamlet  called  Beit-in.  It  is 
not  yet  (1851)  20  years  since  people  began  to  identify 
it  with  the  ancient  Bethel.  The  latter  had  fallen  quite 
into  oblivion.  Its  ruins  cover  a  large  extent  of  ground. 
.  .  .  .  The  foundations  of  houses,  loose  building- 
stones,  and  fragments  of  walls,  are  to  be  seen  in 
abundance."  *  It  is  a  "confused  mass  of  prostrate 
walls  and  ruins.  .  .  .  We  have  seen  no  place  in 
this  country  whose  present  condition  is  in  such  painful 
contrast  to  its  past  history  as  poor  fallen  Bethel. "f 
Dean  Stanley  says,  "Bethel,  the  'House  of  God/  has 
become  literally  Bethaven,  'the  house  of  naught.'  "  One 
speaks  of  "the  wild  and  stony  desolation  that  spreads 
itself  over  these  old  mountain  heights,"  and  another 
describes  it  as  "that  dreary  field  of  ruin." 

Such  was  the  doom  which  hung  over  the  Holy  Place 
of  the  ten  tribes.    A  similar  one  rested  on 

SAMARIA, 

which,  from  the  days  of  Omri,  was  their  capital  and 
one  of  the  chief  glories  of  the  country.  If  we  are  to 
judge  from  the  length  of  the  sieges  which  this  city 

*  Van  de  Velde,  II.,  pp.  282,  283. 
f  The  Land  and  the  Book,  II.,  pp.  91,  93. 


SAMARIA.  127 

sustained,  its  position  must  be  reckoned  among  the 
very  strongest  in  the  land.  It  was  equally  marked  by 
beauty  and  fertility.  But  what  are  natural  strength 
and  beauty  and  fertility  without  righteousness?  After 
speaking  of  the  indignation  of  God  at  the  "transgres- 
sion of  Jacob"  and  "the  sins  of  the  house  of  Israel," 
£he  prophet  Micah  asks:  "What  is  the  transgression 
of  Jacob?  Is  it  not  Samaria?  .  .  .  Therefore  I 
will  make  Samaria  as  the  heap  of  the  field,  and  as  the 
plantings  of  a  vineyard:  and  I  will  pour  down  the 
stones  thereof  into  the  valley,  and  I  will  discover  the 
foundations  thereof"  (Micah  i.  5,  6). 

But  here,  as  elsewhere,  the  doom  lingered  and 
seemed  sometimes  to  be  swept  back  and  defied.  In  109 
b.  c.  the  Jewish  High  Priest,  John  Hyrcanus,  took 
Samaria  after  a  year's  siege,  and  levelled  it  to  the 
ground.  The  desolation  was  not?/  however,  of  long 
duration.  It  was  rebuilt  by  the  orders  of  Gabinius 
about  50  years  after,  and  was  a  few  years  later  restored 
fully  and  with  great  splendour  by  Herod  the  Great, 
who  named  it  Sebaste  (Augusta)  in  honour  of  his 
patron  the  Roman  Emperor.  Josephus  mentions  it  as 
a  city  in  70  a.  d.  It  was  the  seat  of  a  Roman  colony 
in  the  third  century  of  our  era,  and  on  the  conversion 
of  the  empire  it  became  an  Episcopal  See.  The  names 
of  the  Bishops  of  Sebaste  appear  from  time  to  time 
in  the  records  of  the  Councils — -the  last  notice  occur- 
ring in  connection  with  the  Synod  of  Jerusalem,  held 
in  the  year  536.  It  was  taken  by  the  Mohammedans 
in  the  beginning  of  the  seventh  century,  and  it  figures 
also  in  the  story  of  the  Crusades.  For  some  time  after 
it  retained  its  position  among  the  cities  of  Palestine. 
Sir  John  Maundeville,  who  visited  the  country  in  1322, 
calls  it  "the  chief  city"  of  the  district.  But  the  doom 
has  long  since  fallen,  and  the  prediction  which  so  many 
ages  seemed  to  mock,  has  become  the  most  accurate 
of  all  descriptions.  Henry  Maundrell,  telling  what 
he  saw  in  1697,  says-    "Sebaste  is  the  ancient  Samaria, 


128  SAMARIA. 

the  imperial  city  of  the  ten  tribes  after  their  revolt 
from  the  House  of  David.  ...  It  is  situate  upon 
a  long  mount  of  an  oval  figure,  having  first  a  fruitful 
valley  and  then  a  ring  of  hills  running  round  about  it. 
This  great  city  is  now  wholly  converted  into  gardens, 
and  all  the  tokens  that  remain  to  testify  that  there  has 
ever  been  such  a  place,  are  only,  on  the  north  side,  a 
large  square  piazza  encompassed  with  pillars,  and  on 
the  east  some  poor  remains  of  a  great  church." 

As  it  was  then  found,  it  has  since  remained.  "The 
whole  hill  of  Sebastieh,"  says  Robinson,  "consists  of 
fertile  soil;  it  is  now  cultivated  to  the  top,  and  has 
upon  it  many  olive  and  fig  trees.  The  ground  has  been 
ploughed  for  centuries ;  and  hence  it  is  now  in  vain  to 
look  for  the  foundations  and  stones  of  the  ancient 
city."  *  Van  de  Velde  calls  it  a  "pitiable  hamlet,  con- 
sisting of  a  few  squalid  houses,  inhabited  by  a  band  of 
plunderers.  .  .  .  The  shafts  of  a  few  pillars  only 
remain  standing  to  indicate  the  sites  of  the  colonnades. 
.  .  .  Samaria,  a  huge  heap  of  stones !  her  founda- 
tions discovered,  her  streets  ploughed  up,  and  covered 
with  corn  fields  and  olive  gardens.  .  .  .  Samaria 
has  been  destroyed,  but  her  rubbish  has  been  thrown 
down  into  the  valley;  her  foundation  stones,  those 
grayish  ancient  quadrangular  stones  of  the  time  of 
Omri  and  Ahab,  are  discovered,  and  lie  scattered  about 
on  the  slope  of  the  hill."f  "Ruins  everywhere,"  writes 
another,  "in  the  valley,  on  the  hill-side,  down  the 
mountain-top,  amidst  the  olive-groves,  the  wheat-fields, 
and  the  vineyards,  forcibly  bringing  before  the  mind 
the  wrath  of  God  against  that  city."J  Here  also  the 
words  have  been  literally  fulfilled.  The  prediction  has 
become  a  description.  The  stones  of  the  great  city 
have  been  taken  up  by  the  cultivators  and  piled  to- 


*  Researches  in  Palestine,  II.,  p.  307. 
Syria  and  Palestine,  I.,  pp.   378-384.     t  The  Land  and  the 
Book,  II.,  p.   112. 


THE  DOOM  OF  CAPERNAUM.  I29 

gether  or  thrown  down  the  hill-sides,  that  its  site  might 
be  turned  into  fields  and  vineyards.  Samaria  has  been 
changed  into  "the  heap  of  the  field"  and  into  "the 
planting  of  a  vineyard."  Its  stones  are  poured  down 
into  the  valley  and  its  very  foundations  are  laid  bare. 

Two  other  cities,  the  names  of  which  are  forever 
embalmed  in  the  story  of  our  Lord's  life  on  earth,  de- 
mand a  passing  notice.  Capernaum  "rose  under 
the  gentle  declivities  of  hills  that  encircled  an  earthly 
Paradise.  There  were  no  such  trees,  and  no  such 
gardens  anywhere  in  Palestine  as  in  the  land  of  Gen- 
nesareth.  .  .  Josephus,  in  a  passage  of  glowing 
admiration,  after  describing  the  sweetness  of  its  waters, 
and  the  delicate  temperature  of  its  air,  its  palms,  and 
vines,  and  oranges,  and  figs,  and  almonds,  and  pome- 
granates, and  warm  springs,  says  that  the  seasons 
seemed  to  compete  for  the  honor  of  its  possession,  and 
Nature  to  have  created  it  as  a  kind  of  emulative  chal- 
lenge, wherein  she  had  gathered  all  the  elements  of  her 
strength.  .  .  .  'The  cities/  says  Josephus,  'lie  here 
very  thick ;  and  the  very  numerous  villages  are  so  full 
of  people,  because  of  the  fertility  of  the  land  .  .  . 
that  the  very  smallest  of  them  contain  above  15,000  in- 
habitants/ No  less  than  four  roads  communicated 
with  the  shores  of  the  Lake.  .  .  .  Through  this 
district  passed  the  great  caravans  on  their  way  from 
Egypt  to  Damascus/'  * 

But  Capernaum  shared  largely  in  a  fuller  blessing 
than  trade  or  earthly  fertility  and  beauty  could  bestow. 
It  was  the  home  of  Jesus  during  the  busy  years  of  His 
ministry.  It  was  called  "His  own  city."  His  was  a 
familiar  presence  in  its  streets.  The  dwellers  there 
had  been  spectators  of  many  a  miracle.  They  had  heard 
His  words.  The  mere  story  of  what  was  said  and  done 
there,  carried  to  many  another  place,  had  touched  the 
heart  and  changed  the  life.    But  Capernaum  was  con- 

*Farrar:  Life  of  Christ,  I.,  pp.  174,  178. 


130  .  CAPERNAUM. 

tent  to  behold  and  to  listen,  and  perhaps  to  admire. 
But  no  enduring  touch  of  awe  fell  on  its  busy,  frivo- 
lous, pleasure-seeking  life.  There  was  no  turning  from 
sin,  no  seeking  after  God. 

But  those  who  refuse  to  flee  remain  to  warn.  The 
words  of  Christ,  "And  thou,  Capernaum,  shalt  thou  be 
exalted  unto  heaven?  Thou  shalt  go  down  unto 
Hades"  (Matt.  xi.  23),  stood  inscribed  on  the  page  of 
the  gospel  long  before  Capernaum  had  ceased  to  dream 
of  increasing  prosperity.  After  the  blow  had  fallen 
in  the  Roman  conquests  of  70  and  135  a.  d.,  Caper- 
naum, like  tBe  rest  of  Galilee,  revived  again,  and  the 
doom  of  extinction  was  for  a  time  averted.  We  have 
references  to  it  for  ages  afterwards.  It  was  still  a  town 
in  the  days  of  Eusebius  and  Jerome.  It  was  visited  by 
Antoninus  Martyr  about  600  a.  d.  Bishop  Arculf, 
who  saw  it  100  years  later,  says :  "It  lies  on  a  narrow 
piece  of  ground  between  the  mountain  and  the  lake. 
On  the  shore  towards  the  east  it  extends  a  long  way, 
having  the  mountain  on  the  north  and  the  water  on  the 
south."  Willibald  found  it  inhabited  in  722.  Bro- 
cardus,  writing  near  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century, 
describes  it  as  "a  humble  village,  containing  scarcely 
seven  fishermen's  huts."  Quaresimus,  who  visited  Pal- 
estine about  1620,  speaks  of  the  site  as  covered  with 
ruins,  but  it  is  open  to  question  whether  he  did  not 
mistake  the  site  of  this  ancient  city,  and  since  his  day 
all  certainty  as  to  the  situation  of  Capernaum  has  dis- 
appeared. Most  travellers  believe  that  it  is  to  be  found 
at  Tell-Hum,  of  which  Ritter  says :  "The  whole  place, 
taken  in  connection  with  the  great  devastation  of  the 
fairest  decorations  by  the  tooth  of  time,  dashed  by  the 
ripples  of  the  Lake,  and  left  to  no  other  companion- 
ship than  that  of  the  waters,  is  calculated  to  awaken 
the  saddest  feelings  in  the  mind  of  the  traveller."  But 
Robinson,  both  in  his  earlier  and  later  researches,  con- 
tends that  the  identification  wth  Tell-Hum  is  a  mis- 
take.    There  are  cities  in  Palestine  from  whose  pre- 


THE  FATE  OF  JERUSALEM.  I3I 

cincts  the  tide  of  life  has  not  yet  retired,  but  from 
Capernaum  it  has  long  since  passed  away.  Capernaum 
has  gone  down  into  Hades,  and  men  are  now  unable 
to  point  with  absolute  certainty  even  to  its  grave. 

As  might  be  expected,  both  Old  and  New  Testaments 
to  point  with  absolute  certainty  even  to  its  grave. 

JERUSALEM. 

To  those  "who  build  up  Zion  with  blood  and  Jeru- 
salem with  iniquity,"  Micah  declared:  "Therefore 
shall  Zion  for  your  sakes  be  ploughed  as  a  field,  and 
Jerusalem  shall  become  heaps,  and  the  mountain  of  the 
house  as  the  high  places  of  a  forest"  (iii.  12).  The 
words  may  have  been  fulfilled  during  the  Babylonish 
captivity,  though  it  is  most  improbable  that,  in  that 
time,  when  the  remnant  fled  into  Egypt,  and  the  silence 
of  death  fell  upon  the  land,  any  plough  was  driven 
over  the  site  of  the  city  of  David.  But,  although  there 
may  have  been  a  temporary  fulfilment  then,  the  eye 
which  foresaw  that,  foresaw  more.  It  must  have  looked 
on  to  the  time  of  which  that  captivity  and  desolation 
were  but  the  warning.  The  description  of  the  rulers, 
too,  as  building  up  Zion  with  blood  and  Jerusalem  with 
iniquity,  never  applied  to  men  more  fully  than  to  those 
who  shed  the  blood  of  the  Holy  and  Just  One  with  the 
avowed  purpose  of  preserving  the  state  from  Roman 
encroachment,  and  who  are  painted  on  the  pages  of 
Josephus  as  men  steeped  in  intrigue  and  unscrupulous- 
ness,  whose  almost  daily  pathway  was  one  of  robbery 
and  murder. 

Taking  the  words,  then,  as  prophetic  of  the  great 
judgment  on  the  Jewish  people,  is  there  anything  in 
the  present  condition  of  the  city  to  show  that  we  have 
not  mistaken  their  application  ?  The  reply  is  that  they 
are  the  best  of  all  possible  descriptions.  There  are 
three  things  mentioned. 


l$Z  JERUSALEM, 


MOUNT  MORIAH, 


"the  mountain  of  the  House/'  whose  top  was  levelled 
to  make  a  site  for  the  Temple,  was  to  become  as  "the 
high  places  of  a  forest."  This  level  space  is,  as  will 
be  readily  understood,  of  very  limited  extent.  Yet 
part  of  this  limited  area  is  covered  with  trees.  "South 
of  the  Mosque  of  Omar  there  is  a  space  350  feet  in  ex- 
tent filled  with  lofty  cypresses  and  other  trees."*  The 
mountain  of  the  House,  once  covered  with  all  that  gave 
magnificence,  and  beauty,  and  sacredness  to  Jerusalem, 
has  become  like  the  high  places  of  a  forest. 
Then  Jerusalem  with  its  homes  and  palaces 

WAS  TO  BECOME  HEAPS. 

The  Holy  City,  though  still  inhabited,  has  only  about 
one-seventh  of  its  ancient  population,  and  we  have 
already  referred  to  its  ruined  condition.  We  are  pre- 
pared, therefore,  for  a  confirmation  of  this  prediction 
also;  but  it  is  startling  to  find  that  Ritter,  in  his  de- 
scription of  the  present  condition  of  the  city,  uncon- 
sciously repeats  the  words  of  the  prediction.  He  says: 
"Entering  the  city,  the  piles  of  rubbish  and  the  narrow 
streets  compel  us  to  recognize  the  fact  that  it  is  no 
longer  a  royal  capital,  princely  in  its  magnificence, 
but  a  squalid  town,  which  shows  only  too  plainly  its 
humiliation  and  poverty.  As  a  recent  traveller  has 
truly  and  beautifully  said,  to  him  who  does  not  see  this 
city  with  the  eye  of  faith,  and  who,  amid  all  the  strife 
which  now  divides  the  church,  does  not  look  forward 
to  the  glorious  triumph  which  awaits  it,  Jerusalem  is 
only  a  little  eastern  city  covered  with  wrecks  of  past 
desolation,  suffering  under  want  and  oppression,  and 
from  which  the  casual  traveller  hastens  as  rapidly  as 
possible.     But  the  classic  ground,  with  its  history  ex- 

*  Ritter's  Palestine,  IV.,  p.  121, 


(JERUSALEM.  133 

tending  over  thousands  of  years,  remains,  under  all  its 
rubbish  and  ruins,  still  classic* 

The  remaining  part  of  the  prediction  has  been  as 
wonderfully  accomplished.    Ziqn  is  even  now 

PLOUGHED  LIKE  A  FIELD. 

"Only  the  northern  portion  of  Zion  is  included  in  the 
modern  walls ;  and  this  is  occupied  chiefly  by  the  Jew- 
ish quarter,  and  by  the  great  Armenian  convent.  .  . 
Without  the  walls  the  level  part  of  Zion  is  occupied  by 
the  Christian  cemeteries,  the  house  of  Caiaphas  (now 
an  Armenian  Convent),  the  Ccenaculum,  or  Muslim 
tomb  of  David,  and  the  adjacent  convent,  formerly  a 
Latin  convent.  The  rest  of  the  surface  is  now  tilled, 
and  the  city  of  David  has  become  a  ploughed  field! 
The  eastern  slope  is  likewise  in  part  cultivated."  f 
"Mount  Zion,"  says  Dr.  Thomson,  "is  now  for  the 
most  part  a  rough  field.  .  .  From  the  tomb  of  David 
I  passed  on  through  fields  of  ripe  grain.  The  whole 
of  the  hill  here  is  under  cultivation,  and  presents  a 
most  literal  fulfilment  of  Micah's  prophecy:  There- 
fore shall  Zion  for  your  sake  be  ploughed  as  a  field.' 
It  is  the  only  part  of  Jerusalem  'that  is  now,  or  ever 
has  been  ,ploughed.'  "J 

There  are  also  predictions  regarding  the  sacred  city 
in  the  New  Testament,  and,  with  a  word  on  these,,  we 
shall  close  our  survey  of  the  predictions  which  refer  to 
the  Land  of  Israel.  Pointing  to  the  Temple,  our  Lord 
said  to  His  disciples,  "See  ye  not  all  these  things? 
Verily  I  say  unto  you,  there  shall  not  be  left  here  one 
stone  upon  another  that  shall  not  be  thrown  down" 
(Matt.  xxiv.  2).  And  again,  "Jerusalem  shall  be  trod- 
den down  of  the  Gentiles,  until  the  time  of  the  Gen- 
tiles is  fulfilled"  (Luke  xxi.  24).  The  first  of  these 
propTiecies  foretells 

*  Robinson  Researches  in  Palestine,  I.,  264,  265.  f  Ibid.,  98. 
X  The  Land  and  the  Book,  I.,  pp.  410,  539,  540. 


134  JERUSALEM. 

THE  ANNIHILATION  OF  THE  TEMPLE. 

It  is  generally  agreed  that  the  Gospel  of  Matthew  was 
written  some  time  between  50  and  60  a.  d.     In  the 
year  70  the  first  stroke  of  the  judgment  fell.    One  of 
the  very  last  incidents  in  that  terrible  siege  was  the  de- 
struction of  the  Temple  by  fire.    Josephus  records  that 
the  burning  of  the  sanctuary  was  contrary  to  the  wishes 
of  Titus,  and  was  carried  out  in  defiance  of  his  ex- 
press commands.     It  might  have  been  supposed,  then, 
that  a  stay  would  have  been  put  to  any  further  work 
of  destruction.    The  blackened  walls  might  have  been 
allowed  to  stand.    But  the  word  of  the  Lord  is  sure. 
Orders  were  issued  to  raze  the  entire  city,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  one  or  two  towers  and  a  portion  of  the 
wall.    These  were  spared  to  show  to  after  times  what 
the   strength  of  Jerusalem  had  been,   and   what  the 
Roman  triumph  meant.    "Terentius  Rufus,"  says  Mil- 
man,  "executed  the  work  of  desolation,  of  which  he 
was  left  in  charge,  with  unrelenting  severity.     Of  all 
the  stately  city,  the  populous  streets,  the  palaces  of  the 
Jewish  Kings,  the  fortresses  of  her  warriors,  the  Tem- 
ple of  her  God,  not  a  ruin  remained,  except  the  tall 
towers  of  Phasaelis,  Mariamne,  and  Hippicus,  and  part 
of  the  western  wall,  which  was  left  as  a  defense  for 
the  Roman  camp."  *    The  work  was  completed  on  the 
suppression  of  the  last  rebellion  under  Barcochebas  in 
135  a.  D.    The  very  foundations  of  the  Temple  seem 
then  to  have  been  torn  up  and  the  plough  to  have  been 
passed  over  them.    Before  the  Temple  to  Jupiter  Capi- 
tolinus  was  reared  upon  its  site  by  the  Emperor  Had- 
rian, there  remained  of  the  buildings  to  which  our 
Lord  that  day  pointed,  not  one  stone  upon  another 
which  was  not  thrown  down. 
The  remaining  prophecy  depicts  the  tKen 

*  History  of  the  Jews,  II.,  pp.  377,  37a 


ATTEMPT  TO  REBUILD  THE  TEMPLE.  1 35 

FUTURE  HISTORY  OF  JERUSALEM 

in  one  brief  sentence.  Every  one  is  aware  that  the 
city,  whose  very  name  is  so  dear  to  the  heart  of  the 
Jew,  has  been  "trodden  down."  Nor  need  we  search 
the  pages  of  history  to  prove  that  its  lords  and  pos- 
sessors have  been  the  Gentiles.  Never  once,  since  the 
days  of  Hadrian,  has  the  Jew  ruled  in  the  city  of  his 
fathers.  There  were  times  when  it  was  death  for  him 
to  enter  it,  or  indeed  to  approach  near  enough  to  be- 
hold it  from  a  distance.  The  presence  of  the  Jew  is 
barely  tolerated  even  now,  and  the  voice  of  one  Arab 
woman  is  enough  to  frighten  away  bearded  men  from 
the  place  of  wailing.  The  prophecy  states  further  that 
the  Gentile  oppression  will  continue  till  judgment 
should  also  visit  them,  and  "the  time  of  the  Gentiles" 
should  be  fulfilled.  This  prediction  is  remarkable  for  a 
deliberate  and  powerful  attempt  which  was  made  to  de- 
feat it,  and  so  to  disprove  the  claims  of  Jesus.  The  Em- 
peror Julian,  in  his  attempt  to  dethrone  Christianity 
and  to  reinstate  the  ancient  paganism,  hit  upon  the  de- 
vice of  restoring  the  Jews  and  rebuilding  the  Temple. 
We  shall  let  Gibbon  tell  the  story.  "He  resolved  to 
erect,  without  delay,  on  the  commanding  eminence  of 
Moriah,  a  stately  temple,  which  might  eclipse  the 
splendor  of  the  church  of  the  Resurrection  on  the  ad- 
jacent hill  of  Calvary;  to  establish  an  order  of  priests, 
whose  interested  zeal  would  detect  the  arts,  and  resist 
the  ambition  of  their  Christian  rivals ;  and  to  invite  a 
numerous  colony  of  Jews,  whose  stern  fanaticism 
would  be  always  prepared  to  second,  and  even  to  an- 
ticipate, the  hostile  measures  of  the  Pagan  govern- 
ment. Among  the  friends  of  the  Emperor  (if  the 
names  of  Emperor  and  of  friend  are  not  incompatible), 
the  first  place  was  assigned  by  Julian  himself  to  the 
virtuous  and  learned  Alypius.  The  humanity  of  Aly- 
pius  was  tempered  by  severe  justice  and  manly  forti- 


I36  ATTEMPT  TO  REBUILD  THE  TEMPLE. 

tude;  and,  while  he  exercised  his  abilities  in  the  civil 
administration  of  Britain,  he  imitated,  in  his  poetical 
compositions,  the  harmony  and  softness  of  the  odes  of 
Sappho.  This  minister,  to  whom  Julian  communicated 
without  reserve  his  most  careless  levities  and  his  most 
serious  counsels,  received  an  extraordinary  commis- 
sion to  restore  in  its  pristine  beauty  the  Temple  of 
Jerusalem ;  and  the  diligence  of  Alypius  required  and 
obtained  the  strenuous  support  of  the  governor  of  Pal- 
estine. At  the  call  of  their  great  deliverer  the  Jews, 
from  all  the  provinces  of  the  Empire,  assembled  on  the 
holy  mountain  of  their  fathers,  and  their  insolent  tri- 
umph alarmed  and  exasperated  the  Christian  inhabi- 
tants of  Jerusalem.  The  desire  of  rebuilding  the  Tem- 
ple has,  in  every  age,  been  the  ruling  passion  of  the 
children  of  Israel.  In  this  propitious  moment  the  men 
forgot  their  avarice,  and  the  women  their  delicacy ; 
spades  and  pickaxes  of  silver  were  provided  by  the 
vanity  of  the  rich,  and  the  rubbish  was  transported  in 
mantles  of  silk  and  purple.  Every  purse  was  opened 
in  liberal  contributions,  every  hand  claimed  a  share 
in  the  pious  labor ;  and  the  commands  of  a  great  mon- 
arch were  executed  by  the  enthusiasm  of  a  whole 
people. 

"Yet,  on  this  occasion,  the  joint  efforts  of  power  and 
enthusiasm  were  unsuccessful;  and  the  ground  of  the 
Jewish  Temple,  which  is  now  covered  by  a  Mahometan 
Mosque,  still  continued  to  exhibit  the  same  edifying 
spectacle  of  ruin  and  desolation.  .  .  An  earth- 
quake, a  whirlwind,  and  a  fiery  eruption,  which  over- 
turned and  scattered  the  new  foundations  of  the  Tem- 
ple, are  attested,  with  some  variations,  by  contempo- 
rary and  respectable  evidence.  This  public  event  is 
described  by  Ambrose,  bishop  of  Milan,  in  an  epistle 
to  the  Emperor  Theodosius,  which  must  provoke  the 
severe  animadversion  of  the  Jews ;  by  the  eloquent 
Chrysostom,  who  might  appeal  to  the  memory  of  the 


ATTEMPT  TO  REBUILD  THE  TEMPLE.  I37 

elder  part  of  his  congregation  at  Antioch;  and  by 
Gregory  Nazianzen,  who  published  his  account  of  the 
miracle  before  the  expiration  of  the  same  year.  The 
last  of  these  writers  has  boldly  declared  that  this  pre- 
ternatural event  was  not  disputed  by  the  infidels;  and 
his  assertion,  strange  as  it  may  seem,  is  confirmed  by 
the  unexceptionable  testimony  of  Ammianus  Marcel- 
linus.  The  philosophic  soldier,  who  loved  the  virtues, 
without  adopting  the  prejudices,  of  his  master,  has 
recorded,  in  his  candid  and  judicious  history  of  his 
own  times,  the  extraordinary  obstacles  which  inter- 
rupted the  restoration  of  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem. 
'Whilst  Alypius,  assisted  by  the  governor  of  the  prov- 
ince, urged  with  vigor  and  diligence  the  execution  of 
the  work,  horrible  balls  of  fire  breaking  out  near  the 
foundations,  with  frequent  and  reiterated  attacks,  ren- 
dered the  place  from  time  to  time  inaccessible  to  the 
scorched  and  blasted  workmen ;  and  the  victorious  ele- 
ment continuing  in  this  manner  obstinately  and  reso- 
lutely bent,  as  it  were,  to  drive  them  to  a  distance,  the 
undertaking  was  abandoned !'  "  * 

Gibbon  doubts  the  miracle.  "At  this  important 
crisis/'  he  says  truly  enough,  "any  singular  accident 
of  nature  would  assume  the  appearance,  and  produce 
the  effects,  of  a  real  prodigy."  Michaelis  ventured  the 
suggestion  that  the  flames  may  have  been  due  to  the 
ignition  of  foul  air  generated  in  the  caverns  by  which 
the  Temple  area  is  known  to  be  undermined.  But, 
whatever  the  explanation  may  be,  the  fact  is  undoubted 
that  the  attempt  was  made  to  defeat  the  prophecy,  and 
that  the  attempt  failed.  Neither  the  strength  and  res- 
olute determination  of  the  Roman  legions,  nor  the  en- 
thusiasm and  outpoured  wealth  of  the  Jews  were  able 
to  bring  this  "word  of  the  Lord"  to  nought. 

We  conclude  the  present  chapter  with  a  glance  at 
the  testimony  of 

*  History  of  the  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire, 

chap,  xxiii. 


13.8  BABYLON. 

BABYLONIA, 

the  scene  not  only  of  the  captivity  of  the  Jews,  but 
also  of  the  events  which  broke  the  unity  of  our  race, 
and  scattered  its  fragments  over  the  earth.  Of 
Babylon,  the  capital, 

THE    MOST    APPALLING    DESOLATION 

was  foretold  "And  Babylon,  the  glory  of  kingdoms, 
the  beauty  of  the  Chaldaeans'  excellency,  shall  be  as 
when  God  overthrew  Sodom  and  Gomorrah"  (Isa. 
xiii.  19).  At  the  beginning  of  our  era  the  work  of 
destruction  had  been  begun,  but  was  by  no  means 
perfected.  When  captured  by  Alexander,  Babylon 
was  still  great,  and  it  is  said  the  conqueror  intended 
to  make  it  the  capital  of  his  dominions.  Alexander's 
successors  did  not,  however,  carry  out  his  intention. 
In  300  b.  c.  Seleucia  was  built,  and  the  glory  of 
Babylon  was  gradually  transferred  to  her  rival. 
About  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era  only  a 
small  part  of  Babylon  was  inhabited;  and  that 
chiefly,  if  not  wholly,  by  Jews;  the  rest  of  the  city 
was  under  cultivation.  About  the  year  40  a.  d.  a 
persecution  of  the  Jews  under  Caligula  still  further 
diminished  the  number  of  the  inhabitants.  Lucian, 
in  the  second  century,  predicts  that  its  very  site, 
like  that  of  Nineveh,  would  soon  be  a  subject  of  in- 
vestigation. A  number  of  notices,  by  various  writ- 
ers, enables  us  to  trace  the  history  of  the  desolation. 
Jerome,  writing  about  the  beginning  of  the  fourth 
century,  says  that  the  site  of  Babylon  was  made  into 
a  hunting-ground  for  the  Persian  Kings ;  and  Cyril 
of  Alexandria,  about  412,  mentions  that  the  canals  from 
the  Euphrates  had  been  filled  up,  and  that  the  city  was 
then  little  better  than  a  marsh.  In  460  Theodoret 
remarks  that  it  was  no  longer  inhabited  by  either 
Assyrians  or  Chaldaeans,  and  that  only  a  few  Jews 
had  their  habitations   scattered  among  the  ruins. 


ITS  DESOLATION.  139 

Ibn  Haukal,  in  917,  speaks  of  Babel  as  a  small  vil- 
lage, and  says  that  scarcely  any  remains  of  Babylon 
were  to  be  seen;  and  when,  in  the  twelfth  century, 
Benjamin  of  Tudela  passed  through  Chaldsea,  the 
ancient  capital  was  an  utter  desolation,  and  the  ruins 
of  Nebuchadnezzar's  palace  were  inaccessible,  owing 
to  the  number  of  scorpions  and  serpents  by  which 
they  were  infested 

The  desolation,  it  was  foretold,  should  be 

UTTER  AND  LASTING : 

"It  shall  never  be  inhabited,  neither  shall  it  be 
dwelt  in  from  generation  to  generation;  neither  shall 
the  Arabian  pitch  tent  there ;  neither  shall  the  shep- 
herds make  their  flocks  to  lie  down  there"  (Isa.  xiii. 
20).  We  have  seen  how  the  ocean  of  human  life 
eradually  receded  from  this  vast  city,  onc,e  the  home 
of  countless  multitudes.  Wave  after  wave  rushed 
back  from  the  retiring  waters,  as  if  resolved  to  cling 
to  the  ancient  habitations  ;  but  the  hand  of  doom  was 
mightier,  and  every  remnant  of  its  once  busy,  joyous, 
life  has  long  since  passed  away.  Hillah,  six  miles 
southwest  of  Babylon,  which  marks  the  site  of  the 
ancient  town  where  the  plebeians  dwelt  apart,  has  a 
population  of  6,000;  but  not  one  human  dwelling 
rests  upon  the  site  of  the  ancient  city — the  glory  of 
the  Chaldaeans'  excellency.  The  Bedouin,  though  he 
pastures  his  flocks  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood, 
regards  the  ruins  themselves  with  superstitious 
dread,  and  the  latter  part  of  the  prediction  is  also 
fulfilled  to  the  very  letter.  The  tents  of  the  Arabs 
are  freely  pitched  on  the  Chaldaean  plains,  but  not 
one  of  them  is  pitched  amid  the  ruins  of  Babylon. 
Other  cities  named  in  prophecy  have  become  folds 
for  flocks;  but  no  shepherd  makes  his  flocks  to  lie 
down  among  the  mounds  of  ancient  Babylon. 
Ruined  cities  frequently  afford  in  the  remnants  of 


140  BABYLON. 

their  walls  protection  for  flock  and  shepherd  of 
which  advantage  is  eagerly  taken.  But  "on  the 
actual  ruins  of  Babylon  the  Arabian  neither  pitches 
his  tent  nor  pastures  his  flocks — in  the  first  place, 
because  the  nitrous  soil  produces  no  pasture  to 
tempt  him ;  and  secondly,  because  an  evil  reputation 
attaches  to  the  entire  site,  which  is  thought  to  be 
the  haunt  of  evil  spirits. "* 

But  a  deeper  humiliation  was  to  be  inflicted. 
Something  is  said  about  those  who  should  dwell 
within  its  precincts.    The 

TENANTS 

of  the  ruined  city  are  described.  "But  wild  beasts 
of  the  desert  shall  lie  there ;  and  their  houses  shall 
be  full  of  doleful  creatures;  and  ostriches  shall  dwell 
there,  and  satyrs  shall  dance  there.  And  the  wolves 
shall  cry  in  their  castles,  and  jackals  in  the  pleasant 
palaces"  (Isa.  xiii.  21,  22).  This  feature  of  the  deso- 
lation has  been  noted  by  every  traveller.  In  carry- 
ing excavations  into  the  great  mound  of  Babil,  Lay- 
ard  came  upon  some  coffins  containing  skeletons. 
"A  foul  and  unbearable  stench,"  he  says,  "issued 
from  those  loathsome  remains,  and  from  the  pas- 
sages, which  had  become  the  dens  of  wild  beasts, 
which  had  worked  their  way  into  them  from  above." 
And  the  "doleful  creatures  are  not  wanting."  "Owls 
start  from  the  scanty  thickets,  and  the  foul  jackal 
skulks  through  the  furrows."  "The  mound  was  full 
of  large  holes;  we  entered  some  of  them,  and  found 
them  strewed  with  the  carcases  and  skeletons  of 
animals  recently  killed."t  Speaking  of  the  Birs 
Nimroud,  Heeren  says,  "Its  recesses  are  inhabited 
by  lions,  three  being  quietly  basking  on  its  heights 
when  Porter  approached  it,  and,  scarcely  intimidated 

*  Rawlinson,  Egypt  and  Babylon,  p.  206.        f  Keppel. 


ITS  DESOLATION.  I4I 

by  the  cries  of  the  Arabs,  gradually  and  slowly  de- 
scended into  the  plain."    Then 

THE  ASPECT 

the  place  should  wear  was  described  while  it  was 
yet  in  its  glory:  "Babylon  shall  become  heaps"  (Jer. 
li.  37).  Were  it  not  that  we  are  in  the  midst  of  sur- 
passing wonders,  it  would  be  in  the  highest  degree 
astonishing  to  mark  how  travellers  are  here  com- 
pelled to  use  the  very  words  of  Scripture.  "The 
wide  extent"  says  one,  "of  mounds  and  vestiges  of 
buildings  must  arrest  the  attention  of  every  be- 
holder ;  who,  at  the  same  time,  will  not  fail  to  remark 
how  little  the  shapeless  heaps  can  suggest  in  any  de- 
eree  either  the  nature  or  object  of  the  structures  of 
which  they  are  the  wrecks. "*  "The  ruins,"  remarks 
another,  "are  mounds  formed  by  the  decomposition 
of  buildings,  channelled  and  furrowed  by  the 
weather,  and  strewed  with  pieces  of  brick,  bitumen, 
and  pottery.  .  .  I  imagined  I  should  have  said, 
'Here  were  the  walls,  and  such  must  have  been  the 
extent  of  the  area ;  there  stood  the  palace ;  and  this 
most  assuredly  was  the  temple  of  Belus.'  I  was 
completely  deceived;  instead  of  a  few  insulated 
mounds,  I  found  the  whole  face  of  the  country  cov- 
ered with  vestiges  of  buildings,  in  some  places  con- 
sisting of  brick  walls  surprisingly  fresh,  in  others, 
merely  of  a  vast  succession  of  mounds  of  rubbish  of 
such  indeterminate  figures,  variety,  and  extent,  as  to 
involve  the  person  who  should  have  formed  any 
theory  in  inextricable  confusion. "t  It  is  impossible 
to  find,  in  the  whole  range  of  language,  a  term  which 
will  more  fitly  describe  the  present  condition  of  the 
city  than  that  which  is  used  in  the  prophecy.  Babylon 
has  become  heaps. 

Other  details  are  added.  "A  curious  feature  in  the 

*  Fraser,  Mesopotamia  and  Assyria,    f  Rich. 


142  BABYLON. 

prophecies,"  says  Professor  Rawlinson,  "is  the  ap- 
parent contradiction  that  exists  between  two  sets  of 
statements  contained  in  them,  one  of  which  attri- 
butes the  desolation  of  Babylon  to  the  action  of 
water,  while  the  other  represents  the  water  as  'dried 
up/  and  the  site  as  cursed  with  drought  and  barren- 
ness. To  the  former  class  belong  the  statements  of 
Isaiah:  'I  will  also  make  it  a  possession  for  the 
bittern,  and  pools  of  water'  (xiv.  23)  ;  and  'the  cor- 
morant (pelican?),  and  the  bittern  shall  possess  it' 
(xxxiv.  11);  together  with  the  following  passage  of 
Jeremiah,  'The  sea  is  come  up  upon  Babylon;  she  is 
covered  with  the  multitude  of  the  waves  thereof  (li. 
42)  ;  to  the  latter  such  declarations  as  the  subjoined, 
A  drought  is  upon  her  waters,  and  they  shall  be 
dried  up'  (Jer.  1.  38)  ,  'I  will  dry  up  her  sea'  (li.  36)  ; 
'Her  cities  are  a  desolation,  a  dry  land  and  a  desert' 
(1.  12)  ;  'Come  down  and  sit  in  the  dust,  O  virgin 
daughter  of  Babylon'  "  (Isa.  xlvii.  1). 

"But  this  antithesis,  this  paradox,  is  exactly  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  condition  of  things  which  travel- 
lers note  as  to  this  day  attaching  to  the  site.  The 
dry,  arid  aspect  of  the  ruins,  of  the  vast  mounds 
which  cover  the  greater  buildings,  and  even  of  the 
lesser  elevations  which  spread  far  into  the  plain  at 
their  base,  receives  continual  notice.  'The  whole 
surface  of  the  mounds  appears  to  the  eye/  says  Ker 
Porter,  'nothing  but  vast  irregular  hills  of  earth,  . 
.  .  while  the  foot  at  every  step  sinks  into  the  loose 
dust  and  rubbish.'  And  again,  'Every  spot  of  ground 
in  sight  was  totally  barren.  .  .  .  It  is  an  old 
adage  that,  where  a  curse  has  fallen,  grass  will  never 
grow.  In  like  manner  the  decomposing  materials  of 
a  Babylonian  structure  doom  the  earth  on  which 
they  perish  to  an  everlasting  sterility.'  'On  all  sides/ 
says  Sir  Austen  Layard,  'fragments  of  glass,  marble, 
pottery,  and  inscribed  brick  are  mingled  with  that  pecu- 
liar nitrous  and  blanched  soil  which,  bred  from  the 


ITS   DESOLATION.  I43 

remains  of  ancient  habitations,  checks  or  destroys  vege- 
tation, and  renders  the  site  of  Babylon  a  naked  and 
hideous  waste' 

"On  the  other  hand,  the  neglect  of  the  embank- 
ments and  canals  which  anciently  controlled  the 
waters  of  the  Euphrates,  and  made  them  a  defence 
and  not  a  danger,  has  consigned  great  part  of  what 
was  anciently  Babylon  to  the  continual  invasion  of 
floods,  which,  stagnating  in  the  lower  grounds,  have 
converted  large  tracts  once  included  within  the  walls 
of  the  city  into  lakes,  pools,  and  marshes/'* 

And,  not  only  have  the  prophecies  pictured  the 
aspect  of  Babylon,  they  have  also  described 

THE    PROCESS 

by  which  its  edifices  have  been  turned  into  dust. 
"Cast  her  up  as  heaps/'  cries  the  prophet  to  the  men 
of  the  then  far-distant  future — "cast  her  up  as  heaps, 
and  destroy  her  utterly:  let  nothing  of  her  be  left" 
(Jer.  1.  26).  The  tearing  down  of  the  ruins  has  been 
continued  for  centuries.  The  bricks,  even  at  this 
late  date,  are  so  excellent  in  quality,  that  the  shape 
of  the  mounds  is  being  continually  altered  by  the  ex- 
cavations which  are  made  for  them.  "El  Kasr,  when 
visited  by  Rich,  was  nearly  a  square  of  seven  hun- 
dred yards  in  length  and  breadth.  But  even  in  the 
seven  years,  which  intervened  between  this  visit  and 
that  of  Porter,  the  everlasting  digging  and  carrying 
azvay  of  the  bricks  had  been  sufficient  to  change  its 
shape.  What  then  must  have  been  its  size  twenty 
centuries  before!  .  .  .  About  twenty-four  hun- 
dred feet  from  Kasr  is  Amram  Hill.  The  whole  of 
this  stupendous  heap  is  broken  like  that  of  the  Kasr 
into  deep  caverneS  ravines  and  long  winding  fur- 
rows, from  the  number  of  bricks  that  have  been 
taken   away/'f     "To  this   day,7'   says  Layard,   "there 

*  Egypt  and  Babylon,  pp.  207-209.     fHeeren. 


144  BABYLON. 

are  men  who  have  no  other  trade  than  that  of  gath- 
ering bricks  from  this  vast  heap,  and  taking  them  for 
sale  to  the  neighbouring  towns  and  villages,  and  even 
to  Baghdad.  There  is  scarcely  a  house  in  Hillah 
which  is  not  built  of  them." 

And  the  Scripture  takes  us  further  still.  It  foretells 
that,  while  her  mounds  should  be  "cast  up  as  heaps" 
in  the  search  for  building  material, 

STONES    SHOULD    BE    DESTROYED. 

"There  is  one  fact,"  says  Mr.  Rassam,  "connected 
with  the  destruction  of  Babylon  and  the  marvellous 
fulfilment  of  prophecy  which  struck  me  more  than 
anything  else,  which  fact  seems  never  to  have  been 
noticed  by  any  traveller,  and  that  is  the  non-exis- 
tence in  the  several  modern  buildings  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Babylon  of  any  sign  of  stone  which  had 
been  dug  up  from  its  ancient  ruins.  It  seems  that, 
in  digging  for  old  materials,  the  Arabs  used  the 
bricks  for  building  purposes,  but  always  burnt  the 
stone  thus  discovered  for  lime,  which  fact  wonder- 
fully fulfils  the  Divine  words  of  Jeremiah,  namely: 
'And  they  shall  not  take  of  thee  a  stone  for  a  corner, 
nor  a  stone  for  foundations :  but  thou  shalt  be  des- 
olate for  ever,  saith  the  Lord'  (Jer.  li.  26)."  When 
we  reflect  that  these  stones  were  brought  from  far 
(for  no  stone  is  furnished  by  the  vast  plain  of 
Babylonia),  and  must  have  been  in  a  special  degree 
the  pride  of  the  great  city,  we  understand  the  signi- 
ficance of  the  doom.  All  her  beauty  and  magnifi- 
cence were  to  perish  without  memorial. 

We  cannot  conclude  this  hurried  notice  of  Baby- 
lon, without  remarking,  what  is  certainly  not  the 
least  surprising  of  its  testimonies  to  the  Scripture — 
the  fulfillment  of  the  words :  "Behold,  I  am  against 
thee,  O  destroying  mountain,  saith  the  Lord,  which 
destroy eth  all  the  earth ;  and  I  will  stretch  out  mine 


ITS  DESOLATION.  145 

hand  upon  thee,  and  roll  thee  down  from  the  rocks, 
and  will  make  thee 

A     BURNT     MOUNTAIN^ 


(Jer.  li.  25).  Babylonia  is  an  immense  plain  in  which 
no  natural  mountain  or  hill  has  ever  stood.  And  yet 
Babylon  must  have  presented  some  feature  which 
eave  the  epithet,  "destroying  mountain,"  propriety 
and  force  If  there  existed  some  stupendous  struc- 
ture which  was  in  a  peculiar  way  the  confidence  of 
this  people,  the  figure  would  be  explained  at  once. 
If  around  and  upon  such  a  height  the  temples  of 
their  deities  were  placed,  and  if  the  height  itself  was 
consecrated  by  the  most  ancient  and  sacred  tradi- 
tions, we  could  understand  why  the  threat  against  the 
city  and  the  nation  should  be  addressed  to  this,  and 
why  it  should  bear  some  special  mark  of  His  dis- 
pleasure, who  will  not  give  His  glory  to  another, 
nor  His  praise  to  graven  images.  An  inscription  of 
Nebuchadnezzar's  has  been  found  which  relates  how 
he  repaired  and  splendidly  adorned  what  he  names 
"the  Tower  of  the  seven  stages,  the  Eternal  House, 
the.  Temple  of  the  seven  luminaries  of  the  Earth." 
"The  discovery  of  this  inscription,"  says  Lenor- 
mant,  "points  out  to  us,  among  the  ruins  still  lift- 
ing their  heads  around  the  site  of  ancent  Babylon, 
the  still  gigantic  remains  of  a  monument  which,  in 
the  days  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  was  believed  to  be  the 
tower  of  Babel.  It  is  this  that  the  inhabitants  of 
the  country  still  call  'Birs  Nimrod'  ('the  Tower  of 
Nimrod'),  and  in  the  midst  of  the  plains  it  still  looks 
like  a  mountain.3'  It  was  described  by  Herodotus. 
There  was,  first  of  all,  ''a  tower  of  solid  masonry,  a 
furlong  in  length  and  breadth."  Upon  this,  "was 
raised  a  second  tower,  and  on  that  a  third,  and  so  on 
up  to  eight.  The  ascent  to  the  top  is  on  the  outside, 
by  a  path  which  winds  round  all  the  towers.     When 


I46  BABYLON. 

one  is  about  half-way  up,  one  finds  a  resting-place 
and  seats  where  persons  are  wont  to  sit  some  time 
on  their  way  to  the  summit."  This  vast  structure 
was  dedicated  to  Bel,  the  chief  deity  of  the  Babylon- 
ians, and  the  supposed  favor  of  this  deity  gave  Baby- 
lon a  sacredness  even  in  the  estimation  of  the  neigh- 
bouring nations.  It  is  named  in  Assyrian  inscriptions 
"the  dwelling-place  of  Bel."  "The  earth  about  the 
hill  is  now  clear,  but  is  again  surrounded  by  walls 
which  form  an  oblong  square,  enclosing  numerous 
heaps  of  rubbish,  probably  once  the  dwellings  of  the 
inferior  deities,  or  of  the  priests  and  officers  of  the 
Temple.  The  appearance  of  the  tower  of  Nimrod 
is  sublime  even  in  its  ruin.  Clouds  play  round  its 
summit."*  Recall  now  the  words,  "I  will  roll  thee 
down  from  the  rocks,  and  will  make  thee  a  burnt 
mountain,"  and  place  by  the  side  of  them  these,  "It 
is  rent  from  the  top  nearly  half-way  to  the  bottom ; 
and  at  its  foot  lay  several  unshapen  masses  of  fine 
brickwork,  still  bearing  traces  of  a  violent  fire, 
which  has  given  them  a  vitrified  appearance,  whence 
it  has  been  conjectured  that  it  has  been  struck  by 
lightning.  The  appearance  of  the  hill  on  the  eastern 
side  evidently  shows  that  this  enormous  mass  has 
been  reduced  more  than  half."*  It  has  been  rolled 
down  from  the  rocks,  and  been  made  a  burnt  moun- 
tain ! 

We  glance,  in  conclusion,  at  Chaldsea,  the  country 
of  which  Babylon  was  the  mighty  capital.  The 
Chaldaeans  had  spoiled  many  nations,  and  many 
thrones  had  gone  down  before  them.  But  a  day  of 
vengeance  was  to  come.    She  was  to  be 

THE    PREY    OF    MANY    NATIONS. 

The  judgment  was  recorded :  "Many  nations  and 
great  kings  shall  serve  themselves  of  them  also:  and 

*  Heeren. 


THE  PREY  OF  MANY  NATIONS.  I47 

I  will  recompense  them  according  to  their  deeds" 
(Jer.  xxv.  14).  The  following  brief  sketch  of  their 
history  will  show  how  the  words  were  kept.  Baby- 
lonia was  the  prey  first  of  the  Medes  and  the  Per- 
sians; then,  about  three  hundred  years  before  the 
time  of  our  Lord,  of  the  Macedonians  under  Alex- 
ander and  his  successors ;  then  of  the  Parthians ;  and 
afterwards,  from  time  to  time,  of  the  Romans.  For 
two  centuries,  from  636  a.  d.,  it  was  held  by  the 
Arabs.  In  1218  it  was  desolated  by  the  Tartars 
under  Zingis.  "From  the  Caspian  to  the  Indus  they 
ruined  a  tract  of  many  hundred  miles,  which  was 
adorned  with  the  habitations  and  labours  of  mankind ; 
and  five  centuries  have  not  been  sufficient  to  repair 
the  ravages  of  four  years."*  For  a  time  the  country 
was  in  the  hands  of  the  assassins,  who  were  over- 
thrown and  succeeded  by  Holagou  Khan,  the  grand- 
son of  Zingis,  in  1258.  "I  shall  not  enumerate,"  says 
Gibbon,  "the  crowd  of  sultans,  emirs,  and  atabeks 
whom  he  trampled  into  dust."  In  1380  it  was  con- 
quered by  Tamerlane,  who  erected  on  the  ruins  of 
Baghdad  a  pyramid  of  ninety  thousand  heads.  Since 
then  it  has  passed  from  the  grasp  of  one  fierce  race 
into  that  of  another.  The  prophecy  is  simply  the 
summary  of  Chaldaea's  history:  "Many  nations  and 
great  kings  shall  serve  themselves  of  them  also :  and 
I  will  recompense  them  according  to  their  deeds." 
It  was  also  written  that  all  should  find 

AN     ABUNDANT     SPOIL. 

"All  that  spoil  her  shall  be  satisfied"  (Jer.  1.  10). 
The  teeming  riches  of  the  soil  and  the  position  of  the 
country,  which  forced  upon  it  a  chief  share  in  the 
world's  commerce,  seemed  to  bid  defiance  to  the 
ravages  of  man.  No  sooner  did  a  fresh  horde  of  con- 
querors settle  down  upon  the  land  than  it  heaped  its 

*  Gibbon. 


I48  BABYLON— THE  PREDICTED  PUNISHMENT. 

treasure  upon  them  till  they  too  were  ready  for  the 
spoiler.  Gibbon  has  painted  the  joy  of  the  Arabs  at 
their  sudden  enrichment  here  in  636,  little  thinking 
how  every  word  he  penned  was  bowing"  before  the 
prediction,  "All  that  spoil  her  shall  be  satisfied." 
"The  naked  robbers  of  the  desert,"  he  says,  "were 
suddenly  enriched  beyond  the  measure  of  their  hope 
or  knowledge.  Each  chamber  revealed  a  new  treas- 
ure, secreted  with  art,  or  ostentatiously  displayed; 
the  gold  and  silver,  the  various  wardrobes  and 
precious  furniture  surpassed  (says  Abulfeda)  the 
estimate  of  fancy  or  of  numbers;  and  another  his- 
torian defines  the  untold  and  almost  infinite  mass  by 
the  fabulous  computation  of  three  thousands  of 
thousands  of  thousands  of  pieces  of  gold." 

There  was,  last  of  all,  a  prophecy  which  stood  in 
the  most  complete  contradiction  to  the  character  of 
the  country  for  centuries  after  the  beginning  of  the 
Christian  era. 

The  entire 

LAND    WAS     TO     BE    A    DESOLATION. 

Among  the  most  fertile  and  populous  of  all  coun- 
tries, it  was  to  be  among  the  most  barren  and  deso- 
late. "How  is  the  hammer  of  the  whole  earth  cut 
asunder  and  broken!  how  is  Babylon  become  a  des- 
olation among  the  nations"  (Jer.  1.  23)  !  "Her 
cities  are  a  desolation,  a  dry  land,  and  a  wilderness, 
a  land  wherein  no  man  dwelleth,  neither  doth  any 
son  of  man  pass  thereby"  (Jer.  li.  43).  The  wealth 
of  the  soil  may  be  estimated  from  the  fact  that, 
though  Babylonia  and  Assyria  formed  only  a  ninth 
part  of  the  Persian  dominions,  they  contributed  to- 
p-ether one-third  of  the  entire  revenue  of  the  empire. 
The  country,  consisting  of  one  enormous  plain,  lay 
in  the  embrace  of  two  great  rivers,  the  Tigris  and 
the    Euphrates.     By   a   most   elaborate   system   of 


THE  DOOM  OF  BABYLON  ACCOMPLISHED.  I49 

canals  the  enriching  waters  were  spread  over  the 
whole  land.  The  result  was  seen  in  a  fertility  so 
astonishing  that  Herodotus  was  afraid  to  tell  all  he 
knew  lest  he  should  be  accused  of  exaggeratioa 
The  crop  of  corn  ranges,  he  tells  us,  between  two 
and  three  hundredfold.  "The  blade  of  the  wheat- 
plant  and  barley-plant  is  often  four  fingers  in 
breadth.  As  for  the  millet  and  the  sesame,  I  shall 
not  say  to  what  height  they  grow,  though  within  my 
own  knowledge ;  for  I  am  not  ignorant  that  what  I 
have  already  written  concerning  the  fruitfulness  of 
Babylonia  must  seem  incredible  to  those  who  havQ 
never  visited  the  country." 

"Thus  favored  by  nature,"  writes  Heeren,  "this  coun- 
try necessarily  became  the  central  point  where  the 
merchants  of  nearly  all  the  nations  of  the  civilized 
world  assembled ;  and  such  we  are  informed  by  history 
it  remained  as  long  as  the  international  commerce  of 
Asia  flourished.  Neither  the  devastating  sword  of 
the  conquering  nations,  nor  the  heavy  yoke  of  Asia- 
tic despotism  could  tarnish,  though  for  a  time  they 
might  dim,  its  splendour.  It  was  only  when  the  Eu- 
ropeans found  a  new  route  to  India  across  the  ocean 
and  converted  the  great  commerce  of  the  world  from 
a  land  trade  to  a  sea  trade,  that  the  royal  city  on 
the  banks  of  the  Tigris  and  the  Euphrates  began  to 
decline.  Then,  deprived  of  its  commerce,  it  fell  a 
victim  to  the  two-fold  oppression  of  anarchy  and 
despotism,  and  sank  to  its  original  state — a  stinking 
morass  and  a  barren  steppe."*  "The  whole  plain  is 
thickly  covered  with  traces  of  former  habitations. 
Scarcely,  indeed,  is  there  a  single  rood  of  ground 
which  does  not  exhibit  some  fragment  of  brick,  or 
tile,  or  glass,  or  sepulchral  urn  to  tell  that  man  has 
lived  in  a  region  which  now  presents  to  the  eye  but 
one  vast  expanse  of  arid  desert;  a  howling  wilder- 

*  Heeren. 


150  THE  DOOM  OF  BABYLON  ACCOMPLISHED. 

ness,  where  the  only  evidence  that  he  still  exists  is 
afforded  by  the  black  Bedouin  tent,  or  the  wander- 
ing camel  which  here  and  there  dots  its  dreary  sur- 
face/'* We  have  seen  how  slowly  the  doom  of  Baby- 
lon was  accomplished,  and  that  it  is  being  perfected 
even  now ;  and  it  is  only  within  the  last  six  hundred 
years  that  this  judgment  has  fallen  upon  Chaldsea, 
and  that  her  cities  have  become  "a  desolation,  a  dry 
land,  and  a  wilderness/'  What  remains  as  yet  un- 
fulfilled will  also  be  accomplished.  The  time  will 
come  when  the  silence  of  death  will  fall  and  remain 
unbroken:  when  no  man  will  dwell  there  nor  an^ 
son  of  man  pass  thereby. 

Place  these  prophetic  pictures,  the  features  of 
which  we  have  now  looked  at  in  detail — place  them 
for  a  moment  in  full  view.  Remember  that  we  are 
dealing  with  undoubted  predictions,  and  that  there 
is  no  room  for  the  supposition  that  they  were  writ- 
ten after,  and  not  before,  the  event.  Reflect  that 
Judea  and  her  cities,  that  Babylon  and  the  land  of 
which  she  was  once  the  capital  and  the  glory,  are 
fully  and  minutely  described  as  they  were  after- 
wards to  be,  and  that  the  words  of  the  historian  and 
the  traveller  merely  repeat  the  language  of  the 
prophets.  Let  us  deal  with  this  fact  as  we  should 
with  any  other,  and  shall  we  not  own  that' doubts 
are  dispelled  and  convictions  deepened?  God  is  not 
a  myth,  or  a  dream.  He  is,  and  He  has  spoken  with 
us.  His  words  are  remembered  and  fulfilled;  and, 
if  every  word  spoken  in  judgment  is  accomplished, 
let  us  rejoice  that  His  covenant  is  also  "remembered 
for  ever."  We  can  trust  Him  utterly.  "The  Lord 
is  my  light  and  my  salvation:  whom  shall  I  fear? 
The  Lord  is  the  strength  of  my  life ;  of  whom  shall  I 
be  afraid?" 

*  Fraser. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

A      PROPHETIC     FORECAST     OF      THE      WORLD'S      ENTIRE 

HISTORY. 

We  have  now  travelled,  in  our  survey  of  the  pic- 
tures drawn  by  the  pen  of  prophecy,  from  Egypt  to 
Babylon,  and  have  touched  upon  almost  the  whole 
area  covered  by  sacred  story.  Everywhere,  in  the 
nationalities  which  remain  as  well  as  in  those  which 
have  passed  away,  we  have  met  with  marvels  which 
form  an  array  of  evidence  in  favor  of  the  old  belief 
regarding  the  words  of  Scripture,  the  value  of  which 
it  would  be  hard  to  over-estimate. 

But,  as  we  read  the  story  of  the  past,  our  attention 
is  attracted  not  only  to  lands  and  peoples.  There 
are  also  great  movements  which  more  properly  form 
the  material  of  history,  and  give  to  it  unity  and 
interest.  The  story  of  peoples  becomes  in  this  case 
the  history  of  man.  We  observe  the  great  empires 
of  the  ancient  world  sweeping  away  the  barriers 
which  separated  race  from  race,  and  welding  to- 
gether ever  more  perfectly  widely-scattered  nation- 
alities. Each  empire,  which  succeeds  to  the  coveted 
dominion,  succeeds  also  to  the  work  of  uniting  what 
the  past  had  scattered  and  the  ages  had  more  and  more 
widely  sundered.  We  have  now  to  notice  that  these  de- 
velopments did  not  escape  the  observation  of  the 
thought  which  breathes  in  this  Word,  and  that  the 
whole  of  them  have  been  mapped  out  and  described. 


152     PROPHETIC  FORECAST  OF  THE  WORLDS  HISTORY. 

The  book  of  Daniel,  with  which  we  have  now  to 
deal,  has  been  one  of  the  greatest  stumbling-blocks 
in  the  path  of  those  who  have  difficulty  in  believing 
the  miraculous.  It  consequently  holds  quite  a  sin- 
gular place  in  the  story  of  the  attacks  which  have 
been  made  upon  the  authenticity  and  the  inspiration 
of  the  Scriptures.  It  was  to  it  that  Porphyry  first 
applied  the  principles  and  methods  of  what  has  been 
called  "the  higher  criticism."  Many  of  the  prophe- 
cies had  been  so  strikingly  fulfilled  that,  to  evade 
their  force,  they  were  set  down  as  history,  and  the 
date  of  the  composition  of  the  book  was  fixed  at  a 
point  from  which  the  predictions  seemed  to  become 
less  distinct  and  clear.  When  the  modern  school 
sprang  into  being,  it  was  against  Daniel  that  the 
attack  was  again  pressed  with  the  greatest  deter- 
mination and  assurance.  The  mounds  raised  in  the 
former  siege  still  remained.  These  were  now  seized 
and  crowned  with  all  the  appliances  of  modern  war- 
fare. The  result  has  been,  in  the  estimation  of  the 
critics,  one  of  the  most  signal  and  satisfactory  kind. 
The  demonstration  that  Daniel  neither  penned  nor 
saw  the  book  which  has  so  long  claimed  him  for  its 
author,  has  been,  says  Bunsen,  "one  of  the  finest 
triumphs  and  most  useful  achievements  of  modern 
criticism."* 

But  the  triumph  did  not  meet  with  universal 
recognitioa  The  result  was  objected  to  on  various 
grounds.  For  one  thing,  the  moral  sense  was  out- 
raged. It  has  been  often  urged  that  the  Scriptures 
must  either  be  received  as  the  Word  of  God  or  be 
held  to  be  the  most  unblushing  and  blasphemous  of 
falsehoods;  and  that,  if  the  contentions  of  "the 
critics"  were  admitted,  there  would  be  left  us  neithet 
moral  books  nor,  in  the  writers  of  them,  honest  men. 
But  while  fully  admitting  that,  in  their  view,  the 

*  God  in  History,  I.,  p.  191. 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR  S   DREAM.  1 53 

writer  of  Daniel  was  not  honest,  the  critics  main- 
tained that  he  should  nevertheless  be  regarded  as 
admirable !  Bunsen  speaks  of  him  as  "a  pious  man" 
and  "the  pious  author/'  "At  this  juncture/'  he  says, 
"a  pious  man  resolved  to  avail  himself  of  the  tradi- 
tions regarding  Daniel,  and  apply  them  to  the  cir- 
cumstances of  his  own  time,  and,  in  the  name  of  that 
prophet,  proclaim  words  of  admonition  and  proph- 
ecy to  the  faithful  around  him."*  The  necessities 
of  the  critical  position  must  surely  be  painfully  great 
when  honorable  men  have  to  justify  supposed  pious 
frauds,  the  like  of  which,  were  they  to  disgrace  the 
history  of  their  own  times,  they  would  visit  with  the 
most  unqualified  condemnation  and  scorn. 

The  verdict  was  doubted,  however,  upon  other 
grounds  as  well.  Historians  felt  that  the  picture 
given  of  the  times  was  such  as  could  have  sprung 
only  from  a  personal  and  intimate  acquaintance  with 
them.  Heeren  gladly  availed  himself  of  the  light 
thrown  by  the  book  upon  the  arrangements  of  the 
Babylonian-Chaldsean  empire;  and  even  Schlosser, 
thoroughly  identified  though  he  was  with  the  crit- 
ical school,  was  compelled  to  say:  "In  Daniel  we 
think  we  possess  the  only  remains  of  the  modes  of 
thought  and  the  manners  of  the  Babylonian  period." 
The  inferences  of  the  historians  have  now  been  com- 
pletely vindicated  by  the  advance  of  modern  dis- 
covery. The  inscriptions  of  Nebuchadnezzar  have 
been  read ;  we  are  now,  by  the  aid  of  contemporary 
documents,  brought  face  to  face  with  the  times  in 
which  he  lived;  and  these  are  the  times  and  the 
man  with  whom  we  have  been  long  familiar  in  the 
pages  of  Daniel,  "It  is  curious  to  notice,"  says  Len- 
ormant,t  "that  the  three  parts  composing  the  great 
work  on  magic,  of  which  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson  has 
found  the  remains,  correspond  exactly  to  the  three 

*  God  in  History,  i.,  p.  192.    f  Chaldcean  Magic,  p.  14. 


154     PROPHETIC  FORECAST  OF  THE  WORLD  S  HISTORY. 

classes  of  Cfialdsean  doctors  which  Daniel  enum- 
erates. The  further  we  advance  in  the  knowledge 
of  the  cuneiform  texts,  the  greater  does  the  necessity- 
appear  of  reversing  the  condemnation  much  too  pre- 
maturely pronounced  by  the  German  exegetical  school 
against  the  writings  of  the  fourth  of  the  greater 
prophets." 

We  now  propose  to  go  further  than  any  confirma- 
tion of  the  historical  character  of  the  book  can  pos- 
sibly carry  us.  It  contains  prophecies  which  pro- 
fessed to  unveil  the  then 

FAR-OFF    FUTURE. 

In  one  of  them  we  have  a  forecast  of  the  world's 
entire  history,  brief,  indeed,  but  clear  and  well-de- 
fined; its  grand  epochs  are  carefully  marked,  their 
nature  distinguished,  their  number  and  the  order  of 
their  occurrence  fixed.  Have  the  more  than  two 
thousand  years  which  have  passed  since  the  prophet 
wrote,  anything  to  say  as  to  whether  these  are  the 
words  of  God  ?  What  stamp  has  Time,  the  unerring 
and  impartial  judge  of  every  such  pretension,  set 
upon  this  book? 

That  is  the  question:  let  us  now  turn  to  the 
answer.  In  the  last  days  of  the  Assyrian  Empire, 
Nabopolassar,  king  of  Babylon,  had  proclaimed  him- 
self independent,  and,  in  conjunction  with  the 
Medes,  had  crushed  what  remained  of  the  Assyrian 
power  by  the  capture  of  Nineveh.  Necho,  king  of 
Egypt,  had  meanwhile  possessed  himself  of  the 
western  dominions  of  Assyria,  and  was  engaged  in 
the  siege  of  Carchemish  on  the  Euphrates.  Nabo- 
polassar sent  his  son  Nebuchadnezzar  to  sweep  back 
the  Egyptian  hosta  Necho  received  a  crushing  de- 
feat under  the  walls  of  Carchemish,  and  the  entire 
territory  from  the  Euphrates  to  the  borders  of  Egypt 
was  the  reward  of  the  victory.    Nebuchadnezzar  fol- 


tKZ  TTVZ  EMPIRES  €7  PROPHECY^  I55 

lowed  hard  upon  the  heels  of  the  retreating  foe,  and 
was  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Pelusium  when  the  tid- 
ings reached  him  of  his  father's  death.  Making 
a  hasty  peace  with  Necho,  he  sped  back  to  Babylon 
to  assume  possession  of  the  kingdom.  He  ascended 
the  throne  without  opposition,  and  now  in  this  the 
second  year  of  his  reign  his  sway  was  fully  estab- 
lished alike  over  the  old  conquests  and  the  new. 

But  the  warrior's  spirit  cannot  rest.  The  power 
he  holds  is  not  something  to  be  enjoyed ;  it  is  some- 
thing to  be  used;  it  is  a  means,  and  not  an  end. 
He  has  retired  to  rest,  but  the  busy  brain  pursues  its 
all-absorbing  fancy.  Whither  will  he  turn  his  arms? 
and  in  what  way  may  he  most  effectually  break  the 
power  he  means  to  attack?  When  he  and  his  stand 
alone  in  the  earth,  what  then?  The  dominion  has 
returned  again  to  Babylon,  the  ancient  mistress  of 
the  kingdoms;  but  will  it  remain  here?  Sleep  at 
last  seals  the  senses,  but  from  the  unresting  sea  of 
thought  wave  after  wave  is  flung.  In  dreams  he  still 
pursues  ambition's  path.  The  ever  changing  fancies 
sweep  through  the  soul  in  their  swift,  unending 
flight;  but  at  last  their  aimless  career  is  checked, 
and,  built  out  of  the  dreamer's  "thoughts  upon  his 
bed,"  a  vision  rises,  clear,  consistent,  terrible.  The 
conqueror's  spirit  is  bowed  with  awe ;  and  when  he 
has  gazed  and  pondered,  the  vision  fades  and  disap- 
pears. The  unbridled  thoughts  sweep  over  his  soul 
again,  and  blur,  though  they  cannot  efface,  the  deep 
impression  of  the  dream. 

This  dream  was  to  bear  upon  it  the  stamp  that  it 
was  sent  from  God,  and  so,  though  it  was  given  to 
the  king,  his  lips  were  not  permitted  to  tell  it.  The 
vision  was  to  be  related  to  him  by  one  whose  words, 
awakening  his  own  slumbering  recollection,  were  to 
be  to  him  a  demonstration  of  the  interpreter's  pro- 
phetic mission.  The  Babylonian  diviners  were  as- 
tonished by  the  monarch's  demand  not  only  to  fur- 


I56     PROPHETIC  FORECAST  OF  THE  WORLD'S  HISTORY. 

nish  an  interpretation,  but  also  to  make  known  a 
forgotten  dream.     The  story  of  how  Daniel  saved 
them,  as  well  as  his  companions  and  himself,  from 
destruction  has  been  familiar  to  us  from  the  days  of 
our  childhood.     He  begged  for  time.     He  betook 
himself  to  prayer ;  and  he  did  not  plead  in  vain.    The 
next  morning  saw  him  stand  in  the  king's  presence. 
He  reminded  Nebuchadnezzar  how  he  had  seen  a 
cplossal  image  whose  "brightness  was  excellent"  and 
whose  "form  was  terrible."     He  had  then  marked 
that  though  the  image  was  a  unity,  it  was  construct- 
ed of  various  materials.    The  head  was  of  gold,  the 
arms  and  the  breast  of  silver,  the  belly  and  the 
haunches  of  brass,  the  legs  of  iron,  and  the  feet  and 
toes  partly  of  iron,  and  partly  of  that  which,  though 
in  appearance  like  iron,  has  nothing  of  its  strength 
or  power  of  resistance — brittle  earthenware.     Then 
there  was  a  change.    This  image,  with  its  terrible- 
ness   and   splendour,   was   crushed   beneath   an  over- 
whelming vengeance.     He  had  seen  a  stone  cut  out 
of  the  mountain   side    (the  emblem  of  the  Eternal, 
Patient,  Strength)  ;  he  had  seen  it  cut  out  and  fash- 
ioned without  hands.     And  now  this   stone,  miracu- 
lous in  its  origin,  fell  upon  the  toes  of  the  image  and 
crushed  and  ground  it  to  powder,  till  the  iron,  ancTthe 
clay,  and  the  brass,  and  the  silver,  and  the  gold  became 
as  "the.  chaff  of  the  summer  threshing-floors,  and  the 
wind  carried  them  away  that  no  place  was  found  for 
them,  and  the  stone  that  smote  the  image  became  a 
great  mountain,  and  filled  the  whole  earth"  (Dan.  ii. 

35). 

That  was  the  Divine  parable.     The  colossal  image, 

witk  its  splendour  and  terribleness,  was  a  fitting  emblem 
of  the  human  sovereignty  which  men  have  not  only 
feared,  but  have  also  regarded  with  enthusiastic  ad- 
miration. In  the  7th  chapter  of  Daniel  we  have  a  par- 
allel vision.  The  same  empires  pass  before  the  proph- 
et's sight;  but  there  they  are  represented  as  beasts  of 


THE  CHARACTER  OF  THE  ROMAN  EMPIRE.  1 57 

prey.  Grotius  has  pointed  out  that  the  imagery  of  the 
visions  is  varied  in  accordance  with  the  character  of 
the  men  to  whom  they  are  sent.  The  prophet,  with  a 
fieart  which  bleeds  for  human  woe,  sees  the  kingdoms 
as  they  pass  on  through  blood  and  suffering ;  they  arise 
to  kill  and  to  devour.  He,  on  the  other  hand,  whose 
heart  is  fired  with  the  lust  of  glory,  sees  only  the  real- 
ized ideal  of  human  ambition — a  god-like  man  and 
things  that  are  precious  and  strong — fine  gold  and  sil- 
ver and  Brass  and  iron. 

But  we  have  more  than  the  symbolism  of  the  vision : 
the  parable  is  fully  explained.  The  image,  which  in  its 
completeness  represents  the  entire  sovereignty  of  man 
over  his  fellows,  is  divided  into  four  parts.  The  first, 
the  head  of  gold,  is  identified  with  the  Babylonian  em- 
pire (Daniel  ii.  38).  After  this  there  was  to  arise 
"another  kingdom  inferior  to"  the  first,  "and  another 
third  kingdom  of  brass,  which  shall  bear  rule  over  all 
the  earth.  And  the  fourth  kingdom  shall  be  strong  as 
iron."  This  was  to  endure  in  its  latter  stage  of  sub- 
divtsion  till  the  hour  of  vengeance  should  have  struck, 
and  "the  God  of  heaven"  have  "set  up  a  kingdom 
which  shall  never  be  destroyed"  (ii.  39,  40,  44).  Num- 
bered in  this  way,  and  the  first  of  the  kingdoms  being 
so  plainly  designated,  the  student  of  history  can  find 
no  difficulty  in  the  interpretation.  But  we  have  every 
needed  help  furnished  by  the  Scripture  itself.  In  an- 
other vision  the  second  and  third  kingdoms  are  iden- 
tified respectively  with  the  empire  of  Persia  and  the 
empire  of  Greece  ^(Dan.  viii.  20,  21).  The  fourth 
kingdom,  though  more  fully  described  than  any  other, 
is  not  named;  but  ere  the  Scripture  story  is  finished, 
this  kingdom  too  stands  plainly  before  us.  We  open 
the  New  Testament  and  find  the  Roman  power  bearing 
rule  in  Judea.  As  to  "the  stone,"  the  figure  is  applied 
to  Christ  again  and  again,  and  His  own  words  will  be 
remembered :  "Did  ye  never  read  in  the  Scriptures, 
'The  stone,  which  the  builders  rejected,  the  same  was 


I58     PROPHETIC  FORECAST  OF  THB  WORLD'S  HISTORY". 

made  the  head  of  the  corner  V  .  .  he  that  falleth  011 
this  stone  shall  be  broken  to  pieces;  but,  on  whomso- 
ever it  shall  fall,  it  will  scatter  him  as  dust"  (R.  V. 
Matt.  xxi.  42,  44).  These  last  words  are  an  evident 
reference  to  Dan.  ii.  35. 

The  four  empires  are  therefore  determined  by  the 
Scripture  itself.  They  are  the  Babylonian,  the  Persian, 
the  Grecian,  and  the  Roman.  The  fifth  is  the  dominio.i 
of  Christ.  Dealing  only  with  fulfilled  prophecy,  we  do 
not  enter  upon  the  latter  part  of  the  prediction;  and 
confining  ourselves  to  the  prophecies  fulfilled  at  or 
since  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era,  there  is  much 
of  the  earlier  which  also  lies  outside  of  range.  I  shall 
simply  point  in  passing  to  what  everyone  knows  to  be 
true,  that  the  dominions  named  succeeded  each  other 
in  this  very  order.  The  Babylonian  power  was  fol- 
lowed by  the  Persian  under  Cyrus ;  this  was  over- 
turned by  the  Grecian  under  Alexander ;  and  the  Gre- 
cian was  in  like  manner  supplanted  by  the  Roman. 
But  the  marvels  of  this  prophecy  are  not  confined  to 
that  portion  of  it  whose  accomplishment  lay  nearest  to 
the  prophet's  time.    For  example,  the  Roman  was  to  be 

THE    LAST 

of  the  great  world-empires.  There  was  to  be  no 
other.  It  is  to  endure  in  its  subdivision  till  the 
kingdom  of  God  is  established  in  the  earth.  It  must 
be  admitted  that  this  part  of  the  prophetic  picture  is 
striking,  if  not  startling.  Had  the  writer  lived  at 
the  beginning  of  our  era  and  seen  the  Roman  power 
at  the  summit  of  its  glory,  it  would  still  be  inexpli- 
cable on  any  natural  grounds  how  the  notion  could 
have  occurred  to  him  that  this  should  be  the  last  of 
the  dominions  of  man.  There  had  been  other  human 
dominions  before  it ;  why,  then,  should  there  not  be 
also  other  human  dominions  after  it?  If  experience 
had  been  asked  to  guess  the  secreU  of  the  future,  tht 


THE  CHARACTER  OF  THE  ROMAN  EMPIRE.  1 59 

answer   would   certainly  have   been  that  the    revolu- 
tions of  the  past  would  be  repeated  in  the  time  that 
was  then  to  come.     As  the  Babylonian   dominion 
went  down  before  the  Persian,  the  Persian  before 
the   Greek,   the   Greek  before   the   Roman,   so   the 
Roman  might  also  with  certainty  have  been  expect- 
ed to  pass  on  the  sceptre  to  some  other.    But  what 
of  the   fact?     What   have   the   nineteen    centuries 
which  have  elapsed  since  the  beginning  of  the  Chris- 
tian era  to  say  regarding  the  prediction  ?    The  man 
who  then  received  this  as  the  word  of  God  looked 
down  the  ages  and  said  there  would  be  no  other 
world-dominion  of  man ;  and  we  who  now  look  back 
through  these  ages  have  to  confess  that  there  has 
been  no  other.     The   fierce,   rude  warriors   of  the 
north  poured  like  a  flood  against  the  western  empire 
in  the  fifth  century,  but  the  dominion  of  the  world 
was  not  given  to  them.    In  the  seventh  century  the 
Arab-hordes,    sweeping    out   from    the    desert,    as- 
saulted the  empire  on  the  East.    They  assaulted  it 
also  on  the  West,  and  it  seemed  for  a  time  as  if  the 
Caliphs  might  ascend  the  throne  of  the  Caesars.     But 
the  storm  spent  its  strength,  and  the  Arab  had  not  been 
made  the  heir  of  the  Roman.  Tartars  and  Turks  swept 
over  the  East.     They  knocked  loudly  at  the  gates  of 
the  West,  and  men  trembled  lest  the  desolation  which 
had  followed  in  their  train  might  overspread  Christen- 
dom as  well;  but  to  neither  was  the  dominion  given. 
The  dream  of  universal  empire  has  fired  the  breast  of 
king  and  warrior,  and  among  them  one  of  the  mightiest 
geniuses  whose  hand  has  ever  grasped  the  sword.   But 
not  even  to  Napoleon  was  it  given  to  weld  once  more 
the  broken  fragments  of  the  Roman  Empire  into  one. 
There  has  been,  as  this  prophecy  said  there  should  be, 
a  fourth  dominion  of  man ; 

AND    THERE     HAS     BEEN     NO     OTHER. 

Is  it  not  strange  that,  during  these  last  1500  years,  in 


l6o     PROPHETIC  FORECAST  OF  THE  WORLDS  HISTORY. 

which  the  world  has  been  brought  more  together  than 
it  ever  was  before  and  has  been  waiting,  as  it  were,  to 
hail  the  conqueror  and  give  him  a  sway  fuller  than 
man  has  ever  yet  wielded,  no  one  has  seized  upon  the 
prize?  And  is  it  not  still  more  strange  than  these 
words  should  have  told  us  this,  and  said  that  the  world 
should  look  and  wait,  but  that  there  should  be  no 
other  till  He  should  come  whose  right  it  is  to  reign? 
Go  no  further  than  this — place  only  these  things  to- 
gether, and  then  say  whether  any  man  need  ask  where 
he  may  find  the  word  of  the  living  God,  or  where  he 
may  obtain  the  conviction  that  His  hand  has  been 
working  through  all  those  changes  and  hastening  the 
salvation  for  which  the  whole  earth  cries. 
But  the  prophecy  abounds  with  marvels. 

THE    CHARACTER    OF    THE    FOURTH     KINGDOM 

is  fully  described.  The  Roman  empire  was  the  furthest 
removed  from  the  prophet's  time  and  yet  it  is  more 
clearly  depicted  than  any  of  the  others.  To  begin  with 
he  is  struck  by  its 

SINGULARITY. 

In  the  vision  given  to  the  prophet  himself,  "the  fourth 
beast  was  diverse  from  all  the  beasts  that  were  before 
it"  (vii.  7).  The  marked  difference  between  the 
Roman  empire  and  those  which  preceded  it  is  again 
referred  to.  It  is  spoken  of  as  "diverse  from  all  of 
them"  (vii.  19).  The  full  meaning  of  those  words  we 
shall  afterwards  see.  Meanwhile  it  may  be  enough  to 
say  that  in  every  aspect  Rome  was  diverse  from  each 
of  the  dominions  which  preceded  it.  It  was  an  utterly 
new  development  in  history.  Formerly  attention  was 
fixed  upon  conquerors  and  kings  whose  will  was 
obeyed  and  whose  plans  were  executed  by  the  peoples 
whom  they  ruled  and  led.  But  here  our  attention  is 
fixed  not  upon  the  one  but  upon  the  many.    It  is  the 


THE  CHARACTER  OF  THE  ROMAN  EMPIRE.  l6l 

people  who  plan  and  triumph..  Their  dominion  does 
not  perish,  nor  is  even  their  progress  arrested,  because 
of  the  fall  of  their  leaders. 

The  Roman  empire  stands  alone  also  in  its  wide  and 
abiding  influence.  It  did  not  merely  conquer  the  na- 
tions ;  it  impressed  its  own  character  upon  them.  It 
imparted  its  own  institutions,  laws,  and  spirit.  The 
external  dominion  has  long  since  passed  away,  but 
Rome  still  rules  the  nations.  In  its  nature  and  in  its 
work  it  was  diverse  from  all  that  were  before  it.  It  is 
wonderful  to  notice  how  the  features  which  strike  the 
mind  of  the  prophet  are  those  which  also  arrest  the 
attention  of  the  historian.  Guizot  speaks  of  Rome  as 
"the  most  extraordinary  dominion  that  ever  led  captive 
and  oppressed  a  world."  "Now  for  the  -first  time/' 
says  Heeren,  "appears  on  the  page  of  history  the  fear- 
ful phenomenon  of  a  great  military  republic."  "I  con- 
fess that  my  own  imagination,"  writes  Mr.  Merivale, 
"is  most  powerfully  excited  by  the  visible  connection 
between  moral  influence  and  material  authority  which 
is  presented,  to  an  extent  never  realized  before  or  since, 
by  the  phenomenon  of  the  Roman  Empire."*  Niebuhr 
expresses  still  more  fully  the  same  sentiment.  "The 
history  of  Rome  has  the  highest  claims  to  our  atten- 
tion. It  shows  us  a  nation,  which  was  in  its  origin 
small  as  a  grain  of  corn ;  but  this  originally  small  popu- 
lation waxed  great,  transferred  its  character  to  hun- 
dreds of  thousands,  and  became  the  sovereign  of  na- 
tions from  the  rising  to  the  setting  sun.  The  whole  of 
western  Europe  adopted  the  language  of  the  Romans, 
and  its  inhabitants  looked  upon  themselves  as  Romans. 
The  laws  and  institutions  of  the  Romans  acquired  such 
a  power  and  durability,  that  even  at  the  present  mo- 
ment they  still  continue  to  maintain  their  influence 
upon  millions  of  men.    Such  a  development  is  without 

*  History  of  the  Romans,  I.,  p.  xiii. 


162     PROPHETIC  FORECAST  OF  THE  WORLD'S  HISTORY. 

a  parallel  in  the  history  of  the  world.    Before  this  star 
all  others  fade  and  vanish."  * 
The  prophet  is  also  struck  with 

THE    TERRIBLENESS, 

as  well  as  with  the  singularity,  of  the  fourth  empire. 
The  fourth  beast  was  "terrible,  terrible  exceedingly" 
(vii.  7,  19).  In  touching  upon  this  I  am  taking  the 
features  of  the  picture  in  the  order  in  which  they  stand 
in  the  prophecy.  I  am  not  making  selections  but  re- 
peating in  detail  the  words  of  this  portion  of  Scripture. 
Is  it  not  wonderful  then  to  observe  that  history  merely 
reproduces  the  picture  previously  drawn  in  the 
prophecy?  I  have  already  quoted  Heeren's  words 
about  i(the  fearful  phenomenon"  presented  by  Rome. 
Schlegel  speaks  of  the  "fearful"  rapidity  of  its  pro- 
gress, and  Mommsen  of  its  (Cfearfully  strict  military 
discipline."  Merivale  confesses  that  he  contemplates 
the  swift  progress  of  the  Roman  arms  "with  awe  and 
astonishment." 

The  cause  of  this  astonishment  will  be  more  apparent 
as  we  proceed.    The  prophet  speaks  next  of 

THE    STRENGTH 

of  the  fourth  empire.  It  was  "powerful  an3  strong 
exceedingly"  (vi.  7)  ;  "The  fourth  kingdom  shall  be 
strong  as  iron"  (ii.  40).  Here  again  we  have  one  of 
the  great  outstanding  features  of  the  Roman  empire. 
Menzel  speaks  of  it  as  "a  colossal  empire  of  force." 
"In  practised  vigor  and  constancy  under  every  priva- 
tion," says  Schlegel,  "the  Roman  infantry,  with  the 
vigorous  masses  of  its  legion,  surpassed  all  military 
bodies  that  have  ever  been  organized."  And  again, 
"When  even  Hannibal,  the  most  formidable  adversary 
the  Roman  republic  ever  h^d  to  encounter,  and  the  one 

*  History  of  Rome,  L,  p.  92. 


THE  CHARACTER  OF  THE  ROMAN  EMPIRE.  163 

who  had  most  deeply  studied  its  true  character  and  the 
danger  threatening  the  world  from  this  quarter ;  when 
even  he,  after  the  many  great  victories  which,  in  a  long 
series  of  years,  he  had  obtained  over  the  Romans  in 
the  second  Punic  war,  though  he  shook  the  power,  was 
unable  to  break  the  spirit  of  this  people :  when  this  was 
the  case  one  might  regard  the  great  political  question 
of  the  then  civilized  world  as  settled ;  and  it  could  no 
longer  be  a  matter  of  doubt  that  that  city,  justly  de- 
nominated strength,  and  which,  even  from  of  old, 
had  been  the  idol  of  her  sons  (who  accounted  every- 
thing as  nought  in  comparison  with  her  interests)  : 
that  that  city,  I  say,  was  destined  to  conquer  the  world 
and  establish  an  empire,  the  like  whereof  had  never 
yet  been  founded  by  preceding  conquerors."  Even 
Gibbon  accepts  the  language  of  the  prophecy  as  the 
truest  description  of  the  unparalleled  might  of  Rome. 
"The  arms  of  the  Republic,  sometimes  vanquished  in 
battle,  always  victorious  in  war,  advanced  with  rapid 
steps  to  the  Euphrates,  the  Danube,  the  Rhine,  and  the 
ocean ;  and  the  images  of  gold,  of  silver,  or  brass,  that 
might  serve  to  represent  the  nations  and  their  kings, 
were  successively  broken  by  the  iron  monarchy  of 
Rome."  * 

The  more  closely  we  look  the  more  do  we  recognize 
the  truth  of  the  prophetic  picture.  Behind  the  iron 
strength  there  was  an  iron  nature.  Its  mark  is  every- 
where. It  is  seen  in  their  stern  self-control.  Laws 
were  passed  and  enforced,  for  example,  against  the 
spread  of  luxury.  Rufinus,  who  had  held  the  high 
office  of  consul,  was  struck  off  the  list  of  censors  be- 
cause he  possessed  silver  plate  to  the  value  of  £34. 
These  laws  entered  even  into  the  house  of  mourning, 
and  prescribed  how  much  might  be  spent  in  affording 
grief  the  melancholy  satisfaction  of  showing  honour  to 
the  dead.    Mommsen  speaks  of  their  "stern  and  ener- 

*  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire,  chap,  xxxviii. 


1 64     PROPHETIC  FORECAST  OF  THE  WORLD'S  HISTORY. 

getic  morality."  The  iron  was  seen  also  in  the  disci- 
pline, to  which  the  armies  willingly  submitted.  Im- 
provements were  made  in  arms  and  in  tactics,  but  there 
was  no  change  in  the  stern  discipline  of  Rome.  "The 
old,  fearfully  strict,  military  discipline  remained  un- 
altered. Still,  as  formerly  the  general  was  at  liberty 
to  behead  any  man  serving  in  his  camp,  and  to  scourge 
with  rods  the  staff  officer  as  well  as  the  common  sol- 
dier; nor  were  such  punishments  inflicted  merely  on 
account  of  common  crimes,  but  also  when  an  officer  had 
allowed  himself  to  deviate  from  the  orders  which  he 
had  received,  or  when  a  division  had  allowed  itself  to 
be  surprised,  or  had  fled  from  the  field  of  battle."  * 

In  the  history  of  no  other  people  do  we  find  this 
union  of  stern,  vigilant,  authority,  and  voluntary,  in- 
telligent, submission.  Nowhere  besides  do  we  mark 
the  strength  which  this  union  gave.  From  the  cir- 
cumference to  the  centre  of  this  people's  life,  from  the 
far-off  camps  and  battle-fields  to  the  home,  there  is  no 
alloy.  It  is  the  iron  kingdom,  standing  alone  through 
all  history  in  its  terribleness  and  grandeur.  But  when 
we  have  marked  its  peerless  strength,  we  have  to  re- 
member that  from  of  old  this  word  said  it  should  be 
so:  ""the  fourth  kingdom  shall  be  strong  as  iron;"  it 
shall  be  "powerful  and  strong  exceedingly." 

But  the  prophet  also  notes 

THE  TYRANNOUS  USE 

which  was  made  of  the  iron  strength.  "TKe  fourth 
kingdom  shall  be  strong  as  iron:  forasmuch  as  iron 
break'eth  in  pieces  and  subdueth  all  things:  and  as 
iron  tfiat  crusheth  all  these  (that  is — gold,  silver,  and 
brass)  shall  it  break  in  pieces  and  crush"  (Dan.  ii.  40). 
And,  again,  the  fourth  beast  "devoured  and  brake  in 
pieces,  and  stamped  the  residue  with  his  feet."  This 
later  vision  was  thus  interpreted  to  the  prophet.   "The 

*  Momtnsen;  History  of  Rome,  I.,  p.  454. 


THE  TYRANNY  OF  ROME.  165 

fourth  beast  shall  be  a  fourth  kingdom  upon  earth, 
which  shall  be  diverse  from  all  the  kingdoms,  and 
shall  devour  the  whole  earth,  and  shall  tread  it  down, 
and  break  it  in  pieces"  (Dan.  vii.  7,  23). 

The  Romans  were  conscious  of  their  mission.  Virgil 
represents  iEneas  as  thus  addressed  by  the  shade  of 
Anchises : — 

Others  belike  with  happier  grace 
From  bronze  or  stone  shall  call  the  face, 
*  Plead  doubtful  causes,  map  the  skies, 
And  tell  when  planets  set  or  rise: 
But  Roman,  thou,  do  thou  control 
The  nations  far  and  wide: 

Be  this  thy  genius — to  impose 
The  rule  of  peace  on  vanquished  foes, 
Show  pity  to  the  humblest  soul 
And  crush  the  sons  of  pride* 

In  connection  with  these  lines,  Bunsen  remarks  that 
the  Romans  "regarded  the  ruling  of  the  world  as  a 
vocation  entrusted  to  them  by  the  gods,  for  the  sup- 
pression of  injustice  upon  the  earth,  and  the  obtaining 
of  redress  for  the  oppressed,  the  latter  of  course  be- 
ing those  who  appealed  to  the  Romans  for  defence. 
Those  who  preferred  independence  were  rebels,  sedi- 
tious. All  who  set  themselves  in  opposition  to  the 
will  of  the  civilizing,  law-dispensing,  divinities  were  re- 
garded as  barbarians/'f 

How  they  fulfilled  what  they  believed  to  be  their 
vocation,  the  whole  world  knows.  Rome  ever  held  her 
head  on  high  as  if  she  felt  she  was  the  world's  Queen. 
She  would  make  no  peace  with  a  victorious  foe :  she 
might  be  sore  bestead,  but  she  never  acknowledged 
weakness.  When  Hannibal  had  shattered  her  domin- 
ion in  Italy  itself  and  was  threatening  her  very  exist- 
ence, the  donations  sent  by  the  king  of  Syracuse  and 

*  2£neid,  vi.,  Conington's  translation, 
f  God  in  History,  ii.,  pp.  363-364. 


l66     PROPHETIC  FORECAST  OF  THE  WORLDS  HISTORY. 

the  Greek  cities  of  Italy  were  declined  courteously, 
but  with  unbending  haughtiness.  A  more  terrible  trial 
awaited  her.  Her  last  army  was  annihilated  at  Cannae. 
On  that  fatal  field  70,000  of  her  choicest  sons  lay  cold 
and  stiff,  and  her  power  seemed  to  have  perished  with 
them.  But  even  then  Rome  would  not  despair  nor 
give  way  to  a  moment's  weakness.  The  cheek  might 
pale,  but  the  head  was  still  erect,  the  step  was  firm. 
Only  one  of  the  generals  escaped,  the  Consul  Varro, 
the  author  of  the  disaster ;  "and  the  Roman  senators 
met  him  at  the  gate  and  thanked  him  that  he  had  not 
despaired  of  the  salvation  of  his  country.  .  .  .  The 
senate  preserved  its  firm  and  unbending  attitude  while 
messengers  from  all  sides  hastened  to  Rome  to  report 
the  loss  of  battles,  the  secession  of  allies,  the  capture 
of  posts  and  magazines,  and  to  ask  for  reinforcements 
for  the  valley  of  the  Po,  and  for  Sicily  at  a  time 
when  Italy  was  abandoned  and  Rome  almost  without 
a  garrison.  .  .  .  The  time  of  mourning  for  the 
fallen  was  restricted  to  30  days  that  the  service  of  the 
gods  of  joy,  from  which  those  clad  in  mourning  were 
excluded,  might  not  too  long  be  interrupted — for  so 
great  was  the  number  of  the  fallen  that  there  was 
scarcely  a  family  which  had  not  to  lament  its  dead."* 
Such  was  the  scarcity  of  men  fit  for  the  field  that, 
while  calling  out  all  above  boyhood,  Rome  had  to  arm 
besides  her  debtors  and  criminals  and  slaves:  yet  at 
this  very  time  when  "Hannibal  offered  a  release  of 
captives  at  the  expense  of  the  Roman  treasury  it  was 
declined,  and  the  Carthaginian  envoy  who  had  arrived 
with  the  deputation  of  captives  was  not  allowed  to 
enter  the  city:  nothing  should  look  as  if  the  senate 
thought  of  peace.  Not  only  were  the  allies  to  be  pre- 
vented from  believing  that  Rome  was  disposed  to 
enter  into  negotiations,  but  even  the  meanest  citizen 
was  to  be  made  to  understand  that  for  him,  as  for  all, 

*  Mommsen,  History  of  Rome,  ii.,  p.  137. 


THE  TYRANNY  OF  ROME.  167 

there  was  no  peace,  and  that  safety  lay  only  in 
victory."* 

As  marked  a  feature  as  her  refusal  to  make  peace 
with  a  victorious  enemy  was  her  inability  to  bear  the 
existence  of  a  rival.  Cato's  "Delenda  est  Carthago" 
(Carthage  must  be  blotted  out),  was  simply  a  state- 
ment of  the  deliberate  policy  of  Rome.  Foes  must 
be  beaten:  rivals  must  be  crushed.  Cato's  decree  was 
carried  out  by  Scipio,  one  of  the  most  humane  Romans 
of  his  time,  and  this  is  the  way  in  which  the  deed  was 
done:  "For  seventeen  days  the  city  was  in  flames, 
and  the  numbers  that  were  exterminated  amounted  to 
700,000  souls,  including  the  women  and  children  sold 
into  slavery:  so  that  this  scene  of  horror  served  as 
an  early  prelude  to  the  later  destruction  of  Jerusalem. 
.  .  .  Whenever  Roman  interests  were  at  stake,  all 
mankind,  and  the  lives  of  nations,  were  considered  as 
of  no  importance."f  "Scipio's  letter  to  the  senate  is 
said  to  have  contained  no  more  than  these  words: 
'Carthage  is  taken.  The  army  awaits  your  further 
orders/  The  tidings  were  received  at  Rome  with  un- 
common demonstrations  of  joy.  The  victors  recollect- 
ing all  the  passages  of  their  former  wars,  the  alarms 
which  had  been  given  by  Hannibal  and  the  irreconcil- 
able antipathy  of  the  two  nations,  gave  orders  to  raze 
the  fortifications  of  Carthage,  and  even  to  destroy  the 
materials  of  which  they  were  constructed.":}: 

Whatever  Rome  touched  with  a  finger,  was  cer- 
tain to  be  crushed  at  last  beneath  her  feet.  Judea  is 
a  familiar  instance.  Sorely  pressed  by  the  Greco- 
Syrian  power,  she  placed  herself  in  160  b.  c.  under 
Roman  protection.  Not  a  hundred  years  after,  in 
63  b.  c,  Pompey,  at  the  head  of  a  triumphant  army, 
is  appointing  whom  he  pleases  to  the  throne  and  to 
the  high-priesthood.    In  the  year  7  a.  d.  the  shadow 

*  Ibid.,  pp.  137-138.        f  Schlegel,  Philosophy  of  History, 
t  Ferguson,  History  of  the  Roman  Republic. 


l68     PROPHETIC  FORECAST  OF  THE  WORLDS  HISTORY. 

of  its  independence  has  gone,  and  it  is  made  a  prov- 
ince of  the  Roman  Empire.  In  70  a.  d.  resistance 
is  crushed  by  deluging  the  land  with  blood  and  turn- 
ing it  into  a  desert.  The  same  policy  was  pursued 
in  Greece.  The  Romans  came  as  the  enemies  of 
tyrants  and  the  restorers  of  the  ancient  freedom. 
That  was,  however,  only  the  beginning  of  the  story ; 
it  ended  thus:  "Rome,  amid  the  rising  hatred,  did 
not  deem  herself  secure  until  by  one  blow  she  had 
rid  herself  of  all  opponents  of  any  importance. 
Above  a  thousand  of  the  most  eminent  of  the 
Achseans  were  summoned  to  Rome  to  justify  them- 
selves, and  there  detained  seventeen  years  in  prison 
without  a  hearing.  .  .  The  ultimate  lot,  both  of 
Macedon  and  Greece,  was  decided  by  the  system 
now  adopted  at  Rome,  that  of  converting  the  pre- 
vious dependence  of  nations  into  formal  subjection. 
The  insurrection  of  Andriscus  in  Macedonia,  an  in- 
dividual who  pretended  to  be  the  son  of  Perseus, 
was  quelled  by  Metellus,  the  country  being  con- 
stituted a  Roman  province ;  two  years  afterwards,  at 
the  sack  of  Corinth,  vanished  the  last  glimmer  of 
Grecian  freedom."*  "It  is  curious  to  observe,"  says 
Arnold,  "how,  after  every  successive  conquest,  the 
Romans  altered  their  behaviour  to  those  allies  who 
had  aided  them  to  gain  it,  and  whose  friendship  or 
enmity  was  now  become  indifferent  to  them.  Thus, 
after  their  first  war  with  Philip,  they  slighted  the 
Italians;  after  they  had  vanquished  Antiochus, 
they  readily  listened  to  complaints  against  Philip; 
and  now  the  destruction  of  Macedon  enabled  them 
to  use  the  language  of  sovereigns  rather  than  of 
allies  to  their  oldest  and  most  faithful  friends, 
Eumenes,  the  Rhodians,  and  the  Achseans.  .  .  . 
Let  it  be  for  ever  remembered  that,  by  a  decree  of 
the  senate,  seventy  towns  of  Epirus  were  given  up 

*  Heeren. 


THE  TYRANNY  OF  ROME.  1 69 

to  be  plundered  by  the  Roman  army,  after  all  hos- 
tilities were  at  an  end;  that  falsehood  and  deceit 
were  used  to  prevent  resistance  or  escape ;  and  that 
in  one  day  and  one  hour  seventy  towns  were  sacked 
and  destroyed,  and  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand 
human  beings  sold  for  slaves/'* 

Wherever  Rome  imagined  her  interests  were 
threatened  she  pursued  the  same  terrible  policy. 
"Two  nations,  the  Teneteri  and  Usipetes,  who  had 
been  driven  out  of  their  country  by  the  Suevi, 
crossed  the  Rhine  and  demanded  land  from  Caesar, 
who,  unwilling  to  tolerate  so  many  warlike  German 
tribes  in  Gaul,  resolved  to  make  a  fearful  example  of 
them  in  order  to  deter  others  from  crossing  the  fron- 
tier, and,  treacherously  seizing  the  German  leader 
.  .  .  .  suddenly  attacked  his  unsuspecting  fol- 
lowers and  drove  them  into  the  narrow  tongue  of 
land  at  the  conflux  of  the  Maes  and  the  Rhine,  where 
the  greater  part  were  either  slaughtered,  drowned, 
or  taken  prisoners/'t 

The  Romans  had  suffered  considerable  annoyance 
and  loss  from  the  irruptions  of  the  Tyrolese.  A 
great  power  could  not  be  expected  to  endure  such 
insults  with  meekness.  We  should  look  for  reprisals 
severe  enough  to  prove  that  its  friendship  was  more 
to  be  desired  than  its  enmity  But  the  reader  will 
hardly  be  prepared  for  the  following  tale  of  ven- 
geance. "The  Romans  advanced  from  the  Bodensee 
into  the  mountains  and  systematically  exterminated 
the  inhabitants.  Every  man  fell  sword  in  hand,  and 
the  women,  maddened  by  despair,  flung  their 
children  into  the  faces  of  the  enemy.  The  Roman 
historian  turns  with  horror  from  the  monstrous 
crimes  that  blacken  the  page  in  which  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  the  Tyrol  by  Tib- 
erius, afterwards  Emperor  of  Rome,  is  recorded."t 

*  Later  Roman  Commonwealth,  I.,  19-20. 
t  Menzel,  History  of  Germany.  J  Ibid. 


I70     PROPHETIC  FORECAST  OF  THE  WORLD  S  HISTORY. 

One  of  the  noblest  struggles  for  freedom  was  that 
carried  on  in  Spain  by  Viriathus,  "a  simple  Spanish 
countryman — whom  after  six  years'  war  she  could 
only  rid  herself  of  by  assassination.  The  war  never- 
theless continued  after  his  death  against  the  Numan- 
tines,  who  would  not  be  subjected,  but  were  at  last 
destroyed  by  Scipio  Aemilianus."* 

And  let  it  not  be  supposed  that  these  were  inci- 
dents, the  real  nature  of  which  the  Romans  sought 
in  any  way  to  conceal  from  public  view.  Such  tales 
of  bloodshed  formed  the  special  glory  of  their  public 
men.  It  was  inscribed  in  Pompey's  honor  on  the 
temple  of  Minerva  that  "he  sunk,  or  took,  846  ships; 
reduced  1,538  towns  and  fortresses;  and  vanquished, 
slew,  or  led  into  captivity  2,183,000  men.  Herder 
speaks  of  "the  blood-drenched  soil  of  Roman  glory," 
and  sums  up  Roman  history  in  two  words — "Ravage 
and  destruction."  "It  was,"  he  says,  "as  if  the  iron* 
footed  god  of  war,  Aradivus,  so  highly  revered  from 
of  old  by  the  people  of  Romulus,  actually  bestrode 
the  globe  and  at  every  step  struck  out  new  torrents 
of  blood.  .  .  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  if  the 
[Roman  history  were  divested  of  its  accustomed 
rhetoric,  of  all  the  patriotic  maxims  and  trite  sayings 
of  politicians,  and  were  presented  with  strict  and 
minute  accuracy  in  all  its  living  reality,  every 
humane  mind  would  ,be  deeply  shocked  at  such  a 
picture  of  tragic  truth,  and  penetrated  with  the  pro- 
foundest  detestation  and  horror."t 

The  prophecy  also  notes  that  the  hold  of  Rome 
upon  the  nations  was  not  to  be  relaxed  till  their 

SUBJUGATION   WAS  PERFECTED. 

The  fourth  dominion  was  not  only  to  devour  and 
break  in  pieces :  it  was  also  to  stamp  the  residue 
with  its  feet.     Rome  was  resolved  not  only  to  con- 

*  Heeren.        f  Schlegel,    Philosophy    of   History. 


THE  TYRANNY  OF  ROME.  I71 

quer,  but  also  to  absorb,  the  whole  world  Her  col- 
onies were  planted  in  the  conquered  countries,  break- 
ing up  their  strength  for  resistance,  and  forming 
centres  whence  her  language  and  her  laws  were 
forced  upon  the  peoples.  Her  military  highways, 
constructed  with  such  solidity  and  skill  that  many 
of  then-  remain  to  the  present  time,  connected  Rome 
with  her  most  distant  conquests  and  enabled  her  to 
pour  in  her  legions  wherever  her  safety  or  her  honor 
might  be  threatened.  And  what  her  generals  began 
her  proconsuls  and  praetors  perfected.  "The  highest 
military  and  civil  powers,"  says  Heeren,  "were 
united  in  these  governors;  a  principal  cause  of  the 
horrible  oppression  which  was  soon  felt.  Troops 
were  always  kept  up  in  the  provinces,  and  the  Latin 
language  everywhere  introduced  (except  only  where 
Greek  was  spoken)  that  the  inhabitants  might  be 
made  as  much  like  Romans  as  possible."  In  a  word, 
she  devoured,  and  brake  in  pieces,  and  stamped  the 
residue  with  her  feet. 

Here,  as  elsewhere,  prophecy  becomes  the  truest 
and  tersest  of  all  possible  descriptions.  The  eye 
which  here  looked  onward  saw  clearly  and  read 
deeply.  But  we  are  now  to  touch  upon  something 
still  more  wonderful.  Those  ancient  words  picture 
the  political  condition  of 

our  own  times! 

It  will  be  observed  that  the  prophecy  professes  to 
tell  the  history,  as  well  as  the  character,  of  the 
fourth  kingdom.  We  notice  first  that,  though  it  was 
one  dominion,  it  was  nevertheless  represented  in  the 
figure  as  twofold.  In  the  case  of  the  second  do- 
minion, represented  by  the  arms  and  the  breast  of 
silver,  it  was  indicated  that  the  power  originally 
twofold  should,  in  process  of  time,  become  one. 
This  was  literally  fulfilled  in  the  Medes  and  Per- 
sians becoming  one  people.     But  in  the  part  of  the 


172     PROPHETIC  FORECAST  OF  THE  WORLD'S  HISTORY. 

figure,  which  was  the  symbol  of  the  Roman  power, 
this  process  appears  to  be  reversed.  What  was 
originally  one  becomes  two.  It  might  be  supposed 
that  in  pointing  out  this  feature  we  are  laying  our- 
selves open  to  the  charge  of  straining  the  words  of 
Scripture,  if  not  of  profaning  sacred  things  by  child- 
ish trifling.  Should  any  one  view  the  matter  in  this 
light,  let  me  remind  him  of  one  fact,  before  passing 
on.    The  Empire,  originally  one, 

DID    BECOME    TWOFOLD. 

The  Emperor  Diocletian,  who  improved  upon  the 
persecuting  policy  of  his  predecessors,  and  waged 
war  against  the  Scriptures,  ordering  them  to  be 
searched  for  and  destroyed,  became  the  unconscious 
instrument  by  which  this  prediction  was  fulfilled. 
Feeling  that  the  empire,  whose  destinies  he  guided, 
called  for  more  than  one  man's  thought  and 
strength,  he  associated  Maximian  with  himself  in 
the  government.  Maximian  received  the  western 
provinces,  while  Diocletian  retained  the  eastern  for 
himself.  This  division  was  made  in  287  a.  d.,  and 
was  continued  with  but  slight  interruption  till  the 
western  empire  was  overthrown  by  Odoacer  in  476 
a.  d.  The  eastern  finally  fell  in  the  capture  of  Con- 
stantinople by  the  Turks  in  1453.  The  best  com- 
ment on  this  part  of  the  prophecy  is  found  in  the 
division  which  all  historians  recognize.  The  one 
dominion  of  Rome  becomes  at  length  the  empires  of 
the  East  and  of  the  West. 

But  there  was  to  be  a  further  subdivision.  As  we 
have  already  seen,  it  was  predicted  that  the  fourth 
kingdom  was  not  to  be  supplanted  by  any  other 
dominion  of  man,  but  was 

TO    ENDURE    IN    ITS    FRAGMENTS 

till  the  time  of  the  end.  Attention  is  directed  in  the 
vision   given   to   Nebuchadnezzar  to   the   toes  of  the 


THE  DESCRIPTION    OF   OUR   OWN    TIMES.  173 

image.  "The  toes  of  the  feet"  are  spoken  of  as  kings 
or  kingdoms — which  "shall  not  cleave  one  to  an- 
other/' and  in  whose  days  "shall  the  God  of  heaven 
set  up  a  kingdom  whiqh  shall  never  be  destroyed, 
nor  shall  the  sovereignty  thereof  be  left  to  another 
people"  (Dan.  ii  41-44). 

Now  we  know  that  this  word  has  remained  un- 
altered and  untouched  since  the  beginning  of  the 
Christian  era.  We  know  also  that  for  well-nigh  five 
centuries  afterwards  the  word  was  unfulfilled. 
There  were  two  empires,  but  there  was  no  further 
subdivision.  We  know,  too,  that  for  ages  the  pre- 
diction has  been  fulfilled  to  the  very  letter.  The  two 
have  become  many.  It  has  not  been  a  merely  tem- 
porary condition.  Neither  wars,  nor  intermarriages, 
nor  alliances,  tried  though  they  have  all  been,  have 
availed  to  re-unite  the  fragments  and  restore  the 
ancient  unity  of  the  empire.  The  manifold  division 
has  proved  to  be  a  permanent  condition,  and  the 
historical  development  of  the  fourth  dominion  has 
proceeded  exactly  as  this  prediction  foretold  it 
should  do. 

Were  it  possible  to  explain  this  away  as  merely  a 
strange  coincidence,  there  is  more  that  calls  for 
notice  and  explanation.    The  prophecy 

TEACHES    US    TO    READ    OUR    OWN     HISTORY. 

We  may  know  much  regarding  the  various  nation- 
alities scattered  over  what  was  once  the  Roman  em- 
pire, without  having  any  right  conception  of  our 
and  their  relation  to  ancient  Rome.  It  may  seem  to 
us  that  the  empire  has  been  supplanted  by  the  na- 
tions, and  has  passed  utterly  away.  The  prophecy, 
on  the  other  hand,  declares  that  the  fourth  dominion 
still  abides,  that  Rome  still  lives.  The  separate 
dominions  are  only  its  development ;  the  nations  are 
its  fragments,  partaking  of  its  nature  and  continuing 
its  existence. 


174     PROPHETIC  FORECAST  OF  THE  WORLDS  HISTORY. 

We  need  not  argue  as  to  which  of  these  views  is 
correct  The  testimony  of  those  who  have  studied 
the  history  of  the  past  is  that  Rome  lives  on.  "The 
public  reason  of  the  Romans  has  been  silently  or 
studiously  transfused  into  the  domestic  institutions 
of  Europe,  and  the  laws  of  Justinian  still  command 
the  respect  or  obedience  of  independent  nations. "* 
Even  the  outward  continuity  remained  unbroken. 
"Gothic  and  other  chiefs  gave  themselves  the  name 
of  Roman  Patricians,  and  at  a  later  date  the  Roman 
empire  was  restored."  Clovis  received  from  Con- 
stantinople the  titles  of  Consul  and  Patrician,  and 
by  that  means  reconciled  the  people  of  his  Roman 
conquests  to  his  sway.  Charlemagne  was  crowned 
Emperor  of  Rome  by  Leo  III.,  the  Roman  bishop. 
And  this  was  no  unmeaning  form.  "A  seal,"  says 
Hallam,  "was  put  to  the  glory  of  Charlemagne  when 
Leo  III.,  in  the  name  of  the  Roman  people,  placed 
upon  his  head  the  imperial  crown.  His  father,  Pe- 
pin, had,  in  800,  borne  the  title  of  Patrician,  and  he 
had  himself  exercised,  with  that  title,  a  regular  sov- 
ereignty .  over  Rome.  Money  was  coined  in  his 
name,  and  an  oath  of  fidelity  was  taken  by  the  clergy 
and  the  people.  But  the  appellation  of  Emperor 
seemed  to  place  his  authority  over  all  his  subjects 
on  a  new  footing.  It  was  full  of  high  and  indefinite 
pretensions,  tending  to  overshadow  the  free  election 
of  the  Franks  by  a  fictitious  descent  from  Augustus. 
A  fresh  oath  of  fidelity  to  him  as  Emperor  was  de- 
manded from  his  subjects."  The  Church,  by  this 
time  thoroughly  Romanized,  rose  into  power  as  the 
Empire  fell,  and,  along  with  the  faith  which  it  gave 
to  the  conquerors,  handed  down  the  Roman  culture. 
Roman  law  continued  its  hold,  and  Roman  institu- 
tions lived  on  among  the  people.  "Considering  at- 
tentively," says  Hegel,  "how  many  of  the  old  institu- 
tions continued  to  subsist,  and  studying  the  feelings 

*  Gibbon. 


THE  INFLUENCE  OF  ROME.  I75 

of  that  time,  as  they  are  faintly  preserved  in  its 
scanty  records,  it  seems  hardly  too  much  to  say  that 
in  the  8th  century  the  Roman  empire  still  existed  in 
the  West;  existed  in  men's  minds  as  a  power,  weak- 
ened, delegated,  suspended,  but  not  destroyed/'* 

To  these  I  may  add  a  more  recent  and  not  less 
weighty   testimony.     "If   the  historian   of   Rome," 
writes  Freeman,  "is  bound  to  look  back,  still  more 
is  he  bound  to  look  onwards.    He  has  but  to  cast  his 
eye  on  the  world  around  him  to  see  that  Rome  is 
still  a  living  and  abiding  power.     The  tongue  of 
Rome    is   the   groundwork    of   the    living   speech    of 
south-western  Europe;  it  shares  our  own  vocabu- 
lary with  the  tongue  of  our  Teutonic  fathers.    The 
tongue  of  Rome  is  still  the  ecclesiastical  language 
of  half  Christendom;  the  days  are  hardly  past  when 
it  was  the  common  speech  of  science  and  learning. 
The  law  of  Rome  is  still  quoted  in  our  courts  and 
taught  in  our  Universities;  in  other  lands  it  forms 
the  source  and  groundwork  of  their  whole  jurispru- 
dence.    Little  more  than  half  a  century  has  passed 
since  an  Emperor  of  the  Romans,  tracing  his  un- 
broken descent  from  Constantine  and  Augustus,  still 
held  his  place  among  European  sovereigns,  and,  as 
Emperor  of  the  Romans,  still  claimed  precedence 
over  every  meaner  potentate.     And  the  title  of  a 
Roman  office,  the  surname  of  a  Roman  family,  is 
still   the   highest   object   of   human    ambition,   still 
clutched  at  alike  by  worn-out  dynasties  and  by  suc- 
cessful usurpers.    Go  eastward,  and  the  whole  diplo- 
matic skill  of  Europe  is  taxed  to  settle  the  affairs  of 
a  Roman  colony,  which,  cut  off  alike  by  time  and 
distance,   still   clings  to   its   Roman   language   and 
glories  in  its  Roman  name.    We  made  war  but  yes- 
terday upon  a  power  whose  badge  is  the  Roman 
eagle,  on  behalf  of  one  whose  capital  has  not  yet  lost 
the  official  title  of  New  Rome.    Look  below  the  sur- 

*  Philosophy  of  History, 


1/6     PROPHETIC  FORECAST  OF  THE  WORLD*  S  HISTORY. 

face,  and  the  Christian  subjects  of  the  Porte  are 
found  called  and  calling  themselves  Romans ;  go  be- 
yond the  Tigris,  and  their  master  himself  is  known 
to  the  votary  of  Allah  simply  as  the  Roman  Caesar."* 
The  kingdoms  of  to-day  are,  therefore,  as  this 
prophecy  pictured  them,  divisions  and  continuations 
of  the  Roman  Empire.  There  are  two  other  features 
in  the  picture  which,  to  say  the  least,  are  certainly 
not  less  noteworthy. 

THE     NUMBER     OF     THE     KINGDOMS 

as  they  will  be  found  at  "the  time  of  the  end"  is 
definitely  stated.  These  are  represented,  as  we  have 
seen,  by  "the  toes"  of  the  image,  and  in  the  second 
vision  the  fourth  beast  is  pictured  as  having  "ten 
horns."  The  horn  in  the  Old  Testament  is  the 
symbol  of  power,  and  the  meaning  of  this  part  of 
the  figure  evidently  is  that  the  fourth  dominion 
would  finally  develop  into  ten  "powers."  That  this 
is  the  meaning  is  placed  beyond  doubt  by  the  ex- 
planation— "As  for  the  ten  horns,  out  of  this  king- 
dom shall  ten  kings  arise"  (Dan.  vii.  24). 

As  we  look  back  over  the  recent  history  of  Europe 
we  must  be  struck  by  the  fact  that  this  part  of  the 
prophecy  is  being  rapidly 

FULFILLED    IN    OUR    OWN    TIMES. 

The  fragments  of  the  fourth  dominion  are  assum- 
ing their  final  shape.  The  last  line  of  division  be- 
tween the  eastern  and  western  empires  passed  along 
what  is  now  the  western  boundary  of  Austria,  down 
through  the  Adriatic,  and  across  the  Mediterannean, 
striking  the  coast  of  Africa  to  the  west  of  Cyrene. 
If  we  are  to  follow  the  indications  of  the  first  vision, 
we  shall  expect  to  find  five  kingdoms  in  each  of  the 
two  empires.     What  then  is  their  present  condition? 

*  Historial  Essays — Second  Series,  pp.  291,  292. 


DESCRIPTION  OF  OUR  OWN  TIMES.  1 77 

It  has  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  northern  limits 
of  the  Roman  dominion  were  the  Rhine  and  the 
Danube.  Russia,  Norway  and  Sweden,  Denmark, 
and  Holland,  are,  therefore,  excluded  from  our  reck- 
oning. A  few  years  ago  we  should  have  looked  in 
vain  in  the  empire  of  the  West  for  the  five  powers  of 
the  prophecy.  But  Germany,  which  was  previously 
divided  into  five  kingdoms  and  numerous  principal- 
ities, has  latterly  become  one  empire;  and  Italy, 
which  was  similarly  subdivided,  is  now  also  a  single 
kingdom.  These  changes,  which  have  been  among 
the  surprises  of  modern  history,  give  us  in  the  old 
empire  of  the  west  eight  kingdoms — Great  Britain, 
France,  Spain,  Portugal,  Belgium,  Germany,  Switz- 
erland, Italy.  Three  of  these,  Belgium,  Switzerland, 
and  Portugal,  will  no  doubt  soon  cease  to  exist  as 
separate  powers,  and  we  shall  then  have  the  five 
"powers"  foretold  by  the  prophecy.  Recent  changes 
have  also  paved  the  way  for  its  fulfilment  in  the 
eastern  division  of  the  empire.  We  can  already 
mark  the  lines  of  a  fivefold  division  there.  There 
are  Austria,  the  Danubian  Principalities,,  Greece, 
Turkey,  and  Egypt.  Is  it  not  marvellous  that  we 
should  now  have,  not  only  the  indication  of  a  ten- 
fold division  of  the  fourth  dominion,  but  also  of  five 
kingdoms  in  each  of  the  two  great  divisions  of  the  old 
Roman  empire? 

All  these  marvels  are  excelled,  however,  by  an- 
other, which  I  may  describe  as  a  miracle  of  insight. 
The  parts  of  the  image  which  represent  the  four 
dominions  regularly 

INCREASE    IN     STRENGTH. 

The  gold  is  softer  than  the  silver,  the  silver  than  the 
brass,  the  brass  than  the  iron.  Special  attention  is 
directed  to  this  feature  in  the  case  of  the  fourth 
kingdom.  It  "shall  be  strong  as  iron ;  forasmuch  as 
iron  breaketh  in  pieces  and  subdueth  all  things,  and 


I78     PROPHETIC  FORECAST  OF  THE  WORLDS  HISTORY. 

as  iron  that  crusheth  all  these,  shall  it  break  in 
pieces  and  crush"  (Dan.  ii.  40).  But  the  kingdoms 
also  sustain  another  relationship  to  each  other. 
They  as  regularly 

DECREASE     IN     VALUE. 

Attention  is  called  to  this  fact  in  the  case  of  the 
second  kingdom.  The  prophet  said  to  the  king, 
"Thou  art  the  head  of  gold.  And  after  thee  shall 
arise  another  kingdom  inferior  to  thee"    (Dan.  ii. 

39). 

It  will  be  evident  that  the  statement  of  this  double 
relationship  indicates  discrimination  of  a  most  thor- 
ough-going character.  We  know  that  in  the  case  of 
the  Greek  and  Roman  kingdoms,  at  any  rate,  the 
prediction  was  fulfilled  The  brass  was  stronger 
than  the  gold  and  the  silver;  and  the  iron  was  also 
stronger  than  the  brass.  And  this,  it  need  hardly  be 
remarked,  was  not  a  necessity.  It  was  not  necessary 
that  each  succeeding  kingdom  should  be  stronger 
than  that  which  went  before  it.  A  great  kingdom 
may,  in  the  hour  of  its  weakness,  fall  a  prey  to  one 
which,  in  the  fulness  of  its  vigor,  it  would  have 
regarded  as  a  contemptible  adversary.  But  this  was 
not  to  be  the  story  of  the  future.  The  kingdoms 
were  to  increase  in  strength,  and  the  last  was  to  be 
the  strongest  of  them  all.  We  are  now  met,  however, 
by  the  startling  paradox  that  these  dominions  as  they 
increase  in  strength  will  decrease  in  value,  and  that 
the  strongest  of  them  all  will  be  the  least  precious ! 
It  has  been  already  pointed  out  that,  in  the  king's 
vision,  history  is  read  from  the  view-point  of  ambi- 
tion. We  see  the  future  as  it  is  scanned  by  a  Ne- 
buchadnezzar or  a  Napoleon.  Our  eye  rests  on  the 
mighty  prizes  which  lie  in  the  pathway  of  conquest. 
But,  while  this  explains  why  the  kingdoms  are  de- 
scribed in  regard  to  their  strength  and  their  value, 
it  increases  our  difficulty.     Surely,  wre  say,  to  the 


DANIEL  AND   HEGEL.  1 79 

ambitious  man  the  stronger  kingdom  must  neces- 
sarily be  the  more  valuable,  and  the  strongest  the 
most  precious  of  all.  Yet,  instead  of  this,  the  silver 
of  the  second  is  explained  as  indicating  an  inferior 
dominion  to  the  first,  and  consequently  the  iron  of 
the  fourth  must  be  taken  as  indicating  that  the  last 
and  strongest  was  the  least  precious  of  the  four. 

This  point  seems  to  have  quite  escaped  the  notice 
of  commentators,  and  there  is  no  help  to  be  had  in 
consulting  them.  Turning  again  to  the  prophecy 
the  meaning  is  plain.  The  dominions  so  differ  in 
character  that  he,  who  possesses  the  first,  holds 
what  will  yield  to  ambition  a  fuller  satisfaction  than 
can  be  known  in  the  possession  of  any  of  the  others. 
To  the  man  of  ambition — the  man  who  lusts  after 
lordship  over  his  fellows — the  first  dominion  is  more 
precious  than  the  second,  the  second  than  the  third, 
the  third  than  the  fourth.  But,  while  the  meaning 
is  plain,  its  plainness  does  not  remove  our  difficulty. 
Why  should  the  strength  of  the  dominions  be  in 
inverse  ratio  to  their  value?  Why  should  those 
qualities  not  increase  or  decrease  together? 

When  my  attention  was  first  attracted  to  this 
feature  in  the  prophecy,  it  seemed  to  me  that  light 
might  be  found  in  the  writings  of  those  who  dealt 
with  Universal  History,  and  of  such  especially  as 
dealt  with  it  philosophically.  The  search  which  was 
then  entered  upon  was  not  in  vain.  There  is  one 
book  for  which  we  are  indebted  to  one  of  Germany's 
deepest  thinkers,  and  which  deserves,  beyond  any 
other  that  has  ever  been  written,  the  name  of  a 
"Philosophy  of  History."  Its  merits  have  been 
widely  recognized,  and  have  been  as  freely  admitted 
by  the  opponents,  as  they  have  been  loudly  pro- 
claimed by  the  disciples,  of  the  writer.  I  refer  to 
the  well-known  work  of  Jlegel,  Morell  says  of  it: 
"Hegel  has  given  us  many  views  of  great  originality. 
His  'Philosophy  of  History'  is  especially  valuable,  as 


iSo     PROPHETIC  FORECAST  OF  THE  WORLDS  HISTORY. 

containing  investigations  into  the  peculiar  charac- 
teristics of  the  different  ages  of  the  world,  that 
throw  great  light  upon  the  intellectual  progress  of 
civilization/'*  Emil  Palleske  gives  it  still  higher 
praise.  He  refers,  in  his  life  of  Schiller,  to  Kant's 
treatise  on  "Ideas  for  a  Universal  History  consid- 
ered in  a  cosmopolitan  light/'  and  says :  "Kant  in 
this  compares  himself  to  Kepler,  and  wished  that  he 
might  have  a  Newton  as  a  successor.  Hegel  be- 
came this  Newton. "t 

Turning  now  to  his  "Philosophy  of  History/'  we 
find  that  it  covers  the  entire  field  described  in  the 
prophecy.  It  contains  no  reference  whatever,  it 
may  be  said,  to  the  words  of  Scripture,  and  there 
is  in  Hegel's  mind  apparently  not  the  remotest 
thought  of  them.  But  the  problem,  if  we  may  so 
call  it,  is  the  same.  Hegel  contemplates  the  His- 
tory of  man  as  a  whole.  He  sees  in  those  successive 
dominions,  or  rather  in  the  conception  of  human 
freedom  which  each  embodies,  the  advancing  steps 
of  a  continuous  development  The  first  thing  which 
strikes  us  is  that  the  number  of  these  stages  is  iden- 
tical with  that  in  the  Book  of  Daniel.  There  are 
five  developments.  There  is  the  childhood,  the  boy- 
hood, the  youth,  the  manhood,  and  the  old  age  of 
history,  the  last  not  being  weakness,  but  full  matur- 
ity. Then  these  five  are  divided  exactly  as  in  the 
prophecy.  There  are  four  dominions  of  man,  and 
one  of  God  in  man.  Hegel  saw  that  in  Christianity 
civilization  had  reached  a  stage  which  it  never  had 
attained  before,  and  that,  when  Christianity  shall 
have  done  its  work  and  permeated  all  social  and 
political  relationships,  the  last  and  highest  stage  of 
man's  development  will  be  reached. 

Even  these  coincidences  are  astonishing.  They 
prove  that  the  Scripture  looking  forward  and  the 

*  History  of  Modem  Philosophy,  ii.,  pp.  154-155.      f  Vol,  ii., 

p.  32. 


THE  YOUTH  OF  HISTORY.  l8l 

philosopher  looking  back  have  seen  the  same  things. 
But  we  have  not  exhausted  Hegel's  testimony.  He 
deals  with  kingdoms,  not  because  he  desires  to  trace 
their  conquests  or  record  the  influence  which  they 
exerted  over  mankind,  but  merely  because  it  is  only 
when  men  have  been  gathered  into  states  that  the 
march  of  civilization  begins.  It  is  with  this  civiliza- 
tion that  he  concerns  himself.  What  were  the  ideas 
whch  lay  beneath  it,  and  moulded  it,  and  gave  it  its 
distinctive  form?  As  Hegel  looked  back  over  the 
past  he  saw  one  form  emerging  ever  more  fully  from 
surrounding  darkness  and  mist;  it  was  the  form  of 
Freedom.  Men  did  not  at  first  realize — at  least,  as 
we  find  them  congregated  together  in  states — all 
that  they  were  as  men.  The  state  was  in  the  begin- 
ning merely  an  enlargement  of  the  family.  Sover- 
eignty was  looked  upon  as  invested  with  all  the 
rights,  and  hedged  round  about  with  all  the  sanctity, 
of  fatherhood.  The  king  was  the  father  in  whose 
care  all  confided,  whose  frown  they  dreaded,  and  in 
whose  smile  they  rejoiced.  He  alone  was  free ;  the 
duty  of  every  other  was  submission  to  his  will. 
That  was 

THE    CHILDHOOD    OF    HISTORY. 

Hegel  finds  the  fullest  illustration  of  it  in  China. 
The  ancient  economy  of  Babylon  was  almost  wholly 
unknown  in  Hegel's  time,  and  he  makes  only  a  pass- 
ing reference  to  it;  but  I  shall  show  that  every 
feature,  which  he  notes  in  the  condition  of  China 
has  its  parallel  in  that  of  the  Assyrio-Babylonian 
monarchy.  And  we  now  understand  the  reason  of  the 
similarity.  Recent  investigations  have  shown  that 
the  Chinese  are  the  descendants  of  the  Accadians  to 
whom  Babylonia  owed  its  civilisation.  Hegel 
dwells  upon  the  slavery  of  the  family  relations  in 
China:  "The  duties  of  the  family  are  absolutely 
binding  and  established  and  regulated  by  law.    The 


1 82  FORECAST  OF  THE  WORLD'S  HISTORY. 

son  may  not  accost  the  father  when  he  comes  into 
the  room;  he  must  seem  to  contract  himself  to 
nothing  at  the  side  of  the  door,  and  may  not  leave 
the  room  without. the  father's  permission/'*  With 
this  compare  the  following:  "A  tablet  in  the  British 
Museum  contains  a  fragment  of  the  civil  war,  in  a 
double  text — Turanian-Chaldsean  and  Semitic-Assy- 
rian— on  the  subject  of  the  rights  and  reciprocal 
duties  of  husbands  and  wives,  fathers  and  children. 
From  this  we  find  that  the  Assyrian  family  was 
constituted  on  the  basis  of  the  most  absolute  and 
uncontrolled  power  of  the  husband  and  the  father."t 
Then  of  China  Hegel  says:  "The  patriarchal  rela- 
tion is  predominant,  and  the  government  is  based 
upon  the  paternal  management  of  the  emperor,  who 
keeps  all  departments  of  the  State  in  order.  .  .  . 
He  is  the  patriarch,  and  everything  in  the  State  that 
can  make  any  claim  to  reverence  is  attached  to  him 
.  .  .  The  emperor,  as  he  is  the  supreme  head  of 
the  State,  is  also  the  chief  of  its  religion."!  Lenor- 
mant,  referring  to  the  king's  humility  in  the  pres- 
ence of  the  gods,  says,  "But  this  man,  who  was  so 
humble  in  the  presence  of  the  gods,  held  in  Tiis  hands, 
with  regard  to  other  men,  the  double  power,  spir- 
itual and  temporal ;  he  was  both  a  sovereign  pontiff 
and  an  autocrat;  he  was  called  the  vicegerent  of 
the  gods  on  earth;  and  his  authority,  thus  emanat- 
ing from  a  divine  source,  was  as  absolute  over  the 
soul  as  over  the  body."|| 

One  more  twofold  quotation  will  complete  the 
picture :  "Besides  the  imperial  dignity  there  is  prop- 
erly no  elevated  rank,  no  nobility  among  the  Chi- 
nese; only  the  princes  of  the  imperial  house  and  the 
sons  of  the  ministers  enjoy  any  precedence  of  the 
kind,  and  they  rather  by  their  position  than  by  their 

*  Philosophy  of  History,  p.  127.  t  Lenormant,  Ancient  His- 
tory of  the  East,  vol.  1.,  p.  425.  %  Philosophy  of  History, 
pp.  126,  129,  137.     !|  Ancient  History,  vol.  i.,  p.  418. 


THE  YOUTH  OF  HISTORY.  183 

birth.  Otherwise  all  are  equal.  .  .  .  And 
though  there  is  no  distinction  conferred  by  birth, 
and  everyone  can  attain  the  highest  dignity,  this 
very  equality  testifies  to  no  triumphant  assertion  of 
the  worth  of  the  inner  man,  but  a  servile  conscious- 
ness— one  which  has  not  yet  matured  itself  so  far 
as  to  recognize  distinctions."*  Of  the  Assyrio- 
Babylonian  civilization  Lenormant  speaks  in  ex- 
actly similar  terms :  "In  Assyria  there  were  no 
castes,  nor  even  rigorously  defined  classes,  no  here- 
ditary or  established  aristocracy.  There  was  com- 
plete social  equality,  such  equality  as  despotism  de- 
sires and  establishes  as  most  favorable  to  its  own 
existence — an  equality  with  a  common  level  created 
by  the  yoke  that  bears  equally  on  all,  where  there 
is  no  superiority  but  that  of  offices  established  by 
the  will,  often  by  the  caprice,  of  an  absolute 
master."t 

This,  then,  is  what  Hegel  has  well  described  as 
the  Childhood  of  history,  when  all  is  simple  and 
trustful.  Here  all  right  and  power  centre  in  the 
monarch.  "Individuals  remain  as  mere  accidents. 
These  revolve  round  the  monarch,  who  as  patriarch 
.  .  .  stands  at  the  head.  .  .  .  All  the  riches 
of  imagination  are  appropriated  to  that  dominant 
existence  in  which  subjective  freedom  is  essentially 
merged ;  the  latter  looks  for  its  dignity  not  in  itself, 
but  in  that  absolute  object."t  Could  there  be  a  finer 
comment  on  the  words,  "Thou,  O  king,  art  this  head 
of  gold;"  or  on  these  others,  "The  most  high  God 
gave  Nebuchadnezzar  ...  a  kingdom,  and  ma- 
jesty and  glory  and  honour,  and  for  the  majesty 
that  he  gave  him,  all  people,  nations  and 
languages,  trembled  and  feared  before  him:  whom 
he  would  he  slew;  and  whom  he  would  he  kept 
alive ;  and  whom  he  would  he  set  up,  and  whom  he 

*  Philosophy  of  History,  pp.   130,   145.       f  Ancient  History, 
vol.  i.,  p.  423.     $  Philosophy  of  History,  i.,  p.  in. 


184  FORECAST  OF  THE   WORLD'S   HISTORY. 

would  he  put  down"  (Dan.  v.  18,  19)  ?  On  the  one 
side  there  was  the  most  despotic  sway,  on  the  other 
the  deepest  reverence,  the  most  willing  and  unlimit- 
ed obedience.  To  the  lust  of  ambition  what  nobler 
prize  ever  presented  itself  than  to  press  back  the 
boundaries  of  such  a  dominion  till  they  were  conter- 
minous with  the  world,  and  thus  to  become  the 
centre  of  all  earthly  power,  the  source  of  all  earthly 
beneficence,  the  one  object  of  human  reverence, 
whose  thoughts  to  all  men  were  wisdom,  whose  will 
was  unquestioned  law?  He  who  swayed  this 
sceptre  ruled  as  a  god  upon  the  earth.  He  received 
as  a  spontaneous  offering  from  men,  in  the  child- 
hood of  their  history,  what  afterwards  the  world's 
wealth  could  not  buy,  nor  the  terrors  of  the  sword 
compel.  This  was  the  prize  of  "fine  gold." 
The  Persian  dominion  constitutes 

"the   boyhood   of   history, 

no  longer  manifesting  the  repose  and  trustingness 
of  the  child,  but  boisterous  and  turbulent."*  The 
consciousness  of  freedom,  or  rather  of  human 
equality,  begins  to  dawn.  In  the  comparatively  pure 
religion  taught  by  Zoroaster  another  mighty  pres- 
ence was  recognized,  before  whom  king  and  subject 
had  alike  to  bow.  "Ormuzd  is  the  Lord  of  Light. 
.  .  He  is  the  excellent,  the  good,  the  positive  in 
all  natural  and  spiritual  existence."!  The  result  of 
this  purer  faith  was  twofold.  It  was  seen  in  the  tol- 
eration of  the  Persian  empire.  The  kingdoms  are 
left  with  their  own  religions,  institutions,  and  laws, 
and  there  is  no  longer  any  attempt  to  make  the  king 
the  temporal  and  spiritual  head  of  all  mankind.t 
Nebuchadnezzar  commands  men  of  all  nationalities 
to  fall  down  and  worship  the  image  which  he  sets 
up,  and  is  quite  unable  to  comprehend  the  scruples 

^Philosophy  of  History,  p.  112.    f  Ibid.,  p.  186.   t  Ibid.,  p.  120. 


THE  BOYHOOD  OF  HISTORY.  1 85 

of  the  few  pious  Jews  who  refuse  their  adoration; 
while  Cyrus  and  succeeding  Persian  kings  assist  in 
rebuilding  the  Jewish  Temple.  The  King  was  there- 
fore less  to  the  subject  nations  in  this  second  than 
he  had  been  in  the  preceding  dominion. 

But   there   was  another   result — the   relation  be- 
tween the  monarch  and  his  own  people  was  changed. 
"The  Persians,"  says  Hegel,  "stood  with  one  foot 
on  their  ancestral  territory,  with  the  other  on  their 
foreign  conquests     In  his  ancestral  land  the  king 
was  a  friend  among  friends,  and  as  if  surrounded 
by  equals."*     The  king  had  therefore  become  less 
to  his  own  people  than  the  Babylonian  monarch  had 
been  among  his.     But,  while  this  was  so,  it  was  as 
yet  only  the  boyhood  of  the  race.    The  glorious  form 
of  liberty  was  but  dimly  seen,  and  the  spirit  of  slav- 
ery and  tyranny  was  still  unexpelled.    "The  subject 
nations/'  says  Heeren,  "were  treated  as  property, 
and  were  called  slaves,  in  contrast  with  the  Persians, 
who  on  their  side  were  called  freemen.     Such  was 
the  relation  of  the  nations  towards  each  other :  to- 
wards the  king  the  Persians  were  as  little  free  as  the 
others."     But  the  hand  now  laid  upon  the  nations 
was  mightier  than  that  which  they  had  felt  before ; 
for  this  was,  in  a  word,  government  by  a  dominant 
race,  whereas  in  the  previous  case  it  had  been  gov- 
ernment by  a  dominant  personality.    The  provinces 
were  now  held  by  Persian   satraps.     The  nations 
were  led  into  battle,  not  by  their  own  princes,  but  by 
Persian   generals.     The   monarch   no  longer   stood 
among  all  the  peoples  and  tribes  of  his  dominion  the 
one  central  power  and  splendour.     He  was  king  of 
the  Persians,  and  they  controlled  for  him  the  rest. 
Even  to  his  own  he  was  not  the  gorgeous  personal- 
ity which  the  Babylonian  king  had  been.    This  second 
throne  was  still  a  great  prize  for  ambition,  but  it 
was  less  than  the  first.     And  yet,  as  the  king  was 

*  Ibid.,  p.  196. 


1 86  FORECAST  OF  THE   WORLD'S   HISTORY. 

thus  multiplied,  so  to  speak,  into  a  nation,  the  one 
into  the  many,  it  necessarily  held  the  dominion  with 
a  firmer  grasp.  It  was  the  silver,  less  precious,  but 
stronger,  than  the  gold. 

The  third  era — the  Grecian — is 

THE    YOUTH    OF    HISTORY. 

"The  Greek  world  may  be  compared,"  say  Hegel, 
"with  the  period  of  adolescence,  for  here  we  have 
individualities  forming  themselves."*  Freedom  had 
its  birth  among  the  Greeks,  and  their  tenacious 
grasp  of  this  principle  lay  at  the  root  of  their  glory 
and  strength.  Union  and  subordination  were  to 
some  extent  necessary  in  their  predatory  excursions, 
and  in  their  contests  with  neighbouring  cities  and 
states;  but  they  jealously  guarded  the  gift  of  free- 
dom. Their  hatred  of  a  master  still  breathes  its 
scornful  defiance  in  that  word  "tyrant,"  which  they 
have  bequeathed  to  us.  Here  it  was  no  longer  the 
one  who  was  free,  but  the  many.  Among  such  men 
the  king  could  only  be  a  general ;  and  even  this  rank 
he  could  hold  only  in  virtue  of  his  kingly  nature. 
"The  relation  of  princes  to  subjects,"  says  Hegel, 
"we  learn  best  from  Homer.  .  .  .  Their  sub- 
jects obeyed  them,  not  as  distinguished  from  them 
by  conditions  of  caste,  nor  as  in  a  state  of  serfdom, 
nor  in  the  patriarchal  relation,  nor  yet  as  the  result 
of  the  express  necessity  for  a  constitutional  govern- 
ment, but  only  from  the  need,  universally  felt,  of  be- 
ing held  together  and  of  obeying  a  ruler  accustomed 
to  command.  The  prince  has  just  so  much  personal 
authority  as  he  possesses  the  ability  to  acquire  and 
to  assert."t  It  was  the  commanding  intellect  alone 
that  could  be  monarch  here,  for  from  feeble  hands 
the  reins  would  soon  have  been  torn.  Even  under 
Alexander,  the  Grecian  armies  were  remarkable  for 
their  insolence  and  insubordination.     The  strength, 

*  Philosophy  of  History,  p,  112.  t  Ibid.,  p.  239. 


THE  MANHOOD  OF  HISTORY.  187 

however,  which  lay  in  this  consciousness  of  free- 
dom was  immense.  Nothing  could  daunt  its  proud 
and  noble  daring.  He  who  held  this  dominion 
controlled  a  power  which  was  then  irresistible;  for 
he  led  an  army  of  men.  But  his  glory  was  less  than 
that  of  the  world  conquerors  who  had  preceded  him; 
for  he  ruled,  not  over  sons,  but  brothers ;  not  over 
slaves,  but  freemen.  The  brass  was  stronger,  and 
yet  less  precious,  than  the  silver  and  the  gold. 
We  come  now  to 

THE     MANHOOD    OF     HISTORY, 

the  Roman  State.  In  the  Grecian  idea  of  freedom 
there  was  caprice,  and,  consequently,  turbulence  and 
disorganization.  Each  man  was  a  law  to  himself. 
This  idea  sufficed  for  the  youth ;  but  upon  the  man 
there  now  broke  the  majestic  vision  of  a  law  out- 
side man's  will,  to  which  the  will  must  be  subjected, 
and  by  which,  in  return,  freedom  was  guarded. 
Speaking  of  this  distinction,  Hegel  says :  "The 
Romans  completed  this  important  separation,  and 
discovered  a  principle  of  right  which  is  external; 
that  is,  one  not  dependent  on  disposition  and  senti- 
ment."* We  know  how  law  was  reverenced  among 
them.  "In  order  to  obtain  a  nearer  view  of  this 
spirit,  we  must,"  says  Hegel  again,  "pay  particular 
attention  to  the  conduct  of  the  plebs  in  times  of 
revolt  against  the  patricians.  How  often,  in  insur- 
rection and  anarchical  disorder,  were  the  plebs 
brought  back  into  a  state  of  tranquility  by  a  mere 
form,  and  cheated  of  the  fulfillment  of  its  demands, 
righteous  or  unrighteous  !"t 

But  Rome  went  further.  The  will  was  Bowed  to 
one  abstraction — Law :  the  whole  passion  and 
strength  of  the  Roman  nature  were  given  to  an- 
other— the  State.     "True  manhood  acts  neither  in 


*  Ibid.,  p.  300.       t  Ibid.,  p.  298. 


l88  FORECAST  OF  THE   WORLD'S   HISTORY. 

accordance  with  the  caprice  of  a  despot,  nor  in 
obedience  to  a  graceful  caprice  of  its  own,  but  works 
for  a  general  aim — one  in  which  the  individual 
perishes,  and  realizes  his  own  private  object  only  in 
that  general  aim.  Free  individuals  are  sacrificed 
to  the  severe  demands  of  the  national  objects  to 
which  they  must  surrender  themselves  in  this  ser- 
vice of  abstract  generalization/'*  The  Roman  did 
not  give  up  his  liberty  to  a  master,  but  he  resigned 
it  willingly  to  the  State. 

It  may  be  well  to  notice  how  fully  all  this  is  borne 
out  by  the  great  master  of  Roman  history,  who  had 
as  little  thought  of  supporting  Hegel  as  of  supplying 
materials  for  a  comment  on  Scripture.  The  Ro- 
mans, says  Mommsen,  were  "A  free  people,  under- 
standing the  duty  of  obedience,  disowning  all  mystic 
ideas  of  Divine  right,  absolutely  equal  in  the  eye 
of  the  law  and  one  with  another.""}"  "Wherever  in 
Hellas  a  tendency  towards  national  union  appeared, 
it  was  based,  not  on  influences  directly  political,  but 
on  games  and  art :  the  contests  at  Olympia,  the 
poems  of  Homer,  the  tragedies  of  Euripides,  were 
the  only  bonds  that  held  Hellas  together.  Resolute- 
ly, on  the  other  hand,  the  Italian  surrendered  his 
own  personal  will  for  the  sake  of  freedom,  and 
learned  to  obey  his  father  that  he  might  know  how 
to  obey  the  State.  In  such  subjection  as  this,  in- 
dividual development  might  be  marred,  and  the 
germs  of  fairest  promise  in  man  might  be  arrested 
in  the  bud;  the  Italian  gained  instead  a  feeling  of 
fatherland  and  of  patriotism  such  as  the  Greek  never 
knew,  and,  alone  among  all  the  civilized  nations  of 
antiquity,  succeeded  in  working  out  national  unity 
in  connection  with  a  constitution  based  on  self- 
government — a  national  unity,  which  at  last  placed 
in  his  hands  the  supremacy,  not  only  over  the  di- 
vided  Hellenic   stock,   but  over  the   whole   known 

*  Ibid.,  pp.  113-114.     f  History  of  Rome,  i.,  p.  85. 


THE  MANHOOD  OF  HISTORY.  189 

world."*  "Life,  in  the  case  of  the  Roman,  was  spent 
under  conditions  of  austere  restraint,  and,  the 
nobler  he  was,  the  less  he  was  a  free  man.  .  .  . 
But,  while  the  individual  had  neither  the  wish  nor 
the  power  to  be  ought  else  than  a  member  of  the 
community,  the  glory  and  the  might  of  that  com- 
munity was  felt  by  every  individual  citizen  as  a 
personal  possession  to  be  transmitted  along  with 
his  name  and  his  homestead,  to  his  posterity."! 

This  voluntary  self-surrender  became  a  worship. 
The  highest  praise  which  the  Roman  coveted  was  to 
have  it  solemnly  declared  that  he  had  deserved  well 
of  his  country.  Kings,  consuls,  tribunes,  emperors 
were  but  the  servants  of  the  state.  Their  individual 
glory  was  absorbed  in  the  surpassing  glory  of  that 
abstraction:  the  man  was  overshadowed  by  the 
thing. 

Even  the  glory  of  the  Emperors  had  to  be  veiled: 
"The  Csesar  was  in  truth,"  says  Dr.  Freeman,  "an 
absolute  monarch.  But  in  theory  he  was  only  a  citi- 
zen, a  senator,  a  magistrate.  The  Emperor  gave 
his  vote  in  the  Senate  like  another  Senator,  as 
Prince  of  the  Senate  he  gave  the  first  vote;  but  it 
was  open  either  to  patriots  or  to  subtle  flatterers  to 
vote  another  way.  His  household  was  like  that  of 
any  other  Roman  noble;  he  mixed  with  other 
Roman  nobles  on  terms  of  social  equality;  he  had 
no  crowns  and  sceptres,  no  bendings  of  the  knee, 
no  titles  of  Majesty  or  Highness.  .  .  .  He  was 
a  monarch  who  reigned  without  a  particle  of  royal 
show."t  It  is  well  known  how  fully  Augustus  rec- 
ognised the  fact  that  personal  pretensions  would  be 
utterly  destructive  of  this  enormous  power,  and  how 
assiduously  he  cast  away  everything  which  would 
proclaim  him  the  world's  master.  "The  emperors/' 
writes    Hegel,    "conducted    themselves    in    the    enjoy- 

*Ibid.,  pp.  30,  31.       \Ibid.,  iii.,  p.  394- 
X  Historical  Essays — Second  Series,  pp.  372-373- 


190  FORECAST  OF  THE  WORLDS  HISTORY. 

ment  of  their  power  with  perfect  simplicity,  and  did 
not  surround  themselves  with  pomp  and  splendour 
in  Oriental  fashion.  We  find  in  them  traits  of 
simplicity  which  astonish  us.  Thus,  for  example, 
Augustus  writes  a  letter  to  Horace,  in  which  he  re- 
proaches him  for  having  failed  to  address  any  poem 
to  him,  and  asks  him  whether  he  thinks  that  that 
would  disgrace  him  with  posterity."*  He  ordered  a 
palace,  which  had  been  built  by  his  daughter  Julia, 
to  be  pulled  down  because  of  its  splendour. 

"It  was  not  individual  genius,"  says  Mommsen, 
"that  ruled  in  Rome,  and  through  Rome  in  Italy, 
but  the  one  immovable  idea  of  a  policy — propa- 
gated from  generation  to  generation  in  the  Senate. 
Immense  successes  were  thus  obtained  at  an  im- 
mense price.  In  the  Roman  commonwealth  noth- 
ing specially  depended  on  any  one  man,  either  on 
soldier  or  general,  and  under  the  rigid  discipline  of 
its  moral  police  all  the  idiosyncracies  of  human  char- 
acter were  extinguished.  Rome  reached  a  great- 
ness such  as  no  other  state  of  antiquity  attained; 
but  she  dearly  purchased  her  greatness  at  the  sacri- 
fice of  the  graceful  variety,  of  the  easy  abandon, 
and  of  the  inward  freedom  of  Hellenic  life."f  It  was 
no  longer  their  fellow-creature  whom  men  served 
and  for  whom  they  sacrificed  themselves;  it  was 
Rome.  The  highest  place  left  for  ambition  was 
simply  to  be  the  first  and  greatest  servant  of  the 
State.  But  the  power  which  the  stern,  deep,  devo- 
tion of  the  strong  Roman  soul  placed  in  that  ser- 
vant's hand  was  the  mightiest  and  most  terrible  the 
world  had  ever  seen.  There  was  nothing  it  would 
not  dare ;  there  was  nothing  it  could  not  do.  Though 
less  precious  to  ambition,  the  iron  was  stronger 
than  the  gold,  and  the  silver,  and  the  brass. 

So  far  the  agreement  is  remarkable,  but  Hegel 

*  Philosophy  of  History,  p.  326.       f  I.,  p.  471. 


THE  OLD  AGE  OF  HISTORY.  101 

renders  it  absolutely  complete.  He  notes  a  fifth  and 
last  stage  in  the  development,  which  he  calls 

THE     OLD     AGE    OF     HISTORY. 

He  explains  himself  thus:  'The  old  age  of  nature 
is  weakness;  but  that  of  the  spirit  is  its  perfect 
maturity  and  strength.  .  .  .  The  fourth  phase" 
- — it  must  be  remembered  that  Hegel's  fourth  is  our 
fifth,  as  he  reckons  the  first  and  second  stages,  his 
own  "childhood"  and  "boyhood"  of  history,  as  one 
—"the  fourth  phase  begins  with  the  reconciliation 

PRESENTED  BY  CHRISTIANITY  BUT  ONLY  IN  THE  GERM, 
WITHOUT      NATIONAL     OR      POLITICAL     DEVELOPMENT." 

When  Christianity  has  permeated  the  national  and  polit- 
ical life,  the  fifth  kingdom  will  be  established ;  in  other 
words,  the  crowning  development  of  history,  the 
"germ"  of  which  is  already  with  us,  is  "the  kingdom 
of  God"  It  only  remains  to  add  that,  as  is  implied 
in  the  prophecy  which  pictures  the  stone  falling  not 
only  upon  the  iron  but  also  upon  the  brass,  the 
silver,  and  the  gold,  the  various  forms  of  past  civi- 
lisation still  remain.  Their  hour  of  might  has 
passed  away,  but  they  themselves  still  exist.  The 
gold  has  still  its  representative  in  China  and  else- 
where; the  silver  in  such  countries  as  Russia  and 
Turkey;  the  brass  in  such  a  republic  as  Switzerland; 
the  iron  in  those  commonwealths  where,  in  addition 
to  Grecian  freedom,  there  is  the  Roman  unity  and 
subordination. 

This,  it  will  be  observed,  is  not  the  testimony  of 
distinguished  opinion,  but  of  facts.  The  facts  were 
there  though  it  needed  genius  to  discern  and  make 
them  manifest  to  us.  But  what  of  the  Book  in 
which  all  was  written  from  of  old?  How  was  it 
that,  more  than  three-and-twenty  centuries  before 
Hegel  was  born,  and  when  the  past  he  was  after- 
wards to  read  had  just  begun  to  be.  Time's  entire 


192  FORECAST  OF  THE  WORLD'S  HISTORY. 

story  was  already  written,  its  developments  num- 
bered, its  epochs  clearly  marked,  and  their  inmost 
meaning  declared  ?    By  whom  was  it  that  the  future 
was  so  deeply  searched  and  so  fully  made  known? 
There  can  be  but  one  reply.     In  a  dull  and  cloudy 
(day  the  very  light  around  us,  subdued  though  it  be, 
compels  the  belief  that  the  sun,  though  we  do  not 
see  him,  is  shining  in  the  sky.     But  when  the  veil 
of  clouds  has  been  rolled  away,  and  his  full  radiance 
is  poured  upon  us,  there  is  no  more  room  for  infer- 
ence or  argument:  every  eye  must  note  his  glory. 
And  so  here  we  behold  in  unveiled  splendour  that 
full  inspiration  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  the  presence  of 
which   we  feel  in   every  one  of  those   words   that 
search  the  hidden  things  of   man's  heart  and  the 
deep  things  of  God — an  inspiration  which  no  lowly 
Heart  will  ever  try  to  explain  away,   and  which,   in 
the  face  of  these  "abiding  miracles  of  prophecy," 
no  honest  mind  will  seek  to  deny.     And  not  only 
does  it  demonstrate  the  full  inspiration  of  Scripture, 
it  proves  that  God  reigns  in  the  earth  and  guides  it 
on  to  good.     It  reminds  us  that,  as  the  past  has  ac- 
complished His  will,  so  the  present  and  the  future 
will  hasten  the  world's  salvation.     The  stone,  mira- 
culous in  its  origin,  cut  out  of  the  mountain-side  with- 
out hands,  will  yet  smite  the  toes  of  the  image  and 
grind  the  whole  of  it  to  powder.     Christ  will  come 
again,  and  righteousness  and  love  and  peace  will 
bless  the  earth,  which  man's  dominions  have  mocked 
and   scourged.     Let  us   interpret  the   earth's   need 
and    lift   the    cry,    "Thy    Kingdom    come" !      Let   us 
yield  ourselves,  and  let  Him  reign  in  us  now,  so  that 
when  He  does  come,  it  may  not  be  with  condemna- 
tion but  with  joy. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

PROPHECIES  FULFILLED   IN   THE  COMING,  THE   HISTORY, 
AND  THE  WORK  OF  CHRIST. 

The  evidence,  with  which  we  have  hitherto  been 
dealing,  has  been  accumulating  around  one  or  two 
points.  Whatever  doubts  we  may  have  entertained 
regarding  the  existence  of  God  and  the  authority  of 
the  Scriptures,  we  make  bold  to  say  that  the  study 
of  the  predictions  discussed  in  these  pages  is  calcu- 
lated to  result  in  deep  and  abiding  conviction.  No 
one  can  compare  those  forecasts,  so  minute  and 
circumstantial,  with  their  complete  fulfilment  so 
many  ages  afterwards,  and  not  feel  assured  that  God 
is,  and  that  His  power  is  round  us  now,  and  that  the 
Bible,  wondrous  in  so  many  ways  besides,  finds  its 
explanation  in  this  alone — that  it  is  His  word  to  us. 

This  might  have  been  enough  to  lead  us  to  accept 
its  testimony  regarding  the  person  and  work  of 
Jesus  Chrust.  A  piece  of  metal,  said  to  be  gold,  is 
placed  in  the  hands  of  a  jeweller.  He  applies  his  tests 
here  and  there  with  satisfactory  results,  and  then  ac- 
cepts the  whole  without  the  slightest  misgiving  that 
it  is  what  it  was  declared  to  be.  A  messenger  comes 
with  important  intelligence.  If  it  is  true,  it  ought  to 
be  acted  upon  at  once.  There  may  be  no  means  at 
hand  of  directly  testing  its  truth,  but  it  may  be  possi- 
ble to  determine  whether  the  messenger  is  trustworthy 
or  not.     His  story  may  be  sifted,  or  he  may  bear  ere- 


194  PREDICTIONS  REGARDING  CHRIST. 

dentials,  the  production  of  which  will  banish  every 
shadow  of  doubt.  The  Bible  comes  offering  us  in 
God's  name  salvation  through  Christ.  If  that  is  in- 
deed God's  offer,  it  calls  for  immediate  and  grateful 
acceptance.  Now,  for  determining  whether  it  is  of 
God,  we  repeat  that  such  evidence  as  we  have  already 
before  us  might  have  been  enough.  We  have  tested 
the  Scripture  and  found  it  to  be  truth.  The  creden- 
tials of  this  messenger  have  been  produced,  and  these 
have  settled  the  question  whether  the  message  is  from 
God. 

But  we  are  not  compelled  to  rest  upon  that  testi- 
mony. Direct  evidence  that  this  message  of  grace  is 
indeed  of  God,  has  been  given  in  ungrudged  abun- 
dance, and  the  wonders  of  prophecy  have  been  made 
to  cluster  round  what  is  really  the  central  truth  of 
Scripture.  Before  touching,  however,  upon  these  pre- 
dictions, it  is  needful  to  say  a  word  or  two  regarding 
the  age  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures.  We  have 
hitherto  been  content  with  the  admission  that  they  are 
as  old  as  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era.  In  deal- 
ing with  predictions  which  were  accomplished  long 
after  that  period,  and  even  in  our  own  time,  nothing 
more  was  required.  But  in  taking  up  predictions, 
which  were  fulfilled  at  that  very  point  in  the  world's 
history,  this  admission  is  no  longer  sufficient.  Can  it 
be  placed  beyond  the  possibility  of  disproof  or  of 
doubt,  that  there  was  such  an  interval  between  the 
prophecy  and  the  events  it  foretold,  that  no  human 
foresight  can  account  for  its  existence? 

Fortunately  this  point  can  be  settled  briefly  and 
conclusively.  There  is  no  need  for  any  prolonged  dis- 
cussion, or  for  any  long  array  of  proofs.  The  books  of 
the  Old  Testament  were  translated  into  Greek,  at 
least  two  hundred  years  before  the  birth  of  our  Lord. 
The  Septuagint  version,  so  called  because  the  work 
of  translation  was  done  by  about  seventy  learned 
Jews,  was  everywhere  in  use  among  the  Jews,  who 


PREDICTIONS  REGARDING  CHRIST.  I95 

were  scattered  throughout  the  Roman  Empire  long  be- 
fore the  Christian  era  began.  Philo,  who  was  born 
some  thirty  years  before  Christ,  speaks  of  the  transla- 
tion as  already  ancient,  and  mentions  that  an  annual 
festival  was  observed  at  Alexandria  in  commemora- 
tion of  the  work.  "Even  to  this  very  day,"  he  says, 
"there  is  every  year  a  solemn  assembly  held,  and  a 
festival  celebrated,  in  the  island  of  Pharos,  to  which 
not  only  the  Jews  but  a  great  number  of  persons  of 
other  nations  sail  across,  reverencing  the  place  in 
which  the  first  light  of  interpretation  shone  forth,  and 
thanking  God  for  that  ancient  piece  of  beneficence 
which  was  always  young  and  fresh." 

There  is  no  reason,  then,  to  doubt  that  the  transla- 
tion was  begun  in  the  reign  of  Ptolemy  Philadelphus 
about  280  b.  cv  and  that  it  was  completed  not  long 
after.  We  might,  therefore,  have  insisted  upon  an 
earlier  date  than  200  b.  c.  for  the  origin  of  the  Greek 
version.  We  might  have  argued  also  that,  seeing  the 
translation  was  then  made,  the  books  of  the  Old  Tes- 
tament must  be  admitted  to  be  still  older;  for  they 
must  have  been  received  and  venerated  as  God's  word 
long  before  the  necessity  was  felt  for  translating  them 
from  the  Hebrew  into  that  tongue,  which  the  con- 
quests of  Alexander  had  made  the  universal  language 
of  the  time.  But  it  is  enough  for  our  purpose  to  take 
the  smallest  interval  which  can  be  assigned,  and  we 
content  ourselves,,  therefore,  with  the  admission  that 
the  prophecies  were  completed  and  in  men's  hands  two 
centuries  before  our  Lord  appeared.  The  admission 
is  more  than  enough.  Who  can  look  down  through 
the  next  fifty  years,  or  even  the  next  twenty,  and  de- 
scribe the  changes  they  will  bring?  And  two  cen- 
turies !  Who  could  lift  the  veil  made  of  those  two 
hundred  years,  and  paint  as  clearly  and  livingly  as  we 
see  them  now  the  things  which  were  then  to  be? 

The  predictions  with  which  we  are  now  to  deal, 
seem  to  me  sufficient  on  the  very  face  of  them  to  prove 


I96  PREDICTIONS  REGARDING  CHRIST. 

the  claims  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  and  of 
Christianity.  Everyone  admits  that  they  are  woven 
into  the  very  fabric  of  the  Old  Testament.  "The  tes- 
timony of  Jesus  is  the  Spirit  of  Prophecy."  All  are 
aware  that,  though  the  light  of  the  Old  Testament  was 
at  first  confined  to  Israel,  it  proclaimed  from  the  very 
beginning  a  "larger  hope."  The  better  time,  for  which 
Israel  looked,  was  to  be  a  time  of  blessing  for  all  man- 
kind. The  blessing  was  to  spring  up  in  Israel,  but  it 
was  not  to  be  confined  to  Israel.  Jew  and  Gentile 
were  alike  to  rejoice.  A  new  covenant  was  to  be  made 
with  men,  not  like  that  which  had  been  made  with 
Israel  at  Sinai  and  which  had  never  uprooted  sin  from 
the  heart.  The  Spirit  of  God  was  to  be  poured  out 
upon  all  flesh.  The  nations  were  to  cast  away  their 
idols;  for  the  light  was  to  shine  from  Zion,  and  the 
law  of  the  Lord  was  to  go  forth  from  Jerusalem. 

We  are  so  familiar  with  these  and  the  like  predic- 
tions that  references  are  unnecessary.  But  familiarity 
may  conceal  their  marvellousness.  We  are  all  aware 
that  in  those  old  times  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God 
was  confined  to  the  narrow  territory  of  the  Jews ;  that 
each  people  had  its  own  gods ;  and  that  the  idea  of  a 
nation  exchanging  its  religion  for  another  was  quite 
foreign  to  the  experience  and  to  the  thought  of  the 
ancient  world.  Is  it  not  wonderful  then  to  find  the 
hope  burning  on  in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures, 
and  brightening  as  the  ages  advance,  that  a  day  would 
come  when  the  idolatries  of  the  nations  would  be  num- 
bered with  the  things  of  the  past,  that  the  God  of 
Israel  would  be  worshipped  and  served  in  far-ofif 
lands,  and  that  distant  isles  would  wait  for  His  law? 
That  expectation  is  absolutely  without  parallel.  There 
is  nothing  like  it  in  any  literature  besides.  Neither 
philosopher  nor  poet  had  ever  dreamed  of  a  brother- 
hood of  man  founded  upon  universal  sonship  to  God. 
How  then  is  it  that  we  find  this  in  the  Old  Testament 
Scriptures  not  onl^as  an  aspiration,  but  as  a  clear  and 


THE  REVOLUTION  TO  BE  THE  WORK  OF  ONE  MAN.     I97 

oft- repeated  prediction,  a  confident  and  jubilant  ex- 
pectation? Whence  was  it  that  this  idea,  which  never 
stirred  in  human  heart  besides,  fell  upon  the  soil  of 
Jewish  thought?  How  did  it  happen  that  it  remained 
and  flourished  so  that  to  pour  this  light  upon  the  na- 
tions was  regarded  as  the  destiny  of  the  Jewish  people  ? 
But  add  to  this  that,  as  these  Scriptures  said  it  should 
be,  so  it  has  been.  The  idolatries  of  the  nations  have 
disappeared  and  are  disappearing  now.  The  knowl- 
edge of  the  true  God  has  broken  forth  like  a  flood  over 
the  darkened  earth.  The  far-off  isles  have  received 
His  law.  And  this  light,  which  has  enlightened  the 
nations,  has  shone  out  from  Zion,  this  law  has  gone 
forth  from  Jerusalem.  Put  the  strange  prediction  and 
its  wondrous  accomplishment  together,  and  shall  we 
not  say  that  both  are  from  God?  Can  any  one  fail 
to  see  that  the  Word  and  the  Work,  the  Old  Testa- 
ment and  Christianity,  are  here  alike  stamped  with 
God's  seal? 

But  there  is  more  to  account  for  than  this  strange, 
confident  outlook  and  its  equally  strange  fulfilment 
There  was  one  central  figure  in  Israel's  hope;  the 
leading  back  of  the  nations  to  God  was  to  be 

THE    WORK    OF    ONE    MAN. 

All  know  how  this  is  stamped  upon  every  promise  of 
the  world's  redemption.  From  first  to  last  it  is  to  be 
the  work  of  the  Messiah.  It  is  He  who  is  to  bruise 
the  serpent's  head.  In  Him  all  the  nations  of  the  earth 
are  to  be  blessed.  "All  kings  shall  fall  down  before 
Him :  all  nations,  shall  serve  Him.  .  .  .  He  shall 
have  pity  on  the  poor  and  needy,  and  the  souls  of  the 
needy  He  shall  save.  .  .  .  His  name  shall  endure 
for  ever"  (Ps.  lxxii).  The  world's  salvation  begins, 
is  continued,  and  perfected  in  Him.  So  clearly  is  this 
taught  in  the  Old  Testament  that  the  hope  of  the  Jews 
became  the  hope  of  the  Messiah.  The  following  are 
some  of  the  petitions  in  their  ancient  prayers :   "O  that 


I98  PREDICTIONS  REGARDING  CHRIST. 

Elias  would  come  quickly  with  Messias  the  son  of 
David;"  "Send  the  Branch  of  David  in  our  days;" 
"By  the  hand  of  Ben  Issai  (the  son  of  Jesse)  the 
Bethlehemite  bring  near  the  redemption;  How  long 
will  He  tarry;"  "Let  the  memory  of  Messias,  the  son 
of  David,  thy  servant,  come  before  Thee."  Numerous 
as  are  the  quotations  from  the  Old  Testament,  which 
are  applied  to  Jesus  in  the  New,  they  are  far  out- 
numbered by  the  passages  applied  to  the  Messiah  in 
the  Rabbinical  writers.  They  believed  that  it  was  the 
one  purpose  of  the  Scripture  to  testify  of  Him.  "The 
Jewish  doctors  tell  us  'that  all  the  prophets,  none  ex- 
cepted, prophesied  only  of  the  years  of  the  redemption, 
and  the  days  of  the  Messiah/  'All  from  Moses  our 
Master/  says  Maimonides,  'to  Malachi  of  blessed  mem- 
ory/ 'They  all/  says  Abarbanel,  'moved  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  testify  and  foretell  the  coming  of  the  Mes- 
siah/ "* 

This,  then,  was  the  hope  of  the  Old  Testament.  It 
was  contained  in  books  which  we  and  the  Jews  alike 
revere  to  this  day,  and  which  were  translated  into  the 
Greek  tongue  two  centuries  before  Christ  came.  It 
was  so  clearly  and  emphatically  announced,  it  was  so 
frequently  declared,  that  it  filled  the  thought  of  the 
Jewish  people  with  glowing  anticipation.  And  it  was 
an  expectation  which  from  first  to  last  rested  upon  one 
man.  It  was  not  a  blessing  which  was  to  come  men 
knew  not  whence,  nor  how.  They  looked  for  the 
Messiah.  The  hope  of  Israel  and  of  all  peoples  lay  in 
Him.  He  alone  would  touch  the  world's  heart  and  roll 
away  the  world's  burden.  And  the  work  which  He 
began,  He  should  continue.  His  influence  was  pic- 
tured as  going  on  broadening  and  deepening  through 
all  after  time:  "His  name  shall  be  continued  as  long 
as  the  sun;  and  men  shall  be  blessed  in  Him;  all  na- 
tions shall  call  him  blessed"  (Ps.  lxxii.  17). 

*Lyall;  Propedeia  Prophetica,  p.  124. 


THE  REVOLUTION  TO  BE  THE  WORK  OF  ONE  MAN.      1 99 

Now,  it  will  be  admitted  that  the  hope  was,  in  this 
aspect  of  it,  quite  as  marvellous  as  in  the  other  of 
which  we  have  already  spoken.  The  Jews  were  not 
ignorant  of  the  limitations  of  human  greatness.  They 
had  had  great  men  who  had  left  their  impress  upon  the 
institutions  and  the  life  of  their  country;  but  none  of 
them  had  ever  done,  or  had  ever  dreamed  of  attempt- 
ing, such  a  work  as  this.  Their  plans,  like  their  ac- 
tivity, had  been  directed  to  the  needs  of  their  own  peo- 
ple. Who  among  them  had  ever  borne  upon  his  heart 
the  world's  burden,  and  dreamed  of  meeting  the 
world's  need?  Who  had  ever  imagined  that  in  him 
all  the  nations  of  the  earth  would  be  blessed?  Then 
their  work  had  been  limited  by  time  as  well  as  by 
ability.  How  often  had  Israel  reason  to  ask:  "the  fath- 
ers— where  are  they?  and  the  prophets — do  they  live 
for  ever?"  The  mightiest  had  had  to  succumb  to 
death,  and  his  place  was  taken  and  his  work  was  car- 
ried on  by  some  other  servant  whom  God  also  honoured 
and  upheld.  The  ages  had  never  before  been  chained 
to  any  one  man.  Whence  then  can  the  hope  have 
sprung  that  one  should  be  born  who  would  be  the 
source  of  an  undying  influence,  who  would  dominate, 
and  guide,  and  bless,  men  not  only  of  His  own  genera- 
tion but  of  all  after  time?  And  this  is  not  the  only 
marvel.  The  hope  was  as  sure  as  it  was  strange.  The 
Old  Testament  Scriptures  looked  forward  with  confi- 
dent and  glowing  anticipation  to  the  coming  of  One 
who  should  change  the  current  of  the  world's  thought. 
And  we  have  to  testify  that  One  man  has  appeared — the 
one  Man  of  all  time — by  whom  this  has  been,  and  is 
now  being,  done.  The  name  of  Jesus  still  lives  upon 
our  lips — His  power  rests  upon  our  hearts.  Call  it 
fanaticism  if  you  will ;  say,  if  you  choose,  that  this  faith 
in  a  living  Christ,  which  has  endured  for  eighteen  cen- 
turies and  is  spreading  among  the  tribes  of  the  earth 
to-day,  is  a  hallucination.  Let  such  explanations  be 
received  with  what  favour  they  may,  these  theories 


200  PREDICTIONS  REGARDING  CHRIST. 

themselves  testify  that  this  faith  exists  and  that  it  is  a 
power.  That  is  to  say,  one  man  has  arisen,  whose 
surpassing  excellence  they  admit,  and  through  faith  in 
whom  the  work,  which  is  bringing  nations  to  God, 
has  been  carried  on  through  age  after  age  and  is  being 
carried  on  now.  His  name  has  been  "continued ;"  men 
are  "blessed  in  Him;"  and  many  nations  "call  Him 
blessed."  Shall  we  say  that  it  is  a  mere  coincidence 
that  this  strange  hope  has  been,  and  is  still  being,  an- 
swered by  this  strange  fact  in  the  world's  story? 

The  predictions  regarding  the  Messiah  would  have 
been  wonderful  had  they  never  advanced  beyond  these 
points.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  fulness  of  knowl- 
edge which  the  Old  Testament  claimed  was  a  reality, 
there  was  no  reason  why  its  revelation  of  the  future 
should  not  be  still  more  explicit.  There  was  reason 
rather  that  miracles  of  prophecy  should  be  gathered 
around  this  central  hope  of  Scripture  more  fully  than 
elsewhere.  And  this  expectation  has  been  fully  realized. 
The  nature  of  the  Redeemer's  work,  and  even  His 
character  and  history,  are  so  minutely  described  that  it 
is  possible  to  compile  a  history  of  Christ  and  Chris- 
tianity merely  from  the  prophecies.  For  one  thing 
the  Saviour,  for  whom  the  world  waited, 

WAS  TO  BE  A  JEW. 

It  was  recorded  that  it  was  said  to  Abraham,  "in  thy 
seed"  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed. 
There  are  other  predictions  which  named  the  tribe, 
and  even  the  family,  from  which  he  was  to  spring,  and 
the  very  town  in  which  he  should  be  born.  I  mention 
these  latter  predictions  merely  to  remind  the  reader 
how  definite  and  clear  the  prediction  was  that  the  Sav- 
iour of  the  world  was  to  be  a  Jew  He  was  to  be  born 
in  a  Jewish  town,  and  to  be  a  descendant  of  the  nob- 
lest family  in  the  leading  tribe  of  Israel.  Had  there 
been  no  real  foresight  in  these  predictions,  every  step 


THE  YEAR  OF  HIS  APPEARING  FORETOLD.    201 

taken  in  the  direction  of  increased  definiteness  multi- 
plied the  chances  of  exposure.  It  was  going  far  to 
say  that  a  time  was  coming  when  the  nations  would 
cast  away  their  idols.  It  was  going  further  to  affirm 
that  this  revolution  should  be  the  work  of  one  man. 
But  to  define  the  hope  still  more,  and  to  say  that  he 
should  spring  from  this  race  and  no  other,  was  to 
court  defeat  a  thousandfold.  What,  then,  is  the  re- 
sult? The  answer  can  be  given  in  one  word.  There 
has  been  no  defeat.  The  blessing  for  which  the  world 
waited — the  blessing  of  light,  and  peace,  and  strength 
to  seek  a  better  way — has  come  through  one  man,  and 
that  man  was  a  Jew. 

We  have  to  mark,  however,  still  greater  things  than 
these.  The  readers  of  the  Old  Testament  were  not 
merely  told  that  Christ  should  come:  they  were  also 
told  when  He  should  appear. 

THE  VERY  YEAR 

when  He  should  be  manifested  to  Israel,  and  should 
enter  upon  His  work,  was  fixed  centuries  before. 
We  have  already,  in  the  previous  chapter,  proved  the 
wonderful  character  of  the  book  of  Daniel.  That  book 
has  also  another  claim  upon  our  attention,  for  it  con- 
tains one  of  the  most  marvellous  predictions  regarding 
the  Messiah.  In  the  ninth  chapter  it  is  recorded  that 
tKe  prophet  was  told  that  "seventy  weeks  (literally 
"seventy  sevens")  are  decreed  upon  thy  people  and 
upon  thy  holy  city,  to  finish  transgression,  and  to  make 
an  end  of  sins,  and  to  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity, 
and  to  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness,  and  to  seal 
up  vision  and  prophecy,  and  to  anoint  the  most  holy" 
(Dan.  ix.  24).  This  prolonged  description  is  enough 
to  assure  us  that  the  finger  is  here  laid  upon  the  advent 
and  the  work  of  Christ.  It  was  His  alone  "to  finish 
transgression,  to  make  an  end  of  sins,  and  to  make 
reconciliation   for   iniquity."     We   are   not,   however, 


202  PREDICTIONS  REGARDING  CHRIST. 

abandoned  to  the  guidance  of  inference.  Christ  is 
distinctly  named.  The  prophet  was  bid  to  mark  that, 
"from  the  going  forth  of  the  commandment  to  restore 
and  to  build  Jerusalem,  unto  Messiah  (the  Anointed 
One),  the  Prince,  shall  be  seven  weeks  and  three 
score  and  two  weeks"  (ver.  25) — that  is  in  all  69 
weeks,  or,  more  literally,  69  sevens. 

To  what  point  in  the  history  of  Jesus  do  these  69 
sevens  take  us?  That  is  a  most  important  question, 
and  it  has  a  distinct  answer  in  the  prediction.  We 
are  told  (verse  20)  that  after  the  second  period,  the 
"three  score  and  two  weeks,"  "shall  Messiah  be  cut  off, 
but  not  for  himself."  The  -  sevens  and  the  62 
sevens  take  us,  therefore,  to  the  Messiah's  death. 

As  to  what  these  "sevens"  are,  there  can  be  no 
difficulty.  The  same  phrase  occurs  in  Leviticus  xxv.  8, 
where  "seven  sabbaths  (or  sevens)  of  years"  are  spok- 
en of  as  the  period  which  is  to  elapse  between  each 
Jubilee.  The  Jews  indeed  were  commanded  to  reckon 
time  in  this  way.  Every  seventh  year  the  land  was  to 
enjoy  its  sabbath  and  to  remain  untilled.  When  seven 
sevens  were  completed,  the  Jubilee  was  proclaimed, 
and  every  Jewish  slave  was  freed,  and  every  poor 
man's  land  which  had  been  sold  was  restored  to  him 
or  to  his  children.  These  had  been  to  the  Jews,  large- 
ly mere  ideal  institutions.  The  laws  stood  upon  the 
statute  book,  but  they  were  not  observed.  By  reckon- 
ing in  this  way,  the  years  which  stood  between  Israel 
and  their  hope,  it  may  have  been  indicated  that  these 
observances  were  still  demanded  by  God  and  that  the 
hope  was  for  those  who  feared  and  obeyed.  At  all 
events,  the  numbers  are  numbers  of  years.  It  seems 
to  have  been  an  occasional,  if  not  a  customary,  mode 
of  reckoning  time.  In  Genesis  xxix.  27,  28,  we  read 
that  Laban  said  to  Jacob:  "Fulfil  her  week  (her  sev- 
en) and  we  will  give  thee  this  also  for  the  service 
thou  wilt  serve  with  me  yet  seven  other  years.  And 
Jacob   did  so,  and   fulfilled  her  week    (her  seven)." 


THE  YEAR  OF  HIS  APPEARING  FORETOLD.     203 

The  70  sevens  are,  then,  490  years,  and  the  69  sevens 
are  483  years. 

But  from  what  point  was  the  reckoning  to  begin? 
For  this  the  prophet  is  referred  to  an  event  which, 
when  the  words  were  spoken,  was  still  future.  It  was 
the  going  forth  of  a  commandment  to  restore  and  to 
build  Jerusalem,  which  at  that  time  was  deserted  and 
in  ashes.  On  referring  to  the  Books  of  Ezra  and 
Nehemiah,  which  give  us  the  history  of  the  period 
immediately  following  the  captivity,  we  find  that  four 
decrees  are  recorded.  The  first,  however,  only  grants 
permission  to  the  Jews  to  return  and  to  build  the  Tem- 
ple (Ezra  i.  I,  4).  There  is  nothing  said  about  the 
restoring  and  rebuilding  of  the  city.  The  second  de- 
cree is  a  mere  reiteration  of  the  first.  It  provides  for 
the  rebuilding  of  the  Temple  and  for  the  supply  of 
what  is  needful  for  the  Temple  service   (Ezra  vi.  I, 

12). 

Under  that  edict  of  Darius  Hystaspis,  the  building 
of  the  temple  was  completed,  the  priests  were  arranged 
in  divisions,  and  the  ancient  temple  service  was  again 
begun  (verses  13-22).  The  third  decree  was  issued 
more  than  half  a  century  afterwards  when  Ezra  and 
his  companions  went  up  from  Babylon  to  Jerusalem 
in  the  seventh  year  of  Artaxerxes  Longimanus. 
"Now  this  is  a  copy  of  the  letter  that  the  King  Arta- 
xerxes gave  unto  Ezra  the  scribe.  .  .  I  make  a  de- 
cree that  all  they,  of  the  people  of  Israel  and  of  the 
priests  and  Levites  in  my  realm,  who  are  minded  of 
their  own  free-will  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  go  with 
thee.  Forasmuch  as  thou  art  sent  of  the  king  and  of 
his  seven  counsellors  to  enquire  concerning  Judah  and 
Jerusalem,  according  to  the  law  of  thy  God  which  is 
in  thine  hand ;  and  to  carry  the  silver  and  gold,  which 
the  king  and  his  counsellors  have  freely  offered  unto 
the  God  of  Israel,  whose  habitation  is  in  Jerusalem,  and 
all  the  silver  and  gold  that  thou  canst  find  in  all  the 
province  of  Babylon,  with  the  free-will  offering  of  the 


204  PREDICTIONS   REGARDING  CHRIST. 

people  and  the  priests,  offering  willingly  for  the  house 
of  their  God  which  is  in  Jerusalem"  (vii.  11-16). 
The  edict  goes  on  to  confer  power  upon  Ezra,  to  dis- 
pose of  the  funds  committed  to  his  care  for  the  temple 
service,  and  to  call  upon  the  local  governors  for  addi- 
tional help,  etc.  It  concludes  with  these  words:  "And 
thou,  Ezra,  after  the  wisdom  of  thy  God  that  is  in 
thine  hand,  set  magistrates  and  judges,  who  may  judge 
all  the  people  that  are  beyond  the  river,  and  all  such 
as  know  the  laws  of  thy  God ;  and  teach  ye  them  that 
know  them  not.  And  whosoever  will  not  do  the  law 
of  thy  God,  and  the  law  of  the  king,  let  judgment  be 
executed  speedily  upon  him,  whether  it  be  unto  death, 
or  to  banishment,  or  to  confiscation  of  goods,  or  to 
imprisonment"   (25-26). 

That  third  edict  has  very  generally  been  regarded 
as  the  decree  "to  restore  and  to  build  Jerusalem" — a 
view  in  which  I  formerly  concurred.  But  a  closer 
examination  of  the  terms  of  the  edict  does  not  support 
that  conclusion.  Those  terms  are  most  explicit.  Ezra 
is  empowered  to  convey  the  treasure  contributed  by 
the  king  and  his  counsellors,  from  Babylon  to  Jerusa- 
lem, to  receive  other  voluntary  offerings,  to  expend 
the  funds,  to  call  upon  the  "treasurers  beyond  the  riv- 
er" for  additional  funds,  and  to  appoint  magistrates 
and  judges.  But  there  is  no  mention  whatever  of 
building  and  restoring  Jerusalem;  and,  if  that  task 
had  been  assigned  to  Ezra,  it  would  be  hard  indeed  to 
explain  why,  in  an  edict  fully  transcribed  and  elabor- 
ately minute  in  regard  to  everything  else,  no  reference 
whatever  is  made  to  that  important  undertaking. 

When  we  turn  to  the  fourth  decree,  however,  we 
meet  for  the  first  time,  language  which  is  in  significant 
accord  with  the  description  of  "the  commandment" 
spoken  of  by  Daniel.  Nehemiah  tells  us  that,  when 
Artaxerxes  asked  "For  what  dost  thou  make  request," 
he  replied :  "If  it  please  the  king,  and  if  thy  servant 
hath  found  favour  in  thy  sight,  that  thou  wouldst  send 


THE  YEAR  OF  HIS  APPEARING  FORETOLD.     205 

me  unto  Judah,  unto  the  city  of  my  fathers'  sepulchres, 
that  I  may  build  it'"  (ii.  5).  He  also  begged  a  letter 
to  "Asaph,  the  keeper  of  the  king's  forest,  that  he  may 
give  me  timber  to  make  beams  for  the  gates  of  the  pal- 
ace which  appertained  to  the  house,  and  for  the  wall 
of  the  city,  and  for  the  house  that  I  shall  enter  into. 
And  the  king  granted  me  according  to  the  good  hand 
of  my  God  upon  me"  (8).  Here  we  have  in  explicit 
terms  an  authorisation  to  Ezra  to  build  the  city  of  his 
fathers'  sepulchres;  and  the  fourth  decree  is  conse- 
quently "the  commandment  to  restore  and  to  build  Jer- 
usalem." 

To  apply  these  results,  we  have  first  of  all  to  inquire 
what  those  483  years  are.  Are  they  years  in  every 
respect  like  the  years  of  our  own  calendar?  There 
are  clear  indications  in  Scripture  that  the  Hebrew 
month,  like  that  of  Babylonia  and  of  Egypt,  consisted 
of  30  days.  The  year  consequently  contained  360  days ; 
multiplying  those  483  years  of  the  prophecy  by  360  so 
as  to  find  the  entire  number  of  days,  we  divide  by 
365%  and  so  change  them  into  calendar  years.  The 
result  of  this  rough  and  ready,  but  sufficiently  accurate, 
method  is  that  the  483  prophetic  years  are  found  to  be 
equivalent  to  476  years  of  our  ordinary  chronology. 

We  have  to  ask  next  to  what  special  point  in  the 
past  we  have  to  attach  this  immense  measuring  line, 
so  that  we  may  stretch  it  onward  into  the  future.  The 
narrative  in  Nehemiah  furnishes  a  perfectly  clear 
reply.  We  are  told  that  the  concession  was  made  "in 
the  month  Nisan,  in  the  twentieth  year  of  Arta- 
xerxes  the  King"  (ii.  i).  He  began  to  reign  in  the 
year  465  B.  c.  He  was  now  in  the  twentieth  year  of 
his  reign:  in  other  words  19  years  of  his  reign  were 
completed  and  the  20th  year  was  in  progress.  De- 
ducting these  19  years  from  465,  we  are  brought  to 
446  b.  c. — the  year  in  which  the  edict  was  issued  "to 
restore  and  to  build  Jerusalem." 

A  word  or  two  will  now  complete  our  demon- 


206  PREDICTIONS   REGARDING  CHRIST. 

stration.  Applying  the  476  years  of  the  prediction 
to  this  point  (446  years  before  the  birth  of  our 
Lord)  we  find  that  they  bring  us  down  to  that 
event  and  leave  30  years  over.  That  is,  the  year  30 
a.  d.  is  specified  as  that  of  the  Saviour's  cutting  off 
in  His  crucifixion.  While  everyone  will  feel  how 
amazing  it  is  that  the  year  and  the  very  month — 
the  month  Nisan — of  our  Lord's  death  should  have 
been  fixed  centuries  beforehand,  some  may  imagine 
that  there  is,  nevertheless,  a  slight  inaccuracy.  We 
are  told  (Luke  iii.  23)  that  Jesus  entered  upon  this 
ministry  when  he  was  about  30  years  of  age.  The 
year  30  a.  d.  would,  therefore,  be  the  year  when 
His  ministry  began,  and  not  the  year  of  His  cruci- 
fixion. But  the  Scripture  is  absolutely  accurate. 
When  the  division  between  time  B.  c.  and  time  A.  d. 
was  made  in  the  6th  century  of  our  era,  a  mistake 
of  four  years  was  made,  the  year  1  a.  d.  was  really 
the  year  5  a.  d.  ;  and  the  year  10  the  year  14  a.  d.  ; 
and  the  year  30  the  year  34  a.  d.  Our  Lord's  min- 
istry extended  about  four  years;  and  thus  the 
year  30  a  d.  in  our  chronology  was  really  the  year 
of  our  Lord's  death.  The  chronology  was  in  error, 
but  there  was  no  error  in  the  Scripture;  and  that 
sacrifice,  which  will  be  remembered  and  celebrated 
throughout  eternity,  was  offered  at  the  appointed 
time. 

Comment  on  these  facts  is  needless.  They  tell 
their  own  tale  and  leave  their  own  impress.  I  pass 
on  to  note  how  fully 

THE    HISTORY    OF    JESUS 

was  revealed  in  the  mirror  of  prophecy.  There  are 
some  predictions,  such  as  those  regarding  the 
family  from  which  He  was  to  spring  and  the  place 
where  He  was  to  be  born,  the  accomplishment  of 
which,  however  undeniable  it  might  be  to  the  men 
of  the  time#  would  now  be  hard  to  prove.     These  I 


HIS   CHARACTER  DEPICTED.  207 

pass  over.     But  it  was  predicted  that  His  condition 
should  be  one  of 

LOWLINESS    AND    POVERTY. 

Though  born  of  the  royal  house,  that  house  was 
ere  then  to  be  shorn  of  its  splendour.  The  tree  was 
to  be  cut  down  to  the  level  of  the  grass,  which  once 
grew  under  its  shade.  "There  shall  come  forth  a 
root  out  of  the  stock  of  Jesse,  and  a  branch  out  of  his 
roots  shall  bear  fruit"  (Isaiah  xi.  i).  His  condition 
was  to  be  one  which  men  would  regard  with  great 
contempt:  the  Scripture  pointed  "to  Him  whom 
man  despiseth,  to  Him  whom  the  nation  abhorreth, 
a  servant  of  rulers"  (Isaiah  xlix.  7).  There  was 
to  be  nothing  of  superior  station  or  worldly  wealth 
to  commend  Him  to  Israel  He  was  to  be  as  "a  root 
out  of  a  dry  ground,  He  hath  no  form  nor  comeli- 
ness, and  when  we  see  Him  there  is  no  beauty  that 
we  should  desire  Him"  (Isaiah  liii.  2).  How  com- 
pletely this  was  fulfilled  we  know.  He  was  a  car- 
penter's son.  He  himself  was  called  "the  carpen- 
ter." He  had  no  "advantages."  His  knowledge 
seemed  inexplicable  to  the  men  of  His  time.  "How 
knoweth  this  man  letters,"  they  asked,  "having 
never  learned?"  He  could  offer  no  worldly  induce- 
ment to  his  followers.  "The  foxes  have  holes,"  He 
said  to  one,  "and  the  birds  of  the  air  have  nests, 
but  the  Son  of  man  hath  not  where  to  lay  His  head." 
So  low  had  the  fortunes  of  the  ancient  royal  house 
sunk  that,  in  the  times  immediately  preceding,  they 
had  not  furnished  a  single  claimant  for  the  throne, 
and  when  Vespasian  afterwards  made  diligent 
search  for  the  descendants  of  the  hero-king,  that 
he  might  crush  every  possible  seed  of  rebellion,  they 
were  found  to  be  so  poor  and  abject  that  they 
were  dismissed  with  contempt. 
Then  He  was  to  be 

REJECTED    BY    ISRAEL. 


208  PREDICTIONS    REGARDING    JESUS. 

The  coming  of  the  Messiah  had  been  the  hope  of 
Israel  for  well-nigh  two  thousand  yearse  His  ad- 
vent was  longed  for,  and  prayed  for  daily,  through 
all  their  generations.  Had  this  hope  been  the  off- 
spring of  enthusiasm,  nourished  by  national  vanity, 
it  would  be  difficult  to  explain  how,  along  with  this 
anticipation,  there  should  be  the  most  distinct  pre- 
dictions that  He  would  be  rejected  and  abhorred 
by  the  very  people  who  so  intensely  desired  His 
appearing.  And  yet  this  is  what  we  do  find.  The 
prophet,  looking  forward  to  the  day  of  the  Messiah, 
exclaims:  "When  we  see  Him  there  is  no  beauty 
that  we  should  desire  Him.  He  was  despised  and 
rejected  of  men;  a  man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted 
with  grief;  and  as  one  from  whom  men  hide  their 
face,  He  was  despised,  and  we  esteemed  Him  not" 
(Isaiah  liii.  3).  I  have  already  quoted  the  words 
which  speak  of  Him  as  one  "whom  man  despiseth. 
.  .  whom  the  nation  abhor reth"  (Isaiah  xlix.  7). 
Those  who  doubt  the  full  inspiration  of  Scripture 
have  yet  to  give  some  rational  explanation  of  this 
fact  among  others,  how  such  a  forecast  as  this  came 
to  find  a  place  in  the  portraiture  of  the  Messiah, 
and  how  it  has  happened  that  it  has  also  been  liter- 
ally fulfilled  Not  only  was  He  rejected  by  the 
Jews  of  His  own  time:  the  rejection  has  been  per- 
petuated to  the  present  hour.  No  prediction  could 
have  seemed  more  improbable,  and  yet  none  ever 
received  a  sadder  and  more  complete  fulfilment. 
The  Messiah  was  also 

TO    SUFFER    A    VIOLENT    DEATH. 

He  was  to  be  "cut  off"  (Daniel  ix.  26).  "He  was 
taken  away.  .  .  He  was  cut  off  out  of  the  land 
of  the  living"  (Isa.  liii.  8).    He  was  to  die  under  a 

JUDICIAL    SENTENCE. 

"By  oppression  and  judgment  He  was  taken  away" 
(Isa.  liii.  8).     Even 


THE  MANNER  OF  HIS  DEATH  DESCRIBED.  20g 

THE    MANNER    AND    THE    CIRCUMSTANCES 

of  His  death  were  foretold.  "I  am  poured  out  like 
water,  and  all  My  bones  are  out  of  joint :  My  heart 
is  like  wax;  it  is  melted  in  the  midst  of  My  bowels. 
My  strength  is  dried  up  like  a  potsherd;  and  My 
tongue  cleaveth  to  My  jaws ;  and  Thou  has  brought 
Me  into  the  dust  of  death  For  dogs  have  com- 
passed Me:  the  assembly  of  evil-doers  have  enclosed 
Me;  they  pierced  My  hands  and  My  feet3'  (Ps.  xxii. 
14,  16).  "I  gave  My  back  to  the  smiters  and  My 
cheeks  to  them  who  plucked  off  the  hair :  I  hid 
not  my  face  from  shame  and  spitting"  (Isaiah  1.  6). 
"All  they  that  see  Me,  laugh  Me  to  scorn.  They 
shoot  out  the  lip,  they  shake  the  head  saying:  He 
trusted  on  the  Lord  that  He  would  deliver  Him: 
let  Him  deliver  Him  seeing  He  delighteth  in  Him. 
.  .  .  They  part  My  garments  among  them,  and 
upon  My  vesture  do  they  cast  lots"  (Ps.  xxii.  7,  8, 
18).  We  do  not  read  these  words  for  the  first  time. 
We  may  have  often  thought  of  them  as  a  marvellous 
description  of  the  sufferings  of  Jesus ;  but  have  we 
ever  pondered  the  fact  that  they  are  prophecy,  and 
tliat  they  were  written  centuries  before  that  life  was 
lived?  What  does  it  mean?  Is  it  not  God's  sum- 
mons to  believe  and  accept  His  salvation? 
The  predictions  also  supply  a  full  description  of 

THE    CHARACTER    OF    JESUS. 

They  speak  of  His  ardent  devotion,  His  complete 
surrender  to  God.  "I  delight  to  do  Thy  will,  O 
My  God :  yea,  Thy  law  is  within  My  heart"  (Pa  xi. 
8).  They  explain  the  fulness  of  wisdom  and  spir- 
itual might  which  marked  Him :  "The  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  shall  rest  upon  Him,  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and 
understanding,  the  spirit  of  counsel  and  might,  the 
spirit  of  knowledge  and  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord" 
(Isaiah  xi.  2).  They  speak  of  the  patience  of  Jesus. 
There  was  to  be  no  rude  haste  to  snatch  an  early 


210  PREDICTIONS  REGARDING  JESUS. 

victory.  He  was  to  be  no  leader  in  tumultuous 
assault  even  upon  wrong.  "He  shall  not  cry,  nor 
lift  up,  nor  cause  His  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  street" 
(Isaiah  xlii.  2).  They  tell  of  the  lowliness  of  Jesus. 
The  greatness  of  Christ  was  not  to  remove  Him 
from  us  and  shut  Him  up  in  a  world  of  His  own. 
There  was  to  be  might  without  its  pride,  wisdom 
without  its  haughty  disdain,  holiness  without  its 
blighting  scorn  of  weakness  and  sin.  "A  bruised 
reed  shall  He  not  break,  and  the  smoking  flax  shall 
He  not  quench"  (Isaiah  xliii.  3).  "He  shall  feed 
His  flock  like  a  shepherd,  He  shall  gather  the  lambs 
in  His  arm,  and  carry  them  in  His  bosom,  and  shall 
gently  lead  those  that  give  suck"  (Isaiah  xl.  11). 
Can  we  see  the  Redeemer  more  clearly  in  the  Gos- 
pels themselves  than  He  is  revealed  here?  And  if 
not,  is  not  this  fact  alone  enough  to  prove  that  He 
is  God's  gift  to  us  ?  That  life  no  man  could  have  looked 
for,  far  less  painted.  It  was  an  absolutely  new  ex- 
perience for  humanity.  Its  appearance  caused  a 
new  departure  in  thought  and  morals.  It  revolu- 
tionised human  ideas  of  greatness  and  excellence. 
And  yet  that  life  and  spirit  are  not  only  indicated — 
they  are  gloriously  displayed  in  what  are  held  forth 
as  announcements  of  One  who  is  yet  to  come,  and 
to  bring  back  the  earth  to  God.  We  are  told,  cen- 
turies before  He  appears,  that  this  is  to  be  His 
character.  It  was  much  to  have  heard  of  old  the 
voice  from  heaven,  and  to  have  felt  one's  spirit  thrill 
in  answer  to  the  cry  "this  is  my  beloved  Son  in 
whom  I  am  well  pleased."  But  this  is  a  fuller  and 
surer  testimony.  One  might  have  been  mistaken 
as  to  whence,  or  from  whom,  the  cry  came.  The 
thought  might  have  fallen  like  a  blight  that  the 
whole  experience  was  a  dream.  But  this  is  no 
dream,  and  here  there  is  no  possibility  of  mistake. 
When  no  other  could,  God  snowed  us  His  Son,  so 
to  speak,  that  we  might  know  Him  when  He  came. 
And  now  that  He  has  appeared,  who  can  forbear 


HIS  WORK  DESCRIBED.  211 

exclaiming  "this  is  indeed  the  Christ,  tHe  Saviour 
of  the  world !" 

The  reader  need  hardly  be  reminded  how  fully 

THE    WORK    OF   JESUS 

is  described  in  prophecy.  He  was  to  give  light; 
He  Himself  was  to  be  light.  "The  people  that 
walked  in  darkness  have  seen  a  great  light:  they 
that  dwelt  in  the  land  of  the  shadow  of  death,  upon 
them  hath  the  light  shined"  (Isa.  ix.  2).  He  was  to 
be  given  "for  a  covenant  of  the  people,  for  a  light 
to  the  Gentiles,  to  open  the  blind  eyes,  to  bring  out 
the  prisoners  from  the  dungeon,  and  them  that  sit 
in  darkness  out  of  the  prison  house''  (Isa.  xlii.  6,  7). 
"I  will  also  give  thee  for  a  light  to  the  Gentiles  that 
thou  mayest  be  my  salvation  unto  the  end  of  the 
earth"  (Isa.  xlix.  6).  He  was  to  touch  the  whole 
earth  and  bless  it  with  peace  and  power.  "Like  as 
many  were  astonished  at  thee  ...  so  shall  he 
sprinkle  many  nations"  (Isaiah  Hi.  14,  15).  "He 
shall  not  fail,  nor  be  discouraged,  till  He  had  set 
judgment  in  the  earth,  and  the  isles  shall  wait  for 
His  law"  (Isa.  xlii  4). 

But  this  fulness  of  power  and  blessing  was  to  be 
reached  through  suffering.  We  have  seen  that  the 
Messiah  was  to  die.  That  death  had  an  explanation. 
It  was  written  "thou  shalt  make  His  soul  an  offer- 
ing for  sin"  (Isaiah  liii.  10)  ;  and  again,  "Although 
He  had  done  no  violence,  neither  was  any  deceit  in 
His  mouth,  yet  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  Him, 
He  hath  put  Him  to  grief"  (vv.  9,  10).  What  all 
this  meant  for  us  the  prophet  has  explained  in  the 
verse  immediately  preceding.  "Surely  He  hath 
borne  our  griefs,  and  carried  our  sorrows.  .  .  . 
He  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,  He  was 
bruised  for  our  iniquities:  the  chastisement  of  our 
peace  was  upon  Him,  and  with  His  stripes  we  are 
healed.     All  we,  like  sheep,  have  gone  astray,  we 


212  PREDICTIONS  REGARDING  JESUS. 

have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way,  and  the  Lord 

HATH   LAID  ON  HlM  THE  INIQUITY  OF  US  ALL"    (w.  4, 

6).  The  work  of  Christ  is  described  in  similar  terms 
in  Dan.  ix.  24.  It  was  "to  make  reconciliation  for 
iniquity,  and  to  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness. " 
There  is  also  a  striking  prediction  to  the  same  effect 
in  Zechariah  ix.  11.  God  is  speaking  concerning 
His  Messiah  who  "shall  speak  peace  unto  the  na- 
tions/' and  whose  "dominion  shall  be  from  sea  to 
sea,  and  from  the  river  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth," 
and  He  continues :  "As  for  Thee  also,  because  of 
the  blood  of  Thy  covenant  I  have  sent  forth  Thy 
prisoners  out  of  the  pit  wherein  is  no  water."  They 
are  shut  in  with  death ;  but  they  are  His,  and  they 
are  released  on  one  ground  alone — "the  blood  of 
Thy  covenant."  Great  difficulties  have  been  felt  by 
many  in  regard  to  the  doctrine  of  substitution.  It 
has  been  arraigned  as  the  fruit  of  superstition,  or 
of  terrible  misconception.  The  whole  body  of  or- 
dinary teaching  on  the  subject  has  been  named  "the 
blood  theology,"  and  been  cast  on  one  side  as  if 
that  description  were  sufficient  condemnation.  It 
will  be  admitted  that  there  may  be  aspects  from 
which  the  question  might  be  so  viewed  as  greatly  to 
alter  our  judgment  of  it.  Far  as  our  philosophy  has 
reached,  it  is  still  true  that  there  are  things  in 
heaven  and  earth  not  dreamed  of  in  it  But  we 
have  to  deal  here  with  God's  thought,  not  man's. 
The  words  are  stamped  as  His,  for  they  display 
clear  and  full  knowledge  of  what  no  man,  when  the 
words  were  spoken,  could  foresee  even  dimly.  They 
are,  therefore,  God's  statement  of  what  the  death  of 
Christ  means,  and  not  man's  explanation  of  it.  The 
prediction  is  an  attestation,  not  to  the  Lord's  mis- 
sion only,  but  also  to  the  doctrine  of  "forgiveness 
through  His  blood."  It  is  the  seal  of  God's  cov- 
enant with  us  in  Christ.  It  is  the  Divine  assurance 
that  the  wondrous  tale  of  the  cross  is  true.  "All  we 
like  sheep  have  gone  astray.    We  have  turned  every 


HIS  PRESENT  WORK.  21 3 

one  to  his  own  way,  and  the  Lord  hath  laid  on 
him  the  iniquity  of  us  all." 

I  may  notice  in  conclusion,  a  prophetic  testimony 
of  equally  vital  import,  namely,  that 

JESUS    LIVES    AND    SAVES. 

We  find  in  the  predictions  a  strange  conjunction  of 
death  and  after-service — service  which,  notwith- 
standing death,  is  to  be  rendered  in  the  midst  of 
men,  and  by  Him  who  died  for  them.  In  the  22nd 
Psalm,  He,  whose  hands  and  feet  were  "pierced," 
whose  garments  were  divided,  and  upon  whose 
raiment  they  cast  lots,  looks  forward  to  work  which 
He  will  nevertheless  do  for  God  on  the  earth.  "I 
will  declare  Thy  name  unto  my  brethren,  in  the 
midst  of  the  congregation  will  I  praise  Thee"  (Ps. 
xxii.  22).  In  that  prophetic  hymn  of  the  humiliation 
and  death  of  Christ,  which  we  have  already  referred 
to — the  53rd  of  Isaiah — this  strange  testimony  is 
still  clearer.  After  saying  how  it  pleased  the  Lord 
to  bruise  Him  and  put  Him  to  grief,  the  prophet 
proceeds  :  "When  thou  shalt  make  His  soul  an  offer- 
ing for  sin,  He  shall  see  His  seed,  He  shall  prolong 
his  days,  and  the  pleasure  of  the  Lord  shall  prosper 
in  His  hand.  He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul 
and  shall  be  satisfied.  By  His  knowledge  shall  My 
righteous  servant  justify  many,  for  He  shall  bear 
their  iniquities.  Therefore  will  I  divide  Him  a 
portion  with  the  great,  and  He  shall  divide  the  spoil 
wth  the  strong,  because  He  poured  out  His  soul 
unto  death,  and  was  numbered  with  the  transgres- 
sors. Yet  He  bore  the  sin  of  many  and  made  inter- 
cession for  the  transgressors"   (Isa.  liii.  10-12). 

Other  predictions  are  equally  emphatic  as  to  the 
unceasing  activity  and  undying  influence  of  the  Re- 
deemer. But  here  the  fulness  of  His  triumph  over 
death  and  the  oblivion,  which  at  the  close  of  life's 
brief  day,  falls  in  deepening  darkness  upon  human 


214  PREDICTIONS  REGARDING  JESUS. 

work  and  fame,  are  put  so  clearly  that  we  need  no 
testimony  besides.  Death  does  not  shut  out  from 
His  view  the  scene  of  His  earthly  labours.  "He 
shall  see  His  seed,"  "He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of 
His  soul,  and  shall  be  satisfied."  Death  does  not 
even  end  His  earthly  activity.  "The  pleasure  of  the 
Lord  shall  prosper  in  His  hand."  He  shall  "justify 
many."  "H e  shall  divide  the  spoil  with  the  strong." 
Next  in  point  of  difficulty  to  the  doctrine  of  the 
Atonement  stands  this,  that  Jesus  is  a  present 
Saviour — that  to-day,  as  of  old,  He  hears  the  cry  of 
need,  and  will  accept,  and  bless,  and  save.  But 
here  again  difficulty  is  met  by  the  Divine  assurance. 
These  words  are  God's,  for  no  other  could  have  told 
of  Christ's  advent,  or  pictured  His  character,  or 
told  the  story  of  His  suffering  and  work.  If  any 
other  could,  then  put  the  words  aside;  pay  no  heed 
to  this  wondrous  testimony  about  a  living,  present 
Christ,  for  the  words  may  in  that  case  be  merely 
man's.  But,  if  they  bear  the  stamp  of  a  knowledge 
that  is  infinite,  we  know  that  they  came  from  One 
who  will  not  deceive,  and  who  cannot  err.  To  men 
of  old  the  predictions  spoke  of  one  who  said  "I 
come."  To  us  now  they  tell  of  one  whose  word  is: 
"Behold  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock.  If  any  man 
hear  My  voice  and  open  the  door,  I  will  come  in  to 
him  and  will  sup  with  him  and  he  with  Me." 


CHAPTER   X. 

PREDICTIONS     FULFILLED     IN     THE     HISTORY     OF     THE 

JEWS. 

We  shall  now  close  our  readings,  in  the  fulfilled 
prophecies  of  Scripture,  with  a  rapid  survey  of  those 
which  bear  upon  the  fortunes  of  the  Jews.  We 
have  seen  something  of  the  testimony  which  God 
has  borne  to  His  word,  to  Christ,  and  to  some  of 
the  leading  doctrines  of  that  faith,  which  we  are 
told  forms  the  pathway  to  eternal  life.  It  may  be 
well,  then,  that  we  should  be  reminded  that  where 
God  sheds  light  He  expects  obedience,  and  that  the 
possession  of  privileges  has  its  duties  and  its  pen- 
alties. 

In  another  respect  it  may  be  well  that  this  should 
form  the  terminus  of  our  inquiries.  We  have  hith- 
erto been  dealing  with  regions  and  events  far  from 
us,  and  the  force  which  closer  acquaintance  and 
fuller  knowledge  would  have  given  to  conviction 
has  been  wanting.  But  the  Jews,  scattered  every- 
where and  dwelling  in  our  own  midst,  bring  the 
claims  home  to  us  both  of  the  Old  Testament  and  of 
the  New.  The  Bible  lives  in  the  Jew.  His  whole 
history  is  a  testimony  to  its  historic  truth:  in  his 
present  customs,  in  his  very  separateness,  we  see 
the  impress  of  events,  the  reality  of  which  many 
have  doubted,  and  some  have  denied ;  and  he  teaches 
us  that  God's  hand  rests  on  the  life  of  to-day  as 
truly  as  it  rested  on  the  life  of  the  past. 


2l6  PREDICTIONS    REGARDING   THE    JEWS. 

Perhaps  the  most  startling  fact  in  connection  with 
the  Jewish  race  is  its  attitude  towards  Christianity. 
We  know  that  the  Gospel  was  preached  to  the  Jew 
before  it  was  declared  to  the  Gentile,  and  that  many 
received  the  message  The  foundations  of  the  new 
faith  were  laid  among  the  followers  of  the  old.  All 
the  apostles,  without  a  single  exception,  were  Jews. 
The  first  preachers  of  the  Gospel,  who  went  every- 
where preaching  the  word,  were  also  of  the  same 
race;  and  multitudes  of  their  countrymen,  both  at 
home  and  abroad,  rejoiced  in  the  assurance  of  for- 
giveness through  the  blood  of  Christ.  But,  when 
all  this  has  been  admitted,  the  fact  remains  that,  by 
nearly  the  whole  race  then,  and  by  the  entire  race 
ever  since,  the  Messiah  has  been  rejected  and 
sqorned.  This  unanimous  and  persistent  repudia- 
tion of  the  claims  of  Jesus  by  His  own  people  is  not 
devoid  of  difficulty,  and  the  difficulty  is  increased 
when  we  remember  that  for  long  ages  this  nation 
had  been  trained  to  know  God's  mind,  and  had  been 
prepared  by  prophecy  and  by  the  institutions  of  the 
law  to  receive  Christ  when  He  came. 

If  we  were  asked,  then,  to  explain  the  rejection  of 
Jesus  by  His  own  people,  we  might  not  be  able  to 
wholly  remove  the  impression  that  it  throws  doubt  upon 
the  claims  of  the  Gospel.  But  the  prophecies,  which 
the  Jews  cherish  as  well  as  we,  turn  this,  which 
might  have  been  used  as  an  argument  against  Chris- 
tianity, into  one  of  the  strongest  testimonies  to  its  truth. 

THE  REJECTION  WAS  FORETOLD. 

We  are  familiar,  for  example,  with  the  words  of 
Isaiah.  The  prophet  exclaims,  as  he  looks  onward, 
to  the  Gospel  day  and  searches  for  the  fruits  among 
his  people  of  the  labours  of  those  who,  with  himself, 
have  been  proclaiming  Jesus:  "Who  hath  believed 
our  report,  and  to  whom  hath  the  arm  of  the  Lord 
been  revealed?"  (liii.  i.)     He  breaks  out  into  lamen- 


THE  INSTRUMENTS  OF  THEIR  PUNISHMENT.      217 

tation  over  Israel's  rejection  of  Him  of  whom  he 
has  just  predicted  that  He  shall  "sprinkle  many 
nations"  (Hi.  15),  and  exclaims:  "When  we  see  Him 
there  is  no  beauty  that  we  should  desire  Him.  He 
was  despised  and  rejected  of  men ;  a  man  of  sorrows 
and  acquainted  with  grief;  and  as  one  from  whom 
men  hide  their  face  He  was  despised,  and  we  es- 
teemed Him  not"  (liii.  2,  3).  The  Jews  regarded 
the  crucifixion  of  Jesus  as  disproving  all  His  claims, 
and  yet,  seven  centuries  before  His  blood  stained 
the  sod  of  Calvary,  it  was  declared  they  should  so 
regard  it:  "Surely  He  hath  borne  our  griefs  and 
carried  our  sorrows,  yet  we  did  esteem  Him  stricken, 
smitten  of  God,  and  afflicted"  (liii.  4). 

Similar  announcements  meet  us  elsewhere  That 
which  is  yet  to  be  "the  headstone  of  the  corner"  is 
"the  stone  which  the  builders  refused"  (Ps.  cxviii. 
22).  Blindness  was  to  fall  upon  Israel:  "Tarry  ye 
and  wonder;  take  your  pleasure  and  be  blind:  they 
are  drunken,  but  not  with  wine;  they  stagger,  but 
not  with  strong  drink.  For  the  Lord  hath  poured 
out  upon  you  the  spirit  of  deep  sleep,  and  hath 
Closed  your  eyes ;  the  prophets  and  your  heads,  the 
seers  hath  He  covered.  And  all  vision  is  become  to 
you  as  the  words  of  a  book  that  is  sealed,  which 
men  deliver  to  one  that  is  learned,  saying,  Read 
this,  I  pray  thee;  and  he  saith,  I  cannot,  for  it  is 
sealed ;  and  the  book  is  delivered  to  him  that  is  not 
learned,  saying,  Read  this,  I  pray  thee :  and  he  saith, 
I  am  not  learned"  (Isa.  xxix.  9-1).  Therefore  the 
Redeemer  exclaims:  "I  have  laboured  in  vain,  I 
have  spent  My  strength  for  nought  and  vanity;" 
and  while  He  is  described  as  "a  light  to  the  Gen- 
tiles," He  is  in  the  same  breath  spoken  of  as  "one 
whom  man  despiseth — whom  the  nation  abhorreth" 
f(Isa.  xlix.  4,  6,  7).  This  is,  in  fact,  one  of  the  great 
outstanding  features  in  the  prophetic  portraiture  of 
the  Messiah.  If,  therefore,  Israel  had  accepted,  and 
not  rejected,  Jesus,   that  would   have  been  one  of 


2l8  PREDICTIONS   REGARDING   THE    JEWS. 

the  strongest  possible  arguments  against  Christi- 
anity. It  would  have  proved  that  He  was  not  the 
Messiah  whose  advent  had  been  foretold.  On  the 
other  hand,  in  these  predictions  and  their  accom- 
plishment we  have  another  seal  to  the  Gospel.  The 
rejection  is  one  more  test,  placed  in  our  hands  by 
God  Himself,  whereby  we  might  know  whether  He 
whose  name  should  be  declared  to  us  was  indeed  the 
Saviour  of  the  world ;  and  Israel's  abhorrence  of  the 
Nazarene  is  their  unconscious  testimony  that  this 
indeed  is  He. 

Another  difficulty  in  Israel's  rejection  of  the  Mes- 
siah is  its  long  continuance.  One  generation  may 
err,  but  succeeding  generations  review  the  decisions 
of  the  past  and  judge  righteous  judgment.  There 
was  much  in  the  case  of  the  Jews  to  suggest  and  to 
guide  such  a  review.  The  terrible  discipline, 
through  which  they  have  passed,  might  have  hum- 
bled and  enlightened  them.  It  might  have  been 
thought  also  that  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  dwell 
for  18  centuries  in  the  midst  of  Christian  nations, 
with  the  name  of  Jesus  for  ever  in  their  ears,  with 
the  gospels  spread  before  them,  and  the  testimony 
of  their  own  prophets  continually  under  their  eyes, 
without  acknowledging  the  mistake  or  rebellion  of 
their  fathers.  And  yet,  in  spite  of  all,  their  rejection 
of  Jesus  has  been  perpetuated,  and  is  as  resolute 
to-day  as  it  ever  has  been.  This,  we  repeat,  is  a 
farther  difficulty,  and  one  which,  taken  by  itself, 
might  form  a  stumbling-block  in  the  pathway  of 
belief.  It  might  be  hard,  perhaps  impossible,  for 
us  to  explain  how  the  testimony  of  those  prophecies, 
which  the  Jews  revere  as  the  Word  of  God,  has 
failed  to  convince  them  that  Jesus  is  the  Messiah. 
But  here  again  the  objection  is  really  one  of  the 
strongest  confirmations.     This,  too,  was  predicted. 

THE   LONG-CONTINUED    REJECTION 

of  Christianity  by  the  Jews  is  distinctly  prophesied 


THEIR    SUFFERINGS.  2ig 

in  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New.  Isaiah  at  the 
outset  of  his  ministry  has  a  vision  of  the  Lord,  who 
has  come  to  His  Temple,  and  whose  glory  fills  it. 
But,  while  he  is  sent  to  Israel  with  God's  word,  he 
is  told  that  the  vision  which  he  has  seen  will  not 
be  given  to  them.  "And  he  said,  go  and  tell  this 
people :  Hear  ye  indeed,  but  understand  not,  and  see 
ye  indeed,  but  perceive  not.  Make  the  heart  of 
this  people  fat,  and  make  their  ears  heavy,  and  shut 
their  eyes ;  lest  they  see  with  their  eyes,  and  hear 
with  their  ears,  and  understand  with  their  heart,  and 
turn  again  and  be  healed/'  The  prophet  asks  how 
long  the  doom  of  blindness  is  to  rest  upon  Israel, 
and  receives  the  reply:  "Until  cities  be  waste  with- 
out inhabitant,  and  houses  without  man,  and  the 
land  become  utterly  waste,  and  the  Lord  have  re- 
moved men  far  away,  and  the  forsaken  places  be 
many  in  the  midst  of  the  land"  (Isaiah  vi.  9-12). 

It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  blindness  of  the  Jews 
was  to  be  long  continued,  was  to  be  continued, 
indeed,  during  the  long  ages  in  which  the  land 
of  Israel  was  to  be  depopulated,  so  wasted  that  its 
very  fruitfulness  was  to  pass  away.  The  pre- 
diction »in  the  New  Testament  is  still  more  defin- 
ite. In  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  the  apostle  Paul 
speaks  of  his  "heart's  desire  and  supplication  to 
God"  that  Israel  may  be  saved.  But  he  holds  out 
no  hope  to  his  readers  of  an  immediate  answer  to 
his  prayer.  Israel  will  not  return  till  the  time 
of  God's  forbearance  with  the  Gentiles  has  expired. 
"For  I  would  not,  brethren,  have  you  ignorant 
of  this  mystery,  lest  ye  be  wise  in  your  own  con- 
ceits, that  a  hardening  in  part  hath  befallen  Israel, 

UNTIL   THE   FULNESS    OF  THE   GENTILES   BE   COME   IN" 

(Romans  xi.  25),  that  is,  till  the  time  come  when 
God  shall  judge  them  as  He  has  judged  His  ancient 
people.  Others  understand  the  words  as  referring 
to  mercy,  not  to  judgment,  and  believe  that  they  in- 


220  PREDICTIONS    REGARDING   THE   JEWS. 

dicate  the  ingathering  of  all  the  Gentile  nations  into 
the  kingdom  of  God.  In  either  case  it  is  clear  that 
the  rejection  of  Jesus  by  Israel  was  to  continue  to  the 
present  time  and  beyond  it.  This  difficulty,  therefore, 
like  the  other,  is  another  testimony  to  the  truth  of 
God's  word  and  to  the  Gospel  which  He  has  declared. 
The  Jew  confirms  by  his  very  rejection  the  claims 
which  He  scorns. 

This,  however,  is  only  the  beginning  of  the  story. 
The  sin  was  to  be  visited  with  judgment.  Daniel 
in  connection  with  his  prediction  regarding  the 
Messiah,  which  we  have  already  considered,  an- 
nounces the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  the  tem- 
ple :  "The  people  of  the  prince  that  shall  come  shall 
destroy  the  city  and  the  sanctuary"  (Dan.  ix.  26). 
Zechariah,  writing  after  the  return  from  Babylon, 
speaks  of  another  terrible  calamity  for  his  people. 
The  land  is  to  be  spoiled,  Israel  is  to  be  given  over 
to  slaughter,  and  to  be  sold  into  slavery,  "For  I 
will  no  more  pity  the  inhabitants  of  the  land,  saith 
the  Lord"  (Zech.  xi.  1-6).  Malachi,  the  last  of  the 
prophets,  also  hints  at  a  rejection  of  Israel  contem- 
poraneous with  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles.  "I  have 
no  pleasure  in  you,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  neither 
will  I  accept  an  offering  at  your  hand.  For  from 
the  rising  of  the  sun  even  unto  the  going  down  of 
the  same,  My  name  is  great  among  the  Gentiles" 
(Malachi  i.  10,  11). 

We  shall  mainly  confine  ourselves,  however,  to 
the  more  ancient  prophecies  in  Leviticus  and  Deu- 
teronomy, to  which  we  have  referred  in  an  earlier 
chapter.  There,  on  the  foundation  of  their  insti- 
tutions as  a  nation,  it  was  written,  not  only  that 
God  would  punish  persistent  rebellion,  but  also  how 
He  would  punish  it.  The  picture  of  the  Divine 
judgment  is  full  of  minute  details:  it  is  painted 
in  vivid  colours.  There  may  be  some  doubt,  it  is 
true,  as  to  the  application  of  these  predictions  to 


THE  INSTRUMENTS  USED  IN  PUNISHING  THE  JEWS.    221 

the  rejection  of  the  MessiaK.  But  this  doubt,  if  it 
exists,  will  be  dissipated  by  a  moment's  reflection. 
No  other  sin  that  Israel  ever  committed  could  equal 
their  rejection  of  Him,  to  serve  and  aid  whom  in 
His  mission  to  the  nations  they  existed  as  a  people. 
For  them  to  reject  God's  covenant  for  themselves,  to 
attempt  to  bring  to  nought  God's  plan  for  the  world's 
redemption,  and  to  fight,  as  they  did  for  ages,  against 
God's  effort  to  bring  the  nations  to  Himself,  was 
the  most  daring  rebellion  in  which  Israel  had  ever 
engaged.  If  Christianity  is  of  God,  and  these  are 
God's  words,  they  must  find  their  full  accomplish- 
ment in  the  history  of  Israel  at  and  since  the  begin- 
ning of  the  Christian  era.  If  they  had  not  been  so 
fulfilled,  there  could  have  been  no  more  certain  proof 
either  that  the  words  were  not  of  God,  or  that 
Christianity  was  not  from  Him,  and  that  in  reject- 
ing and  attempting  to  defeat  it,  the  Jews  were  not 
rejecting  and  seeking  the  overthrow  of  anything 
which  could  be  called  the  counsel  of  God. 

Turning  now  to  the  prediction  in  Deuteronomy, 
we  note  that  those  who  were  to  be 

THE    INSTRUMENTS    IN    PUNISHING    ISRAEL 

are  described.  If  the  words  had  been  meant  merely 
as  a  threat,  and  not  as  an  unveiling  of  the  future, 
the  materials  for  impressive  writing  lay  at  hand 
What  could  have  impressed  Israel  more  than  to 
hold  over  them  the  menace  of  a  return  to  the  fiery 
furnace  of  Egyptian  bondage?  Or  some  of  the 
neighbouring  and  dreaded  nations  of  the  time  might 
have  been  named  as  their  conquerors  and  oppres- 
sors. But  to  none  of  these  did  the  warning  point. 
The  chastisement  was  not  to  be  the  consequence  of 
ordinary  aggression.  It  was  to  bear  upon  it  from 
first  to  last  the  stamp  of  Divine  judgment.  "The 
Lord  shall  bring  a  nation  against  thee  from  far, 
from  the  end  of  the  earth,  as  the  eagle  flieth;  a 


222  PREDICTIONS   REGARDING   THE   JEWS. 

nation  whose  tongue  thou  shalt  not  understand:  a 
nation  of  fierce  countenance"  (Deuteronomy  xxviii: 
49,  50).  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  remind  the  reader 
how  wonderfully  these  words  were  fulfilled  in  the 
case  of  the  Romans.  They  came  from  far,  from  the 
ends  of  the  earth.  Theirs  was  a  speech  the  Jews 
did  not  understand.  They  were  men  of  fierce  aspect. 
Let  me,  however,  again  remind  him  that  this  pre- 
diction could  scarcely  have  resulted  from  a  calcu- 
lation of  probabilities.  We  may  be  occasionally  dis- 
turbed by  a  dread  of  national  chastisement,  but,  if 
we  were  to  don  the  prophet's  mantle  and  speak  of 
coming  invasion,  should  we  not  inevitably  think  of 
nations  known  to  us  as  the  probable  instruments  of 
vengeance?  If  the  writer  of  Deuteronomy  had  been 
moved  by  the  thoughts  of  his  own  heart,  this  course 
would  have  been  as  natural  to  him  as  it  is  to  us. 
But  he  turned  away  from  every  people  then  known 
to  Israel,  and  said  "Your  punishment  will  come 
from  none  of  these.  A  people  from  far,  from  the 
ends  of  the  earth,  a  people  whose  speech  you  will 
not  understand — they  will  be  the  sword  in  the  hand 
of  God."  What  shall  we  say  of  it?  If  the  words 
are  not  God's,  then  their  presence  on  the  page  of 
Scripture  must  be  due  to  one  of  the  most  wonderful 
freaks  of  chance  of  which  we  have  any  record. 

Whether  they  are  due  to  chance  or  not,  will  be 
made  abundantly  clear  ere  we  have  finished.  The 
words  proceed  to  speak  of 

THE    MERCILESSNESS    OF    THESE    MINISTERS    OF 
VENGEANCE. 

They  were  to  be  "a  nation  of  fierce  countenance, 
which  shall  not  regard  the  person  of  the  old,  nor 
shew  favour  to  the  young"  (Deut.  xxviii.  50).  We 
have  often  heard  of  the  stern  necessities  of  war,  but 
these  necessities  were  never  more  ruthlessly  en- 
forced than  by  the  Romans.     In  their  stern  disci- 


USElk  TREATMENT  AMONG  THE  GENTILES.        2^3 

pline  there  was  no  room  for  pity.  There  was  no 
soft  spot  in  that  iron  heart,  to  which  either  age  or 
infancy  could  make  its  appeal.  Those  who  could  be 
sold  as  slaves,  who  could  fight  in  the  cruel  sports  of 
their  amphitheatres,  or  adorn  the  triumph  of  their 
general,  might  be  spared,  but  they  never  troubled 
themselves  with  useless  incumbrances.  Josephus 
tells  how  at  Tiberias,  even  where  the  people  had 
been  promised  their  lives,  the  old  men  and  those 
who  "were  useless"  were  put  to  the  sword.  The 
same  course  was  followed  at  Jerusalem  and  else- 
where. They  regarded  not  the  person  of  the  old, 
nor  did  they  shew  favour  to  the  young. 

Another  feature  in  the  punishment  of  Israel  was, 
that,  though  Egypt  was  not  to  be  the  means  of  their 
overthrow,  it  was  nevertheless  to  be  concerned  in 
their  degradation.    They  were  to  be 

TAKEN    BACK    TO    EGYPT    IN    SHIPS. 

"And  the  Lord  shall  bring  thee  into  Egypt  again 
with  ships"  (ver.  68).  Of  those  saved  at  Jerusalem, 
all  who  were  over  17  years  of  age  were  sent  to 
labour  in  the  Egyptian  mines,  where  the  prisoners 
were  kept  at  work  day  and  night  without  intermis- 
sion, or  the  slightest  interval  of  sleep,  till  they  fell 
down  and  died.  "The  vast  numbers,"  says  Dio- 
dorus,  "employed  in  these  mines  are  bound  in  fetters 
and  compelled  to  work  day  and  night  without  inter- 
mission and  without  the  least  hope  of  escape.  No 
attention  is  paid  to  their  persons;  they  have  not 
even  a  piece  of  rag  to  cover  themselves;  and  so 
wretched  is  their  condition  that  every  one  who 
witnesses  it  deplores  the  excessive  misery  they  en- 
dure. No  rest,  no  intermission  from  toil,  are  given 
either  to  the  sick  or  maimed ;  neither  the  weakness 
of  age  nor  woman's  infirmities  are  regarded ;  all  are 
driven  to  their  work  with  the  lash,  till,  at  last,  over- 
come with  the  intolerable  weight  of  their  afflictions, 


224  PREDICTIONS    REGARDING   THE    JEWS. 

they  die  in  the  midst  of  their  toil  "*  It  was  a  more 
terrible  bondage  than  that  from  which  God  had  freed 
their  fathers.  Besides  these,  vast  multitudes  were 
sold  into  slavery.  The  markets  were  glutted,  and 
the  words  were  accomplished:  "No  man  shall  buy 
you"  (ver.  68).  97,000,  according  to  Josephus,  were 
carried  away  captive  from  Jerusalem  alone.  This 
number  was  increased  by  a  large  part  of  the  popula- 
tion of  Judea  and  Galilee.  Wherever  resistance  had 
been  offered  to  the  Roman  arms,  captivity  was  the 
mildest  fate  granted  to  the  vanquished.  On  the 
suppression  of  the  rising  under  Barcochebas  in  the 
next  century  all  the  horrors  of  the  previous  war 
were  repeated.  "They  were  reduced  to  slavery/' 
says  Milman,  "by  thousands.  There  was  a  great 
fair  held  under  a  celebrated  Terebinth,  which  tra- 
dition had  consecrated  as  the  very  tree  under  which 
Abraham  had  pitched  his  tent.  Thither  his  mis- 
erable children  were  brought  in  droves,  and  sold  as 
cheap  as  horses.  Others  were  carried  away  and  sold 
at  Gaza ;  others  were  transported  to  Egypt  "If 

This  forms  only  a  small  part,  however,  of  the 
prophetic  description  of  those  sufferings  and  calam- 
ities, which  were  to  make  that  terrible  time  to  be 
forever  remembered  as  a  time  of  judgment.  One 
characteristic  of  the  war  was  to  be 

ITS    SIEGES. 

"He  shall  besiege  thee  in  all  thy  gates,  until  thy 
high  and  fenced  walls  come  down,  wherein  thou 
trustedst,  throughout  all  thy  land :  and  he  shall  be- 
siege thee  in  all  thy  g-ates,  throughout  all  thy  land, 
which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee."  This  was  by 
no  means  an  ordinary  incident  in  Jewish  warfare. 
The  wars  conducted  by  the  Maccabees  were  wars  of 
battles.    They  met  their  enemies  in  the  field.     The 

*  Wilkinson,  Ancient  Egyptians,  ii.,  pp.  143-144. 
t  Milman,  History  of  the  Jews,  ii.,  p.  436. 


Th£  character  OF  THE  BATTLES.  22$ 

Jews  pursued  Cestius  when  he  retreated  from  Jeru- 
salem, and  they  made  a  disastrous  attack  on  Asca- 
lon,  but  with  these  exceptions  the  war  was,  as  here 
described,  a  war  of  sieges.  In  previous  struggles 
there  had  been  battles,  the  names  of  which  awoke 
memories  of  joy  or  sorrow  in  the  breasts  of  the 
children  of  Israel,  but  now  their  story  is  the  story 
of  towns  besieged  and  stormed.  The  names  Jota- 
pata,  Japha,  Tarichea,  Gamala,  Itabyrium,  Gischala, 
Jerusalem,  Herodion,  Machaerus,  Massada,  which 
appear  in  the  history  of  the  campaigns,  are  the 
names,  not  of  stricken  fields,  but  of  captured  cities 
and  fortresses.  I  repeat  that  this  was  not  a  neces- 
sary feature  of  the  war.  The  armies  of  Israel  might 
have  been  defeated  on  their  plains  or  on  their  moun- 
tains, and  the  cities  might,  as  a  consequence  of  the 
defeat,  have  surrendered.  But  the  contest  is  pic- 
tured as  one  of  infatuation  or  despair.  It  is  war  to 
the  death.  The  battle  raged  wherever  there  was  a 
chance  of  resistance,  and  the  Romans  had  to  fight 
their  way  through  the  land  step  by  step,  reducing 
one  stronghold  after  another.  Even  after  Jerusalem 
had  fallen,  as  fierce  a  stand  was  made  at  Machaerus 
and  Massada.  "He  shall  besiege  thee  in  all  thy 
gates  throughout  all  thy  land  which  the  Lord  thy 
God  giveth  thee." 
We  may  notice  also  what  is  said  of 

THE    METHOD    OF    ATTACK. 

'Tie  shall  besiege  thee  in  all  thy  gates,  until  thy  high 
and  fenced  walls  come  down,  wherein  thou  trustedst." 
Josephus  describes  the  terrors  of  the  Roman  batter- 
ing-ram. When  it  is  "pulled  backward,"  he  says, 
"by  a  great  number  of  men  with  united  forces,  and 
then  thrust  forward  by  the  same  men  with  a  mighty 
noise,  it  tatters  the  walls  with  that  iron  part  which 
is  promihent:  nor  is  there  any  tower  so  strong,  nor 
walls  so  bioad,   that   can   resist  any  more   than   its 


226  PREDICTIONS   REGARDING   THE    JEWS. 

first  batteries,  but  all  are  forced  to  yield  to  it  at 
last."  He  describes  its  effects  at  Jotapata,  where 
he  commanded :  "Now  at  the  very  first  stroke  of  this 
engine  the  wall  was  shaken,  and  a  terrible  clamour 
was  raised  by  the  people  within  the  city,  as  if  they 
were  already  taken."  The  result  here,  as  every- 
where besides,  was  that  not  only  was  a  breach  made 
and  the  city  taken,  but,  in  accordance  with  the 
orders  of  Vespasian,  the  city  was  "entirely  demol- 
ished and  all  the  fortifications  burned  down."  Their 
high  and  fenced  walls  came  down  wherein  they  trusted. 
Then  the  prophecy  presents  a  vivid  picture  of  the 
sufferings  of  the  people.    They  were  to  endure 

THE    EXTREMITIES    OF    FAMINE. 

It  was  to  be  no  ordinary  tale  of  want  and  suffering, 
but  one  such  that  the  ears  of  everyone  that  heard 
it  should  tingle.  "Thou  shalt  eat  the  fruit  of  thine 
own  body,  the  flesh  of  thy  sons  and  thy  daughters, 
which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  given  thee,  in  the 
siege  and  in  the  straitness  wherewith  thine  enemies 
shall  straiten  thee.  The  man  that  is  tender  among 
you  and  very  delicate,  his  eye  shall  be  evil  toward 
his  brother,  and  toward  the  wife  of  his  bosom,  and 
toward  the  remnant  of  his  children  which  he  hath 
remaining:  so  that  he  will  not  give  to  any  of  them 
the  flesh  of  his  children  whom  he  shall  eat.  .  . 
The  tender  and  delicate  woman  among  you  which 
would  not  adventure  to  set  the  sole  of  her  foot  upon 
the  ground  for  delicateness  and  tenderness,  .  . 
she  shall  eat  them  (her  children)  for  want  of  all 
things  secretly"  (Deut.  xxviii.  53-57).  So  closely 
was  this  terrible  prediction  fulfilled  that  history  in 
this  case  seems  but  the  echo  of  prophecy.  "The 
famine  was  too  hard,"  says  Josephus,  "for  all  other 
passions,  .  .  .  insomuch  that  children  pulled 
the  very  morsels  that  their  fathers  were  eating  out 
of  their  very  mouths,  and,  what  was  still  more  to 


THEIR  SUFFERINGS.  227 

be  pitied,  so  did  the  mothers  do  to  their  infants ;  and, 
when  those  that  were  most  dear  were  perishing 
under  their  hands,  they  were  not  ashamed  to  take  from 
them  the  very  last  drops  that  might  preserve  their 
lives."  And  he  tells,  with  evident  reluctance  (for  he 
was  still  a  Jew,  and  knew  he  was  exposing  the  shame 
of  his  country  to  the  eyes  of  Gentile  readers),  of  a 
certain  woman  named  Mary,  "eminent  for  her  family 
and  her  wealth"  who  by  reason  of  the  want  of  all 
things  "in  the  siege  and  in  the  straitness,"  "slew  her 
son ;  and  they  roasted  him,  and  ate  the  one  half  of  him, 
and  kept  the  other  half  by  her  concealed." 
They  were  also  to  be 

"left  few  in  number" 

(Deut.  xxviii.  62).  Summing  up  the  numbers  given 
by  Josephus,  it  appears  that  1,356,460  were  slain  and 
101,700  carried  away  captive.  But  he  only  gives  the 
number  of  prisoners  in  Jerusalem  and  two  other  places, 
and  there  were  many  losses  which  he  omits,  "besides 
the  immense  waste  of  life  from  massacre,  famine,  and 
disease,  inseparable  from  such  a  war  in  almost  every 
district."*  This  terrible  total  was  swelled  through  in- 
surrection and  massacre  in  other  parts  of  the  Roman 
Empire,  and  was  further  increased  by  the  atrocities 
perpetrated  by  the  Romans  in  suppressing  the  out- 
break under  Barochebas.  Of  that  "massacre  the  Rab- 
bins tell  frightful  stories,  but  their  horror  is  mitigated 
by  their  extravagance.  More  are  said  to  have  fallen 
at  Bither  than  escaped  with  Moses  from  Egypt.  The 
horses  waded  up  to  their  bits  in  carnage.  Blood  flowed 
so  copiously,  that  the  stream  carried  stones  weighing 
four  pounds  into  the  sea,  according  to  their  account, 
forty  miles  distant.  The  dead  covered  eighteen  square 
miles,  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  adjacent  regions  had 
no  need  to  manure  their  ground  for  seven  years.    A 

*  History  of  the  Jews,  ii.,  p.  381. 


22&  PREDICTIONS    REGARDING    THE    JEWS. 

more  trustworthy  authority,  Dion  Cassius,  states  that 
during  the  whole  war  the  enormous  number  of  580,000 
fell  by  the  sword,  not  including  those  who  perished 
by  famine,  disease,  and  fire.  The  whole  of  Judea  was 
a  desert;  wolves  and  hyaenas  went  howling  along  the 
streets  of  the  desolate  cities."* 

But  the  predictions  are  not  bounded  by  the  judg- 
ments which  marked  the  end  of  the  Jewish  nation  in 
Palestine.  They  have  also  told  their  after  story.  We 
noticed  in  a  former  chapter  the  prophecy,  that  they 
should  be  swept  from  off  the  land  which  God  had 
given  them:  "Ye  shall  be  plucked  from  off  the  land 
whither  thou  goest  in  to  possess  it"  (Deut.  xxviii.  63). 
It  may  be  enough  to  remark  now  that,  from  the  time 
of  the  Emperor  Hadrian  to  the  present,  they  have 
never  been  permitted  to  call  that  land  their  own.  Men 
of  every  nationality  and  faith  have  been  more  at  home 
in  the  ancient  land  of  Israel  than  the  despised  and 
downtrodden  Jew. 

We  proceed  to  follow  their  after  history  as  it  is  de- 
picted in  prophecy,  and  we  mark  first  of  all 

THEIR    UNIVERSAL    DISPERSION. 

"And  the  Lord  shall  scatter  thee  among  all  peoples 
from  the  one  end  of  the  earth  even  unto  the  other  end 
of  the  earth"  (Deut.  xxviii.  64)  ;  "And  you  will  I  scat- 
ter among  the  nations"  (Leviticus  xxvi.  33).  These 
words  have  been  so  fully  accomplished  that  the  disper- 
sion of  the  Jews  has  long  been  one  of  the  common- 
places of  history.  The  Jew  is  found  in  every  land, 
from  north  to  south,  from  east  to  west.  Even  to-day, 
accustomed  as  we  are  to  the  commingling  of  nation- 
alities, the  dispersion  of  Israel  strikes  us  with  aston- 
ishment. To  no  other  nation  would  these  words  have 
applied.  Can  we  explain  how  they  have  been  so  abun- 
dantly fulfilled  in  the  fate  of  the  one  people  of  whom 

*  Ibid.,  ii.,  pp.  435-436. 


THEIR  DISPERSION  AND  THEIR  PRESERVATION.     22Q 

they  were  spoken?  The  fulfilments  of  other  predic- 
tions have  been  far  removed  from  the  scope  of  our  ob- 
servation, and  have  not  summoned  us,  so  to  speak,  as 
God's  witnesses.  But  this  touches  us.  It  is  a  fulfil- 
ment in  our  own  day,  and  in  our  own  land.  It  is  one 
which  we  have  no  need  to  search  out  and  make  our- 
selves acquainted  with.  It  has  been  laid  fully  before 
us;  it  is  among  the  thing  we  have  long  known.  And 
now  what  is  the  testimony  we  have  to  offer  ?  Is  it  not 
that  the  book  which  declared  this  from  of  old  bears 
upon  it  here  the  Divine  seal? 

This,  however,  is  only  part  of  the  picture.     It  was 
foretold  that,  though  dispersed, 

THEY    SHOULD     BE     PRESERVED. 

That  a  nation,  deprived  of  its  fatherland,  wandering 
over  all  the  earth  without  any  home  or  rallying-place, 
deprived,  too,  as  we  shall  immediately  see,  of  the  chief 
ceremonies  and  institutions  of  the  religion  which  had 
been  the  main  instrument  in  binding  them  together  as 
a  people — that  a  nation  so  placed  should  not  be  ab- 
sorbed by  the  peoples  among  whom  they  sojourned, 
and  should  not  disappear  as  a  distinct  and  separate 
race,  is  contrary  to  reason  and  experience.  In  every 
other  instance  the  uprooting  of  a  people  from  their 
own  land  and  the  scattering  of  them  among  surround- 
ing nations,  have  been  followed  by  their  extinction  as 
a  race.  But  the  words  which  pronounced  the  judg- 
ment upon  the  Jew,  said  also,  "And  yet,  for  all  that, 
when  they  be  in  the  land  of  their  enemies,  I  will  not  re- 
ject them,  neither  will  I  abhor  them,  to  destroy  them 
utterly,  and  to  break  My  covenant  with  them ;  for  I  am 
the  Lord  their  God"  (Lev.  xxvi.  44).  And  here  again 
the  improbable,  and  therefore  the  utterly  unforeseen, 
has  happened.  The  Jews  plucked  up  out  of  their  own 
land,  and  scattered  over  the  whole  earth,  have  never- 
theless been  preserved.  "Massacred  by  thousands, 
yet  springing  up  again  from  their  undying  stock,  the 


23O  PREDICTIONS    REGARDING    THE    JEWS. 

Jews  appear  at  all  times  and  in  all  regions.  Their  per- 
petuity, their  national  immortality,  is  at  once  the  most 
curious  problem  to  the  political  inquirer;  to  the  re- 
ligious man  a  subject  of  profound  and  awful  admira- 


tion/'* 
The 

SEPARATENESS, 

which  is  such  a  marked  characteristic  of  the  Jewish 
people,  was  also  clearly  predicted.  It  has  not  always 
been  the  desire  of  Jews  that  it  should  continue.  There 
were  many  in  the  time  of  Ezekiel,  as  well  as  after- 
wards in  the  days  of  the  Maccabees,  who  considered 
its  perpetuation  to  be  a  mistake.  God's  answer  to  the 
imagination  of  their  hearts  was  this:  "That  which 
cometh  into  your  mind  shall  not  be  at  all;  in  that  ye 
say,  we  will  be  as  the  nations,  as  the  families  of  the 
countries,  to  serve  wood  and  stone"  (Ezek.  xx.  32). 
Another  prediction,  to  which  we  shall  again  refer,  rep- 
resents Israel  after  the  dispersion  as  a  woman  who  had 
been  an  adulteress,  but  whom  the  prophet  purchases 
and  weds  on  the  condition  that  she  will  no  more  trans- 
gress, but  abide  for  him  many  days  (Hosea  iii.  1-3). 
Neither  their  own  proclivities  to  idolatry,  nor  the  ter- 
rible constraint  which  was  to  be  put  upon  them,  would 
avail  to  blot  out  the  distinctions  which  separated  them 
from  the  nations  among  whom  they  sojourned.  These 
predictions  have  been  answered  by  what  is  one  of  the 
mightiest  marvels  of  history.  Rivers  sometimes  enter 
the  sea  in  such  volume  and  force  that  they  cleave  path- 
ways for  miles  through  the  ocean  bed.  But  this  force 
is  soon  spent,  and  their  waters,  like  those  of  meaner 
streams,  have  at  last  to  commingle  with  the  ocean. 
We  can  understand  how  the  Jews  might  retain  their 
national,  or  what  in  their  case  was  the  same,  their 
religious,  characteristics   for  a  time.     Customs,  insti- 

*  History  of  the  Jews,  ii.,  pp.  398-399. 


/ 
LOSS  OF  GOVERNMENT,  SACRIFICE,  AND  HOLY-PLACE.  23 1 

tutions,  and  beliefs,  which  had  been  established  for 
ages,  could  not  be  forgotten  in  a  day.  But  scattered, 
dispirited,  in  many  cases  enslaved,  surrounded  by 
strong  temptations,  and  goaded  by  bitter  and  unre- 
lenting persecution  to  cast  away  the  faith  of  their 
fathers,  they  have  overcome  every  opposing  influence 
and  disappointed  every  expectation.  It  is  difficult  to 
explain  this  result,  and  it  was  impossible  to  foresee  it. 
What  then  of  the  words  which  proclaimed  it  from  of 
old,  which  said  that  Israel  should  thus  remain  many 
days,  and  that,  in  spite  of  attempts  even  from  within 
to  heathenize  the  nation,  it  should  not  be  "as  the  na- 
tions, as  the  families  of  the  countries  ?" 

And  the  story  is  told  yet  more  fully.  The  word, 
which  spoke  God's  judgment  upon  their  sin,  foretold 

THEIR  TREATMENT  IN  THE  LANDS  OF  THEIR  LONG  SO- 
JOURN.    They  were,  for  example,  to  be 

COMPELLED   TO    POLLUTE   THEMSELVES    WITH    IDOLATRY. 

"The  Lord  shall  scatter  thee  among  all  peoples,  from 
the  one  end  of  the  earth  even  unto  the  other  end  of 
the  earth ;  and  there  thou  shalt  serve  other  gods,  which 
thou  hast  not  known,  thou  nor  thy  fathers,  even  wood 
and  stone"  (D'eut.  xxviii.  64).  This  doom  had  been 
laid  upon  them  in  the  prediction  which  spoke  of  the 
earlier  captivity :  "The  Lord  shall  bring  thee  and  thy 
king  which  thou  shalt  set  over  thee  unto  a  nation 
which  thou  hast  not  known,  thou  nor  thy  fathers ;  and 
there  shalt  thou  serve  other  gods,  wood  and  stone" 
(ver.  36).  That  prophecy  was  literally  fulfilled  when 
both  king  and  people  were  removed  to  Babylon.  But 
it  will  be  noticed  that  while  there  is  no  mention  of 
their  king  in  the  subsequent  prediction,  the  one  "na- 
tion" to  which  the  Lord  should  bring  them  is  ex- 
changed for  "all  peoples  from  the  one  end  of  the  earth 
unto  the  other  end  of  the  earth."  It  is  clear  then  that 
the  second  prophecy  contemplates  a  different  set  of  cir- 
cumstances, when  Israel  would  be  without  a  king  and 


22,2  PREDICTIONS  REGARDING  THE  JEWS. 

the  people  should  be  scattered  broadcast  over  the  earth. 
Though  the  circumstances  were  to  be  changed,  how- 
ever, this  doom  was  to  be  repeated.  They  were  again 
to  serve  other  gods.  The  prophecy  was  first  fulfilled 
in  the  forfeiture  of  the  Temple  tax  for  the  purposes  of 
Roman  idolatry.  The  Temple  of  Jupiter  Capitolinus 
was  destroyed  by  fire  on  the  same  day  which  witnessed 
the  conflagration  of  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem,  and  the 
half-shekel  paid  by  every  Jew,  no  matter  where  he 
resided,  to  support  the  Temple-service  was  allotted 
by  the  Roman  Emperors  to  the  rebuilding  and  adorn- 
ment of  the  shrine  of  the  Roman  God.  It  was  in  vain 
the  Jews  refused  to  pay.  Their  resistance  was  se- 
verely punished,  and  they  were  compelled  to  take  the 
money  sacred  to  Jehovah  and  lay  it,  so  to  speak,  upon 
the  altar  of  Jove.  The  tax  was  long  continued.  But 
this  was  only  an  earnest  of  what  lay  before  them. 
Neither  the  heathenism  of  the  Roman  Empire,  nor  that 
of  the  so-called  Christianity  whose  priests  succeeded 
to  the  lordship  of  the  Roman  conscience,  knew  any- 
thing of  toleration;  and  we  know  that  even  till  times 
comparatively  recent,  the  persecution  of  this  people  has 
been  continued.  They  have  been  compelled  to  worship 
the  idols  of  Roman  Catholic  Christendom,  gods  of 
wood  and  stone  which  neither  they  nor  their  fathers 
had  known. 

It  was  also  predicted  that 

THEY    SHOULD    HAVE    N")    REST. 

"And  among  those  nations  shalt  thou  find  no  ease,  and 
there  shall  be  no  rest  for  the  sole  of  thy  foot ;  but  the 
Lord  shall  give  thee  there  a  trembling  heart,  and  fail- 
ing of  eyes,  and  pining  of  soul :  and  thy  life  shall  hang 
in  doubt  before  thee;  and  thou  shalt  fear  night  and 
day,  and  shalt  have  none  assurance  of  thy  life :  in  the 
morning  thou  shalt  say,  Would  God  it  were  even !  and 
at  even  thou  shalt  say,  Would  God  it  were  morning! 
for  the  fear  of  thine  heart  which  thou  shalt  fear,  and 


THEIR  SUFFERINGS.  233 

for  the  sight  of  thine  eyes  which  thou  shalt  see"  (vv. 
65-67).  "And  you  will  I  scatter  among  the  nations, 
and  I  will  draw  out  a  sword  after  you"  (Lev. 
xxvi.  33). 

The  tale  which  these  words  recall  is,  without  ex- 
ception, the  most  terrible  and  pathetic  in  human  his- 
tory. In  the  beginning  of  the  second  century  they 
broke  out  into  insurrection  in  Babylonia,  Egypt,  Cy- 
rene,  and  Cyprus.  The  rebellion  was  suppressed  with 
immense  bloodshed.  They  were  expelled  from  Cyprus, 
and  were  never  after  permitted  to  put  a  foot  upon  the 
island.  If  a  Jew  chanced  to  be  wrecked  upon  its 
shores  he  was  immediately  put  to  death.  It  was  said 
that  in  Egypt  as  many  fell  as  originally  escaped  under 
Moses,  namely,  600,000  men.  To  tell  the  story  of  their 
after  persecutions  we  should  have  to  write  their  his- 
tory. They  have  had  periods  of  rest,  but  these  were 
only  lulls  in  the  storm.  The  hatred  in  which  they  were 
held  was  augmented,  too,  by  their  own  madness.  They 
assisted  the  Persians,  for  example,  to  capture  Jeru- 
salem in  the  beginning  of  the  seventh  century,  and, 
after  they  had  butchered  their  own  Christian  prison- 
ers, they  purchased  those  of  the  Persians  that  they 
might  still  further  glut  their  revenge.  All  this  recoiled 
upon  themselves.  We  know  how  they  suffered  during 
the  Crusades.  Peter  the  Hermit  was  leading  his  hosts 
through  Germany  when  the  cry  ran  from  lip  to  lip, 
"why  march  against  the  enemies  of  Christ  when  worse 
enemies  are  being  left  behind  us !"  Their  fury  was 
accordingly  let  loose  against  the  Jews,  who  were 
everywhere  along  the  route  attacked,  plundered,  and 
massacred.  Fifty  years  afterwards  a  second  storm 
broke  upon  the  Jews  of  Germany,  and  fanatical  mobs 
swept  the  cities  of  the  Rhine,  and  renewed  the  former 
horrors.  In  the  same  country  they  suffered  in  every 
popular  rising  "No  fanatic  monk,"  says  Milman, 
"set  the  populace  in  commotion,  no  public  calamity 
took  place,   no  atrocious   or  extravagant   report  was 


234  PREDICTIONS   REGARDING  THE   JEWS. 

propagated,  but  it  fell  upon  the  heads  of  this  unhappy 
caste.     In  Germany  the  black  plague  raged  in  all  its 
fury,  and  wild  superstition  charged  the  Jews,  as  else- 
where, with  causing  and  aggravating  the  misery,  and 
themselves    enjoying    a   guilty    comparative    security 
amid   the  universal   desolation.     Fatal  tumults   were 
caused  by  the  march  of  the  Flagellants,  a  host  of  mad 
enthusiasts,  who  passed  through  the  cities  of  Germany, 
preceded  by  a  crucifix,  and  scourging  their  naked  and 
bleeding  backs  as  they  went  as  a  punishment  for  their 
own  offences  and  those  of  the  Christian  world.    These 
fanatics  atoned  for,  as  they  supposed,  rather  than  ag- 
gravated, their  sins  against  the  God  of  Mercy,  by  plun- 
dering and  murdering  the  Jews  in  Frankfort  and  other 
places.      The    same    dark   stories    were   industriously 
propagated,  readily  believed,  and  ferociously  avenged, 
of  fountains  poisoned,  children  crucified,  the  Host  stol- 
en and  outraged.    The  power  of  their  liege  lord  and 
Emperor,  recognised  by  the  law  of  the  Empire,  even 
when  exerted  for  their  protection,  was  but  slightly  re- 
spected and  feebly  enforced,  especially  where  every 
province  and  almost  every  city  had  or  claimed  an  in- 
dependent jurisdiction.     Still,  persecuted  in  one  city 
they  fled  to  another,  and  thus  spread  over  the  whole 
of    Germany,    Brunswick,    Austria,    Franconia,    the 
Rhine     Provinces,     Silesia,    Brandenburg,    Bohemia, 
Lithuania,  and  Poland.    Oppressed  by  the  nobles,  ana- 
thematised by  the  clergy,  hated  as  rivals  in  trade  by  the 
burghers  in  commercial  cities,  despised  and  abhorred 
by  the  populace,  their  existence  is  known  by  the  chron- 
icle, rarely  of  protective  edicts,  more  often  of  their 
massacres."*    The  light  which  afterwards  dawned  on 
Christendom,  brought,  no   doubt,   alleviation   for  the 
lot  of  the  Jew  in  Germany,  as  elsewhere,  but  the  reg- 
ulations of  Frederick  the  Great,  show  of  what  cruel 
arbitrariness  a  philosophic  statesman  could  be  guilty 
even  in  the  eighteenth  century  when  the  fate  of  the 

*  History  of  the  Jews,  iii.,  pp.  222,  223. 


THEIR  SUFFERINGS.  #35 

Jew  was  in  question;  and  we  still  hear  of  the  Judetir 
hetze — Jew-baiting — in  that  land  of  philosophy  and 
freedom. 

The  story  of  the  Jew  in  England  is  quite  as  terrible. 
They  were  tortured  and  robbed  by  king  and  nobles, 
and  massacred  by  the  populace.  From  500  to  1,500 
men  with  their  wives  and  children  perished  in  a  rising 
in  York  in  the  twelfth  century.  At  the  end  of  the 
thirteenth  century  their  whole  property  was  confis- 
cated, and  they  were  expelled  from  the  kingdom  with 
circumstances  of  great  barbarity.  They  were  not 
re-admitted  till  the  reign  of  Charles  the  Second.  We 
have  to  repeat  the  same  tale  when  we  turn  to  France. 
For  a  brief  period  that  country  was  a  Paradise  to  the 
Jews.  One  of  the  two  Mayors  of  Narbonne  was  al- 
ways a  Jew,  and  the  Jewish  quarter  in  Lyons  was  the 
principal  part  of  the  city.  One  of  them  was  sent  on 
an  embassy  by  Charlemagne.  They  were  physicians 
and  ministers  to  nobles  and  princes,  and  the  confiden- 
tial advisers  of  Louis  the  Debonnaire.  But  their  emi- 
nence and  wealth  only  marked  them  out  the  more  for 
after  robbery  and  oppression.  They  were  plundered 
and  enslaved  by  the  children  of  the  nobles  whom  they 
had  served.  Philip  Augustus  robbed  them  of  their 
effects  and  banished  them  from  the  kingdom.  For  a 
price  they  were  allowed  to  return.  They  came  back 
only  to  be  entrapped.  Louis  VIII.  annulled  all  inter- 
est on  debts  due  to  them,  declared  them  to  be  attached 
to  the  soil,  and  assigned  them  as  property  to  its  lords. 
In  1239  ^e  mobs  of  Paris  rose  against  them  and  com- 
mitted frightful  atrocities,  which  were  imitated  in 
other  parts  of  the  kingdom.  They  were  finally  banish- 
ed from  France  at  the  end  of  the  14th  century,  a  de- 
cree of  exclusion  which  remained  in  force  till  1794* 
The  story  of  their  sufferings  in  Spain  is  more  harrow- 
ing still;  but  we  forbear.  There  has  been  again  a 
lull,  broken  in  recent  years  by  the  persecutions  in 
Russia.     The  contempt  and  hatred  with  which  the 


236  PREDICTIONS  REGARDING  THE  JEWS. 

Jews  are  still  regarded  there  and  elsewhere  on  the 
continent  are  well  known,  and  the  trembling  of  heart 
of  which  the  prophet  spoke  has  not  ceased  even  now. 
Let  me  call  attention  in  closing  to  another  part  of 
their  story  as  told  in  prophecy.  In  the  book  of  Ho- 
sea,  to  which  we  have  already  referred,  we  find  these 
remarkable  words :  "The  children  of  Israel  shall  abide 
many  days  without  king,  and  without  prince,  and  with- 
out sacrifice,  and  without  pillar,  and  without  ephod 
or  teraphim"  (iii.  4).  We  have  here  a  prophetic 
description  of  some  of  the  social  and  religious  pe- 
culiarities of  the  scattered  Israelites.  We  have  seen 
that  the  Jews  were  to  continue,  and  that  they  were  to  be 
separate.  That  they  were  to  be  still  further  separated 
from  the  peoples  among  whom  they  were  to  sojourn 
is  evident  from  this  prediction  in  Hosea.  Tempted 
sorely  to  turn  aside  to  idolatry,  and  terribly  persecu- 
ted because  of  their  refusal,  they  were  nevertheless 
to  preserve  their  ancient  faith:  "Thou  shalt  abide  for 
me  many  days;  thou  shalt  not  play  the  harlot"  (Hosea 
iii.  3).  And  now  we  are  told  that  this  separateness 
would  be  maintained  by  a  community 

deprived  of  any  central  government 

which  might  shield  and  guide  them  as  a  people:  "The 
children  of  Israel  shall  abide  many  days  without  king 
and  without  prince."  The  words  have  been  fulfilled 
in  spite  of  the  strenuous  efforts  of  the  Jews  to  main- 
tain among  themselves  some  central  authority.  With- 
in 60  years  after  the  revolt  under  Barcochebas  the 
Jews  in  the  Roman  Empire  ranged  themselves  under 
the  patriarch  of  Tiberias,  while  the  Jews  in  the  Per- 
sian dominions  gave  their  allegiance  to  another  of 
their  number  who  bore  the  title,  the  Prince  of  the  Cap- 
tivity. Both  sovereignties  flourished  for  a  time.  The 
Patriarch  was  permitted  to  appoint  ministers,  to  exer- 
cise religious  authority,  and  to  receive  an  annual  con- 
tribution from  the  Jews  scattered  throughout  the  Em- 


WITHOUT  SACRIFICE  OR   HOLY  PLACE,  237 

plre.  "Even  now,"  says  Origen,  "when  the  Jews  are 
under  the  dominion  of  Rome,  and  pay  the  didrachma, 
how  great,  by  the  permission  of  Caesar,  is  the  power 
of  their  Ethnarch !  I  myself,  have  been  a  witness  that 
it  is  little  less  than  that  of  a  king.  For  they  secretly 
pass  judgments  according  to  their  law,  and  some  are 
capitally  condemned,  not  with  open  and  acknowledged 
authority,  but  with  the  connivance  of  the  Emperor/' 
The  Prince  of  the  Captivity  assumed  a  still  greater 
state.  His  installation  was  marked  by  great  ceremony. 
The  magnates  of  the  people  assembled  in  a  magnificent 
chamber  adorned  with  rich  curtains,  and  the  Prince 
was  seated  on  a  lofty  throne.  He  resided  in  a  stately 
palace,  and  when  he  went  to  pay  a  visit  to  the  sover- 
eign a  royal  carriage  was  placed  at  his  service.  But 
the  Patriarchate  withered  away  and  was  brought  to  a 
close  about  429.  And  the  last  Prince  of  the  Captivity 
perished  on  the  scaffold  in  the  beginning  of  the  eleventh 
century.  An  independent  kingdom  of  the  Jews, 
which  had  been  established  in  Arabia  Felix  more  than 
a  century  before  the  Christian  Era,  was  overthrown  by 
the  Mohammedans  in  the  seventh  century  With 
these  perished  every  attempt  to  maintain  sovereign 
authority  among  the  Jews;  and  they  have  now  been 
"many  days  without  king  and  without  prince." 
They  were  also  to  be 

"without  sacrifice  and  without  pillar." 

The  patriarchs  set  up  "pillars"  here  and  there  during 
their  wanderings,  and  the  expression  "without  pillar" 
no  doubt  signifies  that  Israel  should  be  deprived  even 
of  thfc  simplest  and  rudest  holy-place.  How  strange 
the  words  must  have  seemed  to  Israel,  and  how  com- 
pletely they  have  been  fulfilled,  I  need  not  say.  Since 
the  destruction  of  the  temple  they  have  neither  had 
sacrifice  nor  holy-place,  and  for  eighteen  centuries 
their  religion  has  continued,  though  deprived   of  all 


238  PREDICTIONS  REGARDING  THE  JEWS. 

that  seemed:  to  give  it  expression  and  to  ensure  its  per- 
manency.   They  were  also  to  remain 

WITHOUT  EPHOD  OR  TERAPHIM. 

The  ephod  was  used  in  the  priestly  ministrations,  and 
specially  in  seeking  to  learn  the  mind  of  God.  The 
teraphim  appear  to  have  been  also  used  for  the  purpose 
of  obtaining  oracular  responses.  This  part  of  the  de- 
scription, therefore,  implied  that  the  priestly  office 
would  cease  in  Israel,  and  that  all  attempts  to  obtain 
the  direction  of  what  we  may  call  the  living  voice  of 
God  would  be  given  over.  In  the  destruction  of  Jer- 
usalem and  the  subsequent  troubles  which  fell  upon 
Judea,  the  entire  priesthood  perished,*  and  since  that 
time  there  has  been  neither  ephod  nor  teraphim  in 
Israel.  The  Rabbi  has  taken  the  place  of  the  priest, 
and  the  unpretentious  and  far-off  worship  of  the  syn- 
agogue has  succeeded  to  the  solemn  service  and 
the  near  access  of  the  Temple.  But  behind  all  the 
wrath  there  is  mercy.  Judgment  paves  the  way  for 
blessing.  Hosea  continues:  "Afterward  shall  the 
children  of  Israel  return,  and  seek  the  Lord  their  God, 
and  David  their  King;  and  shall  come  with  fear  unto 
the  Lord  and  to  His  goodness  in  the  latter  days"  (Hos. 
iii.  5).  The  fulfillment  of  the  previous  words  tells 
that  these  last  are  also  remembered,  and  that  God's 
arm,  "though  strong  to  smite,  is  also  strong  to  save." 

CONCLUSION. 

We  began  with  the  question,  "What  are  we  to  be- 
lieve?"— has  it  been  answered?  Let  me  remind  the 
reader  of  two  things.  On  one  of  them  we  are  all 
agreed.  No  one  can  lift  the  vail  which  hides  the 
future,  and  become  the  historian  of  the  days  that  are 
yet  to  be.    Not  even  the  most  experienced  or  the  most 

*  History  of  the  Jews,  iii.,  p.  414. 


CONCLUSION.  239 

gifted  can  tell  what  will  be  the  political  position  of  any- 
one of  the  leading  countries  of  Europe  at  the  end  of 
the  next  500  years  or  of  the  next  century,  nor  paint  the 
condition  which  its  meanest  hamlet  will  present  when 
fifty  years  have  passed  away.  Great  as  are  the  powers 
of  the  human  intellect,  they  are  limited  on  the  side  of 
the  future  by  sharply  defined  and  utterly  impassable 
boundaries.  No  man  can  prophesy.  That  is  one  thing 
which  we  all  admit  to  be  beyond  the  possibility  of 
question.  The  second  point  is  that  for  the  readers  of 
these  pages  it  is  equally  undeniable  that  Scripture  not 
only  contains,  but  abounds  with,  genuine  prophecies. 
As  our  inquiry  has  proceeded  what,  in  no  offensive 
sense,  we  may  call  sceptical  explanations  have  broken 
down.  The  predictions  were  not  written  after  the 
events,  for  our  case  is  founded  only  upon  prophecies 
which  have  been  fulfilled  at,  or  since,  the  beginning 
of  the  Christian  era.  Then  their  accomplishment  can- 
not be  explained  by  chance.  The  predictions  are  not 
fortunate  guesses,  arrows  shot  at  a  venture  which 
have  happened  to  hit.  The  fulfilments  are  too  many, 
the  prophetic  descriptions  too  clear  and  too  full,  many 
of  the  details  too  striking  and  too  minute,  to  admit 
of  their  being  explained  by  any  such  theory.  It  is 
plainly  impossible  to  account  in  that  way  for  the  pro- 
phetic pictures  of  Egypt,  of  Judea  and  the  Jews,  of 
the  world's  history,  of  Christ  and  His  work.  But, 
if  these  predictions  are  not  due  to  after-knowledge 
or  to  chance,  there  is  only  one  explanation  left.  They 
are  the  result  of  foreknowledge.  They  tell  of  thought 
which  holds  all  generations,  past  and  future,  in  its 
grasp,  and  of  purpose,  which,  perhaps,  like  the  mightier 
harvests  of  earth,  advances  slowly  to  its  fulfilment,  but 
which  is  nevertheless  surely  and  fully  accomplished. 
In  a  word,  they  reveal  God.  They  prove  His  exist- 
ence: they  manifest  Himself;  and  one  cry  of  the 
human  heart  finds  its  answer  there.  The  existence  of 
God  is  not  a  dream.     This  life  of  ours  is  compassed 


240  PREDICTIONS  REGARDING  THE  JEWS. 

about  with  a  larger  and  grander.    There  is  One  for 
us  to  adore,  to  love,  to  lean  upon. 

Then  as  we  read  these  predictions  another  form  is 
revealed.  It  is  a  striking  fact  that  the  ages  have  not 
been  suffered  to  forget  the  name  of  Jesus.  Neither 
persecution,  nor  superstition,  nor  perversions  of  the 
truth,  have  been  able  to  make  the  world  forget  the 
gospel  story,  or  to  silence  those  who  have  proclaimed 
the  Redeemer's  name.  We  still  look  back  to  Bethle- 
hem, to  Nazareth,  to  Galilee,  to  Calvary,  to  Olivet. 
And  just  as  we  look  back  to-day,  so  patriarchs  and 
prophets  looked  forward.  We  look  back  through  the 
light  of  history:  they  looked  forward  through  a  light 
which  anticipated  that  of  history — the  light  of  prophecy. 
We  have  seen  how  the  Old  Testament  from  first  to 
last  glows  with  this  anticipation,  and  we  have  com- 
pared forecast  with  fulfilment.  The  very  fact  that  it 
was  the  unceasing  testimony  of  Scripture  that  a  Son 
of  Abraham,  a  Jew,  should  become  a  light  to  the  Gen- 
tiles, and  that  this  Light  did  rise  and  is  shedding  its 
beams  upon  us  now,  is  enough  to  overwhelm  doubt; 
and  the  picture  of  His  character,  of  His  sufferings, 
of  the  nature  of  His  work  for  us,  forms  a  founda- 
tion for  our  trust,  which,  till  these  things  be  explained 
away,  nothing  can  shake.  And  here  another  cry  of 
the  heart  is  answered.  There  is  a  Mediator  between 
Gocf  and  man:  One  who  is  ours,  and  His :  One  who  is 
for  Him,  and  who  is  also  for  ourselves. 

But  when  these  points  are  settled,  they  reveal  one 
need  more.  We  desire  nearness  to  our  Father  and 
our  Redeemer:  we  thirst  for  likeness  to  them.  In 
other  words,  we  cry  for  light  which  will  reveal  them, 
and  make  plain  our  pathway.  And  need  we  search 
further  for  the  answer?  Is  it  not  in  that  book,  which 
is  without  a  peer,  and  which  is  stamped  as  Divine  by 
the  impress  of  knowledge  such  as  man  has  never 
boasted?  He  who  has  cared  for  every  other  want, 
and^  who  has  made  need  but  a  pathway  into  His  ful- 


CONCLUSION.  241 

ness,  has  cared  for  this,  the  deepest  and  most  clamant 
want  of  all.  Let  us  not  spurn  the  gift.  Let  us  not 
neglect  it.  It  is  heaven's  light  "whereunto  ye  do  well 
that  ye  take  heed,  as  unto  a  lamp  shining  in  a  dark 
place,  until  the  day  dawn,  and  the  day-star  arise  in 
your  hearts," 


THE  WORKS  OF  JOHN  URQUHART. 


Cbe  Bible :  Tt$  Structure 

and  Purpose. 

By  JOHN    URQUHART, 

cAuthor  of  "Recent  Discoveries  and  the  'Bible/*  "The  Wonders 

of  Prophecy,"  "How  Old  is  Man/'  "inspiration  and 

Accuracy   of  the  Holy    Scriptures,"    "Roger's 

Reasons/*  etc* 

Member  of  the   Biblical  Archaeological  Society  and   Associate 
of  the  Victoria  Institute. 


Introduction  by  Dr.  ARTHUR  T.  PIERSON. 

Wm.    Phillips   Hall,  President   American   Bible   League, 
writes : 

I  believe  I  am  fully  warranted  in  endorsing  "  The  Bible  : 
Its  Structure  and  Purpose"  as  one  of  the  most  valuable 
works  already  published  in  the  grand  work  of  Bible  defence 
against  the  sinful  attacks  of  destructive  scholastic  Biblical 
criticism.  All  of  Doctor  Urquhart's  works  in  this  field  are 
of  priceless  worth  to  the  cause  of  true  Christianity,  but  none 
more  so  than  the  work  in  question. 

It  should  be  found  in  every  Minister's  library,  and  in  the 
hands  of  every  lover  of  the  Word  of  God.  You  have  ren- 
dered the  cause  of  Christ  great  service  in  the  publication  of 

this  work . 

Price  per  vol.,  246  pp.,  cloth,  $  1 .25  net. 
The  set  (4  vols.),  $400  net. 


Send  for  Complete  Prospectus  and  the  Opinions 
of  Lawyers,  Pastors,  Christian  Workers  and 
The  Press  of  this  Valuable  Work. 

GOSPEL  PUBLISHING  HOUSE, 

B.    T.    BASS,    MANAGER. 

54  W.   22d   STREET,  NEW  YORK   CITY. 


THE  WORKS  OF  JOHN  URQUHART. 


NEW  POPULAR   EDITION. 

The  Inspiration  and  Accuracy 
of  the  Holy  Scriptures. 

By  JOHN   URaUHART. 

With  Introduction  by  Dr.  DANIEL  S,  GREGORY,  Secretary 
of  the  American  Bible  League. 

Contents :  Part  I,  The  Scripture  Doctrine  of  Inspiration; 
Part  II,  The  Genesis  of  Rationalism;  Part  HI,  Critical  Results 
Tested  by  Modern  Discovery ;  Appendix.  Dean  Farrar  on 
DANIEL. 


SOME   REVIEWS. 

The  Record  says :  "  We  have  several  books  on  our  table 
waiting  to  be  considered,  which  fall  under  the  above  heading 
(Recent  Biblical  Literature).  We  have  no  hesitation  in 
giving  the  first  place  to  the  volume  on  "  The  Inspiration  and 
Accuracy  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,"  which  the  Rev.  J.  Urqu- 
hart,  editor  of  Word  and  Work,  and  already  known  as  a 
writer  on  Biblical  subjects,  has  just  given  to  the  world." 

The  Christian  World  says:  "It  is  written  in  a  lively  and 
interesting  style,  and  shows  considerable  research,  as  well  as 
much  earnestness  of  spirit." 

The  Christian  says :  "  Many  will  be  thankful  to  Mr.  Urqu- 
hart  for  his  book,  which  is  written  in  vigorous  English,  and 
is  full  of  important  facts  and  arguments  for  the  integrity 
and  authority  of  Holy  Scripture." 

The  Scotsman  says:  "The  author  is  deeply  interested  in 
his  subject;  he  is  thoroughly  in  earnest;  he  writes  clearly 
and  simply,  and  is  easy  of  apprehension,  and  has  gathered  a 
large  amount  of  valuable  information," 

The  Sword  and  Trowel  says :  "  Mr.  Urquhart  has,  in  this 
volume,  done  yeoman  service  to  'the  cause  of  God  and 
Truth,'  and  has  made  the  whole  Church  of  Christ  his  debtor. 
Let  those  who  prize  the  Inspired  Word  see  that  this  valuable 
contribution  in  its  defence  is  circulated  wherever  it  has  been 
or  may  be  the  subject  of  attack." 

The  Rev.  Hubert  BrooTce,  in  The  Life  of  Faith,  says: 
"With  admirable  skill  the  writer  has  defined  the  particular 
points  advanced  by  the  critics,  and  then  has  heaped  up  the 
demonstrations  of  the  truth  of  Scripture,  till  it  shines  out 
like  gold  refined  seven  times  in  the  fire." 

New  Popular  Edition.    576  pp.,  cloth,  $1.25  net. 
Former  price,  $2.00, 

12 


THE  WORKS  OF  JOHN  URQUHART. 

THE  WONDERS  OF  PROPHECY ; 

Or,  What  Are  We  To  Believe? 

The  Testimony  of  Fulfilled  Prophecy. 

By   JOHN   TJRaUHART. 

Contents:  I,  A  Serious  Question;  II,  Can  the  Question  be 
Answered;  III,  Predictions  regarding  Tyre  and  Sidon;  IV, 
Predictions  regarding  Egypt ;  V,  Predictions  regarding 
Egypt  (continued);  VI,  Idumea  and  the  Sea  Coast  of  Pales- 
tine; VII,  Judea  and  Babylon;  VIII,  A  Prophetic  Forecast  of 
the  World's  Entire  History;  IX,  Prophecies  Fulfilled  in  the 
Coming,  the  History  and  the  Work  of  Christ;  X,  Predictions 
Fulfilled  in  the  History  of  the  Jews. 

SOME   REVIEWS. 

British  Weekly :  "  The  best  popular  statement  of  the  argu- 
ment from  Prophecy  anywhere  to  be  found." 

C.  H.  Spurgeon :  "More  interesting  than  any  novel." 

The  Sword  and  Trowel :  "  This  precious  treatise  should  be 
scattered  by  tens  of  thousands." 

The  Christian:  "This  book,  so  small  in  bulk  but  so  large 
in  thought,  sets  forth  a  great  mass  of  such  testimony  in  lines 
so  clear  and  powerful  that  we  pity  the  man  who  could  read 
it  without  amazement  and  awe.  ...  It  is  the  very  book  to 
put  into  the  hands  of  an  intelligent  Agnostic,  so  clear  and 
fair  and  satisfactory  is  the  statement  of  the  argument  from 
its  careful  commencement,  through  its  well-defined  progress, 
to  its  magnificent  conclusion." 

231  pp.,  cloth.    75c.  net. 


HOW   OLD    IS    MAN? 

Some  Misunderstood  Chapters  in 
Scripture  Chronology. 

By  JOHN  URQUHART. 

Contents  :  I,  Were  the  Scriptures  intended  to  Provide  an 
Exact  Ancient  Chronology  ?  II,  Some  Characteristics  of 
Scripture  Reckonings;  III,  The  Genealogies  of  Genesis;  IV, 
When  Did  the  Flood  Occur?  V,  How  Old  is  Man? 

A  very  interesting  discussion  on  the  subject. 

116  pp.,  cloth.    Price  75c,  post-paid. 

XX 


THE  WORKS  OF  JOHN  URQUHART. 


BOOKS  FOR  THE  TIMES. 

RECENT    DISCOVERIES 
AND   THE   BIBLE; 

Or,  The  New  Biblical  Guide. 

"    The  Fullest  and  Most  Reliable  Account  of  the  Recent   ** 
Remarkable  Confirmations  of  Scripture. 

By  JOHN  TJBQUHART. 

COMPLETE  IN  EIGHT  VOLUMES. 

Vol.  I.— The  Story  of  the  Higher  Criticism ;  What  the 
Critics  Wish  to  Do  with  the  Bible;  Why  the  Critics  Cannot 
Succeed ;  The  Story  of  the  Discoveries ;  Confirmations  of 
Genesis;  The  Creation  History;  The  Creation  of  Man;  Where 
Was  Paradise?  The  Alleged  "Myths"  of  Genesis;  The  Fall; 
The  Foundation  of  Human  History;  The  Antediluvians;  The 
Deluge;  The  Unity  of  Man;  Nimrod's  Times  and  Work. 

Vol.  n.— The  Tower  of  Babel;  Babylon,  the  Metropolis  of 
the  Nations;  Abraham  and  his  Times;  The  Times  of  Isaac 
and  Jacob;  The  Life  and  Times  of  Joseph. 

Vol.  III.— The  Life  and  Times  of  Joseph  (continued);  Israel 
in  Egypt;  The  Exodus;  The  March  from  Egypt  to  Sinai.  ^ 

Vol.  IV.— Sinai  and  the  Desert  Journey;  The  Conquests  on 
the  East  of  the  Jordan;  the  Problem  of  Balaam;  The  Life 
and  Times  of  Joshua. 

Vol.  V.— The  Book  of  Judges  and  the  Tel-el  Amarna  Tab- 
lets; The  Books  of  Samuel;  The  First  Book  of  Kings. 

Vol.  VI.— The  Second  Book  of  Kings;  The  Books  of  Chron- 
icles; The  Book  of  Ezra;  The  Book  of  Esther. 

Vol.  Vn.— Are  There  Two  Isaiahs?  Jeremiah;  Jonah; 
Nahum;  Daniel;  Confirmation  of  the  New  Testament;  The 
Four  Gospels  and  their  Purpose. 

Vol.  VHI.— Papers  by  Dr.  W.  L.  Baxter,  M.  A.;  The  Bishop 
of  Durham;  Principal  Douglas;  Professor  Sayce;  John  Urqu- 
hart;  and  others. 

The  Bock  says :  "  It  teems  with  up-to-date  information.  It 
is  a  book  that  ought  to  be  in  every  student's  hand,  yet  it  is 
so  simple  and  so  charmingly  written  that  the  man  in  the 
street  can  easily  comprehend  its  arguments  and  appreciate 
its  conclusions.  It  is  also  invaluable  to  the  preacher  for 
giving  him  stores  out  of  which  to  build  the  fabric  of  many 
an  interesting  discourse." 

Price  $1.25  per  vol*   88*00  the  set  of  8  vols. 

Each  volume  may  be  obtained  separately. 

12 


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process. 
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide 
Treatment  Date:  May  2005 

PreservationTechnologies 

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION 

1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive 
Cranberry  Township.  PA  16066 
(724)779-2111 


