n.b.-«?iNGEit 

Ar;^  THESR  SONGS 


1  JWYOUNGA 5*Mt 
W,SHA^OV0   UTAH  „ 


5B- 


THE  SINGERS 

AND  THEIR  SONGS 

SKETCHES  OF  LIVING  GOSPEL  HYMN  WRITERS 


By  CHAS    H    GABRIEL 


Price,  25  Cents 


PUBLISHED  BY 

THE     RODEHEAVER    COMPANY 
CHICAGO        -:-       PHILADELPHIA 

Copyright  1916,  by    Chas.  H.  Gabriel 


Foreword 


A  certain  Scythian*  Abaris.  was 
a  priest  of  ApoIIo.  So  faithfully 
and  well  did  he  serve  in  the  temple 
that  he  was  given  a  golden  arrow 
by  the  god. 

Among  other  attributes,  this 
arrow  would  carry  the  Philosopher 
whither  he  wished  and  rendered 
its  rider  invisible. 

A  fable,  of  course.  But  had  we 
that  arrow  today  what  Pleasures 
we  might  not  enjoy!  And  not  the 
least  of  these  would  be  the  privi- 
lege of  seeing  and  knowing  the 
great  men  and  women  of  our  time. 

Books  on  travel  enable  us  to 
vicariously  enjoy  the  sights  that 
greeted  the  eyes  of  the  writers; 
Books  of  biography  give  us 
glimpses  of  the  famous;  both  are 
modern  arrows  of  Abaris. 

Of  the  present  volume,  as  a 
companion  to  "Gospel  Songs  and 
Their  Writers/*  the  author  may 
now  give  it  as  his  parting  benedic- 
tion, this  motto  from  Chaucer: 

"O  little  booke.  though  art  so  unconning. 
How   darst   thou  put  thyself    in   prees 
fordrede?" 

Chicago    Nineteen-Sixteen 


ihglSraSHHIII 


wmmmmmmmfmmmimm 


JB 


THE  LIBRARY 
PROVO,  UTAH 


Cfye  Singers  anb 
Cfyeir  Sona,$ 


Much  has  come  to  print  concerning  the  lives, 
individualities  and  work  of  the  various  com- 
posers of  sacred  music — particularly  of  Gospel 
Song  writers.  Inasmuch  as  the  popularity  and 
degree  of  excellence  of  such  songs  and  hymns 
lies  rather  in  the  coalescence  of  both  words  and 
music  than  in  the  music  solely,  some  acknowl- 
edgment of  the  genius  of  our  sacred  poets  is 
imperative. 

With  these  thoughts  in  mind  the  Editor  has 
seen  fit  to  inaugurate  a  concatenation  of  arti- 
cles dealing  with  those  of  our  living  authors 
whose  works  are  best  known,  and  to  bring  into 
notice  writers  of  less  experience  whose  verses 
are  rapidly  coming  into  popularity  in  the  church 
and  Sunday  school. 

The  purpose  of  these  sketches  is  to  humanize 
rather  than  criticize.  We  sing  their  hymns, 
think  their  thoughts,  admire  or  condemn  without 
realizing  that  they  are  but  as  ourselves,  only  dif- 
fering in  that  they  possess  the  power  or  gift 
to  adequately  express  in  words  what  we  feel 
but  cannot  describe.  We  believe  that  this  series 
will  do  much  toward  accomplishing  our  object, 
viz :  to  bring  to  the  church  the  consideration  of 
the  debt  it  owes  to  our  Bards  and  that  personal 
touch  which  so  heightens  the  interest  attached  to 
their  productions. 

*    *    * 

Of  the  Queen  of  Gospel  hymn  writers — Fanny 
J.  Crosby — nothing  new  can  be  said.  Her  name, 
suspended  as  a  halo  above  modern  hymnology, 
will  live  on  as  long  as  people  sing  the  Gos- 
pel. Her  work,  in  a  sense,  is  done,  and  her 
cloak  must  fall  on  other  shoulders,  but — whose? 

The  writer  is  convinced  that  the  commercial 
spirit  has  all  but  crushed  the  life  out  of  the 
sacred  Muse,  as  the  entire  number  of  writers 
of  Gospel  hymns  whose  names  are  "household 
words",  may  almost  be  numbered  on  the  fingers 
of  both  hands.  The  price  of  a  hymn  ranges 
from  one  to  five  dollars,  which  is  adequate  from 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  FOUR 


FANNY  CROSBY 

the  composer's  standpoint,  as  scarcely  one  out 
of  each  hundred  of  songs  printed  are  ever  again 
called  for.  Publishers  of  high  priced  maga- 
zines pay  much  more  liberally,  and  consequently, 
the  Gospel  field  does  not  receive  the  attention 
it  did  in  the  days  of  Wesley,  Adams,  Crosby, 
Hawks  and  others  whose  names  are  as  "Apples 
of  gold  set  in  pictures  of  silver.' 
*  *  * 
Perhaps  it  is  the  association  of  that  superb 
song,  "The  Beacon  Light",  with  memories  of 
early  life,  that  brings  the  name  of  Eben  E. 
Rexford  to  the   foreground. 


He  was  born  in  Johnsburg,   N.  Y..  July   16th 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR    SONGS  PAGE  flVE 


1848.  In  early  life  he  moved  to  Wisconsin  where 
a  rudimentary  education  was  obtained  in  the 
district  school.  After  teaching  two  years,  he 
entered  the  Lawrence  University  at  Appleton, 
Wisconsin,  from  which  Institution  he  holds  the 
degree  of  Litt.  D. 

His  first  poem  was  written  when  he  was  four- 
teen years  of  age,  and  published  in  the  New 
York  Weekly,  from  which  publisher  he  received 
his  first  money  for  literary  work.  ''While  at 
College",  he  writes,  "I  received  a  letter  from  H. 
P.  Danks  in  which  he  said  that  someone  had 
told  him  that  I  could  write  singable  verses.  He 
asked  me  to  send  him  some  songs  for  examina- 
tion. For  those  he  used  he  would  pay  me  $3.00. 
I  sent  nine,  among  them  'Silver  Threads  Among 
the  Gold'.  He  paid  me  for  six,  and  I  don't 
know  what  became  of  the  rest.  After  that  I 
furnished  words  for  Harrison  Millard,  Dress- 
ier and  other  composers.  Nearly  all  of  these 
later  songs  were  in  every  way  superior  to  'Sil- 
ver Threads'  but  they  didn't  'take'  as  that  did." 

After  graduating  from  College,  he  became 
interested  in  growing  flowers,  and  began  to 
write  about  them.  His  articles  became  very 
popular,  and  for  fourteen  years  he  was  flori- 
cultural  editor  of  "The  Ladies'  Home  Journal". 
The  J.  B.  Lippincott  Company  published  several 
books  he  has  written  on  the  subject. 

His  first  venture  in  book  form  was  a  poem 
entitled  "Brother  and  Lover",  published  by  Alden 
of  New  York.  It  never  had  but  the  advertising 
of  reviewers  yet  it  sold  seven  editions.  When 
the  publisher  went  out  of  business,  he  presented 
the  plates  and  stock  on  hand  to  Mr.  Rexford, 
and  the  last  copy  was  sold  in  1913.  Besides  his 
book  of  poems,  "Pansies  and  Rosemary,"  which 
contains  many  gems,  he  has  been  a  prolific  writer 
of  stories  for  eastern  magazines  and  is  "still 
at  it". 

His  first  Gospel  hymn  was  the  above  men- 
tioned, "The  Beacon  Light,"  set  to  music  b^  Dr. 
Geo.  F.  Root,  since  which  time  he  has  written 
for  all  the  more  prominent  composers  of  sacred 
music.  For  twenty-five  years  he  has  acted  as 
organist  of  the  First  Congregational  Church  of 
Shiocton,  Wisconsin.  In  a  personal  letter  to  the 
writer,  he  says,  "I  have  a  pleasant  home  and  a 
cat  that  is  nineteen  years  old,  that  knows  more 
than  a  good  many  persons  of  my  acquaintance; 
have  lots  of  books — and  I  read  a  great  deal ; 
have  some  good  pictures,  an  organ,  a  piano  and 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR   SONGS  PAGE  SIX 


a  Victrola.  The  village  choir  meets  at  my  home 
each  week  for  rehearsal,  so,  you  see,  I  am  in 
a  certain  kind  of  musical  atmosphere". 

It  is  impossible  in  these  columns  to  do  justice 
to  this  splendid  writer,  many  of  whose  hymns 
are  destined  to  help  and  bless  generations  to 
come.  We  take  pleasure  in  presenting  his  por- 
trait, and  believe  that  all  who  read  this  imper- 
fect sketch  will  love  the  man  more  than  ever 
for  his  work's  sake.  See  page  ten. 
*     *     * 

The  Giants  of  Music,  Haydn,  Mozart  and 
Beethoven,  were  the  pioneers  in  new  departures 
from  the  music  of  their  day,  advancing  art  be- 
yond the  limits  of  their  fore-bearers.  By  their 
creative  ability  they  gave  the  world  material 
for  greater  thought,  deeper  impressions,  all  tend- 
ing toward  the  most  sublime  of  our  possessions 
— religion.  Others  who  followed  them,  Wagner, 
Liszt,  with  the  advantage  of  broader  educations, 
musically,  profiting  by  their  predecessors,  have 
so  widened  and  intensified  the  scope  of  our 
music  that  there  seems  little  left  that  can  be 
accomplished. 

On  close  inspection,  the  lives  of  these  men, 
though  disclosing  errors  to  which  all  humanity 
is  heir,  are  indicative  of  a  profound  religious 
adoration  of  holy  things.  The  student  of  psy- 
chological theology  may  determine  the  part  this 
has  had  in  making  them  and  their  work  remem- 
bered. If,  however,  through  the  comparatively 
opaque  media  of  Music,  they  have  made  their 
religious  ideas  felt,  how  infinitely  more  closely 
defined  becomes  the  character  of  men  and 
women  who  write  our  Gospel  songs. 

Much  has  been  written  and  said  in  praise  and 
criticism   of   that  beautiful   hymn-poem : 

"Somewhere  the  sun  is  shining, 
Somewhere  the  song  birds  dwell ; 

Hush,  then,  thy  sad  repining, 
God  lives,  and  all  is  well." 

It  is  the  assuring  answer  borne  on  the  wings 
of  hope  from  "Somewhere"  to  the  yearning  cry 
of  a  heart  struggling  in  loneliness,  veiled  in 
mist,  and  almost  discouraged.  It's  author  is 
Jessie   Brown   Pounds. 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR    SONGS 


PAGE  SEVEN 


JESSIE  BROWN  was  born  in  Hiram,  a  Col- 
lege suburb  of  Cleveland,  Ohio,  August  31st, 
1861.  On  account  of  ill  health  in  childhood, 
her  education  was  gained  for  the  most  part  in 
her  own  home.  She  began  to  write  for  Cleve- 
land newspapers  and  for  the  religious  weeklies 
when  she  was  fifteen  years  old.  It  was  not  until 
two  or  three  years  later,  however,  that  she  ven- 
tured to  offer  her  verses  for  publication.  An 
editor  who  published  some  of  these  spoke  of 
them  editorially  as  being  well  adapted  to  use  as 
church  or  Sunday  school  hymns.  This  note 
caught  the  eye  of  Mr.  J.  H.  Fillmore,  who 
wrote  the  author  asking  her  to  write  some 
hymns  for  a  new  book  upon  which  he  was  work- 
ing. She  accepted  and  has  written  hymns  for 
Fillmore  Brothers  with  more  or  less  regularity 
for  thirty-two  years. 

Her  first  book,  "Norman  MacDonald",  ap- 
peared in  1884.  The  year  following  she  accepted 
an  editorial  position  with  the  Standard  Pub- 
lishing Company,  Cincinnati,  retaining  it  until 
the  end  of  1896,  when  she  was  married  to  Rev. 
John  E.  Pounds,  at  that  time  pastor  of  the  Cen- 
tral Christian   Church.   Indianapolis.     At  present 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR   SONGS 


PAGE  EIGHT 


he  is  College  pastor  at  Hiram,  Ohio,  where 
his  wife  is  busy  with  the  social  duties  entailed 
by  his  position,  although  she  still  finds  some 
time  for  literary  composition. 

She  is  the  author  of  nine  books,  of  about  fifty 
librettos  for  cantatas  and  operettas,  and  of 
nearly  four  hundreJ  hymns.  The  best  known  of 
these  are  "Beautiful  Isle  of  Somewhere",  (which 
was  sung  at  President  McKinley's  funeral) 
"Scatter  Seeds  of  Loving  Deeds",  "The  Way  of 
the  Cross  Leads  Home",  "Going  Down  the  Val- 
ley", "Anywhere  With  Jesus",  "I  Know  That 
My  Redeemer  Liveth"  and  "The  Touch  of  His 
Hand   On   Mine". 

"Anywhere  With  Jesus"  was  written  to  music 
furnished  by  D.  B.  Towner,  about  the  year  1886, 
and  became  popular  first  as  a  Sunday  School 
and  then  as  a  Christian  Endeavor  Hymn.  A 
band  of  Endeavorers  were  in  the  habit  of  sing- 
ing on  Sunday  afternoons  at  the  Sing  Sing  Peni- 
tentiary, and  this  hymn  was  a  favorite  with  the 
prisoners.  Among  the  latter  were  two  young 
men,  scarcely  more  than  boys,  who  had  been 
sentenced  to  death  for  a  murder  committed  by 
them  in  a  house  that  they  had  entered  for  the 
purpose  of  burglary.  Under  the  ministry  of  the 
Christian  young  people  who  visited  them  they 
were  converted,  and  on  the  day  of  execution, 
they  made  a  public  confession  of  their  sin,  say- 
ing, however,  that  though  they  merited  the  death 
they  were  about  to  suffer,  they  believed  they 
had  God's  forgiveness  and  that  through  his 
grace  they  could  go  "Anywhere  with  Jesus". 

"Going  Down  the  Valley"  came  to  the  author 
in  the  prayer-meeting  room  of  the  Franklin  Cir- 
cle Church,  Cleveland.  In  this  Church  it  was 
the  custom  of  the  pastor  to  announce  deaths  in 
the  church  families  at  the  close  of  the  prayer 
service.  On  this  particular  occasion  the  author 
thought  how  often  these  announcements  were 
made,  and  she  seemed  to  see  a  procession  of 
persons  going  down  into  a  dark  valley,  walking 
far  enough  apart  so  that  each  must  enter  it 
alone.  After  reaching  home  she  wrote  the 
hymn.  Perhaps  it  may  be  worth  while  here  to 
note  the  manner  in  which  her  hymns  are  writ- 
ten. There  comes  to  her  first  a  single  phrase, 
such  as  "Going  down  the  valley  one  by  one",  or, 
"The  way  of  the  cross  leads  home".  She  is 
not  a  musician,  but  this  phrase  is  almost  in- 
variably accompanied  by  a  tune.  The  sentence 
stays  in  her  mind  or  her  note-book  perhaps  for 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS  PAGE  NINE 


months,  when  the  desire  comes  to  write  out  the 
entire  hymn.  Two  or  three  times  the  musical 
composer  has  hit  upon  the  same  tune  that  came 
to  her  with  her  lines,  though  no  one  but  herself 
has  ever  known  it. 

"Scatter  seeds  of  loving  deeds"  was  one  of 
three  hymns,  among  the  author's  very  earliest, 
entered  in  a  prize  contest  for  contributions  to 
the  Epworth  Hymnal.  All  were  printed,  but 
only  one  took  a  prize,  and  that  not  the  one 
which,  thanks  to  the  happy  musical  setting,  has 
achieved   popularity. 

"I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth"  appeared 
first  in  an  Easter  cantata  entitled  "Hope's  Mes- 
sengers". Here  it  attracted  the  attention  of 
many  musicians  as  belonging  properly  to  the 
realm  of  the  church  hymn,  where  it  still  has  a 
place. 

"Beautiful  Isle  of  Somewhere"  was  written 
near  the  beginning  of  1897.  The  author  had  al- 
ways hesitated  to  write  hymns  of  heaven,  the 
modern  ones,  with  their  appeal  to  the  selfish 
love  of  ease  and  grandeur,  seeming  entirely  un- 
worthy the  theme.  She  desired,  however,  to 
say,  in  some  simple  form,  that  our  expectation 
of  a  future  life,  grounded  as  it  is  upon  our  faith 
in  God's  existence  and  in  his  goodness,  cannot 
be  in  vain.  It  is  not  a  question  of  where  heaven 
is  or  what  it  is,  but  of  our  leaving  the  future  as 
we  must  leave  the  present — to  God's  love  and 
care.  One  Sunday  morning  when  a  slight  ail- 
ment kept  her  from  Church  the  thought  came 
back  to  her,  and  when  her  husband  returned 
from  the  service  she  said,  "My  hymn  is  writ- 
ten". 

There  is  nothing  of  particular  interest  con- 
cerning "The  Way  of  the  Cross  Leads  Home", 
except  that  the  author  was  quite  innocent  of 
any  controversial  spirit.  She  had  heard  it 
urged  that  this  hymn  teaches  that  there  is  no 
safety  beyond  the  line  of  conservative  theology. 
The  intention  was  merely  to  give  emphasis  to 
the  truth  so  constantly  held  up  in  the  teach- 
ings of  Christ,  that  heroic  Christianity  does  not 
follow  the  line  of  the  least  resistance. 

"The  Touch  of  His  Hand  On  Mine"  is  a  re- 
cent production.  It  has  no  special  history,  but 
it  is  the  expression  of  a  very  special  desire  on 
the  part  of  the  author  to  visualize  simply  and 
clearly  the  picture  of  Christ  as  the  Helper  for 
every  day. 

Few  writers  have  made  so  splendid  a  record 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR   SONGS 


PAGE  TEN 


as  Mrs.  Pounds.  Composers  are  delighted  to 
receive  her  hymns.  She  does  not  belong  to  the 
class  who  write  for  "revenue  only",  and  no  of- 
fer, however  unusual,  can  induce  her  to  record 
a  thought  upon  paper  except  at  moments  of  in- 
spiration. 

Only  in  the  blaze  of  high  noon-tide  of  life, 
all  the  Christian  world  salutes  her,  with  the 
hope  that  she  will  not  yet  lay  down  her  pen. 


EBEN  E  REXFORD 

(See  Page  Four) 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR    SONGS  PAGE  ELEVEN 


CHAPTER  TWO 

I  well  remember  the  cross-road  church  at 
home.  It  was  built  for  the  Methodist  denomina- 
tion, yet,  when  it  came  to  the  christening,  one  of 
the  "Pillars"  insisted  that  it  must  be  known  as 
"Wesley  Chapel  Methodist  Church" — and  it  was. 

We  had  a  Sunday  School,  which  convened 
from  May  to  November,  presided  over  by  an 
ambitious  superintendent,  who  wore  large,  heavy, 
old-fashioned  farmer's  boots  that  squeaked  with 
every  step  he  took.  Of  course  there  was  no 
carpet  on  the  aisles,  and  I  can  yet  fancy  I  hear 
the  incessant  screech,  screech,  screech  of  those 
highly  polished  (sometimes  with  stove-blacking) 
Sunday  stogies  as  he  paced  back  and  forth  about 
the  room  over-seeing  the  school  he  was  so  proud 
of,  but  I  shall  not  live  long  enough  to  believe 
otherwise  than  that  he  also  loved  to  hear  those 
heart-searching  screams  of  his  beloved  brogans. 

How  we  did  sing — we  youngsters — away  out 
there  on  the  prairies  with  only  nature  and  God 
as  our  tutors.  Once  each  month  during  the  sea- 
son our  school  gave  a  Sunday  School  Concert 
(would  there  were  more  of  them).  We  had 
no  "orchestra" — no  musical  instruments  of  any 
kind,  except  a  small  Estey  organ — but  we  sang 
and  sang  well,  as  was  attested  by  the  crowds 
that  came  for  miles  around,  in  buggies,  farm 
wagons,  and  on  horse-back,  filling  to  over-flow- 
ing the  church  we  thought  so  large. 

Then,  there  was  the  weekly  singing  school ! 
Every  Saturday  night  old  and  young  would 
gather  and  sing  Do,  Re,  Mi,  etc., — no  guess 
work  in  those  days.  What  did  we  sing?  "The 
Heavens  Are  Telling"  from  The  Creation,  "The 
Hallelujah  Chorus"  from  The  Messiah,  and 
many  other  grand  choruses.  What  else?  Well, 
we  also  sang  such  songs  as  "Where  Are  The 
Reapers",  "Climbing  Up  Zion's  Hill",  "Jesus  of 
Nazareth",  and  many  others.  A  little  later  we 
found  the  new  song  "I  Hear  Thy  Welcome 
Voice",   which  brings  me  to  my  subject. 

Eighty-seven  years  agD,  in  Ithaca,  N.  Y., 
Lewis  Hartsough  was  born.  He  joined  the 
Oneida  Conference  in  1851.  His  health  fail- 
ing, the  American  Bible  Society  sent  him  into 
the  Rocky  Mountain  region,  and  it  was  his  in- 
fluence that  induced  the  Mission  Board  to  create, 
in   1869,  the  Utah  Mission,   with  Mr.  Hartsough 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR   SONGS 


PAGE  TWELVE 


as  its  first  Superintendent.  His  family  was  lo- 
cated at  Laramie,  and  here  Mrs.  Hartsough  was 
drawn,  with  five  other  women  and  six  men,  upon 
the  first  jury  and  tried  the  first  murder  case, 
Judge  Howe,  U.  S.  Chief  Justice,  presiding. 

In  1858  he  edited  "Spiritual  Songs",  followed 
in  1864  by  "Sacred  Melodies",  in  pamphlet 
form.  In  1867-8  "The  Revivalist"  was  issued, 
and  went  through  many  editions.  "Beulah 
Songs"  followed  in  1872,  and  was  even  as  popu- 
lar as  its  predecessor. 

Chaplain  (afterward  Bishop)  McCabe  always 
declared  his  song  "Let  Me  Go"  was  his  best,  but 
the  christian  world  remembers  him  best  by  "I 
Hear  Thy  Welcome  Voice"  which,  it  is  safe  to 
say,  has  been  sung  in  every  revival  meeting  held 
*   during    the    last    thirty    or     forty    years.      Mr. 


•J?*  /f(^vA^i 


Hartsough  has  been  a  Methodist  minister  since 
the  early  fifties,  has  held  many  important  charges 
and  preached  thousands  of  sermons.     It  was   in 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS  PAGE  THIRTEEN 


the  trying  anxieties  and  busy  hours  of  a  revival 
held  at  Ep worth,  la.,  in  1872,  that  he  wrote  his 
masterpiece.  It  is  said  of  him  that  he  never 
knew  a  day  without  family  worship  from  in- 
fancy on  up  to  the  Bible  Class,  and,  later,  the 
superintendency  of  the  Sunday  school.  Is  it  any 
wonder  that  all  who  know  him,  love  him,  and 
that  in* all  things  that  go  for  upright  living  and 
for  better  things  in  life  Mr.  Hartsough  may  be 
counted  "upon? 

Uncounted   thousands     of     hearts     have    been 
comforted    and    the    world    made   better    by    his 
having  lived;  nor  is  his  work  yet  done,  for  to- 
day, at  more  than  86  years  of  age,  he  is  living 
quietly  in  his  home  in  Mt.  Vernon,  Iowa,  where 
he  teaches   the   Old   Folks'   Bible   Class   and   oc- 
casionally writes  a  song  as  he  watches  the  sun 
go  down  and  the  hour  draw  nigh  when  he  shall 
hear   the   "welcome   voice"    of   the    One   he   has 
so    faithfully   served. 
"  'Tis  Jesus  invites  me  this  glory  to  see, 
To  reign  with  Him  ever,  all  happy  and  free; 
I'll  join  with  the  ransomed  and  with  them  abide, 
I'll  cross  the  dark  river  with  Jesus  my  guide." 
*    *    ♦ 

Miss  Eliza  Edmunds  Hewitt  was  born  in 
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  June  28,  1851.  She  was  edu- 
cated in  the  Public  Schools  of  that  city  and 
after  graduation  from  the  Girls'  High  School, 
obtained  a  position  as  teacher.  This  career  was 
cut  short  by  the  development  of  a  spinal  malady, 
which  caused  her  to  be  a  shut-in  sufferer  for 
many  years.  In  course  of  time,  a  gradual  im- 
provement came  about,  and  during  a  slow  con- 
valescence, the  study  of  English  literature,  as 
in  school-girl  days,  was  her  great  delight.  Wish- 
ing to  be  helpful  to  her  Church,  she  wrote 
poems  for  its  primary  department,  some  of  which 
attracted  the  attention  of  Prof.  Jno.  R.  Sweney, 
at  one  time  chorister  of  that  church.  However, 
writing  did  not  fill  all  her  desires  for  usefulness 
in  the  Master's  service,  and  it  has  been  her 
privilege  for  some  years,  to  be  engaged  in  pri- 
mary Sunday  School  work,  and  to  take  an  active 
part  in  the  Philadelphia  Elementary  Union.  At 
present,  she  is  Superintendent  of  the  primary 
department  of  the  Calvin  Presbyterian  church. 
There  is  no  place  where  she  is  happier  than  in 
her  beloved  primary  room,  surrounded  by  her 
bright  young  teachers  and  loving  scholars.  In 
connection  with  this  work,  Miss  Hewitt  has  con- 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  FOURTEEN 


tributed  to  various  Sunday  school  periodicals, 
providing  for  the  Reformed  church  its  Golden 
Text  stories  and   lesson   suggestions. 

Miss  Hewitt's  hymns  are  the  result  of  inspira- 
tion, the  origin  of  which,  to  her,  is  often  myste- 
rious ;  she  has  never  cared  to  keep  a  record,  but 


their  number  is  known  to  have  passed  into  the 
thousands.  The  hymn,  "Sunshine  In  My  Soul," 
was  given  wings,  and  circled  the  globe,  coming 
back  to  its  author  with  many  beautiful  stories 
of  its  use.  The  same  is  true  of  other  of  her 
hymns.  Among  the  most  popular  have  been, 
"Sunshine  In  My  Soul,"  "Will  There  Be  Any 
Stars?,"  "Stepping  in  the  Light,"  "Not  One  For- 
gotten," "More  About  Jesus,"  "The  Very  Same 
Jesus." 

It  was  a  glad  day  when  Miss  Hewitt  met 
Fanny  Crosby  and  their  mutual  love  is  a  joy  to 
both. 

During  a  visit  to  the  Indians  of  the  Onondaga 
Reservation,    she    was    adopted    into    their    tribe, 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR    SONGS 


PAGE  FIFTEEN 


and  this  relationship  has  led  to  unique  and  pleas- 
ant experiences. 

"After  all,  what  hymns  are  so  dear  to  us  as 
the  old  church  favorites?  In  looking  over  my 
life,   would   humbly  and  gratefully   say: 

'Tis  grace  has  brought  me  safe  thus  far, 
And  grace  will  lead  me  home." 
#    *    * 
A  marvelous  record  is  that  of  Christopher  R. 
Blackall!      That    I    should    attempt    to    tell    the 
story  of  his  life  and  work  is  a  presumption  al- 
most inexcusable.     Were  it  possible  to  live  life 
over  again,   the   only  inducement   offered   would 
be  that   I   might  have   the   acquaintance,    friend- 


^.^.fU^-J^L 


ship,  advice  and  record  of  such  a  man  as  a  pat- 
tern, and  the  necessary  ambition  and  ability  to 
carry  me  step  by  step  through  a  second  exist- 
ence, up  to  the  high  position  of  usefulness  and 
honor  occupied  by  Dr.  Blackall. 
He  was  born  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  September  18th, 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR   SONGS  PAGE  SIXTEEN 


1830.  At  sixteen  years  of  age  he  was  promi- 
nently connected  with  the  Order  of  Rechabites ; 
at  eighteen  he  was  editor  of  the  Washingtonian. 
At  twenty-seven  he  graduated  from  the  Medical 
College,  N.  Y.,  and  one  year  later  was  a  profes- 
sor in  the  same  institution.  At  thirty  he  was 
editor  and  publisher  of  Watercure  World.  Two 
years  later  he  was  surgeon  of  volunteers  in  the 
Civil  War,  which  position  he  held  until  his  health 
completely  failed  and  he  returned  to  his  home 
in  Chicago. 

In  1864  he  edited  and  published  the  Journal 
of  Health.  In  1865  he  received  the  diploma  of  a 
Post-Graduate  from  the  Rush  Medical  College. 
In  1866  he  became  General  Secretary  of  the  Cook 
County  Sunday  School  Union.  In  1867  he  be- 
came District  Secretary  for  the  Northwest  for 
the  American  Baptist  Publication  Society,  with 
which  Society  he  has  been  connected  ever  since. 
From  1873  to  1882  he  was  editor  of  Our  Little 
Ones  and  Bible  Lessons,  during  a  part  of  which 
time  he  furnished  Independent  Lessons  to  the 
Standard,  Chicago.  In  1883  he  moved  to  Phila- 
delphia to  become  editor  of  periodicals.  Since 
1884  editor  of  the  Superintendent,  during  which 
year  he  organized  the  Baptist  Superintendent's 
Association  of  Philadelphia. 

In  1885  he  was  ordained  to  the  Christian  min- 
instry ;  for  eight  years  Secretary  of  the  Sunday 
School  Editorial  Association.  In  1908  the  Degree 
of  Doctor  of  Divinity  was  conferred  upon  him 
by  Temple  College.  Since  1908  he  has  been  edi- 
tor of  the  Keystone  Graded  Lessons.  For  many 
years  he  has  been  connected  with  the  Pennsyl- 
vania State  Sabbath  School  Association,  having 
served  as  its  president,  member  of  its  board  of 
directors,  chairman  of  its  executive  committee; 
and  is  still  a  member  of  its  board.  For  many 
years  he  was  editor  of  the  Baptist  Teacher. 

His  first  public  work  in  Sunday  school  lines 
was  as  General  Secretary  of  the  Cook  County 
Association,  where  he  came  into  touch  with  most 
of  the  great  leaders  of  that  time.  Through  the 
influence  of  Doctor,  now  Bishop,  J.  H.  Vincent 
and  B.  F.  Jacobs  he  turned  aside  completely  from 
his  professional  life  as  a  physician  to  take  up 
Sunday  school  work.  Dr.  Vincent  was  at  that 
time  developing  into  that  which  subsequently 
made  him  famous ;  Edward  Eggleston  was  com- 
ing to  the  front  as  editor  of  the  National  Sun- 
day School  Teacher.  B.  F.  Jacobs  was  then  a 
commission    merchant   on   Water    Street.      P.   P. 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS  PAGE  SEVENTEEN 


Bliss  was  Superintendent  of  a  Congregational 
Sunday  school  not  far  from  the  Second  Baptist 
school,  where  the  Doctor  filled  a  like  position. 
D.  L.  Moody  was  rapidly  becoming  the  leading 
evangelist  of  the  country,  as  he  afterward  be- 
came of  the  world.  Ira  D.  Sankey  was  directing 
the  music  of  the  Chicago  noonday  prayer  meet- 
ings. Maj.  D.  W.  Whittle  was  still  a  business 
man. 

Conditions  at  that  time,  about  1867,  were  pe- 
culiar. The  civil  war  had  demoralized  almost 
all  Sunday  school  work,  especially  in  the  south. 
The  nation  was  impoverished  and  the  people 
were  hungry  for  religious  work  and  religious 
life.  Many  Sunday  school  conventions  were  held 
— conventions  that  were  to  the  present  day 
specia,  what  the  old  time  Mason,  Bradbury  & 
Root  musical  conventions  were  to  the  average 
1915  musical  instruction.  Children's  mass  meet- 
ings were  held,  of  which  Dr.  Blackall  conducted 
over  thirty  during  the  twenty-eight  days  of  the 
month  of  February. 

The  following  quotation  from  him  is  inter- 
esting: 

"I  attended  another  convention  in  southern 
Illinois,  which  was  at  that  time  frequently  spoken 
of  as  "Egypt."  It  certainly  was  virgin  soil  for 
that  kind  of  effort.  I  was  very  thoroughly 
ignored  by  some  of  those  in  the  leadership,  be- 
cause I  had  come  from  Chicago,  and  was  known 
to  have  been  in  the  Union  army  during  the  civ.i 
war.  Some  discussion  arose  with  regard  to  the 
question  of  temperance,  and  sharp  words  were 
spoken  by  a  few  who  said  the  efforts  they  had 
been  making  were  ruined  by  a  certain  Baptist 
deacon,  who  had  a  "still"  and  manufactured 
whiskey.  The  deacon  referred  to  promptly  arose 
and  acknowledged  the  fact  that  he  made  whiskey ; 
but  he  said  he  had  a  Bible  warrant  for  it,  and 
quoted  Paul's  words  to  Timothy  to  take  a  little 
wine  for  his  stomach's  sake.  For  that  reason 
he  wanted  it  clearly  understood  that  he  was 
"agin"  the  resolution  that  was  proposed.  He 
should  certainly  manufacture  all  the  whiskey  he 
pleased,  for  the  Bible  gave  him  his  warrant.  The 
outcome  of  the  discussion,  however,  was  on  the 
right  side  of  the  temperance  question." 

Dr.  Blackall  has  written  two  cantatas,  "Bel- 
shazzar"  and  "Ruth."  He  is  the  author  of 
"Stories  About  Jesus,"  "Six  Decades,"  "Son  of 
Timeus,"  and  "A  Daughter  of  Naein."  His 
poem   "Nellie's  Work  for  Jesus"  has  reached  a 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS  PAGE  EIGHTEEN 


sale  of  more  than  twelve  thousand  copies.  He 
is  the  author  of  over  one  hundred  hymns  and 
Sunday  school  songs.  His  hymn  "Sweet  Sabbath 
School"  was  prompted  by  his  interest  in  and 
longing  for  the  welfare  of  the  school  of  which 
he  was  Superintendent  during  an  absence  from 
duty. 

Many  of  the  older  people  of  the  Sunday  school 
remember    "Hast    Thou    Gleaned    Well    Today," 
also  "Follow    the    Path    of    Jesus,"    which    was 
prompted  by  his  necessity  of  following  the  guide 
through   the   Mammoth    Cave    of    Kentucky.      It 
takes  a  great  man  to  do  little  things.     He,   the 
scholar  and  teacher,  wrote: 
"Little  eyes,  little  eyes 
Softly   close   in   worship   now; 
Fold  the  arms,  bow  the  head, 
While    we    whisper    soft    and    low, 
God    is    here,    and   happy   we 
In  His  presence  e'er  may  be." 
which   was  among  the  first  of  the  still  popular 
'"motion"  songs  for  children." 

Beginning  at  sixteen,  he  is  today,  at  eighty- 
five,  still  in  the  harness — not  collecting  and  hoard- 
ing money  or  engineering  a  large  and  extended 
mercantile  business  or  corporation,  but  doing 
good  to  his  fellowmen,  and  telling  to  an  anxious- 
ly listening  world  the  old,  old,  sweet  story  of 
the  Gospel. 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR    SONGS  PAGE  NINETEEN 


CHAPTER  THREE 


Broader  than  the  sermon  is  the  hymn  book  of 
our  churches  today.  Seldom  do  we  tind  a  col- 
lection of  gospel  songs  that  does  not  contain 
"Lead,  Kindly  Light."  written  by  that  great 
Catholic,  Cardinal  Newman;  our  denominational 
hymnal  contains  three  hymns  by  Father  Faber. 
Great  hymns  deal  only  with  the  most  funda- 
mental Christian  doctrines.  Henry  Ward  Beech- 
er  said,  "There  is  almost  no  heresy  in  the  hymn 
book."  Almost  every  great  reform  that  has 
gripped  the  world  has  used  the  persuative  power 
of  song  to  win  its  converts.  Luther's  doctrines 
would  have  fallen  by  the  wayside,  if  the  wan- 
dering students  and  peddlers  of  Germany  had 
not  sung  his  teachings  in  every  town.  The  Wes- 
leyan  movement  had  for  its  leaders  two  brothers, 
John,  the  preacher,  and  Charles,  the  hymn  writer, 
who  declared  "the  devil  shall  not  have  all  the 
lively  tunes." 

In  all  the  sweet  singers  from  Bernard  of 
Cluny  to  blind  Fanny  Crosby,  and  on  to  our  day, 
the  church  universal  has  been  strengthened  and 
cheered.  Their  music  overleaps  the  bounds  of 
denominational  fences  and  becomes  the  posses- 
sion of  all  mankind. 

*     *     *     * 

Of  the  more  recent  hymn  writers  few  are  bet- 
ter known  than  Mrs.  C.  H.  Morris.  Born  in 
1862,  she  received  her  education  in  the  public 
schools  of  McConnelsville,  Ohio.  Converted  at 
the  age  of  ten  years,  she  united  with  the  Metho- 
dist church  and  has  lived  a  consecrated  christian 
life,  believing,  at  the  beginning  of  her  career 
that  if  she  would  write  a  noble  poem,  she  must 
first  live  a  noble  life. 

Her  first  hymn,  "Refining  Fire  of  God,"  was 
written  in  1892;  today  the  number  of  her  pub- 
lished pieces  totals  almost  900,  some  of  which 
have  been  translated  into  many  tongues.  "The 
Fight  Is  On,"  "Nearer,  Still  Nearer,"  "Let  Jesus 
Come  Into  Your  Heart,"  and  others  are  among 
her  best  known.  Mrs.  Morris  not  only  writes 
hymns,  but  invariably  composes  the  music  to 
them,  thus  giving  them  to  the  world  winged  for 
the  flight  her  inspiration  conceived  for  them. 

In  the  prime  of  womanhood  she  became  totally 
blind;  but  for  the  past  few  months  sight  has 
been  gradually  returning,  creating  the  hope  in 
her  breast  that  she  may  once  more  on  earth  see 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR   SONGS 


PAGE  TWENTY 


the  faces  of  those  she  loves,  and  be  able  to  read 
her  bible.  Her  writing  is  done  by  dictation  to 
her  daughter. 

Some  of  Mrs.  Morris'  compositions  seem  des- 
tined to  be  numbered  with  the  few  which  possess 
enduring  qualities.  A  great  hymn  must  be  more 
than  a  great  poem,  and  a  study  of  her  hymns 
reveals    not    the    bizarre    and    unusual,    but    the 


//L 


ct.%  % 


?  6TT7KD 


homely  words  in  common  use,  telling  in  the 
briefest  metrical  form  those  experiences  which 
are  found  on  practically  every  page  of  the  New 
Testament. 

*     *     *    * 

All  who  have  ever  sung  or  heard — 
"Jesus  knows  all  about  our  struggles, 
He  will  guide  till  the  day  is  done; 
There's  not  a  friend  like  the  lowly  Jesus — 
No,  not  one  1    No,  not  one  1" 
will  be  interested  in  reading  about  the  man  who 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  TWENTY-ONE 


gave  these  splendid  lines  to  the  world.  Rev. 
Johnston  Uatman.  Jr. 

Born  in  1856,  he  is  an  ordained  local  preacher  in 
the  M.  E.  church.  Although  just  reaching  the 
zenith  of  his  years,  he  has  written  nearly  five 
thousand  hymns. 

His  first  song,  "I  Am  Walking  With  My 
Savior,"  was  written  in  1892  and  set  to  music  by 
the  late  John  R.  Sweeney  in  1893,  since  which 
time  he  has  written  an  average  of  200  hymns  per 


year.  His  first  real  success  was,  "When  Our 
Ships  Come  Sailing  Home,"  sung  at  Ocean 
Grove  in  1894,  with  tremendous  power.  The  late 
Bishop  McCabe  sang  it  all  over  the  United 
States. 

"Oh  what  singing,   oh  what  shouting, 
When  our  ships  come  sailing  home; 

They  have  stood  the  mighty  tempest, 
They  have  crossed  the  ocean's  foam, 

They  have  passed  o'er  stormy  billows, 
But  they  now  have  gained  the  shore; 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS  PAGE  TWENTY-TWO 


The  anchor's  cast,  they're  home  at  last — 
The  voyage  is  safely  o'er!" 

His  next  success  was  "Deeper  Yet,"  which 
made  its  way  into  the  hearts  of  all  true  worship- 
pers. There  is  a  peculiar  depth  to  it,  found  in 
very  few  gospel  songs. 

In  1895  appeared  the  song  that  has  carried  his 
name  to  many  lands  of  the  earth — "No.  Not 
One;"  within  one  year  it  was  reprinted  in  thirty- 
five  different  song  books,  and  has  been  translated 
into  many  languages  and  dialects. 

In  1898  came  his  "Higher  Ground,"  which  at 
once  took  high  rank  among  holiness  people.  No 
song  can  bring  forth  more  shouts,  at  a  camp 
meeting,  than 

"Lord,  lift  me  up  and  let  me  stand, 
By    faith,    on   heaven's   table-land; 
A  higher  plane  than  I  have  found. 
Lord,  plant  my  feet  on  higher  ground." 

"Count  Your  Blessings"  was  written  in  1897, 
and,  like  a  beam  of  sunlight,  it  has  brightened  up 
the  dark  places  of  earth.  Many  others  might  be 
mentioned  for  it  has  been  said  that  he  "has 
more  hymns  in  the  various  Gospel  song  books 
than  any  song-writer,  living  or  dead."  There  is 
a  newness  of  thought,  a  freshness  of  contem- 
plation and  an  originality  to  his  verses  which  is 
seldom  found. 

Mr.  Oatman  is  a  firm  believer  in  tht  old  doc- 
trine of  the  Wesleyan  theology,  conscientious 
and  consecrated  to  the  Lord,  whose  work  he  is 
doing  so  well.  He  believes  that  his  best  songs 
are  yet  to  be  written,  and  it  is  his  daily  prayer 
that  he  may  be  spared  a  few  years,  in  which  to 
write  the  praises  of  his  Master,  and  that  when 
his  sun  sets  he  may  be  swept  home  to  glory  on 

a  flood-tide  of  song. 

*    *    * 

J.  H.  Sammis  was  born  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  but 
removed  in  his  22nd  year,  to  Logansport,  Ind., 
where  he  was  converted,  and,  for  several  years 
took  an  active  part  in  local  Christian  service. 
He  afterward  gave  up  business  to  become  Y.  M. 
C.  A.  Secretary  for  the  Terre  Haute  (Ind.)  As- 
sociation, from  which  he  became  State  Secretary, 
Leaving  this  work  he  studied  at  Lane  and  Mc- 
Cormack  Seminaries,  and  was  ordained  pastor 
of  the  Presbyterian  church  at  Glidden,  Iowa,  by 
the  Presbytery  of  Ft.  Dodge.  Was  also  pastor 
at  Indianapolis,  Ind.,  Grand  Haven,  Mich.,  Red 
Wing  and   St.   Paul,  Minn.,  becoming  associated 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR    SONGS 


PAGE  TWENTY-THREE 


with   the    Los   Angeles    Bible   Institute    in    1909, 
which  is  his  present  held  of  labor. 

Mr.  Sammis  has  written  over  100  hymns  and 
gospel  songs,  some  of  which  have  had  long  ser- 
vice. "Trust  and  Obey"  has  been  translated  into 
German,  Chinese,  Japanese  and  interior  African 
dialects.  "He's  a  Friend  of  Mine"  has  also  been 
wonderfully  blessed.  Several  of  his  other  hymns 
have  met  and  conquered  the  test  of  public  use. 
May  the  writer  of 

"Trust  and  obey, 

For    there's    no    other    way 

To  be  happy  in  Jesus, 
But  to  trust  and  obey," 
be  spared  and  privileged  to  write  many  more 
hymns  that  serve  to  smooth  the  rough  places 
in  life's  pathway,  cheer  the  lonely  hours,  rift 
the  clouds  of  doubt  and  roll  the  mists  and 
shadows  away. 


Very  few  who  attend  and  work  in  the  Sun- 
day school  will  fail  to  recognize  the  name  of 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR   SONGS  PAGE  TWENTY-FOUR 


Lizzie  De  Armond.  She  is,  perhaps,  the  most 
prolific  writer  ot  children's  hymns,  recitations, 
exercises,  dialogues,  etc.,  of  the  present  day. 
At  twelve  years  of  age,  her  first  poem  was 
printed  iti  the  Germantown,  Pa.,  Telegraph. 
In  the  early  years  of  her  womanhood  the  cares 
and  responsibilities  of  life  crowded  out  all 
possibility  of  writing,  and  it  was  not  until 
she  was  left  a  widow  with  eight  children  to 
support  that  real  necessity  compelled  her  to 
renew  the  work  so  long  neglected.  Short  ar- 
ticles for  various  papers  and  magazines,  libret- 
tos for  cantatas,  nature  stories  and  other  liter- 
ary work  found  a  ready  market,  and  were 
stepping  stones  to  higher  achievement. 

"If  Your  Heart  Keeps  Right"  now  being 
used  so  extensively  in  Evangelistic  meetings, 
is  her  best  known  hymn.  Under  date  of 
January  1st,  1915,  she  writes,  "Now  in  the 
light  of  the  glad  New  Year,  1915,  if  anything 
I  have  written  has  helped  to  lift  one  soul 
above  the  cares  and  worries  of  everyday  life, 
and  brought  it  nearer  to  the  great  loving 
heart  of  Jesus,  the  joy  is  mine,  but  the  glory 

belongs  to   God." 

*     *     * 

Ernest  G.  W.  Wesley  was  born  and  edu- 
cated in  England.  Belongs  to  the  older 
branch  of  the  Wesley  family  through  the 
Barons  of  Noragh  and  the  famous  O'Neils  of 
Ulster.  At  the  age  of  seventeen  he  com- 
menced writing  for  metropolitan  and  local 
papers.  When  twenty-two,  was  special  cor- 
respondent for  The  New  York  Times  in 
Buenos  Aires,  S.  A.,  and  contributor  to  the 
Constitucion  and  Intereses  Argentionos 
(Spanish)   and  the   Standard    (English). 

While  in  Buenos  Aires  he  was  licensed  to 
preach  by  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church. 
For  a  number  of  years  was  manager  of  the 
Club   Estrangeiro. 

Coming  to  the  United  States  in  the  early 
seventies,  he  continued  writing — many  of  his 
earlier  poems  appearing  in  the  Nashville  and 
New  York  Christian  Advocate.  For  ten  years 
he  was  a  regular  contributor  to  Gospel  In  All 
Lands,  The  Baptist  Union  and  other  religious 
and  secular  papers;  for  sixteen  years  was  edi- 
tor of  the  Young  People's  Department  of  the 
Morning  Star  of   Boston. 

Mr  Wesley  has  written  between  five  and 
six  hundred   hymns  and  nearly  two  thousand 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  TWENTY-FIVE 


articles,  chiefly  on  religious  and  theological 
subjects.  About  a  hundred  of  his  poems  have 
been  set  to  music.  He  is  also  author  of 
Songs   of   the    Heart,   Steps    Into   the    Blessed 


Life,  and  a  number  of  tracts.  Among  his  best 
known  hymns  may  be  named,  "Christ  Will 
Never  Fail,"  "Christ  the  Lord,  Cometh,"  and 
"Make  Jesus  King."  Mr.  Wesley  gives  Prof. 
D.  B.  Towner  the  credit  of  directing  his  mind 
to  the  writing  of  hymns  for  Gospel  Singers, 
which  he  did  about  fifteen  years  ago  after 
having  noticed  several  of  his  verses  in  differ- 
ent religious   papers. 

*     *     * 

Ella  Lauder  is  a  direct  descendant  of  the 
Rev.  Thomas  Thatcher,  who  came  to  Massa- 
chusetts   from    England   in    1635,   and   was   the 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  TWENTY-SIX 


first  Pastor  of  the  Old  South  Church  of  Bos- 
ton. 

She  has  written  a  goodly  number  of  hymns 
which  have  been  widely  used.  She  was  for 
three  years  Editor  of  the  Home  Department 
of  the  Midland,  a  Chicago  periodical,  in  which 
the    greater   part   of   her   writings,   both   prose 


t/ 


eCotsLA^oLzsLs 


and  verse,  appeared.  Several  of  her  chil- 
dren's stories  have  appeared  in  various  peri- 
odicals, and  now,  at  the  age  of  fifty-two  years, 
after  having  raised  a  family  of  three  children 
who  are  all  "able  to  look  down  as  they  call 
me  'little  mother',  I  hope  to  find  opportunity 
to  attempt  a  form  for  the  fancies  and  rhythms 
which  still  beat  in  my  brain,  hoping  I  may 
make  my  childish  day-dreams  come  true,  and 
write  something  worth  while". 
*     *     *     * 

Mrs.  Frank  A.  Breck  is  a  direct  descendant 
of  Col.  Timothy  Ellis,  who  won  distinction  in 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR    SONGS 


PAGE  TWENTY -SEVEN 


the  battle  of  Ticonderoga,  during  the  Revolu- 
tionary war.  Born  January  22nd,  1855,  in  Ver- 
mont, her  early  life  was  spent  among  the  New 
England  hills.  Later  she  removed  to  Vine- 
land,  N.  J.,  but  now  resides  in  the  "City  of 
Roses" — Portland   Oregon. 

Her  first  poem,  a  bit  of  ironic  rhyme  on 
"Washing  Dishes",  was  published  in  The 
Youth's  Companion;  later  she  wrote  verse  and 
prose  for  religious. and  household  publications. 

In  1884  she  was  married  to  Frank  A.  Breck 
and  made  her  home  on  a  place  which  was  part 
of  what  had  once  been  the  home  property  of 


<L.,  fyinjL^yfc 


Henry  C.  Work,  author  of  "Grandfather's 
Clock",  "Marching  Through  Georgia",  "Nico- 
demus-'  and  other  famous  songs.  "I  distinctly 
remember  his  pleasant,  kind-hearted  wife  al- 
lowing me  to  thrum  on  their  little  melodeon 
with  my  childish  fingers." 

For  a  number  of  years  family  duties  super- 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR   SONGS 


PAGE  TWENTY-EIGHT 


seded  those  literary,  and  only  semi-occasional- 
ly  did  she  entertain  her  muse.  One  day  the 
mail  brought  her  a  manuscript  copy  of  a  song, 
words  by  herself — "You  Ought  To  Do  Some- 
thing for  Jesus".  It  was  published  in  The 
Christian  Herald,  and  was  her  first  Gospel 
hymn. 

"It  was  a  great  joy  to  me",  she  has  told  me, 
"and,  as  opportunity  offered,  I  penciled  verse 
under  all  sorts  of  conditions — over  a  mending 
basket,  with  a  baby  in  arms,  and  sometimes 
even  when  sweeping  or  washing  dishes,  my 
mind  moved  to  meter." 

She  has  written  between  fourteen  and  fifteen 
hundred  hymns.  Some  of  the  best  known  of 
these  are  "Face  to  Face",  "Help  Somebody  To- 
day", "When  Love  Shines  In"  and  "Life-time 
is  Working-time". 

She  is  the  mother  of  five  daughters,  the  sec- 
ond   of    whom,    Flora    Elizabeth,    has    written 


PALMER  HARTSOUGH 

hymns  occasionally,  several  of  which  have  ap- 
peared in  various  books  of  song.     Mrs.  Breck 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  TWENTY-NINE 


is    a    consistent    Christian.      Her    parents 
grandparents    were    God-fearing    people. 


and 
She 
cannot  remember  when  Bible  reading  and 
prayer  were  not  her  daily  home  custom.  Kind- 
hearted,  charitable  and  sympathetic,  it  was  but 
natural  she   should  sing: 

''Look  all  around  you, 

Find   someone  in  need — 
Help  somebody  today, 

Tho'  it  be  little— 
A  neighborly  deed — 
Help  somebody  today." 

Palmer  Hartsough  is  a  name  familiar  to 
those  who  sing  Gospel  songs.  Pie  is  one  of 
the  few  remaining  of  the  "old  school"  type,  in- 


J.  W.  VAN  DE  VENTER 

to  whose  writing  commercialism  did  not  enter. 
He  was  educated  at  Plymouth,  Ypsilanti  and 
Kalamazoo,  Michigan.  Was  a  pupil,  in  music, 
of  F.  H.  Pease,  Dr.  Geo.  F.  Root  and  others. 
Words  he  wrote  to  an  exercise  in  the  Har- 
mony   class    at    a    Normal    Music    School    at- 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS  PAGE  THIRTY 


tracted  the  attention  of  Dr.  Root,  and  was  the 
beginning  of  his  verse  writing. 

In  1893  he  became  associated  with  the  Fill- 
more Brothers,  music  publishers,  of  Cincin- 
nati, Ohio,  since  which  time  his  writings  have 
come  to  print,  principally,  through  this  firm. 
His  professional  life  has  been  that  of  a  teacher 
of  vocal  music,  which  vocation  he  still  follows 
in  Ontario,  Wisconsin. 

>J?  5jC  JfC  5jC  3p 

Cn  a  farm,  near  the  village  of  Dundee, 
Michigan,  the  subject  of  this  sketch,  J.  W.  Van 
De  Venter,  was  born  December  5th,  1855.  He 
was  educated  in  the  country  and  village 
schools,  and  Hillsdale  College. 

He  has  written  about  one  hundred  hymns 
and  songs.  The  first  to  become  popular  was 
"I  Surrender  All",  which  was  soon  followed 
by  "Looking  This  Way",  which  was  a  great 
favorite  of  the  late  Ira  D.  Sankey.  He  lives 
in  St.  Petersburg,  Florida,  and  is  still  writing. 


^U>J^ 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR    SONGS  PAGE  THIRTY-ONE 


CHAPTER  FOUR 


It  takes  "all  kinds  of  people  to  make  a 
world''  so  they  say,  and  this  creates  the  need 
of  variety  of  songs,  if  all  classes  are  to  be 
reached  and  helped.  In  former  years  I  have 
heard  the  uncultured,  untaught  colored  people 
of  the  South  sing,  at  their  camp-meetings, 
songs  our  churches  would  not  tolerate,  and 
yet  I  am  convinced  that  every  soul  in  those 
audiences  was  filled  with  honest  conviction 
and  sincere  worship.  A  denominational  pa- 
per, in  a  recent  issue,  contained  the  following 
poem,  that  illustrates  this  point: 
There's   a    K'ng   and    Captain    high,    who'll   be 

coming  by  and  by; 
And    he'll    find    me    hoeing   cotton    when    he 

comes. 
You    can    hear    his    legions    charging    in    the 

thunder  of  the  sky, 
And    he'll    find    me    hoeing    cotton    when    he 

comes. 

When  he  comes, 
When   he   comes! 
All  the  dead  shall  rise  in  answer  to  his  drums, 
Oh,    the    fires    of    his     encampment    star    the 

firmament  on  high; 
And   the   heavens    shall   roll   asunder   when   he 

comes. 

There's  a  man  they  thrust  aside,  who  was  tor- 
tured till  he  died; 
And    he'll    find    me    hoeing    cotton    when    he 
comes. 
He  was  hated  and  rejected;   he  was  scourged 
and    crucified; 
And   he'll    find    me    hoeing    cotton    when    he 
comes. 

When  he  comes, 
When   he   comes! 
He'll  be  ringed  by  saints  and  angels  when  he 

comes; 
They'll  be  calling  out  "Hosanna!"  to  the  Man 
that  men  denied; 
And    I'll   knell   among   the   cotton — when   he 
comes. 
Such    pieces    breathe    the    expression    of    the 
heart's    desire    and    intention,    no    matter    what 
language  is  employed,  and  they  will  help  you 
too,  if  you  are  really  sincere  and  not  disposed 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR   SONGS 


PAGE  THIRTY-TWO 


to  be  captious  or  cynical.  While  I  do  not 
advocate  this  class  of  song,  yet  1  would  rather 
be  that  old  colored  man  kneeling  down  there 
in  the  cotton  field,  hoe  in  hand  and  faithful 
when  He  comes,  than  take  my  chances  with 
the    fellow    who    follows    in    the    wake    of    the 

critic. 

*     *     * 

Among  our  most  versatile  and  prolific  writ- 
ers of  gospel  verse,  is  James  Rowe,  who  has 
more  than  9,000  published  hymns,  poems,  reci- 
tations, mottoes,  etc.,  to  his  credit.  Born  in 
England  in  1866,  he  joined  a  party  of  govern- 
ment surveyors  at  the  age  of  16.  Served  four 
years  in  the  Government  Survey  Office,  Dub- 
lin,   Ireland.      Coming  to   America  in   1890,   he 


\  <x^X-4 


(A 


spent  ten  years  in  the  employ  of  the  New 
York  Central  &  Hudson  River  R.  R.  Co.,  when 
he  became  Superintendent  of  the  Mohawk  and 
Hudson     River     Humane     Society,     which     he 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  THIRTY -THREE 


served  for  twelve  years. 

He  began  writing  songs  and  hymns  about 
twenty  years  ago — his  first  one  being  "Speak 
It  For  the  Savior",  which  is  still  very  often 
heard.  The  title  of  "The  Bard  of  Albany"  was 
bestowed  upon  him  recently.  Mr.  Rowe  has 
written  several  small  books  of  recitations,  a 
few  librettos,  and  many  jokes,  sketches, 
stories  and  magazine  articles. 
*     *     * 

Frank  E.  Graeff  is  a  minister  of  the  Gospel 
and  has  been  a  member  of  the  Philadelphia 
Conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
Church    for    25    years.      He    is    the    author    of 


oy^L^ju/c  e , 


over  200  hymns,  200  stories,  numerous  poems 
and  one  book,  "The  Minister's  Twins".  He 
has  contributed  articles  to  many  prominent 
magazines  and  newspapers. 

"Does    Jesus    Care"    is,    doubtless,    the    best 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  THIRTY-FOUR 


known  of  all  his  writings.  It  was  written 
while  he  was  passing  through  one  of  those 
hard  places  which  all  of  us  at  times  must 
pass.  The  hymn  has  been  translated  into  sev- 
eral languages,  and  is  sung  over  the  world. 
Broken,  burdened,  suffering  men  and  women 
have  told  of  its  helpfulness  in  times  of  great 
need  and  sorrow.  Many  instances  of  the  won- 
derful power  it  wields  could  be  mentioned,  and 
Mr.  Graeff  says  of  it,  "The  hymn  seems  to 
carry  comfort  and  hope  to  troubled  hearts — ■ 
and  I  am  glad   I  had  the  inspiration  to  write 

it." 

*     *     * 

The  gospel  song  "Some  Day",  which  was  so 
much    in    use    during    Dr.    Chapman's    simul- 


taneous   evangelistic    campaigns,    introduced   a 
new  poet  to  the  religious  world.    Dr.   M.  Vic- 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR    SONGS  PAGE  THIRTY-FIVE 


tor  Staley  was  born  in  1806,  near  Omro,  Wis- 
consin. From  school  age  until  his  14th  year 
he  attended  the  village  school.  The  family  re- 
moving to  Oshkosh  in  1880,  he  spent  two 
years  in  the  High  School  of  that  town.  About 
this  time  his  success  in  verse,  short  stories 
and  newspaper  articles  in  the  local  press 
prompted  him  to  complete  his  education.  Ac- 
cordingly in  1887  he  entered  Lawrence  Uni- 
versity, where  he  studied  for  five  years,  en- 
tering the  University  of  Wisconsin  at  -Madi- 
son in  1892.  He  graduated  in  1893  with  the 
degree  of  B.  A.  Entering  Yale  University, 
New  Haven,  Conn.,  he  took  a  post-graduate 
course,  one  of  his  instructors  being  Dr.  Wil- 
liam D wight  Whitney.  After  two  years  he 
received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  In  1900  he 
studied  law  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of 
Indiana  with  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  The  same 
degree  was  conferred  upon  him  by  the  Uni- 
versity of  Oregon  T  aw  School,  at  Portland, 
where  he  was  also  admitted  to  the  courts.  He 
has  been  a  teacher  of  Latin  and  Greek  in  Palo 
Alto,  Cal.;  in  the  University  of  Washington, 
Seattle;  at  Orchard  Lake  Military  Academy 
and  Louisiana   State   Normal   School. 

Scholar  that  he  is,  he  is  inclined  toward  and 
takes  time  to  write  ;  the  simple  heart-echo 
hymns  for  the  great  mass  of  people  who  love 
the  pure,  the  true,  the  good  and  the  beautiful 
His  first  hymn  was  "Our  Home  in  Heaven", 
written  about  1887  and  set  to  music  by  Victor 
H.   Benke. 

His  hymns  number  about  100,  beside  one 
book  of  poems  and  a  vast  amount  of  other 
literary  work.  At  present  he  is  Supervising 
Principal  of  the  Corona.  Cal.,  city  schools. 
The  prime  of  his  manhood  and  usefulness 
having  barely  been  attained,  the  world  may 
well  expect  much  more  from  his  talented  pen. 

*  *  * 
"Bred  and  born"  in  the  church  was  Mrs. 
Nellie  Place  Chandler.  At  12  years  of  aee  she 
played  the  organ  in  church  and  Sunday  school, 
since  wh'rh  time  she  has  constantly  been  in 
the  work  either  as  chorister,  organist  or  choir- 
director.  All  her  life  she  has  been  a  student 
as  well  as  teacher  of  music.  Her  first  song 
was  a  "Class  Song"  published  by  The  John 
Church  Company  in  1898.  Her  first  sacred 
song  was   "He   Saves  with    Power   Divine",   in 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR   SONGS 


PAGE  THIRTY-SIX 


1906,  of  which  the  following  incident  is  told: 
Some  years  ago  in  the  Limberlost  country, 
in  the  very  neighborhood  made  famous  by 
Gene  Stratton  Porter  in  "Laddie'',  there  lived 
a  sturdy,  true-blue  American  family  of  father, 
mother    and    eight    children,    happily    gathered 


JtUJ^J^    Q£o<U.  ^tc<^^ 


Cot^A^&OA^ 


around   a   Christian    hearth-stone.     Misfortune 
overtook  them  in  the  form  of  an  epidemic  of 
typhoid   fever.     After  weeks   of  anxious   nurs- 
ing,   when    four    had    been    near    death's    door 
(there    had    been    no    merriment    and    song    in 
that    home    for    days),    when    approaching    ihe 
house   one   day   after   convalescence  had   been 
established,    I    heard    a    cottage    organ    and    a 
quartette    of   glad   voices   as    spontaneous    and 
joyous    as    the    robin's    note    peal    forth    that 
sacred  song  of  Mrs.  Chandler's: 
"Jesus  saves,  sing  aloud  the  story, 
Jesus  saves,  give  Him  all  the  praise  and  glory. 
Jesus  saves,  save  this  soul  of  mine; 
Jesus  saves,  He  saves  with  power  divine." 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THIIR  SONGS  PAGE  THIRTY-SEVEN 


Not  until  then  did  I  realize  the  joyous  in- 
fluence for  good  wielded  by  a  writer  of 
sacred  music. 

More  of  a  composer  of  music,  perhaps,  than 
a  writer  of  hymns,  yet  Mrs.  Chandler  holds 
a  prominent  place  in  the  hearts  of  the  people, 
especially  in  her  own  home,  where  her  whole 
life  has  been  a  blessing  to  all  in  and  out  of 
the  church. 

Concerning  her  manner  of  composing  she 
says,  "As  I  write  the  words  and  music  (I  seem 
unable  to  write  one  without  the  other),  I  can 
hear  it  being  sung  by  the  Sunday  school  or 
choir,  hear  the  instrument  and  accompani- 
ment, until,  if  I  were  able  to  get  it  written  out 
and  conveyed  to  others  as  I  hear  it,  I  might 
write  something  worth  while." 
*     *     * 

"I  need  Thee  every  hour, 

Most  gracious   Lord; 
No  tender  voice  like  Thine 

Can    peace    afford. 
I   need  Thee,   O   I  need  Thee, 

Every  hour  I   need  Thee; 
O  bless  me  now,  my  Savior, 
I  come  to   Thee." 
Few  of  the  millions  of  people,  old  or  young, 
who    have   heard,    sung   or   read   the   beautiful 
hymn   of  which   the   above   is  the   first  stanza 
and  chorus,  know  that  its  writer,   Mrs.  Annie 
Sherwood   Hawks,  is  still  living,  and   "carries 
on   an   extensive   correspondence   with   friends 
all  over  the  country,  and  receives  many  visi- 
tors." 

She  is  the  last  of  three  women  hymn  writers 
whose  fame  is  world-wide — the  other  two,  both 
of  whom  were  blind,  being  Fanny  Crosby,  who 
died  recently,  and  Alice  Holmes,  who  went  to 
her  reward  over  a  year  ago. 

Mrs.  Hawks  began  writing  verse  at  an 
early  age — her  first  being  printed  during  her 
fourteenth  year.  Later  in  life  her  friend  and 
pastor,  the  Rev.  Robert  Lowry,  encouraged 
her  to  write  song-poems,  to  which  he  com- 
posed music.  She  is  the  author  of  over  four 
hundred  hymns,  among  which  may  be  men- 
tioned:—'Tn  the  Valley,"  "Good  Night,"  "Why 
Weepest  Thou,"  "Who'll  Be  the  Next,"  etc., 
but  the  one  by  which  she  is  best  known  is  "I 
Need  Thee  Every  Hour,"  written  in  1875.  It 
is  said  that  this  hymn  has  been  translated  into 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONCS 


PAGE  THIRTY-EIGHT 


more    foreign    languages    than    any    other    of 
modern  times.     Mrs.  Hawks  says  of  it: 

"Whenever  my  attention  is  called  to  it  I  am 


conscious  of  great  satisfaction  in  the  thought 
that  I  was  permitted  to  write  the  hymn  'I 
Need  Thee  Every  Hour',  and  that  it  was  waft- 
ed out  to  the  world  on  the  wings  of  love  and 
joy,  rather  than  under  the  stress  of  a  great 
personal  sorrow,  with  which  it  has  so  often 
heen  associated  in  the  minds  of  those  who  sing 
it. 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR    SONGS 


PAGE  THIRTY-NINE 


"I  remember  well  the  morning,  many  years 
ago,  when  in  the  midst  of  the  daily  cares  of 
my  home,  then  in  a  distant  city,  I  was  so 
filled  with  the  sense  of  nearness  to  the  Master 
that,  wondering  how  one  could  live  without 
Him  either  in  joy  or  pain,  these  words  'I  Need 
Thee  Every  Hour'  were  ushered  into  my  mind, 
the  thought  at  once  taking  full  possession  of 
me. 

"Seating  myself  by  the  open  window  in  the 
balmy  air  of  the  bright  June  day  I  caught  my 
pencil  and  the  words  were  soon  committed 
to  paper,  almost  as  they  are  being  sung  today. 
It  was  only  by  accident,  it  would  seem,  that 
they  were  set  to  music  a  few  months  after  and 
sung  for  the  first  time  at  a  Sunday  School  Con- 
vention held  in  one  of  the  large  western  cities. 
From  there  they  were  taken  farther  west  and 
sung  by  thousands  of  voices  before  the  echo 
came  back  to  me,  thrilling  my  heart  with  sur- 
prise and  gladness. 

"For  myself  the  hymn  was  prophetic  rather 
than  expressive  cf  my  own  experience  at  the 
time  it  was  written,  and  I  do  not  understand 
why  it  so  touched  the  great  throbbing  heart  of 
humanity.  It  was  not  until  long  years  after, 
when  the  shadow  fell  over  my  way — the 
shadow  of  a  great  loss — that  1  understood 
something  of  the  comforting  in  the  words  I 
had  been  permitted  to  write  and  give  out  to 
others  in  my  hours  of  sweet  security  and  peace. 

"Now  when  I  hear  them  sung,  as  I  have 
sometimes,  by  hundreds  of  voices  in  chorus, 
1  find  it  difficult  to  think  they  were  ever,  con- 
sciously, my  own  thought  or  penned  by  my 
own   hand. 

"Copies  of  the  hymn  have  been  sent  to  me 
in  a  number  of  different  languages,  but  the 
one  I  prize  most  highly  is  the  one  printed  in 
the,  to  me,  queer  and  untranslatable  charac- 
ters of  the  Burmese  print." 

Women  have  ever  held  an  exalted  position 
among  the  writers  of  hymns  that  have  been 
and  are  a  strong  factor  in  turning  the  hearts 
of  men  and  women  to  God,  moulding  religious 
life  and  keeping  the  spiritual  fires  burning. 

That  their  words  have  been  carried  to  the 
remotest  ends  of  the  earth  is  but  small  recogni- 
tion of  their  help,  comfort  and  uplift  to  the 
entire  world  of  mankind. 

Mrs.  Hawks  was  born  at  Hoosack,  N.  Y.,  in 
May,  1835.    Her  maiden  name  was  Annie  Sher- 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR   SONGS  PAGE  FORTY 


wood.  She  was  married  in  1859  to  Charles 
Hial  Hawks,  who  died  in  1888.  Of  three  chil- 
dren, a  daughter  remains,  with  whom  Mrs. 
Hawks  resides. 

The  following  excerpts  from  a  letter  received 
from  her  recently  will  be  of  interest: 

"July  27,   1915. 
"Dear  Mr.    Gabriel: 

"You  see  I  have  begun  a  letter  to  you — 
when  it  will  be  finished  is  a  problem*  *  *  *  * 
I  note  a  rather  remarkable  coincidence  that  a 
Gabriel  wrote  'The  Glory  Song.'  *****  j\jy 
health  for  five  years  has  been  that  of  semi- 
invalidism.  I  go  out  very  little  and  have  not 
been  out  of  my  room  much  since  my  recent 
illness.  Owing  to  the  fact  that  I  was  not 
sufficiently  careful  of  my  eyesight,  I  am  now 
paying  the  p  nalty,  and  obliged  to  use  them 
sparingly.  *  *  *  *  *  I  must  close  now  to  resume 
the  letter  later  on,  but  just  here  let  me  say, 
lest  I  forget  to  mention  it,  T  am  very  fond  of 
'The  Glory  Song' — it  is  very  inspiring  to  me. 

July  29. 

"I  am  pleased  to  write  that  I  am  very  much 
better  in  health  than  when  I  received  yours 
of  May  24th,  and  hope  to  continue  to  improve, 
although  my  condition  is  not  favorable  to 
writing  today,  as  I  used  my  eyes  too  much 
yesterday. 

With  thanks  for  your  kindness  and  cour- 
tesy, Sincerely  yours, 

Annie  Sherwood  Hawks. 

The  prayers  of  a  christian  world  ascend  for 
the  one  who  in  the  twilight  of  a  long  life  of 
service  to  her  Master  still  is  singing: 

"I  need  Thee  ev'ry  hour, 

In  joy  or   pain; 
Come  quickly,  and  abide, 

Or  life  is  vain." 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  FORTY-ONE 


CHAPTER  FIVE 


"Shall  We  Gather  at  the  River"  was  written 
in  July,  1864,  by  Dr.  Robert  Lowry.  "I  had 
often  wondered  why",  he  has  said,  'the  hymn 
writers  had  said  so  much  about  "the  river  of 
death'  and  so  little  about  the  pure  river  of 
water  of  life,  clear  as  crystal,  proceeding  out 
of  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb.  As  I 
mused,  the  words  began  to  construct  them- 
selves and  the  music  came  with  the  hymn — 
they  are  twins".  It  was  first  published  by  the 
American  Tract  Society,  and  has  gone  wher- 
ever the  Gospel  is  preached. 

While  in  London  in  1880,  Dr.  Lowry  at- 
tended a  reception  given  the  delegates  of  the 
Sunday  School  Union  as  a  prelude  to  the 
Robert  Raikes  Centennial.  At  the  close  of  the 
exercises,  the  chairman  said,  "I  am  told  the 
author  of  'Shall  We  Gather  at  the  River'  is 
in  the  room.  We  should  all  like  to  hear  him". 
Making  his  way  from  the  rear  seats,  Dr. 
Lowry  entered  the  platform,  was  welcomed  by 
the  chairman  and  introduced  to  the  audience. 
The  reception  given  him  was  so  enthusiastic 
that  for  some  minutes  it  was  impossible  for 
him  to  speak — a  suitable  recognition  due  to 
such  a  man,  and  the  spontaneous  testimony  to 
the  value  of  a  song. 

For  fifty  years 

"Shall  we  gather  at  the  river 

Where  bright  angel  feet  have  trod; 
With  its  crystal  tide  forever 

Flowing  from  the  throne  of  God?" 
has  been  sung  by  the  christian  people  of  all 
lands.  Saints  and  sinners  know  it,  sing  it 
and  love  it.  It  has  not  the  distinction  of  hav- 
ing been  placed,  by  scholars,  among  the  "clas- 
sics", yet  it  clings  to  the  human  heart  in  pros- 
perity and  adversity;  it  lingers  there  through 
health  and  strength,  is  a  comfort  to  the  sick, 
and  the  hope  of  the  dying.  Critics  pass  it  by, 
for  various  reasons — it  is  a  Gibraltar  in  the 
ocean  of  sacred  hymns  that  no  craft  dare  sail 
against.  Faith  listens  and  cries 
"Yes,  we'll  gather  at  the  river 

That  flows  from  the  throne  of  God". 
We  know  not  when  or  how — but — some  time, 
and — somewhere. 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  FORTY-TWO 


Dr.  R.  Kelso  Carter,  who  wrote  "Standing 
on  the  Promises",  was,  for  many  years,  a 
Professor  in  the  Pennsylvania  Military  Col- 
lege at  Chester.  While  there  he  was  licensed 
by  the    M.    E.   Church   to  preach,  and  became 


g.  t'-Qfi*^ 


very  active  in  leading  camp  meetings  and  re- 
vivals, but  failing  health  forced  him  to  aban- 
don the  work.  He  afterward  studied  and  be- 
came a  medical  man  by  profession,  as  well  as 
a  writer. 

He  has  written  several  novels,  always  with 
a  purpose.  His  first  historical  novel,  called, 
"Amor  Victor",  was  praised  almost  extrava- 
gantly by  the  Press,  it  beinp-  compared  with 
Ben  Hur  and  Quo  Vadis.  Occasionally  he 
writes  for  the  Magazines — generally  a  story 
with  a  "heart  throb"  in  it,  or  some  scientific 
lesson  made  simple  and  plain,  or  a  pungent 
bit  of  satire. 

Dr.  Carter  has  written  many  hymns  that 
have    taken    hold,   among   them    "Standing   on 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR    SONGS 


PAGE  FORTY-THREE 


the  Promises",  "All  Taken  Away'',  "At  the 
Cross"  and  "Cross  of  Christ  Lead  Onward". 
His  latest  success,  "The  Sign  of  the  Cross". 
This  song  is  in  the  swinging  military  march 
movement  which  Dr.  Carter's  long  associa- 
tion with  military  training  has  naturally 
evinced  in  his  compositions. 

Not  only  does  he  write  the  words,  but  al- 
most invariably  composes  music  to  his  own 
hymns.  He  is  a  diligent  student  and  steady 
worker,  but,  should  he  lay  his  pen  down  today, 
the  world  must  say  he  did  not  labor  in  vain. 
*     *     * 

Alfred  Henry  Ackley  is  one  of  the  younger 
poets  whose  verses  have  met  with  instant  suc- 
cess. At  22  years  of  age  he  was  graduated 
from  Westminster  Theological  Seminary  of 
Maryland  and  at  once  assumed  the  position  of 
Assistant  Pastorate  of  the  First  Presbyterian 
Church  of  Sharon,  Pa.  Filling  this  and  other 
important  appointments  successfully,  he  is  now 
assistant  to  Rev.  Hugh  Thompson  Kerr,  D.D., 
of  Shadyside   Presbyterian   church. 

He  studied  harmony  and  the  violoncello  un- 
der Alfred  Walker,  of  the  Royal  Academy  of 
Music,  London;  was  also  a  pupil  of  Hans 
Kronold  of  New  York  City. 

His  first  hymn,  "Somebody  Knows" — with 
music  by  his  brother,  B.  D.  Ackley — was  writ- 
ten in  the  Spring  of  1907,  and  at  once  became 
popular  and  is  today  a  favorite  everywhere. 
Among  many  useful  hymns  written  by  him 
are,  "I  Am  Coming  Home",  "Every  Day  I 
Need  Thee  More",  "His  Love  Is  Far  Better 
Than  Gold",  "T  Shall  Not  Be  Moved",  "I  Shall 
Dwell  I^orever  There"  and  others, 
k     *     *     =♦ 

Marian  Wendell  Hubbard  is  a  direct  de- 
scendant of  a  famous  old  New  York  family 
whose  long  line  of  men  occupied  positions  of 
honor  and  responsibility  in  the  service  of  their 
country,  as  well  as  in  literature — Oliver  Wen- 
dell Holmes  and  Wendell  Phillips  being  nearly 
related  to  her  father.  "Surely  I  should  not 
feel  elated"  (I  quote  from  a  personal  letter), 
"over  my  little  gift  of  poesy,  when  it  is  such 
a  tiny  rivulet,  issuing  from  the  great  moun- 
tain stream  of  my  literary  forbears". 

Her  mother  died  when  she  was  nine  years  of 
age,  and  she  was  sent,  to  be  educated,  to 
Pawtucket.   R.   L     At  the  age  of  eighteen   she 


THE  SINGERS  AND  TMZIR   SONC3 


PAGE  FORTY-FOUR 


entered  a  Philadelphia  Publishing  office  as 
proof  reader,  when  her  first  articles  in  prose 
and  poetry  were  printed  under  a  nom  dc 
plume.  One  of  her  prose  articles,  "Human 
Life",    published    in    The    Lutheran,    attracted 


(<7?-?£2l^U^ 


Q^^t^Ce^^/Ju^L^- 


much  attention,  which  gave  her,  while  hiding 
behind  her  pseudonym,  much  pleasure. 

Her  first  hymn  writing  was  done  for  an 
Elgin,  Illinois,  publisher,  and  for  other  com- 
pilers, about  twenty  years  ago.  Among  her 
most  popular  ones  is  "Lord,  Is  It  I?" 

"The  greatest  happiness  I  ever  experienced'*, 
she  declares,  "was  when  I  was  able  for  active 
Christian  work — now,  as  my  treacherous  heart 
makes  me  have  to  be  so  careful,  I  often  feel 
like  an  idler  in  the  vineyard.  I  never  wrote 
a  thing  that  touched  other  hearts,  unless  my 
own  was  touched  by  the  Holy  Spirit." 
*     *     *     * 

Lucia  B.  Cook  was  born  in  Greenville,  S.  C, 
in  1884.  At  15  years  of  age  her  health  began 
to  fail,  and  soon  she  was  a  helpless  invalid. 
"I  remember  thinking  as  I  lay  on  the  hospital 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  FORTY-FIVE 


cot'',  she  writes,  "if  I  live  to  get  well,  I  will 
pray  more;  I  could  not  even  think  as  it  was. 
I  used  to  look  at  my  white-capped  nurses  and 
wash  that  someone  would  tell  me  the  old,  old 
story". 

Health  and  strength  gradually  returning, 
she  again  took  up  the  work  she  had  mapped 
out  for  herself  in  early  girlhood,  and,  relying 
on  the  above  recorded  vow  for  help,  she  occu- 
pies a  position  of  more  than  local  prominence. 


Miss  Cook  is  an  author  and  poet  of  rec- 
ognized ability,  having  for  some  years  been  a 
contributor  to  school,  church  and  literary  pub- 
lications. Her  articles  have  appeared  in  The 
Designer,  The  National  Sunday  School  Times, 
.Churchman  and  many  other  periodicals.  Her 
greatest  interest  is  with  little  children,  and  she 
is  a  deep  lover  of  nature.  Her  first  poetic  ef- 
fort was  written  at  the  age  of  twelve  years. 
She  has  always  kept  in  close  touch  with  edu- 
cational affairs,  and  is  a  student  of  methods. 
Her  hymns  are  scattered  through  many  books — 
are  logical,  practical  and  well  written. 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS  PAGE  FORTY-SIX 


CHAPTER  SIX 


At  every  dangerous  corner  on  the  perilous 
pathway  of  Man's  Destiny,  Providence  has 
placed  one  who  has,  through  virtue  of  great 
genius,  guided  the  steps  of  mankind.  The  ef- 
forts of  the  greatest  in  literature,  Homer, 
Shakespeare,  Dante  and  Cervantes — bore  fruit 
not  alone  in  the  realm  of  their  Art  but  for 
myriads  who  came  after  them. 

It  is,  however,  only  by  the  highly  educated 
that  these  men  are  really  understood,  so,  in 
the  "eternal  fitness  of  things",  we  have  been 
given  those  who  speak  from  the  heart,  and 
possess  the  power  to  give  us  their  thoughts 
with  comprehensible  clearness. 

Many  fail  to  really  understand  the  allegory, 
and  thereby  lose  the  full  beauty  of 
"So  long  thy  power  hath  blest  me,  sure  it  still 

Will   lead  me   on 
O'er  moor  and  fen,  o'er  crag  and  torrent,  till 

The  night  is  gone, 
And  with  the  morn  those  angel  faces  smile 
Which     1     have    loved    long    since,    and    lost 

awhile,'' 
but  the   face  of  the  little  child  brightens   and 
the    eyes    sparkle    with    a    clear    conception    of 
the  meaning  as  it  sings 
"1  am  so  glad  that  our  Father  in  heaven 
Tells  of  His  love  in  the  book  He  has  given; 
Wonderful  things  in  the  bible  I  see, 
This  is  the  dearest  that  Jesus  loves  me." 

To  this  class  belongs  that  master  hymn 
"Savior,  Thy  Dying  Love"',  written  by  Dr.  S" 
D.  Phelps  in  1862,  and  first  published  in  a 
periodical  of  that  time.  Later,  Rev.  Robert 
Lowry  set  it  to  music  and  published  it,  with 
others,  in  a  book  entitled  Pure  Gold.  Ar" 
though  it  has  been  "tuned"  by  many  com- 
posers, the  excellent  music  of  Dr.  Lowry  will 
always  be  associated  with  it,  and  together  the> 
have  been  carried  into  all  parts  of  the  Chris 
tian  world. 

A  letter,  written  in  May,  1866,  by  Dr.  Lowry 
to  Dr.  Phelps  (on  the  latter's  birthday),  says. 
''It    is    worth    living    seventy    years    even     if 
nothing  comes  of  it  but  one  such  hymn  as 
'Savior,  thy  dying  love 

Thou  gavest  me: 
Nor    should    J    aught    withhold, 
Dear  Lord,  from  Thee.' 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR    SONGS 


PACE  FORTY-SEVEN 


Happy    is     the    man     who    can    produce    one 
song   which    the    world    will    keep    on    singing 

after  its  author  shall  have  passed  away." 

*     #     * 

Rev.  Neal  A.  McAulay,  D.D.,  was  born  of 
Scottish  parents  in  the  English  town  of  Nova 
Scotia,  March,  1854.  At  twenty-one  years  of 
age  he  removed  to  Boston,  and,  in  1876,  from 
there  to  Portland,  Me.,  where  he  learned  the 
hatter's  trade. 

He  was  converted  in  1877,  and  came  to  Chi- 
cago in  1882,  where  for  a  year  his  time  was  de- 


voted  to  Mission  work,  and  to  the  Youn? 
Men's  Christian  Association.  He  entered  Mc- 
Cormick  Theological  Seminary  in  1883,  re- 
ceived his  degree  in  1886,  and  the  same  year 
became  Pastor  of  the  Prsbyterian  Church  of 
Wilton,  Iowa,  to  which  pastorate  he  gave 
twenty-one  consecutive  years  of  faithful  serv- 
ice. In  1907  he  accepted  a  call  to  Lyons,  Iowa, 
where  he  is  still  preaching  the  gospel. 

Rev    McAulay  has  been  honored  by  his  de- 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  FORTY-EIGHT 


nomination  in  many  official  capacities,  and  is 
now  a  Director  of  his  Alma  Mater,  and  Presi- 
dent of  the  Clinton,  Iowa,  Ministerial  Asso- 
ciation. 

He  has  traveled  extensively  in  this  country 
and  abroad;  is  connected  with  a  number  of 
fraternities;  is  broad  minded,  optimistic,  and 
a  pastor  greatly  loved  and  honored  by  old  and 
young. 

In  1889  he  began  writing  gospel  hymns, 
many  of  which  have  become  popular  and  use- 
ful. His  best  known  hymns  are  "The  Chil- 
dren's Hosanna",  "Will  I  Empty  Handed  Be", 
"Till  I  See   My  Mother's  Face". 

Being  only  "sixty  years  young",  and  still 
vigorous,  the  Church  may  yet  expect  much 
from  him. 

*    *    * 

Georgia  Tillman  Snead,  Authoress,  Poetess 
and  Teacher,  is  a  native  of  The  Old   Domin- 


ion.  She  has  written  several  volumes  of  prose 
works  and  a  book  of  poems.  Her  books  have 
been   accorded   very  high   praise   by  the  press 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  FORTY-NINE 


throughout  the  country.  There  is  a  peculiar 
charm  to  her  style  of  writing,  which  is  of  the 
highest  ideals  and  purity  of  thought. 

Her  poems  carry  a  sweet  note  of  hope  and 
faith,  and  many  are  characterized  by  a  strong 
devotional  spirit.  For  many  of  the  best  com- 
posers of  church  music  she  has  written  hymns 
that  have  been  greatly  blessed.  Her  verses 
are  specially  adapted  to  Sunday  school  work, 
being  cheerful,  buoyant,  practical  and  full  of 
that  hope  and  confidence  so  characteristic  of 
young  people. 

She  was  for  a  time  in  the  employ  of  the 
Home  Missionary  Society,  but  at  present  de- 
votes her  time  exclusively  to  writing,  and  is 
a  regular  contributor  to  Religious  publications. 
*     *     *     * 

William  C.  Poole,  of  Wilmington,  Delaware, 


is   one  of  the  younger   minsters   and  writers. 
His    ancestors    for    several    generations    were 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONCS  PAGE  FIFTY 


Maryland  Quakers,  but  his  parents  after  mar- 
riage united  with  The  Methodist  Church.  Of 
the  three  children  born  to  them,  two  are 
Methodist  ministers  and  the  third  is  a  Metho- 
dist class  leader. 

Mr.  Poole  was  born  and  raised  on  a  Mary- 
land Farm.  Since  graduating  from  Washing- 
ton College,  his  life  has  been  spent  as  a 
Methodist  minister  in  the  bounds  of  the  Wil- 
mington Conference  in  which  time  he  has 
been  pastor  of  The  McCabe  Memorial,  The 
Richardson  Park  and  other  churches.  In  1913 
he  was  Superintendent  of  The  Anti-Saloon 
League  of  Delaware.  He  is  at  present  pastor 
of  The  Richardson  Park  Church. 

Concerning  his  hymn  writing  and  literary 
work,  Mr.  Poole  says,  "My  first  appearance  in 
print  outside  of  local  papers  was  in  1907. 
Since  my  twelfth  year  I  had  been  writing 
verses  in  old  compositio.n  books  which  I  care- 
full}'  concealed.  Many  of  these  verses  were 
hymns.  It  was  in  1907  that  I  ventured  to 
send  a  manuscript  to  a  prominent  publisher 
and  asked  if  it  was  worth  keeping.  They  im- 
mediately referred  me  to  Charles  H.  Gabriel 
and  he  asked  for  more.  Among  the  first  lot 
was  'Just  When  I  Need  Him  Most',  which  im- 
mediately became  popular. 

Since  then  I  have  written  about  five  hun- 
dred hymns  and  three  hundred  other  verse 
manuscripts,  besides  many  special  articles,  in 
spare  moments  of  a  busy  life.  They  are  writ- 
ten on  trains,  in  meetings,  and  anywhere  the 
mood  seizes  me.  Among  the  hymns  are  "One 
Day  for  Thee",  "Nothing  Held  Back'',  "Don't 
Forget  Jesus"  and  many  others.  I  have  been 
working  under  high  pressure  most  of  the  time 
since  I  was  fifteen  years  old.  While  hymn 
writing  does  not  pay  me  as  compared  with 
other  work,  I  will  stop  a  high  priced  article 
any  time  to  write  a  hymn  which  will  help 
others  on  the  way.  If  I  cannot  sing  to  make 
others  listen,  I  will  write  such  that  they  will 
read. 

My  real  work  is  that  of  a  minister  and  pas- 
tor. The  writing  is  done  as  recreation  and  dir 
version  from  responsibilities  which  might 
otherwise  depress  me.  The  same  idea  which 
sends  me  to  mv  pulpit,  sends  me  to  my  pen 
or  typewriter — To  Help  Somebody." 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR    SONGS  PAGE  FIFTY-ONE 


CHAPTER  SEVEN 


In  May,  1887,  Dr.  S.  F.  Smith  visited  the 
Board  of  Trade  in  Chicago,  and  while  sitting 
in  the  gallery  he  was  pointed  out  to  some  of 
the  members,  and  soon  became  the  center  of 
considerable  notice.  All  at  once  the  trading 
on  the  floor  ceased,  and  from  the  wheat  pit 
came  the  familiar  words  "My  Country  'Tis  of 
Thee".  After  two  stanzas  had  been  sung,  Dr. 
Smith  rose  and  bowed.  Amid  the  cheers  of 
the  traders,  he  was  led  to  the  floor  by  the 
Secretary  of  the  Board.  The  members  flocked 
around  him,  grasped  his  hand,  and,  opening  a 
passage  through  the  crowd,  led  him  into  the 
wheat  pit,  when  with  heads  uncovered,  they 
sang   the   rest   of  the   hymn. 

"Some  men  are  born  great,  some  achieve 
greatness,  and  some  have  greatness  thrust 
upon  them."  No  hymn  writer  ever  reached 
the  goal  by  way  of  Shakespeare's  third  route. 
The  true  poet  is  born — but,  if  all  the  castles 
he  has  built  had  stood,  the  earth  would  be  one 
vast,  beautiful  city;  if  all  his  hopes  had  been 
realized,  the  birds  in  the  forest  would  hush 
and  listen  to  the  sweet  strains  of  poetry  float- 
ing on  the  air;  if  all  his  day-dreams  had  ma- 
terialized the  hills  would  vibrate  and  the 
mountains  echo  with  divine  melody. 

If  his  failures  were  numbered,  only  the 
sands  on  the  seashore  could  equal  them,  while 
his  heartaches  have  been  as  many  as  the  leave3 
on  the  summer  trees.  He  may  have  strug- 
gled against  poverty;  endured  abuse  from 
those  not  in  sympathy  with  him;  neglected 
friendships  or  companionships  that  would 
have  brought  him  pleasure  and  wealth;  felt  the 
cold  breath  of  winter  filter  through  the  door 
of  his  poorly  heated  and  dimly  lighted  room, 
or  even  realized  the  pangs  of  hunger,  yet  un- 
dismayed, undiscouraged,  he  fought  and 
worked  on,  hoped  on  and  struggled  against  the 
unfriendly  tide  until  his  genius,  that  adver- 
sity could  not  throttle,  triumphed,  and  the 
world  hastened  to  place  upon  his  brow  the 
wreath  of  conquest. 

*     *     * 

Mrs.  C.  D.  Martin  is  a  native  of  Canada, 
born  in  1868,  she  was  educated  in  the  public 
and   normal   schools   of  Nova   Scotia,   and   for 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR   SONGS 


PAGE  FIFTY-TWO 


a  number  of  years  was  a  successful  teacher. 
Although  in  early  life  Mrs.  Martin  wrote 
poetic  effusions,  yet  not  until  1906  did  she 
write  for  publication.  Her  first  popular  hymn 
was  "God  Will  Take  Care  of  You";  which  is 
sung  everywhere.     The  hymn  was  written  on 


h^  €>■  A.  h^ 


a  sick  bed  while  she  was  a  guest  of  the  Bible 
School  at  Lestershire,  N.  Y.  It  was  set  to 
music  by  her  husband,  and  has  found  its  way 
into  almost  every  Gospel  song  book  pub- 
lished since  that  time. 

The  famous  "Sparrow  Song"  Mrs.  Martin 
considers  her  masterpiece.  Of  its  inspiration, 
she  writes,  "It  was  written  at  the  bedside  of  a 
bedridden  saint  in  the  city  of  Elmira,  N.  Y.  1 
was  reading  and  singing  to  her,  and  during  our 
conversation  T  asked  her  if  she  did  not  some- 
times get  discouraged.  She  answered,  "How 
can  I  be  discouraged,  when  my  Father  watches 
the  sparrows,  and  I  know  He  loves  and  cares 
for    me"?      Procuring   paper   and    pencil,    in    a 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS  PAGE  FIFTY-THREE 


few  moments  I  wrote  the  now  famous  hymn. 
The  next  day  I  mailed  it  to  Mr.  Chas.  H.  Ga- 
briel, who  wrote  the  music  and  sent  it  to  Mr. 
Chas.  M.  Alexander,  in  England,  where  the 
song  was  first  sung  in  Albert  Hall,  during 
the  great  Torrey-Alexander  revival.  From 
there  it  has  gone  all  over  the  world." 
*    *    * 

"  'Tis   slander, 

Whose  edge  is  sharper  than  the  sword, 
whose  tongue  out-venoms  all  the  worms  of 
Nile,  whose  breath  rides  on  the  posting  winds, 
and  doth  belie  all  comers  of  the  world." 

Because  of  the  fact  that  the  present  genera- 
tion has  been  led  to  believe  much  that  is  un- 
reasonable, base  and  untrue  concerning  the 
origin  and  the  author  of  that  master  Gospel 
song,  "The  Sweet  By  and  By",  the  following 
sketch  is  included  in  this  series  of  biographies. 

Dr.  S.  Fillmore  Bennett,  I  knew  personally. 
He  was  born  in  the  village  of  Eden,  N.  Y., 
June  21st,  1836.  At  two  years  of  age  he  came 
with  his  parents  to  Plainfield,  111.,  where  his 
boyhood  days  were  spent,  working  on  the 
farm,  attending  district  school  during  the  win- 
ter, and  reading  all  the  books  he  could  ob- 
tain and  find  time  for.  At  sixteen  years  of 
age  he  entered  Waukegan  Academy.  Two 
years  lated  he  began  teaching  at  Wauconda. 
In  1858  he  entered  the  University  of  Michi- 
gan; afterward  he  had  charge  of  the  schools 
at  Richmond,  111.  Two  years  later  he  resigned 
and  became  Associate  Editor  of  the  Independ- 
ent at  Elkhorn,  Wis.  In  1864  he  enlisted  in 
Company  D,  40th  Wisconsin  Volunteers,  and 
served  as  Second  Lieutenant.  Returning  from 
the  war,  he  located  at  Elkhorn,  Wisconsin, 
where  he  opened  a  c'.rug  store  and  began  the 
study  of  medicine.  I  herewith  give  verbatim 
his  own  story  of  the  origin  of  the  song: 

"Mr.  Webster,  like  many  musicians,  was  of 
an  exceedingly  nervous  and  sensitive  nature, 
and  subject  to  periods  of  depression,  in  which 
he  looked  upon  the  dark  side  of  all  things  in 
life.  I  had  learned  his  peculiarities  so  well 
that  on  meeting  him  I  could  tell  at  a  glance 
if  he  was  melancholy,  and  had  found  that  I 
could  rouse  him  by  giving  him  a  new  song  to 
work  on.  He  came  into  my  place  of  business, 
walked  down  to  the  stove  and  turned  his  back 
on  me  without  speaking.  I  was  at  my  desk, 
writing.      Turning    to    him    I    said,    'Webster, 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  FIFTY-FOUR 


what  is  the  matter  now,'  'It's  no  matter',  he 
replied,  'it  will  be  all  right  by  and  by'.  The 
idea  of  the  hymn  came  to  me  like  a  flash  of 
sunlight  and  I  replied,  'The  Sweet  By  and  By! 
why  would  not  that  make  a  good  hymn?' 
'Maybe  it  would',  said  he  indifferently.  Turn- 
ing to   my   desk    I   penned   the   words   of   the 


hymn  as  fast  as  I  could  write.  I  handed  the 
words  to  Webster.  As  he  read  his  eye  kin- 
dled, and  stepping  to  the  desk  he  began  writ- 
ing the  notes.  Taking  his  violin,  he  played 
the  melody  and  then  jotted  down  the  notes 
of  the  chorus.  It  was  not  over  thirty  minutes 
from  the  time  I  took  my  pen  to  write  the 
words  before  two  friends,  Webster  and  myself, 
were  singing  the  hymn.  While  singing,  an- 
other friend  entered,  and,  after  listening 
awhile,  said,  'That  hymn  is  immortal'  ". 

It  was  first  published,  with  about  one  hun- 
dred others,  in  a  book  of  songs  called  "The 
Signet  Ring"  issued  soon  after  the  war  of  the 
rebellion. 

He  began  writing  when  a  mere  lad,  and  his 
first  poem  appeared  in  the  Waukegan  Gazette, 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR    SONGS 


PAGE  FIFTY-FIVE 


in  the  early  fifties.  Dr.  Bennett  was  a  prolific 
writer,  and  among  his  best  prose  works  is  a 
series  of  articles  on  "Alcoholism".  His  poem 
"The  Pioneers"  attracted  the  attention  of 
scholars.  He  graduated  from  Rush  Medical 
College  in  1874  and  for  twenty-two  years  was 
a  successful  practitioner. 

Nearly  twenty  years  ago  he  entered  that 
"Land  that  is  fairer  than  day",  for,  although 
his  name  was  written  on  no  church  roll,  he 
was  not  an  atheist  or  infidel,  but  a  public 
spirited  citizen,  a  teacher  of  children  and 
young  people,  a  healer  of  diseases,  a  defender 
of  Old  Glory,  a  poet,  a  scholar,  a  Mason  and 
a  gentleman!  Let  all  who  read  these  lines  de- 
fend his  name  from  the  stain  of  vile  slander 
and  abuse  with  which  it  is  so  often  shame- 
fully and  egotistically  besmirched. 


Mrs.  Annie  L.  Pinfold  was  born  in  Windsor, 
England,  forty-six  years  ago,  but  lives,  today, 
in  a  small  New  England  village  in  the  foot- 
hills of  the  White  Mountains,  on  the  border 
line  between  Maine  and  New  Hampshire. 

Her  little  six  year  old  niece  said  of  her: 
"Aunt  Annie  isn't  a  lady,  'cause  ladies  don't 
work,  and  Aunt  Annie  is  always  working." 
This  childish  statement  explains  why,  some 
years  ago,  a  sprain  brought  on  serious  spinal 
trouble.  "The  Doctors  have  told  me",  she 
writes,  "that  1  ought  to  be  dead,  but  I  could 
not  see  it  that  way.  I  tell  my  friends  that  the 
grace  of  God,  grit  and  gumption  kept  me  alive 
through  those  two  dark  years  in  bed  with  a 
paralyzed  right  arm". 

Ller  first  attempts  at  literary  work  were 
short  stories  for  various  Sunday  school  pub- 
lications. At  the  request  of  various  composers 
of  music  she  undertook  the  writing  of  hymns 
for  Easter,  Children's  Day,  Christmas  and 
other  special  occasions.  Her  success  was  so 
phenomenal  that  she  has  devoted  her  talent 
largely  to  these  lines  of  endeavor.  Though 
hindered  both  physically  and  financially,  she 
has  reached  an  enviable  position  among  liv- 
ing hymn  writers,  and  says  herself,  "I  am  a 
very  fortunate  woman — happy  in  the  little 
world  that  is  mine.  I  am  thankful  for  the 
small  talent  entrusted  to  me,  and  while  it  is 
and  has  been  of  financial  value  to  me,  I  try 
to  use  it  as  a  means  to  help  others.     *     *     * 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR   SONGS 


PAGE  FIFTY-SIX 


with   pencil   handy    (as    my   memory   is   poor), 


T  can  combine  potato-peeling-  and  verse  mak- 
ing, and  so  glorify  a  somewhat  common  task." 
*      *      *      4 

Miss  Laurene  Highfield  was  born  in  Quincy, 
111.,  where  she  still  resides.  Her  literary  work 
consists  of  about  three  hundred  hymns  and 
sacred  songs,  the  libretto  of  one  oratorio  and 

several    cantatas,    besides    many    poems,    exer- 
cises and  recitations  for  special  occasions. 

Her  best  known  hymn,  perhaps,  is  "Go  Tell 
Tt",  which  was  published  in  1904,  and  became 
very  popular  through  being  featured  in  the  Dr. 
Henry  Ostrom  and  -Gypsy  Smith  religious 
campaigns. 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  FIFTY-SEVEN 


CHAPTER  EIGHT 


Our  Gospel  hymn  writers  follow  various  vo- 
cations in  life;  some  are  ministers  of  the  Gos- 
pel, some  are  teachers,  others  are  physicians, 
lawyers,  merchants,  farmers  and  mechanics, 
each  contributing  his  or  her  mite  to  the  grand 
total  of  our  hymnology. 

The  many  thousands  who  have  been  cheered 
and  helped  by   "A  Sinner   Made   Whole"  will 


appreciate  a  word  concerning  William  M. 
Lighthall,  the  writer  of  that  hymn.  A  Cana- 
dian by  birth,  he  was  born  at  Omestown,  half 
a  century  ago,  but  removed  to  Rouses  Point, 
N.  Y.,  in  1881,  where  he  was  educated  and  has 
since  resided.  He  is  a  consecrated  christian; 
a  railroad  man,  and  a  telegrapher,  having  been 
in  the  employ  of  the  Delaware  &  Hudson  Rail- 
road for  over  thirty  years. 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  FIFTY-EIGHT 


Interested  in  everything  that  tends  to  the 
uplift  and  good  of  humanity,  he  is  zealous  and 
unfaltering  in  church  work,  having  held  al- 
most every  position  available  to  a  layman 
within  the  gift  of  the  Presbyterian  Church,  the 
Y.  P.  S.  C.  E.  and  the  Y.  M.  C.  A.  He  is  also 
prominent  in  the  work  of  the  Odd  Fellows  and 
Masons;  has  served  15  years  on  the  Rouses 
Point  Public  School  Board,  as  member,  Sec- 
retary and   President. 

Mr.  1  ighthall  has  written  many  splendid 
hymns,  but  his  best  known  is  "A  Sinner  Made 
Whole". 

***** 

"Some  years  ago  I  had  almost  decided  to 
give  up  hymn  writing,  but  about  that  time  I 
attended  a  convention  in  Ohio.  A  lady  I  met 
said  to  me,  'May  some  soul  be  converted 
through    a    hymn    that   you    shall    write,    who 


CL^LtL-  <&-&L^k^S*^_ 


would  not  be  converted  if  you  do  not  write 
it!  Those  beautiful  and  inspiring  words 
seemed    an    invisible    but    mighty    chain    that 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR    SONGS  TAGE  FIFTY-NINE 


held  me  fast  and  would  not  let  me  give  up". 
So  writes  Miss  Ada  Blenkhorn,  the  successful 
writer  of  "Let  The  Sunshine  In",  "Keep  On 
the  Sunny  Side  of  Life",  "Dark  Africa"  and 
many  other  popular  hymns.  Of  "Let  The 
Sunshine  In"  the  Chaplain  of  a  Kentucky 
State  Prison  said,  "It  has  done  our  prisoners 
more  good  than  all  the  sermons  preached  to 
them".  Another  said,  "It  brought  the  first 
ray  of  light  to  a  condemned  criminal,  who  was 
converted,  afterward  pardoned,  and  who  has 
for  several  years  been  preaching  the  Gospel". 

She  got  her  inspiration  for  "Keep  On  the 
Sunny  Side  of  Life"  from  wheeling  an  invalid 
nephew,  who  alwa}'S  wanted  to  ride  "on  the 
sunny  side  of  the  street". 

"Dark  Africa"  has  been,  under  the  blessing 
of  God,  the  means  of  sending  more  than  one 
missionary  to  that  dark  land,  and  to  other 
lands  as  well. 

She  began  writing  hymns  in  1892  and  is  still 
busy,  with  her  work.  "Kind  words  and  helpful 
suggestions",  she  writes,  "from  composers  and 
publishers  have  been  most  helpful  to  me,  but 
to  the  Giver  of  all  good  gifts  my  constant  and 
deepest  thanks  are  always  due". 
*     *    * 

"My  faith  looks  up  to  Thee, 

Thou  Lamb  of  Calvary, 
Savior  Devine: 

Now  hear  me  while  I  pray, 

Take  all  my  gilt  away, 

O  let  me  from  this  day 
By  wholly  Thine",  etc. 
Is  at  once  a  hymn,  a  creed,  and  a  prayer;  it 
is  faith  seized  with  a  sudden  joy  while  count- 
ing her  treasures  and  laying  them  at  the  feet 
of  Jesus  in  song;  it  is  the  incense  of  prayer 
rising  so  near  the  rainbow  round  the  throne 
that  it  catches  its  colors  and  becomes  radiant 
and  beautiful — "a  cloud  of  incense  illumined 
with  a  cloud  of  glory". 

Fanny  Crosby,  as  all  know,  was  blind  from 
childhood,  and  her  hymns  breathe  that  sweet 
hope,  faith  and  trust  that  there  is  a  world  where 
all  eyes  can  see.  They  are  also  free  from  that 
worldly  atmosphere  that  is  so  often  noticeable 
in  the  lines  of  many  writers. 

There  is  another  blind  poetess  whose  verses 
are  \vell  worthy  the  notice  into  which  they  are 
coming. 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS  PAGE  SIXTY 


Lavinia  E.  Brauff  is  a  native  of  Pittsburgh, 
Pa.,  where  she  was  born  October  12th,  1851. 
Blind  from  her  infancy — caused  by  a  severe 
illness — she  has  no  conception  of  our  beauti- 
ful world,  or  memory  of  the  face  of  her  father, 
who  died  when  she  was  eleven  years  old,  nor 
looked  in  the  loving  eyes  of  her  mother,  whom 
she  lost  in  1832.  She  was  educated  at  the 
School  for  the  Blind  in  Philadelphia. 

Her  first  hymn  was  published  in  1894  to  the 
music  of  H.  P.  Danks.  Mr.  Adam  Geibel,  the 
blind  composer,  has  used  many  of  her  hymns, 
among  them  "Christ  Was  Once  A  Little  Boy", 
which  has  found  its  way  into  many  foreign 
lands. 

In  1907  she  had  the  misfortune  to  fall  on  a 
polished  floor,  sustaining  a  fracture  of  her 
right  hip,  which  has  left  her  lame  for  the  rest 
of  her  life.  For  a  long  time  thereafter  con- 
stant suffering  unfitted  her  for  the  work  she  so 
loved,  but  out  of  the  second  affliction  came 
the  hymns,  "The  Song  That  Tells  of  Jesus" 
and  "Whispers  of  Peace",  which  will  keep  her 
memory  green  long  after  her  blinded  eyes 
shall  have  been  opened  in  that  land  of  which 
she  writes  so  interestingly. 

In  the  beginning  of  her  career  she  was  com- 
pelled to  have  the  aid  of  an  amanuensis,  but 
for  years,  having  mastered  the  typewriter,  she 
has  been  doing  all  her  own  writing,  as  well 
as  attending  to  her  large  correspondence,  in 
which  she  seldom  makes  an  error — her  page 
being,  as  a  rule,  free  from  any  correction. 

"While  composing",  she  writes,  "I  put  all 
my  thoughts  down  on  paper  with  a  Braille 
slate.  I  am  a  member  of  the  Methodist 
church.  Words  can  never  express  the  happi- 
ness I  derive  from  my  writings.  I  thank  God 
for  the  talent  He  has  given  me  and  pray  that 
I  may  be  able  to  use  it  in  His  service". 
*     *     * 

Jennie  Evelyn  Hussy  was  born  February 
8th,  1874,  in  Henniker,  N.  H.,  where  she  still 
lives  in  the  old  farm  home  occupied  by  four 
generations  of  ancestors..  She  is  an  invalid 
from  rheumatism,  the  fingers  of  her  left  hand 
curled  up  while  those  of  her  right  hand  bend 
only  at  the  knuckles. 

She  began  writing  verses  when  but  eight 
years  of  age,  although  none  were  published 
until  she  was  thirteen.  At  sixteen  she  fur- 
nished stories  for  young  people,  floral  articles, 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  SIXTY-ONE 


and  designs  for  crochet  needlework  for  maga- 
zines. In  1898  her  first  hymns  were  published, 
since  which  time  she  has  furnished  many  to 
various  publishers.  She  is  a  member  of  the 
Society  of  Friends  whose  meetings  she  has  at- 
tended from  childhood,  although  her  mother, 
now  eighty-three  years  of  age,  is  a  Congre- 
gationalism 

Shut  in  as  she  is,  her  life  is  cne  of  useful- 


&^~~t.c  £?re<W  tir*4^, 

ness  and  blessing  others  far  more  favored 
might  well  envy.  "If  you  could  look  in  on 
me  some  winter  morning",  a  private  letter 
says,  "you  might  find  me  in  a  wooded  valley 
at  the  foot  of  Mount  Hunger,  feeding  a  com- 
pany  of  gray  squirrels  that  come  to  the  trees 
and  scramble  over  my  windows,  while  blue- 
jays  call  their  companions  to  share  the  food 
I  scatter  for  them.  I  am  fond  of  and  know 
by  name  the  flowers  in  my  range;  I  cultivate 
many  house  and  out-of-door  plants,  while  the 
trumpet  vine,  striped  grass,  old  fashioned  yel- 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  SIXTY-TWO 


low  lilies,  elm  and  crab  apple  trees,  lilac  and 
syringa  bushes  surround  our  house,  with  its 
rockeries  of  ferns  and  columbine." 

Herbert  Buffum  writes,  "I  was  born  in  La 
Fayette,  111.,  November  13,  1879,  and  was  con- 
verted to  God  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
church  under  Capt.  Lee,  now  of  Colorado 
Springs.      Went    to    preaching    at    seventeen 


years  of  age.  Did  city  mission  work  up  and 
down  the  Pacific  Coast,  where  I  was  known 
as  "The  Boy  Preacher"  for  several  years,  hav- 
ing phenomenal  success.  Published  my  first 
song  in  sheet  music  at  eighteen  years  of  age. 
Almost  all  of  my  songs  have  been  written 
under  what  I  have  Been  pleased  to  term  "in- 
spiration". For  3'ears  T  refused  to  sell  a 
manuscript  as  I  had  a  feeling  of  being  sacri- 
legious at  the  thought  of  making  my  song 
writing   a    commercial    enterprise.      One    song, 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR    SONGS 


PAGE  SIXTY-THREE 


written  after  passing  through  a  severe  test 
spiritually,  was  composed  on  the  train  going 
from  Salt  Lake  to  Los  Angeles.  This  little 
song  entitled,  "I'm  Going  Through"  was  to 
the  Holiness  movement  and  City  Missions, 
Salvation  Army,  etc.,  what  the  "Glory  Song'' 
has  been  to  the  wide  world.  Publishers  vied 
with  each  other  to  see  who  could  get  posses- 
sion of  it.  The  last  we  heard,  about  six  dif- 
ferent ones  had  copyrighted  the  song.  I  have 
never  had  an  ambition  to  be  a  writer  outside 
of  the  glory  of  God  and  my  personal  enjoy- 
ment. I  have  made  this  secondary.  With  my 
wife  and  three  children  I  constantly  travel  in 
evangelistic  work.  My  early  work  was  all  on 
the  Pacific  Coast  in  the  large  cities.  Of  recent 
years  it  has  been  in  small  country  towns  of 
Kansas  where  the  "big  guns"  do  not  go.  We 
have  witnessed  something  like  10,000  seek  the 
Lord  for  salvation  while  thousands  of  Chris- 
tians have  been  helped  into  a  deeper  experi- 
ence. 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR   SONGS 


PAGE  SIXTY-FOUR 


CHAPTER  NINE 


History  records  that  terrible  winter  of 
in  South  Dakota,  and  especially  the  blizzard 
of  January  12th,  when  many  were  frozen  to 
death.  To  venture  a  few  yards  from  shelter 
was  to  challenge  death,  and  when  the  indoor 
fuel  was  exhausted  the  people  took  refuge  in 
cellars. 

Mrs.  Ina  Duley  Ogdon,  then  a  girl  of  eleven 
years  of  age,  was  a  resident  of  St.  Lawrence, 
S.  D.,  during  that  eventful  period.  Born  near 
Hoopeston,  111.,  her  first  19  years  of  life  were 
spent   on   the   farm   and   ranch;    the   next   nine 


were  devoted  to  teaching  school,  during  which 
time  she  married.  In  1900  she  removed  to 
Toledo,  Ohio,  where  she  still  resides. 

Her  first  hymn  was  "Open  Wide  the  Win- 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS  PAGE  SIXTY-FIVE 


dows" — the 'inspiration  for  which  she  received 
by  reading  a  story  related  by  the  Rev.  T.  De 
Witt  Talmage:  A  mother,  having  lost  her 
only  child,  sat  in  a  darkened  room,  day  after 
day,  grieving  for  the  little  one  the  Reaper  had 
bound  with  his  sheaves,  when  the  servant  en- 
tered and  said,  "My  dear  Mistress,  why  do  you 
grieve?  Do  not  sit  in  the  darkness — let's  open 
the  window  and  look  toward  the  light".  The 
hymn  was  set  to  music  by  myself  in  1892  and 
has  often  been  reprinted. 

This  was  the  first  of  a  great  number  of  ex- 
cellent hymns,  among  them,  "Could  I  Tell  It", 
"Jesus  Will",  "The  Promise  to  Mother",  etc. 
Her  last  success,  "Brighten  the  Corner  Where 
You  Are",  is  becoming  a  national  favorite,  and 
is  one  of  the  most  popular  songs  used  in 
evangelistic   meetings    today. 

Mrs.  Ogdon  has  always  been  an  intense 
lover  of  gospel  songs,  and  their  influence  on 
her  early  life  was  the  controlling  incentive 
that  gave  to  the  world  that  which  only  she 
could  give.  The  object  of  every  song  seems 
to  have  been  the  winning  of  souls.  Unpre- 
tending, amiable,  esteemed  by  a  large  circle 
of  friends  and  loved  by  thousands  who  have 
sung  her  hymns,  she  shrinks  from  celebrity  in 
the  knowledge  that  her  songs  are  God-given, 
and  that  without  Him  she  could  do  nothing, 
that  in  this  way  He  has  chosen  to  use  her  in 
the  work  of  His  vineyard. 


After  reading  the  145th  Psalm,  one  Sunday 
afternoon  in  1902,  Mrs.  Katharyn  Bacon  was 
impressed  to  write  a  poem  from  the  17th  verse, 
using  "The  Lord  is  Righteous"  for  a  theme. 
This  was  the  beginning  of  her  literary  career. 

Versatile,  diligent  and  enthusiastic,  she  has, 
during  the  thirteen  intervening  years,  written 
several  hundred  hymns,  which  have  been  set 
to  music  by  our  best  known  composers — W. 
H.  Doane,  W.  J.  Kirkpatrick,  Adam  Geibel  and 
others — beside  a  number  of  short  stories, 
sketches,  etc.,  for  the  secular  press. 

Mrs.  Bacon  was  born  (1884)  and  still  lives 
among  the  "hills  of  Tennessee",  where  her  life 
is  spent  among  books,  flowers,  field  and  gar- 
den, close  to  the  great  heart  of  nature,  whose 
voice  speaks  to  her  saying,  "write  with  the 
hope    that    your    thoughts    may    reach    some 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  SIXTY-SIX 


weary  soul,  carrying  hope,  rest,  peace  and  joy 
through  salvation,  and  glorify  the  Father  to 
whom  your  life  is  consecrated". 


Rev.  R.  H.  McDaniel  was  ordained  in  the 
Christian  church  in  1873,  and  has  been  en- 
gaged in  the  ministry  ever  since.  From  earli- 
est recollection  he  found  much  joy  in  church 
music.  The  old-fashioned  hymn  book  was  one 
of  the  delights  of  his  boyhood.  When  in  his 
teens  he  frequently  led  the  song  service  of  the 
good  old-time  prayer  and  testimony  meetings 
when  people  became  "shouting-happy". 

Always  possessed  with  a  desire  to  compose 
verses,  circumstances  prevented  him  from  en' 
tering  that  field,  much  to  his  regret.  In  the 
eighties  he  wrote  a  few  hymns  and  poems  for 
local  use,  but  did  not  attempt  writing  for 
general  use.  Several  hymns  written  since  that 
time  were  published  and  are  still  in  use  more 
or  less  extensively. 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR   SONGS 


PAGE  SIXTY-SEVEN 


"The  old  desire  for  hymn  writing  has  lately 
been  around",  he  writes  me,  "and  I  feel  in  my 
soul  that  God  has  something  for  me  to  do  in 
brightening  the  experience  of  struggling  souls. 
My  chief  desire  is  to  be  a  blessing,  if  possible, 
to  my  fellow-men  through  these  hymns,  and 
thereby  glorify  God  in  the  name  of  his  dear 
son  "whose  I  am  and  whom  I  serve". 

About  a  year  ago  Mr.  McDaniel  wrote  the 
words  of  ''Since  Jesus  Came  Into  My  Heart", 
which  is  so  rapidly  becoming  the  song  of  the 
day. 


^,  M,  *$L^ 


When  Rev.  W.  A.  Sunday  left  the  Des 
Moines,  la.,  railroad  station  at  the  close  of  his 
wonderful  revival  in  that  city,  many  thousands 
of  people  gathered  to  bid  him  good-hye;  hun- 
dreds of  these  people  having  been  converted 
during  the  campaign,  they  changed  the  words 
to  "Since  Jesus  came  into  my  home",  and  the 
noise  of  commerce  was  silenced  by  the  mighty 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  SLXTY- EIGHT 


wave    of    song    that    arose    from    that    human 

throng — 

"Floods  of  joy  o'er  my  soul 

Like  the  sea  billows  roll, 

Since  Jesus  came  into  my  heart". 


Within  sight  of  the  town  where  John  Bun- 
yan,  in  the  solitude  of  his  prison  cell, 
"dreamed"  "The  Pilgrim's  Progress",  Miriam 
E.  Arnold  was  born  about  200  years  after  that 
wonderful  allegory  was  written,  of  which  it  is 
said  no  book,  except  the  bible,  has  gone 
through  as  many  editions. 


TfcuiAjfrsyyt    &    £*Wcxa-^< 


At  five  years  of  age  she,  with  her  parents, 
came  to  America,  and  settled  at  Mount  Clem- 
ens, Mich.,  where  she  yet  resides.  Her  par- 
ents were  deeply  religious,  bible  students  and 
lovers  of  the  old  church  hymns.  The  Sabbath 
meant,  to  them,  a  holy  day,  a  day  of  rest,  wor- 
ship   and    meditation,   and   when    the    evening 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS  PAGE  SIXTY-NINE 


came,  the  family  always  assembled  for  prayer, 
bible  reading  and  songs.  Christmas,  the 
Heavenly  Babe,  Mary,  the  oxen,  the  shep- 
herds, the  sleeping  flocks,  the  angel,  the  "mul- 
titude of  the  heavenly  host",  all  seemed  won* 
derfully  real  to  the  imaginative  mind  of  the 
child,  and  made  impressions  never  to  be 
erased.  She  has  read  the  bible  through  many 
times,  and  has  recited  whole  chapters  from 
memory.  Converted  at  15  years  of  age,  she 
is  a  consistent  member  of  the  M.  E.  church. 
Her  first  poem  was  published  in  1895,  and  has 
been  succeeded  by  probably  100  others,  al- 
most all  of  which  have  been  set  to  music  and 
found  their  way  into  different  song  books. 

The  works  of  some  authors  seem-  to  be 
caught  up  by  the  hand  of  peculiar  circum- 
stances and  carried  into  view  of  the  world, 
while  those  of  other  writers,  equally  as  clever 
and  commendable,  fail  to  receive,  through 
some  irreconcilable  destiny,  due  consider'ation. 
Many  an  author  has  lived,  labored,  hoped, 
wrought  and  died  without  recognition  or 
honor,  and  the  flowers  that  should  have  been 
his  in  life  are  laid  on  his  grave  to  wither  un- 
appreciated, yet  there  is  a  secret  charm,  an 
inexpressible  joy,  a  subtile  infatuation  in  the 
work  of  the  true  poet,  composer  or  litterateur 
that  disposesses  the  sting  of  withheld  comfort, 
pleasure,  riches,  honor  or  fame. 

*     *     *     *     * 

Mrs.  Ida.  M.  Budd  first  opened  her  eyes  in 
a  log  cabin,  in  Saginaw  Co.,  Michigan,  in  1859. 
When  she  was  three  years-  of  age  her  parents 
removed  to  Milford,  Mich.,  where  from  earli- 
est recollection  she  drank  deeply  of  the  nat- 
ural beauties  in  which  the  place  and  its  vicin- 
ity abounded;  made  friends  of  the  trees  and 
their  feathered  denizens;  of  the  hills,  the*  Hu- 
ron river  and  the  small  creek  which  flowed 
past  her  home  to  join  it;  traced  pictures  in 
the  drifting  clouds  and  became,  indeed,  a 
child   of  nature. 

Co-ordinate  with  her  love  of  nature,  became 
her  love  of  books.  "From  the  time  I.  had  my 
6rst  knowledge  of  an  institution  called 
school",  she  writes,  "I  felt  an  ardent  longing 
to  be  a  part  of  it".  In  her  fifth  year  she  was 
permitted  to  be  a  "visitor"  at  school,  and  dur- 
ing that  wonderful  morning,  at  that  early  age, 
the    answer    to    the    perplexing    question    con- 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  SEVENTY 


cerning-  her  life-occupation  was  charmingly  un- 
folded to  her — she  would  be  a  school  teacher. 
At  ten  years  she  began  her  studies.  At  fifteen, 
although  hampered  by  ill  health,  she  received 
her   first  teacher's   certificate. 

He/  father's  return  from  the  war  in  1865, 
bringing  with  him  his  copy  of  "The  Army 
a»nd  Navy  Hymn  Book"  awakened  her  first 
interest  in  hymn-ology  and  she  speedily  ob- 
tained mental  possession  of  such  treasures  as 
"Jesus,   Lover  of  My  Soul",  "Rock  of  Ages'", 


etc.,  singular  mental  food  for  a  child  of  six 
years,  at  which  time  she  first  attended  Sunday 
school  and  became  the  owner  of  a  song  book, 
"Happy  Yoices",  all  her  "very  own". 

As  a  child  she  scribbled  verses,  but,  as  years 
passed  she  became  familiar  with  the  master- 
pieces of  American  poets,  such  as  "Evange- 
line", "Hiawatha",  "Bitter  Sweet",  and  others, 
which    convinced    her    that    the    mystic    spirit 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR    SONGS 


PAGE  SEVENTY-ONE 


which  had  produced  them  resided,  in  some  de- 
gree,  in   her   own   being. 

Her  first  poem  was  printed  in  1881;  her  sec- 
ond in  1890,  in  the  Detroit  Free  Press  under 
a  nom  de  plume.  As  a  writer  of  verse  for 
children  she  has  few  equals,  and  no  superior, 
and  it  gives  me  pleasure  to  know  that  I  com- 
posed the  music  for  her  first  and  many  subse- 
quent poems  of  childhood,  some  of  which 
have  been   reprinted  in  foreign  lands. 

Her  best  known  hymn,  perhaps,  is  "Leaving 
All  to  Follow  Jesus".  John  G.  Whittier,  with 
his  simple,  trusting  faith  in  the  Eternal  Good- 
ness, his  all-including  charity  and  his  strong 
helpfulness,  has  furnished  much  of  the  inspi- 
ration for  her  work,  and  'since  her  first 
acquaintance  with  his  writings  he  has  been 
her  favorite  poet.  The  Youth's  Companion 
paid  her  $20.00  for  her  poem  "Resurgam'', 
printed  in  the  Easter  number  for  1904.  Her 
writings  include  a  number  of  short  stories, 
sketches,  and  miscellaneous  articles.  "These 
waifs  of  mine",  she  writes,  "have  brought  me 
many  delightful  friendships  and  a  big  account 
in  the  bank  of  happy  memories,  and  I  am 
led  thankfully  to  believe  that  they  have  also, 
in  some  instances  at  least,  been  helpful  to 
others." 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS  PAGE  SEVENTY-TWO 


CHAPTER  TEN 


In  Art,  in  Literature,  in  Music,  in  Industry, 
he  who  is  first  or  among  the  leaders  is  ever 
the  target  for  emulation  or  ot  envy.  If  some 
one's  work  arouses  scorn  or  derision  it  is  en- 
tirely safe  from  mediocrity,  since  what  is 
condemned  must  have  something  in  it  in  or- 
der to  attract  attention.  The  palm  of  great- 
ness is  always  accompanied  by  the  weed  of 
detraction  and  while  thousands  worshipped 
at  the  throne  of  Bayreuth,  the  few  whom 
Wagner  dethroned  call  him  Impostor.  "It 
cannot  be  done!"  "It  is  not  done!"  "It  will  not 
be  done!"  are  but  slogans  of  the  incompetents. 
Mediocrity  is  neither  envied  nor  emulated. 

We  should  not  attempt  either  to  condemn 
or  overwhelmingly  praise  contemporaneous 
art, — we  may  opinionate  and  possibly  judge.  All 
of  which  is  merely  to  emphasize  the  maxim, 
"The  Living  Live". 

As  everywhere  within  our  horizon  the  re- 
sults of  preeminence  are  twofold,  they  are 
germane  to  those  in  Gospel  hymnology. 
Many  of  the  hymns  contained  in  our  Church 
Hymnals,  would,  were  they  submitted  to  a 
nineteenth  century  editor,  be  thrown  in  the 
waste  basket;  likewise  many  a  gem  lies  hid- 
den between  the  covers  of  our  present-day 
song  books,  that  will  become  known  and  ap- 
preciated in  the  days  to  come. 

Miss  Julia  Harriette  Johnston  is  a  name  fa- 
miliar to  all  singers  of  Church  and  Sunday 
School  songs.  Coming  from  generations  of 
Presbyterian  ministers  on  both  sides,  with 
blood  of  the  first  Pilgrims  and  Puritans,  and 
a  potent  drop  of  Scotch-Irish  in  her  veins, 
she  has  her  pen  by  inheritance  from  her  min- 
ister-father and  poet-mother.  From  cradle- 
hood  her  ear  was  familiar  with  classic  verse 
recited,  and  uncounted  church  hymns  sung, 
from  memory. 

She  began  writing  when  but  nine  years  of 
age,  but  not  until  early  High  School  days  did 
she  really  begin  to  obey  the  impulse  to  ex- 
press herself  in  verse.  Her  first  hymn  was 
for  the  music  of  her  personal  friend,  Mrs. 
Lucy  Rider  Meyer,  being  a  child-song  en- 
titled "I  Will  Tell  Jesus".  Among  others  set 
by  this  gifted  composer  was  the  well-known 
"All   My   Class  for  Jesus". 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  SEVENTY-THREE 


Among  many  written  for  the  late  James  Mc- 
Granahan  was  "His  Mercy  Flows",  which  was 
a  great  favorite  of  Mr.  D.  L.  Moody.  "Sav- 
ing Grace",  set  by  Mr.  D.  B.  Towner,  is  an- 
other of  her  contributions  to  hymnology. 


Miss  Johnston  considers  her  hymn-writing 
peculiarly  sacred,  but,  although  she  has  quite 
five  hundred  of  them  in  print,  it  is  only  a 
part  of  her  professional  work,  which  includes 
Primary  lessons  for  two  periodicals,  Golden 
Text  Talks  for  Mothers  is  another,  with 
stories,  editorial  paragraphs  and  sketches  for 
little  and  larger  ones,  with  articles  and  poems 
scattered  widely.  She  has  a  little  volume  of 
verse,  one  of  essays  and  poems,  three  Mis- 
sionary books  and  various  other  works.  From 
very  early  girlhood  her  continuous  Sunday 
School  work  has  been  with  little  children,  be- 
ing  now   in    charge    of   a    Beginners'    Depart- 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  SEVENTY-FOUR 


nient   in  her   own   home   town   of   Peoria,   Illi- 
nois, in  which  work  she  finds  the  fullness  of 

joy. 

****** 

Another  successful  writer  of  hymns  for 
children  is  Mrs.  Edith  Sanford  Tillotson. 
Scarcely  a  song  book  or  a  Special  Day  Serv- 
ice is  issued  that  does  not  contain  one  or 
more  of  her  clever  hymns,  poems  or  recita- 
tions. She  says  of  herself,  "I  can  hardly 
imagine   a   person   about  whom  less   could   be 


(L^iMdu^ 


'written  up',  to  interest  the  people,  than  this 
same  E,  S.  Tillotson.  I  was  born  right  here 
in  Corona.  I  lived  in  the  house  where  I  was 
born  until  the  day  I  was  married.  After  that 
we  built  a  home  only  a  stone's  throw  away 
from  my  old  home,  and  here  we  are". 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR    SONGS  PAGE  SEVENTY-FIVE 


For  ten  years  she  has  been  writing  hymns, 
poems,  librettos,  and  doing  other  professional 
work  that  has  made  her  name  a  guarantee 
of    safe,    sound,    useful    and    desirable    material. 


Moses  Gage  Shirley  was  born  at  Goffstown, 
N.  H.,  May  15,  1865,  at  the  old  homestead,  un- 
der the  shadows  of  the  Uncanoonuc  moun- 
tains. 

Mr.  Shirley  is  very  proud  of  the  fact  that 
he  was  born  and  still  lives  in  the  house  that 
was  built  by  a  soldier  of  the  Revolution — 
John  Dinsmore.  Probably  it  is  the  oldest  and 
only  house  in  town  that  has  always  been 
owned  and  occupied  by  one  family.  Mr.  Shir- 
ley is  the  fourth  generation  of  his  family  to 
occupy  it. 

John  Dinsmore  was  one  of  the  first  settlers 
in  this  town.  He  gave  the  homestead  to  Mr. 
Shirley's  grandfather,  who,  in  turn  gave  it  to 
his  son,  the  father  of  the  subject  of  this 
sketch,  who  now  occupies  it. 

The  poet  is  also  proud  of  the  fact  that  he  is 
a  descendant  of  Lieutenant  William  Shirley, 
who  served  on  General  John  Stark's  staff  at 
the  battle  of  Bunker  Hill  and  throughout  the 
stormy  days  of  the  Revolution.  Like  his  il- 
lustrious ancestor  the  poems  of  Moses  Gage 
Shirley  breathe  the  spirit  of  truth,  justice  and 
righteousness,  combined  with  a  sweet  beauty 
of  rhyme  and  rhythm.  They  are  all  on  high 
moral  ground  and  appeal  to  better  living  and 
a  more  exalted  life.  He  has  published  one 
book  of  poetry.  Although  but  few  of  his 
poems  have  been  set  to  music,  yet  the  one  be- 
ginning: 

"Someday  the  sun  of  life  will  set, 

And  I  shall  fall  asleep; 
And  leaving  all  that  I  hold  dear, 

Will  find  that  silence  deep — 
That  mystery,  which,  still  unsolved, 

God  and  His  angels  know, 
(And  those  who  walk  by  crystal  streams 

Where  cooling  breezes  blow), 
Where  grief  nor  sorrow  ever  come, 

Nor  trouble's  billows  sweep; 
Someday  the  reaper  will  appear, 
And  I  shall  fall  asleep." 
will  long  attest  his  genius. 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS  PAGE  SEVENTY-SIX 


T.  O.  Chisholm  was  born  near  Franklin, 
Ky.,  in  1866.  His  boyhood  up  to  the  age  of 
twenty-one,  was  spent  on  a  farm  and  in  teach- 
ing district  schools.  He  was  for  five  years 
editor  of  the  local  paper  at  Franklin;  was  con- 
verted at  26,  and  soon  afterward  was  busi- 
ness manager  and  office  editor  of  the  "Pente- 
costal Herald"  of  Louisville,  Ky.  In  1903  he 
entered  the  ministry  of  the  M.  E.  Church, 
South. 

Prior  to  conversion  he  had  done  versify- 
ing, contributing  to  the  Louisville  Courier- 
Journal,  and  was  chosen  poet  for  the  Ken- 
tucky Press  Association.  His  first  hymns 
were  sent  to  Fanny  Crosby  for  criticism,  who 
returned  them  with  kindly  suggestions  and 
such  words  of  commendation  as  to  encourage 
him  in  the  work.  His  first  success  was  "O, 
To  Be  Like  Thee".  His  aim  in  writing  is  to 
magnify  the  Word,  incorporating  as  much 
Scripture,  either  literally  or  in  paraphrase,  as 
possible,  and  to  avoid  any  flippant  or  senti- 
mental themes,  choosing  subjects  from  the 
inexhaustible  storehouse  of  the  Bible. 

"Having  been  led,  for  a  part  of  my  life'',  he 
tells  us,  "through  some  difficult  paths,  I  have 
sought  to  gather  from  such  experiences  ma- 
terial out  of  which  to  write  hymns  of  com- 
fort and  cheer  for  those  similarly  circum- 
stanced". 


Rev.  Alfred  Barratt  is  a  writer  better 
known  in  England  than  in  our  country,  al- 
though his  hymns  are  becoming  familiar  in 
New  England  and  finding  their  way  west- 
ward. Born  in  New  Springs,  Wigan,  Lan- 
cashire, England,  October  25th,  1879,  of  de- 
vout Christian  parents,  he  began  preaching  as 
an  Evangelist  at  18  years  of  age,  and  soon 
after  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  of  the 
Baptist  denomination. 

He  began  writing  verses  at  the  age  of  22, 
which  were  published  in  local  papers.  His 
first  hymn,  "Sing  for  Jesus",  has  become  a  fa- 
vorite in  many  parts  of  England.  He  is  the 
author  of  over  600  hymns,  each  breathing  a 
cheerful,  optimistic  spirit;  among  them, 
"Shining  for  Jesus",  with  music  by  J.  A. 
Meale,  has  penetrated  almost  every  corner  of 
England. 

At   present  he   is  pastor   of  an   appreciative 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  SEVENTY-SEVEN 


congregation  in  Boston,  Mass.,  whose  mem- 
bers say  that  he  is  an  able  preacher  and  de- 
voted   pastor.      His   whole    life    is    consecrated 


M^rtAJi^rrcJC. 


to  the  service  of  the  Master — hymn-writing, 
preaching  and  pastoral  work  all  done  for  His 
glory. 

****** 

The  thousands  of  singers  who  have  sung 
"Just  One  Touch"  or  "Jesus  Understands", 
will  be  glad  to  see  the  portrait  of  the  writer 
— C.    Louise    Bell. 

Her  first  hymn,  "Come  To  Me",  was  writ- 
ten when  she  was  but  sixteen  years  of  age. 
She  is  the  author  of  more  than  500  hymns,  200 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  SEVENTY- EIGHT 


religious  poems,  and  200  Christmas  and  Eas- 
ter lyrics,  beside  numerous  short  stories, 
sketches  and  other  prose  articles  contributed 
to  various  literary  publications. 


She  writes  under  the  name  of  "Birdie  Bell" 
which  is  not,  strictly,  a  hom  de  plume,  but  a 
name  used  in  the  family,  and  endeared  by  as- 
sociations. She  was  born,  raised  and  lives  in 
New  York  City. 

****** 

When  the  religious  world  began  singing, 
"Are  you  washed  in  the  blood?"  the  name  of 
the  Rev.  E.  A.  Hoffman  came  into  promi- 
nence- when,  later,  "What  a  wonderful  Sav- 
iour" sang  its  way  into  the  Church  that  name 
became  a  synonym  of  success. 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR    SONGS  PAGE  SEVENTY-NINE 


Mr.  Hoffman  was  born  in  Orwigsburg,  Pa., 
in  1839.  His  father  was  a  minister  of  the  gos- 
pel in  the  Evangelical  Association;  both  his 
parents  were  musical,  and  it  was  not  an  un- 
common occurrence  for  the  family  to  spend 
from  half  an  hour  to  an  hour,  after  the  morn- 
ing devotions,  in  the  singing  of  hymns  and 
songs. 

Very  interesting  is  the  following  incident, 
quoted  from  a  personal  letter  recently  re- 
ceived from  him: 

While  I  was  pastor  at  Lebanon,  Pa.,  I 
called  one  day  at  the  home  of  a  parishioner 
and  found  the  lady  in  great  distress  and  sor- 
row. Wringing  her  hands,  she  cried:  "What 
shall  I  do — what  shall  I  do?"  I  replied  "You 
cannot  do  better  than  to  take  it  all  to  Jesus — 
you  must  tell  Jesus."  For  a  moment  she 
seemed  abstracted  in  meditation,  then  her 
face  glowed,  her  eyes  lighted  up,  and  with 
animation  she  exclaimed:  "Yes,  I  must  tell 
Jesus,  I  must  tell  Jesus!" 

As  I  went  from  that  sorrow-filled  home  a 
vision  walked  before  me,  a  vision  of  a  joy-il- 
lumined face,  of  a  soul  transformed  from 
darkness  into  light,  and  I  heard  all  along  my 
pathway  the  echo  of  a  tender  voice  saying,  "I 
must  tell  Jesus!" 

Immediately  on  reaching  his  study  Mr. 
Hoffman  wrote  both  the  words  and  music  of 
that  splendid  song,  "I  Must  Tell  Jesus",  which 
is  destined  to  be  one  among  the  few  songs  of 
our  day  that  will  be  handed  down  from  age  to 
age.  More  than  two  thousand  of  Mr.  Hoff- 
man's hymns  are  in  print,  and  he  is  still  busy 
with  his  pen. 


John  R\  Clements  was  born  in  County  Ar- 
magh, Ireland,  November  28,  1868,  and  was 
brought  to  the  United  States  at  the  age  of  two 
years. 

He  lived  in  the  country  until  he  was  seven- 
teen years  old,  and  got  his  education  in  the 
country  school. 

He  began  commercial  life  at  the  age  of 
thirteen,  as  a  retail  grocery  clerk,  and  has 
since  been  successful  in  the  wholesale  grocery 
business. 

Mr.  Clements  began  writing  verse  when 
quite  young,  but  he  says  Christian  Endeavor 
put  the   devotional   touch  to  his  pen. 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR   SONGS 


PAGE  EIGHTY 


Among  his  well  known  hymns  are  "Jesus 
Leads",  "No  Night  There",  "Lord,  Is  It  I"  and 
others,  but  the  most  famous  of  his  songs  is 
"Somebody  Did  a  Golden  Deed",  which  was 
set  to  music  by  the  late  W.  S.  Werden. 


Wherever  Christian  Endeavorers  meet  the 
song  is  heard,  and  it  is  also  in  general  favor 
with   the  public. 

The  first  stanza  was  not  written  by  Mr. 
Clements,  but  is  part  of  an  anonymous  poem 
he  discovered,  arranged,  and  to  which  he 
added  four  other  original  stanzas,  the  last  of 
which  is  prophetic: 

"Somebody  filled  the  day  with  light, 
Constantly  chased  away  the  night; 
Somebody's  work  bore  joy  and  peace, 
Surely  his  life  shall  never  cease — 
Was  that  somebody  you?" 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS 


PAGE  EIGHTY-ONE 


Since  the  first  chapter  of  this  series   of  bi-  - 
ographies  was  written    the  world  has  lost  the 
one  who  so  sweetly  sang: 

"Some  day  the  silver  cord  will  break, 
And  I  no  more,  as  now,  shall  sing; 

But  this  I  know,  when  I  awake 
Within  the  palace  of  the  King, 

That  I  shall  see  Him,  face  to  face, 
And  tell  the  story — saved  by  grace!" 

That  day  has  come  and  gone,  and  Fanny 
Crosby  is  in  the  presence  of  the  King. 

The  Christian  world,  with  uncovered  head, 
has  stood  around  her  grave  and  dropped  the 
ilower  of  love  upon  her  coffin  lid. 

No  longer  does  she  require  the  services  of 
an  amanuensis;  no  more  a  hand  to  lead  her; 
her  blinded  eyes  are  opened,  and  with  sight 
made  perfect  she  has  looked  upon  the  face 
of  Him  she  loved  and  served  so  faithfully. 

Born  in  Putnam  Co.,  N.  Y.,  March  24,  1820, 
she  died  in  Bridgeport,  Conn.,  Feb.  12th,  1915. 

Words  cannot  do  justice  to  her  memory. 
She  lived,  loved,  labored,  died — but  she  is  not 
dead!  Coming  generations  will  learn  to  know 
and  love  her — the  author  of  more  than  eight 
thousand  hymns. 

Reverently,    silently,    sorrowfully,    we    look 
upon  that  new-made  grave,  and  whisper: 
''Safe  in  the  arms  of  Jesus." 

Perhaps  before  this  last  chapter  shall  have 
been  printed,  the  Great  Reaper  may  bind  with 
his  sheaves  others  whose  names  I  have  men- 
tioned. Job  says  of  man — "He  cometh  forth 
like  a  flower,  and  is  cut  down;  he  fleeth  also 
as  a  shadow,  and  continueth  not." 

Happy  should  be  the  man  whose  name  shall 
live  in  the  hearts  of  the  people!  Not  because 
of  great  wealth  accumulated;  not  because  of 
having  held  a  high  position  in  politics  or  busi- 
ness; not  because  of  having  led  mighty  armies 
to  victory,  or  having  invented  machines  for 
the  destruction  of  mankind,  but  because  of 
some  word  of  hope  or  comfort  he  may  have 
left  behind  him  to  cheer  those  who  shall  come 
after  him — that  he  may  be  as  one  of  whom  the 
poet  has  written 

"Lives  of  great  men  all  remind  us 
We  can  make  our  lives  sublime, 

And,   departing,  leave  behind  us 
Footprints  on  the  sands  of  time." 


/    - 


THE  SINGERS  AND  THEIR  SONGS  PAGE  EIGTHY-TWO 


J.  H.  SAMMIS 

Sketch  of  Mr.  Sammis  appears  on  page  22 


3  1197  203 


Date  Due 

All  library  items  are  subject  to 


recall  at  any  time. 


