Class  J2-Sil^ 
Book 


\^ 


Copyright  N^. 


COPXRIGHT  DEPOSrr. 


THE  IMPORTANCE  AND  VALUE 
OF  PROPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

R.  A.  TORREY 


I 


THE  IMPORTANCE  AND 

VALUE  OF  PROPER 

BIBLE  STUDY 

How  Properly  to  Study 
and  Interpret  the  Bible 

BY 

R.  A.  TORREY 

DEAN   OF  BIBLE   INSTITUTE,    LOS    ANGELES 

Author  of  "The  Real  Christ"  "The  Fundamental 

Doctrines  of  the  Christian  Faith"  "What  the 

Bible   Teaches"  "How  to   Work  for 

Christ"  etc. 


NEW  Xar^  YORK 
GEORGE  H.  DORAN  COMPANY 


Copyright,  ig2l, 
By  George  H.  Damn  Company 


0CT2i  m\ 

\ 

Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America 
0)CI.A624868 


INTRODUCTION 

There  is  a  great  and  constantly  growing  interest 
in  the  study  of  the  English  Bible  in  these  days. 
But  very  much  of  the  so-called  study  of  the  Eng- 
lish Bible  is  unintelligent  and  not  fitted  to  produce 
the  most  satisfactory  results.  The  author  of  this 
book  already  has  a  book  entitled  ^^How  to  Study 
the  Bible  for  Greatest  Profit,''  but  that  book  is 
intended  for  those  who  have  much  time  to  put 
into  thorough  Bible  study. 

The  present  book  is  intended,  first  of  all,  to 
impress  men  with  the  Importance  and  Value  of 
Bible  Study;  secondly,  to  show  busy  men  and 
women  how  to  get  the  most  out  of  their  Bible 
Study ;  thirdly,  to  set  forth  the  fundamental  prin- 
ciples of  correct  Biblical  Interpretation. 

The  book  really  consists  of  four  sermons  deliv- 
ered to  the  members  of  my  own  church  and  con- 
gregation in  Los  Angeles.  There  were  not  a  few 
children  in  the  congregation,  but  they  were  all 
interested,  long  as  the  sermons  were,  and  seemed 
to  grasp  the  main  points  of  the  sermons.  So  I  am 
confident  the  book  will  be  helpful  even  to  those 
who  have  but  little  education.  Some  in  the  con- 
gregation who  are  themselves  in  educational  work, 
both  secular  and  religious,  have  expressed  their 


vi  INTEODUCTION 

appreciation    of    the    help    received    from    the 
sermons. 

If  one  desires  to  go  into  the  subject  more  thor- 
oughly it  is  suggested  that  he  secure  the  author's 
book  already  mentioned,  ^^How  to  Study  the  Bible 
for  Greatest  Profit."  This  book  will  probably  be 
followed  soon  by  one  upon  the  most  fruitful 
methods  of  thorough  Bible  Study. 

E.  A.  TOEEEY. 


CONTENTS 

CHAPTKB  PAGE 

I     The  Importance  and  Value  of  Bible  Study    .       11 
II     How  Properly  to  Study  the  Bible     ....       28 

III  How  TO  Interpret  the  Bible  so  as  to  Find  Its 

True  Meaning 55 

IV  The  Seven  Great  Promises  op  God  for  the  Bible 

Student  and  Soul- Winner 91 


Vll 


THE  IMPORTANCE  AND  VALUE 
OF  PROPER  BIBLE  STUDY 


THE  IMPORTANCE  AND  VALUE 
OF  PROPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

CHAPTER  I 

THE  IMPOETANCE  AND  VALUE  OF  BIBLE  STUDY 

"Blessed  is  the  man  that  walketh  not  in  the  counsel  of  the  un- 
godly, nor  standeth  in  the  way  of  sinners,  nor  sitteth  in  the  seat 
of  the  scornful.  But  his  delight  is  in  the  law  of  the  Lord;  and  in 
His  law  doth  he  meditate  day  and  night.  And  he  shall  be  like  a 
tree  planted  by  the  rivers  of  water,  that  bringeth  forth  his  fruit 
in  his  season;  his  leaf  also  shall  not  wither;  and  whatsoever  he 
doeth  shall  prosper." — Psalm  1:1-3. 

Our  subject  this  morning  is  '^Tlie  Importance 
and  Value  of  Bible  Study, ^'  You  will  find  the  text 
in  Psalm  l;l-3 — ^'Blessed  is  the  man  that  walketh 
not  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly y  nor  standeth 
in  the  way  of  sinners,  nor  sitteth  in  the  seat  of  the 
scornful.  But  his  delight  is  in  the  law  of  the 
Lord;  and  in  his  law  doth  he  meditate  day  and 
night.  And  he  shall  he  like  a  tree  planted  by  the 
rivers  of  water,  that  bringeth  forth  his  fruit  in 
his  season;  his  leaf  also  shall  not  wither;  and 
whatsoever  he  doeth  shall  prosper." 

There  has,  perhaps,  never  been  an  age  that  set 
such  great  store  by  study  as  that  in  which  we  now 
live.     The  unfortunate  thing  about  it  is  that  so 

11 


12     VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

much  of  the  study  in  our  day,  both  by  children  and 
adults,  is  devoted  to  books  and  subjects  in  which 
there  is  little  or  no  profit.!  A  large  portion  of 
every  year  in  our  schools  and  colleges  is  practi- 
cally wasted.  Time  is  squandered  upon  the  purely 
speculative,  the  uncertain,  the  unprofitable,  the 
unessential,  the  unproductive,  the  irrelevant  and 
the  transitory.  Many  practical  business  men  think 
that  the  sooner  the  boy  or  girl  who  is  just  out  of 
school  or  college  forgets  half  of  what  they  imagine 
they  have  learned,  the  better.  The  most  profitable 
of  all  study  is  wisely  ordered  Bible  study.  Its 
value  is  incalculable.  It  is  beyond  all  comparison 
more  profitable  than  any  other  study.  It  is  the 
one  superlatively  profitable  study. 

Possibly  some  of  you  may  be  disposed  to  ques- 
tion that  statement ;  so  I  will  give  you  two  reasons 
why  Bible  study  is  the  one  superlatively  profitable 
study,  why  Bible  study  towers  far  above  all  other 
studies  in  importance  and  value. 

7.    Because  of  What  the  Bible  Is 

First  of  all,  Bible  study  towers  far  above  all 
other  studies  in  importance  and  value  because  of 
what  the  Bible  itself  is, 

1.  In  the  first  place,  the  Bible  is  the  peerless 
masterpiece  of  clear,  pure,  chaste,  forceful,  beau- 
tiful, exalted  English.  Nothing  can  match  it  in 
purity,  smoothness,  clearness,  force,  and  sublimity 
of  expression.    That  admits  of  no  question.    AU 


VALUE  OF  BIBLE  STUDY  13 

intelligent,  well-read  and  candid  infidels  acknowl- 
edge that.  Prof.  Phelps,  at  the  head  of  the  Eng- 
lish Department  at  Yale,  contended  some  years 
ago  that  candidates  for  admission  to  American 
Universities  should  have  their  qualification  for 
admission,  as  far  as  their  knowledge  of  English 
was  concerned,  tested  by  one  book  alone,  the  Bible. 
And  Harvard  University  has  announced  in  the 
past  few  weeks  that  hereafter  every  student  be- 
fore graduation  must  pass  an  examination  in  the 
English  Bible.  Because  of  Harvard's  well-known 
theological  position  and  also  from  the  fact  that 
they  seem  to  emphasize  the  Eevised  Version,  it  is 
evident  that  they  have  in  view  principally  the  fact 
that  the  Bible  is  the  great  English  master-piece. 
Last  Tuesday  I  received  from  G.  P.  Putnam's 
Sons  of  New  York  and  London,  a  book  for  exami- 
nation— a  dictionary  of  6,000  choice  and  effective 
phrases.  In  this  book  (just  published),  time  and 
again,  page  after  page,  every  phrase  was  taken 
from  the  Bible,  without  variation  or  addition. 
Here  and  there  were  scattered  phrases  taken  from 
Shakespeare,  but  on  subject  after  subject  whole 
pages  of  telling  phrases  were  consecutively  taken 
from  the  Bible.  Why?  Because  this  book  of 
phrases  was  prepared  by  a  master  hand  at  Eng- 
lish diction  and  he  knew  where  to  find  the  most 
illuminating  and  most  telling  phrases.  Every 
man  and  woman  should  saturate  themselves  with 
the  very  words  of  the  Bible  if  for  no  other  reason 
than  to  clarify,  tone  up  and  invigorate  their  Eng- 


14    VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

lish  diction.  When  Henry  Stanley,  the  great  news- 
paper writer,  made  his  second  tour  of  exploration 
into  the  heart  of  Africa,  he  took  only  one  book 
with  him,  the  Bible.  In  its  study  he  beguiled  and 
improved  many  lonely  hours,  and  when  he 
emerged,  after  having  been  shut  up  with  one  book 
for  so  many  years,  it  was  noticed  that  Henry 
Stanley  had  acquired  by  absorption  an  entirely 
new  English  style,  a  far  more  forceful  style,  Bible 
English.  It  is  said  that  a  newspaper  report  of  a 
paragraph  from  one  of  Mr.  Moody's  sermons  was 
handed  to  Max  Miiller,  the  great  philologist,  and 
he  was  asked  what  he  thought  of  it.  He  asked, 
*^Who  wrote  thatT'  And  the  reply  was  made, 
**D.  L.  Moody."  ^^I  do  not  wonder  then  at  his 
power,''  Max  Miiller  exclaimed.  ^^That  is  one 
of  the  finest  pieces  of  clear,  strong,  pure  Anglo- 
Saxon  I  have  ever  read."  But  where  had  Mr. 
Moody  learned  this  vigorous  English!  From  the 
only  book  he  thoroughly  knew  and  daily  devoured, 
the  Bible. 

2.  In  the  second  place,  the  Bible  is  the  book 
that  presents  to  us  the  most  profound,  the  most 
coherent  J  the  most  consistent ,  the  most  comprehen- 
sive, the  most  complete,  the  most  perfectly  bal- 
anced, the  most  certain,  the  loftiest  and  the  most 
enduring  system  of  philosophy  ever  discovered, 
I  say  ^^ discovered"  instead  of  ^'devised"  ad- 
visedly; for  man  could  never  have  devised  the 
philosophy  found  in  this  book;  man  simply  dis- 
covered the  philosophy  which  God  had  revealed 


VALUE  OF  BIBLE  STUDY  15 

in  the  Book.  Time  and  again  through  the  cen- 
turies men  grown  wise  in  their  own  conceit,  and 
having  only  a  ludicrously  fragmentary  knowledge 
of  the  Book  upon  which  they  ventured  to  sit  in 
judgment,  have  assayed  to  ridicule  the  Bible's 
philosophy  regarding  God  and  man  and  redemp- 
tion and  duty  and  eternity.  But  always  in  the 
ultimate  outcome  the  philosophy  of  the  would-be 
critics  has  dissolved  and  disappeared,  but  the 
philosophy  of  the  Bible  has  withstood  unscathed 
the  storms  of  centuries.  Philosophies,  empires, 
schools  of  thought  have  passed  away,  but  the 
words  of  this  Book  have  not  passed  away.  (Matt. 
24;35.)  The  philosophy  of  this  Book  has  proven 
imperishable,  and  as  good  for  1921  A.  D.  as  for 
95  A.  D.  In  view  of  this  undeniable  fact  is  it 
not  evident  that  this  is  the  most  important  and 
invaluable  of  all  books  to  study?  Do  not  waste 
your  time  studying  the  soap  bubbles  of  man's 
iridescent  speculation  that  may  be  beautiful  but 
soon  burst  and  leave  nothing  but  a  nasty,  dank, 
greasy  feeling  behind,  but  study  the  Eternal  Kock 
of  this  Book  that  is  rich  with  real  gold. 

3.  In  the  third  place,  the  Bible  is  the  book  that 
offers  to  us  the  purest,  loftiest,  most  complete 
and  absolutely  dependable  syst&in  of  ethics  ever 
known.  Systems  of  moral  philosophy  have  ap- 
peared throughout  the  centuries  and  chiliads, 
from  Zeno  to  Herbert  Spencer,  only  to  disappear, 
but  all  really  honest  seekers  after  thorough-going 
and  complete  righteousness,  bow  to  the  imperish- 


16     VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

able  durability  of  the  ethics  of  the  Bible.  And 
even  those  who  clamor  hysterically  for  us  to  give 
up  the  Virgin  Birth  of  our  Lord,  the  resurrection 
of  His  very  body  from  the  dead  and  all  the  mira- 
cles, the  Deity  of  our  Lord,  His  atoning,  substi- 
tutionary death,  and  others  of  the  most  distinctive 
of  the  doctrinal  teachings  of  the  Book,  neverthe- 
less themselves  cry  **Let  us  keep  the  ethics  of 
the  Bible.  They  are  not  only  unsurpassed  but  ab- 
solutely unequaled."  The  most  important  thing 
to  know  is,  how  to  live;  not  how  to  live  physi- 
cally, but  how  to  live  morally.  If  that  is  so  then 
the  most  important  book  for  all  of  us  to  know  is 
the  book  that  tells  us  that  as  no  other  book  tells 
us. 

4.  In  the  fourth  place,  the  Bible  is  the  one  and 
only  book  that  has  never  been  outgrown  or  super- 
seded. I  had  occasion  last  summer,  in  breaking 
up  our  home  in  Montrose,  Pa.,  to  go  over  some  of 
the  books  I  studied,  yes,  dug  into  with  many  hard 
hours  of  intellectual  toil,  at  preparatory  school 
and  at  Yale.  There  was  not  one  of  them  of  any 
present  value  to  my  children  or  grandchildren. 
They  had  all  been  outgrown  or  superseded ;  other 
books  have  taken  their  place.  But  this  Book  has 
not  been  superseded.  No  University  professor  on 
earth  can  suggest  some  other  book  to  take  the 
place  of  this  Book.  Some  venture  to  say  **We 
need  a  new  Bible,"  but  where  is  itf  Why  do  not 
they  bring  it  out?  When  an  especially  callow  and, 
therefore  daring  member  of  this  crew  does  at- 


VALUE  OF  BIBLE  STUDY  17 

tempt  a  new  Bible  it  is  only  **a  shorter  Bible*'; 
that  is,  the  old  Bible  with  parts  left  out  that  made 
him  uneasy  in  his  sin,  or  his  self-righteousness 
and  self-sufficiency.  No!  No!  no!  Any  one  who 
has  a  modicum  of  real,  healthy  common  sense 
knows  that  you  cannot  outgrow  or  supersede  the 
Bible.  And  we  can  safely  leave  those  who  want 
to  get  out  ^^a  new  Bible '*  to  sit  and  twiddle  their 
thumbs  along  with  the  other  lunatics  who  are 
working  on  a  *' perpetual  motion"  machine.  This 
all  being  true,  and  eighteen  centuries  of  unvary- 
ing history  of  human  thought  demonstrate  that  it 
is  true,  can  there  possibly  be  any  other  study  so 
important  and  so  permanently  profitable  as  the 
study  of  this,  the  one  and  only  Imperishable 
Booh? 

5.  Once  more,  the  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God, 
That  needs  no  demonstration.  Some  of  the  things 
I  have  already  said  this  morning  prove  it,  if  yon 
will  only  think  them  through.  And  I  have  proven 
it  again  and  again  from  this  platform.  Other 
books  tell  us  what  men  suppose;  the  Bible  tells 
us  what  God  knows.  Other  books  tell  us  what 
other  men,  almost  as  foolish  as  ourselves,  specu- 
late; this  Book  tells  us  what  an  infinitely  wise 
God,  Who  made  us  and  all  things,  and  conse- 
quently knows  all  things,  has  inerrantly  revealed. 
If  you  had  two  books  on  the  subject,  one  by  the 
one  master  thinker  on  that  subject,  the  other  by 
a  third-rate  tutor  in  a  fourth-rate  college,  which 
would  you  study  most?    And  will  you  study  most 


18    VALUE  OF  PROPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

the  Book  of  God,  the  Book  of  the  infinitely  "wise, 
omniscient  God,  or  the  book  of  some  little  6x9 
human  brain — ^that  is  larger  than  any  hmnan 
brain  as  compared  with  the  infinite  capacity  of  the 
mind  of  the  great  Jehovah,  the  Eternal  I  AM. 

II.    Because  of  What  the  Bible  Does 

Bible  study  towers  above  all  other  studies  in 
importance  and  value  not  only  because  of  what 
the  Bible  itself  is,  but  also  because  of  what  the 
Bible  does. 

On  this  I  cannot  dwell  as  I  would  like.  The 
full  exposition  of  this  line  of  thought  would  afford 
more  than  enough  material  for  a  whole  sermon 
by  itself.  Let  me  select  a  few  of  the  more  vital 
points. 

1.  First  of  all,  the  Bible  properly  studied 
makes  men  wise  unto  salvation.  The  great  master 
apostle,  Paul,  writing  to  a  zealous  young  bishop, 
his  convert  and  most  trusted  coadjutator,  says  in 
2  Tim.  3 :13-15 :  **But  evil  men  and  impostors  shall 
wax  worse  and  worse,  deceiving,  and  being  de- 
ceived. But  continue  thou  in  the  things  which 
thou  hast  learned  and  hast  been  assured  of,  know- 
ing of  whom  thou  hast  learned  them;  and  that 
from  a  child  thou  hast  known  the  holy  scriptures, 
which  are  able  to  make  thee  wise  unto  salvation 
through  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus. ' '  This  is 
tremendous  endorsement  of  the  superlative  im- 
portance of  Bible  study,  and  every  word  of  it  is 


VALUE  OF  BIBLE  STUDY  19 

true.  This  Book  does  make  men  wise  with  the 
wisdom  that  is  golden,  the  wisdom  that  brings 
eternal  salvation.  No  other  book  in  all  literature 
does  it  with  the  certainty  and  celerity  and  com- 
pleteness with  which  this  Book  does  it.  No  one 
can  study  this  Book  aright,  no  matter  how  ig- 
norant he  may  otherwise  be,  without  becom- 
ing possessed  of  that  priceless  wisdom  that 
means  eternal  life.  Eternal  life  is  found  in  know- 
ing God  and  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ  (John  17:3). 
And  no  other  book  has  the  power  to  make  us 
acquainted  with  God  and  with  His  Son,  Jesus 
Christ,  that  this  Book  has. '  I  have  known  great 
philosophers  and  great  men  of  science  and  great 
literary  luminaries,  who  did  not  know  God,  just 
because  they  had  not  studied  and,  therefore,  did 
not  know  their  Bibles.  They  knew  rocks  and 
flowers  and  the  entrails  of  frogs,  and  the  planets 
and  the  comets  and  the  stars,  and  men's  books, 
but  they  did  not  know  the  one  Book  and,  there- 
fore, they  did  not  know  the  God  who  made  the 
rocks  and  the  flowers  and  the  stars;  and,  there- 
fore, they  were  lost,  eternally  lost,  for  all  their 
knowledge  of  other  things.  On  the  other  hand, 
I  have  known  uncultured  people,  almost  illiterate 
people,  washerwomen  and  such  like,  for  example, 
who  had  studied  and,  therefore,  did  know  the 
Bible,  and,  therefore,  they  knew  more  of  the  wis- 
dom that  really  counts,  the  wisdom  that  spells 
salvation,  in  five  minutes,  than  these  learned  pro- 
fessors knew  in  their  whole  lifetime.    Oh,  study 


20    VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

the  Book  that  brings  eternal  life,  make  it  in  your 
own  experience  '*the  implanted  word,  which  is 
able  to  save  your  souls''  (James  1:21  E.  V.). 

2.  In  the  second  place,  the  Bible  so  makes 
known  Jesus  Christ  as  to  lead  any  one  who  studies 
it  OtS  he  ought,  to  believe  vn  Jesus  as  the  Christ, 
the  Son  of  God  and  so  to  obtain  eternal  life  m 
His  name.  That  is  what  John  himself  says  in 
John  20:31  E.  V.  His  words  are:  ** These  are 
written,  that  ye  may  believe  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God;  and  that  believing  ye  may 
have  life  in  His  name."  Is  there  anything  else  in 
all  the  world  so  valuable  as  eternal  life?  Is  there 
any  other  study  for  one  moment  comparable  in 
importance  and  value  to  the  study  that  brings  us 
eternal  life?  In  former  years  I  had  hay  fever 
severely.  Every  September  for  three  weeks  or 
more  I  could  not  lie  down  to  sleep,  or  even  stay 
in  the  house  at  night.  I  would  go  off  by  myself 
every  night  where  I  would  not  disturb  any  one 
else,  and  all  the  night  through  would  almost  rup- 
ture blood  vessels  by  spasms  of  coughing.  I  saw 
advertised  a  book  on  hay  fever,  so  I  bought  it  and 
studied  it  with  great  care,  and  obtained  great  re- 
lief. Was  not  that  profitable  study?  But  what 
is  getting  deliverance  from  some  such  wretched 
complaint  as  hay  fever,  to  getting  eternal  life,  and 
the  proper  study  of  this  Book  brings  eternal  life. 
No  man  can  study  even  one  book  in  the  Bible,  the 
Gospel  of  John,  in  the  way  he  ought  to  study  it, 
without  believing  before  he  gets  through  **that 


VALUE  OF  BIBLE  STUDY  21 

Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  and  by  **  be- 
lieving,'' obtaining  ** eternal  life  in  His  name." 
I  have  proven  that  time  and  time  again  upon  all 
classes  of  men,  from  bartenders  to  a  College  Dean 
in  one  prominent  British  University  and  a  very 
distinguished  professor  in  another. 

3.  In  the  third  place,  the  Bible  imparts  God's 
own  nature  to  the  men,  women  and  children  who 
study  it  as  they  should,  and  thus  completely 
transforms  their  inmost  and  their  outward  life. 
Peter  puts  it  this  way:  *  through  these  (i.  e., 
through  the  exceeding  great  and  precious  prom- 
ises of  the  Book),  ye  may  become  partakers  of 
the  divine  nature''  (2  Pet.  1:4,  R.  V.).  Is  not  that 
great,  to  become  a  partaker  of  God's  own  nature? 
Well,  it  is  through  the  proper  study  of  this  Book, 
by  the  truth  of  this  Book  carried  home  to  our 
hearts  by  the  Holy  Spirit  as  we  study  it,  that  we 
become  partakers  of  God's  own  nature.  Centuries 
of  experience  prove  the  truth  of  this  wonderful  as- 
sertion of  Peter.  Countless  men  and  women  of  the 
most  depraved  nature  have  obtained  an  entirely 
new  nature,  God 's  own  nature  implanted  in  them, 
by  the  proper  study  of  this  Book.  I  have  been 
told  that  if  you  study  Mrs.  Mary  Baker  Eddy's 
*' Science  and  Health"  sedulously  enough  it  will 
cure  you  of  appendicitis.  Well,  study  this  Book 
as  you  ought  and  it  will  cure  you  of  Devilitis. 
I  have  found  it  so  in  my  own  experience.  If  any 
man  ever  had  the  devils,  I  had  them.     Neither 


22    VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

Mrs.  Eddy  nor  Christian  Science  cured  me,  but 
this  Book  did.    Try  it  for  yourself. 

4.  In  the  fourth  place,  this  Book  when  properly 
studied,  makes  the  one  who  studies  it  ^'grow  like 
the  palm  tree"  in  all  the  graces  and  glories  of 
Christian  character,  **  Desire  the  sincere  milk  of 
the  Word/'  says  Peter,  **that  ye  may  grow 
thereby.''  (1  Pet.  2:2.)  Various  neighbors  of 
mine  in  South  Pasadena  have  built  homes  since  I 
located  there  and  have  set  out  various  kinds  of 
palm  trees.  It  is  simply  amazing  how  they  have 
grown.  Ah,  but  that  is  nothing  to  the  way  men, 
women  and  children  grow  spiritually  and  morally 
when  they  feed  as  they  ought  on  ''the  Bread  of 
Heaven''  and  '*the  milk"  of  Eden  and  **the  finest 
of  the  wheat"  in  the  Garden  of  God  and  **the 
honey  out  of  the  (Eternal)  Eock,"  found  in  this 
Book.  Oh,  sometimes  I  almost  grow  weary  when 
people  come  sighing  about  me  from  the  Atlantic 
to  the  Pacific,  and  from  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  to  the 
border  of  Canada  and  beyond,  blubbering  over 
their  poor  progress  in  the  Christian  life,  and 
wondering  why  they  do  not  make  more  headway. 
And  when  I  ask,  *^Do  you  meditate  in  God's  Word 
day  and  night?  Do  you  really  dig  into  the  Bible 
every  day  ? "  *  *  Oh,  no,  not  every  day, ' '  they  reply, 
**I  am  very  busy.  I  am  a  very  hard  working 
man,"  or  *^I  am  a  very  active  business  man  with 
many  other  men  under  me,"  or  ^ 'I  am  a  very 
busy  mother,  and  I  cannot  find  time  to  get 
down  to  solid  Bible  study  every  day."    **Do  yon 


VALUE  OF  BIBLE  STUDY  23 

read  the  newspaper  every  day?*^  **Y-e-s,  morn- 
ing and  evening. ' '  And  no  time  to  get  alone  each 
day  and  listen  to  God?   Thou  fool! 

5.  In  the  fifth  place,  the  Bible  properly  studied, 
makes  the  heart  pure  and  keeps  the  life  white. 
*  ^  Wherewithal  shall  a  young  man  cleanse  his 
way?'*  the  Psalmist  asks,  and  then  replies,  *'By 
taking  heed  thereto  according  to  thy  word.''  (Ps. 
119:9.)  There  is  a  power  in  this  Book,  when  it 
is  properly  studied,  to  make  and  keep  the  life 
clean  that  no  other  book  possesses.  And  there  is 
also  in  this  Book,  when  properly  studied,  a  power 
that  no  other  book  possesses,  to  make  and  keep 
the  heart  pure.  The  Psalmist  says  again  two 
verses  farther  down,  in  Psalm  119:11,  *'Thy  word 
have  I  laid  up  in  my  heart,  that  I  might  not  sin 
against  thee.''  Oh,  how  many  stained  lives  I 
have  seen  bleached  white  by  the  power  of  the  sun- 
rays  of  this  Book.  How  many  hearts  I  have  known 
that  were  **full  of  all  uncleanness"  to  be  made 
pure  and  clean  by  filling  them  with  the  truth  found 
in  this  Book. 

6.  In  the  sixth  place,  the  Bible,  properly 
studied,  brings  peace,  wonderful  peace,  to  the 
troubled  heart.  The  Psalmist  says  in  Ps.  85:8, 
E.  v.,  "I  will  hear  what  God  Jehovah  will  speak; 
for  He  will  speak  peace  unto  his  people,  and  to  his 
saints."  The  one  who  learns  to  sit  and  listen  to 
God  as  He  speaks  to  him  in  this  Book  will  hear 
Him  speaking  words  that  will  fill  the  heart  with 
peace,  no  matter  how  storms  may  rage  without 


24     VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

and  no  matter  how  war  howls  and  bellows.  Listen- 
ing to  God's  Word,  David  sang  in  the  midst  of  the 
wildest  conflicts,  **  Jehovah  is  my  light  and  my 
salvation;  whom  shall  I  fear?  Jehovah  is  the 
strength  of  my  life;  of  whom  shall  I  be  afraid? 
When  evil-doers  came  npon  me  to  eat  up  my  flesh, 
even  mine  adversaries  and  my  foes,  they  stumbled 
and  fell.  Though  a  host  should  encamp  against 
me,  my  heart  shall  not  fear:  though  war  should 
rise  against  me,  even  then  will  I  be  confident/' 
(Ps.  27:1-3,  E.  V.)  And  our  Lord  Jesus,  in  the 
most  awful  night  the  disciples  ever  passed 
through,  just  before  the  wild  storm-clouds  broke, 
said  to  them,  in  speaking  of  the  peace-giving 
power  of  His  words,  ^  *  But  the  Comforter,  even  the 
Holy  Spirit,  whom  the  Father  will  send  in  my 
name,  he  shall  teach  you  all  things,  and  bring  to 
your  remembrance  all  that  I  said  unto  you.  Peace 
I  leave  with  you;  my  peace  I  give  unto  you:  not 
as  the  world  giveth,  give  I  unto  you.  Let  not  your 
heart  be  troubled,  neither  let  it  be  fearful/'  (John 
14 :26,  27,  E.  V.)  Oh,  here  is  the  practical  secret  of 
perfect  peace,  listening  to  the  Saviour's  words  as 
found  in  this  Book.  He  is  always  saying  to  the 
wind-driven  heart,  as  He  said  to  the  wind-tossed 
sea  of  old,  ** Peace,  be  still."  And  if  we  listen, 
there  is  always  **a  great  calm."  (Matt.  8:23-26.) 
7.  In  the  seventh  place,  the  Bible,  properly 
studied,  brings  joy  as  well  as  peace,  Jeremiah 
discovered  that  many,  many  centuries  ago.    In  the 


VALUE  OF  BIBLE  STUDY  25 

midst  of  crushing  sorrow,  in  the  midst  of  the  dis- 
integration and  shame  and  agony  of  the  nation 
he  passionately  loved  and  for  which  he  would 
gladly  have  died,  in  the  midst  of  conditions  as 
dark  and  foreboding  as  ever  confronted  any  man 
on  earth,  he  sang,  * '  Thy  words  were  found,  and  I 
did  eat  them;  and  thy  words  were  unto  me  a  joy 
and  the  rejoicing  of  my  hearf  ( Jer.  15 :16,  R.  V.) 
Is  there  any  joy  purer  than  that  which  comes  from 
properly  directed  study?  But  there  is  no  other 
study  that  brings  joy  for  a  moment  comparable  to 
the  joy  that  comes  from  proper  Bible  study. 
Many  forms  of  study  bring  great  joy  to  a  healthy 
mind.  The  joys  that  come  from  earnest  study  of 
various  kinds,  philosophical,  scientific,  historical, 
literary  and  linguistic  have  been  among  my  chief 
joys  for  many  years,  nearly  my  whole  life 
through,  from  early  boyhood.  But  there  has  come 
into  my  heart  a  joy  from  Bible  study,  through  dig- 
ging into  the  gold  mines  of  this  wonderful  and 
inexhaustible  Book,  with  which  the  joys  that  have 
come  from  all  other  forms  of  study  are  not  worthy 
to  be  compared  for  one  moment.  There  are  no 
other  joys  like  this.  ''Blessed''  indeed  *4s  the 
man  that  walketh  not  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly, 
nor  standeth  in  the  way  of  sinners,  nor  sitteth  in 
the  seat  of  the  scornful.  But  his  delight  is  i/n  the 
law  of  the  Lord;  and  in  his  law  doth  he  meditate 
day  and  night.  And  he  shall  be  like  a  tree  planted 
by  the  rivers  of  water,  that  bringeth  forth  his 


26    VALUE  OF  PROPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

fruit  in  his  season ;  his  leaf  also  shall  not  wither ; 
and  whatsoever  he  doeth  shall  prosper." 

I  might  go  on  and  on,  telling  the  great  things 
that  the  right  Mnd  of  Bible  study  will  do.  There 
is  no  end  to  the  subject;  so  we  may  as  well  stop 
here. 

Is  it  not  as  clear  as  day  that  the  study  of  a  Book 
that  is  what  this  Book  most  assuredly  is,  and  a 
Book  that  does  what  this  Book  most  assuredly 
does,  is  infinitely  the  most  important  and  valuable 
study  in  the  world?  The  luster  of  all  other  study 
grows  dim  compared  with  this.  Will  you  then  be- 
gin to  study  the  Bible  as  you  ought?  Begin  to- 
day. Please  note  that  I  have  been  careful  to  say 
over  and  over  again  ^  ^  the  Bible  properly  studied, '  * 
that  is,  the  Bible  studied  in  the  way  and  by  the 
methods  in  and  by  which  it  should  be  studied ;  the 
Bible  studied  in  a  way  appropriate  to  the  unique 
and  divine  character  of  the  Book.  There  is  Bible 
study,  or  at  least  what  is  called  *^ Bible  study," 
that  is  not  so  profitable  as  this.  Indeed,  there  is 
what  is  called  '* Bible  study"  that  is  not  profitable 
at  all,  and  even  ** Bible  study"  so-called  that  is 
positively  injurious.  I  would  rather  have  a  son 
or  daughter  of  mine  study  almost  anything  else 
than  have  them  study  the  Bible  as  they  dream 
they  study  it  at  the  Chicago  University,  or  in  the 
American  Institute  of  Sacred  Literature,  and  in 
many  other  places  in  these  days. 

I  will  speak  next  Sunday  morning  on  **How 
Properly  to  Study  the  Bible,"  how  to  study  it  for 


VALUE  OF  BIBLE  STUDY  27 

light  and  not  for  darkness,  how  to  study  it  for 
life  and  not  for  death,  how  to  study  it  for  blessing 
and  not  for  cursing,  how  to  study  it  so  it  will  lift 
us  up  to  heaven  and  not  sink  us  down  to  hell. 


CHAPTER  II 

HOW  PROPEBIiY  TO   STUDY  THE  BIBLE 

*  *  These  were  more  noble  than  those  in  Thessalonica,  in  that  they 
received  the  word  with  all  readiness  of  mind,  and  searched  the 
scriptures  daily,  whether  those  things  were  so/' — ^Acts  17:11. 

My  subject  this  morning  is,  Bow  Properly  to 
Study  the  Bible,  I  have  eleven  texts  in  which  God 
Himself  tells  us  very  plainly  and  very  fully  how 
to  study  His  Book. 

Acts  17:11:  '^  These  were  more  noble  than  those 
m  Thessalonica,  in  that  they  received  the  word 
with  all  readiness  of  mind,  and  searched  the  scrip- 
tures daily,  whether  those  things  were  so."  Isa. 
8:20,  R.  V. :  '^jTo  the  law  and  to  the  testimony!  if 
they  speak  not  according  to  this  word,  surely  there 
is  no  morning  for  them,"  Ps.  1:1-3:  ^^ Blessed  is 
the  man  that  walketh  not  in  the  counsel  of  the  umr- 
godly,  nor  standeth  in  the  way  of  sinners,  nor 
sitteth  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful.  But  his  delight 
is  in  the  law  of  the  Lord;  and  in  his  law  doth  he 
meditate  day  and  night.  And  he  shall  be  like  a 
tree  planted  by  the  rivers  of  water,  that  bringeth 
forth  his  fruAt  in  his  season;  his  leaf  also  shall  not 
wither;  and  whatsoever  he  doeth  shall  prosper.** 
Ps.  119:11,  E.  v.:  ''Thy  word  have  I  laid  up  in 
my  heart,  that  I  might  not  sin  agavnst  thee." 

28 


HOW  TO  STUDY  THE  BIBLE  29 

1  Thess.  2:13:  ''For  this  cause  also  thank  we  God 
mthout  ceasing,  because,  when  ye  received  the 
word  of  God  which  ye  heard  of  us,  ye  received  it 
not  as  the  word  of  men,  but  as  it  is  in  truth,  the 
word  of  God,  which  effectually  worheth  also  in 
you  that  believe/'  John  7 :17,  R.  V. :  '*//  any  man 
unlleth  to  do  his  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  teach- 
ing, whether  it  is  of  God,  or  whether  I  speak  from 
myself.' '  James  1:22:  ''But  be  ye  doers  of  the 
word,  and  not  hearers  only,  deceiving  your  own 
selves/'  1  Cor.  2:14:  "But  the  natural  man  re- 
ceiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God:  for 
they  are  foolishness  unto  him:  neither  can  he  know 
them,  because  they  are  spiritually  discerned." 
Ps.  119:18,  R.  v.:  "Open  thou  mine  eyes,  that  I 
may  behold  wondrous  things  out  of  thy  law." 
Matt.  11:25:  '^At  that  time  Jesus  answered  anU 
said,  I  thank  thee,  0  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and 
earth,  because  thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the 
wise  and  prudent,  and  hast  revealed  them  unto 
babes."  Luke  24:27,  R.  V. :  "And  beginning  from 
Moses  and  from  all  the  prophets,  he  interpreted 
to  them  in  all  the  scriptures  the  thi/ngs  concerning 
himself." 

We  saw  last  Sunday  morning  something  of  the 
importance  and  value  of  properly  conducted  Bible 
study.  We  saw  that  properly  conducted  Bible 
study  was  the  one  superlatively  important  study 
for  young  and  old.  We  saw  that  Bible  study 
towered  above  all  other  studies  in  importance  and 
value.    But  we  also  saw  that  not  all  Bible  study 


30     VALUE  OF  PEOPEB  BIBLE  STUDY 

had  this  great  importance.  We  saw  that  there 
was  in  our  day  much  that  was  called  **  Bible 
study"  that  was  not  profitable  at  all;  that  indeed 
there  was  much  that  was  called  Bible  study  that 
was  positively  injurious.  So  our  subject  to-day 
is,  How  to  Properly  Study  the^  Bible.  I  use  the 
word  ^ ^properly"  in  its  exact  sense,  of  appropri- 
ately or  fittingly.  A  proper  study  of  the  Bible  is  a 
study  of  the  Bible  that  fits  the  book  you  are  study- 
ing. A  study  of  other  books  that  would  be  perfect- 
ly proper  for  them  would  not  be  proper  at  all  for 
the  Bible ;  for  the  Bible  is  what  no  other  book  in 
the  world  is,  the  Bible  is  God's  Book  and  other 
books  are  men's  books.  As  Paul  said  in  writing 
to  the  believers  in  Thessalonica,  '^For  this  cause 
also  thank  we  God  without  ceasing,  because,  when 
ye  receive  the  word  of  God  which  ye  heard  of  us, 
ye  received  it  not  as  the  word  of  men,  hut  as  it  is 
in  truth,  the  word  of  God,  which  effectually  work- 
eth  also  in  you  that  believe."  The  proper  study 
of  the  Bible  will  be  the  most  highly  profitable 
study  of  the  Bible.  The  improper  study  of  the 
Bible  will  be  unprofitable  study  of  the  Bible.  The 
great  reason  why  the  kind  of  study  of  the  Bible 
that  is  done  at  the  Chicago  University  and  in  the 
American  Institute  of  Sacred  Literature,  and  in 
many  such  places  and  institutions,  is  so  unprofit- 
able, why  it  is  oftentimes  so  positively  pernicious 
and  injurious,  is  because  it  is  so  utterly  improper, 
so  utterly  unbefitting  the  Book  upon  which  it  is 
bestowed.    No  really  intelligent  man  would  study 


HOW  TO  STUDY  THE  BIBLE  31 

a  fairy  tale  in  the  same  way  he  would  study  an 
accurate  and  entirely  reliable  history.  And  at 
Chicago  University  they  study  the  histories  of 
the  Bible,  which  are  the  most  exact  and  accurate 
and  reliable  histories  ever  written,  as  if  they  were 
fairy  tales,  or  ^^folk  lore."  No  really  intelligent 
or  rational  man  or  woman  would  study  an  omni- 
scient God's  Word  as  they  would  study  ever- 
erring  man's  word.  And  the  Bible  is  God's  Word 
and  they  study  it  at  Chicago  University  as  if  it 
were  the  word  of  men  who  did  not  know  quite  as 
much  as  the  very  self-sufficient  teachers  at  Chi- 
cago University  know.  And  that  is  a  very  im- 
proper, yes,  a  very  asinine,  way  to  study  the  Book 
that  is  so  clearly  demonstrated  by  eighteen  cen- 
turies of  investigation  and  uniform  experience  to 
be  the  very  Word  of  God. 

How  shall  we  study  the  Bible  so  as  to  study  it 
properly  and,  therefore,  study  it  for  the  highest 
profit?  God  Himself  tells  us  and  tells  us  in  the 
Bible  itself. 

/.    Study  the  Bible,  the  Bible  Itself 

1.  In  the  first  place.  Study  the  Bible,  the  Bible 
Itself.  The  importance  of  that  comes  out  in  a  very 
striking  way  in  Acts  17:11;  ''These  were  more 
noble  than  those  in  Thessalonica,  in  that  they  re- 
ceived the  word  with  all  readiness  of  mind,  and 
searched  the  scriptures  daily,  whether  those 
things  were  so."    Notice  please  that  it  says  they 


32     VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

**  searched  the  scriptures  daily,  whether  those 
things  were  so/'  They  did  not  search  the  ** Tal- 
mud" nor  the  ^ '  Targmus, ' '  the  commentaries  on 
the  scriptures,  they  went  right  to  the  scriptures 
themselves.  They  left  the  muddy  streams  of 
man's  interpretations  of  the  scriptures  and  went 
to  the  pure,  crystal  spring,  the  scriptures  them- 
selves. That  is  the  proper  way  to  study  the  Bible : 
as  it  is  God's  Word,  and  as  it  alone  is  God's  Word, 
we  must  each  one  of  us  go  right  to  the  Book 
itself  for  ourselves.  It  is  as  true  to-day  as  it  was 
when  Jesus  was  here  on  earth,  that  men  ^  'make  the 
Word  of  God  of  none  effect  through  their  tradi- 
tion" (Mark  7:13),  and  the  cardinal  principle  of 
Protestant  spiritual  liberty  as  distinguished  from 
Roman  Catholic  bondage  to  a  hierarchy,  yes,  the 
cardinal  principle  of  New  Testament  Christian- 
ity, is  for  each  child  of  God  to  go  right  to  the  pure 
fountain  of  God's  Word  for  himself.  Jesus 
Christ  says,  * '  Call  no  man  your  father  upon  earth : 
for  one  is  your  Father,  even  he  who  is  in  heaven," 
and  call  no  man  master,  *'for  one  is  your  Master, 
even  the  Christ"  (Matt.  23 :9, 10,  R.  V.) ;  that  is  to 
say,  recognize  no  absolute  spiritual  authority; 
stand  in  independent  relations  to  God.  I  refuse  in 
my  study  of  the  Book  of  God  to  bow  to  the  abso- 
lute authority  of  any  pope  or  bishop  or  priest,  or 
of  any  theological  professor.  I  refuse  to  bow  to 
the  Roman  Catholic  Pope  Benedict  or  to  the  Prot- 
estant Pope,  Shailer  Mathews,  or  Pope  Case,  or 
Pope  anybody  else,  and  you  on  your  part  refuse  to 


HOW  TO  STUDY  THE  BIBLE  33 

bow  to  Pope  Torrey  or  to  Pope  anybody  else.  Get 
right  to  the  Book  itself,  ^'to  the  law  and  to  the 
testimony!  if  they  speak  not  according  to  this 
word,  surely  there  is  no  morning  for  them."  Do 
not  study  commentaries,  lesson  helps  or  other 
books  about  the  Bible :  study  the  Bibl'3  itself.  Do 
not  study  about  the  Bible,  study  the  Bible.  The 
Bible  is  the  Word  of  God,  and  only  the  Bible  is 
the  Word  of  God.  A  young  man  who  had  just 
graduated  from  one  of  our  great  Eastern  Uni- 
versities came  to  Mr.  Moody  to  consult  with  him 
as  to  his  life  work.  He  was  a  young  man  be- 
longing to  a  very  wealthy  family.  Mr.  Moody 
said  to  him  ^^Do  not  go  into  business.  You  have 
more  money  now  than  you  know  what  to  do  with. 
Why  do  you  not  give  your  life  to  teaching  the 
English  Bible?"  The  young  man  replied  **I  do 
not  know  anything  about  the  English  Bible." 
'^Why,"  Mr.  Moody  exclaimed,  ^*I  thought  you 

had  just  graduated  at University,  and  that 

they  had  a  high-priced  professor  employed  there 
for  the  one  purpose  of  teaching  the  English  Bible. ' ' 
*'Yes,"  he  said,  ''that  is  true,  and  I  have  taken  his 
classes.  But,  Mr.  Moody,  would  you  like  to  know 
how  he  teaches  the  English  Bible  ?  We  have  been 
studying  for  six  months  to  find  out  who  wrote  the 
Pentateuch,  and  we  know  less  about  it  than  when 
we  started."  That  was  not  Bible  study  at  all,  it 
was  study  about  the  Bible.  And  a  good  deal  of 
the  so-called  "study  of  the  English  Bible"  to-day 


34    VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

in  universities  and  theological  seminaries  is  of 
that  character. 

Every  child  of  God  should  dig  into  the  Bible 
itself  entirely  independently  of  all  commentaries 
or  all  lesson  helps.  I  love  to  go  alone  with  God 
and  His  Book  and  see  what  He  has  to  say  to  me, 
without  any  man's  intervention.  The  trouble  with 
most  of  us  is  that  we  live  on  spoon  victuals.  You 
come  here  Sunday  after  Sunday  and  I  ladle  out 
to  you  what  I  have  found  in  the  Book.  Go  to  the 
Book  itself.  I  have  sometimes  watched  a  robin 
feed  its  young,  and  spit  into  their  gaping  mouths 
what  it  had  dug  up  and  chewed.  I  do  not  like  it. 
It  is  doubtless  necessary  for  young  robins  and 
chippy  birds,  but  we  ought  to  get  beyond  that  and 
go  right  to  the  Book  itself  for  ourselves. 

II.    Study  the  Bible,  Really  Study  It 

In  the  second  place,  Study  the  Bible,  Really 
Study  It.  That  too  comes  out  in  Acts  17 :11,  they 
^'searched  the  scriptures  daily,  whether  those 
things  were  so."  Note  carefully  the  word 
^^ searched/'  or  as  it  is  translated  in  the  Revised 
Version,  ^^ examining  the  scriptures.''  The  Greek 
word  translated  ^^ searched' '  in  the  Authorized 
Version  and  ^^ examining''  in  the  Revised  Version, 
is  a  very  strong  word.  It  means  ^Ho  search  after 
by  looking  through,  to  investigate,  to  examine,  to 
inquire  into,  to  scrutinize,  to  sift. ' '  It  means  the 
closest  and  most  minute  study.    The  Bible  being 


HOW  TO  STUDY  THE  BIBLE  35 

God's  Book  is  full  of  meaning  in  its  minutest 
word;  and  is  worthy  of  not  merely  the  cursory, 
superficial  reading,  the  careless  skimming  that 
most  people  give  to  it.  That  is  all  most  of  the 
other  books,  men's  books,  deserve;  any  closer 
study  than  that  is  a  waste  of  time.  But  the  Bible, 
being  God's  Book,  God's  own  Perfect  Word,  God's 
inexhaustible  storehouse  of  truth,  in  which  are  hid- 
den the  infinite  treasures  of  the  wisdom  and  knowl- 
edge of  God,  is  worthy  of  the  closest  and  minutest 
study.  And  it  abundantly  rewards  such  study, 
and  that  is  one  of  the  countless  proofs  that  the 
Bible  really  is  God's  Word.  The  more  closely 
and  microscopically  you  study  this  Book,  the  more 
you  see  and  the  more  wonderful  the  blessing  you 
get.  The  Bible  should  be  studied  with  the  closest 
and  most  concentrated  attention.  Here  is  where 
more  people  miss  the  fullest  blessing  in  their  study 
of  the  Bible  than  anywhere  else.  They  are  looking 
at  the  Bible  with  their  bodily  eyes,  but  their  minds 
are  off  in  a  dozen  other  places.  When  you  study 
the  Bible,  resolutely  shut  everything  else  out,  shut 
to  the  door  of  your  mind  to  everything  else  and 
shut  yourself  up  with  God  alone.  It  may  take 
time  to  cultivate  this  habit  of  concentrated  atten- 
tion, but  any  Christian  can  accomplish  it.  If  you 
find  your  mind  wandering,  go  back  and  fasten 
your  eyes  and  your  mind  on  that  verse  again,  and 
chew  every  word.  Eemember  what  Jeremiah  said, 
*  ^  Thy  words  were  found  and  I  did  eat  them;  and 
thy  words  were  unto  me  a  joy  and  the  rejoicing 


36    VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

of  my  hearf  (Jer.  15:16,  R.  V.)  A  very  promi- 
nent and  very  busy  business  man  said  to  me  one 
nigM,  *  ^  Tell  me  in  a  single  word,  bow  to  study  my 
Bible. ' '  I  replied,  '*  It  is  a  pretty  big  contract,  to 
tell  a  man  in  a  single  word  bow  to  study  tbe  Bible, 
but  if  I  must  put  it  into  one  word,  tbis  is  tbe  word, 
*tbougbtfully' — study  tbe  Bible  tbougbtfully,  give 
your  wbole  attention  to  tbe  Bible  as  you  study 
it. '  ^  It  is  well  to  read  a  cbapter  of  tbe  Bible  and 
tben  close  tbe  book  and  see  bow  mucb  you  can  re- 
member. Do  tbe  same  witb  single  verses.  Tbis  is 
one  of  tbe  greatest  secrets  of  profitable  study  of 
any  kind,  concentrated  attention;  but  it  is  preemi- 
nently tbe  secret  of  profitable  Bible  study.  Tbe 
one  great  object  of  tbe  analytical  study,  verse  by 
verse,  and  word  by  word,  of  some  books  in  tbe 
Bible,  tbat  I  compel  tbe  students  in  tbe  Bible 
Institute  to  do,  is  to  train  tbem  to  tbe  babit  of 
concentrated  attention  wben  tbey  study  tbe  Bible. 
But  you  do  not  need  to  be  a  student  in  tbe  Bible 
Institute  to  do  it;  any  of  you  can  learn  to  do  it. 
Not  only  can  every  one  of  you  learn  to  do  it,  but 
you  must  learn  to  do  it. 

III.    Study  the  Bihle  Daily 

In  tbe  tbird  place.  Study  the  Bihle  Daily,  Tbat 
also  comes  out  in  Acts  17 :11,  ' '  Tbese  were  more 
noble  tban  tbose  in  Tbessalonica,  in  tbat  tbey  re- 
ceived tbe  word  witb  all  readiness  of  mind,  and 
searcbed    tbe    scriptures    daily,    wbetber    tbose 


HOW  TO  STUDY  THE  BIBLE  37 

things  were  so."  The  daily  study  of  the  Bible 
is  the  only  proper  or  fully  profitable  way  to  study 
the  Bible.  We  saw  ia  our  introduction  that  proper 
Bible  study  was  the  study  that  was  appropriate 
or  fitting  to  the  Book  we  were  studying,  the  kind 
of  study  of  which  that  Book  was  worthy.  As  the 
Bible  is  God's  Book,  the  only  kind  of  study  that 
is  fitting  to  it,  is  every-day  study.  Do  you  not 
desire  to  know  every  day  what  God  has  to  say  that 
day?  If  you  do  not,  you  are  a  fool.  Every 
Christian  who  does  not  study,  really  study j  the 
Bible  every  day  is  a  fool.  Not  only  that,  any 
Christian  who  neglects  the  study  of  the  Bible  one 
single  day  insults  God.  And  you  should  put  much 
time  every  day,  no  matter  how  busy  you  are,  into 
Bible  study.  Certainly  fifteen  minutes  a  day  is  too 
little  time  to  put  into  listening  to  what  God  has 
to  say  to  you.  My  students  think  one  hour  a  day 
is  little  enough  time  to  spend  with  me  and  who 
am  I?  Who  is  God?  One  of  the  greatest  follies 
of  which  the  average  Christian  is  guilty,  is  spend- 
ing so  little  time  each  day  alone  with  God.  Mr. 
Moody  used  to  say,  ''In  our  prayers  we  talk  to 
God,  in  our  Bible  study  God  talks  to  us,  and  we 
had  better  let  God  do  most  of  the  talking.''  We 
certainly  ought  to  spend  more  time  every  day 
listening  to  what  God  has  to  say  to  us  in  His  Word 
than  we  require  Him  to  spend  in  listening  to  what 
we  have  to  say  to  Him  in  our  prayers.  Most  of 
us  spend  too  little  time  in  prayer  and  almost  every 
one  of  us  spends  far  too  little  time  in  Bible  study. 


38     VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

Stop  and  register  a  resolution  right  now  that  from 
this  time  on  you  will  spend  more  time  every  day 
of  your  life  in  listening  to  God  as  He  speaks  in 
His  Word,  more  time  in  real  Bible  study. 

IV,    Study  the  Bible  to  Find  Out  What  it  Actual- 
ly  Teaches 

In  the  fourth  place,  Study  the  Bible  to  Find  Out 
What  it  Actually  Teaches.  That  too  comes  out 
in  Acts  17:11,  ^'they  received  the  word  with  all 
readiness  of  mind,  and  searched  the  scriptures 
daily,  whether  these  things  were  so/'  It  comes 
out  in  these  words,  '^whether  these  thvngs  were 
so/'  They  *^ examined  the  scriptures''  to  find  out 
what  they  actually  taught;  not  to  find  out  some- 
thing to  corroborate  their  own  previous  opinions 
but  to  find  out  exactly  what  God  had  to  say.  Do 
not  study  the  Bible  to  find  out  what  you  can  make 
it  mean,  but  to  find  out  what  God  evidently  in- 
tended to  teach.  One  of  the  most  prolific  sources 
of  misunderstanding  and  evil  in  Bible  study  is 
found  right  here.  Men  go  to  the  Book  not  to  find 
out  what  God  has  to  say  and  what  He  really  means 
to  teach,  but  to  find  something  that  will  corrobo- 
rate their  own  view,  or  something  that  they  can 
somehow  twist  into  agreement  with  their  own  pre- 
conceived opinions.  Take,  for  example,  what  the 
Bible  teaches  about  the  Second  Coming  of  Christ. 
A  host  of  books  and  pamphlets  have  appeared  on 
this  subject  in  the  last  few  years,  but  not  a  few 


HOW  TO  STUDY  THE  BIBLE  39 

of  these  do  not  exhibit  the  remotest  desire  to  find 
out  what  the  Bible  really  has  to  say  upon  the  sub- 
ject and  to  accept  that  as  final.  They  are  simply 
a  labored  and  ingenious  attempt  either  to  discredit 
what  Christ  Jesus  and  the  apostles  do  say,  or  else 
to  distort  it  and  make  it  mean  what  any  fair- 
minded  man  or  woman  in  their  inmost  heart  knows 
it  was  never  intended  to  mean.  Take,  for  exam- 
ple, Shailer  Mathews'  tract,  ''Will  Christ  Come 
Again  1 ' '  From  start  to  finish  it  is  simply  a  subtle 
attempt  to  discredit  the  teaching  of  Jesus  Christ 
and  the  apostles  on  this  subject.  Or  take  either 
of  the  two  most  lauded  books  on  the  Second  Com- 
ing written  from  the  Post-Millennial  viewpoint. 
While  they  are  not  so  outrageously  and  blasphe- 
mously irreverent  in  their  allusions  to  the  words 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  and  the  apostles  as  Shailer 
Mathews'  pamphlet  is,  they  certainly  are  not  an 
honest,  frank,  simple-minded  attempt  to  find  out 
exactly  what  God  has  to  say  on  the  subject.  It 
would  be  a  glaring  outrage  to  study  any  man's 
book  in  that  way:  it  is  an  atrocious  insult  to  God 
to  study  His  Book  in  that  way.  Study  the  Bible 
with  an  absolutely  single-eyed  purpose  to  discover 
exactly  what  God  intended  to  teach. 

V,    Meditate  Long  and  Profoundly  on  What  You 
Find  Taught  in  the  Bible 

In  the  fifth  place.  Meditate  Long  and  Profoumd- 
ly  on  What  You  Find  Taught  in  the  Bible.  This  is 


40     VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

what  we  are  taught  in  our  third  text,  ^  ^  Blessed  is 
the  man  that  walketh  not  in  the  counsel  of  the  un- 
godly, nor  standeth  in  the  way  of  sinners,  nor  sit- 
teth  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful.  But  his  delight 
is  in  the  law  of  the  LOED;  and  in  his  law  doth 
he  meditate  day  and  night.  And  he  shall  be  like 
a  tree  planted  by  the  rivers  of  water,  that  bringeth 
forth  his  fruit  in  his  season;  his  leaf  also  shall 
not  wither;  and  whatsoever  he  doeth  shall  pros- 
per." As  the  Eternal  and  all- wise  God  is  the 
Speaker  in  the  Bible  everything  taught  in  the 
Bible  is  worthy  of  our  most  profound  and  most 
prolonged  consideration.  We  should  ponder  it, 
we  should  weigh  it,  we  should  thoroughly  masti- 
cate and  digest  it,  we  should  ^^ meditate  upon''  it 
as  we  read  it  and  hear  it,  and  afterwards  as  we 
go  about  our  daily  work  we  should  ^^  meditate 
upon  it  day  and  night/'  Meditation  is  one  of  the 
most  fruitful  processes  of  the  human  mind.  But 
how  fruitful  and  profitable  meditation  may  be  de- 
pends entirely  upon  what  we  meditate  upon. 
There  is  no  profit  in  meditation  that  is  mere  mind- 
wandering  and  day-dreaming.  The  most  fruitful 
and  profitable  of  all  meditation  is  meditation  upon 
God's  revealed  truth,  God's  revealed  Word.  It  is 
by  meditation  upon  the  truth  that  truth  fructifies, 
just  as  eggs  hatch  by  being  sat  upon.  ^'Blessed," 
infinitely  *^  blessed,  is  the  man  that  meditateth 
upon  the  Word  of  God  day  and  night. ' '  One  of  the 
best  ways  to  conserve  golden  moments  that  might 
otherwise  be  squandered  (for  example,  as  we  walk 


HOW  TO  STUDY  THE  BIBLE  41 

the  streets  or  fields  or  ride  on  the  trolley  car)  is  to 
meditate  upon  the  Word  you  have  been  studying. 
Turn  God 's  Word  over  and  over  and  over  again  in 
your  mind  as  you  study  it.  Look  at  all  the  facets 
of  each  diamond  of  truth.  Let  the  Word  soak  in, 
let  it  saturate  your  life,  your  thoughts,  your  feel- 
ings, your  will.  Bible-soaked  thoughts  are  God- 
like thoughts.  Bible-soaked  affections  are  God- 
like affections.  A  Bible-soaked  will  is  a  God-like 
will.  That  is  a  large  part  of  what  is  meant  in 
John  15 :7,  R.  V.  *  'If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words 
abide  in  you,  ask  whatsoever  ye  will,  and  it  shall 
be  done  unto  you.''  '* Meditate"  on  the  Word  of 
God  **day  and  night." 

VI,    Store  the  Bible  Up  in  Your  Memory 

In  the  sixth  place,  growing  out  of  what  we  have 
just  said.  Store  the  Bible  Up  vn  Your  Memory. 
Without  such  storing  up  in  memory  the  most 
profitable  meditation  upon  it  is  impossible.  The 
great  profit  of  storing  up  the  Bible  in  your  mem- 
ory is  set  forth  in  Psalm  119 :11,  R.  V.  *'Thy  word 
have  I  laid  up  in  my  heart,  that  I  might  not  sin 
against  thee. ' '  That  is  the  proper  thing  to  do  with 
God's  Word,  lay  it  up  in  your  heart.  What  is  so 
worthy  of  being  treasured  in  our  minds  as  the 
golden  words  of  God?  Whoever  has  God's  Word 
stored  away  in  his  mind  has  treasure  vaults  filled 
with  pure  gold.  Our  Lord  Jesus,  as  part  of  His 
farewell  message  to  His  disciples  in  the  wonderful 


42    VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

fourteenth  chapter  of  John  (R.  V.)  says  in  v.  21, 
*^He  that  hath  my  commandments,  and  keepeth 
them,  he  it  is  that  loveth  me :  and  he  that  loveth  me 
shall  be  loved  by  my  Father,  and  I  will  love  him, 
and  will  manifest  myself  unto  him. '  ^  Do  you  not 
long  to  be  one  of  those  whom  the  Father  and  the 
Son  peculiarly  *4over'  Do  you  not  long  to  have 
the  Lord  Jesus  ^^ manifest'  Himself  to  you!  Well, 
these  words  tell  you  how  to  secure  these  priceless 
privileges,  '*He  that  hath  my  commandments,  and 
keepeth  them,  he  it  is  that  loveth  me :  and  he  that 
loveth  me  shall  be  loved  of  my  Father,  and  I  will 
love  him,  and  will  manifest  myself  unto  him/'  To 
keep  Christ's  words  means  more  than  simply  to 
obey  them;  it  means  to  treasure  them,  to  hold  on 
to  them,  to  store  them  up  in  your  mind  and  heart, 
or  to  use  David's  phrase,  ^^lay  them  up  in  your 
heart."  Then  in  John  14:23,  Jesus  says,  ^*If  a 
man  love  me,  he  will  keep  my  word :  and  my  Father 
will  love  him,  and  we  will  come  unto  him,  and 
make  our  abode  with  him/'  Is  not  that  great, 
having  the  Father  and  the  Son  making  their  home 
with  us?  Well,  it  is  through  the  treasured  up 
Word  that  this  is  brought  about.  Just  two  sug- 
gestions about  how  to  memorize  scripture !  First, 
memorize  it  systematically.  Do  not  have  a  jumble 
,of  disjointed  texts  in  your  mind,  but  classified  and 
associated  texts.  Association  is  the  great  secret 
of  a  retentive  memory.  Group  your  memorized 
passages  together,  classify  them  in  a  logical  and 


HOW  TO  STUDY  THE  BIBLE         43 

orderly  way.    Second,  commit  the  verses  to  mem- 
ory by  chapter  and  verse. 

VII.    Study  the  Whole  Bible 

In  the  seventh  place,  Study  the  Whole  Bible. 
That  comes  out  in  a  very  striking  way  in  Luke 
24 :27,  R.  V.,^  *  And  beginning  from  Moses  and  from 
all  the  prophets,  he  interpreted  to  them  in  all  the 
scriptures  the  things  concerning  himself. ' '  We  see 
that  Jesus  studied  not  merely  parts  or  frag- 
ments of  the  Bible,  but  the  whole  Bible  as  far  as 
He  had  it,  ^'beginning  from  Moses  and  from  all 
the  prophets,  he  interpreted  to  them  in  all  the 
scriptures  the  things  concerning  himself.''  The 
whole  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God;  therefore  every 
part  of  the  Bible  should  be  studied.  We  not  only 
need  to  know  the  mind  of  God,  but  the  whole  mind 
of  God.  One  of  the  commonest  causes  of  com- 
paratively unprofitable  Bible  study  is  that  only 
parts  of  the  Bible  are  studied.  Some  only  study 
pet  books.  Some  study  only  the  New  Testament ; 
some  study  only  the  Psalms;  some  never  study 
Genesis ;  some  never  study  prophecy,  they  never 
study  Revelation  and  they  never  study  Daniel. 
Others  study  nothing  but  Daniel  or  Revelation. 
Some  study  only  pet  subjects ;  some  never  study 
anything  but  Divine  healing,  and  some  never  study 
Divine  healing  at  all.  Some  never  study  the  Sec- 
ond Coming  of  Christ  and  others  never  study  any- 
thing but  the  Second  Coming  of  Christ.  You  never 


44     VALUE  OF  PROPEE  BIBLE  STUDY 

rightly  understand  any  one  of  the  sixty-six  books 
of  the  Bible  until  you  study  it  in  its  relation  to 
the  other  sixty-five.  You  never  rightly  under- 
stand any  subject  in  the  Bible  until  you  under- 
stand it  in  its  relation  to  other  subjects  in  the 
Bible. 

VIII,    Study  the  Bible  as  the  Word  of  God 

In  the  eighth  place.  Study  the  Bible  as  the  Word 
of  God,  This  we  are  taught  to  do  by  God  Himself 
in  1  Thess.  2:13,  *'For  this  cause  also  thank  we 
God  without  ceasing,  because,  when  ye  received 
the  word  of  God  which  ye  heard  of  us,  ye  received 
it  not  as  the  word  of  men,  but  as  it  is  i/n  truth, 
the  word  of  God,  which  effectually  worketh  also  in 
you  that  believe. ' '  We  have  already  seen  that  the 
proper  way  to  study  any  book  is  to  study  it  as 
just  what  it  is.  Well,  then  it  is  clear  as  day  that, 
as  the  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God,  the  proper  way  to 
study  it  and  the  only  proper  way  to  study  it,  the 
only  way  to  get  the  largest  profit  out  of  the  study 
of  it,  is  to  study  it  as  the  Word  of  God,  Many 
distinguished  university  professors  say  we  should 
study  the  Bible  just  as  we  study  any  other  book, 
and  they  fancy  that  they  have  said  something  won- 
drously  wise  when  they  have  said  it.  But  while 
it  is  partly  true,  it  is  very  largely  false ;  indeed, 
it  is  very  largely  abject  nonsense.  We  should 
study  the  Bible  as  we  study  any  other  book  to 
this  extent,  that  we  apply  to  it  the  same  laws  for 


HOW  TO  STUDY  THE  BIBLE  45 

the  discovery  of  the  meaning  of  words  and  phrases 
and  the  same  laws  of  grammatical  construction 
that  we  apply  to  any  other  book;  but  there  the 
principle  ceases.  We  should  study  it  as  we  study 
no  other  book,  for  it  is  what  no  other  book  is ;  it 
is  God's  Word  and  all  other  books  are  men's 
words,  and  we  should  study  it  as  what  it  is,  and 
we  should  study  other  books  as  what  they  are. 
So  we  should  study  the  Bible  and  the  Bible  alone, 
as  God's  Word,  and  we  should  study  every  other 
book  as  men's  word  for  that  is  exactly  what  they 
are.  What  is  involved  in  studying  the  Bible  as 
God's  Word?    Five  things: 

1.  First,  that  we  believe  absolutely  its  every 
statement.  We  may  not  see  how  it  can  be  true, 
but  we  should  believe  it  just  because  God  says  it. 
Abraham  could  not  see  how  he,  when  he  was 
'* about  100  years  old"  and  Sarah  nearly  as  old, 
and  childless,  could  become  *^a  father  of  many 
nations";  but  God  said  so  and  Abraham  believed 
it,  and  * '  God  counted  it  to  him  for  righteousness ' ' 
(Gen.  15 :6).  If  we  have  really  good  sense  we  will 
behave  just  like  Abraham.  God  says  something  in 
this  Book ;  Prof.  So  and  So  says  it  is  not  so,  and 
the  Rev.  Dr.  Bighead,  D.D.,  Ph.D.,  LL.D.,  Litt.D., 
F.R.G.S.,  A.  S.  S.,  says  it  cannot  be  so ;  but  as  God 
says  so,  you  and  I,  if  we  have  real  good  sense,  will 
believe  it  in  spite  of  all  the  A.S.S.E.S.  in  the  world. 

2.  In  the  second  place,  that  we  bamk  vmhesitat- 
ingly  and  without  a  trace  of  doubt  or  anxiety  lest 
it  fail  us  on  its  every  promise  in  all  its  height  and 


46     VALUE  OF  PROPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

depth  and  length  and  breadth.  I  am  only  a  frail 
and  feeble  man,  but  I  expect  every  man  to  accept 
and  rest  absolutely  upon  every  promise  of  mine. 
And  God,  who  cannot  lie  (Tit.  1:2),  not  only  ex- 
pects that  of  you  and  me,  He  demands  it,  and  you 
are  a  fool  if  you  do  not  do  it.  A  good  many  of  the 
promises  of  this  Book  seem  altogether  too  big  to 
believe,  but  God  made  them  and  there  is  nothing 
too  big  for  God,  and  not  a  promise  in  this  Book 
ever  went  down  yet,  if  you  put  both  your  feet  upon 
it.  I  have  found  that  out  by  36  years  of  experi- 
ence. This  Book  tells  me  that  I  am  an  heir  of  God 
and  a  joint-heir  with  Jesus  Christ;  it  promises  me 
that  I  am  to  inherit  all  God  is  and  all  God  has.  It 
looks  ridiculous  to  me,  but  I  believe  it.  God  says 
it  and,  therefore,  I  believe  it.  I  would  be  a  fool 
if  I  did  not. 

3.  In  the  third  place,  studying  the  Bible  as  the 
Word  of  God  involves  your  obeying  implicitly  and 
exactly  its  every  commandm&nt  that  is  addressed 
to  you.  There  are  commandments  in  this  Book 
that  are  not  addressed  to  you:  the  Bible  explicitly 
says  that  they  are  addressed  to  Jews  and  you  are 
not  a  Jew.  But  there  are  many  commandments 
that  are  addressed  to  you ;  obey  every  one  of  them 
to  the  last  jot  and  tittle.  It  will  seem  hard  some- 
times but  it  will  pay. 

4.  In  the  fourth  place,  studying  the  Bible  as 
the  Word  of  God  involves,  studying  it  as  God's 
message  to  you,  studying  it  not  as  God's  Word 
in  the  abstract,  but  God's  Word  in  the  concrete, 


HOW  TO  STUDY  THE  BIBLE         47 

God's  Word  to  you.  Forget  everybody  else  for 
the  time  being  and  think  of  God  as  saying  this 
thing  to  you.  Oh,  it  is  fine  to  have  a  talk  with  God 
and  to  have  Him  do  the  talking.  He  has  so  much 
more  to  say  that  is  worth  hstening  to  than  you  or 
I  have  to  say  to  him.  I  know  a  man  out  in  China 
who  has  the  rare  gift  of  keeping  his  mouth  shut 
in  seven  different  languages.  He  is  quite  a  young 
man  but  he  has  acquired  a  great  reputation  for 
sagacity  because  he  so  seldom  says  anything.  He 
listens.  But  the  place  of  places  to  keep  still  is 
when  you  are  studying  the  Bible;  keep  still  and 
listen  and  let  God  do  the  talking. 

5.  In  the  fifth  place,  studying  the  Bible  as  the 
Word  of  God  involves  studying  the  Booh  as  in 
the  presence  of  God.  See  God  standing  right  there 
saying  these  things  which  are  written.  Have  you 
never  thought,  when  you  have  read  how  God  came 
down  and  talked  with  Abraham  face  to  face,  that 
you  wished  He  could  come  down  and  talk  that  way 
with  you?  Well,  we  have  a  privilege  far  beyond 
that  of  Abraham.  It  was  only  in  a  few  very  rare 
instances  that  God  came  down  and  met  Abraham 
and  talked  with  him,  but  God  is  ready  to  come 
down  and  meet  us  and  talk  with  us  face  to  face 
every  time  we  open  our  Bibles.  Oh,  it  is  great  to 
have  God  call  you  into  His  presence  and  say,  **I 
have  something  I  want  to  whisper  right  into  your 
ear  alone  and  into  your  heart,'*  and  then  open 
your  Bible  and  see  God  standing  there  and  hear 
Him  saying  that  which  is  written  there  in  the  Book 


48    VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

before  your  eyes.  Studying  the  Bible  that  way 
makes  the  Bible  a  new  and  living  Book.  It  is  great 
to  study  the  Bible  on  your  knees.  It  has  been  one 
of  the  rarest  privileges  of  my  life  to  read  every 
chapter  in  the  Bible  and  every  verse  in  the  Bible 
on  my  knees.  And  it  is  your  privilege  to  do  the 
same. 

IX.    Study  the  Bible  With  a  Will  Wholly  Sur- 
rendered to  God 

In  the  ninth  place,  Study  the  Bible  With  a  Will 
Wholly  Surrendered  to  God,  That  is  one  of  the 
greatest  secrets  of  proper  and  profitable  Bible 
study.  There  is  nothing  that  clears  up  the  mind 
to  see  and  understand  what  God  says  and  what 
God  means  like  a  will  wholly  surrendered  to  God. 
Our  Lord  Jesus  Himself  teaches  us  that.  He  says 
in  John  7  :17,  R.  V.,  *'If  any  man  willeth  to  do  his 
willy  he  shall  know  of  the  teaching,  whether  it  is  of 
God  or  whether  I  speak  from  myself. ' '  The  mind 
of  the  man  whose  will  is  not  surrendered  to  God 
is  a  fogbank;  the  mind  of  the  man  whose  will  is 
surrendered  to  God  is  clear  shining  as  a  perfect 
California  day.  Oh,  I  have  known  men  to  whom 
the  Bible  was  a  sealed  book,  a  useless  book,  a  silly, 
stupid  book,  but  by  the  unreserved  surrender  of 
their  wills  to  God  the  Bible  became  an  open  book. 
The  surrender  of  the  will  to  God  will  do  more  to 
make  the  Bible  an  open  book  than  a  university 


HOW  TO  STUDY  THE  BIBLE  49 

education  at  home  and  abroad  in  Greek  and 
Hebrew  and  cognate  languages.  I  have  known 
great  Greek  scholars  and  great  Hebrew  scholars 
who  were  as  blind  as  a  bat  to  the  real  meaning  of 
God^s  Word,  simply  because  their  wills  were  not 
surrendered  to  God;  and  I  have  known  men  and 
women  who  knew  none  of  "the  original  lan- 
guages** in  which  the  Bible  was  written,  neither 
the  original  Greek,  nor  the  original  Hebrew,  only 
''the  original  English,'*  who  were  open-eyed  to  all 
that  was  best  and  dearest  in  this  Book  because 
their  wills  were  utterly  surrendered  to  God.  We 
had  a  young  woman  in  the  Bible  Institute  in  Chi- 
cago years  ago  who  seemed  to  have  no  fitness  to 
be  a  student  at  a  Bible  Institute.  She  was  en- 
tirely out  of  harmony  with  the  place  and  densely 
ignorant  of  the  things  of  God.  One  day  she  went 
(as  all  the  women  students  were  required  to  go 
now  and  then)  down  to  one  of  the  destitute  parts 
of  the  City,  calling  from  house  to  house  upon  the 
poor.  She  became  utterly  disgusted  with  the  sur- 
roundings and  quit  her  work  and  went  down  to 
the  Lake  Shore  Drive  and  walked  along  in  front 
of  the  magnificent  mansions  there  and  said  to  her- 
self, ''Now,  this  is  what  I  like,  and  this  is  what 
I  am  going  to  have.  I  am  thoroughly  sick  of  Mil- 
ton Ave.  and  Townsend  St.  This  for  me.*'  In 
that  rebellious  state  of  mind  she  returned  to  the 
Institute  and  the  bell  soon  rang  for  supper.  She 
went  down  and  took  her  seat  at  the  table,  still  re- 


50     VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

belling  at  the  thought  of  a  life  of  sacrifice  amid 
unpleasant  surroundings.  But  suddenly,  there  at 
the  supper-table,  she  surrendered  her  will  to  God, 
sprang  from  the  table,  rushed  over  to  one  of  the 
other  girls,  threw  her  arms  around  her  and  said, 
*^I  am  a  volunteer  for  Africa.''  A  wonderful 
transformation  and  a  wonderful  opening  of  her 
mind  to  the  things  of  God  occurred  instantly.  I 
was  away  when  it  all  happened,  but  when  I  came 
back  my  secretary  told  me  about  it ;  for  it  was  the 
talk  of  the  school.  A  little  later  in  the  day  as  I 
passed  out  of  the  gate  on  La  Salle  Avenue  I  met 
her  just  coming  in.  She  looked  up  radiantly  into 
my  face  and  said,  ^'Oh,  Mr.  Torrey,  have  you 
heard  the  news  I"  I  said,  ^^Yes,  Jack,  Miss  Waite 
has  told  me."  Then  she  fairly  danced  in  holy  glee 
on  the  sidewalk  as  she  poured  out  her  glad  heart, 
and  then  she  said,  *  ^  Oh,  Mr.  Torrey,  the  most  won- 
derful thing  about  it  is  that  the  Bible  is  a  new 
Book.  I  thought  the  Bible  was  the  most  stupid 
book  in  the  world.  I  would  rather  have  read  an 
old  almanac  than  the  Bible.  You  did  compel  me 
by  your  lectures  at  Northfield  to  believe  in  the 
Deity  of  Christ,  but  the  Bible  I  could  not  endure. 
But  oh,  since  I  surrendered  my  will,  what  a  won- 
derful Book  the  Bible  is ;  God  is  making  marvel- 
ous revelations  to  me  from  it  every  day.''  Oh, 
men  and  women,  if  you  want  a  Bible  that  is  won- 
derful, a  Bible  whose  every  page  glows  with  glory, 
study  it  with  a  will  absolutely  surrendered  to  God. 


HOW  TO  STUDY  THE  BIBLE  51 

X.  Study  the  Bihle  to  Learn  How  to  Live  Your 

Daily  Life,  and  Live  Your  Daily  Life 
That  Way 

In  the  tenth  place,  Study  the  Bihle  to  Learn 
How  to  Live  Your  Daily  Life,  and  Live  Your 
Daily  Life  That  Way.  God  commands  ns  to  do 
this  in  James  1 :22.  He  says,  *^Be  ye  doers  of  the 
word,  and  not  hearers  only,  deceiving  your  own- 
selves.''  Very  many  study  the  Bible,  yes,  dig 
into  it,  spend  hours  with  it,  just  to  gratify  their 
curiosity  on  the  great  subjects  of  which  the  Bible 
treats,  or  to  quahfy  themselves  to  be  expert  theo- 
logical disputants.  No,  no,  no,  study  the  Bible 
to  find  out  how  to  live  so  as  to  please  God,  and 
live  that  way.  Studying  the  Bible  mth  an  eager 
desire  to  learn  how  to  please  God,  and  living  that 
way,  goes  a  long  way  toward  making  the  Bible 
an  open  book.  People  often  ask,  what  is  the  best 
translation  of  the  original  scriptures,  the  Author- 
ized Version,  or  the  Eevised  Version,  or  Wey- 
mouth's, or  whose  translation?  Listen,  infinitely 
the  best  translation  of  the  Bible  is  the  translation 
into  daily  living. 

XI.  Study  the  Bihle  Under  the  Holy  Spirit's 

Personal  Direction 

In  the  eleventh  place.  Study  the  Bihle  Under  the 
Holy  Spirit's  Personal  Direction.  God  tells  us  in 
1  Cor.  2 :14 :  '  ^  But  the  natural  man  receiveth  not 


52     VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God :  for  they  are  fool- 
ishness nnto  him:  neither  can  he  know  them,  be- 
cause they  are  spiritually  discerned/'  Do  not 
study  the  Bible  as  the  Christian  Scientist  studies 
it,  through  Mrs.  Eddy's  spectacles,  under  bond- 
age to  ^^ Science  and  Health.''  Mrs.  Eddy's 
spectacles  are  badly  smoked  glasses.  Do  not  study 
the  Bible  as  Pastor  Russell's  dupes  study  it, 
through  that  silly  man's  spectacles,  trying  to  see 
the  Bible  with  ^^ Millennial  Dawn"  standing  be- 
tween you  and  the  Book  of  God  itself.  Do  not 
study  it  as  the  Mormon  studies  it,  looking  at  the 
Bible  through  the  densely  opaque  medium  of  the 
ridiculous  and  immoral  Book  of  Mormon,  appar- 
ently gotten  up  originally  as  a  joke  by  a  back- 
sliding Presbyterian  preacher,  Solomon  Spauld- 
ing.  ''Call  no  man  master"  (Matt.  23:10).  Do 
not  study  it  through  any  man's  spectacles;  study 
it  through  the  telescope  and  microscope  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  Study  it  under  the  personal  direc- 
tion of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  way  to  obtain  His 
personal  direction  in  your  study  of  the  Bible  we 
are  told  in  Ps.  119:18,  R.  V.:  ''Open  thou  mine 
eyes,  that  I  may  behold  wondrous  things  out  of 
thy  law."  It  is  by  asking  for  it.  " If  ye  then,  being 
evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your  chil- 
dren, how  much  more  shall  your  heavenly  Father 
give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ash  Him''  (Luke 
11:13).  We  are  also  told  in  Luke  24:45,  R.  V., 
"Then  opened  He  their  mind,  that  they  might 
understand  the  scriptures." 


tm 


HOW  TO  STUDY  THE  BIBLE  53 

XII,    Study  the  Bible  with  a  Child-like  Mind 

In  the  twelfth  place,  Study  the  Bible  iinth  a 
Child-like  Mind.  That  is  the  only  proper  way 
to  study  the  Bible,  for  the  Bible  is  a  revelation  in- 
tended by  God  to  be  understood  by  all  honest- 
minded,  humble-minded,  teachable  people.  Many 
very  scholarly  men  study  the  Bible  as  if  it  were  a 
puzzle  book;  instead  of  taking  the  meaning  that 
lies  on  the  surface,  they  dig  down  for  some  occult 
meaning,  some  meaning  other  than  what  the  words 
seem  to  imply.  The  Roman  Catholic  Church  says 
that  simple-minded  Christians  must  not  dare  to 
study  the  Bible  for  themselves  independently — 
they  must  go  to  the  priest  to  interpret  it  for  them; 
and  the  Chicago  University  says  that  ordinary, 
*'unscholarly"  regenerate  men,  women  and  chil- 
dren cannot  get  the  Bible 's  real  meaning  for  them- 
selves, they  must  have  some  great  scholar,  soaked 
in  the  German  infidelity  of  Wellhausen  and  Graf 
and  their  host  of  satellites  and  followers,  to  in- 
terpret it  for  them.  But  Jesus  said,  * '  I  thank  thee, 
0  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  because  thou 
hast  hid  these  things  frotn  the  unse  and  prudent, 
and  hast  revealed  them  unto  babes,''  (Matt. 
11:25.)  Oh,  these  ingenious  and  fantastic  inter- 
pretations of  cunning  *' scholars,"  men  who  are  so 
subtle  that  they  are  positively  silly !  They  would 
be  laughable  if  they  were  not  outrageous.  Some 
men's  erudition  is  very  close  to  perdition.    The 


54     VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

little  girl  was  rigM  wlien  she  said,  *^If  God  didn't 
mean  what  He  said,  why  didn't  He  say  what  He 
meant?"  He  does  say  what  He  means,  exactly 
what  He  means. 

XIII,    Study  the  Bible  Systematically 

Once  more.  Study  the  Bible  Systematically.  It 
is  very  clear  from  Luke  24 :27,  E.  V.  that  Jesus  so 
studied  it,  for  we  read:  *^And  beginning  from 
Moses  and  from  all  the  prophets,  he  interpreted 
to  them  in  all  the  scriptures  the  things  concerning 
himself."  Have  some  good  system  of  Bible  study 
and  follow  it.  System  counts  in  everything,  but 
it  counts  more  in  study  than  it  counts  in  any- 
thing else :  and  it  counts  more  in  Bible  study  than 
in  any  other  form  of  study.  I  have  not  time  here 
to  go  into  the  details  of  systems  or  methods  of 
Bible  study. 

Let  me  add  just  one  word,  improve  spare  mo- 
ments for  Bible  study.  Carry  a  Bible  with 
you  wherever  you  go,  or  at  least  a  New  Testa- 
ment, and  wherever  you  have  a  spare  moment, 
put  it  into  Bible  study.  But, do  not  rest  content 
with  the  use  of  spare  moments  in  Bible  study; 
have  a  regular  set  time  every  day  that  is  kept 
sacredly  for  getting  alone  with  God  in  the  study  of 
His  Word, 


CHAPTER   III 


HOW  TO  INTERPRET  THE  BIBLE  SO  AS  TO  FIND  ITS  TRUE 
MEANING 

* '  For  we  are  not  as  the  many,  corrupting  the  Word  of  God :  but 
as  of  sincerity,  but  as  of  God,  in  the  sight  of  God,  speak  we  in 
Christ.''— 2  Cor.  2:17,  K.V. 

' '  Therefore  seeing  we  have  this  ministry,  even  as  we  obtained 
mercy,  we  faint  not:  (2)  but  we  have  renounced  the  hidden  things 
of  shame,  not  walking  in  craftiness,  nor  handling  the  Word  of 
God  deceitfully ;  but  by  the  manifestation  of  the  truth  commend- 
ing ourselves  to  every  mans  conscience  in  the  sight  of  God.  (3) 
And  even  if  our  Gospel  is  veiled,  it  is  veiled  in  them  that  perish: 
(4)  in  whom  the  God  of  this  world  hath  blinded  the  minds  of  the 
unbelieving,  that  the  light  of  the  Gospel  of  the  glory  of  Christ, 
who  is  the  image  of  God,  should  not  dawn  upon  them." — 2  Cor. 
4:1-4,  E.V. 

''"Give  diligence  to  present  thyself  approved  unto  God,  a  work- 
man that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed,  handling  aright  the  word  of 
truth."— 2  Tim.  2:15,  E.V. 

"  The  Devil  .  .  .  saith  unto  him,  ,  ,  .  it  is  written." — Matt. 
4:5-7. 

My  subject  this  morning  is,  How  to  Interpret 
the  Bible  so  as  to  Find  its  True  Meaning.  I  have 
four  texts.  The  first  is  2  Cor.  2:17,  R.  V.:  ''For 
ive  are  not  as  the  man]/,  corrupting  the  word  of 
God:  but  as  of  sincerity,  but  as  of  God,  in  the 
sight  of  God,  speak  we  in  Christ."  The  word 
translated  ''corrupting^'  in  this  verse  is  the  par- 
ticiple of  a  verb  derived  from  a  noun  meaning  '  *  a 
tavern  keeper,  or  a  wine  merchant,  a  petty  re- 
tailer, a  huckster,  a  peddler,"  and  the  thought  is 
that  as  tavern  keepers  and  wine  merchants  and 

55 


56     VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

peddlers  frequently  adulterate  their  wines  or 
fruits,  or  other  wares,  so  many  alleged  teachers 
of  the  Word  of  God  adulterate  the  Word  of  God. 
That  is  certainly  true  of  not  a  few  preachers  and 
*^ Bible  teachers''  and  * ^ theological  professors''  in 
America  and  elsewhere  in  these  days.  Paul  says 
he  was  not  in  that  contemptible  disreputable  busi- 
ness ;  and  we  ought  to  be  careful  that  we  are  not 
when  we  teach  or  when  we  study  God's  word. 

Our  second  text  is  2  Cor.  4:1-4:  '' Therefore  see- 
ing we  have  this  ministry,  even  as  we  obtained 
mercy,  we  faint  not :  but  we  have  renounced  the 
hidden  things  of  shame,  not  walking  in  craftiness, 
nor  handling  the  word  of  God  deceitfully ;  but  hy 
the  manifestation  of  the  truth  commending  our- 
selves to  every  man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of 
God.  And  even  if  our  gospel  is  veiled,  it  is  veiled 
in  them  that  perish  {are  perishing) :  in  whom  the 
god  of  this  world  hath  blinded  the  minds  of  the  mv- 
believing,  that  the  light  of  the  gospel  of  the  glory 
of  Christ,  who  is  the  image  of  God,  should  not 
dawn  upon  them/'  The  word  translated  ^^hand- 
limg  deceitfully''  in  these  verses  means  to  ** cor- 
rupt" as  metals  are  debased  or  wine  adulterated, 
and  the  thought  is  that  of  debasing  the  pure  gold 
of  God's  Word,  or  adulterating  the  pure  wine  of 
God's  Word,  by  minglin-g  with  it  false  ideas. 
That  too  is  a  common  practice  to-day.  Paul  says 
that  he  has  **  renounced  the  hidden  things  of 
shame"  and  that  he  is  ^^not  walking  in  (theologi- 
cal) craftiness  (cunning  or  subtlety)" — it  is  evi- 


HOW  TO  INTEEPRET  THE  BIBLE      57 

dent  that  he  had  not  had  the  advantage  of  an  edu- 
cation in  some  of  our  American  institutions — and 
that  he  was  not  debasing  the  pure  gold  of  ^^the 
Word  of  God"  or  adulterating  the  pure  wine  of 
the  ^^Word  of  God''  by  mixing  in  his  own  precon- 
ceived notions.  Here  too  we  also  greatly  need  to 
be  on  our  guard  when  we  study  or  teach  the 
^^Word  of  God.'' 

Our  third  text  is  2  Tim.  2:15:  '*Give  diligence 
to  present  thyself  approved  unto  God,  a  workman 
that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed,  handling  aright 
the  word  of  truth."  The  Authorized  Version,  as 
you  know,  reads,  * '  Study  to  show  thyself  approved 
unto  God,  a  workman  that  needeth  not  to  he 
ashamed,  rightly  dividing  the  word  of  truth/'  The 
Greek  word  Paul  actually  used  means,  ^*  cutting 
straight, ' '  and  that  would  be  a  better  way  to  trans- 
late it  here  than  the  way  in  which  it  is  rendered  in 
either  the  Authorized  Version  or  the  Revised  Ver- 
sion. Then  the  verse  would  read  *  *  Give  diligence 
to  present  thyself  approved  unto  God,  a  workman 
that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed,  cutting  straight 
the  word  of  truth."  I  tell  you  there  is  a  lot  of 
crooked  cutting  nowadays  when  men  come  to  the 
study  and  interpretation  of  the  Word  of  God, 
especially  when  they  find  something  they  do  not 
wish  to  believe.  Some  years  ago,  a  friend  of 
mine  passed  by  a  carpenter  and  joiner's  shop  in  a 
Southern  city.  Over  the  door  was  this  sign,  ^^All 
sorts  of  twisting  and  turning  done  here."  That 
would  be  a  fine  sign  to  put  over  the  door  of  some  of 


58    VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

our  theological  seminaries,  and  many  of  our  pul- 
pits and  Bible  classes,  and  many  a  room  where 
Christians  are  studying  the  Word  of  God  alone ; 
and  each  one  of  us  needs  to  be  very  much  on  our 
guard  that  this  may  not  be  an  appropriate  sign 
to  be  put  over  the  door  of  the  room  where  we 
study  our  Bible  alone.  Remember,  as  you  study 
the  Bible  that  it  is  God's  Word  and  be  sure 
to  '^cut  it  straight.''  My  fourth  text  is  Matt. 
4:5-7,  *^The  devil  .  .  .  saith  unto  Him,  ...  it  is 
written."  You  see  from  this  passage  that  the 
devil  can  quote  scripture  and  interpret  or  misin- 
terpret scripture,  and  argue  from  what  ''is  writ- 
ten" in  the  Book  of  God.  If  you  think  he  has  quit 
the  business,  read  *^ Pastor"  Russell's  ** Millen- 
nial Dawn,"  or  Mrs.  Eddy's  ^'Science  and 
Health,"  or  some  of  the  productions  of  the 
*^ American  Institute  of  Sacred  Literature"  or  the 
Chicago  University,  or  some  of  the  Sunday  School 
helps  sent  out  by  some  of  our  denominational 
Boards.  But  I  would  not  advise  you  to  spend 
much  time  on  this  evidently  devil-inspired  trash. 
It  is  not  enough  to  study  the  Bible,  nor  even  to 
spend  several  hours  in  Bible  study  daily.  We 
must  seek  diligently  to  ''cut  it  straight/'  We 
must  find  out  how  to  interpret  the  Bible  so  as 
to  find  its  true  meaning,  so  as  to  discover  just 
what  God  meant  to  teach  by  each  verse  we  study : 
and  then  interpret  it  that  way  in  every  instance. 
Of  many  passages  of  scripture  there  are  several 
possible  meanings;  one  man  says  it  means  one 


HOW  TO  INTEEPEET  THE  BIBLE      59 

thing  and  another  man  says  it  means  another 
thing.  Now  God  intends  only  one  of  these  mean- 
ings. We  should  seek  to  find  out  not  what  men 
say  it  means,  even  good  men,  but  what  God  in- 
tended it  to  teach.  Is  there  any  way  in  which 
ordinary  men  like  you  and  me  can  tell  to  a  cer- 
tainty which  interpretation  of  several  possible  in- 
terpretations of  a  passage  is  the  right  interpreta- 
tion, the  exact  meaning  God  intended  to  convey? 
There  is.  There  are  certain  Laws  of  Interpreta- 
tion that  will  enable  you  to  know  in  at  least  al- 
most every  instance  just  what  is  the  true  inter- 
pretation of  every  verse  in  the  Bible,  what  is  the 
true  sense  of  the  passage,  just  what  God  wishes  to 
teach.  I  shall  endeavor  to  state  these  laws  so  you 
can  all  understand  them  and  then  apply  them  for 
yourselves. 

/.    Get  Absolutely  Right  with  God  Yourself  by 
the  Absolute  Surrender  of  Your  Will  to  God 

The  first  great  law  of  correct  Bible  interpreta- 
tion, which  will  be  recognized  as  a  law  of  God  by 
any  fair-minded  person  who  gives  it  a  few  min- 
utes' consideration,  is  Get  Absolutely  Right  unth 
God  Yourself  by  the  Absolute  Surrender  of  Your 
Will  to  Him.  The  only  man  who  is  at  all  compe- 
tent to  interpret  the  will  of  God  is  the  man  who  is 
in  harmony  with  God,  and  the  only  man  who  is  in 
harmony  with  God  is  the  man  whose  will  is  fully 
surrendered  to  God.    If  you  are  not  right  with 


60    VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

God  yourself,  you  certainly  are  not  competent  to 
say  what  Grod  means  by  any  passage  in  His  Word. 
Our  Lord  Jesus  Himself  says  this  in  John  7 :17, 
R.  v.,  *^If  any  man  willeth  to  do  Ms  mil,  he  shall 
know  of  the  teaching,  whether  it  is  of  God,  or 
whether  I  speak  from  myself. '^  Nothing  else  so 
clears  up  our  minds  to  understand  the  Word  of 
God  as  the  surrender  of  our  wills  to  God.  The 
will  is  the  eye  of  the  soul.  Our  Lord  says  that  also. 
He  says  in  Matt.  6 :22,  23,  R.  V.,  ^^The  lamp  of  the 
body  is  the  eye:  if  therefore  thine  eye  he  single, 
thy  whole  body  shall  be  full  of  light.  But  if  thine 
eye  be  evil,  thy  whole  body  shall  be  full  of  dark- 
ness." And  it  is  clear  from  the  next  verse  that  by 
a  * '  single  eye ' '  He  means  a  will  fully  surrendered 
to  God.  His  words  are,  ''No  man  can  serve  two 
masters:  for  either  he  will  hate  the  one,  and  love 
the  other ;  or  else  he  will  hold  to  one,  and  despise 
the  other. '^  If  your  will  is  surrendered  to  God 
and  to  Him  alone,  your  '^eye''  is  ^'single,"  and 
your  *^ whole  body  full  of  light.''  But  if  your 
will  is  not  fully  surrendered  to  God  and  Him 
alone,  your  **eye''  is  ^^eviP'  and  your  whole  per- 
son is  **full  of  darkness.''  Nothing  else  gives  us 
such  a  clear  eye  to  discern,  as  we  read  God's 
Word,  just  what  God  means,  as  an  entirely  sur- 
rendered will.  A  surrendered  will  will  do  more  to 
qualify  any  one  to  be  a  competent  and  dependable 
interpreter  of  the  Word  of  God  than  the  fullest 
possible  university  course  in  Greek  and  Hebrew 
and  the  cognate  languages.    As  I  said  last  Sun- 


HOW  TO  INTEEPEET  THE  BIBLE      61 

day,  I  have  known  great  Greek  scholars  and  great 
Hebrew  scholars  and  men  deeply  versed  in  the 
cognate  languages  who  were  blind  as  a  bat  to  the 
real  meaning  of  the  scriptures  because  they  lacked 
that  clearness  of  spiritual  vision  that  comes  only 
from  a  surrendered  will.  And  on  the  other  hand 
I  have  known  very  ordinary  and  quite  uneducated 
men  and  women,  men  and  women  with  no  preten- 
sions whatever  to  scholarship,  who  had  a  wonder- 
ful understanding  of  the  meaning  of  God's  Word 
because  their  wills  were  surrendered  to  God.  We 
get  this  same  principle  of  Bible  interpretation 
from  Psalm  25:14:  ^*The  secret  (or,  the  friend- 
ship) of  Jehovah  is  with  them  that  fear  Him;  and 
he  will  show  them  His  covenant.''  The  same 
thought  is  found  in  Prov.  3 :32,  ^ '  The  f roward  is 
an  abomination  to  Jehovah :  but  his  secret  is  with 
the  righteous. ' '  A  closely  similar  thought  is  found 
in  our  Lord's  last  words  to  His  disciples  on  the 
night  before  His  crucifixion,  in  John  15 :15,  E.  V. : 
'^No  longer  do  I  call  you  servants ;  for  the  servant 
knoweth  not  what  his  lord  doeth :  but  I  have  called 
you  friends ;  for  all  things  that  I  heard  from  my 
Father  I  have  made  known  unto  you.'' 

The  first  great  principle  of  Biblical  interpreta- 
tion is  then,  that  the  one  who  would  interpret  the 
Bible  must  himself  he  in  harmony  with  the  Author 
of  the  Booh  hy  the  surrender  of  his  will  to  God. 
Every  theological  professor  whose  will  is  not  fully 
surrendered  to  God,  should  be  turned  out  of  the 
chair  he  occupies  in  any  Seminary  or  University. 


62    VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

When  Mr.  Alexander  and  I  were  holding  meetings 
in  a  university  city  in  England,  Mr.  Alexander 
was  invited  out  to  dinner  by  one  of  the  most  promi- 
nent officers  in  one  of  the  theological  schools  con- 
nected with  the  university.  This  man,  who  was  a 
fine  man  in  many  ways,  took  exception  to  some  of 
our  teachings.  He  accompanied  Mr.  Alexander 
after  dinner  out  to  his  carriage,  and  as  they  stood 
by  the  carriage  and  had  a  few  earnest  parting 
words  Mr.  Alexander  put  the  question  straight 
to  him,  ^ '  Have  you  ever  made  a  full  surrender  of 
your  will  to  God?'*  This  prominent  theological 
university  teacher  very  frankly  and  gently  said  to 
Mr.  Alexander,  * '  No,  Mr.  Alexander,  I  have  not. ' ' 
That  accounted  for  his  misunderstanding  of  the 
Word  of  God,  and  the  same  thing  accounts  for  the 
misunderstanding  of  the  Word  of  God  on  the  part 
of  a  great  many  students  of  the  Word  to-day.  See 
to  it  that  you  are  not  blinded  in  a  similar  way  to 
the  real  meaning  of  God's  Word.  Unless  you  ful- 
fill this  first  great  law  of  correct  Bible  Interpreta- 
tion it  will  not  help  you  to  fulfill  the  other  laws. 
You  will  get  nowhere  in  your  study  of  the  Word. 

77.    Be  Determined  to  Find  Out  Just  What  God 

Intended  to  Teach  and  Not  What  You 

Wish  Him  to  Teach 

The  second  principle  of  correct  Bible  interpre- 
tation is.  Be  Determined  to  Find  Out  Just  What 
God  Intended  to  Teach  and  Not  What  You  Wish 


HOW  TO  INTEEPRET  THE  BIBLE      63 

Him  to  Teach.  One  great  reason  why  many  do 
not  find  out  the  true  meaning  of  God's  words  is 
because  they  do  not  really  wish  to  find  out  the  true 
meaning  of  God's  words,  but  they  wish  to  find 
some  way  in  which  they  can  force  God's  words 
into  harmony  with  their  own  notions.  Many  men 
and  women  see  in  the  Bible  just  what  they  wish  to 
see  in  the  Bible.  This  is  the  cause  of  the  blinding 
of  the  eyes  of  many.  Some  one  asked  me  the  other 
day,  * '  Why  cannot  the  Jews  see  that  their  own  Old 
Testament  Scriptures  predicted  a  suffering  Mes- 
siah, who  should  make  atonement  for  sin  by  His 
death  and  that  Jesus  is  that  Messiah?  It  is  so 
plain."  The  answer  is  simple,  because  they  do 
not  wish  to.  And  I  asked  the  person  who  asked 
me  this  question  another  question,  ^'Why  do  not 
Christians  to-day  see  that  there  are  other  predic- 
tions in  the  Old  Testament  just  as  plain  and  far 
more  of  them,  that  the  Messiah  is  coming  as  an  all- 
conquering  King  to  rule  the  nations  with  a  rod 
of  iron,  that  Jesus,  the  true  Messiah,  is  coming 
again  r'  The  answer  to  that  is  just  as  simple — 
because  they  do  not  wish  to. 

There  was  a  time  many  years  ago  when  I  was  so 
certain  that  all  men  would  ultimately  be  saved  and 
the  devil  too,  and  was  so  determined  to  establish 
that  doctrine,  that  I  interpreted  everything  I 
found  in  the  Bible  on  the  subject  of  future  punish- 
ment in  the  light,  or  rather  in  the  darkness,  of 
that  determination  of  mine,  to  make  the  Bible 
square  with  my  own  view,  which  I  reasoned  out 


64    VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

pMlosophically  and  was  ready  to  defend  against 
all  comers.  But  when  I  reached  the  point  where  I 
desired  not  only  to  make  the  Bible  square  with 
my  philosophical  arguments  for  universal  salva- 
tion, but  to  find  out  just  what  God  really  taught,  I 
easily  found  just  what  God  did  teach;  and  my 
universal  salvation  arguments  evaporated  into 
thin  air.  We  must  all  of  us  be  on  our  guard  at  this 
point,  that  in  absolute  honesty  we  have  but  one 
wish  and  that  is  to  find  out  just  what  God  means 
by  the  verse  we  are  studying  and  that  only,  no 
matter  how  much  it  may  conflict  with  our  previous 
ideas. 

Ill,    Get  the  Most  Accurate  Text 

The  third  principle  of  correct  Bible  interpreta- 
tion is.  Get  the  Most  Accurate  Text  to  Interpret. 
It  is  the  original  manuscripts  of  the  Bible  that  are 
the  very  Word  of  God.  Now  we  do  not  have  the 
original  Mss.  of  the  Bible.  We  have  many  Mss. 
but  not  one  of  them  is  the  original.  There  are 
many  variations  in  the  Mss.  which  we  possess. 
But  by  a  comparison  of  the  very  many  Mss.  we 
have  of  the  various  parts  of  the  Bible — and  we 
have  far,  far  more  Mss.  of  the  books  of  the  Bible 
than  of  any  other  ancient  book — ^we  can  come  very 
close  to  the  original  texts  as  they  came  from  the 
hands  of  Paul  and  John  and  Matthew  and  the  rest 
of  the  writers  of  the  books  of  the  Old  and  New 
Testaments.  Indeed  we  have  now  what  is  to  all 
practical  intents  and  purposes  what  is  the  original 


HOW  TO  INTERPEET  THE  BIBLE      65 

text  as  it  came  from  the  hand  of  the  original 
writers  of  the  various  books  of  the  Bible.  It  is 
wonderful  when  one  thinks  of  it,  when  we  remem- 
ber how  old  these  books  are  and  how  often  they 
were  copied  and  how  very  many  Mss.  we  have 
and  the  advances  in  scholarship,  especially  in  tex- 
tual criticism,  that  have  been  made  in  the  time 
between  when  the  Authorized  Version  was  pub- 
lished 310  years  ago  in  1611  and  when  the  Re- 
vised Version  was  published  only  a  few  years 
ago,  in  1881  (The  N.  T.),  that  there  are  so  few 
differences  of  real  importance  between  the  Author- 
ized Version  and  the  Revised  Version.  There  is 
not  one  single  doctrine  of  any  vital  importance 
affected  in  the  least  by  the  variations  between  the 
two  versions,  not  one.  That  is  amazing  and  shows 
the  wonderful  providential  care  with  which  Grod 
guarded  His  own  written  word.  But  there  are 
slight  differences  and,  of  course,  we  wish  the  exact 
mind  of  God  and,  as  that  is  found  in  the  original 
Mss.,  we  therefore  desire  and  should  seek  the 
purest  text,  the  most  exact  text,  the  text  which  is 
closest  to  the  original  Mss.  There  can  be  no  hon- 
est question  that,  taken  all  in  all,  the  Revised  Ver- 
sion presents  a  text  more  nearly  exactly  the  same 
as  that  of  the  original  Mss.  than  the  Authorized 
Version.  So,  though  for  many  reasons  the 
Authorized  Version  is  the  better  for  the  general 
reading  of  the  average  Christian,  nevertheless, 
every  one  who  wishes  to  find  the  exact  words  of 
God  should  have  and  should  study  the  Revised 


66    VALUE  OF  PROPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

Version.  There  is  one  glaring  misrendering  in  the 
Revised  Version.  It  is  f onnd  in  2  Tim.  3 :16.  The 
Revised  Version  reads,  ^  ^  Every  scripture  inspired 
of  God  is  also  profitable  for  teaching,  for  reproof, 
for  correction,  for  instruction  which  is  in  right- 
eousness," putting  the  *4s"  after  the  *' inspired  of 
God''  instead  of  before  it  as  in  the  Authorized 
Version.  There  is  absolutely  no  warrant  for  this 
change.  It  is  utterly  indefensible.  It  should  read 
**  Every  scripture  is  inspired  of  God  and  is  profit- 
able for  teaching,  for  reproof,  for  correction,  for 
instruction  in  righteousness.''  But  the  fault  in 
that  case  is  not  in  the  Greek  text  upon  which  the 
Revised  Version  is  built,  but  upon  the  translation 
of  the  text.  There  is  no  question  about  the  Greek 
text  even  in  this  case.  Many  uncertainties  about 
the  meaning  of  various  passages  in  the  Bible 
would  be  easily  settled  if  we  would  just  look  at  the 
more  correct  text  as  given  in  the  Revised  Version. 
Take  as  an  illustration,  1  Thess.  5:22.  The 
Authorized  Version  renders  this  *^  abstain  from 
all  appearance  of  evil ; ' '  the  R.  V.  renders  it  *  *  ab- 
stain from  every  form  of  evil."  While  the  Greek 
text  King  James  translators  and  the  revisers 
used  is  the  same,  there  is  no  room  for  doubt  that 
the  English  text  in  the  Revised  Version  gives  the 
true  sense  of  the  Greek  text  better  than  the 
Authorized  Version.  We  are  not  so  much  to  *  *  ab- 
stain from  the  appearance  of  evil"  but  from  what 
is  actually  evil,  and  from  what  is  actually  evil  in 


HOW  TO  INTEEPRET  THE  BIBLE      67 

every  form  m  which  it  appears,  ^^  every  form  of 
evil.'' 

IV,    Fimd  Out  the  Most  Exact  and  Literal  Mea/ti- 
ing  of  the  Text 

The  fourth  principle  of  correct  Bible  interpre- 
tation is,  Find  Out  the  Most  Exact  and  Literal 
Meaning  of  the  Text.  It  is  one  of  the  most  firmly 
established  principles  of  law  in  England  and  in 
America  that  ^^a  law  stands  as  it  is  written,"  i.  e., 
that  a  law  means  exactly  what  it  says  and  is  to  be 
interpreted  and  enforced  just  as  it  reads.  This  is 
just  as  good  a  principle  for  interpreting  the  Bible 
as  for  interpreting  law.  If  Shailer  Mathews  and 
the  rest  of  the  higher  critics  and  *'new  theology" 
men  were  practicing  law  and  should  try  in  any 
court  of  justice  to  interpret  laws  as  they  interpret 
the  BiblCj  they  would  be  laughed  out  of  court.  It 
is  no  wonder  that  the  one  who  has  done  more  to 
prick  the  iridescent  soap  bubbles  of  the  higher 
critics  and  new  theology  men  than  almost  any  one 
else  was  a  brilliant  lawyer,  knighted  by  King  Ed- 
ward for  his  eminent  legal  talents,  my  late  inti- 
mate and  beloved  friend,  Sir  Eobert  Anderson. 
The  primary  meaning  of  any  passage  of  Scripture, 
just  as  the  meaning  of  any  law  on  our  statute 
books,  is  the  literal  meaning,  unless  it  is  perfectly 
plain  from  the  context  or  from  other  scripture  or 
from  the  manifestly  figurative  character  of  the 
passage  that  something  else  than  the  literal  sense 
is  intended. 


68    VALUE  OF  PBOPEB  BIBLE  STUDY 

Those  who  do  not  wish  in  any  particular  case 
to  accept  what  God  actually  says,  including  some 
who  really  are  scholars,  who  ought  to  know  bet- 
ter, often  take  refuge  from  the  plain  meaning  of  a 
text  by  saying,  ^^Oh,  but  you  know  *the  letter  kill- 
eth  but  the  Spirit  giveth  life,'  "  by  which  they 
mean  the  literal  sense  of  a  passage,  the  interpreta- 
tion that  takes  God  as  meaning  just  what  He  says, 
kills,  but  a  '* spiritual"  interpretation,  i.  e.,  an  in- 
terpretation that  makes  God  mean  something  He 
does  not  say,  gives  life.  If  any  one  will  look  up 
PauPs  words,  'Hhe  letter  killeth  but  the  Spirit 
giveth  life"  (2  Cor.  3:6,  E.  V.)  in  their  context,  he 
will  see  that  Paul  never  dreamed  of  such  an  inter- 
pretation or  application  of  his  words  as  these  men 
give  to  them.  It  is  clear  as  day  from  the  context 
that  what  Paul  meant  was  that  the  mere  written 
letter,  ^^ written  with  ink"  (v.  3)  or  engraven  ^^in 
tables  of  stone"  killed,  but  the  Word  of  God  writ- 
ten ^^with  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God"  on  our 
hearts  (^4n  tables  that  are  hearts  of  flesh")  gives 
life.  These  men  who  thus  misuse  2  Cor.  3 :6  call 
those  who  hold  fast  to  the  actual  literal  meaning 
of  the  words  *^  deadly  literalists. "  But  if  that 
kind  of  literalism  is  ^ '  deadly, ' '  then  Paul  himself, 
the  very  one  who  wrote  these  words,  was  one  of 
the  most  ^^ deadly  literalists"  the  world  has  ever 
known;  for  Paul  constantly  insisted  upon  the  lit- 
eral meaning  of  words  and  would  build  an  argu- 
ment upon  the  tense,  number  or  case  of  a  word 
used.     A  very  distinguished  Hebrew  scholar,  a 


I 


HOW  TO  INTEKPRET  THE  BIBLE      69 

professor  in  a  leading  American  theological  semi- 
nary, once  tried  to  work  this  interpretation  of  2 
Cor.  3:6  on  me.  In  a  friendly  discussion  I  had 
driven  him  into  a  comer  by  quoting  a  plain  state- 
ment of  God's  Word.  He  could  not  escape,  but 
tried  to  by  the  subterfuge  of  saying,  ''But  you 
know '  the  letter  killeth  but  the  Spirit  giveth  life. '  ' ' 
I  replied,  ''Now  Professor,  do  you  really  think 
that  is  what  Paul  means  by  those  words?"  And 
he  frankly  said,  "No,  I  know  it  is  not." 

Another  very  easy  and  very  common  way  of 
reading  out  of  the  Bible  what  God  lias  put  into  it, 
is  for  men  to  say  when  they  are  driven  into  a  cor- 
ner by  some  plain  passage  that  they  do  not  wish 
to  believe,  ' '  Oh,  that  is  figurative, ' '  by  which  they 
mean  it  does  not  mean  what  it  says,  but  you  can 
take  it  to  mean  whatever  you  like.  That  is  a  very 
common  way  nowadays  with  the  post-millennial- 
ists  of  reading  out  of  the  Bible  what  God  so  plain- 
ly says  in  it  about  the  personal,  visible,  bodily, 
imminent  coming  again  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  It  is 
outrageous  trickery,  unworthy  of  any  one  who  has 
sense  enough  to  subordinate  his  own  crude  and 
fallible  opinions  to  the  plain  teaching  and  in- 
finite wisdom  of  God's  Word.  When  statements 
are  plainly  figurative,  of  course,  interpret  them  as 
figures,  but  even  then  remember  that  figures  stand 
for  facts,  and  that  God's  figures  never  overstate 
the  facts,  and  never  misinterpret  the  facts,  and 
that  an  honest  man's  figures  never  mean  just  the 
opposite  of  what  they  seem  to  teach. 


70     VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

The  most  plain  and  obvious  meaning  of  any 
passage  in  the  Bible  is  always  to  be  preferred  to 
a  subtle  and  ingenious  one;  for  the  Bible  was 
written  for  plain,  honest-minded,  humble-minded, 
common  folk  and  not  for  a.  few  sublimated  mystics. 
Did  not  Jesus  Himself  say,  ^  ^  I  thank  thee,  0 
Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  that  thou  didst 
hide  these  things  from  the  wise  and  understand- 
ing, and  didst  reveal  them  unto  babes :  yea,  Father, 
for  so  it  was  well-pleasing  in  thy  sight!"  (Matt. 
11:25,  26,  E.  v.).  Well,  do  not  forget  it.  A  man 
who  really  was  a  great  scholar  once  said  at  a  Bible 
Conference,  **I  think  the  best  method  of  Bible 
study  is  the  haby  method/'  by  which  he  meant  just 
what  Jesus  Christ  means  here,  that  God  reveals 
His  truth  to  the  humble,  teachable  mind,  to  the 
one  who  comes  to  Him  as  a  babe.  Eemember  how 
Jesus  said  again,  *^  Except  ye  be  converted  and 
become  as  little  children,  ye  shall  in  no  wise  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  (Matt.  18:3.) 

V.    Note  the  Exact  Force  of  Each  Word  Used 

The  fifth  principle  of  correct  Bible  interpreta- 
tion is.  Note  the  Exact  Force  of  Each  Word  Used. 
Eemember  that  the  Bible  is  Grod's  Word  and  that 
God  always  says  exactly  what  He  means,  no  more, 
no  less.  Eemember  that  the  Bible  is  verbally  in- 
spired; i.  e.,  that  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  unerring 
Spirit  of  God  led  the  Bible  writers  in  the  choice 
of  every  word  they  wrote,  led  them  to  write  the 


HOW  TO  INTERPRET  THE  BIBLE      71 

word  that  exactly  expressed  what  was  in  the  mind 
of  God,  or,  as  Paul  puts  it,  ^*  Which  things  also 
we  speak,  not  in  words  ivliich  man's  toisdom 
teachetli,  but  which  the  Spirit  teacheth;  combining 
spiritual  things  with  spiritual  words.''  (1  Cor. 
2 :13,  R.  v.).  N'ote  every  word  and  the  exact  force 
of  every  tvord.  Take,  for  example,  Rev.  2 :10 :  * *Be 
thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  the 
crown  of  life. "  Now  this  is  constantly  interpreted 
as  meaning  that  we  are  saved  by  being  faithful 
unto  death,  but  it  does  not  say  so.  It  says,  ^^Be 
thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  the 
croivn  of  life."  It  tells  us,  not  the  way  to  be  saved, 
but  the  way  to  obtain  the  crown.  Take  Luke  6 :30, 
R.  v.,  *^Give  to  every  one  that  asketh  thee.''  This 
is  constantly  interpreted  as  if  it  meant  *^Give  to 
every  one  that  asketh  thee,  just  what  he  asJcs/^ 
but  it  does  not  say  so ;  it  says,  ^ '  Give  to  every  one 
that  asketh,"  but  does  not  specify  what  to  give 
to  him.  And  it  means  exactly  and  literally  what 
it  says.  It  is  far  better  to  give  some  men  advice 
than  it  is  to  give  them  money.  The  whole  context 
shows  we  are  to  take  God  as  our  example  in  our 
giving  and  in  all  else  that  we  do,  and  while  God 
gives  to  every  one  that  asks.  He  certainly  does 
not  always  give  even  to  His  own  children,  the  very 
thing  we  have  asked.  Take  'Eph.  4 :30,  ' '  Grieve 
not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  in  whom  ye  were 
sealed  unto  the  day  of  redemption."  This  is  con- 
stantly interpreted  as  meaning  that  we  are  not  to 
*' grieve  away  the  Holy  Spirit."    But  it  does  not 


72     YALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

say  so.  So  far  from  teacMng  us  that  we  can  grieve 
away  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  tells  us  in  the  last  part 
of  the  verse  that  we  cannot,  *4n  whom  ye  were 
sealed  unto  the  day  of  redemption/'  But  while 
we  cannot  grieve  Him  away,  if  we  are  children  of 
God,  we  can  grieve  Him,  and  alas,  we  do. 

VI.    Interpret  the  Words   Used  m  Any  Verse 
According  to  Bible  Usage 

The  sixth  great  principle  of  correct  Bible  in- 
terpretation is.  Interpret  the  Words  Used  in  Any 
Verse  According  to  the  Bible  Usage  of  those 
words.  Some  people  when  they  find  any  word  in 
the  Bible,  run  off  for  "Webster's  Dictionary  or  the 
Standard  Dictionary  to  find  out  just  what  the 
word  means.  No,  go  to  the  Bible.  Take  your 
concordance  and  look  up  every  passage  in  which 
the  word  in  question  is  used  and  you  will  have 
God's  definition  of  its  meaning.  For  example, 
take  the  word  *^ death."  In  Eom.  6:23  we  read, 
'^For  the  wages  of  sin  is  death;  but  the  free  gift 
of  God  is  eternal  life  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord." 
What  does  *^ death"  mean  here!  Many  run  off  to 
a  dictionary  and  decide  it  means  *^  cessation  of 
existence,"  but  take  your  Bible  and  concordance 
and  go  through  the  Bible  and  you  will  find  it  means 
nothing  of  the  kind  in  the  Bible.  God  Himself 
defines  the  '^death"  which  is  the  ultimate  result 
of  sin  in  Eey.  21  ;8:  '^But  the  fearful  and  unbe- 
lieving, and  the  abominable,  and  murderers,  and 


HOW  TO  INTEEPRET  THE  BIBLE      73 

whoremongers,  and  sorcerers,  and  idolators,  and 
all  liars,  shall  have  their  part  in  the  lake  which 
hurneth  with  fire  and  hrintstone:  which  is  the  sec- 
ond death/'  A  man  came  into  my  office  in  Minne- 
apolis. This  text  was  hanging  among  others  upon 
the  wall  and  he  read,  ^^The  ivages  of  sifi  is  death/' 
and  then  turned  to  me  and  said,  ^'Do  you  believe 
that?"  I  knew  the  man  was  an  annihilationist 
and  said,  ^'Yes,  sir,  I  believe  it,  but  do  you  know 
what  ^ death'  means T'  and  then  I  took  my  Bible 
and  showed  him  that  his  understanding  of  the 
word  *' death''  was  not  the  Bible  meaning  and  I 
think  I  convinced  him  of  his  error.  Take  the  word 
*' sanctify,"  a  word  of  very  frequent  occurrence 
in  the  Bible.  Many  define  the  word  for  themselves 
and  take  it  to  mean,  ^'to  make  absolutely  holy 
in  character,"  and  build  up  a  whole  system  of 
theology,  and  an  utterly  false  system  of  theology, 
on  their  wrong  definition.  If  they  would  take  their 
Bibles  and  concordances  and  look  up  every  one  of 
the  very  many  passages  in  the  Bible  where  this 
word  is  used,  they  would  find  that  the  primary 
meaning  of  *Ho  sanctify"  is  ^Ho  set  apart  for 
God, ' '  and  so  they  would  find  that  the  Bible  teach- 
ing on  this  exceedingly  precious  and  important 
subject  of  sanctification  is  entirely  different  from 
what  they  suppose.  Just  so  with  the  word  ^'jus- 
tify" and  a  multitude  of  other  words.  Wlien  you 
are  in  doubt  as  to  the  exact  meaning  of  any  word 
in  the  Bible,  take  your  concordance  and  look  up 


74    VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

every  verse  in  tlie  Bible  where  this  word  is  used 
and  you  will  see  jnst  what  the  word  means. 

VII.    Interpret  the  Words  of  Each  Author  in  the 

Bible  With  a  Regard  to  the  Particular 

Usage  of  That  Author 

The  seventh  principle  of  correct  Bible  interpre- 
tation is  closely  connected  with  the  sixth.  It  is, 
Interpret  the  Words  of  Each  Author  in  the  Bible 
with  a  Regard  to  the  Particular  Usage  of  That 
Author.  While  God  is  the  real  Author  of  every 
book  in  the  Bible,  He  used  the  individual  person- 
ality of  each  man  He  employed  to  write  the  va- 
rious books  which  make  up  His  own  Word.  So 
we  should  find  how  the  particular  writer  that  we 
are  studying  uses  any  word.  For  example,  James 
does  not  use  the  words  ^^ faith"  and  '^ believe"  in 
the  exact  sense  Paul  uses  them,  nor  in  the  exact 
sense  in  which  John  uses  them.  When  James 
talks  about  ^^ believing"  he  means  a  mere  intel- 
lectual conviction  of  the  truth,  and  so  he  says, 
**the  demons  also  believe,  and  shudder"  (James 
2 :19,  E.  v.).  Paul  speaks  of  *^ believing"  as  a  con- 
viction that  governs  a  man's  whole  inner  life, 
his  intellect,  his  emotions,  and  his  will ;  so  he  says 
in  Eom.  10:9,  10,  E.  V.:  ''If  thou  shalt  confess 
with  thy  mouth  Jesus  as  Lord,  and  shalt  believe 
in  thy  heart  that  God  raised  him  from  the  dead, 
thou  shalt  be  saved;  for  with  the  heart  man  be- 
lieveth  unto  righteousness;  and  with  the  mouth 


HOW  TO  INTERPEET  THE  BIBLE      75 

confession  is  made  unto  salvation. '*  And  he  said 
to  the  Philippian  jailer  in  Acts  16:31,  R.  V.,  ''Be- 
lieve on  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved.'' 
John,  too,  when  he  speaks  of  *' believing'^  means 
a  conviction  to  which  a  man  utterly,  unreservedly 
and  gladly  surrenders  himself.  So  he  says  in 
John  20:31,  R.  V.,  ^^  These  are  written,  that  ye 
may  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of 
God;  and  that  believing  ye  may  have  life  in  his 
name/'  And  he  says  in  1  John  5:1:  ''Whosoever 
helieveth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  begotten  of 
God;''  and  four  verses  farther  down,  '^Who  is  he 
that  overcometh  the  world,  but  he  that  helieveth 
that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God. ' ' 

VIII,    Interpret  Individual  Verses  With  a 
Regard  to  the  Context 

The  eighth  principle  of  correct  Bible  interpre- 
tation is,  Interpret  Individual  Verses  with  a  Re- 
gard to  the  Context.  Many  a  verse  might  mean 
two  or  three  or  more  different  things  if  it  stood 
alone,  without  any  setting;  but  in  the  connection 
in  which  it  is  found  in  the  Bible,  taking  note  of 
what  goes  before  and  what  comes  after,  it  cannot 
mean  but  one  of  these  three  or  four  different 
things.  So  we  must  notice  carefully  what  comes 
before  the  verse  we  are  studying  and  what  comes 
after  it,  if  we  are  to  find  out  the  exact  meaning  of 
the  verse  before  us.  For  example,  take  Acts  2 :39, 
R.  v.,  *'For  to  you  is  the  promise,  and  to  your 


76    VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

children,  and  to  all  that  are  afar  off,  even  as  many 
as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call  unto  him/'  Now 
what  is  ' '  the  promise ' '  to  which  reference  is  made 
in  this  passage  ?  Some  say  it  is  the  promise  of  sal- 
vation ;  others  say  it  is  the  promise  to  the  individ- 
ual of  the  baptism  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  Which  is 
right?  If  the  verse  stood  alone  either  one  might  be 
right.  But  when  we  look  at  it  in  its  context,  only 
one  is  seen  to  be  the  true  sense.  Read  the  verse 
that  goes  immediately  before,  *^And  Peter  said 
unto  them.  Repent  ye  and  be  baptized  every  one 
of  you  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  unto  the  remis- 
sion of  your  sins ;  and  ye  shall  receive  the  gift  of 
the  Holy  Spirit/'  Then  he  goes  on  immediately  to 
say,  ''For  unto  you  is  the  promise'' — ^what  prom- 
ise! The  promise,  of  course,  of  which  he  has  just 
spoken,  *^the  promise  of  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Spirit. ' '  Take  John  14 :18,  R.  V. :  *  ^  I  will  not  leave 
you  desolate :  I  come  unto  you. ' '  To  what  coming 
does  this  refer,  to  the  Second  Coming  of  Christ, 
or  to  His  coming  in  the  Holy  Spirit  to  dwell  in 
their  hearts?  It  might  mean  either,  if  it  stood 
alone.  But  if  you  will  read  the  two  verses  that 
immediately  precede  and  the  five  verses  immedi- 
ately following,  you  will  see  it  refers  to  His  com- 
ing in  the  Holy  Spirit  to  dwell  in  their  hearts. 
He  says  in  the  verses  that  immediately  precede, 
*  *  And  I  will  pray  the  Father,  and  he  shall  give  you 
another  Comforter,  that  he  may  be  with  you  for- 
ever, even  the  Spirit  of  truth:  whom  the  world 
cannot  receive ;  for  it  beholdeth  Him  not,  neither 


HOW  TO  INTERPRET  THE  BIBLE      77 

knoweth  him:  ye  know  him;  for  he  abideth  with 
you,  and  shall  be  in  you. ' '  Then  He  says,  ' '  I  will 
not  leave  you  desolate:  I  come  unto  you/'  This 
becomes  even  clearer  in  the  verses  that  follow 
where  He  speaks  of  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
in  which  He  will  manifest  Himself  to  them  and 
will  come  and  make  His  abode  with  them. 


IX.    Interpret  Individual  Passage  in  the  Light 
of  Parallel  or  Related  Passages 

The  ninth  principle  of  correct  Biblical  interpre- 
tation is,  Interpret  Individual  Passages  in  the 
Light  of  Parallel  or  Related  Passages,  The 
meaning  of  many  passages  in  the  Gospels  whose 
meaning  seems  doubtful  would  be  settled  at  once 
if  one  would  only  read  the  parallel  passages  in 
another  Gospel.  Take  for  example,  Luke  14:  26, 
27,  R.  V. :  **If  any  man  cometh  unto  me,  and  hateth 
not  his  own  father,  and  mother,  and  wife,  and  chil- 
dren, and  brethren,  and  sisters,  yea,  and  his  own 
life  also,  he  cannot  be  my  disciple.  Whosoever 
doth  not  bear  his  own  cross,  and  come  after  me, 
cannot  be  my  disciple.''  Now  that  looks  hard. 
It  has  puzzled  more  people  than  almost  any  other 
passage  in  the  Bible.  But  turn  to  the  parallel 
passage,  Matt.  10 :37,  38,  and  it  is  all  cleared  up. 
**He  that  loveth  father  or  mother  more  than  me 
is  not  worthy  of  me;  and  he  that  loveth  son  or 
daughter  more  than  me  is  not  worthy  of  me.  And 
he  that  doth  not  take  his  cross  and  follow  after 


78    VALUE  OF  PROPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

me,  is  not  worthy  of  me."  So  it  is  evident  that 
our  Lord  Jesns  used  the  word  *^hate''  in  Luke 
14 :26,  27  in  a  sense  in  which  it  is  used  a  number 
of  times  in  the  Bible,  as  a  comparatively  less  love. 
Our  love  for  God  should  be  so  immeasurably  su- 
perior to  our  love  to  even  the  dearest  of  our 
earthly  relatives  that  in  comparison  with  our  love 
to  God  our  attitude  toward  them  should  be  like 
aversion,  or  turning  away  from  them. 

Take  John  14:3,  R.  V.,  ^^I  will  come  again,  and 
will  receive  you  unto  myself;  that  where  I  am, 
there  ye  may  be  also."  Now  our  Lord  might  refer 
to  His  coming  again  to  receive  us  at  death,  or  He 
might  refer  to  His  Second  Coming.  To  which  does 
He  refer?  Another  passage  clearly  and  unmistak- 
ably answers  the  question,  1  Thess.  4 :16, 17,  R.  V. : 
^  ^For  the  Lord  Himself  shall  descend  from  heaven, 
with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and 
with  the  trump  of  God:  and  the  dead  in  Christ 
shall  rise  first;  then  we  that  are  alive,  that  are 
left,  shall  together  with  them  be  caught  up  in  the 
clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air:  and  so  shall 
we  ever  be  with  the  Lord. ' '  There  are  four  points 
in  each  statement ;  they  exactly  cover  one  another 
and  make  it  clear  that  PauPs  words  are  an  in- 
spired commentary  on  our  Lord's  words.  Jesus 
says,  ^  ^  I  will  come  again ; ' '  Paul  says,  ' '  The  Lord 
Himself  shall  descend  from  heaven  with  a  shout, 
with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with  the 
trump  of  God."  Jesus  says,  *'And  mil  receive 
you  unto  myself ;''  Paul  says,  ^*We  .  .  .  shall  he 


HOW  TO  INTERPEET  THE  BIBLE      79 

caught  up  in  the  clouds  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the 
air/'  Jesus  says,  ^^That  where  I  am,  there  ye  muy 
he  also-/'  Paul  says,  ''So  shall  we  ever  he  with  the 
Lord/'  Jesus  says  in  introducing  this  promise, 
''Let  not  your  heart  he  troubled;^'  Paul  says  in 
closing,  "Wherefore  comfort  one  another  with 
these  words/'  Take  Matt.  13 :33,  R.  V. :  ^^The  king- 
dom of  heaven  is  like  unto  leaven,  which  a  woman 
took,  and  hid  in  three  measures  of  meal,  till  it  was 
all  leavened. ' '  Now  some  say  this  means  that  the 
Kingdom  of  God,  the  truth  of  God  and  the  Gospel 
of  God,  are  going  to  gradually  grow  and  spread 
until  they  pervade  the  whole  world.  Others  say 
that  the  leaven  represents  the  corrupt  doctrine, 
that  the  woman,  an  apostate  church,  mixes  in  the 
children's  bread  and  which  multiplies  like  the 
yeast  germs  until  the  whole  life  and  doctrine  of 
the  church  is  leavened.  Which  is  right?  Turn  to 
1  Cor.  5:6-8,  R.  V.,  and  you  get  God's  answer  to 
this  important  question:  '^Know  ye  not  that  a 
little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lumpf  Purge  out 
the  old  leaven,  that  ye  may  be  a  new  lump,  even  as 
ye  are  unleavened.  For  our  passover  also  hath 
been  sacrificed:  wherefore  let  us  keep  the  feast, 
not  with  old  leaven,  neither  with  the  leaven  of 
malice  and  wickedness,  but  with  the  unleavened 
bread  of  sincerity  and  truth."  This  is  an  in- 
spired commentary  on  our  Lord's  words  and 
makes  it  as  clear  as  day  that  the  *  heaven"  refers 
to  corruption,  error  and  sin. 
The  Bible  itself  is  the  very  best  commentary  on 


80    VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

the  Bible.  There  is  not  a  doubtful  or  difficult 
passage  in  the  Bible  anywhere  that  some  other 
passage  does  not  clear  up  and  explain,  if  we  seek 
long  enough  for  it.  The  best  book  to  help  you  in 
finding  these  other  passages  that  clear  up  uncer- 
tainties and  solve  difficulties  is  the  *^  Treasury  of 
Scripture  Knowledge.''  Of  several  possible  ex- 
planations of  a  passage,  choose  the  one  in  har- 
mony with  the  general  teaching  or  trend  of  the 
Bible.  If  any  one  received  a  letter  from  me  that 
had  a  statement  in  it  that  was  capable  of  two 
interpretations,  one  of  which  was  in  harmony  with 
the  general  trend  of  my  letter  and  my  other  writ- 
ings, and  one  of  which  was  utterly  at  variance  with 
the  general  trend  of  my  letter  and  with  my  other 
writings,  he  would  not  hesitate  for  one  moment 
to  give  that  interpretation  that  was  in  harmony 
with  the  general  teaching  and  trend  of  my  letter 
and  of  my  other  writings,  and  just  so  we  ought  to 
act  in  interpreting  the  Bible.  This  does  not  mean 
that  we  are  to  distort  and  twist  a  passage  out  of 
its  obvious  meaning  so  there  may  be  no  apparent 
contradiction  between  it  and  some  other  clear 
passage  in  the  Bible.  One  of  the  most  vicious 
principles  of  Bible  interpretation  is  that  we  must 
reconcile  every  passage  with  the  teaching  of  every 
other  passage.  As  the  Bible  is  the  revelation  of 
an  infinite  mind  that  presents  all  sides  of  the 
truth,  it  is  inevitable  that  there  should  be  in  it  two 
lines  of  truth  which  it  is  perfectly  easy  to  recon- 
cile in  a  mind  of  infinite  wisdom,  but  which  we  in 


HOW  TO  INTERPEET  THE  BIBLE      81 

our  limitations  of  thought  and  onesidedness  of 
thought,  cannot  reconcile  at  all.  So,  for  example, 
we  are  not  to  try  to  explain  away  the  clear  teach- 
ing of  the  Word  of  Grod  as  to  the  sovereignty  of 
God  on  the  one  hand,  nor  the  clear  teaching  of  the 
Word  of  God  as  to  the  freedom  of  the  human  will 
on  the  other  hand.  But  if  there  are  several  very 
easily  possible  interpretations  of  a  passage  and 
one  fits  in  more  harmoniously  with  the  general 
teaching  and  trend  of  the  Bible  than  the  other, 
that  is  the  one  to  be  accepted. 

X.    Interpret  Obscure  Passages  in  the  Light  of 
Passages  That  Are  Perfectly  Plain 

The  tenth  principle  of  correct  Biblical  interpre- 
tation is.  Interpret  Obscure  Passages  in  the  Light 
of  Passages  that  are  Perfectly  Plai/n.  Many  do 
just  the  opposite  thing.  There  will  be  a  number 
of  passages,  the  meaning  of  which  is  as  plain  as 
day.  There  will  be  another  passage  which  is  more 
or  less  obscure,  and  they  will  ignore  all  these  per- 
fectly plain  passages  and  try  to  explain  them  away 
in  the  uncertain  light  of  the  obscure  passage. 
Just  the  other  procedure  would  be  the  rational 
one.  Take,  for  example,  1  Cor.  9:27,  R.  V.:  '^I 
buffet  my  body,  and  bring  it  into  bondage :  lest  by 
any  means,  after  that  I  have  preached  to  others,  I 
myself  should  be  rejected'^  (rather,  be  disap- 
proved). Now  this  might  seem  to  imply  a  fear  on 
PauPs  part  that  even  after  his  faithful  work  he 


82    VALUE  OF  PROPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

might  be  lost  (taking  the  exact  force  of  the  words 
and  looking  up  their  Biblical  usage,  we  find  that 
the  verse  even  when  taken  alone  cannot  possibly 
teach  this),  but  there  are  numerous  passages  in 
the  Bible  which  make  it  plain  as  day  that  Paul 
entertained  no  fear  whatever  of  such  a  character. 
He  says  in  2  Tim.  1 :12,  R.  V. :  ^'For  which  cause  I 
suffer  also  these  things :  yet  I  am  not  ashamed ;  for 
I  know  him  whom  I  have  believed,  and  I  am  per- 
suaded that  he  is  able  to  guard  that  which  I  have 
committed  unto  him  against  that  day,"  And  he 
says  in  2  Tim.  4:18,  R.  V.,  ''The  Lord  will  deliver 
me  from  every  evil  work,  and  will  save  me  unto  his 
heavenly  kingdom :  to  whom  be  the  glory  for  ever 
and  ever. ' '  And  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  distinctly 
said  in  John  10:28,  R.  V.,  *^I  give  unto  them  eter- 
nal life ;  and  they  shall  never  perish y  and  no  one 
shall  snatch  them  out  of  my  hand,''  And  in  1  John 
2 :19,  R.  v.,  John  says,  ' '  They  went  out  from  us, 
but  they  were  not  of  us ;  for  if  they  had  been  of  us, 
they  would  have  continued  with  us:  but  they  went 
out,  that  they  might  be  made  manifest  that  they 
all  are  not  of  us,''  thus  distinctly  teaching  that 
when  one  is  really  bom  again  he  will  not  fall  away. 

XI,  Interpret  Any  Passage  in  the  Bible  as  Those 
Who  Were  Addressed  Would  Have  Understood  It 

The  eleventh  principle  of  correct  Biblical  in- 
terpretation is.  Interpret  Any  Passage  in  the  Bible 
as  Those   Who   Were  Addressed   Would  Have 


HOW  TO  INTEEPRET  THE  BIBLE      83 

Understood  It.  Words  that  were  addressed  to 
any  people  were  intended  to  be  understood  hy 
them.  There  may  be  exceptions  to  this  principle, 
but  they  are  rare.  An  illustration  of  an  exception 
is  found  in  John  2:19,  R.  V.,  where  he  says,  ** De- 
stroy this  temple,  and  in  three  days  I  will  raise  it 
up.'^  John  tells  us  Jesus  was  speaking  of  the  tem- 
ple of  His  body,  but  the  Jews  would  not  have  so 
understood  it.  In  this  case  our  Lord  Jesus  was  not 
speaking  for  the  present  moment  but  for  the  days 
that  were  to  come.  This  John  explains  in  the 
22nd  verse  where  he  says,  '^When  therefore  he 
was  raised  from  the  dead,  his  disciples  remem- 
bered that  He  spake  this;  and  they  believed  the 
scripture,  and  the  word  which  Jesus  had  said." 
In  interpreting  the  Bible  we  need  to  have  a 
knowledge  of  the  times  and  places  and  customs 
where  the  words  were  spoken.  For  example,  our 
Lord  said  to  Peter  in  Matt.  16:19,  E.  V.,  *^I  will 
give  unto  thee  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven : 
and  whatsoever  thou  shalt  bind  on  earth  shall  be 
bound  in  heaven ;  and  whatsoever  thou  shalt  loose 
on  earth  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven.'^  Now  this  was 
perfectly  understood  by  those  to  whom  he  said 
it,  because  they  knew  the  customs  of  the  day. 
When  one  graduated  from  one  of  the  Eabbinical 
classes,  he  was  given  by  the  Eabbi  a  *^key"  to 
indicate  that  he  was  now  ready  to  open  the  secrets 
of  the  kingdom;  and  so  our  Lord  promised  to 
Peter  *Hhe  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven"  to  in- 
dicate that  Peter  would  be  able  to  open  the  truth 


84    VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  men.  We  see  Peter 
using  the  keys  with  the  Jews  on  the  day  of  Pente- 
cost and  with  the  Gentiles  in  the  household  of 
Cornelius.  There  was  another  well-known  usage 
of  the  day  that  explains  the  remainder  of  the 
verse.  The  words  *^bind  and  loose''  were  used 
constantly  of  the  Eabbis  as  referring  to  *  ^forbid- 
ding and  permitting. ' '  For  example,  Shammai,  a 
very  strict  Rabbi,  was  said  to  *^bind,"  or  *^for- 
bid''  what  Hillel,  a  more  generous  and  liberal 
Rabbi,  was  said  to  ^^ loose,"  or  *^ permit." 

Z7/.    Interpret  What  Belongs  to  the  Christian, 

as  Belonging  to  the  Christian;  What  Belongs 

to  the  Jew,  as  Belonging  to  the  Jew,  and 

What  Belongs  to  the  Gentiles,  as 

Belonging  to  the  Gentiles 

The  twelfth  principle  of  correct  Biblical  inter- 
pretation is,  Interpret  What  Belongs  to  the  Chris- 
tian, as  Belonging  to  the  Christian,  What  Belongs 
to  the  Jew,  as  Belonging  to  the  Jew,  and  What 
Belongs  to  the  Gentiles,  as  Belonging  to  the  Gen- 
tiles. One  of  the  commonest  causes  of  misinter- 
pretation of  the  Bible  is  the  taking  what  is  said, 
or  what  applies,  to  one  class  of  people  and  apply- 
ing it  to  another  class.  Take,  for  example,  Rom. 
8:35,  R.  v.,  ''Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love 
of  Christ?  shall  tribulation,  or  anguish,  or  perse- 
cution,  or   famine,   or  nakedness,   or  peril,   or 


HOW  TO  INTERPEET  THE  BIBLE      85 

sword?''  Now  this  is  distinctly  said,  as  the  con- 
text clearly  shows,  of  the  believer,  of  the  one  who 
is  ^^foreordained,"  *^ called,"  ** justified."  Many 
take  it  as  teaching  that  nothing  can  separate  any- 
hody  *'froni  the  love  of  Christ."  It  teaches 
nothing  of  the  kind. 

XIII,    Interpret  Each  Writer  vnth  a  View  to  the 
Opinions  the  Writer  Opposed 

The  thirteenth  principle  of  correct  Biblical  in- 
terpretation is,  Interpret  Each  Writer  with  a 
View  to  the  Opinions  the  Writer  Opposed.  That 
is  to  say,  in  interpreting  Panl,  when  he  is  opposing 
the  Judaizing  tendencies  in  certain  circles  of  his 
day,  we  should  bear  that  in  mind  in  interpreting 
his  epistles;  for  example,  in  interpreting  the 
Epistle  to  the  Romans  and  the  Epistle  to  the  Ga- 
latians.  When  we  are  interpreting  James,  we 
should  bear  in  mind  that  he  was  opposing  the 
antinomians  of  his  day,  those  who  taught  that 
if  a  man  believed  correctly  about  Christ,  he  was 
under  no  moral  obligations,  he  could  live  as  he 
pleased  and  yet  be  a  saved  man.  In  interpreting 
John  in  his  First  Epistle,  we  should  bear  in  mind 
that  he  was  opposing  the  gnostics  of  his  day  who 
were  degrading  Christianity  by  combining  it  with 
a  fantastic  philosophy,  very  like  to  the  philosophy 
of  ** Christian  Science,"  and  in  some  forms  of 
Gnosticism  the  philosophy  of  * '  Theosophy. " 


86    VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

XIV.    Interpret  Poetry  as  Poetry  and  Interpret 
Prose  as  Prose 

The  fourteenth  principle  of  correct  Biblical  in- 
terpretation is,  Interpret  Poetry  as  Poetry,  and 
Interpret  Prose  as  Prose,  For  example,  in  in- 
terpreting the  18th  Psalm,  we  should  bear  in  mind 
that  it  is  largely  highly  poetical,  a  remarkably 
vivid,  poetic  description  of  a  thunderstorm  in 
which  God  put  forth  His  power  in  defense  of  His 
servant.  The  highly  poetical  character  of  the 
Psalm  should  be  kept  in  mind  in  interpreting  the 
Psalm;  for  example,  the  8th  verse,  ** There  went 
up  a  smoke  out  of  his  nostrils,  and  fire  out  of  his 
mouth  devoured:  coals  were  kindled  by  it."  Now 
this  is  not  to  be  taken  literally  as  representing 
God  as  a  Being  out  of  whose  nose  literally  there 
poured  forth  smoke  and  fire  out  of  His  mouth. 
It  is  a  wonderfully  vivid  and  highly  poetical  de- 
scription of  a  thunderstorm.  Some  people  have 
no  poetic  sense  and  do  everything  in  a  matter-of- 
fact  way.  The  story  is  told  of  aj^aan  of  this  hope- 
lessly prosaic  type  of  mind  who  read  the  well- 
known  verse, '  ^  There  are  books  in  brooks,  sermons 
in  stones  and  good  in  everything, ' '  and  he  at  once 
made  this  criticism  ^^that  is  not  what  the  writer 
meant  to  say.  What  he  meant  to  say  was  that 
there  are  sermons  in  books,  stones  in  brooks  and 
good  in  everything."  Poetry  should  be  inter- 
preted as  poetry.  That  is  not  to  say  it  does  not 
mean  what  it  says,  but  it  says  it  in  a  figurative  way 


HOW  TO  INTEKPRET  THE  BIBLE      87 

and  sometimes  in  a  vividly  pictorial  way,  that 
represents  an  idea  by  a  picture. 

But  while  we  interpret  poetry  as  poetry,  we 
should  interpret  prose  as  prose.  It  is  just  as 
grave  a  breach  of  every  sensible  law  of  interpre- 
tation to  interpret  prose  as  poetry  as  it  is  to  in- 
terpret poetry  as  prose.  This  is  one  of  the  out- 
standing faults  of  many  of  the  so-called  *^  mod- 
em" interpreters  of  the  Bible.  They  find  a  state- 
ment in  the  Bible  that  is  evidently  prose,  but  it 
contains  a  truth  they  do  not  wish  to  accept  and 
they  at  once  say,  **this  is  figurative."  They  criti- 
cize those  *^ stupid"  people  who  interpret  poetry 
as  prose  but  do  not  realize  they  are  open  to  just 
as  grave  criticism  for  interpreting  prose  as 
poetry. 

XV,    The  Holy  Spirit  Is  the  Best  Interpreter  of 
the  Bible 

The  fifteenth  principle  of  correct  Biblical  in- 
terpretation is,  The  Holy  Spirit  Is  the  Best  In- 
terpreter of  the  Bible,  The  best  interpreter  of 
any  book  is  the  author  of  the  book,  and  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  beyond  any  honest  question  the  Author 
of  the  Bible:  '*no  prophecy  ever  came  by  the  will 
of  man;  but  men  spake  from  God,  being  moved 
(more  literally,  being  *borne  along,'  or  *  carried 
along')  by  the  Holy  Spirit."  (2  Pet.  1:21,  E.  V.) 
This  being  true,  of  course  it  admits  of  no  question 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  best  interpreter  of  the 


88     VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

Bible,  and  the  man  who  in  his  study  of  the  Word 
seeks  and  obtains  the  illumination  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  a  far  more  dependable  interpreter  of  the 
Word  than  the  greatest  scholar  on  earth  who  is  not 
illumined  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  As  we  pointed  out 
last  Sunday,  ^^the  natural  man  receive th  not  the 
things  of  the  Spirit  of  God:  for  they  are  foolish- 
ness unto  him;  and  he  cannot  know  them,  because 
they  are  spiritually  judged."  (1  Cor.  2:14,  E.  V.) 
Therefore,  no  matter  how  well  founded  one's 
claims  to  scholarship  may  be,  if  he  is  not  a  Spirit- 
taught  man  his  interpretations  of  the  Word  of  God 
are  absolutely  valueless.  The  humblest  and  most 
uneducated  Christian  here  who  is  taught  by  the 
Spirit  of  God  w'ould  be  a  far  more  competent  and 
reliable  interpreter  of  the  scripture  than  the 
greatest  university  professor,  or  theological  pro- 
fessor, on  earth  who  was  not  in  right  relations  to 
God  and,  therefore,  was  not  taught  by  the  Spirit 
of  God.  Our  Lord  Jesus  said  to  His  disciples  on 
the  night  before  His  crucifixion,  ^^Howbeit  when 
Ee,  the  Spirit  of  truth,  is  come,  he  shall  guide  you 
into  all  the  truth"  (John  16:13,  E.  V.).  Now 
while  this  promise  was  made  primarily  to  the 
apostles  and  is  a  guarantee  of  their  inspiration  and 
their  absolute  dependability  as  teachers,  it  also  be- 
longs in  a  lesser  way  to  the  individual  believer. 
John,  the  beloved  disciple,  himself  applies  it  to  the 
believer.  He  says  in  1  John  2 :27,  E.  V. :  '*  And  as 
for  you,  the  anointing  which  ye  received  (i.  e.,  the 
Holy  Spirit)  of  Him  (i.  e.,  from  Christ)  abideth  in 


HOW  TO  INTERPEET  THE  BIBLE      89 

you,  and  ye  need  not  that  any  one  teach  you;  but  as 
His  anointing  teacheth  you  concerning  all  things/* 
So  in  your  study  of  the  Bible,  in  your  eager  desire 
to  discover  its  true  meaning,  your  determination 
to  find  out  the  exact  mind  of  God,  as  He  has  re- 
vealed it  in  His  Word,  above  all  else  seek  the 
GUIDANCE  OF  THE  HoLY  SpmiT.  The  Way  to  get  His 
guidance  is  to  ask  for  it.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Himself 
said,  *'If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give 
good  gifts  unto  your  children,  how  much  more 
shall  your  heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit 
to  them  that  ash  Him/'  (Luke  11 :13,  R.  V.)  How 
often  you  have  thought  as  you  have  heard  some 
Bible  teacher  who  has  been  especially  helpful  to 
you,  *  *  Oh,  if  I  could  only  go  to  that  man  every  day 
and  have  him  for  my  teacher,  I  would  make  some 
progress  in  the  knowledge  of  the  things  of  God." 
But  every  time  you  open  your  Bible  alone  by  your- 
self, you  can  have  a  far  more  competent  and  skill- 
ful teacher  than  any  human  Bible  teacher  this 
world  ever  saw.  You  may  have  the  Author  of  the 
Book  to  interpret  it  to  you,  and  the  greatest  of 
all  secrets  of  true  interpretation  of  the  Word  of 
God  is  to  have  the  Spirit  of  God  for  your  inter- 
preter of  the  Word.  And  if  you  are  in  right  rela- 
tions to  God,  trusting  in  the  finished  work  of  Jesus 
Christ  as  the  sole  ground  of  your  acceptance  be- 
fore God,  looking  to  the  Risen  Christ  to  give  you 
daily  victory  over  sin,  absolutely  surrendered  in 
your  will  and  your  affections  and  in  your  thoughts 
to  the  will  and  mind  of  God,  and  then  ask  the  Holy 


90    yALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

Spirit  each  time  you  open  the  Word,  to  come  and 
interpret  it  to  yon,  and  really  mean  it,  and  are 
whole-heartedly  willing  to  accept  and  act  upon 
what  the  Holy  Spirit  will  show  you,  you  may  have 
the  Holy  Spirit  as  your  Interpreter  every  time 
you  open  the  Book. 


I 


i 


CHAPTEE  IV 

THE  SEVEN  GREAT  PROMISES  OF  GOD  FOE  THE 
BIBLE   STUDENT  AND  SOUL-WINNER 

I  have  turned  over  the  matter  in  my  mind  for 
some  weeks  as  to  what  subject  I  should  speak 
upon  this  morning  to  the  Graduating  Class.  I 
thought  it  was  pretty  well  settled  in  my  mind  that 
I  should  speak  on  2  Tim.  4:5,  **Make  full  proof  of 
thy  ministry."  But  not  many  days  ago  I  was  so 
stirred  by  reading  a  book  entitled  **  Modem  Ee- 
ligious  Liberalism''  that  I  was  strongly  disposed 
to  speak  on  *^What  to  Do  with  the  Bible,"  and 
had  the  sermon  outlined  in  my  mind.  But  when 
I  went  to  God  in  definite  prayer  about  it  last  Mon- 
day afternoon.  He  gave  me  the  subject  *' The  Seven 
Great  Promises  of  God  for  the  Bible  Student  and 
Soul-winner. ' '  For  two  years  you  have  been  dili- 
gently studying  the  Bible  under  the  direction  and 
encouragement  of  some  of  the  best  known  students 
and  teachers  of  the  Bible  in  the  world,  and  you 
have  been  studying  it,  not  merely  that  you  might 
get  as  complete  an  intellectual  mastery  of  it  as 
possible,  but  that  you  might  find  equipment  for 
the  most  glorious  work  in  the  world,  that  of  soul- 
winning.  But  you  certainly  are  not  foolish  enough 
to  think  that  your  studies  are  now  at  an  end.  Only 

91 


92    VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

a  hopeless  fool  could  fancy  for  a  moment  that 
two  years  of  study  anywhere,  or  under  any  teach- 
ers that  ever  lived,  could  exhaust  this  Book  in 
which  are  hidden  the  infinite  and  inexhaustible 
treasures  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God. 
Your  Bible  studies  are  just  begun.  Bible  study  is 
to  be  your  life-long  employment,  and  you  are  going 
out  to  wear  yourselves  out  in  the  great  work  for 
which  you  have  been  preparing — soul-winning. 
You  are  not  all  to  be  foreign  missionaries,  or  min- 
isters of  the  Grospel  at  home,  but  you  are  to  be 
soul-winners  all  your  days;  some  in  the  foreign 
field;  some  in  large  churches,  some  in  small 
churches,  and  some  in  obscure  and  neglected  un- 
churched fields  at  home ;  and  some  of  you  in  that 
most  hallowed  of  all  fields  of  soul-winning,  upon 
which  the  Bible  lays  so  much  emphasis,  the  Chris- 
tian home.  But  all  of  you,  by  the  good  hand  of 
God  upon  you,  are  to  be  soul-winners.  So  I  can 
think  of  no  more  appropriate  subject  for  this  most 
joyous,  and  at  the  same  time  most  solemn,  occa- 
sion than  that  which  I  have  announced,  The  Seven 
Great  Promises  of  God  for  the  Bible  Student  and 
Soul-winner. 

7.    The  First  Great  Promise 

The  first  Great  Promise  is  from  Psalm  1:1-3: 
^'Blessed  is  the  man  that  walJceth  not  in  the 
coumsel  of  the  v/ngodlyj  nor  stcmdeth  in  the  way 
of  sinners,  nor  sitteth  m  the  seat  of  the  scorn- 


SEVEN  GREAT  PROMISES  OF  GOD  93 

fvl.  But  his  delight  is  in  the  law  of  the  Lord;  and 
in  his  law  doth  he  meditate  day  and  night. 
And  he  shall  he  like  a  tree  planted  hy  the  rivers 
of  water,  that  hringeth  forth  his  fruit  in  his 
season;  his  leaf  also  shall  not  wither;  and  what- 
soever he  doeth  shall  prosper.''  Please  look  at 
that  promise  steadily  and  with  open  eyes  and  clear 
eyes  until  you  take  in  its  wonderful  meaning, 
*' Blessed  is  the  man  that  walketh  not  in  the  coun- 
sel of  the  ungodly,  nor  standeth  in  the  way  of 
sinners,  nor  sitteth  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful. 
But  his  delight  is  in  the  law  of  the  Lord;  and  in 
his  law  doth  he  meditate  day  and  night.  And  he 
shall  be  like  a  tree  planted  by  the  rivers  of  water, 
that  bringeth  forth  his  fruit  in  his  season ;  his  leaf 
also  shall  not  wither;  and  whatsoever  he  doeth 
shall  prosper.''  God  here  promises  to  the  Bible 
student  and  the  would-be  Soul-winner,  that  if  he 
meets  one  of  the  fundamental  conditions  of  profit- 
able Bible  study,  thorough-going  separation  from 
the  world,  not  walking  in  the  counsel  of  the  un- 
godly, nor  standing  in  the  way  of  sinners,  nor 
sitting  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful,  and  then  medi- 
tates in  God^s  own  Law,  the  revealed  will  of  God, 
as  found  in  this  Book,  which  is  demonstrably  "the 
Word  of  God"  (Mark  7:13;  1  Thess.  2:13),  medi- 
tates in  it  day  and  night,  then  he  shall  be  a  fruitful 
tree,  a  constantly,  perpetually  fruitful  tree,  a  well- 
watered  tree,  watered  by  the  streams  of  life  that 
flow  from  the  throne  of  God  through  the  channels 
of  this  wonderful  Book,  and  that  **whatsoeveb  he 


94     VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

DOETH  SHALL  PROSPER. ' '  What  an  amazing  promise ! 
What  a  stupendous  promise!  And  what  an  all- 
sufficient  promise  for  the  Bible  student  who  is 
about  to  enter  upon  his  life  work.  Young  men 
and  women,  you  certainly  long  for  a  good  share 
of  prosperity,  but,  oh!  to  think  of  it,  that  there 
is  a  way  to  make  sure  of  it,  that  everything  you 
may  do  in  these  coming  days  and  years  shall 
prosper.  If  any  one  in  your  position  can  face 
a  promise  like  that  and  not  have  to  put  forth  some 
effort  to  keep  from  shouting  I  can  hardly  under- 
stand it. 

Be  Sure  You  Meet  the  Conditions  of  the  Fulfill- 
ment of  the  Promise. 

1.  The  first  condition  is  separation  from  the 
world  in  all  your  conduct,  not  walking  **in  the 
counsel''  (or,  advice)  of  those  who  are  not  fully 
surrendered  to  God,  not  standing  in  the  way  that 
sinners  go,  nor  sitting  down  *^in  the  seat  of  the 
scornful,"  or  *^ scoffers,''  as  the  Revised  Version 
translates,  and  this  includes  all  ^^ Higher  Critics" 
and  ^^New  Theology"  men  and  other  infidels, 
whose  chief  stock  in  trade  is  making  light  of  what 
God  Himself  says  and  of  the  most  fundamental 
and  precious  doctrines  of  our  faith.  If  you  find 
yourseff  located  in  some  ^^seat''  of  learning  where, 
as  at  the  Chicago  University,  they  make  light  of 
the  precious  truths  of  God  (that  is  the  exact  force 
of  the  Hebrew  word  translated  ** scornful"  in  the 
Authorized  Version  and  ' '  scoffers ' '  in  the  Revised 


SEVEN  GREAT  PROMISES  OF  GOD  95 

Version),  get  up  out  of  that  **seaf  right  off,  do 
not  ^'sit  in  the  seat  of  scoffers.*' 

2.  And  the  second  condition  is,  that  you  medi- 
tate in  God^s  Word  day  and  night,  that  is,  that 
you  deeply,  profoundly,  continuously  ponder  the 
revelation  God  has  made  in  this  Book;  that  you 
not  merely  study  the  Bible  for  a  quarter  of  an 
hour  or  a  half  hour  or  even  an  hour  every  day, 
but  that  you  store  up  in  your  mind  and  heart  what 
you  there  find  and  ponder  it  day  and  night.  Young 
men  and  women,  never  forget  that.  There  will  be 
a  great  pressure  of  work  upon  you  in  the  coming 
days,  and  many  books  and  papers  and  magazines 
and  reviews  will  clamor  for  your  attention,  but 
stoutly  and  steadfastly  refuse  to  let  either  the 
demands  of  service  or  of  other  literature  than  the 
Bible  crowd  out  the  precious  Word  of  God,  medi- 
tation day  and  night  upon  which,  and  upon  which 
alone,  spells  prosperity  in  everything  you  under- 
take. 

Why  is  it  that  so  many  missionaries  and  min- 
isters and  other  Christian  workers  are  so  little 
prospered?  The  answer  is  found  right  here,  be- 
cause they  give  so  little  time  to  actually  medi- 
tating upon  the  Word  of  God;  because  they  let 
work  or  other  lines  of  study  crowd  out  the  Word 
of  God,  or  else  they  ponder  it  without  that  clear- 
ness of  vision  that  comes  from  clear-cut  separa- 
tion from  the  world  and  from  all  *^ modernists" 
and  other  scoffers. 


9S    VALUE  OF  PROPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

II.    The  Second  Great  Promise 

The  second  Great  Promise  of  God  for  the 
Bible  Student  and  Soul-winner  is  Daniel  12:3: 
'^ And  they  that  he  wise  shall  shine  as  the  bright- 
ness of  the  firmament;  and  they  that  turn 
m<my  to  righteousness  as  the  stars  for  ever  and 
ever/*  This  is  a  great  promise  for  Bible  students 
as  well  as  for  Soul-winners,  for  it  is  only  the 
Bible  student  who  is  really  ^^wise.'^  It  is  the 
^* entrance  of  Grod's  words''  that  ^^giveth  light;'* 
that  ^^giveth  understanding  unto  the  simple" 
(Psalm  119:130).  No  one  can  be  truly  wise,  wise 
with  real  wisdom,  the  wisdom  that  counts  for 
eternity,  as  well  as  time,  unless  he  is  a  Bible  stu- 
dent. So  Grod  tells  us  in  this  striking  promise  that 
the  Bible  student  shall  **  shine  as  the  brightness 
of  the  firmament"  and  the  Soul-urinner  ^^as  the 
stars  forever  and  ever."  Every  red-blooded  man 
and  every  woman  who  is  worth  while  longs  to 
shine.  If  you  did  not  wish  to  shine  for  your  own 
sake,  you  ought  to  have  a  great  ambition  to  shine 
for  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  sake.  He  Himself 
bids  us  shine.  He  says  in  Matt.  5 :14, 16,  *^  Ye  are 
the  light  of  the  world.  .  .  .  Let  your  light  so  shine 
before  men,  that  they  may  see  your  good  works, 
and  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven,*' 
Well,  this  promise  tells  us  how  to  shine,  how  to 
gloriously  shine,  how  to  shine,  not  for  the  few 


SEVEN  GREAT  PROMISES  OF  GOD  97 

brief  days  of  this  fleeting  life  that  now  is,  but 
**forever  and  ever.*'  Be  a  Bible  student,  a  Real 
Bible  Student,  and  be  a  Soul- winner;  for  *Hhey 
that  be  wise  shall  shine  as  the  brightness  of  the 
firmament ;  and  they  that  turn  many  to  righteous- 
ness as  the  stars  forever  and  ever.'*  Oh,  that 
large  but  foolish  company  of  men  and  women, 
including  not  a  few  ministers  and  theological 
teachers  and  writers,  who  wish  to  shine  down 
here,  to  have  a  cheap  reputation  for  **  advanced 
scholarship,''  forgetting  that  the  history  of  the 
world  and  the  church  is  forever  demonstrating 
that  the  ^^ advanced  scholarship"  of  to-day  is  the 
ridiculous  nonsense  of  to-morrow.  Young  men 
and  women,  listen,  it  is  not  worth  while  to  shine 
down  here,  to  get  all  sorts  of  degrees  and  titles 
attached  to  your  name  because  you  are  untrue  to 
God  and  His  inspired  Word.  Look  back  and  see 
how  the  shores  of  past  time  are  strewed  with  the 
whitened  wrecks  of  men  who  shone  in  an  apostate 
church.  No,  do  not  care  a  fig  to  shine  as  a  great 
*' pulpit  orator,"  or  *^ pulpit  humorist,"  or  pulpit 
mountebank,  or  a  pulpit  comforter  by  holding  out 
false  hopes  to  those  who  desire  to  live  careless 
and  worldly  and  pleasure-seeking  lives;  it  does 
not  pay  to  shine  down  here,  even  as  a  **golden- 
tongued  pulpit  orator."  It  does  pay  to  shine  up 
yonder,  to  ^  ^  shine  as  the  stars  forever  and  ever. ' ' 
And  there  is  only  one  way  to  shine  up  yonder, 
by  being  a  Real  Bible  Student  and  a  Soul-winner. 


98    VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

///.    The  Third  Great  Promise 

The  third  Great  Promise  of  God  for  the  Bible 
Student  and  Soul-winner  you  will  find  in  Psalm 
126:6:  ^^He  that  goeth  forth  and  weepeth,  bearing 
precious  seed,  shall  doubtless  come  again  with 
rejoicing,  bringing  his  sheaves  with  him/'  Here 
is  another  promise  that  stirs  the  alert  and 
intelligent  soul  to  its  very  depths.  What  intelli- 
gent harvester  does  not  long  to  come  home 
laden  down  with  mighty  sheaves  of  golden  grain? 
But  what  other  harvest  is  so  desirable  as  the 
harvest  of  precious  souls  1  This,  too,  is  a  promise, 
as  we  shall  see  shortly,  for  both  the  Bible  Student 
and  Soul-winner,  a  Soul-winner  just  because  he 
is  a  Bible  student.  It  tells  us  how  to  come,  when 
our  brief  but  laborious  harvest  time  is  over,  bring- 
ing our  golden  sheaves  with  us.  Listen,  *^He  that 
goeth  forth  and  weepeth,  bearing  precious  seed, 
shall  doubtless  come  again  with  rejoicing  bring- 
ing  his  sheaves  with  him."  Just  three  conditions 
of  a  bountiful  harvest:  ** goeth  forth,"  ** weep- 
eth," ** bearing  precious  seed."  Let  me  change 
the  order. 

1.  First,  ^* Bearing  precious  seed."  What  the 
** precious  seed"  is  that  must  be  borne  if  we  are 
to  reap  an  abundant  harvest  of  the  right  sort, 
our  Lord  Jesus  Himself  tells  us  in  Luke  8:11, 
*  *  The  seed  is  the  Word  of  God. ' '    That  is  the  only 


SEVEN  GREAT  PROMISES  OF  GOD   99 

seed  that  is  worth  sowing,  or  that  will  bring  a 
harvest  of  souls.  Men  are  bom  again,  Peter  tells 
us,  **not  of  corruptible  seed,  but  of  incorruptible, 
by  the  word  of  God,  which  liveth  and  abideth  for- 
ever.'* (1  Pet.  1 :23.)  To  sow  the  Word,  we  must 
know  the  Word;  so  you  can  see  how  this  is  a 
promise  for  the  Bible  student  as  well  as  for  the 
Soul- winner.  The  Revised  Version  reads  in  place 
of  '^precious  seed,''  *^seed  for  sowing/'  and  the 
Hebrew  words  mean  just  that  or  **a  sowing  of 
seed;"  and  the  only  seed  that  is  fit  for  *^ sowing" 
in  the  prepared  soil  of  the  human  heart  is  god's 
WORD.  Here,  too,  we  see  why  it  is  so  many 
preachers  and  missionaries  and  personal  workers 
gather  such  scant  harvests ;  they  are  sowing  some- 
thing beside  the  Word  of  God.  Go  listen  to  many 
sermons  and  note  how  little  there  is  of  the  un- 
mixed seed  of  the  Word  of  God  in  them,  so  much 
bull's-eye  daisies  and  chess  and  Canada  thistles 
of  man's  notions  and  vagaries  and  speculations 
and  conceits  mixed  in,  until  their  churches  look 
like  some  alleged  *^ wheat  fields"  that  we  see,  full 
of  daisies,  mustard,  **the  devil's  paint-brush," 
Canada  thistles  and  bull  thistles  and  nettles.  Oh, 
young  men  and  women,  always  bear  the  **  precious 
seed"  of  God's  Word  and  only  that.  If  some  one 
tells  you  it  won't  draw  like  poetry  and  moonshine 
and  ^* advanced  thought"  and  movies,  think  of 
Moody  and  Spurgeon  and  some  of  the  things  your 
own  eyes  have  seen  these  past  months  in  this  very 
building  and  elsewhere. 


100  VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

2.  Then  note  the  words,  ''goeth  forth,''  ''He 
that  goeth  forth  and  weepeth,  bearing  precious 
seed,  shall  doubtless  come  again  with  rejoicing, 
bringing  his  sheaves  with  him. ' '  It  is  not  enough 
to  have  the  seed,  go  sow  it.  Sow  it  far  and  wide, 
throughout  America,  not  forgetting  the  neglected 
fields,  through  China,  through  Japan,  through 
Africa,  through  India,  everywhere.  It  is  not  the 
seed  the  farmer  has  in  his  granary  that  brings  a 
harvest,  but  the  seed  he  sows  in  his  field;  and  it 
is  not  the  truth  you  know,  hut  the  truth  you  sow 
that  will  hear  a  harvest.  Remember  it  is  **seed 
for  sowing''  (R.  V.),  and  the  truth  you  have 
learned  from  the  study  of  God^s  Word  here  and 
the  truth  you  shall  learn  in  your  future  study  of 
the  Word  is  ''seed  for  sowing."  Never  forget 
that.  Many  a  man  who  knows  little  gathers  a  far 
more  abundant  harvest  than  many  who  know 
much,  for  what  little  he  knows  he  assiduously 
sows. 

3.  And  once  more  in  regard  to  this  promise: 
Note  the  words,  "and  weepeth."  It  is  not  enough 
to  know  the  Word  of  God  and  it  is  not  enough  to 
sow  the  Word  of  God :  if  you  would  have  a  boun- 
teous harvest,  if  you  would  come  *^  bringing  your 
sheaves  with''  you,  you  must  as  you  sow  the  seed, 
water  it  with  your  tears.  Not  only  does  the  Word 
of  God  teach,  but  experience  also  abundantly 
proves  that  it  is  the  Word  of  God  that  is  given 
with  a  heart  full  of  love  for  sinners,  a  love  that 
shows  itself  in  tears  of  sympathy  for  the  sinner's 


SEVEN  GREAT  PROMISES  OF  GOD  101 

sorrows  and  tears  of  pain  over  the  sinner's  sin 
and  stubbornness,  that  bears  fruit  in  souls  saved. 
Here  is  where  many  missionaries  in  the  foreign 
field  fail  and  many  preachers  at  home  fail;  they 
have  no  deep  heartfelt  love  that  leads  to  tears  for 
those  to  whom  they  preach  and  with  whom  they 
work.  One  of  the  mightiest  Soul-winners  among 
the  outcast  that  this  country  ever  saw  was  Col. 
George  Clark,  the  founder  of  the  Pacific  Garden 
Mission  in  Chicago.  Col.  Clark  worked  faithfully 
at  his  business  six  days  of  the  week  that  he  might 
preach  the  Gospel  without  pay  seven  nights  in  the 
week.  Every  night  they  would  gather  in  the  Pa- 
cific Garden  Mission,  four  or  five  hundred  men, 
mostly  of  the  down-and-out  class.  They  would 
hang  upon  every  word  Col.  Clark  spoke,  though 
he  was  not  an  interesting  speaker,  indeed  a  very 
ordinary  and  commonplace  speaker.  I  never 
heard  him  give  an  original  thought  in  all  my  life, 
and  yet  those  outcasts  would  sit  all  the  evening 
and  hang  upon  his  words.  Some  of  the  most  bril- 
liant speakers  in  America  would  go  there,  but 
could  not  hold  that  crowd,  but  Col.  Clark  always 
could.  I  studied  these  strange  phenomena  and 
finally  found  the  explanation  of  them.  They  knew 
that  Col.  Clark  loved  them,  that  he  would  give  his 
last  penny  for  them,  that  he  would  wear  his  life 
out  for  them,  as  he  actually  did.  Col.  Clark  was  a 
man  much  given  to  tears  as  he  spoke.  He  was  a 
large,  powerful  man,  weighing  perhaps  250 
pounds,  and  tears  from  such  a  man  seemed  out 


102  VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

of  place,  and  after  a  while  he  became  ashamed  of 
his  many  tears  and  held  them  back.  But  he  found 
that  with  the  drying  up  of  his  tears  he  lost  his 
power;  and  he  went  to  God  and  cried,  *^0h,  God, 
give  me  back  my  tears, ' '  and  God  gave  him  back 
his  tears  and  gave  him  back  his  power.  Young 
men  and  women,  cultivate  a  real,  heartfelt  love 
for  those  among  whom  you  work.  Ask  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  make  real  to  you  their  lost  condition  and 
to  make  vivid  to  you  their  coming  doom  if  they 
are  not  saved.    It  is  not  the  one  who  knows  the 

MOST  BUT  THE  ONE  WHO  LOVES  THE  MOST  WHO  WINS 

THE  MOST.  I  think  I  would  make  a  good  mission- 
ary to  the  Chinese,  for  I  love  the  Chinese;  I  con- 
fess I  love  them  more  than  I  do  any  other  people. 
But  look  to  God  to  give  you  a  tear-bringing  love 
for  any  people  among  whom  you  work. 


IV.    The  Fourth  Great  Promise 

The  fourth  Great  Promise  of  God  for  the  Bible 
Student  and  Soul-winner  you  will  find  in  James 
1:5,  R.  v.:  ''If  any  of  you  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask 
of  God,  that  giveth  to  all  men  liberally,  and  up- 
braideth  not;  and  it  shall  be  given  him,"  This, 
too,  is  a  great  promise  for  the  Bible  student 
and  Soul-winner.  To  be  a  successful  student  of 
the  Word  one  needs  ''wisdom"  and  to  be  a 
successful  Soul-winner,  one  needs  great  "wis- 
dom" and  tact.     This  promise  tells  how  to  get 


SEVEN  GREAT  PROMISES  OF  GOD  103 

this  wisdom,  ash  for  it,  '*If  any  of  you  lack 
wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God,  that  giveth  to  all  men 
liberally  and  upbraideth  not;  and  it  shall  he  given 
him/'  What  to  do  is  put  in  one  word,  ''ask;'' 
definite,  believing  prayer.  The  next  two  verses 
say,  *  *  But  let  him  ask  in  faith,  nothing  doubting ; 
for  he  that  doubteth  is  like  the  surge  of  the  sea 
driven  by  the  wind  and  tossed.  For  let  not  that 
man  think  that  he  shall  receive  anything  of  the 
Lord.'*  Our  promise  tells  us  very  clearly  of 
Whom  to  ask.  It  is  put  in  two  words,  ^^of  God." 
Be  very  clear  about  that.  There  is  much  asking 
that  is  not  really  ''of  God."  Men  pray,  but  they 
do  not  really  get  into  the  presence  of  God,  and 
''ask  of  Him.'*  Be  sure  you  do  every  time  you 
pray. 

And  note  carefully  of  what  God  to  ask,  the 
"God,  Who  giveth  to  all  liberally  and  upbraideth 
not."  There  is  only  one  God  who  does  that,  the 
God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  Jesus 
Christ.  There  is  much  that  is  called  praying  in 
these  days  that  is  not  unto  Him.  Prof.  Theodore 
Gerald  Soares,  Professor  of  Homiletics  and  Re- 
ligious Education  and  Head  of  the  Department  of 
Practical  Theology  at  the  University  of  Chicago, 
says,  "The  mental  state  of  peace,  exultation  and 
resolution  which  issue  upon  the  exercise  of  prayer 
are  due  to  the  release  of  conscious  tension."  That 
certainly  is  not  praying  to  the  ' '  God,  Who  giveth 
to  all  men  liberally  and  upbraideth  not,"  even  if 
the  writer  is  a  theological  professor.     President 


104  VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

Gr.  Stanley  Hall,  of  Clark  University,  Worcester, 
Mass.,  says  that  prayer  is  '*  communion  with  the 
deeper  racial  self  within  ns."  That  certainly  is 
not  asking  of  the  **God,  Who  giveth  to  all  men 
liberally  and  npbraideth  not. ' '  Prof.  George  Bur- 
man  Foster,  who  was  for  a  while  professor  in  the 
theological  department  of  Chicago  University, 
and  then  Professor  of  Philosophy  of  Eeligion 
in  another  department  in  the  University  up  to  the 
time  of  his  death,  said,  ^^the  only  prayer  which 
we  have  a  moral  right  to  pray  is  precisely  the 
prayer  which  after  all  we  ourselves  must  answer. ' ' 
That  certainly  is  not  asking  of  the  **God,  Who 
giveth  to  all  men  liberally  and  npbraideth  not.'' 
Prof.  Edward  Scribner  Ames,  Associate  Pro- 
fessor of  Chicago  University,  and  Pastor  of 
Hyde  Park  Church  of  Disciples  of  Christ,  in  his 
book,  *'The  New  Orthodoxy,"  says,  **For  the 
modem  man  standing  erect  in  his  pride  of  power, 
the  old  ceremony  full  of  passivity  and  surrender 
is  a  symbol  of  a  dyimg  age  J'  That  certainly  is 
not  asking  of  the  *^God,  Who  giveth  to  all  men  lib- 
erally and  npbraideth  not. ' '  Prof.  Gerald  Bimey 
Smith,  at  the  present  time  *' Professor  of  Chris- 
tian Theology'^  at  the  Chicago  University,  says, 
''the  worship  of  God  in  a  democracy  will  consist 
in  reverence  for  those  human  values  which  de- 
mocracy makes  supreme.'^  That  certainly  is  not 
asking  of  the  ^^God,  Who  giveth  to  all  liberally 
and  npbraideth  not."  I  would  as  soon  think  of 
sending  a  son  of  mine  to  a  smallpox  hospital  as  a 


SEVEN  GREAT  PROMISES  OF  GOD  105 

health  resort  as  to  send  him  to  a  theological  Sem- 
inary or  University  where  such  blasphemous  folly 
as  that  is  taught,  as  a  preparation  for  an  efficient 
ministry  or  for  missionary  work.  Are  our  Bap- 
tists, Methodists  and  Presbyterians  gone  mad  that 
they  send  their  children  to  institutions  where  such 
wicked,  blasphemous  and  practically  atheistic 
things  are  taught  f  But  real  Prayer  to  a  Real.  God, 
the  only  true  God,  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  brings  wondrous  wis- 
dom in  the  study  of  the  Word  of  God  and  in  Soul- 
winning.  No  other  shovel  digs  so  deep  into  the 
gold  mine  of  God's  Word  and  throws  out  such 
nuggets  of  pure  gold  as  prayer,  real  prayer  to  a 
real  God.  No  other  rain-maker  will  so  operate 
upon  the  clouds  of  God's  abundant  grace  that 
always  overhang  us  and  bring  down  such  mighty 
outpourings  of  the  Holy  Spirit  manifesting  them- 
selves in  a  multitude  of  souls  won  as  real  prayer 
to  a  real  God.    Never  forget  that.    Never,  never, 

NEVER  FORGET  THAT. 

F.    The  Fifth  Great  Promise 

This  naturally  and  inevitably  brings  us  to 
the  Fifth  Great  Promise  of  God  for  the  Bible 
Student  and  Soul-vAnner.  You  will  find  it 
in  Acts  1:8:  ^'Ye  shall  receive  power,  after  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  come  upon  you:  and  ye  shall  he 
witnesses  unto  me  both  in  Jerusalem,  and  in  all 
Judea,  and  in  Samaria,  and  unto  the  uttermost 


106  VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

part  of  the  earth.''  The  great  need  of  missionary, 
minister  and  personal  worker,  and  father  and 
mother,  when  they  study  God's  Word  and  when 
they  go  out  to  win  souls,  is  power,  power  to  pene- 
trate the  sacred  cloisters  of  Grod's  Word  where 
such  abundant  treasures  of  truth  are  stored  and 
power  to  present  to  others  the  truth  discovered 
in  such  a  way  as  to  convict  of  sin  and  reveal  Jesus 
Christ  and  to  bring  men  to  accept  Jesus  as  their 
Lord  and  Saviour  and  thus  be  born  again.  This 
verse  reveals  the  great  secret  of  that  power:  **Ye 
shall  receive  power,  after  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
come  upon  you:  and  ye  shall  be  witnesses  unto 
me  both  in  Jerusalem,  and  in  all  Judea,  and  in 
Samaria,  and  unto  the  uttermost  part  of  the 
earth.''  We  need  power,  a  power  not  from  this 
earth,  not  from  human  culture,  not  the  power 
learned  in  schools  of  oratory,  nor  the  power  that 
comes  from  the  tricks  of  the  world,  baptized  with 
Christian  names,  as  in  the  ^  *  Inter  church  World 
Movement,"  not  the  power  to  draw  crowds 
learned  from  Douglas  Fairbanks,  Mary  Pickford 
or  Charlie  Chaplin,  and  crystallized  in  the  intro- 
duction of  the  movies  into  the  Sunday  evening 
service,  turning  the  sacred  house  of  God  into  a 
third-class  Sunday  theatrical  performance.  No! 
No!!  No!!!  ^^ POWER  FROM  ON  HIGH" 
(Luke  24:49).  This  promise  tells  us  how  to  get 
it.  It  tells  us  how  any  graduate  of  the  Bible  In- 
stitute, or  any  child  of  God,  can  get  it.  Listen 
again,  ^^Ye  shall  receive  power,  after  that  the 


SEVEN  GREAT  PROMISES  OF  GOD  107 

Holy  Ghost  is  come  upon  you:  and  ye  shall  be 
witnesses  unto  me  both  in  Jerusalem,  and  in  all 
Judea,  and  in  Samaria,  and  unto  the  uttermost 
part  of  the  earth;''  the  definite  baptism  with 
THE  Holy  Spirit,  of  which  Peter  said  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost,  immediately  after  he  himself  had  been 
'* baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit,"  *^For  the  prom- 
ise is  unto  you,  and  to  your  children,  and  to  all 
that  are  afar  off,  even  as  many  as  the  Lord  our 
God  shall  call  unto  Him. ' ' 

VI,    The  Sixth  Great  Promise 

This  then  leads  us  directly  to  the  Sixth 
Great  Promise  of  God  for  the  Bible  Student 
and  Soul-unnner.  You  will  find  it  in  Luke 
11:13:  '^If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give 
good  gifts  unto  your  children:  how  much  more 
shall  your  heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit 
to  them  that  ask  him/'  The  fifth  promise  tells  us, 
that  ** power  from  on  High,''  power  right  from 
God,  God's  own  power,  will  be  upon  us  after  the 
Holy  Spirit  comes  upon  us,  and  the  sixth  promise 
tells  us  how  to  make  sure  of  the  Holy  Spirit  com- 
ing upon  you,  ^^If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know  how 
to  give  good  gifts  unto  your  children :  how  much 
more  shall  your  heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  them  that  ask  Him."  The  way  is  very 
simple,  just  ''ask,"  '^ask  him,"  that  is,  God,  the 
only  true  God,  the  ** Heavenly  Father,"  not  the 
God  that  ''is  imminent  in  humanity"  of  which 


108  VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  ^STUDY 

these  wise  New  Theologists  prate,  but  ^^the  God 
and  Father  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ/'  ^^Who  is  in  Heaven, '^  the  Real  God,  the 
God  who  actually  isj  and  not  the  God  of  man's 
mad  imaginings.  Prof.  Walter  Rauschenbusch, 
now  dead  (died  in  1918),  formerly  Professor  of 
Church  History  in  Rochester  Theological  Sem- 
inary, a  Baptist  institution,  said,  ^Hhe  old  con- 
ception that  God  ...  is  distinct  from  our  human 
life"  must  give  way  to  *'the  religious  belief  that 
He  is  immanent  in  humanity."  Do  not  ask  for 
the  Holy  Spirit  of  such  a  God  as  that,  ask  of  the 
Real  God,  your  ^* Father  in  heaven."  Prof.  Royce, 
late  of  Harvard  University,  says,  ^Hhe  divine  is 
no  more  separate  and  aloof.  It  is  within  and  or- 
ganic with  the  human. ' '  The  same  thought  is  else- 
where put  in  these  words,  *^God  is  considered  as 
the  soul  of  the  world,  the  spirit  animating  nature, 
the  universal  force  which  takes  the  myriad  forms 
of  heat,  light,  gravitation,  electricity  and  the 
like."  Do  not  ask  any  such  God  as  that  to  give 
you  the  Holy  Spirit.  You  might  as  well  pray  to 
a  Hindoo  or  Chinese  idol  or  an  Alaskan  totem. 
Prof.  Gerald  Birney  Smith,  Professor  of  Chris- 
tian Theology  at  the  present  time  in  Chicago 
University,  speaks  of  God  as  *Vthe  spiritual  forces 
of  the  world  in  which  we  live,  the  unseen  forces  of 
the  universe."  Do  not  ask  that  God  for  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Prof.  Royce  defines  God  as  the  immanent 
*  *  spirit  of  the  community. ' '  Do  not  ask  that  God 
for  the  Holy  Spirit.    No,  do  not  pray  to  the  God 


SEVEN  GREAT  PROMISES  OF  GOD  109 

of  any  of  this  sort  of  theological  Seminary  and 
University  professors  who,  *^  professing  them- 
selves to  be  wise/'  have  '^become  fools.''  (Rom. 
1:22.)  Pray  to  the  eeal  God  the  God  Whom  the 
Lord  Jesus  revealed  in  His  words  and  in  His  Per- 
son, our  ** Heavenly  Father,"  the  God  Who  really 
is  and  really  answers  prayer,  and  if  you  really  are 
His  child,  He  will  answer  and  He  will  baptize  you 
and  fill  you  with  His  Holy  Spirit,  and  you  will 
have  power,  and  no  man  will  be  *^able  to  resist 
the  wisdom  and  the  Spirit  by  which  (you)  speak." 
(Acts  6:10.) 

F7Z.    The  Seventh  Great  Promise 

Now  we  come  to  the  seventh  and  last  Great 
Promise  of  God  for  the  Bible  Student  and 
Soul-winner^  a/nd  in  some  respects  it  is  the 
best  of  alL  It  is  the  direct  outcome  of  the 
sixth  promise  and  closely  related  to  the  fifth 
and  fourth  promises.  You  mil  find  it  in  Matt, 
28:19,  20,  R.  V.:  ''Go  ye  therefore,  and  make 
disciples  of  all  the  nations,  baptizing  them  into  the 
name  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son  and  of  the 
Holy  Spirit:  teaching  them  to  observe  all  things 
whatsoever  I  commanded  you:  and  lo,  I  a/m  with 
you  always,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world,''  Oh, 
what  a  promise!  The  promise  of  the  personal 
presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Himself  with  us  all 
the  time,  ** until  the  consummation  of  the  age," 
when  He  will  come  visibly  and  bodily  to  take  us 


110  VALUE  OF  PROPEE  BIBLE  STUDY 

to  be  with  Himself  forever.  He  is  now  our  unseen 
Lord  (1  Pet.  1:8)  up  yonder  in  the  glory,  inter- 
ceding for  us  (Heb.  7 :25),  taking  up  our  case,  and 
advocating  it  and  carrying  it  through.  But  He 
is  also,  even  now,  our  peesent  lord.  It  is  the  work 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  when  He  comes  to  us,  to  form 
within  us  an  indwelling  Christ.  The  Lord  Jesus 
Himself  said  to  His  disciples  the  night  before  He 
left  them,  in  John  14:15-23,  R.  V. :  ^^If  ye  love  me, 
ye  will  keep  my  commandments.  And  I  will  pray 
the  Father,  and  he  shall  give  you  another  Com- 
forter, that  he  may  be  with  you  forever,  even  the 
Spirit  of  truth:  whom  the  world  cannot  receive; 
for  it  beholdeth  him  not,  neither  knoweth  him :  ye 
know  him ;  for  he  abideth  with  you  and  shall  be  in 
you.  I  will  not  leave  you  desolate:  1  come  unto 
you:  Yet  a  little  while,  and  the  world  beholdeth  me 
no  more ;  but  ye  behold  me :  because  I  live,  ye  shall 
live  also.  In  that  day  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  in 
my  Father,  and  ye  in  me,  and  I  in  you.  He  that 
hath  my  commandments,  and  keepeth  them,  he  it 
is  that  loveth  me :  and  he  that  loveth  me  shall  be 
loved  of  my  Father,  and  I  will  love  him  and  will 
manifest  myself  unto  him.  Judas  (not  Iscariot) 
saith  unto  him.  Lord,  what  is  come  to  pass  that 
thou  wilt  manifest  thyself  unto  us,  and  not  unto 
the  world?  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  him, 
If  a  man  love  me,  he  will  keep  my  word :  and  my 
Father  will  love  him,  and  we  will  come  unto  him, 
and  malie  our  abode  with  him.^'  Yes,  He  is  really 
with  us,  not  visibly  as  in  that  glad  coming  day 


SEVEN  GREAT  PROMISES  OF  GOD  111 

He  will  be,  but  nonetheless,  really  and  conscious 
ly  with  us.  Young  men  and  women,  as  you  leave 
these  halls  and  these  friendships  with  the  Faculty 
and  your  fellow-students  that  have  become  so 
precious  to  you,  you  will  have  many  lonely  hours 
and  lonely  days  and  lonely  weeks.  I  think  the 
loneliest  day  I  ever  saw  up  to  that  time  was 
the  day  I  graduated  at  Yale  and  left  the  city  on  a 
late  boat  for  New  York.  Most  of  my  class  took 
earlier  trains.  It  seemed  as  if  I  would  almost 
die  of  loneliness.  Forty-six  years  have  passed, 
but  the  memory  of  the  misery  of  that  night  lingers 
with  me  yet.  And  you  will  have  lonely  days.  And 
when  you  get  into  the  heart  of  China  and  into  the 
heart  of  Africa  and  into  Indian  jungles,  you  will 
see  lonely  days.  But  you  need  not  see  lonely  days, 
you  need  not  see  a  lonely  hour,  or  a  lonely  minute. 
By  day  and  by  night,  you  may  have  the  dearest 
and  best  and  most  satisfying  of  all  companions, 
our  glorious  Lord  Jesus  Himself.  Listen  again  to 
this  crowning  promise  of  all:  *^Go  ye  therefore, 
and  make  disciples  of  all  the  nations,  baptizing 
them  into  the  name  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son 
and  of  the  Holy  Spirit :  teaching  them  to  observe 
all  things  whatsoever  I  command  you:  and  lo,  I 
am  with  you  always ^  even  unto  the  consummation 
of  the  age."  Ah,  this  coming  summer  when  some 
night  I  am  up  alone  on  the  Yangtze  or  elsewhere, 
out  in  some  lonely  mountain  or  desert  plain,  I 
might  be  lonely,  but  I  won't,  Jesus  will  be  there 


112  VALUE  OF  PEOPER  BIBLE  STUDY 

and  He  will  be  with  you  too  if  you  meet  the 
conditions. 

Note  these  conditions  well,  ^^Go  ye  therefore, 
and  make  disciples  of  all  the  nations,  baptizing 
them  into  the  name  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son 
and  of  the  Holy  Spirit :  teaching  them  to  observe 
all  things  whatsoever  I  commanded  yon:  and  lo, 
I  am  with  yon  always,  even  nnto  the  consumma- 
tion of  the  age.''  If  you  go  out  into  all  the  world 
making  disciples,  going  as  far  as  your  line  may  ex- 
tend, be  it  eighteen  miles  or  eighteen  thousand 
miles.  He  will  go  with  you.  But  if  you  do  not 
listen  sharply  for  His  call,  and  go  as  far  as  He 
bids  you  go.  He  will  not  go  with  you.  If  we  go 
His  way.  He  will  go  ours ;  but  if  we  do  not  go  His 
way,  He  will  not  go  ours.  If  Grod  says  Africa,  and 
your  foolish  heart  says  Southern  California,  He 
will  not  go  with  you :  and  amid  the  dearest  friends 
on  earth,  you  will  be  supremely  lonely.  But  if 
you  say  with  Isaiah  of  old  when  the  Lord  Jesus 
calls,  and  He  is  calling  now,  ^^Here  am  I;  send 
me''  (Isa.  6:8)  He  will  send  and  He  will  go  along. 
You  may  be  alone  beneath  the  silent  stars  on  some 
African  table-land,  but  you  wiU  not  be  alone.  He, 
our  glorious  Lord  will  walk  by  your  side.  And  He 
is  enough.  And  you  will  walk  with  Him  forever ; 
for  He  hath  said,  **If  any  man  serve  me,  let  him 
follow  me;  and  where  I  am,  there  shall  also  my 
servant  he:  if  any  man  serve  me,  him  will  the 
Father  honor."  (John  12:26.) 

Young  men  and  women  of  the  Graduating  Class : 


SEVEN  GEEAT  PROMISES  OF  GOD  113 

You  have  been  here  at  the  Bible  Institute  of 
Los  Angeles  two  years.  You  have  worked  hard. 
You  have  done  well.  You  have  made  satisfac- 
tory progress  in  your  study  of  the  Word  of  God, 
in  your  Christian  character  and  in  your  work  for 
Christ.  You  have  won  the  confidence  and  respect 
and  love  of  every  member  of  the  Faculty,  and  I 
think  we  can  rest  confident  that  we  have  won  your 
love,  as  well  as  your  confidence.  You  are  about 
to  leave  us,  we  are  sorry  to  have  you  go,  we  shall 
greatly  miss  you.  When  I  come  back  next  Novem- 
ber and  look  out  over  the  seats  in  the  lecture  room, 
my  first  impulse  will  be  to  look  for  the  faces  that 
I  know  so  well  and  to  listen  for  the  voices  that  I 
have  learned  to  distinguish  from  one  another,  and 
I  shall  miss  you  and  every  member  of  the  Faculty 
will  miss  you.  But  we  are  glad  you  are  going. 
There  was  never  in  all  this  world's  history  such  a 
crying  demand  for  men  and  women  who  know 
God,  who  know  Jesus  Christ,  who  know  the  Holy 
Spirit,  who  know  their  Bibles  and  how  to  use  them 
in  winning  souls  for  Christ,  as  in  the  day  in  which 
you  and  I  live.  We  shall  follow  you  with  our 
prayers.  We  expect  you  to  do  credit,  both  by 
your  holy  living  and  your  effective  service,  to  the 
Institute  that  sends  you  forth,  but  what  is  infi- 
nitely more  important,  to  our  God  and  Father  and 
to  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  God  bless 
you. 

THE  END 


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process 
Neutralizing  agent:  i\/Iagnesium  Oxide 
Treatment  Date:  May  2005 

PreservatronTechnologies 

A  WORLD  LEADER  rN  PAPER  PRESERVATION 
J 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive 


