'I'l'l- 

IP 


:  .  1   ■!  !,  :,  ,:  HJIMiiliMiiliiJillliiiiJliiiliiriiiiiilSaMStSM 

■  '    I    "1- ■    I  !S  COHNELL    NNIVHHSITY    I  IHRARV 


■  'Pi 


Jpi 


i!;;|!j:jii!j'|  3   192 
'i'  ;i:i;",'ii;'i:iS.-n.i:iisp^fs 


■!)■■' -i-j-i.'.-    --'^dm 


•J.l>: 


."Ti 


"!'■  .'..iS 


i;'>'i"i'i. 


!lll)!tl 


m 


'■■■■P'f'r' 


'«y 


igS!t=? 


Wrfjl 


CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  tiiis  book  is  in 
tine  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101105058 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 


EDITED   BY  THE 


VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER; 


AND   BY  THE 


REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 


WITH 


INTRODUCTIONS 

BY  THE 

r^'S.  AECHDEACON  F.  W.  FAKEAB,  D.D.,  P.E.S.—EIGHT  HEV.  H.  COTTEEILL,  D.D.,  P.E.S.B, 

— VBEY  EEV.  PEINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.— EBV.  CANON  G.  EAWLINSON,  M.A. 

— EEV.  A.  PLUMMBE,  M.A.,  D.D. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toronto. 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 


EDITED   BY  THE 


REV.  CANON  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A., 

nCAR   AND  RURAL  DEAN   OF   ST.    PANCRAS,    AND   EXAMINING  CHAPLAIN  TO  THE   LORD 
BISHOP   OF  GLOUCESTER  AND   BRISTOL  J 


AND   BY  THE 

REY.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL, 

EDITOR  OF  "THE  HOMILETIC  QUARTBRLT." 


NUMBERS. 

Sntrobnction : 
By   rev.  THOMAS  WHITELAW,   M.A, 

(Ejeposition  arib  fomiletico: 
By  rev.   R.  WINTERBOTHAM,   LL.B.,  M.A.,  B.Sc 

UtCUUBGNT  OF  ST.  PETER'S,  FRASERBURGH. 

fomilies  bg  l)arions  ^titl)ors: 

REV.   PROF.   W.   BINNIE,   D.D.,  REV.   D.   YOUNG,   B.K. 

REV.   E.   S.   PROUT,   M.A.,  REV.   J.  WAITE,   B.A 


FUNK    &   WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
Nev/  York  and  Toronto. 


INTRODUCTORY  ESSAY  OW 

THE  AUTHENTICITY  AND  AUTHOESHIP 

OF 

THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEKS. 

THE    EEV.  THOMAS   WHITELAW,  MJL 


rrS  AUTHENTICITY. 

The  general  question  of  the  Mstoiio  credibility  of  the  narrative  contained  in  the 
first  five  books  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  having  already  been  considered  in  an 
Essay  on  the  Authorship  of  the  Pentateuch  prefixed  to  the  Genesis  volume  of  the 
present  series  of  Commentaries,  attention  needs  now  to  be  directed  to  such  difficulties 
alone  as  are  specifically  associated  with  the  Book  of  Numbers ;  and  these  it  will  be 
most  convenient  to  investigate  under  the  threefold  subdivision  of  seeming  chrono- 
logical inaccuracies,  so-called  statistical  errors,  and  alleged  physical  impossibilities. 

a.  BEEMSSta  OhbONOLOQIOAIi  TSAOCURAXHEa. 

I.  The  seooitd  fassoteb.  On  the  ground  that  ch.  ix.  1  appeara  to  rdate 
to  a  second  celebration  of  the  passover  in  the  first  month  of  the  second  year,  while 
the  census  (ch.  i.  1)  was  taken  in  the  second  month  of  the  same  year,  Bleek  declares 
it  to  be  "most  evidently  conspicuous"  that  the  unknown  compiler  of  the  history 
has  here  inadvertently  perpetrated  a  grievous  chronological  blunder  ('  Introd. ,'  VoL 
1.  p.  249).  It  is,  however,  precarious  to  assert,  in  the  absence  of  indication  from 
the  writer  himself,  that  he  clearly  and  deliberately  designed,  in  every  separate 
portion  of  his  composition,  to  adhere  strictly  to  the  order  of  time.  The  circumstance 
"  that  the  separate  laws,  as  they  were  made  known  to  Moses  by  Jehovah,  and  to 
the  people  by  Moses,  are  interwoven  in  the  history  of  the  joumeyings  through  the 
wilderness,"  while  exceedingly  valuable  as  a  note  of  the  historic  crvdibility  and 
Mosaic  authorship  of  the  entire  narrative  (vide  infra,  p.  xx),  does  not  justify  the 
conclusion  that  Bleek  desires  it  to  carry — that  "  we  should  certainly  expect  that  if 
Moses  wrote  the  Pentateuch  as  it  is  now  constructed,  aU  the  particulars  would  have 
been  fitted  together  in  a  consecutive  order  and  connection  in  accordance  with  the 

NDUBBBs.  a 


THE  AUTHENTICITY  AND  AUTHORSHIP  OF 


aotnal  sequence  of  events."  Not  to  mention  tliat  B'eek  does  not  deem  it  necessary 
to  insist  upon  the  application  of  this  criterion  in  determining  the  authenticity  and 
genuineness  of  the  synoptical  Gospels  of  Matthew  and  Luke  (vide  '  Introd.  to  N.  T.,' 
Vol.  I.  p.  280),  it  is  certain  with  regard  to  Numbers  that  the  account  of  the 
princes'  offerings  at  the  dedication  of  the  altar  (ch.  vii.)  does  not  occupy  the  place 
to  which  it  is  chronologically  entitled,  while  it  is  doubtful  if  the  instructions  relating 
to  the  construction  of  silver  trumpets  (ch.  x.  1 — 10)  should  not  be  assigned  to  an 
earlier  period  than  immediately  before  the  march,  and  yet,  according  to  Bleek, 
this  latter  paragraph  bears  "  in  the  highest  measure  the  stamp  of  exactness,  dis- 
tinctness^ and  historic  fidelity,"  while,  with  reference  to  the  former,  even  Ewald 
would  admit  that  the  writer  had  derived  his  information  from  antique  Mosaic 
fragments  ('History  of  Israel,'  Vol.  H.  p.  18).  But  the  question  still  remains 
whether  in  point  of  fact  the  narrative  has  at  this  particular  stage  suffered, 
even  inadvertently,  a  chronological  dislocation.  If  the  writer's  purpose  had  been 
simply  to  ohronide  the  interesting  circumstance  that  the  anniversary  of  the  exodus 
had  been  kept  in  the  wilderness  by  a  second  celebration  of  the  passover,  tkoa  it 
must  be  conceded  that  at  least  it  wears  this  aspect.  A  closer  scrutiny  of  the 
passage,  however,  leads  to  a  somewhat  dififerent  conclusion.  The  historian,  it  is 
seen,  is  engaged  in  recording  the  transactions  that  occurred  preparatory  to  depart- 
ing from  Sinai,  and  has  arrived  at  that  point  where  only  two  remain  to  be  noted, 
viz.,  the  observance  of  a  supplementary  or,  as  it  is  sometimes  designated,  a  little 
passover,  and  the  construction  of  silver  trumpets  for  signal-giving  on  the  desert 
march.  Accordingly,  with  reference  to  the  first,  instead  of  writing  down  in  so  many 
words  that  certain  parties  performed  a  special  paschal  celebration  on  the  fourteenUi 
day  of  the  second  month,  he  details  the  circumstances  out  of  which  tie.  necessity 
for  such  celebration  arose,  and  the  authority  they  had  received  for  its  observance, 
leaving  it  to  be  inferred  by  his  readers  that  the  Divine  prescription  with  regard  to 
the  matter  was  not  neglected,  just  as,  in  connection  with  the  silver  trumpets,  in- 
stead of  stating  that  they  were  manufactured  as  God  had  enjoined,  he  contents 
himself  with  simply  engrossing  in  his  narrative  the  order  he  had  received  for  theii 
oonstruction.  Thus,  instead  of  being  an  "  evident  inaccuracy,"  the  section  about 
the  passover  has  been  introduced  into  the  history  on  a  principle  at  once  perfectly 
lucid  and  readily  intelligible. 

n.  The  thirtt-sevsn'  tbabs'  ohasm.  It  is  immaterial  whether,  with  Bleek, 
Ewald,  Colenso,  Kuenen,  and  others,  we  regard  the  first  month  spoken  of  in  ch. 
XX.  1  as  the  first  month  of  the  third  year,  or,  with  Gerlach,  Lange,  Kurtz,  Eeil, 
'  Speaker's  Commentary,'  &c. ,  consider  it  to  be  the  first  month  of  the  fortieth  year— ^ 
immaterial,  that  is  to  say,  so  far  as  the  present  argument  is  concerned.  In  the 
former  case,  a  gap  occurs  in  the  history  of  over  thirty-seven  years  concerning  which 
the  writer  preserves  unbroken  silence,  while  in  the  latter  the  chronological  break  is 
scarcely  less,  though  the  silence  is  not  so  absolute — the  rebellion  of  Korah  and  his 
company  occurring  in  the  intervaL  In  either  case  the  difficulty  is  pretty  much 
the  same,  viz.,  to  understand  how,  on  the  hypothesis  of  the  Book  of  Numbers 
having  been  composed  as  a  connected  historical  work,  so  long  a  series  of  years 
should  have  been  passed  over,  if  not  without  the  least,  yet  with  so  little,  information. 
"  It  is  impossible,"  writes  Bleek,  "  to  imagine  how  a  contemporary  historian  cuuld 
have  skipped  so  long  a  period  with  such  seeming  unconsciousness; "  "it  is  hardly 
conceivable  that,  circumstanced  as  they  were,  nothing  should  have  happened  to 
them  which  deserved  to  be  recorded  as  much  as  many  other  events  described  in  the 
Pentateuch;"  and  accordingly  he  adds,  "It  follows  tiiat  this  gap  can  only  be 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


attributed  to  the  want  of  completeness  and  aoouraoy  of  the  history  "  (vide  '  Introd. 
to  the  Old  Test.,'  VoL  L  p.  251).    Bohlen,  mth  much  bolder  ingenuity,  blots  the 
thirty-seven  years  out  altogether,  regarding  the  number  forty  of  which  the 
narrative  speaks,  especially  when  conjoined  with  the  story  of  the  whole  generation 
perishing,  as  conclusive  evidence  of  its  mjrthioal  complexion.  "  The  epico-traditional 
period, of  forty  years  was  prescribed  to  the  author  of  the  Book  of  Numbers,  and  he 
does  his  best  to  fill  it  up  with  the  few  events  which  were  at  his  command,  even 
specifying  the  days  and  months  when  they  occurred  "  ('  Introd.,'  Vol,  I.  p.  86 ;  cf. 
Kuenen,  *  The  Eeligion  of  Israel,'  VoL  L  p.  131).  Ewald,  with  less  audacity,  ascribes 
it  to  an  almost  total  obscuration  of  the  national  memory  in  the  time  of  Ids  Elohist 
concerning  a  dark  period  of  their  history  which  they  were  anxious  to  forget. 
"  When  the  people  were  already  established  in  Oanaan,  and  looked  back  upon  the 
long  period  of  their  wanderings  in  the  desert  after  their  exodus,  undoubtedly  the 
view  became  fixed  among  them  that  the  time  passed  in  the  desert  had  been  forty 
years — a  round  number,  the  adoption  of  which  may  be  inferred  from  the  Book  of 
Origins.    But  when  its  author  sought  to  assign  to  the  several  still  remembered 
events  of  this  long  period  their  proper  dates — ^their  years,  months,  and  days — we  see 
at  once  how  difficult  it  was  even  then  to  effect  this  in  any  historical  sense."  Accord- 
ingly, he  explains  that  "  all  those  events  which  could  not  belong  to  the  close  of  the 
wanderings  were  placed  in  the  first  two  years,  and  all  the  remainder  in  the  last 
year  of  the  forty,"  leaving  the  entire  middle  of  these  forty  years  "a  completely 
blank  space,  of  which  nothing  further  is  said  than  that  the  generation  which  came 
up  from  Egypt  had  to  die  in  the  desert  for  its  backslidings,  in  order  to  make  room 
for  a  better  "  ('  History  of  Israel,'  Vol.  IL  p.  186).    And  perhaps  no  better  or  more 
fescinating  theory  could  be  adopted  for  the  solution  of  this  singular  phenomenon, 
if  it  were  perfectly  certain  that  the  present  narrative  would  resist  every  endeavour 
to  regard  it  as  contemporaneous  history,  and  that  on  such  an  assumption  the 
remarkable  lacuna  could  not   be  reasonably  accounted  for.     The  hypothesis  of 
Havemick  may  indeed  be  dismissed  as  improbable  and  unsatisfactory,  that  "little 
transpired  during  that  long  space  of  time  that  was  sufficiently  remarkable  and 
important  to  deserve  mention,  or  of  which  even  a  remembrance  was  preserved " 
('Introd.  to  Pent.,'  §  27).    Even  the  explanation  offered  by  Eurtz  scarcely  com- 
mends itself  as  perfectly  sufficient,  that,  "  so  far  as  the  wanderings  in  the  desert  are 
concerned,  nothing  of  a  stationary  (or   retrograde)  character  was  regarded  as 
forming  part  of  the  history  to  be  recorded,  but  only  that  which  was  progressive" 
and  that  "the  thirty-seven  years  were  not  only  stationary  in  their  character, — years 
of  detention,  and  therefore  without  a  history, — ^but  they  were  also  years  of  dispersion  " 
('  Hist,  of  Old  Covenant,'  Vol.  III.  p.  309).    The  true  solution  rather  lies,  we  appre- 
hend, in  the  direction  of  the  thought  hinted  at  by  Gerlach,  that  "  it  is  the  manner 
of  sacred  history  to  relate  only  the  events  of  most  weight  and  consequence  in  the 
progress  of  the  kingdom  of  God,"  or,  as  we  should  prefer  to  state  it,  to  record 
events  only  in  so  far  as  they  have  a  bearing  on  the  kingdom  of  God,  "  and  so  it 
passes  over  in  silence  the  long  time  which  was  spent  in  the  wilderness  by  the 
generation  destined  to  die  there  "  ('  Commentary  on  Numbers,'  oh.  xx. ).  So  to  speak, 
at  Kadesh,  in  consequence  of  the  people's  unbelief  and  condemnation,  the  continuity 
of  God's  kingdom  in  Israel  was  interrupted,  and  was  not  again  resumed  till  the  old 
race,  having  perished  for  their  sins,  was  supplanted  by  a  new ;  and  this  view  would 
seem  to  be  countenanced  by  the  remarkable  coincidence,  that  almost  immediately 
after  the  reassembling  of  the  tribes  at  Kadesh,  Miriam,  probably  the  sole  survivor 
of  the  doomed  race,  dies,  and  that  soon  after  steps  are  taken,  by  the  removal  of 

a2 


THE  AUTHENTICITY  AND  AUTHOBSHIP  OF 


Aaron  and  the  transference  of  his  official  garments  to  Eleazar  Lis  son,  to  complete 
the  renovation  of  the  congregation  by  giving  them  a  new  high  priest  in  room  of 
one  who  was  rather  a  representative  of  the  congregation  that  had  disappeared. 
Hence,  if  this  be  the  proper  light  in  which  to  regard  the  relation  subsisting  between 
the  old  congregation  and  the  new,  it  will  supply  an  answer  to  the  query  why  Moses 
did  not  write  the  story  of  these  years  of  wandering — ^whieh  was  simply  because 
the  people  were  during  that  long  interval  no  longer,  gud  people,  the  congregation 
of  the  Lord,  though  of  course  as  individuals  many  of  them  may  hare  found 
salvation ;  it  wUl  afford  an  explanation  of  why  the  rebellion  of  Eorah  and  his 
associates  was  inserted  in  the  narrative — which  was  not  simply  to  fill  an  otherwise 
inconvenient  gap,  or  because  of  its  appallingly  tragic  character,  but  because  Aaron, 
having  not  yet  been  placed  under  the  ban  of  exclusion  from  Oanaan,  though  the 
people  were,  might  be  said  to  belong  to  and  represent  Q-od's  kingdom  on  earth,  so 
that  an  invasion  of  his  high  priestly  fiinctionB  by  unauthorised  persons  like  Korah 
and  his  companions  had  stiU  a  bearing  on  the  history  of  the  theocratic  kingdom, 
though  the  ordinary  annals  of  the  dying  people  had  none ;  and  it  wiU  reply  to 
Kurtz's  difficulty,  that  "  the  history  does  not  break  oflf  immediately  after  the 
rejection,  but  embraces  several  events,  as  well  as  Several  groups  of  laws,  which 
belong  to  the  period  subsequent  to  the  rejection  " — ^the  events  being  of  the  character 
just  described,  and  the  laws  being  either  for  the  priests  or  the  people  when  they  had 
come  into  the  land  of  their  hahitations,  i.  e.  for  the  new  theocratic  congregation. 
Thus  the  thirty  yeare^  chasm  does  not  invalidate,  but  rather  marvellously  authen- 
ticate, the  history  in  which  it  occurs.  It  may  be  added  that  if  the  writing  had 
been,  as  Bohlen  styles  it,  "a  popular  inventive  legend,"  it  is  scarcely  likely,  if  we 
may  judge  from  the  apocryphal  G-ospels,  that  the  writer  would  have  left  any  gap 
which  the  spirit  of  romance  could  have  fiUed. 

m.  The  fobtteth  teab.  The  number  and  importance  of  the  transactions 
assigned  to  the  brief  interval  of  six  months  between  Aaron's  death,  on  "  the  first 
day  of  the  fifth  month  "  of  the  fortieth  year  of  the  wanderings  (oh.  •»"«"«-iii  38), 
and  the  commencement  of  Hoses'  address,  on  the  first  day  of  the  eleventh  month 
(Deut  i.  3),  render  it  impossible,  according  to  Kuenen  ('  The  Eeligion  of  Israel,' 
Vol.  I.  ch.  ii.  p.  131)  and  Oolenso  ('On  the  Pentateuch,'  Fart  X  ch.  xxiL  pp.  144 — 
146),  to  maintain  the  historic  credibility  of  at  least  this  portion  of  the  narrative. 
But  it  is  pertinent  to  observe  in  reply,  (1)  that  it  is  not  perfectly  certain  that  all 
the  incidents  reported  in  chs.  xxi. — xxxvL  took  place  in  the  comparatively  short 
space  referred  to.  The  Aradite  War,  e.  g.,  though  succeeding  in  the  history  the 
account  of  Aaron's  death  at  Mount  Hor  (ch.  xxi  1 — 3),  is  by  competent  expositors 
(Kurtz,  Keil,  Lange,  Gerlaoh,  '  Speaker's  Commentary '),  and  with  much  probability, 
believed  to  have  occurred  before  that  event,  at  the  commencement  of  the  march 
from  Kadesh,  or  while  the  ambassadors  were  negotiating  with  the  king  of  Edom 
for  a  passage  through  his  dominions ;  and  there  is  nothing  in  the  narrative  that 
absolutely  enjoins  us  to  hold  that  every  single  transaction  of  which  these  chapters 
speak  was  finished,  and  every  word  which  they  record  uttered,  before  Moses  began 
his  exhortation  on  the  first  day  of  the  eleventh  month  (of  ch.  xxvii.  12  — 14 
with  Deut.  xxxiL  48,  and  ch.  xxxv.  9 — 34  with  Deut.  iv.  41).  But  even  if  it 
were  required  to  compress  them  all  within  the  space  of  half  a  year,  it  might  be 
remarked,  (2)  that  many  of  those  occurrences  for  which  successive  periods  are 
somewhat  arbitrarily  demanded  may  easily  enough  have  happened  contempora- 
neously. For  instance,  the  struggle  with  the  king  of  Bashan,  though,  according  to 
Deut.  iii.  4,  6,  not  at  all  a  trifling  skirmish,  but  a  serious  engagement  which 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBBBS. 


neulted  in  the  capture  of  "  threescore  cities  fenced  with  high  waUs,  gates,  and  bars, 
beside  un-walled  towns  a  great  many,"  and  vrhich,  according  to  Oolenso,  must 
have  occupied  at  least  a  month,  might  well  hare  been  undertaken  and  concluded 
during  the  absence  of  the  king  of  Moab's  messengers,  whose  double  journey  to  the 
Babylonian  town  of  Fethor,  on  the  great  river  Euphrates,  a  distance  of  350  miles, 
which  began  after  the  slaughter  of  the  Amorites,  and  before  the  attack  on  the 
Bashanite  monarch  (ch.  xxii.  2),  could  scarcely  have  been  completed  in  less  than 
six  weeks ;  and  since  the  expedition  against  Midian  in  which  Balaam  lost  his  life 
did  not  employ  more  than  12,000  men  (ch.  xxxi.  3,  4),  it  will  be  difficult  to  show 
why  many  of  the  transactions  reported  as  having  taken  place  before  the  end  of  the 
tenth  month  may  not  have  occurred  during  the  progress  of  that  event.  Yet,  if 
even  this  hypothesis  be  discarded,  and  it  be  deemed  imperative  that  aU.  the  several 
incidents  comprised  in  the  history  should  find  a  place  in  distinct  chronological 
succession  within  the  limits  of  the  six  months  specified,  it  stUl  is  competent  to 
maintain,  (3)  that  until  we  can  determine  precisely  the  rapidity  with  which  events 
moved  in  the  closing  months  of  Israel's  pilgrimage,  it  will  be  impossible  to  assert 
with  anything  like  dogmatic  certitude  that  a  young  and  vigorous  people,  trained  in 
the  wilderness,  inspired  by  a  great  national  hope,  and  led,  as  it  were,  by  Q-od  him- 
self, would  not  have  been  able  to  carry  them  through  in  the  time  appointed. 

b.  So-called  Statistioai.  Ebkobs. 

I.  The  XT7MBEK  OF  TBS  FiOHTiNO  MEN.  It  appears  from  the  record  that  on 
three  several  occasions, — in  the  third  month  of  the  first  year  after  the  exodus  for  the 
purpose  of  raising  a  poll  tax  (Exod.  xxx.  11  sqq. ;  c£  xxxvii.  2d,  26),  in  the  second 
month  of  the  second  year  for  the  organisation  of  an  army  (ch.  L  3),  and  in  the 
fortieth  year,  in  the  steppes  of  Moab,  with  a  view  to  the  prospective  division  of 
Canaan  among  the  tribes  (ch.  xxvL  4), — in  accordance  with  Divine  instructions,  a 
formal  registration  of  the  male  heads  of  the  people  from  twenty  years  old  and 
upward  was  effected,  the  result  being  that  in  each  case  the  numbers  were  practically 
the  same — 603,550,  603,550,  and  601,730 ;  the  Levites,  who  were  reckoned  separately, 
numbering  22,000  in  the  second  census,  and  23,000  in  the  third.  In  the  corre- 
spondence between  the  third  summation  and  the  second,  although  not  a  single 
individual  survived  in  the  third  that  was  numbered  in  the  second  except  Caleb  and 
Joshua,  and  although  the  tribe  of  Levi  showed  an  increase  of  300,  it  is  unnecessary, 
with  Bohlen,  to  detect  an  exemplification  of  the  "inventive  process,"  since  it  is 
almost  certain  that  a  fictitious  writer  would  have  either  equated  the  two  numbers 
precisely,  or  rendered  the  divergence  between  them  more  striking,  and  since  it  was 
clearly  not  impossible,  considering  the  special  mortality  that  is  represented  as  having 
overtaken  the  old  nation  during  the  years  of  penal  wandering,  that  the  deaths 
should  have  been  as  many  as  the  births,  while,  if  we  have  regard  to  the  Divine 
purpose  of  supplanting  the  adult  congregation  of  unbelievers  with  a  fresh  population 
of  desert-bom  warriors,  inured  to  hardship  and  trained  to  confidence  in  God,  there 
will  appear  a  special  fitness  in  arranging  that  the  regenerated  nation,  in  resuming, 
as  it  were,  the  interrupted  thread  of  its  history,  should  be  of  exactly  the  dimensions, 
or  nearly  so,  of  the  community  which  had  perished.  The  historic  accuracy  of  the 
two  lists,  besides,  receives  authentication  from  the  circvmistance  that,  while  the 
totals  of  both  so  nearly  approximate,  the  difierence  being  only  1820,  considerable 
variations  exist  in  the  numbers  of  the  individual  tribes,  as  appears  from  the  appended 
table,  and  that  these  can  in  no  small  degree  be  accounted  for. 


THE  AUTHENTICITY  AND  AUTHORSHIP  Of 


At  Sinai.  In  the  plains  of  Moalt. 

Reuben  46,500  43,730 

Simeon  .„        59,300  22,200 

Gad  ^  45,650  40,500 

Judah  74,600  76,500 

Issaohar  54,400  »  64,300 

Zebulun  57,400  60,500 

Ephraim  .^        40,500  32,500 

Manasseb 32,200  .»        52,700 

Benjamin  ,„        35,400  ...        45,600 

Dan  62,700  64,400 

Asber  41,500  53,400 

Naphtali  53,400  45,400 

Total  603,550  601,730 

Thna  Judah  slio-ws  an  increase  in  the  second  computation  of  1900,  which  waa 
amply  Bu£B.cient  to  enable  him  to  retain  the  precedence  of  hia  brethren,  in  accord- 
ance with  the  prophetic  benediction  pronounced  upon  him  by  his  venerable  ancestor 
(Gen.  xliz.  8 — 12).  The  increase  of  Issachar  was  9900,  of  Zebulun  3100,  of  Manasseh 
20,900,  of  Benjamin  10,200,  of  Dan  1700,  and  of  Asher  11,900;  but  not  even  the 
htrgest  of  these  indicates  a  proportion  which  can  be  said  to  be  absolutely  un- 
paralleled ;  and,  considering  the  highly  fayourable  circumstances  under  which  the 
new  race  grew  up  in  comparison  with  the  enervating  bondage  of  Egypt,  it  can 
hardly  be  required  to  show  that  it  was  by  no  means  impossible.  The  principal 
difficulty  attaching  to  the  census  lists  is  not  to  account  for  the  increase  of  certain 
tribes,  but  satis&ctorily  to  explain  the  decrease  in  others.  Thus  the  diminution  of 
Beuben  amounted  to  2770,  and  it  is  commonly  supposed  that  its  cause  must  be 
sought  in  the  destruction  of  the  Korahite  company,  Dathan  and  Abiram  being 
distinguished  members  of  this  particular  tribe  (oh.  zxvi.  9,  10).  The  extra- 
ordinary fall  of  37,100  which  Simeon  exhibited  has  with  much  probability  been 
ascribed  to  the  plague  which  had  recently  cut  off  24,000  persons,  most  of  whom,  it 
has  been  conjectured,  were  Simeonites — Zimri,  whose  wickedness  "  in  the  matter  of 
Cozbi,  the  daughter  of  a  prince  of  Midian,"  provoked  the^tM  eelotarum  of  Fhinehas, 
having  been  "a  prince  of  a  chief  house  among  the  Simeonites"  (oh.  xxv.  14). 
Then  the  remarkable  paucity  of  numbers  in  the  tribe  of  Levi,  in  liie  one  census 
22,000,  and  in  the  other  23,000,  has  been  explained  by  considering  "  that  this  tribe 
sustained  two  heavy  strokes,"  it  being  expressly  mentioned  that  the  sons  of  Aaron, 
Nadab  and  Abihu,  died  childless  (oh.  iii.  4),  and  "  the  stress  put  upon  the  fact 
that  the  children  of  Korah  were  not  destroyed  with  their  father"  (ch.  xxvi.  11) 
pointing  directly  "  to  the  implied  antithesis  that  after  all  many  Levitea  did  perish 
in  the  conspiracy  of  Korah"  (Lange  'on  Numbers,'  p.  11);  while  if  the  rate  of 
Increase,  1000  persons,  or  less  than  five  per  cent,  was  small  when  compared  with  that 
of  the  other  tribes,  it  has  been  shown  that  "  in  the  interval  between  Moses  and 
David  their  rate  of  increase  was  still  below  that  of  other  tribes  "  (Eeil '  on  Numbers,' 
p.  9),  so  that  the  peculiarity  here  adverted  to  was  at  least  not  exceptional  in  the 
history  of  Levi.  Thus  the  difficulties  connected  with  the  second  and  the  third 
enumerations  of  the  people  may  be  regarded  as  completely  vanishing  on  a  little  close 
examination ;  and  the  same  will  suffice  to  dispose  of  the  objection  that  the  numbers 
in  the  first  and  second  censuses  should  have  been  exactly  the  same,  which,  it  ia 
alleged,  could  hardly  have  been  the  case,  even  in  round  numbers,  considering  that 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  tH 


au  interval  of  nine  months  had  elapsed  between  them  (ColenBo  •  on  the  Pent.,'  VoL 
I.  oh.  vii.  p.  42).  But  without  insisting  on  the  fact  that  stationary  communities,  in 
respect  of  population,  are  by  no  means  unknown  in  modern  times,  it  may  be 
legitimately  urged  either,  (1)  with  Miohaelis,  Kurtz,  and  others,  that  there  was  no 
actual  numbering  at  all  on  the  occasion  of  the  lifting  of  the  poU  tax,  but  that  the 
real  census  was  taken  on  making  up  the  muster  roU,  the  number  yielded  by  it 
being  employed  without  hesitation  to  indicate  the  amount  raised  by  the  tax  in 
consequence  of  the  variation  in  the  sum  total  being  but  trifling ;  or,  (2)  with  Gerlaoh, 
Keil,  '  Speaker's  Commentary,"  &c.,  that  the  second  registration  was  not  a  fresh 
census  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term,  but  simply  a  classification  of  the  results  of 
the  preceding  enumeration  by  thousands,  hundreds,  and  tens,  in  accordance  with 
Jethro's  suggestion ;  or,  (3)  with  Lange,  that  the  two  censuses  were  really  one, 
which,  beginning  with  the  view  of  lifting  a  tax  and  ending  with  the  construction 
of  an  army,  extended,  like  the  census  of  David  at  a  later  period  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  8), 
over  the  entire  space  of  nine  months  or  a  year. 

n.  Thb  ntjmbeb  of  the  congregation.  Accepting  then  what  seems  to  be 
indisputable,  that  the  census  of  the  adult  males  reached  the  round  sum  of  600,000, 
and  estimating  the  proportion  of  those  adult  males  or  persons  in  the  prime  of  life 
and  capable  of  bearing  arms,  to  the  rest  of  the  population,  in  accordance  with  the 
somewhat  precarious  standard  of  modern  statistics,  as  that  of  one  to  four  or  five,  it 
may  be  safely  concluded  that  the  entire  body  of  the  people,  or  "  the  whole  congre- 
gation," numbered  between  two  and  three  milKons.  But  neologio  criticism  professes 
itself  at  a  loss  to  understand  how  in  the  course  of  215  years  the  seventy  souls  that 
oame  into  Egypt  (Gen.  xlvi.  26,  27 ;  Deut.  x.  22)  could  have  developed  into  so 
formidable  a  community;  how  in  the  Arabian  peninsula,  which  at  the  present 
moment  is  a  scene  of  barrenness  and  desolation,  scarcely  capable  of  sustaining  a 
population  of  over  6000,  so  vast  a  multitude  could  have  subsisted  for  a  period  of 
forty  years ,  and  how,  if  the  Israelites  had  been  so  large  a  nation  in  the  Mosaic  age, 
they  should  either  have  been  so  long  in  conquering  the  land  of  Canaan  as  the  Books 
of  Joshua,  Judges,  and  1  Samuel  represent  them  to  have  been,  or  have  found  it 
possible  to  live  alongside  of  the  Canaanites  within  so  limited  a  territory. 

1.  Oolenso  ('  Pent.,'  Vol.  I.  ch.  xvii.),  following  Bohlen,  declares  the  increase  ot 
seventy  souls  into  two  and  a  half  millions  in  the  space  of  215  years,  the  interval 
between  the  descent  into  Egypt  and  the  exodus  from  Egypt,  to  be  open  to  serious 
difficulties,  if  not  impossible  (cf.  Kuenen,  '  The  EeUgion  of  Israel,'  Vol.  I.  ch.  iL  p. 
163) ;  and  it  may  be  frankly  conceded  that  if  his  principles  of  computation  are 
correct,  his  conclusion  cannot  possibly  be  set  aside.  If  in  the  215  years  there  were 
only  four  descents,  if  the  rate  of  increase  was  no  greater  in  Egypt  than  it  had  been 
previously,  t.  e.  four  or  five  sons  to  a  family,  and  if  none  but  pure  Israelites  were 
recognised  as  forming  part  of  the  congregation,  then  it  need  not  surprise  one  to 
leam  that,  "  instead  of  600,000  warriors  in  the  prime  of  life,  there  could  not  have 
been  5000,"  that  "  if  the  numbers  of  all  the  males  in  the  four  generations  be  added 
together  (which  supposes  that  they  were  all  living  at  the  time  of  the  exodus),  they 
would  only  amount  to  6311,"  and  that,  even  with  the  addition  of  the  children  of  the 
fifth  generation,  "  the  sum  total  of  males  of  all  generations  could  not,  according  to 
these  data,  have  exceeded  28,465,  instead  of  being  1,000,000."  But  none  of  the 
above  assumptions  can  be  regarded  as  established  certainties.  The  first  indeed 
appears  to  receive  support  from  Exod.  vi.  16,  18,  20,  which  seems  to  style  Moses 
the  great-grandson  of  Levi.  But  as  Levi  was  at  least  forty  years  of  age  at  the 
iescent  into  Egypt,  and  had  three  sons  before  that  event,  we  may  reckon  that 


rili 


THE  AUTHENTICITY  AND  AUTHOESHIP  OF 


Eohath  was  bom  in  his  father's  thirty-eighth  year,  aad  was  accordingly  two  yean 
of  age  when  he  was  deported  from  the  land  of  Canaan.  But  Eohath  in  torn 
married,  say  at  thirty  years  of  age,  and  had  a  son  named  Am  ram,  who  is  represented 
as  having  begotten  Moses,  say  at  the  age  of  forty.  Adding  twenty-eight  (30 — 2) 
and  forty  and  eighty  as  the  age  of  Moses  at  the  exodus,  we  can  only  make  148 
years  instead  of  215,  showing  that  between  Levi  and  Moses  there  were  more  descents 
than  four,  and  that  the  Amram  of  ver.  20,  who  was  Moses'  father,  was  not  the  son 
of  Eohath  spoken  of  in  yer.  18,  but  a  remote  descendant  of  that  individual.  The 
accuracy  of  this  calculation  is  further  strikingly  confirmed  by  a  reference  to  the 
number  of  the  Eohathites  in  the  time  of  Moses,  of  whom  the  fourth  part,  or  2160 
(men  and  boys),  were  Amramites  (ch.  iii.  27,  28);  from  which  it  follows,  since 
Moses  had  only  two  sons,  that  he  must  have  been  possessed  of  brothers  and  nephews 
to  the  number  of  2147,  which  is  simply  inconceivable  (cf.  EeQ  '  on  Ex.,'  vi.  27 ; 
Eurtz,  '  Hist,  of  O.  0.,'  Vol.  II.  p.  144).  Hence,  instead  of  four  descents  for  the 
increase  of  Israel,  we  may  reasonably  reckon  seven,  and  in  some  instances,  like  that 
of  Joshua,  eight  or  nine  (I  Ohron.  vii.  20 — 27) ;  and  this,  without  demanding  any 
higher  rate  of  increase  than  attended  Jacob's  sons  in  the  first  generation,  would 
abundantly  satisfy  all  the  requirements  of  the  case.  Of  the  seventy  souls  who 
went  down  into  Egypt,  assuming  that  only  Jacob's  grandsons,  fifty-one  in  number, 
were  capable  of  further  out-population,  and  that  each  of  these  had  only  four  sons 
(Oolenso  allows  four  and  a  half),  their  increase  may  be  thus  represented : — 

204  males. 

•••        •••        ••■  oio 

•■•  •■•  •■•  Ojao4 

•••         •••         >••  lOfUob 

52,224 

208,896 

•••         ■••         •••  8Qd,5o4 

That  is,  the  208,896  fathers  of  the  sixth  descent  had  at  the  close  of  the  next  thirty 
years,  or  immediately  before  the  exodus,  835,584  sons,  to  whom  if  we  add  64,416 
surviving  fathers  and  grandfathers  we  shall  bring  the  total  up  to  900,000  males, 
the  number  requisite,  according  to  Golenso,  to  give  600,000  fighting  men  above 
twenty  years  of  age.  It  is  true  that,  in  this  calculation  we  have  excluded  the 
operation  of  the  law  of  mortality  among  families,  but  then  to  counterbalance  this 
we  might  warrantably  have  claimed  a  higher  rate  of  increase  than  that  adopted, 
since  it  is  certain  God  had  promised  that  the  blessing  of  fruitfulness  should 
attend  Jacob's  descendants  in  Egypt,  and  since  we  know  that  Pharaoh  must  have 
observed  something  unusual  in  the  rapid  multiplication  of  the  Hebrews  to  cause 
him  to  promulgate  his  truculent  decree.  Thus,  without  resorting  to  the  (somewhat 
doubtful)  hypothesis  of  Eurtz  ('  Hist,  of  0.  0.,'  Vol.  XL  p.  149),  that  Jacob  and  his 
sons  were  accompanied  into  Egypt  by  men-servants  and  maid- servants,  whose 
offspring  were  included  in  the  family  of  Israel,  there  need  be  no  difficulty  in 
believing  that  the  entire  congregation  of  Israelites  proper  numbered  between  two 
and  three  million  souls. 

2.  Nor  was  it  likely  that  the  question  of  finding  sustenance  for  themselves  »nd 
for  their  flocks  and  herds  occasioned  them  as  much  anxiety  as  it  has  since  done  to 
rationalistic  critics.  Oolenso,  again  following  in  the  wake  of  EInobel  and  Bohlen, 
has  ducliired  it  an  absolute  impossibility  that  such  a  mass  of  human  beings  with 
their  cattle  coiild  obtain  support  for  such  a  length  of  time  as  forty  years  from  the 


At  iho 

euJ  of  1st  30  years 

2nd  „       „ 

3rd  „      „ 

4th  „       „ 

5th  „       „ 

6th  „      „ 

7th  „      „ 

THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


scanty  vegetation  of  the  desert.  But  (1)  the  story  does  not  represpnt  the  Israelites 
as  having  been  maintained  exclusively  by  the  natural  produce  of  the  wilderness, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  expressly  claims  that  they  enjoyed  for  themselves  (and  we 
may  rest  assured  also  for  their  cattle,  if  such  was  necessary)  a  miraculous  supply 
both  of  meat  and  of  drink ;  and  (2)  there  is  good  reason  for  believing  that  the 
Arabian  peninsula  was  considerably  more  fertile  than  it  is  to-day,  that,  in  fact,  there 
were  resources  in  the  country  of  which  they  might  have  availed  themselves  in  cases 
where  no  special  miraculous  provision  was  granted;  while  (3)  there  are  indications 
in  the  narrative  itself  that  the  flocks  and  herds  were  scattered  far  and  wide  during 
the  sojourn  in  the  desert,  and  so  were  able  the  more  easily  to  obtain  pasture.  The 
first  of  these  considerations  may  be  disregarded  by  rationalising  critics,  but,  unless 
a  disbelief  in  the  miraculous  is  to  be  postulated  as  a  preliminary  to  historical 
research,  intelligent  and  unprejudiced  Bible  students  wiU  find  it  impossible  to 
ignore  the  circumstance  that  the  entire  narrative  belongs  to  the  region  of  the  super- 
natural, that  the  writer  explicitly  asserts  the  intervention  of  causes  which  were 
supramundane  in  effecting  Israel's  guidance  through  the  great  and  terrible  wilder- 
ness, and  that,  as  the  Hebrew  Psalmist  expresses  it,  "man  did  eat  angel's  food." 
At  the  same  time,  while  observing  that  the  desert  pilgrims  were  at  special  times 
and  places  provided  with  miraculous  supplies,  they  will  hardly  fail  to  notice  that 
nowhere  does  the  narrative  afi&rm  that  these  were  their  sole  support,  or  convey  the 
impression  that  the  region  through  which  they  passed'  was  an  immense  plain  of 
sand,  or  a  bleak  and  sterile  tract  of  bare  and  calcined  rock.  The  passage  adduced 
by  Colenso  to  prove  that  the  inhospitable  desert  was  incapable  of  affording  susten- 
ance to  the  two  millions  of  Israelites  who  passed  through  it,  with  their  two  millions 
of  sheep  and  oxen,  rather  makes  for  the  opposite  contention  (ch.  xx.  2),  since  it 
relates  to  the  beginning  of  the  fortieth  year,  thereby  showing  that  during  aU  the 
previous  thirty-nine  years  at  least  neither  the  people  nor  the  animals  had  perished, 
and  since  it  applies  not  to  the  whole  extent  of  the  Arabian  peninsula,  but  to  the 
most  barren  and  desolate  region  of  it,  styled  "  the  desert  of  Sin,"  now  called  the 
Wady-el-Arabah,  situated  between  the  land  of  Edom  and  the  wilderness  of  Paran. 
And  indeed  a  sufficient  refutation  of  the  sweeping  statements  of  Knobel,  Bohlen, 
Colenso,  Kuenen,  and  others  may  be  found  in  the  fact,  which  is  ineontrovertible, 
that  at  the  very  period  when  the  Israelites  passed  through  it,  it  was  the  seat  of 
several  numerous  and  powerful  nomadic  tribes,  like  the  Amalekites,  with  whom 
they  warred  at  Hephidim,  the  Midianites,  whom  they  encountered  at  Shittim,  and 
the  Kenites,  who  inhabited  some  parts  of  the  same  wilderness,  "  having  their  nest 
in  the  rock."  Then  there  are  grounds  for  believing  that  the  scene  of  Israel's 
wanderings  is  not  precisely  the  same  to-day  as  it  then  was.  "There  is  no  doubt 
that  the  vegetation  of  the  wAdys  has  considerably  decreased.  ...  If  this  be  so,  the 
greater  abundance  of  vegetation  would,  as  is  well  known,  have  furnished  a  greater 
abundance  of  water,  and  this  again  would  react  on  the  vegetation,  from  which  the 
means  of  subsistence  would  be  procured  "  (Stanley's  '  Sinai  and  Palestine,'  pp.  24, 
25).  Carl  Bitter  also  thus  sums  up  the  circumstances  which  appear  to  'bim  to 
warrant  the  inference  that  the  Sinaitio  peninsula  was  capable  of  providing  susten- 
ance for  a  more  numerous  population  than  it  is  presently  able  to  maintain :  — ' '  There 
was,  it  is  evident,  in  former  times,  a  growth  both  of  the  larger  sorts  of  trees  and 
of  smaller  shrubs,  of  which  we  have  no  remnant;  there  was  also  a  large  number  of 
plants  which  might  contribute  in  part  to  the  sustenance  of  Israel  during  the  journey; 
there  was  a  universally  distributed  agriculture,  as  we  learn  from  the  existence  of 
mines,  and  from  the  oldest  Egyptian  habitations,  as  well  as  from  the  Chrietion 


THE  AUTHENTICITY  AND  AUTHORSHIP  OF 


monuments  which  we  everywhere  found— <5loiB*'ers,  hermitages,  walls,  gardens, 
and  fountains ;  and,  lastly,  there  is  an  evident  possibility  that  there  was  a  much 
greater  supply  of  water  in  the  wSdys,  more  abundant  rain-storms,  and  the  possi- 
bility of  economising  the  supplies  thus  gained  by  a  use  of  the  same  appliances 
which  were  common  elsewhere  in  countries  similarly  situated  and  conditioned  " 
(•Geography  of  Palestine,'  VoL  L  p.  380.  Clark's  'For.  Theol.  Lib.').  And  of 
course  the  ability  of  the  Israelites  to  procure  support  for  themselves  and  their  flocks 
would  be  largely  increased  if  it  was  not  imperative,  as  is  often  arbitrarily  asserted, 
that  they  should  keep  constantly  together,  but  if,  on  the  contrary,  it  was  permissible 
to  disperse  themselves  abroad  among  the  more  fertile  localities.  Nor  need  this 
have  been  impossible  though  considerable  bodies  of  armed  men  should  have  been 
required  to  guard  them  fi-om  the  attacks  of  hostile  tribes,  since  the  entire  army  was 
600,000  strong,  and  could  easily  have  spared  a  few  detachm.ents  for  suoh  a  purpose 
had  that  been  necessary.  Of  this,  however,  there  is  no  evidence ;  and  if  Moses  fed 
the  flocks  of  Jethro  in  the  Sinaitio  desert  for  forty  years  without  the  presence  of  a 
military  guard,  it  does  not  seem  unreasonable  to  conclude  that  Moses'  countrymen, 
especially  when  assisted  by  the  mixed  multitude  (pnS,  plebs  promiscua,  iwifuiToe 
\a6e,  a  swarm  of  foreigners,  though  by  a  slight  change  in  the  punctuation  it  might 
be  made  to  mean  inhabitants  of  the  desert,  or  wandering  Arabs  or  Bedaween,  who 
had  joined  themselves  to  Israel  on  the  eve  of  the  exodus),  might  be  competent  in 
the  same  region  and  for  the  same  number  of  years  to  feed  their  own.  But  without 
enlarging  further  on  this  controverted  problem,  it  may  be  satisfactory  to  note  that 
the  general  accuracy  of  the  views  here  propounded  is  recognised  by  Ewald,  who 
thus  writes : — "  We  cannot,  therefore,  fail  to  see  that  then  the  peninsula  must  have 
supported  a  fer  more  numerous  population  than  now ;  in  a  condition  of  great 
privation  and  trial  certainly,  of  which  indeed  in  all  the  traditions  there  is  frequent 
complaint,  but  still  so  that  a  finigal  and  laborious  people  would  not  absolutely 
perish  if  only  they  made  the  trials  themselves  the  sources  of  warning  and  strength. 
Erom  the  present  number  of  the  inhabitants  of  a  country  which  has,  moreover,  been 
utterly  neglected  by  the  human  hand,  no  certain  conclusion  respecting  its  earlier 
state  can  be  drawn ;  and  that  peninsula  is  not  the  only  country  from  whose  present 
scanty  population  we  should  never  have  guessed  the  former  density  of  human  life. 
...  -  This  only  we  can  perceive,  although  the  ooimtry  has  not  yet  been  thoroughly 
explored  in  all  directions  by  intelligent  Europeans,  that  it  is  by  no  means  one  vast 
sandy  plain,  .  .  .  but  shows  clear  indications  of  having  been  formerly  much  more 
extensively  cultivated.  Moreover,  we  cannot  exactly  know  how  far  the  various 
tribes  may  have  straggled  out  from  Sadesh  to  procure  subsistence ;  for  it  is  clear 
that  Kadesh  was  only  the  resting-place  of  Moses  and  the  tabernacle,  and  the  meet- 
ing-place of  the  community  on  appointed  days  ('  History  of  Israel,'  Vol.  U.  p.  197). 
8.  The  third  difiSoulty  in  connection  with  the  size  of  the  congregation  may 
be  disposed  of  in  a  few  sentences.  That  600,000  soldiers  should  not  have  found 
the  conquest  of  Canaan  so  hard  a  matter  as  the  Biblical  narrative  represents 
might  seem  an  obvious  conclusion,  were  it  not  that  it  rests  upon  two  unwarrant- 
able assumptions :  (1)  that  the  Oanaanites  were  neither  numerous  nor  powerful, 
whereas  they  were  both,  having  thirty-one  kings,  and  possessing  mamy  towns 
(Josh.  xii.  7 — 24) ;  and  (2)  that  the  warfare  in  which  Israel  engaged  was  one  in 
which  victory  was  determined  by  purely  military  considerations,  whereas  the 
siege  of  Jericho  (ibid.  vi.  2)  and  the  defeat  at  Ai  {ihid.  vii.  4)  were  witnesses  to 
the  contrary.  But,  in  truth,  the  ease  or  difSculty  of  the  conquest,  of  Canaan  ia 
largely  a  matter  of  opinion,  and  it  is  at  least  in  this  connection  interesting  to  note 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


that  Kuenen  objects  to  the  historic  credibility  of  the  conquest  on  the  ground  that  it 
was  much  too  easily  accomplished  ('  The  Beligion  of  Israel,'  YoL  X  oh.  iL  p.  131). 
As  to  the  possibility  of  finding  room  in  Canaan  for  two  millions  more  of  people 
than  it  had  previously  contained,  it  is  sufficient  to  reply,  (1)  that  in  order  to  make 
room  for  them  a  pretty  considerable  removal  of  the  earlier  inhabitants  was  efFeoted 
by  means  of  the  sword,  and  (2)  that  it  is  doubtful  if  the  remaining  Oanaanitish 
population,  though  increased  by  the  influx  of  three  millions  of  Israelites,  would  be 
as  large  as  the  five  millions  of  inhabitants  that  were  contained  in  Palestine  in  the 
flourishing  period  of  the  IsraeUtish  kingdom. 

III.  Thk  number  of  the  first-born.  Rationalising  critics  appear  to  bo 
unanimous  in  pitching  upon  this  as  an  insuperable  obstacle  to  the  historical  validity 
of  the  Mosaic  narrative.  It  will  accordingly  be  desirable  to  state  the  difficulty  in 
their  own  words.  "  According  to  ch.  i.  46  and  ii.  32,  the  number  of  all  the  male 
Israelites  from  twenty  years  old  and  upwards  was,  without  the  Levitea,  603,350. 
If,  however,  the  number  of  the  first-born  of  the  male  sex,  reckoned  from  one  month 
old  and  upwards,  amounted  only  to  a  little  over  22,000  (according  to  ch.  iii),  the 
number  of  them  from  twenty  years  old  and  upward  could  only  be  reckoned  at  from 
about  11,000  to  14,000,  and  in  that  the  first-bom  of  the  Levites  would  also  be  com- 
prehended, so  that  from  the  rest  of  the  tribes  they  would  only  amount  to  from 
about  10,000  to  13,000.  According  to  this  the  proportion  of  the  first-born  males  to 
the  whole  of  the  male  Israelites  would  only  be  as  one  to  forty-five.  But  this  is  a 
proportion  that  we  cannot  well  think  could  have  reaUy  existed  "  (Bleek,  '  Introd.  to 
Pent.,'  Vol.  I.  p.  315).  "At  one  time  the  number  of  men  able  to  bear  arms  above 
twenty  years  of  age  is  said  to  amount  to  603,650,  exclusive  of  the  Levites;  soon 
afterwards,  however,  the  number  of  the  first-born  males  is  set  down  at  22,273.  A 
Comparison  of  these  two  statements  is  sufficient  to  show  the  fictitious  character  of 
the  whole  census ;  for  from  it  we  may  deduce  that  every  mother,  taking  one  with 
another,  must  have  brought  into  the  world  no  less  than  forty-two  male  children ; 
or,  ia  other  words,  that  only  one  first-born  child  is  to  be  allowed  for  every  forty- 
two  males"  (Bohlen,  'Introd.  to  Pent.,'  p.  113)..  The  problem  is  stated  in  sub- 
stantially equivalent  terms  by  Vater  '  on  Numb.  iii.  39,'  Oolenso  '  on  the  Pent.,'  Part 
I.  ch.  xiv.,  Kuenen  in  '  The  Eeligion  of  Israel,'  Vol.  L  ch.  ii.  p.  172,  and  others;  and 
as  thus  presented  it  has  met  with  various  replies.  1.  Michaelis  has  endeavoured  to 
resolve  it  by  supposing  that  polygamy  extensively  prevailed  among  the  Israelites, 
and  that  only  the  first-bom  of  the  fathers  were  counted  ('Laws  of  Moses,'  ii.  §  94) ; 
but,  as  KeQ  properly  observes,  "  polygamy  never  prevailed  among  the  Israelites  or 
any  other  people  with  anything  like  the  universality  which  this  would  suppose," 
and,  besides,  the  expression  "Dm  liaS"  (eh.  iiL  12)  distinctly  points  to  the  first- 
born  on  the  mother's  side,  rn  which  case,  as  Kurtz  remarks,  "the  existence  of 
polygamy  would  only  serve  to  render  the  difficulty  perfectly  colossal."  2.  Saver- 
nick  has  so  far  modified  the  above  opinion  as  to  hold  that  the  first-born  on  the 
sides  of  both  parents  were  alone  reckoned,  but  this  is  a  purely  arbitrary  assumption, 
and  tends  rather  to  increase  than  remove  the  perplexity.  3.  Baumgarten  has 
suggested  that  only  the  first-bom  under  six  years  of  age  were  numbered,  adducing 
in  support  of  this  view  that  all  above  that  age  had  been  redeemed  by  partaking  of 
the  passover  in  Egjrpt,  but  such  a  sentiment  has  no  foundation  in  anything  con- 
tained in  Scripture.  4.  Kurtz  has  advanced  a  number  of  considerations  which  in 
his  judgment  afford  an  adequate  explanation  of  the  otherwise  inexplicable  fact :— • 
(1)  the  rarity  of  polygamy,  which  lessened  the  proportion  of  the  first-born ;  but,  on 
Kurtz's  own  theory  that  ch.  iii.  12  points  to  the  mother's  first-born,  the  iarit| 


aa  THE  AUTHENTICITY  AND  AUTHORSHIP  OP 

•r  prevalence  of  polygamy  has  properly  speaking  no  bearing  whateTer  on  the 
question ;  (2)  the  fruitfulness  of  Hebrew  mothers,  to  which  unquestionably  some 
degree  of  weight  must  be  attached ;  and  (3)  the  exclusion  of  first-bom  sons  who 
were  not  also  the  first-bom  of  their  mothers,  or  who  were  themselves  heads  of 
families,  which,  though  controverted  by  Colenso,  appears  to  be  a  step  in  the  right 
direction.  Every  one,  however,  of  the  above  solutions  proceeds  upon  the  assumption 
that  the  law  relating  to  the  sanctification  of  the  first-bom  was  intended  to  have  a 
retrospective  force,  but  exactly  in  the  denial  of  this  kc  post  facto  operation  of  the 
Divine  enactment  lies  the  true  solution  of  this  quoestio  vexata,  which  is  given  by — 
5.  Eeil,  after  Vitringa,  viz.,  that  only  the  first-bom  were  counted  who  had  come 
into  the  world  since  the  night  of  the  exodus  when  the  law  was  promulgated  (Exod. 
ziii.  2),  t.  e.  thirteen  months  before,  so  that,  as  has  been  aptly  remarked,  the  real 
difficulty  is  not  that  the  first-bom  were  so  few,  but  that  they  were  so  many ;  and 
yet  the  peculiar  situation  of  Israel  during  those  thirteen  months  abundantly  pro- 
vides the  required  explanation.  "  When  the  Israelites  were  groaning  under  the 
hard  lash  of  the  Egyptian  task-masters,  and  then  under  the  inhuman  and  cruel 
edict  of  Pharaoh,  which  commanded  aU  the  Hebrew  boys  to  be  put  to  death,  the 
number  of  marriages  no  doubt  diminished  from  year  to  year ;  but  with  the  emanci- 
pation and  the  revival  of  the  nation's  hopes  "  there  might  very  well,"  says  Keil, 
"  have  been  about  36,000  marriages  contracted  in  a  year,  say  from  the  time  of  the 
seventh  plague,  three  months  before  the  exodus,  and  about  37,600  children  bom 
by  the  second  month  of  the  second  year  after  the  exodus,  22,273  of  them  being 
boya." 

«.  Alleged  Phtsioal  Impossibilities. 

I.  The  DimBS  of  the  fbiests.  "The  Book  of  Leviticus  is  chiefly  occupied 
in  giving  directions  to  the  priests  for  the  proper  discharge  of  the  different  duties  of 
their  ofiB.oe,  and  further  directions  are  given  in  the  Book  of  Numbers ; "  "  and  now 
let  us  ask,  for  all  these  multifarious  duties,  during  the  forty  years'  sojourn  in  the 
wilderness,  .  .  .  how  many  priests  were  there  ?  The  answer  is  very  simple.  There 
were  only  three,  Aaron  (till  his  death)  and  his  two  sons,  Eleazar  and  Ithamar. 
Tet  how  was  it  possible  that  these  two  or  three  men  should  have  discharged  all 
these  duties  for  such  a  vast  multitude  P"  ('  Colenso  on  the  Pent.,'  Part  I.  ch.  xx.) 
The  reply,  like  the  objection,  is  very  simple.  1.  The  Levitioal  laws,  though  given 
in  the  desert,  were  not  designed  to  come  into  full  operation  there.  This  was 
obviously  the  case  with  the  important  legislation  delivered  during  the  period  of 
penal  wandering  (ch.  xv.  2).  The  terms  also  in  which  the  passover  was  insti- 
tuted bear  that  it  was  meant  for  Canaan  (Exod.  xiii.  5).  At  the  time  of  the  erec- 
tion of  the  tabernacle  it  was  contemplated  that  a  few  months  would  see  them  in 
the  land  of  their  inheritance.  Hence  there  is  no  sound  reason  for  supposing  that 
the  multifarious  duties  recorded  in  the  Books  of  Leviticus  and  Numbers  (at  that 
time  not  composed)  were  performed  by  the  priests.  2:  In  point  of  fact  the  Levitical 
laws  were  not  observed  in  the  wilderness  in  all  their  completeness.  As  much  as 
this  is  testified  by  Moses  in  Deut.  xii  8.  But,  it  is  alleged,  with  reference  to  the 
second  passover,  it  is  absolutely  certain  that  no  part  of  the  original  ceremony  was 
omitted.  The  phrase,  "  according  to  aU  the  rites  of  it,  and  according  to  aU  the 
ceremonies  thereof,  shaU  ye  keep  it,"  precludes  the  idea  of  any  departure  from  the 
Btatiitory  regulations;  and  how  could  three  priests,  it  is  asked,  slaughter  150  000 
larobs  according  to  Colenso,  100,000  according  to  Kurtz,  or  even  50,000  according 
to  Keil,  and  sprinkle  their  blood  upon  the  altar  in  the  short  space  of  time  allott^ 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS.  siU 

for  that  -work  P  Keil  thinks  it  might  have  been  done,  quoting  an  instance  from 
Josephua  ('  Wars,'  VI.  is.  3)  in  -which  the  blood  of  256,500  paschal  lambs  was  sprinkled 
upon  the  altar  in  the  time  of  the  Emperor  Nero ;  but  since  this  second  paasorer 
was  entirely  exceptional,  and  was  not  directly  contemplated  in  the  enactments  which 
had  been  made  in  view  pf  the  people's  settlement  in  Canaan,  and  since  the  statute 
forbidding  the  killing  of  the  paschal  lambs  at  any  other  place  than  the  tabernacle 
(Deut.  xvi.  2)  had  not  yet  been  published,  nay,  since  the  terms  of  this  statuto 
appear  rather  to  imply  that  up  to  the  time  of  its  publication,  the  fortieth  year,  they 
had  been  in  the  habit  of  slaughtering  them  elsewhere,  it  would  seem  as  if  the 
inference  of  Kurtz  were  correct — that  the  lambs  were  killed  by  the  heads  of  families 
themselves,  and  the  blood  sprinkled  on  the  door-posts ;  that,  in  short,  the  second 
year's  passover  was  observed  not  upon  the  model  of  the  future  celebrations  in 
Palestine,  but  upon  that  of  the  past  celebration  in  Egypt ;  so  that,  even  with  regard 
to  this,  no  undue  exaction  of  strength  would  be  required  from  Aaron  and  his  sons. 
'  But  even  should  we  hold  that  the  Levitical  system  was  in  operation  in  the  wilder- 
ness with  anything  approaching  to  completeness,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  (3)  that 
the  Levites  had  been  assigned  to  the  priests  for  assistants  in  matters  relating  to  the 
tabernacle,  and  that  they  were  not  strangers  forbidden  to  come  nigh  on  pain  of 
death,  as  Colenso  alleges,  on  the  strength  of  ch.  iii.  10,  38,  but,  as  oh.  i.  51 
shows,  persons  who  by  their  very  office  were  under  obligation  to  minister  unto  the 
tabernacle  (ch.  i.  47). 

n.  The  ASSEMBLDra  op  the  congregation.  The  objection  here  alluded  to 
only  needs  to  be  stated  to  discover  its  absurdity.  Interpreting  the  narrative  with 
the  severest,  and  let  it  be  also  said  the  simplest,  literaUty,  it  supposes  that  two 
millions  and  a  haK  of  people  were  required  to  assemble  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle, 
which  according  to  exact  arithmetical  calculation  was  eighteen  feet  wide,  which  would 
allow  nine  full-grown  men  to  stand  in  front  of  it,  which,  with  eighteen  inches  between 
each  rank,  would  necessitate  a  line  of  nearly  twenty  miles  to  bring  all  the  adult 
males  precisely  in  front  of  it,  and  a  line  of  sixty  miles  if  the  old  men,  women,  and 
children  were  included  I  "  It  is  surely  inconceivable,"  writes  Colenso,  "  that  such 
an  enormous  congregation  should  have  been  summoned  expressly  by  Jehovah  to 
attend  for  the  purpose  of  witnessing  a  ceremony  taking  place  in  a  teat  eighteen 
paces  long  and  six  wide,  which  could  only  have  been  seen  by  a  few  standing  at  the 
door  "  ('  On  the  Pent.,'  Part  I.  ch.  iv.).  To  this  it  might  be  amply  sufficient  to  reply 
that  there  is  one  thing  even  more  inconceivable,  viz.,  that  a  person  of  intelligence 
could  have  proposed  such  a  difficulty ;  but  for  further  satisfaction  it  may  be  added 
that  the  expressions,  "  the  whole  assembly  "  (Exod,  xii.  6 ;  Numb.  x.  3, 4),  and  "  all 
the  congregation"  (ch.  xvi.  19,  25),  do  not  necessarily  signify  every  individual 
member  of  the  community,  but,  in  perfect  consistency  with  historical  accuracy, 
may  mean  a  portion,  representative  or  otherwise,  of  the  whole.  The  foolishness  of 
insisting  in  every  instance  on  the  universal  sense  of  the  terms  "  all "  and  "  whole  " 
is  recognised  by  Colenso  himself,  who,  writing  of  ch.  x.  3,  4,  admits  that  "  no 
one  would  suppose  that  every  individual  would  be  able  to  attend  such  a  summons 
(to  the  tabernacle  door),  or  would  be  expected  to  do  so,"  and  who  accordingly  limita 
the  expressions,  "  all  the  congregation,"  and  "  the  whole  assembly,"  first  to  the  adult 
malea  in  the  prime  of  life,  and  eventually  to  ' '  the  great  body  of  the  603,550  warriors,'* 
i.  <!.,  we  presume,  the  major  part  of  them.  But  if  "  all"  may  import  something  less 
than  the  whole,  it  will  be  difficult  to  adduce  a  cogent  argument  to  show  that  the 
"  all "  may  not  sometimes  be  represented  by  a  part.  And  indeed  in  the  Book  of 
Numbers  itself  there  are  not  wanting  hints  of  the  representative  character  af  the 


»v  THE  AUTHBNTIOITr  AND  AUTHORSHIP  OF 

great  congregational  assembly,  as  when,  in  oh.  i.  16,  tlie  princes  of  the  tribes  are 
designated  "  the  renowned  of  the  congregation,"  li  «rally,  the  called  men  of  the  con- 
gregation, "  because,"  adds  Keil,  "  they  were  called  to  diets  of  the  congregation,  as 
representatives  of  the  tribes,  to  regulate  the  affairs  of  the  nation,"  an  interpretation 
concurred  in  by  the  best  authorities  (of.  oh.  xvi.  2). 

m.  The  makchinq  of  the  host.  In  the  estimation  of  some  the  observance 
by  two  and  a  half  millions  of  people  of  the  marching  orders  prescribed  for  their 
joumeyings  seems  a  harder  problem  than  even  their  subsistence  in  the  wilderness. 
According  to  oh.  ii.,  as  subsequently  modified  by  ch.  x,  14 — 28,  the  camp  of  Judah, 
consisting  of  186,400  soldiers,  led  the  van.  These  were  followed  by  the  Gershonites 
and  Merarites,  13,700  strong,  accompanied  by  the  tabernacle  furniture  on  waggons. 
Next  came  the  camp  of  Beuben,  numbering  151,450  men  of  war.  Behind  these 
the  Kohathites,  8600,  kept  the  charge  of  the  sanctuary.  These  were  succeeded  by 
the  camp  of  Ephraim,  containing  108,100  adult  males;  whUe  the  camp  of  Dan,  with 
157,600  warriors,  brought  up  the  rear.  In  each  case  the  soldiers  were  accompanied 
by  their  families,  so  that,  counting  women  and  children,  each  of  the  four  campa 
may  be  roughly  estimated  at  half  a  million.  Now,  since  the  narrative  does  not 
permit  us  to  think  of  anything  but  an  orderly  march,  we  must  imagine,  it  is  said, 
these  four  main  divisions  of  half  a  million  each  falling  into  line  and  moving  ott  the 
ground,  not  simultaneously,  but  in  prearranged  siiccession,  so  that,  as  the  first 
camp  would  require  at  least  four  or  five  hours  for  its  necessary  evolutions,  the  day 
would  practically  be  at  an  end  before  the  last  company  had  begun  to  move ;  after 
which  we  must  further  contemplate  this  long  line  of  two  and  a  half  millions  travel- 
ling, say  ten  or  a  dozen  miles,  and  at  the  close  of  the  day's  journey  re-forming,  no 
matter  where  they  halted,  into  a  camp  of  exactly  the  dimensions  of  that  from 
which  in  the  morning  they  had  broken  up — all  which,  even  with  the  help  of  a 
little  miracle  in  the  way  of  warding  off  sickness  and  imparting  unusual  vigour 
and  intelligence  to  the  people  and  their  leaders,  it  is  alleged  is  scarcely  within  the 
limits  of  physical  possibility.  And  unquestionably,  as  thus  represented,  it  must 
have  been  a  problem  for  the  Israelites  to  understand  how  they  were  to  get  away 
from  the  spot,  since,  if  sixteen  hours  were  demanded  for  the  work  of  faUing  into 
line,  it  is  doubtful  if  they  could  have  been  expected  to  do  more  for  the  day  than  fall 
out  again  and  return  to  their  square  formations.  But  the  manifest  absurdity  of 
this  suffices  to  show  that  such  a  representation  must  be  wholly  incorrect ;  and 
indeed  any  interpretation  of  the  marching  orders  which  professes  to  exhibit  their 
impracticability  will  be  found  as  difficult  to  harmonise  with  the  modern  theory  of 
a  late  authorship  as  with  that  of  a  Mosaic  origin,  since  it  is  simply  incredible  that 
any  writer  possessed  of  intelligence  would  have  inserted  in  his  manuscript  what  by 
the  supposition  is  so  palpably  impossible.  The  essential  fallacy  in  the  hypothesis 
is  that  each  division  waited  before  commencing  its  movements  until  those  of  its 
predecessor  were  completed,  that  the  camp  of  Reuben,  e,  g.,  remained  perfectly 
stationary  till  the  last  line  in  Judah's  company  was  started,  nay,  till  the  Gershonites 
and  Merarites  had  taken  up  position  in  Judah's  rear.  But  obviously  all  the  four 
divisions  might  have  simultaneously  commenced  their  preparations,  by  falling  into 
line  as  far  as  practicable  on  the  ground ;  and  the  work  of  doing  so,  it  must  not  be 
forgotten,  would  be  largely  facilitated  by  the  principle  adopted  in  their  several 
encampments,  the  men  being  arranged  "  by  their  generations,  after  their  families, 
by  the  house  of  their  fathers,  according  to  the  number  of  their  names,"  ».  e.  by 
hundreds  and  fifties  and  tens ;  so  that,  even  granting  four  or  five  hours  for  the 
completion  of  the  movemeits  of  Judah,  it  does  not  follow  that  more  than  three  oi 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


four  hoxirs  additional  woiild  be  required  for  similarly  completing  the  movements 
of  the  other  three  divisions.    Meantime  Judah  has  been  travelling,  let  ue  suppose, 
four  hotira  at  the  rate  of  two  or  two  and  a  half  miles  an  hour,  so  that,  after  • 
journey  of  ten  miles,  he  is  ready  for  encampment,  which  cousumea,  we  may  conjec- 
ture, not  more  than  four  hours.    Thus  the  entire  day  of  Judah  was  divided  into 
three  equal  portions  of  four  hours  each,  the  first  of  which  was  spent  in  breaking 
up  and  forming  into  line,  the  second  in  travelling,  and  the  third  in  re-camping.    As 
we  have  supposed  the  last  Une  to  be  four  hours  later  than  Judah  in  starting,  they 
would  likewise  be  four  hours  later  in  arriving.     And  though  darkness  must  have 
set  in  before  the  last  travellers  were  quartered  for  the  night,  it  is  not  likely  that 
that  would  greatly  impede  their  progress  or  interfere  with  their  comfort,  since, 
according  to  the  story,  Jehovah  went  before  them  in  a  pillar  of  cloud  by  day,  and 
a  pillar  of  fire  by  night.     Of  course  in  the  above  calculations  we  do  not  pretend  to 
show  how  the  march  actually  was  accomplished,  but  simply  to  demonstrate  that 
assertions  as  to  its  impossibility  are  extremely  rash,  and  not  such  as  would  be  made 
by  any  modern  general  of  intelligence  and  capacity.    Besides,  it  should  be  noted 
that,  though  the  ideal  order  and  method  of  marching  are  depicted  by  the  historian, 
it  is  not  necessary  to  assume,  what  certainly  the  historian  does  not  assert,  that  these 
wore  in  every  minute  particular  carried  out  on  the  first  trial  with  the  same  faultless 
precision  that  might  have  been  exhibited  by  a  highly-disciplined  modern  army,  or 
that  they  themselves  would  display  at  a  later  period  when  practice  had  made  perfec- 
tion. On  the  contrary,  it  maybe  reasonably  supposed  that,  daring  the  fortnight  which 
intervened  between  the  construction  of  the  camp  and  the  marching  of  the  host,  the 
▼arious  sections  of  the  army,  under  their  captains  of  hundreds  and  fifties  and  tens, 
would  be  subjected  to  a  sort  of  preparatory  drill  in  anticipation  of  the  general 
advance,  and  that  though,  in  consequence  of  the  numerous  hitches  that  might 
naturally  be  expected  to  occur  in  an  Initial  experiment  on  so  great  a  scale,  the  first 
day's  marching  would  almost  certainly  prove  a  serious  affair,  occupying  a  great 
many  hours,  and  leaving  them  only  a  few  miles  from  Sinai ;  yet,  as  the  days  went 
by,  and  frequent  repetition  imparted  facility  to  their  movements,  these  imperfections 
would  gradually  disappear,  and  the  actual  method  of  marching  more  nearly 
approach  the  ideal.     Then,  if  it  further  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  narrative  does 
not  affirm  that  the  work  of  reconstructing  the  camp  was  undertaken  every  night, 
thus  involving  the  tedious  labour  of  deploying  into  line  each  successive  morning, 
which  would  certainly  have  involved  an  unnecessary  expenditure  of  time  and  energy 
that  might  have  been  otherwise  profitably  consumed  in  journeying,  but  that  only 
then  was  the  tabernacle  set  up  when,  as  at  Sibroth-Hattaavah,  they  had  reached  a 
station  where  the  multitude  could  conveniently  rest — when  this  circumstance  in 
addition  is  remembered,  it  wiU  be  seen  that,  attended  though  it  must  have  been 
with  much  painful  labour,  the  marching  of  the  host  need  not  by  any  means  have 
been  an  insuperable  difficulty,  and  much  less  a  physical  impossibiUty. 

IV.  The  TiCToaT  over  Midian.  While  dwelling  largely  and  with  much 
impressiveness  upon  the  immoral  aspects  of  this  remarkable  campaign,  Oolenso, 
after  Bohlen,  ia  particularly  scandalised  at  the  idea  of  12,000  Israelites  alaying  all 
the  male  Midianites,  capturing  all  their  females  and  children,  including  32,000 
virgins,  seizing  all  their  cattle  and  flocks  (72,000  oxen,  61,000  asses,  675,000  sheep), 
and  all  their  goods,  and  burning  all  their  cities  and  all  their  goodly  castlea,  without 
the  loss  of  a  single  manl  (ch.  xxxi.  49;  'On  the  Pentateuch,'  Vol.  L  ch.  xxii.). 
I)e  Wette  regards  this  particular  statement  as  proof  conclusive  of  the  mythical 
i>baraoter  of  the  narrative ;  but  Tacitus  ('  Annals,'  xiii.  39)  records  an  instance  in 


xvi  THE  AUTHENTICITY  AND  AUTHORSHIP  OP 

which,  at  the  capture  of  a  Parthian  castle,  the  Bomans  slaughtered  all  their  foei 
without  losing  a  single  man,  and  Strabo  (xvi.  1128)  mentions  a  battle  in  which 
1000  Arabs  were  slain  by  only  two  Bomana  (vide  Bosenmiiller  on  Numb,  -r-r-ri, 
49),  while  Havernick  a£SrmB  that  the  life  of  Saladin  contains  almost  in  the  same 
words  a  like  statement  respecting  the  issue  of  a  battle  ('Introd.,'  p.  330).  Hence  the 
extraordinary  preserration  which  Israel  enjoyed  on  this  occasion,  though  owing 
more  to  Divine  interposition  than  to  the  operation  of  natural  causes,  such  as  the 
non-military  character  of  the  Midianites  and  the  suddenness  of  the  attack  to  which 
they  were  exposed,  can  scarcely  be  held,  on  any  principles  of  sound  reasoning,  to 
afford  colotirable  pretext  for  impeaching  the  correctness  of  the  narrative. 

ITS  AUTHORSHIP. 

The  authorship  of  the  Book  of  Numbers  may  be  regarded  as  practically  settled 
by  the  previous  question  of  its  historic  credibility.  If  no  valid  argument  can  be 
adduced  for  impugning  the  veracity  of  its  contents,  the  inference  is  irresistible  that 
it  can  only  have  proceeded  from  the  pen  of  Moses.  Yet  it  is  alleged  that  the  Book 
of  Numbers  presents  features  which  can  only  be  explained  by  the  modern  theory 
of  its  being,  like  the  rest  of  the  Pentateuch,  a  late  compilation. 

1.  The  alternating  use  of  the  Divine  names,  which  forms  so  prominent  a  character- 
istic of  the  Book  of  Genesis,  and  which  largely  disappears  in  the  Books  of  Exodus 
and  Leviticus,  reasserts  itself,  it  is  maintained  (De  Wette,  'Kritik  der  IsraeUtischen 
Geschichte,'  p.  362),  in  the  Book  of  Numbers,  in  particxilar  in  the  section  relating  to 
Balaam  and  his  prophecies  (chs.  xxii. — ^xxiv.),  in  such  a  way  as  to  suggest  the  idea 
of  composite  authorship.  Without  anticipating  what  may  be  advanced  in  the  body 
of  the  work  on  this  important  subject,  it  may  suffice  in  this  place  to  notice  that  the 
peculiarity  attaching  to  Balaam's  use  of  the  Divine  names,  no  less  than  that  belongs 
ing  to  the  historian's  employment  of  them,  admits  of  a  perfectly  intelligible  explan- 
ation on  the  theory  of  the  Mosaic  authorship.  Whatever  view  we  adopt  as  to  the 
character  of  Balaam, — ^whether,  with  PhUo,  Josephus,  Origen,  Augustine,  Lyra, 
A  Lapide,  and  others,  we  regard  him  as  having  been  "  prophetam  rum  Dei,  ted 
diaboli,"  an  Oriental  wizard  who  claimed  to  possess  the  gift  of  prophecy,  DD^"7,  the 
Old  Testament  counterpart  of  Simon  Magus  in  the  primitive  apostolic  Chui-ch,  or 
accept  the  view  of  TertuUian,  Jerome,  Deyling,  Buddseus,  &c.,  that  he  was  a  true 
prophet  of  God  who  feU  through  oovetousness, — and  whatever  opinion  we  may 
entertain  as  to  the  source  of  his  religious  information, — whether,  with  Tholuck  and 
Lange,  we  discover  that  in  the  primeval  monotheism  which  still  Ungered  in  Mesopo- 
tamia, or,  with  Hengstenberg,  find  it  in  the  report  of  God's  dealings  with  Israel, 
which  even  then  had  penetrated  as  far  east  as  the  Euphrates,  or,  with  Eurtz,  Eeil, 
and  the '  Speaker's  Commentary,'  seek  for  it  in  both, — ^it  seems  apparent  that  Balaam 
professed  to  be  a  worshipper  of  Jehovah  (ch.  xxii.  8,  18) ;  in  which,  as  Kurtz 
correctly  observes,  the  king  of  Midian  could  not  fail  to  discern  peculiarly  welcome  in- 
telligence, for  "  if  he  succeeded  in  inducing  him  to  curse  the  Israelites,  their  power, 
he  thought,  would  be  effectually  broken"  ('  Hist,  of  0.  0.,'  Vol.  HI.  p.  387).  Hence 
it  was  specially  fitting  that  he  should  use  the  term  Jehovah  as  he  does,  whether 
conversing  in  plain  prose  with  the  Moabitish  messengers,  or  pouring  forth  predic- 
tions in  elevated  strains  of  poetry,  even  though  it  should  have  been  the  case,  as 
Keil  suggests,  that  the  Jehovah  whom  Balaam  worshipped  was  "only  Elohim,  t. «. 
only  a  Divine  Being,  but  not  the  God  of  Israel."    Nor  does  it  look  a  hard  problea 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  xvil 

to  explain  why  in  oh.  xxii.  38  he  should  have  discarded  the  favourite  term  Jehovah 
for  the  more  general  expression  Elohim,  since  it  was  not  at  that  moment  his  desire 
to  emphasise  the  fact  that  Jehovah  had  declined  to  extend  him  the  needful  sanction 
to  undertake  the  solicited  mission,  which  indeed  he  had  already  done  (ch.  xxii. 
13),  hut  to  repudiate  the  insinuation  of  the  king  of  Moah  that  he  had  hesitated  to 
comply  with  the  invitation  addressed  to  him  simply  through  fear  of  not  receiving  a 
sufficient  recompense,  by  representing  that  he  had  really  been  hindered,  not  through 
personal  reluctance,  but  by  Divine  restraint,  in  which  case,  as  Hengstenberg 
remarks,  "  even  a  member  of  the  chosen  people  would  have  used  Elohim."  Then 
the  mode  in  which  the  historian  employs  the  terms  is  as  little  suggestive  of  a 
diverse  authorship,  but  is  possessed  of  a  significance  as  remarkable  and  specific,  as 
that  in  which  they  were  employed  by  Balaam.  In  the  first  place,  when  recording 
the  interview  between  Balaam  and  the  elders,  although  the  Kosem  says  Jehovah,  he 
writes  Elohim  (ch.  xxii.  9,  10,  12,  20).  And  even  if  we  cannot  unreservedly  adopt 
the  view  of  Hengstenberg,  that  the  historian's  design  was  "  to  determine  Balaam's 
personal  relation  to  God  in  opposition  to  his  hypocritical  pretensions"  ('  Authenticity 
and  Genuineness  of  the  Pentateuch,'  Vol.  I.  p.  388),  or  believe  with  Baux  that  the 
writer  meant  to  intimate  "that  the  heathen  seer  did  not  stand  at  first  in  any 
connection  whatever  with  the  true  God  of  Israel "  ('  Geschichte  der  alttestL 
Weissagung,'  i.  p.  344),  or  affirm  with  Eeil  that  it  serves  as  an  indication  that 
"  Balaam's  original  attitude  towards  Jehovah  was  a  very  imperfect  one  "  ('  Com- 
mentary on  Numbers,'  ch.  xxii.  1),  we  may  hold  it  as  a  perfectly  adequate  explan- 
ation that  as  yet  there  was  no  necessity  to  take  the  slightest  cognisance  of  Balaam's 
relation  to  Jehovah,  assumed  or  otherwise,  but  simply  to  draw  attention  to  the  fact 
that  the  Divine  interposition  solicited  by  Balaam  was  granted.  At  the  same  time 
we  regard  the  preponderance  of  argument  as  lying  on  the  side  of  Hengstenberg's 
interpretation  of  a  contrast  which,  as  he  justly  observes,  is  too  remarkable  and 
occurs  too  often  to  have  been  purely  accidental,  while  we  cannot  attach  a  large 
degree  of  importance  to  the  objection  of  Keil  that  such  a  view  "  sets  up  a  chasm 
between  Elohim  and  Jehovah,  with  which  the  fact  that,  according  to  ch  xxii.  22, 
the  wrath  of  Elohim  on  account  of  Balaam's  journey  was  manifested  in  the  appear- 
ance of  the  angel  of  Jehovah  is  irreconcilable,"  since  it  rather  seems  to  bridge  over 
any  such  imaginary  chasm  by  showing  that  the  Elohim  who  was  angered  was  not 
different  from  the  Maleach  Jehovah  who  accorded  permission,  but  was  in  reality 
one  and  tho  self-same  Being.  And  now  if  we  inquire  why  from  this  point  onward 
,  Jehovah  is  so  frequently  employed  by  the  writer,  it  will  be  difficult  to  discover  a 
more  satisfactory  reason  than  that  supplied  by  Hengstenberg,  that  he  designed  "to 
point  out  how  Jehovah,  the  God  of  Israel,  overruled  the  whole  transaction  for  his 
people's  welfare,  and  how  Balaam,  who  otherwise  had  no  intercourse  with  him,  was 
obliged,  in  this  extraordinary  juncture,  to  serve  him  as  an  instrument." 

2.  The  narrative  contains  repetitions  and  variations  which,  in  the  estimation  of 
the  higher  criticism,  suggest  a  remodelling  of  the  original  documents  by  subsequent 
editorship,  and  a  working  up  of  different,  and  sometimes  contradictory,  raccouuts 
into  the  same  writing.  Bleek  specifies  as  an  example  the  account  of  the  spies  in 
cha.  xiii.  and  xiv.,  in  which  he  assigns  ch.  xiii.  1 — xiv.  4,  10 — 25,  39 — 45  to 
the  fundamental  or  Elohist  writing,  and  the  remainder  (ch.  xiv.  5 — 10,  26 — 38)  to 
the  revisionary  labours  of  the  Jehovist,  the  ground  of  this  apportionment  of  the  text 
being  that  ch.  xiv.  10 — 25  declares  that  "  of  aU  the  Israelites  who  had  been 
witnesses  of  Jehovah's  wonders  in  Egypt  and  the  wilderness,  and  had  so  of^eIl 

HUMBEBS.  6 


Kviii  THE  AUTHENTICITY  AND  AUTHORSHIP  OF 

tempted  him,  not  one  should  behold  the  promised  land  except  Caleb,"  while  ch.  xiv. 
26 — 38  aflarms  "  that  except  Caleb  and  Joshua,  all  those  previously  numbered  from 
twenty  years  old  and  upwards  should  perish  in  the  wilderness,  and  that  their 
children  only,  after  a  forty  years'  journeying  through  the  wilderness,  should  arrive 
at  the  land  of  Canaan,"  the  first  statement  agreeing  with  ch.  xiii.  30,  where  Caleb 
quiets  the  people  who  were  agitated  through  the  report  of  the  spies,  and  the  second 
with  oh.  xiv.  6,  where  Joshua  and  Caleb  do  this  ('  Introd.  to  Old  Testament,'  Vol.  L 
§  119).  The  '  Speaker's  Commentary'  agrees  with  this  opinion  so  far  as  to  regard 
it  as  "likely  that  a  later  and  independent,  but  not  inconsistent,  account  has  been 
interwoven  with  the  earlier  one,"  only  it  seems  unable  to  determine  which  account 
was  the  original  narrative,  and  which  the  interpolation ;  in  the  Introduction  to 
Numbers,  §§  4,  7,  saying,  "  The  passages  introducing  the  name  of  Joshua  would 
seem  to  be  the  inserted  ones,"  and  in  the  exposition  of  ch.  xiv.  24  assigning 
this  distinction  to  those  in  which  the  name  of  Caleb  only  is  mentioned.  But  there 
does  not  appear  to  be  any  urgent  necessity  for  adopting  the  theory  of  combined 
accounts,  either  in  the  e.iaggerated  form  of  Bleek  or  in  the  modified  form  of  the 
'  Speaker's  Commentary.'  "  The  fact  that  Caleb  only  is  mentioned  in  ch.  xiii.  30, 
though,  according  to  oh.  xiv.  6,  Joshua  also  stood  by  his  side,  may  be  explained  on 
the  simple  ground  that  at  first  Caleb  was  the  only  one  to  speak  and  maintain  the 
possibility  of  conquering  Canaan  "  (Keil).  Another  instance  commonly  adduced 
in  support  of  the  idea  of  commingled  documents  is  found  in  chs.  xvi.  and  xvil,  in 
which,  according  to  Stahelin,  De  Wette,  Bleek,  and  others  of  the  rationalising 
school  of  criticism,  the  story  belonging  to  the  earliest  narrative  of  the  insurrection 
of  Korah  with  his  250  Levites  against  the  priestly  power  of  Moses  and  Aaron  has 
been  mixed  up  with  another  tradition  relating  to  the  sedition  of  certain  Eeubenite 
princes  against  the  civil  authority  of  the  law-giver  in  particular,  ch.  xvi.  12—15, 
2 ; — 34  being  additions  of  tht  supplementer.  But  the  hypothesis  that  there  were 
originally  two  distinct  rebellions  and  that  the  accounts  of  these  have  been  incor- 
porated into  one  narrative,  does  not  necessarily  militate  against  the  idea  of  the  Mosaic 
authorship  of  the  writing,  eince  the  original  narrative  may  have  been  subsequently 
expanded  by  its  first  composer  so  as  to  include  the  two  accounts  in  one.  Indeed 
if  we  suppose,  what  is  not  at  aU  unlikely  to  have  been  the  case,  that  the  spirit  of 
mutiny  was  abroad  in  the  congregation,  there  might  easily  have  been  more  than 
one  distinct  centre  of  insubordination ;  and  this  hypothesis,  that  the  Eeubenite 
princes  with  their  followers  acted  in  confederation  with  the  Levite  Korah  and  his 
company  (of.  Ewald,  '  History  of  Israel,'  Vol.  11.  p.  179),  wUl  be  found  to  go  far  to 
explain  the  seeming  dislocation  of  the  narrative,  in  which  a  distinction  appears  to 
be  kept  up  between  the  priestly  and  the  princely  rebels.  Other  specimens  might 
be  given  of  the  so-called  repetitions  and  contradictions  that  exist  in  Numbers,  such 
as  oh.  xui  16  compared  with  ch.  xi.  28,  ch.  xiv.  45  compared  with  oh.  xxi.  3,  and 
ch.  xxi.  13  with  oh.  xxxiii.  45  S. ;  but,  besides  admitting  of  easy  refutation,  none 
of  them  are  of  such  importance  as  to  call  for  extended  notice. 

3.  Ofice  more,  in  common  with  the  other  portions  of  the  Pentateuch,  the  Book  of 
Numbers  is  believed  to  exhibit  traces  of  a  later  authorship  than  that  of  Moses,  in 
such  like  passages,  e.  g.,  as  ch.  xv.  32 — 86,  which  appears  to  intimate  that  at  the 
time  of  its  composition  the  children  of  Israel  were  no  longer  in  the  wilderness ; 
ch,  XX.  6,  which  suggests  that  they  were  then  in  Canaan ;  ch.  xxi.  14,  15,  17,  18, 
27 — 30,  in  which  the  writer  alludes  to  certain  archaic  songs  with  which  his  readers 
were  familiar;  oh.  xxiv.  7,  which  could  not  have  been  penned  before  the  days  of 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEB8.  xix 

the  monarohy;  and  ch.  ^xir.  IT,  18,  wMoh  clearly  belongs  to  the  time  of  Dayid, 
when  Idumea  was  conquered  by  Israel.  But  as  the  most  of  these  have  boen 
examined  in  the  Essay  on  the  Authorship  of  the  Pentateuch  already  referred  to 
{vide  '  Genesis,'  Pulpit  Commentary),  it  ■wUl  be  the  less  needful  to  subject  them  at 
present  to  separate  consideration.  It  may  suffice  to  remark  that  though  unquestion- 
ably when  thus  brought  together  they  appear  to  have  a  cumulative  force  of  great 
value,  yet  the  exact  amount  of  importance  to  be  attached  to  them  depends  upon 
whether  they  individually  will  bear  the  light  of  candid  and  impartial  investigation , 
for  if  when  separately  taken  they  break  down  on  examination,  the  nett  result  of 
even  an  infinite  series  of  such  examples  will  be  nil,  and  it  may  with  confidence  be 
affirmed,  as  Keil  and  Hengstenberg  have  abundantly  shown,  that  every  one  of  the 
above  so-called  difficulties  is  capable  of  easy  solution.  Besides,  to  borrow  an  arrow 
from  the  quiver  of  an  opponent,  "he  who  relies  upon  the  impression  made  by  the 
whole,  without  interrogating  the  parts  one  by  one,  repudiates  the  first  principles  of 
all  scientific  research,  and  pays  homage  to  superficiality  "  (Kuenen.  '  The  EeUgion 
of  Israel,'  vol,  i.  p.  11). 

But  now,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Book  of  Numbers  possesses  characteristics  which 
point  as  unmistakably  in  the  direction  of  a  Mosaic  authorship  as  the  foregoing 
peculiarities  are  believed  to  speak  in  favour  of  a  later  origin. 

1.  The  Book  of  Kiunbers  contains  several  sections  which  in  their  existing  shapes 
were  either  written  by  the  hand  of  Moses  or  belong  to  the  Mosaic  age.  Of  these 
passages  the  following  is  the  list  prepared  by  Bleek  ('Introduction  to  Old  Testament,' 
Vol,  I.  §  118):— ohs.  i.,  ii.,  iii.,  iv.;  vi.  22—27;  x.  1—10;  xix.;  xxi.  14,  15,  17, 
18,  27,  30;  xxxiii.  1—49 ;  with  which  in  the  main  Ewald  agrees,  adding  ch.  .x.  35, 
36;  XX.  14 — 22,  as  fragments  "of  the  earliest  accounts  of  the  Mosaic  times,"  at 
the  same  time  guarding  himself,  with  reference  both  to  ch.  xx.  14 — 22  and  ch. 
xxxiii.,  by  declining  positively  to  affirm  "  that  these  catalogues  were  kept  during 
the  journey,  or  written  down  at  once  during  its  last  year,"  though  he  admits  that 
at  a  much  later  period  they  could  not  have  been  attempted  ('  History  of  Israel,' 
Vol.  n.  pp.  24,  26).  a.  The  list  of  camping  stations  indeed  distinctly  claims  to 
have  been  written  by  Moses  (ch.  xxxiii.  2),  and  though  Bohlen  ('  Introduction  to 
Genesis,'  Vol.  I,  p.  88)  professes  to  be  able  to  detect  in  it  everywhere  traces  of  fiction, 
he  may  be  said  to  stand  alone  in  the  possession  of  so  remarkable  a  power  of  vision. 
The  almost  unanimous  verdict  of  critical  inquirers  assigns  this  ancient  catalogue  of 
desert  stations  to  Mosaic  times  for  the  simple  reason  that  such  a  long  series  of 
names  could  not  possibly  have  been  retained  in  the  memory  for  any  lengthened 
period,  and  regards  it  as  perfectly  authentic  because,  as  Ewald  acknowledges,  on 
examination  it  appears  to  be  correct.  /3.  With  regard  to  the  songs  contained  in  ch. 
xxi.,  "  it  is  so  absolutely  against  all  probability  that  they  should  be  the  production 
of  a  later  age,"  writes  Bleek,  "that  it  has  been  acknowledged  by  De  Wette  that  they 
are  certainly  derived  from  the  Mosaic  age;"  and,  again,  "if  we  find  here  songs 
which  bear  indications  of  belongiug  to  the  Mosaic  age,  which,  however,  do  not 
contain  any  reference  at  all  to  the  circumstances  of  a  later  time,  but  are,  on  the 
contrary,  full  of  features  of  individuality  which  are  not  otherwise  intelligible,  and 
are  without  meaning  except  in  reference  to  circumstances  in  the  time  of  Moses,  it 
becomes  highly  probable  that  they  were  not  only  composed  in  the  Mosaic  age,  but 
that  they  were  then  written  down,  and  have  come  down  to  us  from  thence" 
('  Introduction  to  Old  Testament,'  Vol.  I.  §  79).  y.  The  legislation  of  ch.  xix.  bears 
npon  the  i»c«  of  it  that  it  was  meant  for  a  time  when  the  people  dwelt  in  oampa 

6  -'. 


THE  AUTHENTICITY  AND  AUTllJRSHIP  OB' 


and  tents  (of.  vera.  3,  7,  9,  14),  and  cotild  scarcely  have  been  composed  at  a  latex 
period,  when  the  circumstances  of  the  people  were  bo  entirely  altered  as  to  render 
directions  about  camps  and  tents  quite  inapplicable.  !.  Similarly,  the  ordinance 
relating  to  the  silver  trumpets  (ch.  x.  1 — 10),  and  the  instructions  bearing  on  the 
census  and  the  arrangement  of  the  camp  (chs.  L — ^iv.),  so  unmistakably  discover 
their  connection  with  the  desert,  that  no  intelligent  critic  ever  dreams  of  disputing 
that  at  least  they  belong  to  that  early  era ;  -while — f .  That  the  high  priestly  bene- 
diction (ch.  vi.  24 — 26)  and  the  military  order  which  was  uttered  at  the  marching 
and  halting  of  the  camp  (oh.  x.  35,  36)  were  also  composed  then  seems  impossible  to 
deny,  for,  to  use  the  words  of  Bwald,  "  in  these  antiquely  simple  but  powerful  and 
beautiful  utterances  there  is  nothing  contrary  to  the  age  and  spirit  of  Moses ;  the 
first  poetically  describes  the  peaceful,  and  the  second  the  warlike,  feelings  of  the 
community  during  that  primeval  age."  If,  therefore,  these  different  portions  of  the 
present  Book  have  descended  from  the  age  in  which  Moses  lived,  why  should  it  be 
deemed  imperative  to  search  for  another  author  to  whom  to  ascribe  their  actual 
composition  ?  And  if  it  should  appear,  as  on  reflection  it  can  hardly  fail,  that  there 
is  no  such  urgent  necessity,  may  it  not  be  regarded  as  creating  at  least  presumptive 
evidence  that  the  other  sections  of  the  Book  have  also  proceeded  &om  his  pen  P 

2.   The  Book  of  Numbers  bears  evidence  of  having  been  composed  in  the 
desert  by  an  eye-witness  of,  and  participator  in,  the  scenes  and  transactions  he 
records.     Here,  of  course,  the  argument  will  be  more  satisfactory  if  proof  can  be 
advanced  from  those  parts  of  the  Book  whose  Mosaic  origin  is  commonly  disputed ; 
and  to  these  alone,  accordingly,  attention  wiU  at  present  be  directed.    Now  that  the 
children  of  Israel  were  as  yet  sojourning  in  the  Arabian  peninsula,  and  had  not 
settled  in  Canaan  when  this  division  of  the  Pentateuch  was  composed,  may  be 
inferred  from  the  character  of  the  legislation  which  it  records,  which  always  pre- 
supposes that  the  people  "  had  not  yet  come  into  the  land  of  their  habitations,"  but 
were  dwelling  in  camps  and  tents  with  the  tabernacle  in  their  midst  {vide  ch.  v.  3. 
4 ;  vi  10,  13 ;  viii.  1 ;  xv.  2 ;  xviii  2,  6,  21).     It  is  on  this  principle  that  Bleek 
identifies  the  legislation  in  Leviticus  as  belonging  to  Mosaic  times,  and  there  can 
be  no  reason  of  a  valid  nature  for  refusing  assent  to  the  truth  of  this  principle  when 
applied  in  the  same  way  to  Numbers.     Then,  that  the  author  must  have  been 
familiar  with  the  desert  is  apparent  from  the  accuracy  of  his  geographical  knowledge, 
which  has  not  only  in  many  of  its  details  been  verified  by  modem  explorers,  as,  e.  g., 
Hebron  (ch.  xiii.  22)  and  Eadesh  (ibid,  ver.  26),  but  which  strenuously  resists  all 
attempts  at  further  identification  except  upon  the  hypothesis  of  its  own  correctness 
(cf.  Lange  '  on  Numbers,'  Introduction,  p.  7) ;  while  the  way  in  which  the  history 
and  the  legislation  are  commingled  in  the  narrative — the  history  often  affording  the 
requisite  basis  for  the  legislation,  and  the  legislation  frequently  sprLaging  naturally 
out  of  the  circumstances  described — ^renders  it  impossible  that  any  but  an  actual 
participant  in  the  events  and  transactions  themselves  could  have  written  it  {vide 
chs.  v.,  is.,  XXX.,  xxxvi.).    "  Evidently  the  alternations  of  historical  and  legislative 
portions  reflect  the  order  of  actual  transaction,"  and  "this  feature  is  exactly  one 
which  belongs  to  the  work  of  a  contemporary  annalist "  ('Speaker's  Commentary,' 
Introduction  to  Numbers,  §  4,  (2)  ). 

3.  The  Book  of  Numbers  reveals  an  intimate  acquaintance  on  the  part  of  its 
author  with  Egyptian  manners  and  customs,  which  at  least  harmonises  with  the 
idea  that  that  author  was  Moses.  (1)  The  trial  by  jealousy  (ch.  v.  11 — 35)  may  be 
compared  with  the  tale  of  Setnau  translated  by  Brugsch  from  a  demotic  manuscript 


THE  BOOK  OP  NDMBER8.  id 

belonging  probably  to  the  third  century  B.O.,  but  relating  to  the  times  of  Barneses 
U.,  in  which  Ptah-nefer-Sa,  having  found  the  book  which  the  god  Thoth  wrote 
with  hia  own  hand,  copied  it  on  a  new"  piece  of  papyrus,  dissolved  it  in  water,  and 
4rank  it,  with  the  immediate  result  that  "  he  knew  all  that  it  contained "  (vide 
•  Eecords  of  the  Past,'  Vol.  IV.  p.  138).    (2)  The  consecration  of  the  Levites  (ch. 
viii.  7)  finds  a  counterpart  in  the  ablutions  of  the  Egyptian  priests,  who  shaved 
their  heads  and  bodies  every  third  day,  and  spared  no  pains  to  promote  the  clean- 
liness of  their  persons,  bathing  twice  a  day  and  twice  during  the  night,  and  per- 
forming a  grand  ceremony  of  purification  preparatory  to  their  periods  of  fasting, 
which  sometimes  lasted  from  seven  to  forty-two  days,  or  even  longer  {vide  Wilkin- 
son's 'Ancient  Egyptians,'  Vol.  I.  p.  181).    (3)  The  notion  that  contact  with  a  dead 
body  communicated  uncleanness  (oh.  xix.  11)  was  not  unknown  to  the  Egyptians, 
who,  according  to  Porphyry ('De  Abst.,'  ii.  60,  quoted  in  'Speaker's  Commentary'), 
required  their  priests  to  shun  graves,  funerals,  and  funeral  feasts.     (4)  The  dainties 
referred  to  in  ch.  xi.  6,  cucumbers,  melons,  leeks,  onions,  and  garUck,  were  such  as 
abounded  in  ancient  Egypt  (cf.  Herodotus,  ii.  93,   125;  Hengstenberg's  'Egypt 
and  the  Books  of  Moses,'  ch.  vii.  pp.  208 — 214 ;  WUkingon's  '  Ancient  Egyptians,' 
Vol.  n.  pp.  23  aqq.).    (5)  The  antiquarian  statement  in  ch.  ■^™.  22  about  the  age  of 
Hebron  indicates  an  acquaintance  with  Egyptian  history  which  was  less  likely  to 
have  been  possessed  by  a  foreigner  than  by  one  who  was  native  bom.    Now, 
although  it  cannot  be  maintained  that  these  allusions  to  Egypt  and  its  history 
demonstrate  with  mathematical  certainty  that  Moses  was  the  author  of  Nimibers 
it  is  yet  a  fair  and  legitimate  inference  that  they  are  much  more  easily  explained 
on  that  hypothesis  than  any  other. 

4.  It  may  be  noted  that  the  Book  of  Numbers  is  not  destitute  of  incidental  and 
undesigned  traces  of  having  been  composed  in  Mosaic  times.  (1)  The  mention  of 
Amon  as  the  territorial  boundary  between  Moab  and  the  Amorites  (ch.  vvj.  13), 
though  cited  by  Bohlen  ( '  Introduction, '  Vol.  Lp.70)asa  geographical  anachronism 
under  the  mistaken  impression  that  David  first  constituted  the  Amon  the  northern 
limit  of  Moab,  is  in  reality  an  indication  that  the  Amorites  had  not  then  been  dis- 
possessed by  the  two  tribes  and  a  half,  or,  in  other  words,  that  the  clause  was  written 
while  the  IsraeUtish  army  was  stiU  upon  the  south  bank  of  the  river.  (2)  The 
circumstance  that  in  ch.  xxxiv.  a  larger  extent  of  territory  was  assigned  to  Israel 
than  they  ever  permanently  occupied  indirectly  confirms  the  Mosaic  authorship, 
since,  as  has  been  well  remarked  in  the  'Speaker's  Commentary,'  "a  historian  of 
later  times  would  hardly  have  ascribed  to  his  people,  without  explanation  or  quali- 
fication, districts  which  in  fact  they  did  not  possess,"  whereas  "  a  romancer  of  such 
times,  drawing  an  imaginary  frontier,  would  certainly  not  have  left  out  of  it  the 
renowned  city  of  Damascus,  especially  after  carrying  his  border  Hue  almost  roimd 
this  district,  and  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  city  and  its  territory  were  in  the 
dominions  of  David  and  Solomon,  and  afterwards  of  Jeroboam  II. "  (Introduction, 
§  4).  (3)  The  want  of  correspondence  between  the  settlements  of  the  two  tribes 
and  a  half,  as  described  in  ch.  xxxii.  34 — 42,  and  as  actually  held  by  them  at  a 
later  period  (Josh.  xiii.  15 — 33),  also  points  to  a  contemporary  author,  since  a  late 
writer  would  almost  certainly  have  made  the  two  to  harmonise  by  constructing 
both  passages  in  accordance  with  existing  fact. 

Thus  the  Book  of  Numbers,  when  fairly  and  dispassionately  interrogated,  not  only 
does  not  support  the  modem  hypothesis  of  its  being  a  late  compilation  from  pre- 
•gdating  dooumenta,  some  of  which  had  descended  from  primitive  times,  but  tiM 


ntii  THE  AUTHORSHIP  OF  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEB9. 

majority  of  vHoli  were  only  the  praise-worthy  endeavours  of  subsequent  ages  t« 
preserve  the  national  traditions  of  the  Beni-Israel  from  becoming  extinct,  bat 
abundantly  warrants  the  still  popular  belief,  that  while  there  is  every  probability 
that,  like  tiie  rest  of  the  Pentateuohal  writings,  it  has  been  subjected  to  one  or  more 
revisions,  and  may  even  have  suffered  interpolation  in  unimportant  passages,  such 
as  oh.  xii.  8  (though  this  of  course  is  not  absolutely  certain),  yet  in  the  main,  and 
fjubstantiaUy  as  we  still  possess  it,  it  proceeded  as  au  original  oompositioii  from  lUso 
bauJ  of  Mosea. 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS. 


INTRODUCTION. 

The  Boot  of  N'umbers  is  a  part  of  the  Mosaic  writings  ordinaiHy  called  ih* 
Pentateuch.  It  ■would  be  more  correct  in  a  literary  sense  to  say  that  it  forma 
part  of  those  records  of  the  Beni-Israel  which  bring  down  the  history  of  that 
peculiar  people  to  the  date  of  their  victorious  entry  into  their  own  land.  The 
Book  which  foUows  is  (on  any  theory  as  to  its  authorship)  widely  dissevered 
from  the  previous  records  in  character  and  scope.  The  Book  of  lumbers  forms 
the  concluding  fourth  of  a  work  of  which  the  substantial  unity  and  Continuity 
cannot  be  reasonably  questioned,  and  therefore  very  much  which  affects  this 
Book  is  better  treated  of  in  an  Introduction  to  the  whole.  The  division,  how- 
ever, which  separates  Numbers  from  Leviticus  is  more  marked  than  that  -wdiich 
separates  Leviticus  from  Exodus,  or  Exodus  from  Genesis.  The  narrative  (which 
has  been  almost  entirely  suspended  throughout  the  third  Book)  reappears  in  the 
fourth,  and  leads  us  on  (with  divers  breaks  and  interruptions  indeed)  through 
the  whole  of  that  most  important  and  distinctive  period  which  we  may  call  the 
fourth  stage  in  the  national  life  of  the  Beni-Israel.  The  first  of  these  stages 
extends  from  the  call  of  Abraham  to  the  beginning  of  the  sojourn  in  Egypt. 
The  second  includes  the  time  of  sojourning  there.  The  third  is  the  short  but 
critical  period  of  the  exodus  from  Barneses  to  Mount  Sinai,  including  the  giving 
of  the  Law.  The  fourth  reaches  from  Mount  Sinai  to  the  river  Jordan,  and 
coincides  with  the  whole  period  of  probation^  preparation,  failure,  recovery.  It 
will  be  noticed  that  our  Book  is  the  only  one  of  the  four  which  corresponds 
entirely  to  one  of  these  stages ;  it  has  therefore  more  real  distinctness  of  character 
than  any  of  the  other  three. 

A.    On   THB  CONIPBNTS  OF  THB  BoOK. 

If  we  take  the  Book  of  Numbers  as  it  stands,  apart  from  any  preconcfflyed 
theories,  and  allow  its  contents  to  divide  themselves  into  sections  according  to 
the  actual  character  of  their  subject  matter.  We  shall  obtain,  without  any  serioui 
difference  of  opinion,  the  following  result.  Perhaps  no  book  in  the  Bible  falla 
more  easily  and  natoially  into  ita  component  parta 

■DlfBUS.  • 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


SYNOPSIS  OP  NUMBERS, 
Skcttion  I. — Preparations  fob  thb  Great  Mamh. 

CHAT. 

1.  i.  1 — 46  The  first  census  of  Israel. 

2.  i.  47 — 64  Special  orders  about  the  Levites. 

3.  ii.  1 — 34  Camping  order  of  the  tribes. 

4.  iii.  1 — 4  Notice  of  the  priestly  family. 

6.    iii.  5 — 61      Dedication  of  the  Levites  in  lieu  of  the  firstborn: 

their  number,  charge,  and  redemption. 
6.    iv.  1 — 49    Duties  of  the  Levites  on  the  march. 

SsuTiON  II. — Repetitions  or  and  Additions  to  the  Levitioal  Lbhsutioii. 

1.  T.  1 — 4       The  exclusion  of  the  unclean. 

2.  y.  6 — 10      Laws  of  recompense  and  of  offering*. 

3.  V.  11 — 31    The  trial  of  jealousy. 

4.  vL  1—21     The  Nazirite  vow. 

6.    vi  22 — 27    The  formula  of  priestly  benediction. 

Section  IIL — Narrative  of  Events  from  the  sbttino  dp  of  t^ 
Tabebnaclb  to  the  Sentence  of  Exile  at  Eadbsh. 

1.  vii.  1 — 88    Offerings  of  the  princes  at  the  dedication. 

2.  vii.  89 The  voice  in  the  sanctuary. 

3.  viiL  1 — 4     The  lamps  lighted  in  the  tabernacle, 

4.  viii.  6 — ^26 Consecration  of  the  Levites. 

6.  ix.  1 — 14  The  second  passover,  and  the  supplemental  passovcB 

6.  ix.  16 — 23 The  cloud  on  the  tabernacle. 

7.  X.  1 — 10  «.  The  silver  trumpets. 

8.  X.  11 — 28  The  start  and  order  of  maioh. 

9.  X.  29 — 32  The  invitation  to  Hobab. 

10.  X.  33—36    The  first  journey. 

11.  xi.  1 — 3       Sin  and  chastisement  at  Taberah. 

12.  xi.  4 — 36     Sin  and  chastisement  at  Eibroth-hattaaTah. 

13.  xii.  1 — 16    Sedition  of  Miriam  and  Aaron. 

14.  xiii.  1 — 33 Mission  and  report  of  the  spies, 

16.    liv,  1 — 46 Rebellion  and  rejection  of  the  people, 

Sbction  IV. — Fragments  of  Lbvitioal  Leqislation. 

1.    XV.    — 21     Law  of  offerings  and  first-fruits. 

8,    XV.  22 — 31 Law  of  trespass  offerings,  and  of  presumptnoos  dm 

3.  XV.  32 — 36 Incident  of  the  sabbath-breaker. 

4.  XV.  37—41 Law  of  fringes. 

Section  V. — Nabbative  of  the  Revolt  against  thi  Aaronio  Pbiesthood. 

1.    zvi.  1 — 50 Rebellion  of  Eorah   and  his  confederates,  and  iti 

suppression.  , 

%,    xvii.  1 — 13 The  rod  of  Aaron  which  budded. 

Section  VL— Fdbtheb  Additions  to  the  Law, 

1.    xviii.  1 — 32        The  charge  and  emoluments  of  priests  and  Levftet. 

5.  xiz.  1 — ^22 Law  of  the  red  heifer,  and  the  pollution  of  death. 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


Sbotion  VII. — ^Nabrativk  of  Events  dubinq  thb  Last  Jouhnbt. 

OHAP, 

1.  XX.  1—13    The  water  of  strife. 

2.  XX.  14 — ^21 The  insolence  of  Edom. 

3.  XX.  22—29 The  death  of  Aaron. 

4.  xxi.  1 — 3     Episode  of  King  Arad. 

6.     xxi.  4 — 9     Episode  of  the  brazen  serpent 

6.  xxi.  10 — 32         Last  marches  and  first  victoriea. 

7.  xxi.  33 — ^xxii.  1 Conquest  of  Og. 

SEcrrioN  VIII. — Stobt  of  Balaam. 

1.    xxii.  2 — 38 The  coming  of  Balaam. 

2-    xxii.  39 — ^xxiv.  26      ...    The  prophecies  of  Balaam. 

Seotion  IX. — ^Nabbativb  of  Events  in  the  Plains  op  Moab. 
1.    XXV.  1 — 18 Sin  and  atonement  at  Shittim. 

5.  xzvl  1 — 65         Second  census  of  Israel  with  a  view  to  the  allotment 

of  the  land. 

8.  zxvii.  1 — 11       Suit  of  Zelophehad's  daughters. 

4.    xxvii.  12 — 23      Supersession  of  Moses  by  Joshua. 

Section  X. — Recapitulations  of  and  Additions  to  the  Law. 
1.    zxviii.  1 — xxix.  40    ...    The  annual  routine  of  sacrifice. 
i.    XXL.  1 — 16 Law  of  vows  made  by  women. 

Section  XI. — Nabbative  of  fubthbh  Events  in  the  Plains  of  Moab. 

1.  xxxi.  1 — 64         Extirpation  of  Midian, 

2.  zxxiL  1 — 42        Settlement  of  the  two  and  a  half  tribes. 

Section  XII. — The  Itinbrabt. 
xxzilL  1—49       List  of  marches  from  Rameses  to  Jordan. 

Section  XIII. — Final  Instboctions  in  view  of  thb  Conquest  of  Canaan. 

1.  xxziii.  60 — 56     The  clearance  of  the  holy  land. 

2.  xxxiv.  1 — 16       ...     M.     Boundaries  of  the  holy  land. 
8.    xxxiv.  16—29     Allotment  of  the  holy  land. 

4.    XXXV.  1 — 8 Reservation  of  cities  for  the  Levites. 

6.  zxxv.  9 — 34        The  cities  of  refuge,  and  law  of  liomicid«. 

6.    xxxvi.  1 — 13       ...     ...     Law  of  the  marriage  of  heiresses. 

Other  divisions  than  these  may  of  course  be  founded  npon  considerations 
of  chronology,  or  upon  the  wish  to  group  together  the  historical  and  legislative 
portions  in  certain  combinations ;  bat  these  considerations  are  obviously  foreign 
to  the  Book  itself.  While  a  general  sequence  is  evidently  observed,  dates  are 
almost  entirely  absent ;  and  while  it  is  very  natural  to  trace  a  close  connection 
between  the  facts  of  the  narrative  and  the  matter  of  the  legislation,  such  connec- 
tion (in  the  absence  of  any  statement  to  substantiate  it)  must  lemain  always 
uncertain,  and  often  very  precarious. 

The  contents,  therefore,  of  this  Book  fall  naturally  into  thirteen  8ecti«nu  of 
very  various  length,  clearly  marked  at  their  edges  by  the  change  either  of  subject 
matter  or  of  literary  character.  Thus,  «.  g.,  no  reader,  however  nnedncated,  ooitld 

c2 


INTBODUCTION  TO 


avoid  noticing  the  abrupt  transition  from  ch.  adv.  to  ch.  xv. ;  and  thus  agmn  no 
reader  who  had  any  ear  for  literary  style  could  fail  to  isolate  in  his  own  mind 
the  story  of  Balaam  from  the  narrative  which  precedes  and  follows  it.  Perhaps 
the  only  question  which  could  be  seriously  raised  on  this  subject  is  the  propriety 
of  treating  the  Itinerary  as  a  separate  section.  The  character,  however,  of  the 
passage  is  so  distinct,  and  it  is  so  clearly  separated  from  what  follows  by  the 
formula  of  ch.  xxxiii.  50,  that  there  seems  no  alternative  if  we  wish  to  follow 
the  natural  lines  of  division. 

It  will  be  seen  that  of  the  thirteen  sections,  eight  are  narrative,  four  are 
legislative,  and  one  (the  last)  is  of  a  mixed  character. 

B.  On  the  Chbonoloqt  of  thb  Book. 
The  dates  given  in  the  Book  itself  are  (excluding  the  date  of  the  departure 
from  Eameses,  ch.  xxxiii.  3)  only  four ;  but  the  reference  to  the  setting  up  of 
the  tabernacle  is  equivalent  to  a  fifth.   We  have,  therefore,  the  following  as  fixed 
points  in  the  narrative. 

1.  The  dedication  of  the  tabernacle,  with  the  offering  of  the  princes  (viL  1,  2)  and 

the  descent  of  the  sacred  cloud  (iz,  16)     Ist  day  of  Abib  in  year  2. 

2.  The  second  passover  (ix.  6)    14lh  day  of  Abib  in  year  2. 

3.  The  census  at  Sinai  (i.  1)         Ist  day  of  Zif  in  year  2. 

4.  The  supplemental  passover  (ix  11)       14th  day  of  Zif  in  year  2. 

5.  The  start  for  Canaan  (x.  11) 20th  day  of  Zif  in  year  2. 

6.  The  death  of  Aaron  (xxxiii.  38)      1st  day  of  Ab  in  year  40. 

There  is,  however,  a  note  of  time  in  this  Book  which  is  more  important  than 
any  dute,  for  in  ch.  xiv.  an  exile  of  forty  years  is  denoimced  against  the  Beni- 
Israel ;  and  although  it  is  not  stated  at  what  precise  point  the  exUe  terminated, 
yet  we  may  safely  conclude  that  it  was  either  at  or  very  near  the  conclusion  of 
this  Book.  If,  therefore,  we  had  no  subsequent  data  to  guide  us,  we  should  say 
that  ch.  i. — ^x.  10  covers  a  space  of  one  month,  twenty  days  ;  ch.  x.  11 — ^xiv.  a 
space  which  may  be  variously  estimated  from  two  months  to  four  months  j  ch. 
XV. — XX.  28  a  space  of  very  nearly  thirty-eight  years  (of  which  the  great  bulk 
would  coincide  with  chs.  xv. — xix.)j  and  the  remainder  a  space  of  nearly  two  years. 
It  is,  however,  stated  in  Deut.  i.  3  that  Moses  began  his  last  address  to  the  people 
on  the  first  day  of  the  eleventh  mouth  of  the  fortieth  year,  i.  e.  exactly  six 
months  after  the  death  of  Aaron,  and  only  five  months  after  the  departure  from 
Mount  Hor.  This  does  no  doubt  crowd  the  events  of  the  last  period  into  a 
strangely  brief  space  of  time,  and  shortens  the  time  of  wandering  from  forty  to 
thirty-eight  and  a  half  years.  The  latter  difficulty,  although  not  to  be  lightly 
passed  over,  is  yet  fairly  met  by  the  assumption  that  the  Divine  mercy  (which 
ever  loves  to  take  hold  on  any  excuse  for  leniency)  was  moved  to  include  the 
time  of  wandering  already  spent  in  the  term  of  punishment  inflicted  at  Kadesh. 
The  former  difficulty  is  more  serious,  for  it  implies  a  hurry  which  does  not 
appear  upon  the  face  of  the  narrative.  We  may,  however,  remember  that  a 
generation  which  had  grown  up  in  the  desert,  hardened  to  exposure,  and  inured 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


to  fatigue,  would  move  with  a  swiftness  and  strike  with  a  vigour  altogether 
foreign  to  the  nation  which  came  out  of  Egypt.  The  actual  distance  traversed 
by  the  main  bulk  of  the  people  (more  than  200  miles)  need  not  have  occupied 
more  than  a  month,  and  some  of  the  operations  recorded  may  have  been  carried 
on  simultaneously.  It  will  not,  however,  be  forgotten  that  the  difficulty  arises 
from  a  comparison  of  two  dates,  neither  of  which  is  found  in  the  main  nan»- 
tive  of  the  Book  of  Ifumbers. 

0.  Or  THE  Composition  op  thb  Book,  and  thh  Sbquknob 
OP  ITS  Contents. 

If  we  compare  the  table  of  contents  with  the  table  of  dates,  we  shall  see  at 
once  that  the  earlier  portions  of  the  narrative  are  out  of  chronological  order,  and 
we  shall  not  find  any  sufficient  reason  assigned  for  this  dislocation.  On  the  con- 
trary, closer  examination  wUl  leave  the  greater  certainty  that  eh.  vii.  and  ch. 
viiL  to  ver.  4  (at  least)  connect  themselves  rather  with  Exod.  xl.  or  Levit.  ix. 
than  with  their  present  context.  It  appears,  also,  from  the  synopsis  of  the  Book, 
that  narrative  alternates  with  legislation,  in  such  a  way  as  cut  it  up  into  clearly 
marked  sections.  It  is  asserted  that  the  legislative  matter  thus  interspersed 
grows  out  of,  and  shows  a  natural  connection  with,  the  narrative.  This  is  true 
in  some  cases,  but  in  many  more  cases  it  is  not  true.  E.  g.  it  is  at  least  plausible 
in  the  case  of  the  law  for  the  exclusion  of  the  unclean  which  interrupts  the 
narrative  in  ch.  v.  1 — 4.  But  it  is  not  even  plausible  with  respect  to  the  laws 
which  follow  to  the  end  of  ch.  vi. ;  no  ingenuity  can  show  any  special  connec- 
tion between  the  preparations  for  departure  from  Sinai  and  the  trial  of  jealousy 
or  the  Nazirite  vow.  Again,  it  is  possible  to  argue  that  the  law  which  regulated 
the  respective  offices  and  emoluments  of  the  priests  and  Levites  finds  its  proper 
place  after  the  record  of  Korah's  rebellion ;  and  also  that  the  ordinance  of  the 
red  heifer  was  historically  connected  with  the  sentence  of  death  in  the  wilder- 
ness and  the  compulsory  disuse  of  the  ordinary  routine  of  sacrifice.  Bat  it  could 
hardly  be  seriously  contended  that  the  fragmentary  enactments  of  ch.  xv.  or  the 
regulations  of  ch.  xxx.  have  the  least  apparent  connection  with  their  place  in 
the  record.  It  is  not  at  all  too  much  to  say,  with  regard  to  the  greater  number 
of  the  laws  in  this  Book,  that  their  position  is  arbitrary  as  far  as  we  can  now  see, 
and  that  the  reasons  assigned  for  their  standing  where  they  do  are  pittely  arti- 
ficial It  does  not  follow  that  there  were  not  actual  reasons,  unknown  to  ns, 
why  these  laws  should  have  been  revealed  at  times  corresponding  to  their  posi- 
tion ;  nevertheless,  the  presumption  which  arises  upon  the  face  of  the  record  is 
certainly  this,  that  the  legislative  matter  in  this  Book  consists  mainly  of  frag- 
ments of  the  Levitical  legislation  which  have  in  some  way  become  detached  and 
have  been  interspersed  through  the  narrative.  One  exception,  however,  is  so 
obvious  that  it  must  be  noted :  the  routine  of  sacrifice  in  chs.  xxviii.,  xxix.  is 
not  a  fragment,  nor  an  isolated  enactment ;  it  is  a  recapitulation  in  a  very  com- 
plete form  of  the  whole  law  so  far  as  it  applied  to  a  distinct  and  important 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


department  of  Jewish  worship.  As  such  it  accords  with  its  assigned  position  on 
the  threshold  of  the  promised  land ;  or  it  may  even  represent  a  later  codification 
of  the  Mosaic  legislation  on  the  subject.  Turning  now  to  the  narrative,  we  find 
that  it  is  exceedingly  uneven  and  intermittent  in  its  character  as  a  record. 
Three  hundred  and  twenty-six  verses  are  devoted  to  the  arrangements  and  events 
of  the  fifty  days  which  preceded  the  march  from  Sinai ;  one  hundred  and  fifty- 
five  more  contain  the  story  of  the  few  months  which  ended  with  the  defeat  at 
Kadesh ;  to  the  next  thirty-eight  years  helong  only  sixty-three  verses,  relating 
in  detail  a  single  episode  without  date  or  place ;  the  rest  of  the  narrative,  con- 
sisting of  three  hundred  and  sixty-one  verses,  relates  to  the  last  period,  of  little 
more  than  eleven  months  according  to  the  accepted  chronology.  Even  in  this 
last  portion,  which  is  comparatively  full,  it  is  evident  by  a  reference  to  the 
Itinerary  that  no  notice  is  taken  of  many  places  where  the  camp  was  halted,  and 
where  no  doubt  incidents  of  greater  or  less  interest  occurred.  The  Book,  there- 
fore, does  not  profess  to  be  a  continuous  narrative,  but  only  to  record  certain 
incidents — some  briefly,  some  at  considerable  length — of  the  journeys  from  Sinai 
to  Kadesh,  and  from  Kadesh  to  Jordan,  together  with  a  single  episode  from  the 
long  years  between.  But  the  narrative,  broken  as  it  is  in  chain  of  incident,  is 
further  broken  in  literary  character.  The  questions  which  arise  out  of  the  story 
of  Balaam  are  discussed  in  their  proper  place ;  but  it  is  impossible  to  believe 
(unless  some  very  strong  necessity  can  be  shown  for  believing)  that  the  section 
ch.  xxiL  2 — xxiv.  has  the  same  literary  history  as  the  rest  of  the  Book.  Inserted 
in  the  Book,  and  that  in  its  proper  place  as  to  order  of  events,  its  distinctness 
is  nevertheless  evident,  both  from  other  considerations  and  especially  from  its 
rhetorical  and  dramatic  character.  It  requires  no  knowledge  of  Hebrew,  and  no 
Acquaintance  with  learned  theories,  to  recognise  in  this  section  an  epic  (partly 
f rose  and  partly  verse)  which  may  indeed  have  come  from  the  same  author  as 
the  narrative  which  surrounds  it,  but  which  must  have  had  within  that  author's 
jmind  a  whoUy  different  origin  and  history.  "What  is  said  of  the  story  of  Balaam 
may  be  said  in  a  somewhat  different  sense  of  the  archaic  quotations  in  ch.  xxL 
Imbedded  as  these  are  in  the  story,  they  are  on  the  face  of  them  as  plainly  foreign 
as  the  erratics  which  the  icebergs  of  a  vanished  age  have  left  behind.  But, 
more  than  this,  the  very  presence  of  these  quotations  gives  a  peculiar  character 
to  the  narrative  in  which  they  occur.  It  is  hard  to  believe  that  the  historian, 
&  ^.,  of  the  exodus  would  stoop  to  cuU  these  suiitches  of  old  song,  which  are  for 
the  most  part  devoid  of  any  religious  import;  it  is  hard  not  to  think  that  they 
are  due  to  popular  memory,  and  were  repeated  by  many  a  camp-fire  before  they 
got  written  down  by  some  unknown  Iiand. 

Looking,  therefore,  at  the  Book  of  Numbers  simply  as  one  of  the  sacred  books 
of  the  Jews,  we  find  that  it  presents  the  following  features.  It  narrates  a  variety 
of  incidents  at  the  beginning  and  ending  of  the  desert  wanderings  between  Sinai 
Kid  Jordan,  and  carries  on  the  story  of  Israel  (with  one  remarkable  break)  from 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS. 


the  holy  monnt  of  conseciation  to  the  holy  land  of  habitation.  The  narrative, 
howeyer,  incomplete  as  to  matter,  is  also  inconsecutive  as  to  form ;  for  it  is 
interspersed  with  legislative  matter  which  does  not  seem  for  the  most  part  to 
have  any  special  connection  with  its  context,  bnt  would  find  its  natural  place 
«mong  the  laws  of  Leviticus.  Moreover,  while  the  main  part  of  the  narrative 
entirely  harmonises  in  literary  style  and  character  with  that  of  the  previous 
books  (at  least  from  Gen.  xi.  10  onwards),  there  are  portions  towards  the  end 
wnicn  bear  internal  evidence— the  one  less,  the  other  more  strongly — of  a  different 
origin.  If  we  had  no  other  data  to  go  upon,  we  should  probably  come  to  the 
conclusion — 1.  That  the  materials  used  in  compiling  the  Book  were  in  the  main 
from  one  hand,  and  that  the  same  to  which  we  owe  both  the  previous  history  of 
the  Beni-Israel  and  the  Sinaitic  legislation.  2.  That  the  materials  had  existed 
in  a  somewhat  fragmentary  state,  and  had  been  arranged  in  their  present  order 
by  some  unknown  hand.  3.  That  in  one  chapter  at  least  some  other  material 
of  a  more  popular  kind  had  been  drawn  upon.  4.  That  in  one  case'  an  entire 
section  had  been  inserted,  complete  in  itself,  and  of  a  character  very  distinct 
from  the  rest.  These  conclusions  are,  however,  by  no  means  so  certain  but  that 
they  may  be  set  aside  by  sufficient  arguments  if  such  can  be  found. 

D.  On  thb  AnTHOBSHip  of  thb  Book. 

It  has  been  until  lately  assumed  as  a  matter  of  course  that  the  whole  of  this 
Book,  together  with  the  other  four  of  the  Pentateuch,  was  written  by  Moses. 
With  regard  to  ch.  xii.  3  alone,  the  obvious  difficulty  of  ascribing  such  a  state- 
ment to  Moses  himself  has  always  led  many  to  regard  it  as  an  interpolation  by 
some  later  (sacred)  writer.  When  we  come  to  examine  the  evidence  for  the 
Mosaic  authorship  of  the  whole  Book  as  it  stands,  it  is  astonishing  how  little  it 
amounts  to.  There  is  not  a  single  statement  attached  to  the  Book  to  show  that 
it  was  written  by  Moses.  There  is  indeed  a  statement  in  ch.  xxxiii.  2  that 
"  Moses  wrote  their  goings  out  according  to  their  journeys  by  the  command- 
ment of  the  Lord  j "  but  this,  so  far  from  proving  that  Moses  wrote  the  Book, 
somewhat  strongly  militates  against  it.  For  the  statement  in  question  is  found  in 
a  section  which  is  obviously  distinct,  and  which  has  more  the  appearance  of  an 
appendix  to  the  narrative  than  of  an  integral  part  of  it.  Moreover,  it  does  not 
even  apply  to  the  Itinerary  as  it  stands,  but  only  to  the  bare  list  of  marches 
upon  which  it  is  founded;  the  observations  appended  to  some  of  the  names 
(e.  g.  to  Elim  and  to  Mount  Hor)  are  much  more  like  the  work  of  a  later  writer 
copying  from  the  list  left  by  Moses.  If  we  found  in  an  anonymous  work  a  list 
of  names  inserted  towards  the  end  with  .the  statement  that  the  names  had  been 
written  down  by  such  and  such  a  person  (whose  authority  would  be  unquestioned), 
we  should  not  certainly  quote  that  statement  in  order  to  prove  that  that  person 
wrote  all  the  rest  of  the  book.  Supposing  the  statement  to  be  true  (and  there 
seems  no  idtematiye  between  accepting  it  as  true  within  the  knowledge  of  the 


Tffl  INTBODUCTION  TO 


writer  and  rejecting  it  as  a  \nlful  falsehood),  it  simply  assures  us  that  Mosea 
kept  a  written  record  of  the  marches,  and  that  the  Itinerary  in  question  is  based 
on  that  record.  Turning  to  the  external  testimony  as  to  authorship,  we  come  to 
the  evidence  afforded  by  the  opinion  of  the  later  Jews.  No  one  doubts  that 
they  ascribed  the  whole  Pentateuch  to  Moses,  and  comparatively  few  doubt  that 
their  tradition  was  substantially  correct.  But  it  is  one  thing  to  believe  that  an 
opinion  handed  down  from  an  uninqairing  age  as  to  the  authorship  of  a  book 
was  substantially  correct,  and  quite  another  thing  to  believe  that  it  was  formally 
correct  That  the  Law  was  of  Mosaic  origin  and  authority  may  have  been  per- 
fectly true  for  all  practical  religious  purposes  ;  that  the  Law  was  written  down 
verbatim  as  it  stands  by  the  hand  of  Moses  may  have  been  the  very  natural,  but 
at  the  same  time  inaccurate,  form  in  which  a  true  belief  presented  itself  to  minds 
whoUy  innocent  of  literary  criticism.  To  set  the  tradition  of  the  later  Jews 
against  the  strong  internal  evidence  of  the  writings  themselves  is  to  exalt  tradi- 
tion (and  that  at  its  weakest  point)  at  the  expense  of  Scripture.  It  may  be  very 
true  that  if  the  Law  was  not  really  of  Mosaic  origin,  the  saints  and  prophets  of 
old  time  were  grievously  deceived ;  it  may  be  quite  false  that  any  particular 
opinion  current  amongst  them  as  to  the  precise  character  of  the  Mosaic  author- 
ship has  any  claim  upon  our  acceptance.  That  "  the  Law  was  given  by  Moses  " 
is  a  thing  ac  Bonstantly  affirmed  in  the  Scriptures  that  it  can  hardly  be  denied 
without  overthrowing  their  authority ;  that  Moses  wrote  every  word  of  Numbers 
as  it  stands  is  a  literary  opinion  which  naturally  commended  itself  to  an  age  of 
literary  ignorance,  but  which  every  ensuing  age  is  at  liberty  to  revise  or  reject. 

It  is,  however,  argued  that  our  Lord  himself  has  testified  to  the  truth  of  the 
ordinary  Jewish  tradition  by  using  the  name  "  Moses  "  as  tantamount  to  the 
Mosaic  books.  This  argument  has  more  special  reference  to  Deuteronomy,  but 
the  whole  Pentateuch  is  included  within  its  scope.  It  is  answered — and  the 
answer  is  apparently  incontrovertible — ^that  our  Lord  merely  used  the  common 
language  of  the  Jews,  without  meaning  to  guarantee  the  precise  accuracy  of  the 
ideas  on  which  that  language  was  based.  As  a  fact,  the  Pentateuch  was  known 
as  "  Moses,''  just  as  the  Psalms  were  known  as  "  David."  No  one,  perhaiis, 
would  now  contend  that  Ps.  xcv.  must  of  necessity  be  ascribed  to  David  himself 
because  it  is  cited  as  "  David  "  in  Heb.  iv.  7 ;  and  few  would  maintain  the  like 
of  Ps.  ex.,  even  though  our  Lord  certainly  assumed  that  "  David  "  spake  therein 
(Matt,  xxii  45).  Both  these  psalms  may  have  been  David's  own,  and  yet  we  need 
not  fed  ourselves  tied  up  to  that  conclusion  because  the  ordinary  language  and 
opinion  of  the  Jews  concerning  them  is  followed  in  the  New  Testament.  The 
common  sense  of  the  matter  seems  to  be,  that  unless  our  Lord's  judgment  had  been 
directly  challenged  on  the  subject,  he  could  not  have  done  otherwise  than  use 
the  common  terminology  of  the  day.  To  do  otherwise  had  been  the  part,  not 
of  a  prophet,  but  of  a  pedant,  which  he  assuredly  never  was,  "We  may  be 
•lire  that  he  always  spake  to  people  in  their  own  language,  and  accepted  their 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES. 


cnnent  ideas,  nnleas  those  ideas  involved  some  practical  religious  error.  He 
took  occasion,  e.  g.,  to  say  that  Moses  did  not  give  the  manna  from  heaven 
(John  vL  32),  and  did  not  institute  circumcision  {ibid.  vii.  22),  for  these 
exaggerations  in  the  popular  estimate  of  Moses  were  both  false  in  themselves 
and  might  be  known  to  be  false ;  but  to  open  up  a  literary  controversy  which 
would  have  been  unintelligible  and  unpractical  for  that  and  many  succeeding 
generations  was  wholly  foreign  to  that  Son  of  man  who  was  in  the  truest  sense 
the  child  of  his  own  age  and  of  his  own  people.  To  take  an  instructive  instance 
from  the  region  of  physical  science :  it  has  actually  been  made  a  reproach  against 
the  sacred  writers  that  they  speak  (as  we  do)  of  the  sun  rising  and  setting, 
whereas  in  truth  it  is  the  movements  of  the  earth  which  cause  the  appearances 
in  question.  It  does  not  occur  to  such  critics  to  ask  themselves  how  the  sacred 
writers  could  have  used  in  that  age  scientific  language  which  even  we  cannot  use 
in  common  conversation.  That  our  Lord  spake  of  the  sun  rising  and  setting, 
and  not  of  the  earth  revolving  on  its  axis  from  west  to  east,  is  a  thing  for  which 
we  have  perhaps  as  much  reason  to  be  thankful  as  those  who  heard  him.  Simi- 
larly, that  our  Lord  spake  of  Moses  without  hesitation  or  qualification  as  the 
author  of  the  Pentateuch  is  a  matter  not  of  surprise,  but  of  thankfulness  to  us 
all,  however  much  modem  investigation  may  have  modified  our  conception  of 
the  Mosaic  authorship.  What  could  possibly  be  more  alien  from  the  revealed 
character  of  that  adorable  Son  of  man  than  a  display  either  of  scientific  or  of 
literary  "knowledge,  foreign  to  the  age,  which  had  no  bearing  upon  true  religion 
or  the  saving  of  the  world  from  sin  1 

External  testimony,  therefore,  only  seems  to  force  upon  us  the  conclusion 
that  the  substance  of  "  the  Law  "  (in  some  general  sense)  is  of  Mosaic  origin ; 
but  it  does  not  oblige  us  to  believe  that  Moses  wrote  down  either  the  legislative 
or  narrative  portions  of  our  Book  with  his  own  hand.  We  are  therefore  left  to 
internal  evidence  for  the  determination  of  all  such  questions.  Now  it  must  be 
at  OBce  conceded  that  internal  evidence  is  extremely  difficult  to  weigh,  especially 
in  writers  so  remote  from  our  own  age  and  our  own  literary  canons.  But  a  few 
points  come  out  strongly  from  the  study  of  the  Book. 

1.  As  already  shown,  its  very  form  and  character  point  to  the  probability  of 
its  having  been  compiled  from  documents  previously  existing,  and  put  together 
for  the  most  part  very  inartificiaUy.  Scarcely  a  trace  appears  of  any  attempt  to 
soften  down  the  abrupt  transitions,  to  explain  the  obscurities,  or  to  bridge  over 
the  gaps  with  which  the  Book  abounds;  its  multiplicity  of  beginnings  and 
endings  is  left  to  speak  for  itself. 

2.  The  great  bulk  of  the  Book  bears  strong  evidence  to  the  truth  of  the 
ordinary  belief  that  it  was  written  by  a  contemporary,  and  that  contemporary 
none  other  than  Moses  himself.  If  we  look  at  the  narrative,  the  curiously 
minute  touches  here  and  the  equally  curious  obscurities  there  point  alike  to  a 
writer  who  had  lived  through  it  all ;  a  later  writer  would  have  had  no  motiv* 


mTBODUOTION  TO 


for  inBeiting  many  of  the  details,  and  would  have  had  strong  motives  fox 
explaining  many  things  which  now  arouse,  without  gratifying,  oar  cariosity.  The 
antiquarian  information  incidentally  giyen  ahout  Hebron  and  Zoan  (ch.  xiii  22) 
seems  thoroughly  incompatible  with  a  later  age  than  that  of  Moses,  and  points 
to  one  who  had  had  access  to  the  public  archives  of  Egypt ;  and  the  list  of  cheap 
delicacies  in  ch.  xi  6  is  evidence  of  the  same  sort.  The  boundaries  assigned 
to  the  promised  land  are  indeed  too  obscure  to  be  made  the  basis  of  much  argu- 
ment, but  the  one  plain  fact  about  them — ^that  they  exclude  the  trans-Jordanic 
territory — seems  inconsistent  with  any  subsequent  period  of  Jewish  national 
feeling.  Until  towards  the  close  of  the  monarchy  the  regions  of  Gilead  and 
Bashan  were  a  part,  and  an  integral  part,  of  the  land  of  Israel ;  Jordan  could 
only  have  been  made  the  eastern  frontier  at  a  time  when  the  self-wDIed  choice 
of  the  two  and  a  half  tribes  had  not  yet  obliterated  (so  to  speak)  the  original 
boundary  of  the  promised  possession.  Moreover,  the  obvious  want  of  coincidence 
between  the  settlements  recorded  in  ch.  xxxiL  34 — 38  and  those  afterwards  held 
by  these  tribes  tells  strongly  in  favour  of  the  contemporary  origin  of  this  record. 
If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  look  at  the  legislation  included  in  this  Book,  we  have  not 
indeed  the  same  assurances,  but  we  have  the  fact  that  very  much  of  it  is  on  the  face 
of  it  designed  for  a  wilderness  life,  and  required  to  be  adapted  to  the  times  of  settled 
habitation :  the  camp  and  the  tabernacle  are  constantly  assumed,  and  directions 
given  (as  e.  g.  in  ch.  xix.  3,  4, 9)  which  could  only  be  replaced  by  some  equivalent 
ritual  after  the  temple  was  set  up.  It  is  of  course  possible  (though  very  improbable) 
that  some  later  writer  might  have  imagined  himself  to  be  living  with  the  people  in 
the  wilderness,  and  have  written  accordingly  j  but  it  is  eminently  unlikely  that 
he  would  have  succeeded  in  doing  so  without  betraying  himself  many  times. 
The  religious  fictions  of  a  much  later  and  more  literary  age,  such  as  the  Book  of 
Judith,  continually  blunder,  and  if  the  Book  of  Tobit  escapes  the  charge,  it  is 
because  it  restricts  itself  to  domestic  scenes.  Against  this  strong  internal 
evidence — all  "the  stronger  because  it  is  difficult  to  reduce  it  to  definite  statement 
— there  is  really  nothing  to  be  set.  The  theory,  which  once  seemed  so  plausible, 
that  the  use  of  the  two  Divine  names,  Jehovah  and  Elohim,  pointed  to  a  plurality 
of  authors  whose  various  contributions  might  be  distinguished,  has  happily  been 
long  enough  in  the  hands  of  its  advocates  to  have  reduced  itseK  to  absurdity. 
If  there  be  any  one  left  who  is  disposed  to  pursue  this  ignis  faiuua  of  Old 
Testament  criticism,  it  is  not  possible  for  soberness  and  common  sense  to  foUow 
him — ^he  must  chase  his  phantoms  until  he  be  weary,  for  he  wiU  always  find  some 
one  more  foolish  than  himself  to  give  him  a  reason  why  "  Jehovah  "  should  stand 
here  and  "  Elohim  "  there.  The  argument  from  the  use  of  the  word  nahi  (prophet 
— cL  xL  29 ;  xiL  6)  seems  to  be  founded  on  a  misunderstanding  of  1  Sam.  ix.  9, 
and  the  few  other  exceptions  which  have  been  taken  refer  to  passages  which  may 
well  be  interpolations.  The  conclusion,  therefore,  is  strongly  warranted  that  the 
bulk  of  the  material  contained  in  this  Book  ia  from  the  hand  of  a  contemporary, 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


and  if  so,  from  the  hand  of  Moses  himself,  since  no  one  else  can  even  be 
suggested. 

3.  There  is  every  reason  to  believe,  and  no  necessity  to  deny,  that  interpolationa 
were  made  either  by  the  original  compiler  or  by  some  later  reviser.  Instances 
will  be  found  in  ch.  xii.  3 ;  xiv.  25,  and  in  ch.  xv.  32 — 36.  In  the  last  case  it 
may  be  reasonably  contended  that  the  incident  is  narrated  in  order  to  illustrate  the 
sternness  of  the  law  agauist  the  presximptuous  sinner,  but  the  words  "  when  the 
children  of  Israel  were  in  the  wUdemess  "  seem  to  show  conclusively  that  the  illus- 
tration was  interpolated  by  some  one  living  in  the  land  of  Canaan.  No  one  perhaps 
would  have  doubted  this  except  under  the  strangely  mistaken  idea  that  it  is  an 
article  of  the  Christian  faith  that  Moses  wrote  every  word  of  the  Pentateuch. 
In  chs.  xiii.,  xiv.,  and  xvi.  there  are  signs  not  so  much  of  interpolation,  but  of 
a  revision  of  the  narrative  which  has  disturbed  its  sequence,  and  in  the  latter 
case  has  made  it  very  obscure  in  parts.  These  phenomena  would  be  accounted 
for  if  we  could  suppose  that  one  who  had  himself  been  an  actor  in  these  scenes 
(such  as  Joshua)  had  altered  and  revised,  not  very  skUfully,  the  record  left  behind 
by  Moses.  We  have,  however,  no  evidence  to  substantiate  such  a  supposition. 
In  ch.  xxL  1 — 3  we  have  an  apparent  example  neither  of  interpolation  nor  of 
revision,  but  of  accidental  dislocation.  The  notice  of  King  Arad  and  his  defeat 
is  evidently  very  ancient,  but  it  is  generally,  agreed  that  it  is  out  of  place  where 
it  stands ;  nevertheless,  the  displacement  would  seem  to  be  older  than  the 
present  form  of  the  Itinerary,  for  the  passing  allusion  in  ch.  xxxiii.  40  refers  to 
the  same  event  in  the  same  geographical  connection.  The  repetition  of  the 
genealogy  of  Aaron  in  ch.  xxvL  58 — 61  has  all  the  appearance  of  an  interpolar 
tion.     The  character  of  ch.  xxxiii.  1 — 49  has  been  already  discussed. 

4.  There  remain  two  important  passages  on  which  objections  have  been 
founded  against  the  Mosaic  authorship  of  the  Book.  The  one  is  the  narrative 
of  the  march  round  Moab  in  ch.  xxi.,  with  its  quotations  of  ancient  songs  and 
sayings.  The  objection  indeed  that  no  "  book  of  the  wars  of  the  Lord  "  could 
have  been  then  in  existence  is  arbitrary,  for  we  have  no  means  of  proving  a 
negative  of  this  kind.  That  written  records  were  very  rare  in  that  age  is  really 
no  reason  for  denying  that  Moses  (who  had  received  the  highest  education  of 
the  most  civilised  country  in  the  then  world)  was  able  to  write  down  memorials 
of  his  own  time,  or  to  make  a  collection  of  popular  songs.  But  that  Mosea 
should  have  quoted  from  one  of  those  songs,  which  could  only  just  have  been 
added  to  the  collection,  seems  very  unlikely ;  and  this  fact,  together  with  the 
different  character  of  the  narrative  in  this  part,  may  incline  us  to  believe  that 
the  compiler  here  added  to  the  (perhaps  meagre)  record  left  by  Moses  by  drawing 
upon  some  of  that  popular  lore,  partly  oral,  partly  written,  which  happened  to 
illustrate  his  text.  The  other  passage  is  the  long  and  striking  episode  of  Balaam, 
which  has  been  already  spoken  of.  There  is  no  difficulty  in  supposing  that  this 
came  from  the  hand  of  Moses,  if  we  look  upon  it  as  an  epic  poem  based  upon 


x«  INTRODUCTION  TO 


facts,  although  it  is  a  matter  of  conjecture  ho^w  he  became  acquainted  with  the 
facts.  The  possible  explanation  is  suggested  in  the  notes,  and  it  is  clear. in  any 
case  that  no  subsequent  Jewish  writer  would  be  in  a  better  position  than  Moses 
himself  in  this  respect,  while  to  regard  it  as  a  mere  effort  of  the  imagination 
creates  a  host  of  difficulties  greater  than  those  it  solves. 

This  part  of  the  subject  may  be  summed  up  by  saying,  that  while  the  external 
evidence  aa  to  authorship  is  indecisive,  and  only  obliges  us  to  believe  that  "  the 
Law ''  was  given  by  Moses,  the  internal  evidence  is  strong  that  the  Book  of 
Numbers,  like  the  preceding  books,  is  substantiallyfrom  the  hand  of  Moses.  The 
objections  urged  against  this  conclusion  are  either  in  themselves  captious  and 
untenable,  or  are  merely  valid  against  particular  passages.  As  to  these,  it  may 
be  fearlessly  allowed  that  there  are  some  interpolations  by  a  later  hand,  that 
portions  have  been  revised,  that  the  various  sections  would  seem  to  have  existed 
separately,  and  to  have  been  put  together  with  little  art,  that  some  other  material 
may  have  been  worked  into  the  narrative,  and  that  some  of  the  legislation  may 
perhaps  be  rather  a  later  codification  of  Mosaic  ordinances  than  the  original 
ordinances  themselves. 

K  On  thb  Truth  op  tbb  Book. 

It  may  perhaps  seem  that  in  surrendering  the  traditional  opinion  that  in  all 
this  Book  we  have  the  ipsisdma  verba  written  down  by  Moses,  we  have  given  up 
its  veracity.  Such  an  inference,  however,  would  be  quite  arbitrary.  Nothing 
turns  upon  the  question  whether  Moses  wrote  a  single  word  of  Numbers,  unless 
it  be  the  list  of  marches,  of  which  as  much  is  expressly  stated.  There  is  no 
reason  for  asserting  that  Moses  was  inspired  to  write  true  history,  and  that 
Joshua,  e.  g.,  was  not.  The  Books  of  Joshua,  Judges,  and  Euth  are  received  as 
true,  although  we  do  not  know  who  wrote  them,  and  the  Book  of  Judges  at  any 
rate  is  apparently  compiled  from  fragmentary  records.  Even  in  the  New  Test^a- 
ment  we  do  not  know  who  wrote  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews ;  and  we  do  know 
that  there  are  passages  in  the  Gospel  of  St.  Mark  (oh.  xvi.  9 — 20)  and  in  the 
CTOspel  of  St.  John  (ch.  viii.  1 — 11)  which  were  not  written  by  the  evangelists 
i*i  whom  they  have  been  traditionally  assigned.  The  credibility  of  these  writings 
(considered  apart  from  the  fact  of  their  inspiration)  turns  mainly  upon  the 
question  to  whose  authority  the  statements  contained  in  them  can  be  traced,  and 
in  a  very  minor  degree  to  whose  hand  the  present  arrangement  of  them  is  due. 
As  to  the  first,  we  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  materials  of  the  Book 
are  substantially  from  Moses  himself,  whose  knowledge  and  veracity  are  alike 
beyond  suspicion.  As  to  the  second,  we  have  only  to  acknowledge  the  same 
ignorance  aa  in  the  case  of  the  greater  part  of  the  Old  Testament  and  of  some 
part  of  the  New  Testament.  It  is,  of  course,  open  to  any  one  to  doubt  or  to  deny 
the  truth  of  these  records,  but  in  order  to  show  reason  for  doing  so  he  must  not 
be  cont«nt  with  pointing  out  some  difference  of  style  here,  or  some  trace  of  a 


THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBBBS.  xlfi 

later  hand  thete,  but  he  mnst  bring  forward  some  dear  Instance  of  errors  some 
undeniable  self-contradiction,  or  some  statement  -which  is  fairly  incredible.  The 
mere  existence  of  a  record  so  ancient  and  reyered,  and  the  unmistakable  tone  of 
simplicity  and  straightforwardness  which  characterises  it,  give  it  a  primd  facie 
claim  upon  our  acceptance  until  good  cause  can  be  shown  to  the  contrary.  If 
the  early  records  of  other  nations  are  largely  fabulous  and  incredible,  no  pre- 
sumption passes  over  from  them  to  a  record  which  on  the  face  of  it  presents  such 
utterly  different  features.  It  remains  to  examine  candidly  the  only  objection 
of  a  serious  nature  (apart  from  the  question  of  miracles,  which  it  is  useless  to 
consider  here)  which  has  been  brought  against  the  substantial  truth  of  this 
Book.  It  is  urged  that  the  figures  set  down  as  representing  the  numbers  of 
Israel  at  the  two  censuses  are  incredible,  because  inconsistent,  not  only  with  the 
possibilities  of  life  in  the  wilderness,  but  also  with  the  directions  given  by 
Moses  himself.  This  is  in  truth  a  very  serious  objection,  and  there  is  much  to 
be  said  for  it.  It  is  quite  true  that  a  population  of  some  2,000,000  people, 
including  a  fuU  proportion  of  women  and  children  (for  the  males  of  that  genera- 
tion would  be  rather  under  than  over  the  average),  would  under  any  ordinary 
circumstances  seem  unmanageable  in  a  wild  and  difScult  country.  It  is  quite 
true  (and  this  is  much  more  to  the  point)  that  the  narrative  as  a  whole  leaves 
a  distinct  impression  upon  the  mind  of  a  very  much  smaller  total  than  the  one 
given.  It  is  sufficient  to  refer  for  proof  to  such  passages  as  oh.  x.  3 — 7,  where 
the  whole  nation  is  supposed  to  be  within  hearing  of  the  silver  trumpet,  and 
able  to  distinguish  its  calls  ;  ch.  xiv.,  where  the  whole  nation  is  represented  as 
joining  in  the  uproar,  and  therefore  as  included  in  the  sentence  ;  ch.  xvi.,  where 
a  similar  scene  is  described  in  connection  with  the  revolt  of  Korah;  ch.  xx.  11, 
where  the  whole  thirsty  multitude  is  represented  as  drinking  (together  with 
their  cattle)  of  the  one  stream  from  the  smitten  rook ;  oh.  xxi.  9,  where  the 
brazen  serpent  on  a  standard  may  be  seen,  apparently,  from  every  part  of  the 
camp.  Each  one  of  these  instances,  indeed,  if  taken  by  itself,  may  be  shown 
to  be  far  from  conclusive ;  but  there  is  such  a  thing  as  cumulative  evidence — ^the 
evidence  which  arises  from  a  number  of  small  and  inconclusive,  testimonies  all 
pointing  the  same  way.  Now  it  can  hardly  be  denied  that  all  these  incidents 
raise  in  the  mind  a  strong  impression,  which  the  entire  narrative  tends  to  con- 
firm, that  the  numbers  of  Israel  were  much  more  moderate  than  those  given. 
The  difficulty,  however,  comes  to  a  head  in  connection  with  the  marching  order* 
issued  by  Moses  directly  after  the  first  census,  and  to  that  point  we  may  confine 
our  attention. 

According  to  ch.  ii.  (as  slightly  modified  afterwards — see  on  ch.  x.  17)  the 
eastern  camps  of  Judah,  Issachar,  and  Zebulun,  containing  more  than  600,000 
people,  were  to  march  first,  and  then  the  tabernacle  was  taken  down  and  carried 
on  waggons  by  the  Gershonites  and  Merarites.  After  them  marched  the  southern 
camps  of  Beuben,  Gad,  and  Simeon,  more  than  600,000  strong ;   and  behind 


INTBODUCTTION  TO 


them  the  Kohathites  bore  the  sacred  fumiture ;  the  other  Levites  ■vrere  to  put 
up  the  tabernacle  against  the  Kohathites  arrived.  The  remaining  camps  of  the 
west  and  of  the  north  followed  with  some  900,000  souls. 

If  we  try  to  picture  to  ourselves  a  day's  march  between  Sinai  and  Eadesh 
(for  the  marching  orders  were  doubtless  suspended  then,  and  may  never  have 
been  issued  again),  we  have  to  think  of  600,000  people  at  the  first  signal  of 
departure  striking  their  tents,  forming  into  columns  under  their  natural  leaders, 
and  setting  forth  in  the  direction  taken  by  the  cloudy  pillar.  We  are  not  at 
liberty  to  suppose  that  they  straggled  far  and  wide  over  the  face  of  the  land, 
because  it  is  evident  that  an  orderly  march  is  intended  under  the  guidance  of  a 
single  moving  object.  It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  a  multitude  so  vast  and  so 
mixed  could  have  moved  off  the  ground  in  less  than  four  or  five  hours  at  least, 
even  if  this  was  possible ;  but  this  was  only  one  division  out  of  four,  and  these 
were  separated  by  some  little  interval,  so  that  it  would  be  already  dark  before 
the  last  division  could  possibly  have  fallen  into  the  line  of  march.  "Now  if  we 
turn  our  eyes  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  day's  march,  we  see  the 
journey  arrested  by  the  cloudy  pillar ;  we  see  the  first  division  of  600,000  souls 
taming  to  the  right  in  order  to  take  up  camping  ground  towards  the  east ;  when 
these  are  out  of  the  way  we  see  the  Levites  arriving  and  setting  up  the  taber- 
nacle beside  the  cloudy  pillar ;  then  another  division  of  half  a  million  people 
come  up  and  spread  themselves  on  the  south  of  the  tabernacle  across  the  onward 
track ;  behind  the  last  of  these  come  the  Kohathites  with  the  sacred  fumiture,  and, 
passing  through  the  midst  of  the  southern  camps,  rejoin  at  last  their  brethren 
in  order  to  place  the  holy  things  in  the  tabernacle;  then  foUows  a  third 
division,  some  360,000  strong,  who  march  off  to  the  left ;  and  last  of  aU  the  fourth 
division,  which  contains  more  than  another  half-million,  has  to  make  a  circuit 
entirely  round  the  eastern  or  western  camps  in  order  to  take  up  its  own  quarters 
on  the  nortL  Undoubtedly  the  question  forces  itself  on  every  one  who  permits 
himself  to  think  about  it,  whether  such  orders  and  such  numbers  are  compatible 
with  one  another.  Even  if  we  allow  for  the  providential  absence  of  all  sickness 
and  aU  death,  it  appears  very  doubtful  whether  the  thing  was  within  the  limits 
of  physical  possibility.  Again,  we  have  to  ask  ourselves  whether  Moses  would 
have  separated  the  tabernacle  from  its  sacred  furniture  on  the  march  by  half  a 
million  of  people,  who  must  (under  any  circumstances)  have  been  many  hours 
In  getting  out  of  the  way.  It  may  be  said,  and  with  some  truth,  that  we 
scarcely  know  what  may  be  done  by  vast  multitudes  animated  by  one  spirit, 
habituated  to  rigid  discipline,  and  (in  this  case)  aided  by  many  peculiar  and 
indeed  miraculous  circumstances.  Still  there  are  physical  limits  of  time  and 
space  which  no  energy  and  no  discipline  can  overpass,  and  which  no  conceivable 
exercise  of  Divine  power  can  set  aside.  It  may  be  granted  that  2,000,000  of 
Israelites  might  have  wandered  for  years  in  the  peninsula  under  the  given 
conditions,  and  yet  it  may  be  denied  that  they  coulrl  follow  the  marching  orden 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS. 


issued  at  SinoL    Without  attempting  to  solve  this  question,  two  considerations 
may  be  pointed  out  which  a£fect  its  character.     1.  No  simple  alteration  of  the 
text  will  set  the  figures  in  accord  with  the  apparent  requirements  of  the  narra- 
tive.    The  total  of  600,000  adult  males  is  repeated  again  and  again,  from  Exod. 
xii.  37  onwards ;  it  is  made  up  of  a  number  of  smaller  totals,  which  are  also 
given  ;  and  it  is  to  some  extent  checked  by  comparison  with  the  number  of  the 
"  first-bom  "  (whatever  that  may  mean)  and  the  number  of  Levites.     2.  If  the 
numbers  recorded  were  given  up  as  untrustworthy,  it  is  certain  that  nothing  - 
else  in  the  Book  would  he  directly  affected.     The  numbers  stand  quite  apart,  at 
least  in  this  sense,  that  they  have  no  value  and  no  interest  whatever  of  any 
moral  or  spiritutd  kind.     Arithmetic  enters  into  history,  but  it  does  not  enter 
into  religion.     The  same  things  have,  from  the  point  of  view  of  religion,  pre- 
cisely the  same  value  and  the  same  meaning  when  done  or  suffered  by  one 
thousand  which  they  would  have  had  if  done  or  suffered  by  ten  thousand. 
If,  then,  any  earnest  student  of  Holy  Writ  should  find  himself  imable  to 
accept,  as  historically  trustworthy,  the  numbers  given  in  this  Book,  he  is  not 
therefore  driven  to  discard  the  Book  itself,  fraught  as  it  is  with  so  many  a 
message  to  his  own  souL     Bather  than  do  this — ^rather  than  cast  away,  as  if  it 
had  no  existence,  all  that  mass  of  positive,  albeit  indirect  and  often  subtle, 
evidence  which  goes  to  substantiate  the  truth  of  the  record — ^he  would  do  well 
to  put  aside  the  question  of  mere  numbers  as  one  which,  however  perplexing, 
cannot  be  looked  upon  as  vitaL     He  may  even  hold  that  in  some  way  the  num- 
bers may  have  been  corrupted,  and  he  may  think  it  possible  that  the  Divine 
providence  which  watches  over  the  sacred  writings  has  suffered  them  to  be 
corrupted  because  mere  numbers  are  of  no  moral  or  spiritual  import.     He  may 
feel  encouraged  in  this  opinion  by  the  apparently  undeniable  fact  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  who  inspired  St.  Paul  did  not  prevent  him  from  misquoting  a  number 
out  of  this  very  Book  (1  Cor.  x.  8)  j  for  he  cannot  fail  to  perceive  that  the 
misquotation  (supposing  it  to  be  one)  does  not   make  the  slightest  possible 
difference  to  those  holy  and  important  lessons  which  the  Apostle  was  drawing 
from  these  records.     It  is  not  by  any  means  affirmed  by  the  present  writer  that 
the  numbers  in  question  are  unhistoric ;  nor  would  he  deny  that  their  accuracy 
is  maintained  by  far  greater  scholars  and  theologians  than  himself ;  he  would 
only  submit  to  the  reader  that  the  whole  question,  with  aU  its  attendant  diffi- 
culties, may  be  calmly  considered  and  argued  on  its  own  merits  without  involving 
anything  which  is  really  vital  in  our  faith  as  concerning  the  word  of  God.     We 
should  surely  have  learnt  little  from  the  perplexities  and  victories  of  faith  in 
the  last  forty  years  if  we  were  not  prepared  for  the  possibility  of  admitting 
many  modifications  into  our  conception  of  inspiration  without  any  fear  lest 
inspiration  should  become  to  us  less  real,  less  full,  less  precious  than  it  is. 

The  introduction  to  a  single  book  is  not  the  place  to  discuss  the  character  of 
that  inspiration  which  it  shares  with  the  other  "  God-inspired  Scriptures."    Xb* 


xvi  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  iTTJMBEBS. 

present  writer  may,  however,  be  excused  if  he  points  out  once  for  all  that  the 
testimony  of  our  Lord  and  of  the  Apostle  Paul  is  clear  and  emphatic  to  the 
typical  and  prophetical  character  of  the  incidents  here  narrated.  Such  a 
reference  as  that  in  John  iii.  14  and  such  a  statement  as  that  in  1  Cor.  x.  i — 
11  cannot  be  explained  away.  Here  then  is  the  heart  and  kernel  of  the 
inspiration  of  the  Book  as  recognised  by  our  Lord,  by  his  apostles,  and  by  aU 
his  devout  followers.  They  who  live  (or  die)  before  us  in  these  pages  are 
Tviroi  iiftiiy,  types  or  patterns  of  ourselves ;  their  outward  history  was  the  fore- 
shadow of  our  spiritual  history,  and  its  records  were  written  for  our  behoof. 
Having  this  clue,  and  holding  this  as  of  faith,  we  shall  not  greatly  err.  The 
questions  which  arise  may  perplex,  but  may  not  shake  us.  And  if  a  wider 
acquaintance  with  scientific  criticism  tend  at  first  to  unsettle  our  faith,  yet,  on 
the  other  hand,  a  wider  acquaintance  with  experimental  religion  tends  every 
day  to  strengthen  our  faith,  by  testifying  to  the  marvellous  and  profound 
correspondence  which  exists  between  the  sacred  records  of  that  long-vanished 
past  and  the  ever-recurring  problems  and  vicissitudes  of  Christian  Ife. 


Literature  on  Numbers. 


A  vast  number  of  Commentaries  may  be  consulted  on  the  Book  of  rTunibers,  hu 
as  a  rule  they  deal  with  it  only  as  a  portion  of  the  Pentateuch.  It  is  indeed  bo 
inseparably  united  to  the  Books  which  precede  it  that  no  scholar  would  make  it  the 
subject  of  a  separate  work. 

It  is  therefore  to  works  on  the  Pentateuch  that  the  student  must  be  referred,  and 
amongst  these  the  Commentary  of  Keil  and  Delitzsch  (translated  for  Clark's  Foreign 
Theological  Library)  may  perhaps  be  mentioned  as  the  most  useful  and  available  for 
careful  interpretation  and  explanation  of  the  text.  The  'Speaker's  Commentary,'  and 
the  smaller  works  which  have  followed  in  its  wake,  must  be  pronounced  very  inferioi 
in  thoroughness  and  general  usefulness  to  the  equally  accessible  standard  German 
Commentaries.  Ewald,  Kurtz,  and  Hengstenberg,  in  their  several  works,  have 
treated  of  the  incidents  and  ordinances  recorded  in  Numbers  with  considerable 
fulness  from  very  varying  standpoints ;  the  last-named  has  also  a  lengthy  mono- 
graph on  the  history  of  Balaam.  For  the  homiletical  treatment  of  the  Book  there 
is  nothing  so  suggestive  within  a  moderate  compass  as  what  may  be  found  in  the 
Bishop  of  Lincoln's  Commentary. 

It  must  be  frankly  acknowledged  that  the  student  who  wishes  to  form  an  intelligent 
opinion  on  the  many  difficult  questions  which  arise  out  of  this  portion  of  the  sacred 
narrative  will  not  find  all  these  questions  honestly  faced  or  satisfactorily  answered 
in  any  one  of  the  existing  Commentaries.  He  will,  however,  by  combining  what 
appear 
either  i 


m  any  one  of  the  existmg  Commentaries.  He  will,  however,  by  combining  what 
appears  best  in  each,  have  before  him  the  materials  by  means  of  which  he  may 
either  form  hia  judgment,  or  suspend  it  until  in  God's  good  time  a  clearer  light  tWl 
■hiM, 


THE 


BOOK   OP    NUMBEES. 


The  Census  of  Sinai  (oh.  l). 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  I. 


The  census  Divinely  oommandbd  (vers. 
1 — 16).  Ver.  1. — In  the  tabernacle  of  the 
eongregatlon — where  the  Lord  spake  with 
Moses  'f%ce  to  face  "  (Exod.  xxziii.  11),  and 
where  all  the  laws  of  Leviticus  had  been 
given  (Levit.  i  1).  On  the  first  day  of  the 
second  month,  in  the  second  year.  On  the 
first  day  of  Zif  (or  Ijar) ;  a  year  and  a  fort- 
night since  the  ezodua,  ten  months  and  a 
half  since  their  arrival  at  Sinai,  and  a  month 
since  the  tabernacle  had  been  set  up. 

Ver.  2. — Take  ye  the  sum  of  all  the  con- 
gregation. The  census  here  ordered  had 
clearly  been  anticipated,  as  far  as  the  numbers 
were  concerned,  by  the  results  of  the  half- 
shekel  poll-tax  for  the  service  of  the  sanctu- 
ary levied  some  time  before  on  aU  adult 
males  on  pain  of  Divine  displeasure  (Exod. 
xxz.  11,  ag.).  Since  all  who  were  liable  had 
paid  that  tex  (Exod.  xxxviii .  25,  26),  it  would 
only  have  been  requisite  to  make  slight  cor- 
rections for  death  or  coming  of  age  during 
the  interval.  The  totals,  however,  in  the 
two  cases  being  exactly  the  same,  it  is  evident 
that  no  such  corrections  were  made,  and  that 
the  round  numbers  already  obtained  were 
accepted  as  sufficiently  accurate  for  all  prac- 
tical purposes.  After  their  families.  This 
was  to  be  a  registration  as  well  as  a  census. 
No  doubt  the  fists  and  pedigrees  collected  at 
this  time  laid  the  foundation  of  that  exact 
■  and  careful  genealogical  lore  which  played 
80  important  a  part  both  in  the  religious  and 
in  the  secular  history  of  the  Jews  down  to 
the  final  dispersion.  Every  Jew  had  not  only 
his  national,  but  also  (and  often  even  more) 
his  tribal  and  family,  associations,  traditions, 
and  sympathies.  Unity,  but  not  ufliformity, 
— ^nnity  in  aU  deepest  interests  and  highest 
KUUBEBS. 


purposes,  combined  with  great  variety  of 
character,  of  tradition,  and  even  of  tendency 
— was  the  ideal  of  the  life  of  Israel.  The 
number  of  their  names.  It  is  impossible 
to  help  thinking  of  the  parallel  expression 
in  Acts  i.  15,  of  the  similarity  in  position  of 
the  two  peoples,  of  the  contrast  between  their 
numbers  and  apparent  chances  of  success,  of 
the  more  striking  contrast  between  their 
actual  achievements. 

Ver.  3. — By  their  armits.  Every  citizen 
was  a  soldier.  The  military  monarchies  of 
medisEval  or  of  modem  days,  with  their  uni- 
versal obligation  to  service  in  the  ranks,  have 
(so  far)  but  followed  the  example  of  ancient 
Israel. 

Ver.  4. — A  man  of  every  tribe.  The  for- 
mer census,  which  was  for  religious  purposes 
only,  was  made  with  the  assistance  of  the 
Levites.  This,  which  was  rather  for  politica' 
and  military  purposes,  was  supervised  by  the 
lay  heads  of  the  people. 

Ver.  5. — These  are  the  names  of  the  men. 
The  tribes  are  here  mentioned  (through  tlieir 
princes)  very  nearly  in  the  order  of  their 
subsequent  encampment — south,  east,  west, 
and  north.  Gad  alone  is  displaced,  in  order 
that  he  may  be  classed  with  the  other  sons 
of  the  handmaids  after  the  sons  of  the  free 
women. 

Ver.  7. — Nahshon — the  brother-in-law  of 
Aaron  (Exod.  vi.  23),  and  ancestor  of  David 
and  of  Jesus  Christ  (Matt.  i.  4). 

Ver.  10.  —  Elishama  —  grandfather  of 
Joshua  (1  Chron.  vii.  26),  All  the  rest  are 
unnamed  elsewhere. 

Ver.  16. — Heads  of  thonsands.  Septua- 
gint,  chiliarchs ;  but  the  word  is  used  for 
famUies  (see  Judges  vi.  15),  and,  like  all  such 
words,  it  rapidly  lost  its  aumeiical  signifi- 
cance. 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [ch.  i.  1—16. 


H0MILETIC3. 

Vers.  1 — 16. — The  numbering  of  God's  people-  We  liave  here,  spiritually,  the  Clmrch 
of  God  militant  here  on  eartli,  "  drawn  up  unto  eternal  life  "  (Acts  xiii.  48),  numbered 
and  counted  and  ordered  by  the  Great  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host ;  man  by  man,  soul 
by  soul,  to  be  his  valiant  soldiers  and  servants  in  the  march  and  the  conflict,  and  tlie 
manifold  trials  and  temptations  of  this  probation.     Consider,  therefore — 

I.  That  this  numbering  of  all  his  soldiers  by  name  was  madb  at  the  express  and 
PARTICOLAB  COMMAND  OF  GoD,  as  it  Were  for  the  Divine  information  ;  herein  con- 
trasting with  that  other  numbering  so  sorely  avenged  under  David,  because  made  to 
feed  his  own  pride.  Even  so  the  Lord  is  exceeding  careful  of  the  number  of  Iiis 
own  ;  one  of  the  two  sacred  mottoes  stamped  upon  his  Church  is,  "The  Lord  knoweih 
them  that  are  his  "  (2  Tim.  ii.  19) ;  "The  Good  Shepherd  calleth  his  own  sheep  by 
name  "  (John  x.  3)  ;  and  every  one  of  them  is  expressed  by  name  in  his  book 
(Sev.  iii.  5).  We  are  "  numbered  "  in  the  census  of  a  great  nation ;  every  one  of  us 
is  something  stronger,  holds  his  head  somewhat  higher,  for  the  thought  that  he  is 
numbered  amongst  the  thirty  millions  of  a  great  country,  the  ninety  millions  of  a 
greater  people.  Are  we  also  "  numbered  "  among  the  innumerable  and  ever-victorioug 
hosts  of  the  Lord?  Are  we  included  in  his  census?  If  so,  are  we  mindful  of  the 
condition?  (2  Tim.  ii.  3,  4).  Are  we  tremblingly  hopeful  of  the  promise?  (Rev. 
iii.  5). 

II.  That  it  was  in  the  second  tear  that  they  were  thus  numbered  "  by  their 
armies  :  "  first  came  the  great  deliverance  unto  Sinai,  the  mount  of  God ;  then  came 
the  teaching  of  the  moral  law ;  then  came  the  instructions  of  outward  religion ;  then 
— and  not  till  then — the  command  to  number  into  the  ranks.  Even  so  the  soldiers 
of  the  cross  are  not  called  at  once  to  arms ;  the  deliverance  ca«ne  first  of  course,  the 
decease,  "the  exodus"  (Luke  ix.  31)  which  he  accomplished  at  Jerusalem;  after 
that  came  to  each  the  inculcation  of  the  immutable  laws  of  moral  conduct ;  after  that 
the  ordinances  of  public  and  private  worship ;  and  then  only,  after  such  training, 
with  such  aids,  is  each  believer  numbered  unto  active  service,  and  called,  as  it  were, 
by  name  to  approve  himself  as  a  trusty  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ. 

III.  That  only  those  were  "numbered,"  and  entered, as  it  were, on  the  roll-call  of 
the  Lord,  who  were  "  able  to  go  forth  to  war  in  Israel ; "  all  the  others,  the 
women  and  the  children,  &c.,  remained  unspecified  and  unnoted.  Even  so  all  the 
Lord's  people  whose  names  are  written  in  the  Book  of  Life  must  be  combatants. 
They  need  not  indeed  be  men,  but  they  must  "quit"  themselves  "like  men" 
(1  Cor.  xvi.  13).  They  may  be  weak  women,  or  even  tender  children,  for  such  have 
shown  themselves  (and  do  show)  to  the  full  as  valiant  for  Christ  as  any  men.  But 
they  must  be  combatants,  for  that  is  the  one  condition  on  which  we  are  received  into 
that  "_  multitude  which  no  man  can  number  "  (but  the  Lord  can),  and  the  promise  is 
"  to  him  that  overcometh,"  and  to  none  other. 

IV.  Tbat  of  these  names  in  ver.  16,  renowned  amongst  men  and  chosen  of  God  to 
honour  and  dignity,  all  but  two  abb  totally  unknown  to  us,  and  those  two 
only  through  their  descendants.  So  in  the  Church,  those  that  are  the  greatest  with- 
God  are  often  the  obscurest  in  the  annals  of  men.  As  "  Antipas  "  wa&  expressly 
called  (by  a  singular  honour),  "my  faithful  martyr"  by  Christ;  yet  b  there  no 
knowledge  of  him,  not  even  a  legend  concerning  him,  in  the  Church. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1, 2. — A  homily  for  the  census  day.  The  numbering  of  the  people.  I.  A  few 
w  uKDS  ABOUT  THE  CENSUS  which  is  being  taken  to-day  in  every  town,  every  hamlet, 
every  remote  habitation  of  the  United  Kingdom,  from  the  English  Channel  to  the  seas 
that  surge  round  the  Shetland  Islands.  There  are  still  some  people — not  many,  let  ua 
hope — who  have  a  scruple  about  filling  up  the  census  papers.  They  are  haunted  with 
sn  apprehension  that  there  is  something  wrong,  something  dangerous,  about  the  busi> 


CH.  1.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBBE8.  3 

nesB.  "  Did  not  King  David  transgress  in  numbering  the  people  ?  Did  he  not  by  so 
doing  bring  God's  wrath  upon  his  kingdom  ?  Would  that  which  brought  guilt  and 
sorrow  on  David  be  right  or  safe  for  us  ?  "  What  are  we  to  say  to  these  scrupulous 
persons  ?  I  have  not  time  to  go  into  the  questions  that  have  been  raised  about  the  real 
nature  of  David's  sin.  One  thing  is  plain :  the  evil  lay  not  in  the  taking  of  a  census, 
but  in  the  intention  of  that  particular  census.  David  was  a  man  of  war.  In  his  hands 
the  kingdom  was  in  danger  of  becoming  a  despotic  and  military  monarchy,  such  as  the 
nations  of  the  world  have  had  occasion  to  know  too  well.  And  there  can  be  little  doubt 
that  the  census  he  projected  was  meant  to  subserve  the  ends  of  such  a  monarchy.  It  was 
meant  to  be  just  such  an  instrument  of  oppression  in  Israel  as  William  the  Conqueror's 
Domesday  Book  was  in  England.  The  design  of  the  compilation  seems  to  have  been, 
in  both  cases,  very  much  the  same.  Anyhow,  it  is  certain  that  the  simple  numbering 
of  the  people  was  not  forbidden  by  the  law  of  God.  On  the  contrary,  the  Bible  is 
dead  against  such  a  barbarous  and  hazardous  style  of  national  administration  as  is 
inevitable  when  the  national  governors  are  in  the  dark  regarding  the  statistics  of  the 
people.  The  Israelites  dealt  largely  in  statistics ;  to  a  surprising  degree  they  antici- 
pated the  practice  of  the  nineteenth  century  in  this  matter.  At  all  the  great  turning- 
points  in  their  history  a  census  was  taken.  This  Book  of  Numbers  owes  its  name  to 
the  fact  that  it  records  two  census-takings,  one  at  the  beginning,  the  other  at  the 
close,  of  the  forty  years'  sojourn  in  the  wilderness.  So  long  as  the  Bible  has  a  Book 
of  Numbers  in  it,  intelligent  Bible  readers  will  see  in  it  an  admonition  to  fill  up  their 
census  papers  with  exactness  and  for  conscience  sake. 

II.  Meditations  propbk  to  the  census  day.  i'he  filling  up  of  a  census  paper 
is,  in  itself,  a,  piece  of  secular  business.  Yet  I  donot  envy  the  man  who  can  perfomi  it 
without  being  visited  with  a  touch  of  holy  feeling.  The  setting  down  of  the  names 
of  one's  household  brings  up  many  tragic  memories.  The  setting  down  one's  own 
age,  after  a  lapse  of  ten  3'ears — surely  it  summons  us  to  count  our  days  that  we  may 
apply  ojir  hearts  to  wisdom.  It  is  not  often  observed  that  the  law  of  Moses  prescribed 
a  religious  service  for  the  occasionof  a  census-taking  (Exod.  xxx.  11 — 16).  This  the 
children  of  Israel  are  to  perform,  "  that  there  be  no  plague  among  them  when  thou 
numbereat  them."  A  measure  may  be  right  in  itself,  and  yet  may  be  apt  to  become 
to  us  an  occasion  of  sin.  When  a  nation  is  reckoning  up  the  number  of  its  sons,  it 
will  be  apt  to  harbour  proud  confidence  in  their  valour  ;  and  proud  confidence  in  man 
God  will  not  bear.  When  Nebuchadnezzar  begins  to  say,  "  Is  not  this  great  Babylon 
which  I  have  built  for  the  house  of  my  kingdom?  "God's  humbling  stroke  is  near. 
On  the  census  day  the  Israelites  were  to  bring  "  every  man  a  '  ransom  for  his  soul.'  " 
The  act  was  as  much  as  to  say,  "  I  am  not  worthy  to  be  registered  among  the  living 
in  Israel,  the  holy  nation,  the  kingdom  of  priests.  I  am  a  sinful  man,  0  Lord ;  but 
I  believe  that  there  is  forgiveness  with  thee.  Forgive  me,  therefore,  0  Lord  ■  reject 
me  not.  Eemember  me  with  the  favour  thou  bearest  unto  thy  people,  that  I  may 
rejoice  in  the  gladness  of  thy  nation,  and  glory  with  thine  inheritance."  The  ransom 
money  required  from  every  Israelite  on  the  census  day  was  a  poll-tax  of  half  a  shekel. 
The  rich  paid  no  more,  the  poor  paid  no  less.  The  law  of  Moses  did  not  often  impose 
this  sort  of  tax ;  for  with  a  show  of  equality,  it  is  the  most  unequal  of  taxes.  Ordi- 
narily the  law  invited  princes  to  bring  princely  gifts,  while  it  suffered  the  poor  man's 
pair  of  turtledoves  to  come  up  with  acceptance  on  the  altar.  The  poll-tax  of  the 
census  day  was  altogether  exceptional.  Nor  is  it  difiicult  to  understand  why  the 
exception  should  have  been  made  on  this  one  occasion.  It  was  very  significant. 
Religion  does  not  abrogate  all  social  inequalities ;  but  the  non-recognition  of  these  in 
the  atonement-money  admonishes  us  that  the  inequalities  which  find  place  among 
men  in  regard  to  wealth,  station,  intellectual  gifts,  are  as  nothing  in  comparison  with 
their  essential  equality  as  creatures  made  in  the  image  of  God.  It  admonishes  us 
also  that  all  who  have  obtained  an  inheritance  among  God's  people  are  on  one  level 
with  regard  to  their  right  to  be  there.  "  There  is  no  difEerence  ;  for  all  have  sinned, 
and  all  are  justified  freely."  Yet  another  reflection.  The  Lord  keeps  an  exact 
register  of  his  people.  There  is  a  Book  of  Life  in  which  are  inscribed  the  names  of 
all  whom  he  has  chosen,  and  caused  to  approach  unto  him,  that  they  may  dwell  in 
his  house.  How  true  this  is,  the  whole  Scripture  bears  witness  (see  Exod.  xxxii.  32  ; 
Isa  iv.  3  ;  Ezek.  xiii.  9 ;  Luke  x.  20  ;  Phil.  iv.  3 ;  Heb.  xii.  23  ;  Rev.  xiii.  8).     Wa 

B2 


4  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES.  [ch.  j.  1— IC, 

commonly  think  of  this  as  a  boolt  which  is  shut  and  sealed.  No  man  on  earth  can 
take  it  into  his  hand  and  read  out  the  names  inscribed  in  it.  The  Lord  only  knoweth 
them  that  are  his  ;  we  may  not  sit  In  judgment  on  one  another's  state  before  God. 
All  this  is  true.  Yet  the  truth  has  another  side :  if  the  seventy  are  to  rejoice  because 
their  names  are  written  in  heaven,  it  must  be  possible  for  them  to  ascertain  the  fact. 
A  man  may  ascertain  his  own  acceptance  with  God.  Not  only  so.  If  the  Apostle  was 
confident  reg-ardirig  certain  of  the  early  Christians  that  their  names  were  in  the  Book 
of  Life,  we  also  may,  without  prying  into  God's  secrets,  attain  to  a  similar  persuasion 
respecting  such  of  our  brethren  as  bear  Christ's  image,  and  abound  in  his  work. 
Who  bear  Christ's  image,  and  abound  in  his  work — I  use  these  words  advisedly  ;  they 
express  the  evidence  which  avails  to  prove  that  a  given  name  is  in  the  Book  of  Life. 
The  census-table  compiled  by  Moses  contained  only  the  names  of  such  as  were,  by 
birth  or  adoption,  the  sons  of  Jacob.  The  Book  of  Life  contains  only  the  names  of 
those  whom  God  has  "  predestinated  to  the  adoption  of  sons  by  Jesus  Christ."  To 
make  sure  that  I  am  a  son — that  God  has  brought  me  home  to  himself:  by  his  Word 
and  Spirit — this  is  the  only  way  of  making  sure  that  my  name  has  a  place  in  the 
Lamb's  Book  of  Life. — B. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — God  commands  a  census.  I.  The  place  and  time  of  the  command. 
God  spoke  to  Moses  in  thewUderness  of  Sinai.  Many  wildernesses,  though  uncultivated, 
were  fertile  and  well  watered,  but  the  wilderness  of  Sinai  was  a  desolate  place. 
Moses  calls  it  "the  great  and  terrible  wilderness,  wherein  were  fiery  serpents  and 
scorpions  and  drought,  where  there  was  no  water ; "  and,  again,  "  a  desert  land,  a  waste 
howling  wilderness"  (see  Stanley's  'Sinai  and  Palestine ').  Very  difEerent  from  the 
riches  of  Egypt  left  behind,  and  the  riches  of  Canaan  lying  before.  But  though  a 
wilderness,  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  was  there,  made  by  God's  appointment 
and  direction,  even  down  to  its  minutest  arrangements  and  furniture.  As  long  as 
the  tabernacle  in  their  midst  was  honoured,  the  people  could  dwell  safely  even  in  the 
wilderness. 

n.  The  purpose  of  the  nombebinq.  To  ascertain  the  strength  of  the  people  for 
war.  Canaan,  towards  which  they  were  advancing,  was  in  the  possession  of  enemies, 
who  appreciated  all  its  riches,  and  would  not  relinquish  them  without  a  severe 
struggle.  At  the  time  of  the  census  the  Israelites  had  not  brought  on  themselves  the 
penalty  of  the  forty  years'  wandering.  The  census  was  meant  to  be  one  preparation 
fur  immediate  conquest,  as  the  mission  of  the  spies  was  another.  There  was  every- 
thing to  give  them  courage  and  strength  of  mind  when  they  remehabered  that  there 
were  more  than  600,000  figliting  men  amongst  them.  And  as  they  counted  up  theii 
resources  for  war,  so  we  may  be  sure  Christ  would  ever  have  his  militant  Church  on 
earth  to  do  the  same.  The  tone  of  the  New  Testament  is  not  less  warlike  than  of  tlie 
Old,  our  Canaanites  being  principalities  and  powers,  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this 
world,  and  spiritual  wickedness  in  high  places. 

III.  The  method  of  the  ndmbeking.  The  method  was  determined  by  the  purpose. 
Note,  first,  the  exclusions.  The  women  and  the  children  were  left  out.  In  counting 
the  Levites  the  children  were  not  left  out.  Every  male  from  a  month  old  was 
numbered,  for  theirs  was  a  constant  service,  and  even  the  youngest  was  looked  on  as 
in  training  for  it.  But  when  war  is  imminent  we  can  only  count  on  8«ch  as  can  be 
ready  at  once,  those  from  twenty  years  old  and  upward.  The  Church  of  Christ  still 
divisible  in  the  same  way — -those  who  can  fight,  and  those  who  cannot ;  the  men  who 
are  strong,  because  of  the  solid  food  they  take,  and  the  babes  who  are  still  hanging 
on  milk  and  spoon  meat.  The  Levites  also  were  left  out.  A  numerical  loss  may  yet 
be  a  real  gain.  The  Israelites  were  strong  in  their  600,000  only  as  long  as  they  served 
God,  according  to  his  statutes  and  commandments.  For  the  Levites  to  go  to  battle 
meant  that  all  would  go  to  neglect  and  disorder  in  the  tabernacle.  God  obeyed  and 
honoured  is  God  on  our  side,  and  who  then  can  be  against  us  ?  The  man  who  keeps 
his  fifty-two  sabbaths  every  year  for  God  has  not  lost  them,  and  the  weekly  contri- 
bution set  aside  for  God's  cause  is  not  wasted.  Secondly,  the  order  observed  in  the 
numbering.  By  each  tribe  and  family  the  result  would  be  more  speedily  and  correctly 
arrived  at.  Nature,  even  under  the  curse  of  sin,  has  its  order,  and  will  help  us,  if  we 
on  observant  of  it,  to  do  the  work  of  grace  in  an  orderly  way.     Though  there  ig  a 


CH.  1. 1—160 


TfiE  BOOS  OF  NUMBERS. 


limit  at  the  one  end  of  life,  there  is  none  mentioned  at  the  other.  A  man  is  never  too 
old  to  fight  for  God,  directing  and  inspiring  the  stronger  arm  of  younger  men.  There 
is  room  for  a  Nestor  as  well  as  an  Achilles,  and  Venice  loved  to  keep  the  fame  of 

"  Blind  old  Dandolo, 
Th'  octogenarian  chief,  Byzantium's  conquering  foe." 

Thirdly,  with  all  the  information  gained,  there  was  much  unknown.  Those  fit  for 
fight  by  age  could  be  counted  up  ;  but  what  of  disposition  ?  who  could  sift  out  the 
Korahs,  Dathans,  and  Abirams,  and  the  people  whose  hearts  lingered  after  the  flesh- 
pots  of  Egypt  ?— Y. 

Vers.  5 — 16. — The  men  of  renown  who  managed  the  census.  I.  They  are  meeb 
NAMES  TO  us.  Were  we  asked  who  Bliab  was,  wo  should  say  the  eldest,  envious, 
angry  brother  of  David,  not  the  census-taker  for  Zebulun  ;  or  Gamaliel,  he  wlio  stood 
up  in  the  council,  not  the  census-taker  for  Manasseh.  High  as  they  may  have  been 
once,  their  position  in  human  history  is  little  better  than  oblivion. 

"The  long,  proud  tale  of  swelling  fame 
Dried  to  a  brief  and  baiTen  name." 

II.  Yet  though  mere  names  now,  tliey  were  once  well  known.  Every  child  of 
Zebulun  would  be  taught  to  look  up  to  Eliab. 

III.  Though  mere  names  to  us,  they  did  a  useful  work  in  their  time.  It  would 
be  no  small  satisfaction  to  them,  if  they  looked  at  the  thing  rightly,  to  consider  that 
they  had  been  able  to  undertake  for  Moses  such  an  important  work  as  making  sure  of 
the  fighting  strength  of  each  tribe. 

IV.  There  was  doubtless  some  appreciation  of  their  services  at  the  time,  both  by 
Moses  and  the  sober-minded  of  the  people. 

V.  But  in  any  case  God  has  marked  what  they  did.  He  has  the  record  of  all  the 
faithful  and  the  holy  who  have  only  their  names  in  human  history,  and  the  far 
greater  part  of  them  not  even  that. — Y. 

Ver.  3. — "  From  twenty  years  old  and  upward."  By  this  census  all  the  young 
men  of  Israel  were  urged  to  the  consideration  of  a  possible  claim  upon  them.  It  is 
to  the  young  men  that  a  country  looks  when  her  integrity  and  liberties  are  in  danger. 
Young  men  are  wanted  still  to  take  a  brave  and  intelligent  part  in  the  strife  of  the 
Church  militant.  "  I  have  written  unto  you  young  men  because  ye  are  strong,  and 
the  word  of  God  abideth  in  you,  and  ye  have  overcome  the  wicked  one."  So  Paul  to 
Timothy:  "  Endure  hardness,  as  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ."  God's  people  have 
to  deal  with  the  Canaanites,  Amorites,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  hostile  nations.  Many 
iniquities  are  in  possession  of  the  earth.  Old  men,  who  have  struggled  against  them 
and  done  something  to  diminish  them,  ask  who  will  take  up  the  sword  and  shield  and 
go  forth  against  the  mighty.  The  word  comes  to  us.  "  You  are  fit  to  fight.  Will  you 
fight  ?  "  Young  men  dazzled  with  the  visions  of  military  glory,  here  is  a  campaign 
where  not  men  are  slaughtered,  but  the  evils  that  ruin  men.  Our  Lord,  the  Captain 
of  our  salvation,  will  richly  equip  us  with  weapons  mighty  for  the  pulling  down  of 
strongholds,  the  armour  of  righteousness  on  the  right  hand  and  the  left. — Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


The  census  taken  (vers.  17 — 46).  Ver. 
17. — These  men.  Designated  by  direct  com- 
mand of  God ;  yet  probably  the  same,  or 
some  of  the  same,  selected  by  Moses  for 
obvious  personal  and  social  reasons  a  sliort 
time  before  (Exod.  xviii.  25). 

Ver.  18. — On  the  first  day  of  the  second 
month.  The  natural  meaning  is  that  the 
census  was  completed  in  one  day.  If  so,  the 
"census  papers,"  the  pedigrees  and  family 
liets,   must    have    been   ready  beforehand. 


Notice  had  in  fact  been  given  more  than  a 
month  before,  and  the  lists  made  up,  when 
the  poll-tax  was  paid. 

Ver.  19. — As  the  Lord  commanded  Moses, 
so  he  iiumbered  them.  The  usual  note  of 
absolute  obedience  to  the  Divine  instruc- 
tions ;  but  it  'serves  to  express  the  funda- 
mental difference  between  this  numbering 
and  David's. 

Ver.  21. — Forty  and  six  thousand  anfli 
Atc  hundred.    All  the  numbers  (sevb  of  Gad 


TME  fiOOK  Of  NtJMBfiRS. 


toa.  t.  it— 46. 


only)  are  m  unbroken  hundreds.  It  might 
have  been  so  arranged  by  miracle  ;  but  such 
an  overruling  would  have  no  assignable  ob- 
ject, and  therefore  it  is  far  better  to  fall  back 
on  the  obvious  and  natural  explanation  that 
the  totals  were  approximate.  If  they  were 
simply  the  poll  -  tax  figures  unaltered,  it 
would  be  natural  to  suppose  that  the  offer- 
ings were  made  up  in  fifty-shekel  lots,  and 
the  offerers  divided  as  nearly  as  possible  into 
hundreds.  For  military  purposes  a  certain 
number  of  supernumeraries  would  be  con- 
venient. In  the  one  excepted  case  of  Gad  a 
half-hundred  appears  for  some  unexplained 
cause. 

Ver.  24. — Gad.  He  is  here  ranked  im- 
mediately after  Reuben  and  Simeon,  because 
he  was  placed  with  them  in  the  encampment 
(gee  above,  ver.  5). 

Ver.  26. — Judah.  The  immense  and  dis- 
proportionate increase  of  Judah  is  no  doubt 
a  difficulty  in  itself ;  but  it  is  quite  in  keep- 
ing with  the  character  assigned  to  him  in 
Erophecy  and  the  part  played  by  him  in 
istory. 

Ver.  32. — Of  the  children  of  Joseph.  Both 
are  numbered  as  separate  tribes,  but  Ephraim 
already  takes  precedence,  not  as  being  larger, 
which  is  not  considered  in  this  list,  but 
according  to  prophecy  (Gen.  xlviii.  5,  14). 

Ver.  38.— Of  the  children  of  Dan.  The 
enormous  numerical  increase  in  this  tribe  is 
the  more  remarkable  because  it  is  clearly 
intimated  that  Dan  had  but  one  son,  Hushim 
or  Shuham  (Gen    xlvi.  23 ;  Numb.  xxvi. 


42).  It  may,  of  course,  be  said  that  he  had 
other  sons  not  enumerated,  but  such  an  as- 
sumption is  arbitrary  and  improbable  in  the 
face  of  the  family  genealogies  in  ch.  xxvi. 
If  he  had  any  other  sons,  they  did  not  leave 
any  families  behind  them.  But  if  the  so- 
journing of  the  Israelites  in  Egypt  was  430 
years,  according  to  the  plain  statement  ol 
Exod.  xii.  40,  even  this  increase  is  quite  within 
possible,  and  even  probable,  limits,  consider- 
mg  the  peculiar  circumstances  and  the  known 
fecundity  of  the  race.  For  if  Hushim,  who 
came  into  Egypt  with  his  grandfather,  had 
only  three  sons  born  to  him  within  the  next 
twenty-five  years,  and  if  his  descendants 
doubled  themselves  every  quarter  of  a  cen- 
tury, which  is  not  an  uncommon  rate  of  in- 
crease under  certain  circumstances,  then  his 
numbers  would  have  fully  reached  200,000  by 
the  time  of  the  exodus.  Perhaps  the  most 
puzzling  feature  about  the  increase  is  the 
great  inequality  with  which  it  was  spread 
over  the  various  tribes,  a  fact  of  which  we 
cannot  even  suggest  any  explanation. 

Ver.  46.  —  Six  hundred  thousand  and 
three  thousand  and  five  hundred  and  fifty. 
See  Exod.  xxxviii.  26.  As  the  adult  male  Le- 
vites  numbered  about  10,000,  this  represents 
an  increase  of  13,000  since  the  exodus.  Some 
thousands  had  died  through  the  Divine  dis- 
pleasure, but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  natural 
mortality  may  have  ceased.  It  was  evidently 
in  the  purpose  of  God  that  all  who  crossed 
the  Red  Sea  should  also  enter  their  promised 
land. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  17 — 46. — GodPs  army.  We  have  here,  spiritually,  the  army  of  tlie  living 
God  numbered  and  arrayed  unto  the  march  and  the  victory.     Consider,  therefore — 

That  it  would  appear,  as  far  as  we  can  gather  from  the  Increase  in  numbers, 
that  none  had  died  since  the  exodus,  save  through  disobedience  and  idolatry.  Even 
80,  none  can  perish  or  be  lost  from  the  vast  army  which  has  come  through  the  Red 
Sea  of  the  blood  of  Christ,  save  through  their  own  disobedience,  through  departing 
in  their  heart  from  the  living  (Jod,  and  making  them  other  gods.  The  armies  of  God 
do  not  and  cannot  decrease  by  death,  by  violence,  or  accident :  such  things  have  no 
dominion  over  them ;  only  sin  can  separate  from  the  society  of  the  elect,  from  the 
communion  of  saints. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  44 — 46. — The  two  numheringi  in  t/ie  wilderness.  The  Bible  abounds  in 
statistics.  The  historical  boolcs,  in  particular,  bristle  with  genealogies  and  census- 
tables.  "Numbers"  gets  its  name  from  the  circumstance  that  it  contains  the 
tabulated  results  of  two  distinct  numberings.  The  statistical  chapters  are  commonly 
passed  over  in  the  consecutive  reading  of  the  Scripture,  in  the  family,  and  in  the 
Church.  The  wine  of  the  kingdom  does  not  flow  from  them  freely ;  all  the  rather 
ought  care  to  be  taken  to  read  and  expound  them  occasionally.  AH  Scripture  is 
profitable;  and  the  statistical  oh?iptera,  hard  and  barren  as  they  look,  are  no 
exception. 


ek.  1.  l?-.4d.5  tm  BOOK  Of  KOMBEES.  T 

'''"'■'  ■ '  ■■ '■--■   — ~ ' ,■  -- -     II-  I 

I.  For  one  thing,  these  chapters  serve  admirably  to  anchor  the  ebligion  of  thb 
Bible  on  the  firm  ground  op  history.  The  Lord  Jesus  was  not  a  mythical 
character,  not  a  mere  play  of  glorious  colour  on  a  bank  of  unsubstantial  vapour.  Ha 
was  the  son  of  a  daughter  of  David's  house.  His  genealogy  is  extant ;  and  a  long 
chain  of  family  registers,  imbedded  in  the  historical  books  of  the  Old  Testament, 
afEord  the  means  of  verifying  it.  The  sacred  writers  are  never  afraid  to  descend 
from  the  region  of  moral  and  religious  disquisition  into  the  region  of  exact  numbers, 
which  can  be  sifted  and  weighed  in  the  light  of  our  modern  statistical  science.  The 
importance  of  all  this  can  hardly  be  exaggerated,  especially  for  an  age  like  the  present, 
which  so  confidently  calls  in  question  the  historical  verity  of  the  Scriptures.  To  come 
to  these  census  chapters  in  Numbers.  The  critics  laugh  at  the  idea  that  a  nation  of 
two  millions  and  more  were  led  out  of  Egypt  by  Moses  and  sojourned  in  the  wilder- 
ness for  forty  years.  Objections  formidable  enough  are  brought  forward  ;  but  the 
objectors  have  to  face  the  fact  that  the  history,  besides  giving  the  round  numbers, 
explain  how  they  were  made  up.  What  is  more ;  the  details  are  found,  on  examination 
by  men  expert  in  statistics,  to  have  such  an  air  of  reality  that  the  ablest  commentator 
(Knobel)  of  the  Critical  School,  can  think  of  no  more  feasible  explanation  than  to 
suggest  that  some  Levite  must  have  laid  his  hands  on  the  report  of  some  real  census, 
taken  in  a  later  age,  and  inserted  it  here  in  the  Pentateuch.  How  writings  so  dis- 
honestly compiled  should  have  reached  the  high  moral  elevation  of  the  Pentateuch, 
the  critic  has  omitted  to  explain.  He  is  certainly  right  in  taking  the  chapters  in 
Numbers  for  veritable  census-tables. 

II.  Nor  is  it  only  in  this  general  vibw  of  thkm  that  these  statistical 
CHAPTERS  ABB  INSTRUCTIVE.  The  facts  recorded  (like  all  the  authentic  facts  of 
God's  providential  government  of  men)  are  very  suggestive.  1.  Observe  how 
unequally  the  several  tribes  have  multiplied.  Compare  Judah  and  his  74,600  with 
Benjamin  and  his  35,400.  All  family  histories  and  national  histories  are  full  of 
similar  inequalities.  'There  are  great  nations  (France,  Spain)  In  which  the  population 
is  stationary  or  receding  ;  others,  similarly  situated,  in  which  there  is  steady  increase 
(Germany,  Eussia).  In  the  course  of  two  or  three  centuries,  facts  like  these  must 
powerfully  affect  the  history  of  the  world.  What  hopes  with  regard  to  the  future 
are  excited  by  observing  that,  as  a  rule,  it  is  the  Protestant  nations  that  are  multiply- 
ing, and  replenishing  the  earth,  and  subduing  it  I  2.  How  the  blessing  delivered  by 
Jacob  bears  fruit  after  he  has  gone  ;  inG6n.  xlix.  two  sons — Judah  and  Joseph — are 
honoured  above  the  rest,  (a)  To  Judah  is  assigned  the  primacy  of  honour  and  power 
forfeited  by  Eeuben,  the  firstborn  (vers.  8 — 12).  How  the  fulfilment  of  this  comes 
to  light  in  the  census  at  Sinai  I  His  tribe  outnumbers  all  the  others  save  one ;  his  tents 
occupy  the  place  of  honour  in  the  camp,  being  pitched  towards  the  rising  of  the  sun  ; 
his  standard  (the  lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah)  leads  the  van  in  the  march  ;  in  the 
captain  of  his  host,  Nahshon,  the  son  of  Amminadab,  we  recognise  the  ancestor  of  our 
Lord.  (6)  Josmh,  the  best-beloved  of  the  twelve,  was  to  be  a  fruitful  vine,  a  fruitful 
bough  by  a  well,  whose  branches  run  over  the  wall.  His  tvyo  sons  were  to  become 
each  a  several  tribe,  "  as  Eeuben  and  Simeon  they  shall  be  mine"  (Gen.  xlviii.  5,  6  ; 
xlix.  22 — 26).  This  also  is  exactly  accomplished ;  not  only  are  Ephraim  and  Manasseh 
reckoned  as  two  tribes,  but  each  takes  rank  with  the  other  tribes  in  respect  both  to 
honour  and  numbers.  Contemplating  these  facts  in  the  light  of  Jacob's  blessing,  we 
can  perceive  a  moral  purpose  in  them  ;  Joseph  and  Judah  were  the  two  who  excelled 
in  godliness  and  magnanimity.  The  faithful  God  keepeth  covenant  to  a  thousand 
generations  (comp.  Ps.  ciii.  17).  3.  How  a  family,  which  at  one  time  promised  well, 
may  catch  a  blight  and  fade  away.  Mark  the  story  of  Simeon  ;  at  Sinai  he  was  one  of 
the  most  populous  of  the  tribes ;  thirty-eight  years  later  he  is  much  the  smallest.  From 
nearly  60,000  he  has  slirivelled  into  about  22,000  (oomp.  1  Chron.  iy.  27).  This  down- 
ward course  went  on  after  the  conquest.  Simeon's  allotted  inheritance  was  next  to 
that  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  ;  and  ere  many  generations  passed  he  seems  to  have  been 
absorbed  by  his  more  energetic  and  prosperous  brother.  The  statistics  of  the  Bible, 
being  the  digested  statement  of  facts  in  the  Divine  government  of  families  and  nations, 
are  mines  where  those  who  choose  to  dig  find  much  silver.  "  The  works  of  the  Lord 
are  great,  sought  out  of  all  them  that  have  pleasure  therein." — B. 


THE  hoon.  Ol?  NtJMbfiM. 


tcft  1  il-bl 


EXPOSITION. 


The  IjBVites  (vera.  47 — 54).  Ver.  47. — 
Kot  numbered  among  them.  They  were 
numbered  (ch.  iii.  39),  but  not  among  the 
rest ;  their  census  was  taken  separately,  and 
on  a  different  basis. 

Ver.  48. — Had  spoken.  Rather,  "spake," 
and  so  Septuagint.  This  was  the  formal 
command  to  separate,  although  it  had  been 
anticipated  to  a  considerable  extent.  The 
Levites  bad  been  marked  out  from  the  others 
(11  as  the  tribesmen  of  Moses  and  Aaron, 
(2)  as  the  champions  of  Jehovah  in  the  mat- 
ter of  tho  golden  calf  (Exod.  xxxiL  26,  sq.) ; 
they  had  been  already  employed,  or  at  least 
designated,  for  religious  services ;  and  the 
peculiarity  of  their  future  position  in  Israel 
had  been  recognised  in  the  Divine  legislation 
(Levit.  XXV.  32,  sq. ),  and  in  their  not  being 
called  upon  to  contribute  to  the  capitation 
for  the  sanctuary.  In  a  word,  this  ordinance, 
like  so  many  others,  did  little  more  than  give 
a  formal  and  direct  sanction  to  a  state  of 
things  which  had  already  come  into  play, 
panly  through  natural  causes,  partly  through 
providential  directions. 

Ter.  61. — The  stranger.  The  word  ap- 
pears to  mean  here  any  unauthorised  person 
(see  oh.  xvi.  40).  This  is  the  first  intimation 
given  of  the  extreme  and  awful  sanctity  of 
the  tabemacle,  as  the  tent  of  the  Divine 
Presence.     It  is,  however,  quite  of  a  piece 


with  the  anxious  warnings  against  intrusion 
upon  the  holy  mount  at  the  time  of  the 
giving  of  the  law  (Exod.  xix.  21,  sq.).  The 
groat  necessity  for  Israel  was  that  he  should 
understand  and  believe  that  tJie  Lord  before 
whom  he  had  trembled  at  Sinai  was  really 
in  the  midst  of  him  in  all  his  travail  and  his 
danger.  This  could  only  be  impressed  upon 
his  dull  mind  and  hard  heart  by  surrounding 
the  presence  chamber  of  Jehovah  with  awful 
sanctities  and  terrors.  At  a  subfequent 
period,  when  the  religiotis  reverence  here 
thrown  around  the  tabernacle  had  been 
transferred  to,  or  rather  concentrated  upon, 
the  ark  alone,  Uzzah  was  actually  smitten 
for  breaking  this  law  (1  Chron.  xiii.  10). 
The  tumult  raised  against  St.  Paul  (Acts 
xxi.  27,  sq.)  was  justified  by  a  supposed 
violation  of  the  same. 

Ver.  53.— That  there  be  no  wrath  upon 
the  congregation — that  no  man,  not  being 
a  Levite,  intrude  himself  through  ignorance 
or  presumption  upon  the  sacredness  of  the 
tabernacle,  and  so  bring  death  upon  himself, 
and  displeasure  upon  the  people.  The  le- 
vites shall  keep  the  charge  of  the  taber- 
nacle. Out  of  this  command  grew  the  Levit- 
ical  guard  of  the  tenijile,  which  afterwards 
played  a  considerable  part  in  the  hiatoiy  of 
Israel  (2  Kings  zL). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  47 — 6i.— The  servants  of  God.  We  have  here,  spiritually,  the  multitude  of 
those  who  are  specially  devoted  to  the  service  and  ministry  of  God,  whoever  they 
may  be,  and  whatever  their  labour  for  the  body  of  Christ:  that  these  have  their  own 
duties  and  charges,  and  therewith  their  own  immunities  and  liberties.  Or  we  may 
take  it  rather  of  all  the  people  of  God,  so  far  as  they  rise  to  the  higher  religious 
life,  dying  unto  the  world,  and  living  unto  Christ.    Consider,  therefore — 

I.  That  the  Levites  were  not  numbered  with  the  rest,  for  the  ordinary 
PUBPOSES  OF  the  LIFE  IN  THE  WILDERNESS.  Those  that  are  devoted  to  the  service 
of  God,  or  addicted  to  the  ministry  of  tlie  saints,  are  to  be  mixed  up  as  little  as 
possible  in  the  entanglements  of  business,  of  politics,  of  society,  and  of  all  the  transi- 
tory things  which  make  up  the  life  of  the  world. 

II.  That  they  were  not  numbered  among  the  other  tribes,  not  in  order  that  they 
might  be  idle,  or  have  less  to  do,  but  that  they  might  the  better  do  their  own 
WORK  which  the  Lord  assigned  them.  Even  so,  no  one  is  marked  off,  or  set  apart, 
that  he  may  live  on  others,  or  look  down  on  others,  or  enjoy  more  ease  or  more  con- 
sideration than  others  ;  but  only  that  he  may  be  the  more  free  to  do  the  »vork  whicn 
the  Lord  hath  appointed  him. 

IIL  That  the  sum  of  their  labodk  and  charge  was  to  attend  upon  the 
tabebnaole — to  be  in  waiting  upon  the  Divine  presence  in  the  midst  of  Israel.  So 
they  who  would  give  themselves  to  the  work  of  Christ  must  set  this  before  them 
as  the  great  object  of  it  all:  that  he  be  glorified,  and  his  spiritual  presence  be 
cherished  in  the  midst  of  his  people.  As  in  one  sense,  the  true  way  to  serve  God  is 
to  serve  his  people,  so  in  another  the  true  way  to  serve  the  people  is  to  help  them  to 
eerro  God.    Nor  is  their  work  of  Uast  real  value,  who,  having  none  opportunity  oi 


ea.  1. 4?-aj  fm  600^  Ot*  MttMBteHS.  9 

benefiting  their  fellows  direotly,  do  yet  assist  by  their  practice  and  example  to  keep 
alive  reverence  and  devotion  amidst  a  careless  world. 

IV.  That  the  kncampinq  or  the  Levitbs  was  to  be  close  bound  about  thb 
TABERNACLE.  So  those  that  are  especially  called  to  the  service  of  God  must  have 
their  dwelling  very  near  him:  they  can  only  do  more  for  him,  on  condition  of  living 
nearer  to  him.  It  is  their  one  real  privilege — if  they  know  it — that,  having  their 
duties  about  holy  things,  and  being  free  from  many  distractions  common  to  others, 
they  have  opportunity  of  keeping  closer  to  the  holy  one. 

,V.  That  no  "  stbangeb,  "  might  come  nigh  unto  the  tabebnacle  on  pain  of 
DEATH.  So  can  no  profane  person  intrude  upon  Divine  things  except  at  deadly 
spiritual  peril.  That  neai-ness  to  God  which  is  life  to  the  humble  and  meek  is 
death  to  the  presumptuous  soul ;  that  familiarity  with  holy  things  which  is  a  source 
of  growth  in  grace  to  the  holy  is  hardening  and  destruction  to  the  unholy.  No 
"stranger"  to  the  atoning  love  can  venture  upon  the  presence  of  the  All-holy  and 
live:  every  one  that  knows  not  God,  and  has  not  his  love  abiding  in  him,  is  a 
"  stranger  "  in  this  sense. 

VI.  That  vbby  much   of  the  Levitbs'  woek  was  laborious,  tieesome,  or 

TRIVIAL,    YET    IT   WAS   ALL   UNDEE    THB    SAME    AWFUL    SANCTIONS,    and    invested   with 

the  same  holy  character.  So,  if  any  will  be  really  devoted  to  the  work  of  Christ,  he 
must  do  that  which  falls  to  his  lot,  however  humble  outwardly,  or  tippiirently 
unspiritual ;  for  the  work  is  all  one,  and  all  of  one,  if  only  it  be  done /or  that  one. 

HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  47 — 64. — The  appointment  of  the  Levites  to  he  the  sacred  tribe.  This  is  the 
first  of  a  series  of  passages  in  which  the  law  regarding  the  Levites  is  delivered.  These 
all  occur  in  Numbers,  excepting  a  very  few  which  are  found  in  Deuteronomy ;  and 
they  must  be  read  together  if  you  would  get  a  connected  and  complete  view  of  the 
statutes  relating  to  the  sacred  tribe.  Head  together,  the  several  texts  will  be  found  to 
dovetail  one  into  another.  The  first  is  quite  general,  raer,ely  intimating  that  the  Levites 
were  to  be  numbered  and  marshalled  as  a  host  by  themselves,  being  wholly  dedicated 
to  the  service  of  the  sanctuary.  The  second,  entitled  "The  generations"  of  the 
Levites,  their  Family  Book,  gives  particulars  regarding  their  divisions  and  several 
ofBces  (chs.  iii.,  iv.).  The  third  describes  how  they  were  set  apart  to  office  by  a 
solemn  purification  (ch.  viii.  5).  Subsequent  passages  contain  (fourthly)  the  tragic 
Story  of  Korah  and  his  company  (ch.  xvi.),  and  (fifthly)  the  provision  made  for 
the  Levites'  honourable  maintenance  (chs.  xviii.,  xxxv.).  One  who  reads  this  series 
of  passages  with  care  will  make  a  discovery  of  some  value  regarding  the  structure 
of  these  books  of  the  Pentateuch.  Because  the  several  laws  relating  to  one  subject 
are  not  set  down  in  one  place,  as  they  would  be  in  our  books,  and  are  not  arranged 
according  to  our  ideas  of  order,  it  is  confidently  affirmed  that  they  are  set  downwitli- 
out  any  order,  and  indeed  that  the  Mosaic  law  is.  a  somewhat  random  collection  of 
documents  diverse  in  date  and  character.  This  is  certainly  an  error.  The  beautiful 
order  discoverable  in  the  ordinances  regarding  the  Levites  will  be  found  to  prevail 
in  the  ordinances — scattered  as  they  may  seem— on  many  other  subjects. 

I.  This,  being  the  earliest  notice  of  the  Levites  as  a  separate  and  sacred  tribe, 
invites  us  to  review  the  story  of  theie  calling.  The  first  step  was  taken  when 
the  Lord,  ordaining  in  Israel  a  hereditary  priesthood,  nominated  "  Aaron  the  Levite  " 
and  his  sons.  Still,  though  Aaron  the  Levite  was  called,  nothing  was  said  regarding 
the  rest  of  the  tribe.  But  it  was  plain  that  one  man  and  his  two  sons  (the  whole 
number  of  the  Aaronites  after  the  death  of  Nadab  and  Abihu)  could  not  execute  the 

Eriests'  office  for  a  great  nation. .  Helpers  they  must  have.  •  .Who  more  fit  than  their 
rethren  of  their  own  tribe?  They  were  much  the  smallest  of  the  tribes,  so  that 
their  maintenance  would  not  be  too  burdensome  ;  and  they  had  already  distinguished 
themselves  by  their  zeal  for  the  Lord  to  such  a  degree  as  amounted  to  a  virtual  con- 
secration to  his  service  (see  Exod.  xxxii.  29).  Accordingly,  when  the  order  was 
given  to  number  and  marshall  the  congregation,  an  exception  was  made  in  relation 
to  the  Levites.  They  were  numbered  by  themselves,  as  a  separatrrl  nvA  sacred 
tribe.     Becall  the  fact  just  noticed,  that  the  Levites  were  fitted  for  their  olBce  befor* 


10  THE  BOOK  OE*  NUMfiEBS.  [o^.  >  *7-^4. 

they  were  called  to  it.  Their  fitness  was  made  manifest  before  a  word  was  spoken 
regarding  the  horiourable  office  in  which  it  was  to  be  exercised.  The  whole  history  of 
the  Church  is  full  of  similar  facts.  When  some  great  exigency  arises  calling  for  the 
services  of  men  possessing  special  qualities  of  character  or  attainment,  it  is  generally 
found  that  the  Head  of  the  Church  has  anticipated  the  occasion  by  raising  up  the 
men  required.    See  for  an  illustrious  example,  Gal.  i.  15,  16. 

II.  The  work  appointed  to  the  Levites.  It  was  "  to  keep  the  charge  of  the 
tabernacle  "  (ver.  53).  They  carried  it ;  guarded  it ;  did  all  the  work  of  it  except 
offering  sacrifice,  burning  incense,  and  blessing  the  people.  In  a  word,  they,  under 
the  hand  and  oversight  of  the  priests,  attended  to  the  "  outward  business  of  the 
house  of  God  "  (Neh.  xi.  16).  One  cannot  read  this  account  of  the  Levites'  work 
without  being  touched  with  a  sense  of  the  superiority  of  the  Christian  Church  and 
its  services  over  the  tabernacle  and  the  Levitical  ministrations.  To  thoughtful  and 
spiiitually-minded  men  the  Levitical  ministrations  must  have  been  an  intolerable 
burden.  Barnabas  the  Levite  would,  without  doubt,  say  Amen  when  he  heard  Peter's 
description  of  them  as  "  a  yoke  which  neither  we  nor  our  fathers  were  able  to  bear  " 
(Acts  XV.  10).  It  is  right  to  remember  that,  as  time  passed,  the  yoke  was  much 
mitigated.  If  the  Pentateuch  gives  no  express  commandment  to  the  Levites  except 
about  the  external  business  of  the  tabernacle,  that  simply  confirms  the  antiquity  of 
the  Pentateuch.  By  King  David  they  were  invited  to  higher  service  as  singers  and 
•ven  as  psalmists.  Jehoshaphat  employed  them  largely  as  public  teachers  of  the  law 
throughout  the  cities  of  Judah  (2  Chron.  xvii.  8, 9).  Moreover,  the  Levitical  services 
as  prescribed  by  Moses,  although  burdensome  and  unprofitable  when  compared  with 
those  of  the  New  Testament  Church,  had  a  great  purpose  to  serve  both  in  prefigur- 
ing the  truth  to  be  afterwards  revealed,  and  as  an  educational  institute  by  which 
the  people  of  God  were  prepared  for  the  better  time.  It  is  a  good  thing  to  have  a 
charge  to  keep  in  connection  with  Clirist's  Church,  in  any  capacity,  however  humble. 
Better  be  a  Levite  to  keep  the  door  of  the  house  of  God  than  live  without  God  in  a 
palace. — B. 

Vers.  45 — 50. — "  Differences  of  administrations  "  in  the  service  of  God.  The 
different  departments  of  service  appointed  to  the  host  of  Israel  and  to  the  Levites 
remind  us  of  similar  diversities  in  national  and   Church  life  at  present.     I.  The 

SERVICE   OP   'JHB   SWOED.      II.    ThE   SUPERIOR   SERVICE   OP   THE   SANCTUAET. 

I.  1.  The  apparent  strergth  of  the  Israelites  was  according  to  the  number  of  its 
soldiers.  So  with  a  nation  and  its  bread-winners,  or  with  a  Church  and  its  active 
workers.  The  "mixed  multitude"  (representing  hangers-on,  idlers,  grumblers; 
ch.  xi.  4),  not  reckoned  or  "  mustered  " :  only  true  Israelites  can  be  relied  on.  2. 
Their  aggregation  by  tribes  illustrates  the  value  of  natural  affinities  in  Christian  work 
(vers.  18,  20,  22,  &c.).  This  truth  may  be  applied — (1)  To  Christian  nationalities, 
whether  of  a  European  or  Asiatic  type :  e.  g.  Chinese  Churches  should  not  be  cast  in 
English  moulds.  (2)  To  Christian  denominations,  which  may  work  best  as  separate, 
yet  allied  denominations,  each  having  its  own  methods  and  rallying  round  the 
standard  of  some  special  truth.  We  are  reminded  also  of — 3.  The  value  of  noble 
Church  traditions.  "  The  house  of  their  fathers  "  had  a  special  honour  in  the  eyes  of 
every  patriotic  Israelite.  So  with  British  Christians :  e.  g.  attachment  of  Episcopalians 
to  the  Church  of  the  Protestant  martyrs,  and  of  other  Christians  to  the  Churches 
of  Puritan,  Covenanting,  Nonconforming,  or  Methodist  ancestors  (Ps.  xxii.  4,  5  ; 
xxxiv.  4). 

II.  The  Levites  were  not  mustered  as  soldiers,  but  were  active  in  another  depart- 
ment of  service.  The  ark  and  its  ministries  were  symbols  of  the  source  of  the 
nation's  strength.  Their  valuable  services  are  described  as  a ''warfare"  (ch.  iv.  23, 
marg.).  Just  as  in  a  nation,  it  is  not  the  hand-workers  only  that  are  a  source  of  strength 
and  wealth,  but  thinkers,  writers,  lecturers,  preachers  also,  so  in  a  Church  the  least 
prominent  may  not  be  the  least  useful  (Cf.  1  Cor.  xii.  12 — 28).  The  Levites  pitched 
nearest  the  tabernacle  (vers.  52,  53),  "that  there  be  no  wrath,"  &c.  Simeons  and 
Annas  in  the  temple,  invalids  "  dwelling  in  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High,"  may 
not  be  "  numbered  "  among  the  workers  of  the  Church,  but  may  have  power  with  Go3 
and  prevail  m  intercessors  for  their  brethren.  — P. 


e».  1.  4?~54.]  m&  fiOOK  Of  NtMBERS.  11 

Vor.  52. — Om/-  position  in  tlie  Church.  "And  the  children  of  Israel  shall  pitch  their 
tents,  every  man  by  his  own  camp,  and  every  man  by  his  own  standard,  throughout 
their  hosts." 

I.  Unity  without  uniformity.  Beading  the  history  of  the  Israelites,  we  are  made 
to  feel  they  were  assuredly  one  nation,  and  yet  just  as  assuredly  twelve  tribes. 
Everything  was  done  to  keep  each  tribe  separate  and  yet  all  the  tribes  together.  So, 
ever  and  anon,  some  new  regulation  came  out  to  manifest  afresh  the  unity,  yet 
diversity,  of  Israel.  Every  man  traced  his  genealogy  back  to  a  son  of  Jacob,  and  this 
itself  showed  him  to  be  of  the  seed  of  Abraham.  Jacob  had  a  blessing  for  each  of 
his  children  separately,  a  blessing  meant  to  rest  upon  each  tribe  down  through  all  its 
increase  and  vicissitudes.  So  here  each  tribe  was  numbered  as  well  as  the  sum  of 
the  congregation.  Each  tribe  had  its  place  in  resting  and  in  marching;  whether 
honourable  or  not  was  scarcely  the  question,  seeing  it  was  by  express  appointment 
of  Jehovah.  And  as  if  to  emphasise  this  separation,  it  was  provided  for  in  Canaan 
as  well  as  in  the  wilderness. 

II.  The  typical  significance  of  this  with  respect  to  the  Church.  There  are 
diversities  in  the  Church.  There  is  one  Saviour  and  one  gospel ;  but  there  were 
twelve  apostles,  each  directly  chosen  of ^  the  Saviour.  Consider  the  epistles :  the 
individuality  of  the  writers  is  as  clear  as  their  inspiration.  So  there  is  one  Church, 
but  many  sects ;  and  one  might  almost  say  God  has  ordered  there  should  be  many 
sects.  There  is  probably  no  sect  in  evangelical  Christendom  but  what,  if  it  were 
possible  to  interrogate  its  founders,  they  would  say,  "  We  could  do  no  other."  God 
has  honoured  all  the  sects  in  turn.  Princes'in  Israel  and  captains  in  the  war  against 
sin  have  sprung  from  all  of  them.  We  see  in  part  and  we  prophesy  in  part ;  and  we 
do  not  all  see  the  same  parts,  and  thus  our  prophecies  difEer.  Must  be  faithful,  each 
of  us,  to  what  we  see  of  truth,  keeping  clear  of  all  that  is  censorious  with  respect  to 
those  who,  though  they  difEer,  are  still  our  brethren.  Diversity  must  belong  to  the 
imperfections  of  mankind.  Imperfections  in  the  regenerate  even  more  manifest  than 
in  the  unregenerate.  In  all  the  diversity  there  is  unity.  Tribe  does  not  infringe  on 
tribe  ;  each  man  has  his  own  camp,  his  own  standard.  But  with  all  these  separating 
regulations,  there  was  a  central  power  to  unite.  The  tribes  lay  eastward,  southward, 
westward,  northward ;  but  eastward,  &c.  of  what?  The  tabernacle.  Immediately  around 
it  were  Aaron  and  the  Levites  in  special  charge,  but  the  whole  of  Israel  was  also  around 
it.  So  in  all  our  diversities  we  are  related  to  Christ.  We  cannot  separate  from  one 
another  as  long  as  each  is  true  to  him.  In  all  our  divisions,  even  in  our  sometimes 
acrimonious  disputings,  it  remains  true — one  Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptis/n.  A  family 
none  the  less  a  family  though  there  be  many  differences  among  its  members.  The 
spirit  of  Christ  is  one  that  first  of  all  produces  life,  and  then  leads  us  into  all  the 
truth.  As  all  the  tribes  compose  one  nation,  so  all  the  sects  one  Church.  We  have 
all  one  God  and  Father,  and  the  features  of  our  celestial  parentage  will  be  revealed 
in  each,  however  much  there  may  be  for  a  time  to  obscure.  This  diversity  as  well 
as  unity  may  extend  to  the  heavenly  state.  It  may  belong  to  heaven  as  well  as  earth. 
Diversity  may  belong  to  the  perfection  of  the  believer  as  well  as  his  imperfection. 
The  highest  perfection  may  be  that  of  harmony.  This  diversity  is  significantly 
hinted  at  in  Eev.  vii.,  where  twelve  thousand  are  sealed  from  each  tribe.  The  twelve 
foundations  in  the  New  Jerusalem  had  each  of  them  its  own  order  of  precious  stones. 
Cherish  both  variety  and  unity  as  essential  elements  in  the  kingdom  of  God. — ^Y. 

Ver.  54. — BemarTcahle  oledience.  "  And  the  children  of  Israel  did  according  to  all 
that  the  Lord  commanded  Moses,  so  did  they."  We  have  here  a  remarkable  obedience— 
very  remarkable,  as  being  found  in  a  book  marked  with  records  of  murmuring, 
disobedience,  and  rebellion.     Whence  the  possibility  of  such  a  statement  here  ? 

I.  The  obedience  was  in  an  outward  thing.  If  inward  disposition  had  been 
demanded  as  well  as  outward  action,  we  should  hardly  have  heard  such  complete 
obedience  spoken  of.  It  is  easier  to  make  a  pilgrimage  to  Eome  or  Jerusalem  than 
to  live  for  one  hour  in  complete  surrender  to  God. 

II.  The  obedience  was  made  as  easy  as  possible.  Jehovah  told  them  not  only 
the  thing  to  be  done,  but  the  way  in  which  to  do  it  Besides,  something  of  the  sama 
kind  had  been  done  a  little  while  before. 


li 


1?ttfi  fiOOR  OP  NtJMBfiRS. 


tea.  It.  1—54. 


III.  Thebe  wbee  certain  ends  to  be  attained  which  made  the  wobk  attractivb. 
A  certain  carnal  satisfaction  in  counting  up  the  full  warlike  strength  of  the  nation ; 
also  a  sense  of  rivalry  between  tribe  and  tribe  to  see  which  was  most  numerous. 
Some  commands  of  God,  so  far  as  the  letter  is  concerned,  may  jump  with  our  own 
inclination.  It  is  further  to  be  noticed  that  this  remarkable  obedience  did  not  prevent 
an  early  and  extensive  disobedience  in  other  ways.  A  command  to  number  the  people 
was  not  a  sufficient  test  of  obedience.  Eecollect  one  who  said  to  Christ  with  respect 
to  the  commandments,  "All  these  have  I  kept  from  my  youth."  He  little  knew  a 
searching  test  was  close  at  hand.  It  is  possible  to  render  outward  service,  and  that 
in  many  ways,  and  for  a  long  time,  with  an  unchanged  heart.  The  spirit  that 
underlies  every  ordinance  of  God  may  be  repugnant  to  our  natural  disposition  (Matt, 
vii.  21 — 23).  The  practical  warning  is,  that  we  should  labour  to  make  the  outward 
things  the  fruit  and  manifestation  of  the  inward.  "These  things  ought  ye  to  have 
done," — the  numbering,  &c.| — "and  not  left  the  other  undone" — the  loving  of  tlie 
Lord  with  all  the  heart  and  soul  and  might. — Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  II. 


The  encamping  of  the  tribes  (ch.  ii.). 
Ver.  1. — The  lord  spake  unto  MoBes  and 
unto  Aaron.  Probably  when  they  had 
finished  the  census,  and  brought  the  results 
into  the  tabernacle. 

Ver.  2. — Shall  pitch  by  his  own  standard. 
We  are  not  told  how  they  had  pitched  hither- 
to ;  the  tribal  and  family  order  now  enforced 
was  the  natural  order,  but  in  the  absence  of 
precise  directions  would  sometimes  be  de- 
parted from.  With  the  ensign.  Rather, 
"  ensigns  "  (otJioth  in  the  plural).  Each  tribe, 
it  would  seem  (see  ver.  31),  had  its  standard 
(degel),  and  each  family  in  the  tribe  its 
ensign  {oth).  Far  off.  Rather,  "  over 
against,"  i.  e.  facing  the  tabernacle,  with  a 
certain  space  (perhaps  2000  cubits.  Josh.  iii. 
4)  between. 

Ver.  3. — On  the  east.  The  van,  the  post 
of  honour.  The  general  direction  indeed  of 
their  march  was  northwards,  not  eastwards  ; 
but  nothing  can  obliterate  the  natural  pre- 
eminence given  to  the  east  by  the  sunrise, 
the  scattering  of  light  upon  the  earth,  the 
daily  symbol  of  the  day-spring  from  on  higli. 
The  standard  of  the  camp  of  Judah.  Judah 
led  the  way  not  because  he  was  the  greatest 
in  number,  for  the  order  of  the  tribes  was 
not  determined  by  this  consideration,  but 
because  of  his  place  in  prophecy,  and  as  the 
ancestor  of  the  Mes.siah  (Gen.  xlix.  10). 
According  to  Aben  Ezra  and  other  Jewish 
expositors,  the  device  upon  the  standard  of 
Judah  was  a  young  lion,  and  this  agrees 
with  Rev.  v.  5.  The  same  authorities  assign 
to  Reuben  a  man,  to  Ephraim  an  ox  (cf. 
Deut.  xxxiii.  17),  to  Dan  an  eagle.  If  it 
were  so,  we  sliould  find  in  these  banners  the 
origin  of  the  forms  of  the  living  creatures 
in  the  visions  of  Ezekiel  and  St.  John  (Ezek. 
i.  26  ;  X.  1  ;  Rev.  iv.  4—6),  unless,  indeed, 
the  devices  on  the  standards  were  them- 
iclres  taken  from  the  symbolic  forms  of  the 


cherubim  in  the  tabernacle,  and  these  in 
their  turn  borrowed  from  the  religions"  art  of 
Egypt.  But  the  tradition  of  the  Jews  is  too 
fluctuating  to  carry  any  weight.  The  Targum 
of  Palestine  assigns  to  Judah  the  lion,  but  to ' 
Reuben  a  stag,  to  Ephraim  a  young  man,  and 
to  Dan  a  basilisk  serpent. 

Ver.  5. — Kext  unto  him.  Whether  the 
leading  tribe  occupied  the  centre  or  one  ex- 
treme of  its  own  side  of  the  encampment  is 
a  matter  of  mere  speculation. 

Ver.  9.— These  shall  first  set  forth.  No 
order  to  set  forth  had  been  given,  but  the 
necessity  of  doing  so  was  understood,  and 
is  here  anticipated,  as  in  ch.  i.  51. 

Ver.  14. — Beuel.  Probably  an  error  of 
transcription  for  Deuel,  which  actually  ap- 
pears here  in  many  MSS.  The  Septuagint, 
however,  has  Raguel  (see  ch.  i.  14 ;  vii. 
42,  &c.).  The  error  is  utterly  unimportant, 
except  as  proving  the  possibility  of  errors  in 
the  sacred  text. 

Ver.  17.— Then  the  tabernacle  .  .  shall 
set  forward.  Thus  it  was  provided  that, 
whether  at  rest  or  on  the  march,  the  Divine 
habitation  should  be  exactly  in  the  midst  of 
Israel. 

Ver.  24.— All  that  were  numbered  of  the 
eamp  of  Ephraim.  All  the  descendants  of 
Rachel,  forming  at  this  time  the  smallest  of 
the  four  divisions,  although  destined  to  be- 
come very  numerous.  Their  association  in 
the  camp  was  continued  in  the  promised 
land,  for  the  greater  part  of  their  territory 
was  coterminous.  Subsec^uently,  however, 
the  great  division  of  the  kmgdom  Separated 
Benjamin  for  ever  from  his  brethren.  In 
the  third  rank.  Immediately  behind  the 
tabernacle.  This  position  is  clearly  alluded 
to  in  Ps.  Ixxx.  1,  2. 

Ver.  25.— The  standard  of  .  .  Dan.  In 
the  light  of  its  subsequent  history,  it  is  re- 
markable that  this  tribe  should  at  this  time 
have  been  so  prominent  and  so  honoured. 
Dan  ia,  so  to  speak,  the  Judas  among  th« 


OH.  n.  1—34.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


19 


twelve.  In  history  he  eods  by  melting  away 
into  the  heathen  among  whom  he  intruded 
himself.  In  the  sacred  writings  he  ends  by 
being  omitted  altogether ;  he  has  no  part  in 
the  new  Jerusalem — perhaps  on  account  of 
the  idolatry  connected  with  his  name  (see 
Judges  xviii. ;  Rev.  vii.). 

Ver.  34. — So  they  pitched.  The  Targum 
of  Palestine  (which  embodies  the  traditional 
learning  of  the  Palestinian  Jews  of  the 
17th  century)  says  that  the  camp  covered  a 
space  of  twelve  square  miles.  Modem 
writers,  starting  from  some  measurements 
of  the  Roman  camps  given  by  Polybius, 
compute  the  necessary  space  at  three  or 
three  and  a  half  miles  square.  This  would 
require  the  strictest  discipline  and  economy 
of  space,  and  makes  no  provision  for  cattle ; 
but  supposing  that  the  women  and  children 
were  closely  packed,  it  might  suffice.  It  is, 
however,  evident  that  there  would  be  very 
few  places  in  the  wilderness,  if  any,  where 
more  than  three  square  miles  of  fairly  level 
ground   could  be  found.     In  the  plains  of 


Moab  the  desired  room  might  perhaps  have 
been  found,  but  scarcely  anywhere  in  the 
wilderness  of  Paran.  We  must  conclude, 
therefore,  that  this  order  of  encampment  was 
an  ideal  order,  beautiful  indeed  by  reason  of 
its  faultless  regularity  and  equality,  but  only 
to  be  attained  in  practice  as  circumstances 
should  permit,  more  or  less.  Indeed,  that 
the  foursquare  symmetry  of  the  camp  had 
an  ideal  meaning  and  significance  more 
really,  because  more  permanently,  important 
than  its  actual  realisation  at  the  time,  is 
evident  from  its  recurrence  again  and  again 
in  the  Apocalyptic  writings  (see  Ezek.  xlviii. 
20,  and  especially  Rev.  xxi.  16).  It  is  im- 
possible to  help  seeing  that  the  description 
of  the  heavenly  Zion  is  that  of  a  city,  but  of 
a  city  modelled  upon  the  pattern  of  the 
camp  in  the  wilderness.  Here  is  one  of 
those  cases  in  which  the  spiritual  significance 
of  an  order  is  of  such  importance  that  it 
matters  comparatively  little  whether  it  could 
be  literally  carried  out  or  not. 


H0MILETIC8. 

Ch.  ii. — The  camp  of  the  Saints.  We  have  nere,  spiritually,  the  Church  of  God  in 
its  order  and  its  beauty  and  its  balanced  proportion  of  parts  ;  resting  inwardly  upon, 
Bnd  ranged  outwardly  around,  the  abiding  presence  of  the  Almighty,  and  thus  pre- 
pared either  to  abide  in  harmony  and  safety,  or  to  set  forward  without  confusion  and 
without  fear.     Consider,  therefore,  on  a  broad  view  of  this  chapter — 

I.  That  the  one  and  only  cenj're  of  the  whole  camp,  of  all  its  symmetry  and 
all  its  order,  was  the  tabernacle  of  God.  About  this  were  arranged  in  the  inner 
lines  of  encampment  the  priests  and  Levites,  in  the  outer  lines  tne  rest  of  Israel ;  the 
tent  of  the  Presence  was,  as  it  were,  the  jewel  of  priceless  worth,  of  which  the  camps 
of  Levi  formed  the  inner  case,  the  other  camps  the  outer  casket.  Even  so  the  whole 
Church  of  God,  in  its  broadest  extent,  is  centred  upon  and  drawn  up  about  the 
spiritual  presence  of  God  in  Christ,  according  to  that  which  is  written :  "  I  will  dwell 
in  them,  and  walk'in  them."  Whether  for  rest  or  for  progress,  for  safety  or  success, 
all  depends  exclusively  upon,  aU  can  be  measured  only  with  reference  to,  that  Presence 
in  the  midst  of  her.  She  is  herself,  in  the  truest  sense,  the  living  shrine,  the  spiritual 
casket,  which  encloses  and  enfolds  this  Divine  jewel.  About  this  Presence — "  over 
against "  it,  full  in  view  of  it,  looking  straight  towards  it,  albeit  separated-  yet  by  an 
uncrossed  interval — all  the  tribes  of  God  are  dniwii  up,  all  of  them  near,  all  equally 
near,  save  that  those  are  nearest  who  are  specially  devoted  to  the  waiting  upon  that 
Presence. 

II.  That  as  the  glory  and  beauty  of  the  encampment  depended  as  to  its  internal 
symmetry  upon  the  presence  of  God  in  the  midst  of  it,  so  it  depended  as  to  its 

OUTWABD   PERFECTION    UPON   THE   ORDERLY   ARRANGEMENT  AND    HARMONY  OF  ITS  PARTS. 

Every  tribe  and  every  family  had  its  place,  knew  its  place,  kept  its  place,  mutually 
supporting  and  supported  by  all  the  others.  Even  so  God  is  not  the  author  of  con- 
fusion, but  of  peace,  in  all  the  Churches  of  the  saints.  Conflicting  aims,  rivjlries, 
counter-workings,  cannot  be  in  the  Divine  ideal.  Towards  them  that  are  without,  in 
the  face  of  the  difficulties  and  hostilities  of  the  Church's  earthly  pilgrimage,  an 
absolute  discipline,  a  perfect  oneness  of  purpose,  a  unive;  sal  walking  by  the  same 
rule  and  minding  the  same  thing,  is  an  essential  part  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus 
(John  xvii.  21,  22 ;  1  Cor.  i.  10;  Phil.  ii.  2;  iii.  16). 

III.  That  this  perfect  order  and  discipline  was  not  attained  by  ignoring  or  efEacing 
the  natural  divisions  and  distinctions  of  the  people,  and  by  making  of  each  individual 


U  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oh.  ii.  1—84. 

an  isolated  unit  before  God  ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  by  eecognising  and  utilising 
HUMAN  DIVISIONS.  "  Every  man  shall  pitch  by  his  own  standard,  with  the  ensign  of 
their  father's  house."  Even  so  within  the  common  life  of  the  Church  of  Christ  there 
is  room  and  use  for  many  strong  and  lasting  divergencies  of  Christian  character  and 
cast  of  thought  due  to  national  or  social  or  educational  distinctions.  Variety  embraced 
in  unity  is  the  law  of  the  Spirit.  There  is  a  true  sense  in  which  all  Christian  truth 
and  virtue  are  the  proper  heritage  of  each  Christian  soul,  which  each  ought  to 
possess  ;  but  there  is  also  a  true  sense  in  which  the  Christian  virtues,  and  even  the 
complemental  truths  of  the  Christian  faith,  are  rather  distributed  among  the  various 
portions  of  the  Church  than  equally  spread  over  all,  or  perfectly  combined  in  any  one. 
If  we  would  have  a  true  conception  of  the  full  beauty  and  power  of  Christianity,  we 
must  embrace  in  one  view  all  the  ages  of  faith,  we  must  have  respect  unto  east  and 
west  and  north  and  south  alike.  If  our  own  sympathies  are  chiefly  with  one  or  other, 
there  will  be  the  more  reason  to  give  heed  that  we  do  not  overlook  the  excellence 
most  remote  from  our  own.  Dan  and  Simeon,  whatever  might  be  said  or  feared  of 
them,  had  their  place  in  the  camp  of  God  as  well  as  Judah  and  Ephraim. 

Consider,  again,  on  a  closer  inspection  of  the  camp — 1.  That  it  lay  foursquare  in 
twelve  great  divisions,  with  the  tabernacle  in  the'  centre.     And  this  arrangement  is 
clearly  of  spiritual  import,  because  it  is  carefully  preserved  in  the  prophetic  visions 
of  Ezekiel  and  St.  John.    The  heavenly  city,  which  is  the  camp  of  the  saints,  lieth 
foursquare,  and  the  length  is  as  large  as  the  breadth  (Bev.  xx.  9  ;  xxi.  16).     And  this 
seems  to  denote  the  absolute  and  unbroken  equality,  and  the  equal  development  in 
every  direction,  of  the  heavenly  state,  wherein  it  contrasts  so  strongly  with  the  strange 
inequality  and  the  one-sided  character  of  all  earthly  good.     The  Church  should  lie 
foursquare  because  she  should  show  an  equal  front,  and  have  attained  a  like  extension 
in  every  direction,  in  whatsoever  way  regarded.    And  notice  here  that  the  superior  per- 
fection of  the  gospel  is  shown  herein,  that  the  holy  city  not  only  lieth  as  a  perfect 
square,  but  standeth  as  a  perfect  cube, — " '  the  length  and  the  breadth  and  the  height  of  it 
are  equal "  (Rev.  xxi.  16), — an  impossibility  bordering  on  the  grotesque,  in  order  to  em- 
phasise the  entire  absence  of  anything  one-sided,  unequal,  or  imperfect.  Again,  the  holy 
city,  like  the  camp  of  Israel,  is  laid  out  with  careful  respect  unto  the  number  twelve, 
because  this  is  the  full  and  perfect  number  of  the  tribes,  and  intimates  that  the  Church 
is  of  all,  and  for  all,  who  can  in  any  wise  be  reckoned  as  the  people  of  God.     2.  That 
the  foursquare  arrangement  of  the  camp  was  ideal,  and  could  only  be  approximately 
realised  in  the  wilderness  through  the  evil  necessity  of  things :  the  camps  could  not 
be  pitched  across  rugged  mountains  or  precipitous  ravines,  such  as  constantly  lay  in 
their  way.    Even  so  the  ideal  picture  of  the  Church  drawn  in  the  New  Testament 
has  never  been  adequately  realised,  nor  perhaps  can  be,  amidst  the  confusions  and 
contradictions  of  time.     Her  harmony  and  symmetry  are  grievously  marred  for  want 
of  room,  and  through  the  impracticable  nature  of  men  and  circumstances.     Never- 
theless, the  Divine  ideal  lives  before  her  eyes  and  within  her  heart,  and  it  is  the 
unchanging  hope  of  every  faithful  soul  to  behold  it  realised,  sooner  or  later,  in  the 
good  providence  of  God.    In  the  mean  time,  when  outward  regularity  was  impossible, 
the  one  thing  for  each  tribe  to  do  was  to  pitch  as  near  to  the  tabernacle,  on  its  own 
side,  as  possible.    Even  so  the  practical  wisdom  and  duty  of  every  Church  is  to  abide 
as  near  to  God  as  it  can  according  to  tlie  truth  and  order  it  has  received  ;  the  nearer 
to  God,  the  closer  to  one  another.     3.  That,  among  the  tribes,  Judah  held  the  van, 
and  his  standard  led  the  way,  on  which  was  borne  aloft  "  the  lion  of  the  tribe  of 
Judah."     Even  so  Christ — concerning  whom  "  it  is  evident  that  our  Lord  sprang  out 
of  Juda  "  (Heb.  vii.  14)— must  always  go  before  us  in  the  way,  and  all  the  hosts  of 
light  must  follow  after  him.     4.  That  Dan  at  this  time  was  very  large  in  numbers, 
and  held  an  honourable  place,  and  was  a  standard-bearer ;  yet  afterwards  he  dwindled, 
and  left  the  place  given  him  by  Providence,  and  sought  another  for  himself,  and  fell 
into  idolatry,  and  was  struck  out  at  last  from  the  list  of  the  Israel  of  God.     Even  so 
it  happens  that  some  particular  Church  or  some  individual  at  one  time  shall  stand 
high,  and  be  a  leader,  and  hold  a  place  of  command,  yet  afterwards  shall  swerve 
from  the  right  way,  and  fall  into  some  idolatry,  and  be  cast  out  as  evil  at  the  last 
But  it  is  not  necessary  to  seek  to  discover  wickedness  in  the  first  estate  because  it  is 
in  the  last ;  as  in  Dan  it  is  not  possible  to  find  any  cause  of  wrath  while  he  walked 


CH.  II.  1—34.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  IS 

with  the  others  in  the  wilderness ;  and  even  Judas  must  have  been  sincere  at  first,  and 
was  not  discerned  from  the  other  eleven.  5.  That  at  this  time  the  children  of  Leah 
were  all  together,  and  that  this  union  was  apparently  made  sure  for  ever  by  their 
dwelling  side  by  side  in  Canaan.  Yet  when  the  great  division  came,  Ephraim  and 
Manasseh  went  one  way,  Benjamin  the  other.  Even  so  it  often  happens  that  those 
who  have  grown  up  together  as  brethren  in  the  common  enjoyment  of  spiritual 
blessings  and  practice  of  religious  duties,  are  thereafter  widely  separated  by  some 
great  sifting,  and  take  opposite  sides  on  some  fundamental  question. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ch.  ii. — The  muster  at  Sinai.  The  children  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness  were  a 
divinely-framed  figure  or  parable  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  Devout  readers  of  the 
story  of  the  long  march  from  Egypt  to  Canaan  have  always  been  haunted  with  such 
an  irrepressible  feeling  of  this  figurative  and  spiritual  intention,  that  traces  of  it  are 
apparent  in  the  familiar  speech  of  all  the  Christian  nations.  Christians  everywhere 
speak  of  redemption  from  bondage,  the  wilderness  of  this  world,  the  wilderness 
journey,  the  heavenly  manna,  the  "  Rock  of  ages  cleft  for  me,"  the  land  of  promise, 
Pisguh  views  of  the  better  land,  the  dark  Jordan,  the  promised  inheritance.  The 
muster  at  Sinai  is  a  chapter  in  the  long  parable ;  a  chapter  as  replete  as  any  with  in- 
struction regarding  the  Church  of  God. 

I.  The  Chdbch  is  an  army.  The  enumeration  at  Sinai  was  not  an  ordinary  census. 
It  took  note  only  of  such  as  were  fit  to  bear  arms.  These  opening  chapters  of 
Numbers  are  a  muster-roll.  The  Church  in  this  world  is  the  Church  militant.  Christ 
is  a  Man  of  war  (Ps.  xlv.  3 — 5).  Every  true  follower  of  Christ  is  called  to  be  a 
soldier,  and  to  fight  a  good  fight.  There  is  no  place  in  Christ's  host  either  for  neutrals 
or  non-combatants  (Matt.  xii.  30). 

II.  Tub  Chuhch  is  an  army  on  the  march.  1.  Not  settled  in  permanent  quarters. 
The  wilderness  was  not  a  place  to  build  cities  in  or  to  plant  vineyards.  As  little  is 
the  world  a  continuing  city  to  Christ' s  saints.  Compare  "  this  tabernacle,"  2  Cor.  v.  1 ; 
2  Pet.  i.  14.  We  are  passing  travellers  here.  2.  Marching  to  an  appointed  place. 
In  some  sense  all  men — believers  and  unbelievers  alike — are  on  the  march.  Com- 
pare the  Anglo-Saxon  prince's  comparison  of  human  life  to  the  flight  of  the  bird 
out  of  the  dark  night,  through  the  lighted  hall,  and  out  by  the  opposite  door  into  the 
darkness  again.  God's  people  are  not  only  passers-by,  but  "strangers"  here,  who 
have  in  view  u.  country  beyond.  Their  back  is  toward  Egypt,  their  face  toward 
Canaan,  and  they  are  on  the  move  from  the  one  to  the  other. 

"  We  nightly  pitch  our  moving  tent 
A  day's  march  nearer  home. " 

III.  The  Church  is  an  army  with  banners.  Not  a  mob,  but  a  marshalled  host. 
Observe  the  order  prescribed  in  this  chapter  for  the  encampment  and  for  the  march. 
This  idea  of  the  Church  has  often  been  abused  to  the  support  of  ecclesiastical  systems 
for  which  there  is  no  warrant  in  the  New  Testament.  The  sort  of  organised  unity 
proper  to  the  Hebrew  Church  cannot  be  transferred  to  the  Church  Catholic.  Stillthe 
idea  is  true  and  valuable.  God  is  a  God  of  order,  and  not  of  confusion.  We  beUeve 
in  the  communion  of  saints.  Christians  are  not  to  fight  every  one  for  his  own 
hand,  or  march  every  one  by  himself.  It  is  a  good  and  pleasant  thing  for  brethren 
to  come  together  and  keep  together. 

IV.  The  Church  is  an  army  of  which  God  keeps  a  perfect  roll.  A  good  general 
would  like  to  know,  and  Christ  does  know,  every  one  of  his  men  by  name,  and  they 
are  written  in  his  book.  When  a  soul  is  born  again— bom  in  Zion— the  Lord  registers 
the  fact  (Ps.  Ixxxvii.  6) ;  and  he  continually  remembers  the  person's  name.  "  I  am 
poor  and  needy,  yet  the  Lord  thinketh  upon  me." 

V.  The  Church  is  an  army  which  has  the  Lord  foe  its  ever-present  Lbadei 
AND  Commander.  The  ark  of  the  covenant  led  the  van  on  the  march,  and  rested  in 
the  midst  of  the  congregation  when  it  encamped.  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world ;  .  .  • 
itnd,  lo,  I  aw  with  you  alway." — B, 


1%  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oH.  II.  1—34. 

Vers.  1,  2. — God's  tahemacle  in  the  midst  of  Israel's  tents.  I.  As  the  souecb  op 
ORDER.  Israel  formed  an  armed  encampment,  not  a  mob.  The  place  of  each  tribe 
was  assigned  by  God,  and  thus  was  not  a  matter  of  caprice  or  partiality  on  the 
part  of  Moses  (ver.  34).  They  were  grouped  according  to  their  tribes  and  families. 
A  post  in  the  rearguard  was  as  honourable  as  one  in  the  van,  because  a  matter  of 
Divine  appointment.  Yet  all  "  afar  ofE,"  as  a  sign  of  the  reverence  due  to  their  God. 
Apply  this  truth  to  the  tribes,  i.  e.  the  visible  Churches  and  denominations  of  the 
Israel  of  God.  This  may  be  illustrated  from  apostolic  days,  or  from  modern  Church 
history.  Each  hai  a  position,  historical,  geographical,  social,  assigned  by  the 
providence  of  God.  Bach  tribe  had  some  peculiarities  (of.  Gen.  xHx.),  as  each  section 
of  the  Church  has.  And  as  there  were,  no  doubt,  reasons  for  the  position  allotted  to 
every  family,  so  the  God  of  "order"  and  "peace"  (1  Cor.  xiv.)  designed  that  evory 
Church  should  fill  its  appointed  place  ("  by  its  own  standard,"  &c. ),  and,  as  part  of  the 
militant  host,  stand  in  orderly  relations  to  himself  and  to  the  brotherhood.  The  same 
truth  extends  to  individuals,  the  bounds  of  their  habitation  and  the  sphere  of  their 
service  having  been  fixed  by  God. 

II.  As  A  CENTRE  OP  ATTEACTiON.  The  doors  of  the  tents  probably  faced  the 
tabernacle.  It  was  a  centre  of  attraction — 1.  For  guidance,  through  the  high  priest, 
and  Moses,  and  the  symbolic  cloud  (cf.  Ps.  xxv.  4,  5,  9, 16).  2.  For  pardon,  through 
sacrifice.  And  God  himself  is  the  only  hope  of  a  sinful  Church  (Jer.  xiv.  7 — 9  ;  2 
Cor.  V.  18,  19).  3.  For  purity,  through  the  restraining  and  elevating  influence  of 
a  holy  God  ever  present  in  their  midst  (cf.  Deut.  xxiii.  14  with  2  Cor.  vi.  16 — vii.  1).  - 

III.  As  k  FLEDGE  OF  SAFETY,  both  when  encamped  (ver.  2)  or  on  the  march  (ver. 
17).  So  "  God  is  in  the  midst "  "  of  the  tabernacles  of  the  Most  High,"  the  homes 
of  his  people  (cf.  Deut.  iv.  7,  and  Eom.  viii.  31).  He  is  in  our  midst  as  "a  lion" 
to  terrify  our  foes  (Hos.  xi.  10 ;  see  Acts  v.  17 — 42),  as  a  fire  to  enlighten  and  to 
protect  (Isa.  iv.  5),  as  "a  man  of  war"  to  fight  for  us  (Isa.  xlix.  25,  26;  Numb, 
xxiii.  21).  This  presence  of  God  in  our  midst  should  inspire  (1)  confidence  (Deut. 
xxxiii.  29),  (2)  reverence  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  7),  (3)  joy  (Ps.  cxviii.  15),  and  should  prepare 
us  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  in  Eev.  xxi.  3 — 7. — P. 

Ch.  ii. — The  disciplineof  God^s  army.  As  thefirst  chapter  discovers  the  «w  of  God's 
array,  so  the  second  discovers  the  discipline  of  it.  Number  is  nothing  without  order 
and  discipline.  A  handful  of  cavalry  can  scatter  a  mob.  Discipline  also  prevents 
rivalries.  If  those  about  our  Lord,  in  spite  of  all  his  teaching,  asked,  "Who  shall  be 
greatest  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ?  "  then  we  may  be  sure  there  were  many  ambitious 
souls  asking  in  the  wilderness,  "Who  shall  be  greatest  in  Israel?"  The  discipline 
set  before  us  in  this  chapter  was  particularly  related  to  the  tabernacle.  In  this 
connection  the  discipline  may  be  regarded  as  intended  to  secure  three  things. 

I.  Reverence  for  the  SANCTnAEY.  They  were  to  pitch  the  camp  far  off  about  the 
tabernacle.  There  was  plenty  of  a  superstitious  and  idolatrous  spirit  among  the 
Israelites,  but  the  reverence  was  wanting  that  comes  from  intelligent  appreciation. 
But  for  a  special  injunction  to  the  contrary,  they  would  very  hUely  have  crowded 
round  the  tabernacle,  as  feeling  nothing  peculiar  about  the  ark.  This  lesson  of 
reverence  had  to  be  sharp'y  taught  again  and  again,  e.  g.  to  the  Philistines  and  the 
men  of  Bethshemesh  (1  Sam.  v.  and  vi.),  and  to  Uzzah  (2  Sam.  vi.).  The  fear  of 
God  is  not  only  the  beginning  of  wisdom,  but  also  of  security  and  spiritual  conquests. 
It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God.  The  Israelites  carried 
about  with  them  something  as  awful  as  the  mount  that  burned  with  fire.  So  in  the 
Church  of  Christ  there  should  be  a  deep  habitual  reverence  for  the  Almighty.  The 
death  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira  is  a  lesson  for  all  ages  as  to  the  danger  of  forgetting 
that  God  is  strict  to  mark  iniquity.  Confidence  is  necessary,  but  in  our  boldest 
approaches  there  must  be  the  deepest  humility.  If  we  waged  our  spiritual  warfare 
with  real  reverence  for  the  great  Trinity  above,  there  would  be  more  success, 

II.  Defencb  of  the  sanctuary.  It  was  in  the  midst,  alike  in  resting  and  in 
marching.  Travellers  in  savage  countries  circle  themselves  with  fire  at  night,  to 
seep  ofiE  the  wild  beasts.  So  the  circling  tribes  were  to  be  a  defence  to  the  tabernacle. 
The  company  of  Judah  marched  in  front,  and  Dan  brought  up  the  rear.  Judah  went 
from  honour  to  honour  among  the  tribes,  until  the  honour  culminated  in  the  inn  at 


CH.  III.  1 — 61.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


17 


Bethlehem.  Reuben,  though  the  eldest,  was  not  put  first.  "  Unstable  as  water,  thou 
shalt  not  excel."  He  could  do  something,  leaning  on  Judah  ;  not  last,  yet  not  com- 
petent to  be  first.  But  exactly  all  the  reasons  why  the  tribes  were  arranged  thu», 
and  not  otherwise,  we  cannot  tell.  Jehovah  had  the  sovereign  disposal  of  the  matter ; 
not  therefore  arbitrary,  or  without  cause.  A  commander  does  not  give  reasons  for  his 
strategy,  though  some  of  them  may  be  afterwards  discoverable.  Glod  has  given  his 
people  to  defend  the  sanctuary  still,  to  contend  earnestly  for  the  faith  once  for  all 
delivered  to  the  saints ;  against  the  paganism  of  the  old  world,  and  all  sorts  of  corrup- 
tion in  Christendom  itself  ;  against  the  pride  of  science  transgressing  its  borders.  We 
have  to  fight  for  an  open  Bible,  free  to  every  one  caring  to  read  it ;  a  full  Bible,  its 
truths  not  minimised  or  attenuated  to  suit  the  fancies  of  men ;  a  pure  Bible,  interpreted 
in  its  own  light,  and  not  confused  with  the  distortions  of  later  traditions.  The 
Scriptures  are  our  tabernacle,  and  we  must  defend  them  as  something  solemnly  put 
in  our  charge. 

III.  Protection  FROM  THK  SANCTUARY.  That  which  we  defend  protects  us.  Peter, 
before  the  Council,  asserted  and  acted  bis  right  to  preach  the  gospel.  "  We  must  obey 
God  rather  than  men."  Defending  what  was  committed  to  his  charge,  he  also  was 
defended  when  God  delivered  him  from  Herod's  prison.  The  unfaithful  are  the 
insecure.  When  we  are  searching  the  Bible  to  defend  it  against  the  attacks  of  its 
enemies,  we  are  multiplying  comforts  and  defences  for  our  own  souls.  How  many 
looking  for  arguments  have  also  found  balm  and  security  I  The  Lord  would  have 
Israel  to  understand  that  it  was  not  because  they  were  600,000,  but  because  he  was 
their  Leader,  they  were  strong.  Let  our  protection  come  from  God.  Protections  of 
human  device  are  like  the  experiments  in  modern  naval  construction.  A  defence  may 
be  announced  perfect,  but  some  new  weapon  will  make  it  worthless.  The  shield  of 
faith  alone  will  quench  all  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked  one.  Compare  1  Cor.  xiv. 
with  this  chapter,  as  showing  the  need  both  for  order  and  discipline. — Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  III. 


Thb  nttmbbrs  and  buties  op  the  Le- 
vites  ;  their  substitution  foe  the  first- 
BORN (ch.  iii.).  Ver.  1. — These  .  .  are  the 
generations  of  Aaron  and  Moses.  The  word 
"generations"  (toledoth)  is  used  here  in  a 
peculiar  and,  so  to  speak,  technical  sense, 
with  reference  to  what  follows,  as  in  Gen.  ii. 
4  ;  vi.  9.  It  marks  a  new  departure,  look- 
ing down,  not  up,  the  course  of  history. 
Moses  and  Aaron  were  a  beginning  in  them- 
selves as  the  chosen  heads  of  the  chosen 
tribe :  Moses  having  the  higher  office,  but 
one  entirely  personal  to  himself;  Aaron 
being  the  first  of  a  long  and  eminent  line  of 
piiests.  The  actual  genealogy,  therefore,  is 
that  of  Aaron,  and  he  is  placed  first.  In 
the  day.  Apparently  the  day  mentioned  in 
eh.  i.  1  ;  or  it  may  be  more  general,  as  in 
Gen.  ii.  4. 

Ver.  3. — Vhom  Tie  consecrated.  The 
"he"  is  impersonal  ;  the  Septuaglnt  has, 
"  whose  hanjs  they  filled." 

Ver.  4.— They  had  no  children.  If  they 
had  left  sons,  these  would  have  succeeded 
to  their  office,  and  to  the  headship  of  the 
III  iestly  line.  In  the  sight  of  Aaron.  In 
his  lifetime  (of.  Gen.  si.  28).  Septuagint, 
"with  Aaron."  In  the  time  of  Diivid  the 
descendants  of  Eleazar  wtre  divided  i»to 
XUKIBEHS, 


sixteen  courses,  the  descendants  of  Ithamai 
into  eight  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  3). 

Ver.  6. — Bring  the  trihe  of  Levi  near 
Not  by  any  outward  act  of  presentation,  bii 
by  assigning  to  them  solemnly  the  dutie- 
following.  The  expression  is  often  used  ol 
servants  coming  to  receive  orders  from  theii 
masters. 

Ver.  7. — ^They  shall  keep  his  charge,  and 
the  charge  of  the  whole  congregation 
Septuaglnt,  "shall  keep  his  watches,  anr 
the  watches  of  the  children  of  Israel."  Thi 
Levites  were  to  he  the  servants  of  Aaron  cm 
the  one  side,  and  of  the  whole  congregation 
on  the  other,  in  the  performance  of  theii 
religious  duties.  The  complicated  cereraonia  I 
now  prescribed  and  set  in  use  could  not  pos- 
sibly be  carried  out  by  priests  or  people 
without  the  assistance  of  a  large  number  of 
persons  trained  and  devoted  to  the  work. 
Compare  St.  Paul's  words  to  the  Corinthians 
(2  Cor.  iv.  5),  "Ourselves  your  servants  for 
Jesus'  sake." 

Ver.  8. — Instrnments.  Vessels  and  furni- 
ture.    Septuaglnt,  ffrei')).     Vulgate,  vasa. 

Ver.  9.  They  are  wholly  given  unto  him. 
The  word  nethunim  (wholly  given)  is  em- 
phatic here,  and  in  ch.  viii.  16.  As  the 
whole  house  of  Israel  at  large,  so  especially 
(for. a  reason  which  will  presently  appear) 
the  tribe  of  ttvi  belonged  absolutely  to  God  J 
0 


18 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEHS. 


fcH.  HI.  1 — 51, 


and  he,  as  absolutely,  made  them  over  to 
Aaron  and  the  priests  for  the  service  of  his 
sanctuary.  Cf.  Eph.  iv.  11,  "gave  some 
apostles,"  &c.  The  Lcvites,  as  gifts  from 
God  {nethwnim)  to  their  brethren  the  priests, 
must  be  distinguished  from  the  nethinim  or 
serfs  of  foreign  extraction  given  by  the  con- 
gregation to  the  Levitos  to  do  their  most 
menial  work  for  them  (Josh.  ix.  27). 

Ver.  10. — The  stranger  that  Cometh  nigh. 
This  constantly  recurring  formula  lias  not 
always  quite  the  same  moaning:  in  ch.  i.  51 
it  signified  any  one  not  of  the  tribe  of  Levi  ; 
here  it  includes  even  the  Levite  who  was  not 
also  a  priest.  The  separation  of  the  Levites 
for  the  ministry  of  the  tabernacle  was  not  to 
infringe  in  the  least  upon  the  exclusive  rights 
of  Aaron  and  his  sons. 

Ver.  12. — I  have  taken  the  Levites.  The 
actual  separation  of  Levi  had  been  already 
anticipated  (see  ch.  i.  47,  53),  but  the  mean- 
ing and  purpose  of  that  separation  is  now 
formally  declared.  No  reason,  however,  is 
assigned  for  the  choice  of  this  particular 
tribe.  It  is  almost  always  assumed  that 
their  zeal  in  the  matter  of  the  golden  calf 
was  the  ground  of  the  preference  shown  to 
them  now.  But  it  may  be  doubted  whether 
there  was  any  ' '  preference  "  in  the  matter  at 
all.  To  Aaron  and  his  seed  an  undoubted 
and  important  preference  was  shown,  but 
the  functicras  and  position  of  the  Levites 
were  not  such  as  to  give  them  any  pre- 
eminence, or  to  secure  tliem  any  substantial 
advantage.  They  were  tied  down  to  the 
performance  of  routine  duties,  which  de- 
manded no  intelligence,  and  gave  scope  for 
no  ambitions.  The  one  obvious  reason  why 
Levi  was  selected  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact 
that  he  was  by  far  the  smallest  in  numbers 
among  the  tribes,  being  less  than  half  the 
next  smallest,  Manasseh,  and  almost  exactly 
balancing  the  first-bom.  A  larger  tribe  could 
not  have  been  spared,  and  would  not  have 
been  needed,  for  the  purpose  in  question. 
If  any  more  recondite  motive  must  be  sought 
for  the  Divine  selection,  it  must  be  found  in 
the  prophecy  of  Gen.  xlix.  7.  Levi  as  well 
as  Simeon,  though  in  a  different  way,  was 
doomed  never  to  raise  his  head  as  a  united 
and  powerful  tribe  among  his  brethren. 

Ver.  13. — Because  all  the  first-born  are 
mine  (see  Exod.  xiii.  2,  and  below  on  ver. 
43).  That  the  powers  of  heaven  bad  a 
special  claim  upon  the  firstling  of  man  or 
beast  was  probably  one  of  the  oldest  religious 
ideas  in  the  world,  which  it  would  be  diffi- 
cult to  trace  to  any  origin  but  in  some 
primeval  revelation.  It  branched  out  into 
many  superstitions,  of  which  the  cruel  cultus 
of  Moloch  was  the  worst.  Among  the  tribes 
which  preserved  the  patriarchal  faith,  it  re- 
tained more  or  less  of  its  primitive  meaning 
iB  tb«  Msignment  of  «^oTwciaJ  duties  to  the 


eldest  son.  According  to  the  Targums,  the 
"  young  men  of  the  children  of  Israel "  sent 
by  Moses  to  offer  sacrifices  before  the  con- 
secration of  Aaron  (Exod.  xxiv.  5)  were  first- 
bom.  Whatever  ancient  and  latent  claims, 
however,  God  may  have  had  upon  the  first- 
born of  Israel,  they  are  here  superseded  by  a 
special  and  recent  claim  founded  upon  their 
miraculous  preservation  when  the  first-born 
of  the  Egyptians  were  slain.  All  the  first- 
born in  that  day  became  "anathema,"  de- 
voted to  God,  for  evil  or  for  good,  for  death 
or  for  life.  He,  to  whom  belongs  the  whole 
harvest  of  human  souls,  came  and  claimed 
his  first-fruits  from  the  fields  of  Egypt.  He 
took  unto  himself  by  death  the  first-bom  of 
the  Egyptians  ;  he  left  for  himself  in  life  the 
first-born  of  the  Israelites.  For  the  conveni  • 
ence,  however,  of  the  people,  and  for  the 
better  and  more  regular  discharge  of  the 
ministry,  he  was  content  to  take  the  single 
small  tribe  of  Levi  in  lieu  of  the  first-born 
of  all. 

Ver.  12. — Instead  of  all  the  first-horn. 
The  Septuagint  inserts  here,  "  they  shall  be 
their  ransom." 

Ver.  13.— Mine  shall  they  he:  I  am  the 
Lord.  Rather,  "mine  shall  they  be,  mine, 
the  Lord's." 

Ver.  15. — From  a  month  old.  The  first- 
born were  to  be  redeemed  "from  a  month 
old"  (ch.  xviii.  16). 

Ver.  17.— These  were  the  sons  of  Levi. 
These  genealogical  notices  are  inserted  here 
in  order  to  give  completeness  to  the  account 
of  the  Levites  in  the  day  of  their  dedication. 

Ver.  23. — Shall  pitch.  These  directions 
as  to  the  position  and  duties  of  the  Levitioal 
families  retain  the  form  in  which  they  were 
originally  given.  The  way  in  which  they 
are  mixed  up  with  direct  narrative  affords  a 
striking  proof  of  the  inartificial  character  of 
these  sacred  writings.  Behind  the  taber- 
nacle westward.  The  tabernacle  opuned  or 
looked  eastward  towards  the  sunrise. 

Ver.  25.  — The  charge  of  the  sons  of 
Gershon.     See  ch.  iv.  24—26. 

Ver.  28. — Eight  thousand  and  six  hun- 
dred. The  four  families  of  the  Kohathites, 
of  which  that  of  Amram  was  one,  must  have 
contained  about  18,000  souls.  Moses  and 
Aaron  were  sons  of  Amram,  and  they  seem 
to  have  had  but  two  sons  apiece  at  this  time. 
If,  therefore,  the  family  of  the  Amramites 
was  at  all  equal  in  numbers  to  the  other 
three,  they  must  have  had  more  than  4000 
brothers  and  sisters,  nephews  and  nieces.  It 
is  urged  in  reply  that  Amram  lived  137  years, 
and  may  have  had  many  other  children,  and 
that  the  variations  in  the  comparative  rates 
of  increase  are  so  great  and  so  unaccountable 
that  it  is  useless  to  speculate  upon  them. 
There  is,  however,  a  more  serious  difficulty 
coufteoted  witb  the  ge»e»logy  of  Moses  »m 


OH.  111.  1—61.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEliS. 


19 


Aaron,  as  given  here  and  elsewhere.  If  they 
were  the  great-grandohildren  of  Levi  on 
their  father's  side,  and  his  grandchildren 
on  their  mother's  side,  it  is  impossible  to 
maintain  the  obvious  meaning  of  Exod.  xii. 
40.  Either  the  genealogy  must  be  lengthened, 
or  the  time  must  be  very  much  shortened  for 
the  sojourning  in  Egypt.  The  known  and 
undoubted  habit  of  the  sacred  writers  to 
omit  names  in  their  genealogies,  even  in 
those  which  seem  most  precise,  lessens  the 
difficulty  of  the  first  alternative,  whereas 
every  consideration  of  numbers,  including 
those  in  this  passage,  increases  the  difficulty 
of  the  second.  To  endeavour  to  avoid  either 
alternative,  and  to  force  the  apparent  state- 
ments of  Scripture  into  accord  by  assuming 
a  multiplicity  of  unrecorded  and  improbable 
miracles  at  every  turn  (as,  e.  g. ,  that  Jochebed, 
the  mother  of  Moses,  was  restored  to  youth 
and  beauty  at  an  extreme  old  age),  is  to  ex- 
pose the  holy  writings  to  contempt.  It  is 
much  more  reverent  to  believe,  either  that 
the  genealogies  are  very  imperfect,  or  that 
the  numbers  in  the  text  have  been  very  con- 
siderably altered.  Every  consideration  of  par- 
ticular examples,  still  more  the  general  im- 
pression left  by  the  whole  narrative,  favours 
the  former  as  against  the  latter  alternative. 

Ver.  30. — Elizaphan  the  sou  of  Uzziel — 
of  the  youngest  branch.  This  may  have 
aroused  the  jealousy  of  Korah,  who  repre- 
sented an  elder  branch. 

Ver.  32.  —  Eleazar.  Tiie  priests  were 
themselves  Kohathites,  and  therefore  their 
chief  is  here  mentioned  as  having  the  over- 
sight over  the  other  overseers — ipsos  custodes 


Ver.  38. — Before  the  tabernacle  toward 
the  east, . .  .  Iffoses,  and  Aaron  and  hia  sons. 
The  most  central  and  honourable  place  in  the 
camp,  and  the  most  convenient  for  constant 
and  direct  access  to  the  sanctuary.  Moses 
held  a  wholly  personal  and  exceptional  posi- 
tion as  king  in  Jeshurun  (Dent,  xxxiii.  5) ; 
Aaron  was  hereditary  high  priest.  Between 
them  they  represented  the  union  of  royal 
and  sacerdotal  authority,  which  had  many 
partial  continuations  in  Jewish  history,  but 
was  fully  realised  in  Christ. 

Ver.  39. — Twenty  and  two  thousand.  It 
is  obvious  that  there  is  a  discrepancy  between 
this  total  and  its  three  component  numbers, 
which  make  22,300.  It  is  so  obvious  that  it 
must  have  been  innocent ;  no  one  deliberately 
falsifying  or  forging  would  have  left  so  pal- 
pable a  discrepancy  on  the  face  of  the  narra- 
tive. It  may,  therefore,  have  arisen  from  an 
error  in  transcription  (the  alteration  of  a 
single  letter  would  suffice) ;  or  it  may  be  due 
to  the  fact  that,  for  some  reason  not  stated, 
300  were  struck  off  the  Levitical  total  for  the 
purpose  of  this  census.  Such  a  reason  was 
foiled  by  the  Ilebrew  expositors,  «|>4  !»' 


been  accepted  by  some  modems,  in  the  fact 
that  the  Levites  were  taken  and  counted  in- 
stead of  the  first-bom,  and  that,  therefore, 
their  own  first-bom  would  have  to  be  ex- 
cluded. There  is  nothing  to  be  said  against 
this  explanation,  except  that  no  trace  of  it 
appears  in  a  narrative  otherwise  very  fuU  and 
minute.  The  first-bom  of  the  Levites  nuiy 
have  been  just  300  (although  the  number  is 
singularly  small),  and  they  may  have  been 
considered  ineligible  for  the  purpose  of  re- 
deeming other  first-bom  ;  but  if  so,  why  did 
not  the  sacred  writer  say  so,  instead  of  silently 
reducing  the  total  of  "aU  that  were  numbered 
of  the  Levites  "  1 

Ver.  43. — Twenty  and  two  thousand  two 
hundred  and  threescore  and  thirteen.  These 
were  the  first-born  of  the  twelve  tribes  ;  but 
who  were  included  under  the  designation 
"first-bom"  is  a  matter  of  grave  dispute. 
The  smallness  of  their  number  (not  much 
above  one  per  cent,  of  the  whole  population) 
has  given  rise  to  several  conflicting  theories, 
all  of  which  seem  to  be  artificial,  arbitrary, 
and  therefore  unsatisfactory.  It  is  urged  by 
some  that  the  expression  "  every  male  that 
openeth  the  womb  "  must  be  strictly  pressed, 
and  that  there  would  be  no  "first-bom"  in 
those  families  (which  form  a  considerable 
majority)  in  which  either  a  girl  was  bom 
first,  or  the  eldest,  being  a  boy,  had  died.  It 
is  further  urged  that  only  those  first-born 
would  be  counted  who  were  not  themselves 
fathers  of  families.  These  considerations  will 
indeed  reduce  the  probable  numbers  very 
largely,  but  not  to  the  required  amount. 
Others,  again,  give  an  entirely  different  turn 
to  the. difficulty  by  urging  that  as  the  com- 
mand in  Exod.  xiii.  1  was  prospective  only^ 
so  at  this  time  only  the  first-born  since  the 
exodus  were  counted.  This  makes  it  neces- 
sary to  assume  an  altogether  unprecedented 
birth-rate  during  that  short  period.  One 
other  explanation  strives  to  satisfy  the  arith- 
metical conditions  of  the  problem  by  assum- 
ing that  the  whole  of  the  Divine  legislation 
in  this  matter  was  in  reality  directed  against 
the  worship  of  Moloch,  and  was  designed  to 
prevent  the  offering  of  first-born  to  him  by 
redeeming  them  unto  himself.  As  the  rites 
of  Moloch  only  demanded  young  children  of 
tender  age,  only  such  were  counted  in  this 
census.  It  may,  indeed,  be  very  probably 
concluded  that  their  heavenly  Father  did 
claim  these  first-born,  partly  in  order  to  save 
them  from  Moloch,  because  the  people  would 
thereafter  be  exposed  to  the  fascination  of  that 
horrid  superstition ;  but  there  is  no  proof 
whatever  that  they  were  acquainted  with  it 
at  this  time.  These  cruel  rites,  together  with 
many  other  heathen  abominations,  are  for- 
bidden in  Levit.  xviii.  21  and  Deut.  xviii. 
10,  in  view  of  the  entry  Into  Canaan,  whera 
tbey  were  practised.  The  prophet  Amos,  wbe^ 

'  03 


20 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[CH.  III.  1 — 61. 


he  reproaches  them  with  having  "earned  the 
tabernacle  of"  their  "  Moloch  even  in  the 
wilderness  (Amos  v.  26),  absolves  them  by  im- 
plication from  any  darker  superstition  ;  and 
the  highly  rhetorical  passage  Ezek.  xx.  26 
seems  to  refer  to  the  consequences  of  dis- 
obedience at  a  later  date,  and  can  hardly  be 
pressed  against  the  entire  silence  of  the 
Pentateuch.  Anyhow  it  does  not  seem  pos- 
sible, on  tlie  strength  of  a  supposed  intention 
on  the  part  of  God  of  which  no  trace  ajipoars 
in  the  text,  to  impose  a  narrow  and  arbitrary 
limit  upon  the  plain  command  to  number 
"all  the  lirst-bom,  from  a  month  old  and 
upward. "  If  we  turn  from  these  speculations 
to  the  reason  and  ground  of  the  matter  as 
stated  by  God  himself,  it  will  appear  much 
more  simple.  It  was  distinctly  on  the  ground 
of  their  preservation  from  the  destroying 
angel  in  Egypt  that  the  first-born  of  Israel 
were  claimed  as  Goi'B  pecuUum  now  (see  ver. 
13).  The  command  in  Exod.  xiii.  1  was 
no  doubt  prospective,  but  the  sanctification 
of  the  first-born  was  based  upon  the  deliver- 
ance itself ;  and  this  command  was  intended 
not  to  limit  that  sanctification  for  the  pre- 
sent, but  to  continue  it  for  the  future.  Now 
if  we  turn  to  Exod.  xii.  29,  30,  and  ask  who 
the  first-bom  were  whom  the  destroying  angel 
cut  off,  we  see  plainly  enough  that  they  in- 
cluded the  eldest  son,  being  a  child,  in  every 
house  ;  that  every  family  lost  one,  and  only 
one.  On  the  one  hand,  Pliaraoh  himself  was 
in  all  probability  a  first-born,  but  he  was  not 


in  any  personal  danger,  liecauBe  he  ranked 
and  suffered  as  a  father,  not  as  a  son.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  majority  of  families  in 
which  the  first-bom  was  a  daughter,  or  had 
died,  did  not  therefore  escape:  "there  was 
not  a  house  where  there  was  not  one  dead. " 
Taking  this  as  the  only  sure  ground  to  go 
upon,  we  may  conclude  with  some  confidence 
that  the  first-bom  now  claimed  by  God  in- 
cluded all  the  eldest  sons  in  the  families  of 
Israel  who  were  not  themselves  the  heads  of 
houses.  These  were  fhe  destroyed  in  Egypt 
— these  the  redeemed  in  Israel.  How  they 
came  to  be  so  few  in  proportion  is  a  matter 
in  itself  of  extremely  slight  importance,  and 
dependant,  perhaps,  upon  causes  of  which 
no  record  was  left. 

Ver.  47.  —  Five  shekels  apiece.  This 
amount  had  already  been  fixed  (Levit.  xxvii. 
6,  if  indeed  this  chapter  does  not  belong  to 
a  later  period)  as  the  commutation  value  of 
a  male  child  under  five  years  old  who  had 
been  vowed  unto  the  Lord.  If  the  redeeming 
of  the  first-born  by  the  Levites  began  with 
the  eldest,  those  that  were  left  over  would 
all  be  within  this  age.  A  shekel.  See 
Exod.  XXX.  13. 

Ver.  51. — Gave  the  monej .  .  .  unto  Aaron. 
The  Levites  were  given  to  Aaron  in  liai  of 
the  first-born.  As,  however,  their  number 
fell  somewhat  short,  fhe  redemption  monjy 
taken  for  the  remainder  was  due  to  Aaron 
as  compensation,  and  was  doubtless  spoiled 
to  the  support  of  the  ti^bemacla  worship. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ch.  iii. — The  servants  of  God,  and  the  Church  of  the  First-born.  We  may  a^  in 
this  chaptei-,  spiritually,  the  oblig;ation  of  the  whole  people  to  be  the  bond-servants 
of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  dedication,  as  their  representatives  in  the  outward  and  visible 
service  of  God,  of  such  as  are  separated  unto  the  Holy  Spirit  at  his  call.  For  the 
whole  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  general  assembly  and  Church  of  the  first-born, 
and  they  are  all  wholly  his  by  right  of  redemption,  and  are  all  priests  unto  God  ; 
nevertheless,  for  convenience,  and  almost  of  necessity,  their  outward  ministry  and 
service  in  holy  things  is  discharged  by  such  as  God's  choice  and  their  own  aptness 
have  marked  out  tlierefor. 

Consider,  therefore,  with  kespect  to  the  Lsvites — 

I.  That  they  were  "wholly  given  "unto  Aaron,  the  high  peikst.     Evbn  so 

THEY     THAT     ARE     DEVOTED     DNTO     SACRED     MINISTRIES    ARE   "  WHOLLY     GIVEN  "    UNTO 

Jesus  Christ,  tlie  great  High  Priest,  and  are  placed  at  his  disposal,  that  he  may  use 
their  labours  according  to  his  will  ;  and  this  is  the  one  simple  consideration  whii;h 
must  govern  their  life,  unless  tliey  be  rebellious. 

II.  That  they  were  given  unto  Aaron  "  to  keep  his  charge,  and  the  charge  of 

THE   WHOLE   CONGREGATION  J  "    i.e.   TO   ASSIST   HIM   AND    TO   ASSIST   THEM    IN  THE   D)S- 

oriAEGE  OP  THEIR  SEVERAL  OFFICES  AND  DUTIES,  SO  that  they  might  be  rendered 
aright  to  the  well-pleasing  of  God.  Even  so  it  is  in  the  deepest  sense  true  (if  rightly 
considered)  that  every  one  who  has  some  special  call  is  a  partner  partly  in  the  work 
of  Christ,  partly  in  the  duty  of  the  Church  ;  he  helps  to  carry  on  the  one  or  to  dis- 
charge tlie  other  (or  both).  The  atonement  indeed  was  made  by  Aaron — as  by 
Christ — himself,  alone ;  but  the  outward  and  subordinate  matters  of  his  oflSoe  he 
discharged  by  means  of  the  Levites,  and  he  could  not  otherwise  have  discharged 
tbem.     Even  so  does  Christ  oulwi^rdly  and  visibly  fulfil  his  n^anjfold  ollice  upgn 


Cfi.  iti.  1— 51.J  THE  BOOK  OF  NtTMBEllS.  .  21 

earth  by  the  mouths  and  by  the  hands  of  his  servants.  Thus,  if  any  preach  the 
word,  he  is  doing  the  work  of  Christ  our  Prophet ;  if  any  minister  to  the  sick,  of 
Christ  our  Healer;  if  any  feed  his  Iambs,  of  Christ  our  Good  Shepherd  ;  if  any  rule 
over  mon  for  their  good,  of  Christ  our  King.  Even  if  any  suffer  in  the  spirit  of 
Christ,  he  is  filling  up  the  yet  unfilled  measures  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ  (Col.  i.  24), 
because  it  is  appointed  unto  Christ  to  suffer,  as  once  in  himself,  so  now  in  his  earthly 
members,  until  the  cup  be  wholly  drained  (of.  Rev.  i.  9  ;  xiv.  12).  So,  on  the  other 
hand,  every  one  that  is  devoted  to  some  ministry  is  discharging  the  duty  of  all  to 
all,  and  through  all  to  God.  The  body  of  Christ,  which  is  the  Church,  owes  unto 
all  her  members  spiritual  and  temporal  care  and  tendance  ;  unto  God  ceaseless 
worship,  prayer,  and  praise.  But  as  the  natural  body  discharges  many  of  its  functions 
through  separate  members  or  organs,  so  does  the  body  of  Christ  through  individuals 
set  apart  thereunto. 

Consider,  again,  with  eespect  to  the  fiest-bobn — 

I.  That  God  claimed,   as   of  eight,   the  sebvices  of  all  the   firsi-boen 

BECAUSE   OF   their   PRESERVATION   THROnOH   THE    BLOOD   OP   THE    (PASSOVBR)    LAMB   IN 

Egypt.  Even  so  all  who  belong  to  "  the  general  assembly  and  Church  of  the  first- 
born," which  are  enrolled  not  in  the  lists  of  Aaron  on  earth,  but  in  the  book  of  God 
in  heaven  (Heb.  xii.  23),  i.  e.  all  Christian  people,  so  far  as  they  understand  their 
high  calling,  are  claimed  as  his,  and  wholly  his,  by  God;  and  this. because  he 
redeemed  them  by  the  precious  blood  of  Christ  (1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20 ;  Rom.  xiv.  8 ; 
1  Pet.  i.  19,  &c.).  And  notice  that  this  "  hallowing"  of  the  first-born  was  a  kind  of 
death.  All  the  first-born  throughout  the  land  of  Egypt  were  "  anathema  " — a  thing 
devoted.  God  had  claimed  them.  If  then  these  are  saved  from  the  destroyer  by 
the  death  of  the  substituted  lamb,  they  are  still  regarded  as  dead  unto  the  old, 
the  ordinary,  life  of  men  who  are  sui  juris,  as  living  only  for  God,  and  unto  God. 
And  this  is  precisely  and  unequivocally  the  position  of  all  redeemed  souls.  Christ 
did  not  die  that  they  should  not  die,  but  that  their  death  should  take  a  happy  and 
blessed  form,  instead  of  one  dark  and  terrible  (2  Cor.  v.  15  ;  Col.  iii.  3,  &c.).  Every 
soul,  elect,  first-born,  redeemed,  is  hallowed  and  dedicated  and  marked  as  dead  unto 
sin  and  self,  alive  only  unto  God. 

II.  That  the  first-born  were  numbered  by  name,  even  to  the  last  individual  ; 
which  does  not  seem  to  have  been  the  case  even  with  the  Levites.  Even  so  there  is 
no  one  of  his  redeemed,  first-born,  that,  does  not  come  into  separate  remembrance 
before  God,  because  a  soul  hallowed  by  the  precious  blood  is  of  priceless  worth. 

III.  That  the  odd  number  of  the  first-born  over  and  above  those  redeemed  by 
the  Levites  had  to  be  redeemed  with  a  price  ;  for  they  were  his,  and  he  could  by 
no  means  renounce  his  rights  over  any.  Even  so  all  the  assembly  of  the  first-born 
are  the  Lord's,  and  he  cannot  forego  his  claims  over  any  one  of  them,  neither  can 
any  one  of  them  say,  "  It  does  not 'matter  about  me — /  shall  not  signify — /  need  not 
be  counted."  The  services  of  all  are  due  to  Christ,  and  God  will  have  this  acknow- 
ledged without  any  exception. 

Consider,  again,  as  incidentally  appearing — 1.  That  the  whole  matter  begins  with 
the  genealogy  of  Aaron  and  Moses — the  priest  and  the  Ruler  in  Israel.  Even  so 
all  questions  of  religion  and  devotion,  however  seemingly  simple  or  entirely  prac- 
tical, do  really  begin  with  and  from  the  "generations"  of  him  who  is  both  Priest 
and  Ruler  in  Israel,  of  him  who  came  forth  out  of  Bethlehem,  whose  goings  forth 
are  from  everlasting  (Micah  v.  2).  And  so  do  the  Gospels  begin  with  the  human 
genealogy  (Matthew,  Luke),  or  the  Divine  (John),  of  the  Anointed,  or  with  the 
briefest  summary  of  both  (Mark—"  the  Son  of  God ").  2.  That  Nadab  and 
Abihu,  priests  of  the  line  of  Aaron,  who  offered  strange  fire,  had  no  children.  Even 
so  the  solitary  priesthood  of  Christ  is  ministered  visibly  in  the  Church,  and  there 
are  that  attempt  to  minister  it  presumptuously  and  falsely,  as  though  it  were  their 
own  ;  but  these  are  spiritually  barren,  and  leave  no  children  in  the  faith,  because 
the  blessing  and  power  of  God  is  not  with  their  ministry,  and  because  human 
ambitions  are  "  strange  "  to  the  gospel  of  love.  3.  That  Moses  and  Aaron  camped 
on  the  east  of  the  tabernacle,  as  the  place  at  once  most  central  and  most  near  the 
Divine  presence.  Even  so  our  King  and  Priest  doth  so  abide  as  that  he  may  ever 
appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us  (Heb.  ix.  24),  and  yet  may  ever  be  in  the  midrt 
«£  hia  OboTch  ^att.  zxviii.  20 ;  Bev.  ii.  1). 


Sa  tttfi  600S  OF  NUMBERS.  [ob.  tn.  1— «1. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ch.  iii. — The  families  of  Levi  get  their  several  commissions.  The  third  and 
fourth  chapters  of  Numbers  form  a  section  by  themselves,  and  of  this  section  the 
opening  verse  is  the  descriptive  title:  The  generations  of  Aaron  and  Moses. 
According  to  the  idiom  of  the  Bible,  this  means  that  the  two  chapters  which  follow 
constitute  the  Book  of  the  Families  of  Levi  (compare  the  titles  of  the  several  sec- 
tions of  Genesis,  viz.,  ch.  ii.  4  ;  v.  1 ;  vi.  9 ;  x.  1 ;  xi.  27,  &c.  ;  also  Matt.  i.  1).  The 
design  of  the  book  is  to  note  the  principal  divisions  of  the  tribe  and  allot  to  each 
its  place  and  duties.  Observe  how  the  names  of  Aaron  and  Moses  stand  where  we 
should  have  expected  to  find  Levi's.  The  patriarch's  fame  has  been  quite  eclipsed 
by  that  of  his  illustrious  descendants,  insomuch  that  here  the  tribe  takes  its  title  fiom 
them  rather  than  from  him.  The  book  of  the  Levites  is  entitled  the  Book  of  Aaron 
and  Moses. 

I.  In  this  family  book  the  pbe-eminbnce  is  given  to  Aaron.  The  name  of 
Moses  is  inscribed  in  the  title,  but  his  family  is  otherwise  of  no  note.  The  noble  self- 
denial  of  Moses  in  this  matter  has  been  much  commended,  and  with  reason.  He  wfis 
superior  to  the  ambition  which  seeks  to  build  up  a  family  at  whatever  cost  to  the 
nation.  There  is  some  reason  to  think  that  his  sons  were  unworthy.  Their  mother 
was  a  Midianite,  and  seems  to  have  had  little  sympathy  with  her  husband's  faith.  It 
was  otherwise  with  Aaron.  His  wife  was  a  daughter  of  Amminadab,  the  prince  of 
Judah  and  ancestor  of  our  Lord  (Exod.  vL  23).  Her  name  was  Elisheba  ("  a  wor- 
shipper of  God  ") ;  and  as  the  name  became  a  favourite  one  among  the  daughters  of 
the  priestly  house  (Luke  i.  6),  it  may  be  presumed  that  she  was  worthy  of  the  name, 
the  first  of  all  the  saintly  Elisabeths.  The  sons  of  Aaron  and  Elisabeth,  being  the 
"leirs  of  the  priesthood,  took  precedence  of  the  other  families  of  Levi,  and  occupied 
the  place  of  honour  in  the  camp.  They,  with  Moses,  pitched  their  tents  in  front  of 
the  tabernacle,  towards  the  east  (ver.  38).  Note  in  passing  how,  at  this  early  date, 
the  two  families  which  were  to  be  pre-eminent  for  fifteen  hundred  years  in  respect  of 
force  of  character,  variety  of  services,  and  public  honours  are  already  marked  out 
by  the  hand  of  God.  On  the  march  the  prince  of  Judah  leads  the  van  (ch.  i.  7 ;  ii. 
3,  9)  ;  in  the  encampment  Aaron  and  his  sons  occupy  the  place  of  honour.  In  the 
family  book  of  Levi  the  sons  of  Aaron  and  Elisabeth  take  precedence  of  all  their 
brethren.  Yet  not  so  as  to  give  any  foothold  in  Israel  to  that  sacerdotal  pride  which 
made  the  Brahmins  of  India  and  the  priests  of  Egypt  a  sacred  caste,  and  taught  the 
people  to  bow  before  them  as  demigods.  If  Aaron  and  Elisabeth  ever  read  this 
family  register,  their  hearts  did  not  swell  with  pride.  The  first  sentences  recall  the 
tragedy  of  their  house.  Aaron's  two  eldest  sons,  with  the  oil  of  their  consecration 
yet  fresh  upon  them,  sinned  presumptuously,  were  smitten,  and  their  names  perished 
from  Israel.  Not  even  in  the  house  of  the  godliest  pair  is  grace  hereditary.  Aaron, 
the  saint  of  God,  and  his  saintly  Elisabeth  mourn  over  sons  whom  God  has  cut  ofE  in 
their  sin.  God  will  endure  no  rival  in  his  house.  His  most  honoured  servants  must 
be  content  to  be  only  his  servants,  and  the  servants  of  all  men  for  his  sake.  The 
Bible  tolerates  no  hero  worship.  It  tells  the  truth  about  the  best  of  men,  lovingly 
indeed,  but  without  extenuation.  In  our  family  registers  we  are  not  bound  by  the 
same  rule.  We  do  not  occupy  the  throne  of  judgment,  and  may  bury  domestic 
tragedies  out  of  sight.  But  God  is  Judge,  and  his  book,  as  it  cannot  err  in  its 
judgments,  must  speak  without  reserve,  although  the  effect  should  be  to  "stain  the 
pride  of  all  glory  "  (Isa.  xxiii.  9). 

II.  The  greater  part  of  this  family  book  is  occnpiED  with  the  census  of 

THE   LeVITIOAL  clans  AND  THE  ALLOTMENT  TO   EACH   OF  ITS  PLACE  AND  DUTIES.      The 

particulars  falling  under  this  head  do  not  call  for  special  notice  here.  They  concur 
with  those  related  in  the  earlier  chapters  of  this  book  in  showing  that  the  march  of 
the  tribes  was  performed  with  the  most  perfect  order.  Never  was  any  great  multi- 
tude more  unlike  a  mob  than  the  congregation  in  the  wilderness.  Moses  in  Egypt 
had  shown  himself  a  man  "mighty  in  deeds  "  (Acts  vii.  22).  The  tradition  which 
makes  him  to  have  led  victorious  armies  in  his  youth  is  probably  true.  Certainly 
the  order  laid  down  in  Numbers  for  the  march  and  the  camp,  for  the  nation  in  general 


eft.  tti.  1-61.;)  *ttte  Soofe  OJ*  nuMber8.  23 

and  for  tlie  Levites  in  particular,  shows  everywhere  tlie  hand  of  the  general  accus- 
tomed to  handle  great  bodies  of  men. — Care  is  taken  to  put  on  record  the  reason 
for  the  separation  of  the  Levites  to  the  service  of  the  tabernacle.  By  primitive 
custom  a  certain  sanctity  was  attributed  to  the  first-born.  The  act  of  God  in  pass- 
ing over  the  first-born  of  Israel  in  Egypt  established  an  additional  claim  upon  the 
first-bom  thenceforward  (cf.  Exod.  xiii.,  also  cli.  xxii.  29,  &c.).  To  have  required 
the  personal  service  of  the  eldest  son  of  every  house  would  have  been  inconvenient. 
Better  let  the  tribe  of  Levi  be  substituted,  and  let  them  minister  to  Aaron  their  brother ; 
an  arrangement  facilitated  by  the  circumstance  that  tlie  Levites  were  nearly  the  same 
in  number  as  the  first-born.  (The  equation  is  not  without  its  difficulties.  But  there  ia 
great  doubtas  to  who  exactly  were  meant  by  the  "  first-born."  Till  that  is  settled  it 
is  too  soon  to  charge  the  narrative  with  error.)  It  was  needful  to  state  very  dis- 
tinctly the  reason  for  the  separation  of  a  whole  tribe  to  sacred  service.  The  tribe 
thus  separated  had  to  be  supported  by  their  brethren,  besides  being  disabled  fordoing 
their  share  of  military  and  other  public  service.  The  Israelites  would  be  unlike  the 
rest  of  mankind  if  they  did  not,  by  and  by,  grudge  such  a  great  expenditure.  They 
are  to  be  reminded  that  the  separation  of  the  Levites  was  in  liquidation  of  a  prior 
claim,  and  took  place  by  way  of  accommodation  to  their  convenience.  When  money 
or  service  is  asked  for  religious  or  charitable  objects  there  are  sure  to  be  grumblers,  and 
it  is  very  expedient  to  fortify  the  demand  with  a  clear  statement  of  the  reasons. — B. 

Ver.  4. — " Strange Jire."  There  are  various  kinds  of  "  fire"  used  in  the  service  of 
God  which,  if  not  as  hateful  in  his  sight  as  that  offered  by  Nadab  and  Abihu,  ar? 
"  strange."  There  is  a  fire  which  is  appropriate  and  acceptable,  because  kindled  by 
God  ;  all  others  are  "  strange  fire,  which  he  commanded  not"  (Levit.  x.  1).     ^.  g. — 

I.  Illegitimate  zeal,  as  seen  in  every  kind  of  persecution  (see  Luke  ix.  51 — 66). 
Yet  a  writer  on  the  origin  of  the  Inquisition  quotes  the  passage  in  justification  of  the 
burning  of  heretics  :  "  Lo  I  fire  the  punishment  of  heretics,  for  the  Samaritans  were 
the  heretics  of  those  times"  (Prescott's  'Ferdinand  and  Isnbella,'  i.  319,  ».).  See 
Gal.  iv.  18.  But  let  the  zeal  run  in  the  path  marked  out  for  it  by  Christ  towards 
enemies  (Matt.  v.  44),  backsliders  {Gal.  vi.  1),  or  heretics  (James  v.  19,  20). 

II.  Unadthorised  services  ;  whether  offered  by  unauthorised  persons,  as  Korah, 
who  yet  had  the  true  fire  (ch.  xvi.  17,  18),  or  Saul  (1  Siim.  xiii.  9 — 14),  or  Uzziah 
(2  Chron.  xxvi.)  ;  or  by  God's  servants,  but  in  ways  alien  to  his  mind  (Illua.,  Uzzah, 
1  Chron.  xiii.  9,  10  ;  xv.  13).  Such  are  the  "  voluntary  humility  "  and  "  neglecting 
of  the  body"  condemned  in  Col.  ii.  18 — 23,  and  all  similar  austerities.  The  tire  God 
approves  must  be  presented  by  accepted  worshippers  in  an  appointed  way-. 

III.  SuPBKSTiTious  DEVOTIONS.  Tliese  may  be  presented  through  Christ "  the  way,'' 
and  yet  marred  by  ignorant  fears  of  God,  or  unworthy  fancies,  or  errors  intertwined 
with  God's  truth  in  the  many  ways  known  to  ancient  or  modem  superstition  (1  John 
iv.  18 ;  V.  l»-rl5). 

IV.  Artificial  emotion.  We  need  never  dread  the  emotion  caused  by  God's 
own  truth,  used  in  legitimate  ways.  Truth  is  like  solid  fuel  that  ought  to  keep  up  a 
glowing  heat,  whether  of  alarm  (Acts  ii.  37  ;  xxiv.  25)  or  of  joy  (Acts  ii.  41).  But 
emotion  excited  apart  from  the  communication  of  appropriate  truth  may  be  disastrous ; 
or  at  best  like  a  blaze  of  straw,  soon  leaving  only  blackness  and  ashes.  All  such 
"strange  fire  "  tends  to  the  injury,  or  even  the  destruction,  of  the  offerers  (John  iv. 
24).  To  worship  God  in  truth  we  must  ourselves  be  "accepted  in  the  beloved," 
enlightened  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  must  present  spiritual  sacrifices  kindled  by  his 
own  celestial  fire  of  love. — P. 

Ver.  4. — A  mortal  sin.      "And  Nadab  and  Abihu  died  before  the  Lord,"  Sec. 

I.  Who  they  were  that  committed  this  sin.  Sons  of  Aaron  ;  e'der  sons,  in 
whom,  therefore,  a  greater  sense  of  thoughtf  ulness  and  responsibility  might  have  been 
expected.  They  had  also  been  duly  anointed  and  consecrated.  'They  could  hardly 
plead  ignorance  and  inexperience  in  the  things  of  God.  They  had  nothing  else  to 
do  than  attend  to  the  tabernacle.  They  knew,  or  ought  to  have  considered,  that 
Jehovah  had  laid  down  instructions,  even  to  the  minutest  points,  as  to  what  the 
prtests  were  to  do.  It  is  a  warning  then  to  all  who  stand  among  peculiar  privileges 
anfl  enjoy  greater  light,  «.  g.,  those  who  live  in  a  household  where  there  is  piety 


24 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[CH.  IV.  1 — id. 


at  tlie  head,  and  a  continual  regard  in  all  things  for  the  will  of  God  (Matt.  xi. 
20—24). 

II.  The  sin  thet  committed.  They  offered  strange  fire  before  the  Lord.  The 
fire  to  be  used  was  the  holy  fire  ever  burning  upon  the  altar  (Levit.  vi.  13).  To  ofEer 
incense  was  to  symbolise  thanksgiving  and  supplication,  and  this,  of  all  things, 
requires  to  be  done  in  most  careful  conformity  with  Divine  appointments.  All 
offerings  to  God,  to  be  worth  anything,  must  be  voluntary ^-  j'et  even  a  voluntary 
offering  maybe  an  abomination  before  him  when  it  is  a  random  and  reckless  exercise 
of  our  own  freedom.  The  highest  of  human  actions  is  to  do  God's  will  with  all  our 
will,  as  tieeing  clearly  that  it  is  the  right  thing  to  do. 

III.  The  terrible  conseqdenoe.  It  was  truly  a  mortal  sin,  a  sin  which  on  the 
very  commission  of  it  was  followed  by  death,  like  the  taking  of  some  swift-working 
poison.  It  was  as  dangerous  for  a  careless  priest  to  take  up  the  tabernacle  services 
as  for  a  man  to  take  naked  lights  about  a  powder  magazine.  The  fire  of  the  Lord 
was  a  hidden  thing,  yet  in  a  moment  its  full  energy  might  be  revealed,  either  to  bless 
or  destroy  (cf.  Levit.  ix.  24  with  Levit.  x.  2).  But  though  the  sin  was  a  mortal 
sin,  it  was  not  in  itself  worse  than  other  offences  against  which  sentence  is  not 
executed  speedily.  All  sin  is  mortal,  though  the  deadly  result  be  spread  oyer  long 
periods.  This  sin  was  punished  promptly  and  terribly,  as  were  some  other  sins  in 
Israel,  not  because  they  were  worse,  but  because  the  people,  and  particularly  the 
Levites,  needed  a  lesson  in  the  most  impressive  way  in  which  it  could  be  given.  The 
fire  of  the  Lord  went  out  against  the  priests  here,  but  soon  after  it  went  out  against 
the  people  (ch.  xi.  1).     "  Except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  likewise  perish." 

Lessons : — A  worthy  office  'may  have  an  unworthy  occupant.  There  are  'a  Nadab 
and  Abibu  here  ;  there  were  o  Hophni  and  Phinehas  afterwards,  and  a  Judis  among  the 
apostles.  Anointing,  consecration,  imposition  of  hands  may  have  ofSoial  value,  but 
God  only  can  give  the  faculty  of  true  inward  service.  We  may  bring  strange  fire 
before  God  when  we  bring  zeal  not  according  to  knowledge.  There  may  be  great 
fire  and  intensity  and  activity  with  nothing  of  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of 
fire.  Consider  the  lamentations  of  Paul  over  his  persecuting  days.  There  is  here 
another  instance  of  the  letter  killing.  In  the  Old  Testament  punishment  predominated 
over  reward,  because  disobedience  predominated  over  obedience. — Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER   rV. 


The  duties  of  the  Lbvitbs  (ch.  iv.). 
Ver.  2. — Take  the  sum  of  the  BonB  of  Kohatli. 
The  Levites  having  been  separated  from  the 
other  tribes,  the  Kohathites  are  now  to  be 
separated  from  amongst  the  other  Levites  for 
the  most  honourable  and  sacred  duties.  To 
them  the  preference  was  given  presumably 
because  the  priests  were  Kohathites. 

Ver.  3. — From  thirty  years  old  and  up- 
ward. The  age  at  which  they  became  liable 
for  service  was  shortly  after  reduced  to  twenty- 
five  (ch.  viii.  24),  and  at  a  later  period  to 
twenty  (1  Chron.  xxiii.  27).  In  the  wilder- 
ness a  larger  number  of  the  men  might  be 
required  to  attend  to  their  own  camps,  and 
their  own  families ;  but  the  explanation  may 
probably  be  found  in  the  unusually  large 
proportion  who  were  at  this  time  between 
the  ages  of  thirty  and  fifty.  The  Septuagint 
has  altered  thirty  into  twenty-five  to  make 
it  agree  with  ch.  viii.  24.  Thirty  years  be- 
came among  the  Jews  the  perfect  age  at  which 
\  man  attained  to  full  maturity,  and  entered 
ipon  all  his  rights  and  duties  (cf.  Luke  iii 


23).  Into  the  host.  Not  the  military  ranks, 
but  the  tniKtia  sacra  of  the  Lord.  To  do  the 
work.     Literally,  "to  war  the  warfare." 

Ver.  4.  —  About  the  moat  holy  things. 
Rather,  "  the  most  holy  things  ;  "  they  were 
the  service  of  the  Kohathites.  So  the  Septu- 
agint. 

Ver.  5. — The  covering  veil.  The  curtain 
which  hung  before  the  holy  of  holies,  after- 
wards known  as  "the  veil  of, the  temple" 
(Luke  xxiii.  45). 

Ver.  6. — The  covering  of  badgers'  skins. 
Probably  of  sea-cow  skins  (tachash),  but  see 
Exod.  XXV.  6.  The  Targum  of  Palestine,  and 
the  Septuagint,  both  render  it  "a  covering 
of  hyacinthine  skin. "  The  later  Jews  would 
have  no  knowledge  of  the  marine  animals 
common  on  the  shores  of  the  Red  Sea.  A 
cloth  wholly  of  blue.  This  was  the  dis- 
tinctive outer,  and  therefore  visible,  covering 
of  the  most  sacred  thing,  the  ark. 

Ver.  7.— The  dishes,  and  the  spoons,  and 
the  bowls,  and  covers  to  cover  withal. 
Rather,  "the  plates,  the  bowls,  the  wine 
pitchers,  and  the  chalices  for  pouring  out," 
i.  «.  the  diiuk  offerings.    The  two  first  seem 


oa.  IV.  1 — 49.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS. 


26 


to  have  been  used  in  the  meat  offering,  the 
two  last  in  the  drink  offering. 

Ver.  8. — Shall  put  in  the  staves  thereof. 
This  fonmila  is  repeated  alike  with  reference 
to  the  ark,  the  table,  and  the  two  altars.  It 
would  therefore  be  natural  to  suppose  that 
the  staves  had  all  been  taken  out  while  the 
various  coverings  were  put  on.  On  the  other 
hand,  it  is  expressly  directed  in  Exod.  xxv. 
15  that  the  staves  of  the  ark  shall  "  not  be 
taken  from  it."  Two  explanations  are  pos- 
sible. Either  the  former  command  does  not 
contemplate  the  necessity  of  wrapping  up  the 
ark,  and  only  applies  to  all  times  when  it 
was  at  rest,  or  in  movement ;  or  else  the 
latter  direction  only  means,  in  the  case  of 
the  ark,  that  the  staves  should  be  adjusted 
for  the  purpose  of  bearing. 

Ver.  9. — Snuff-dishes.  Some  render  this 
word  "extinguishers,"  but  it  could  hardly 
bear  that  meaning,  since  it  also  signifies 
censers  in  ch.  xvi.  6,  and  fire-pans  in  Exod. 
xxvii.  3.  They  were  evidently  shallow  metal 
pans  available  for  many  different  purposes. 

Ver.  10. — Upon  a  bar— i.  e.  a  bearing- 
frame.  'Eir'  dva^optwi',  Septuagint;  "upon 
a  rest,"  Targum  of  Palestine. 

Ver.  12. — All  the  instruments  of  ministry. 
These  do  not  seem  to  be,  at  any  rate  exclu- 
sively, the  vessels  pertaining  to  the  golden 
altar.  They  are  not  packed  up  with  it,  but 
separately,  in  a  blue  cloth  and  a  skin  cover- 
ing of  their  own.  Probably  they  include 
all  the  vessels  and  utensils  used  inside  the 
tabernacle  which  have  not  been  previously 
mentioned. 

Ver.  13. — Take  away  the  ashes.  This  is 
omitted  by  the  Septnagint.  The  Hebrew 
word  for  "ashes"  is  of  somewhat  doubtful 
meaning,  being  only  used  here  and  in  Exod. 
xxvii.  3 ;  Ps.  xx.  8  (see  margin).  Being 
connected  with  the  word  "  fat,"  it  may  per- 
haps mean  the  grease  or  dripping  from  the 
burnt  offerings.  The  Targum  of  Palestine 
renders  it  ' '  cinders. "  As  the  altar  was  hol- 
low, and  was  filled  with  earth  or  stones  when 
used,  there  would  be  no  need  to  cleanse  it 
from  ashes  ;  if  this  be  the  meaning  of  the 
word,  the  comfliand  would  rather  have  been 
to  collect  the  living  embers  before  the  altar 
was  removed,  in  order  to  keep  alive  the  sacred 
fire.  That  this  fire  was  never  allowed  to  go 
out  may  be  looked  upon  as  certain. 

Ver.  15. — These  things  are  the  burden  of 
the  sons  of  Kohath.  One  thing  which  the 
Kohathites  almost  certainly  had  to  carry  is 
omitted  here,  possibly  because  it  was  carried 
without  any  cover  at  all,  and  was  not  regarded 
as  of  equal  sanctity  with  the  rest.  Anyhow, 
the  omission  is'  very  remarkable,  and  may 
have  been  accidental.  It  is  supplied  by  the 
Septnagint  and  the  Samaritan  text  in  the 
following  addition  to  ver.  14:  "And  they 
fdball  take  a  purple  cloth,  and  cover  the  laver 


and  its  foot,  and  they  shall  put  it  into  a 
hyacinthine  cover  of  skin,  and  put  it  on 
bars."  The  burdens  of  the  Kohathites  were 
six,  not  counting  the  laver  and  its  foot :  (1) 
the  ark  ;  (2)  the  table  of  shewbread  ;  (3)  the 
candelabrum  ;  (4)  the  golden  altar  ;  (5)  "in- 
struments of  ministry;"  (6)  the  frame  of  the 
brazen  altar. 

Ver.  16.— To  the  office  of  Eleazar,  .  .  . 
oversight.  Septua.^'int,  iniaicoTrot;  'KAfoJnp 
.  .  .  y  iTTiaieovt).  On  him  was  laid  the  over- 
sight of  and  the  responsibility  for  all  the 
material  appliances  of  Divine  worship,  and 
in  especial  it  devolved  upon  him  to  see  to  the 
oil,  the  incense,  and  the  chrism,  and  the 
materials  for  the  daily  meat  offering.  No 
doubt  it  is  intended,  allhough  not  precisely 
e.'cpres.ied,  that  the  Kohathites  were  specially 
under  his  orders. 

Ver,  18.— Cut  ye  not  off  the  tribe  of  the 
families  of  the  Kohathites.  The  word  tribe 
(sheOet)  is  used  in  an  unusual  way  hei'e, 
not  in  the  sense  of  tribus,  but  of  stirps. 
Perhaps  as  Levi  was  himself  a  microcosm  of 
all  Israel,  so  liis  families  ranked  as  tribes ; 
and  no  doubt  they  remained  more  distinct 
than  the  families  of  any  other  tribe.  The 
meaning  of  the  coimnaud  is  plainly  this, 
"Take  care  thiit  the  Kohathites  are  not  cut 
off  through  any  negligence  or  want  of  con- 
sideration on  your  part ; "  and  the  form  of 
the  command,  "cut  ye  not  off,"  conveyed 
most  emphatically  the  warning,  that  if  any 
mischief  befell  the  Kohathites  which  the 
priests  could  have  prevented,  they  would  be 
responsible  for  it  in  the  sight  of  God.  No 
doubt,  as  a  fact,  the  Kohathites  would  take 
their  cue  from  the  conduct  of  the  priests  :  if 
they  were  iiTeverent  and  careless,  the  Levites 
would  be  the  same,  and  would  sooner  or  later 
presume,  and,  presuming,  would  die. 

Ver.  19. — Thus  do  unto  them,  i.  e.  exactly 
as  commanded  in  vers.  6 — 15. 

Ver.  20. — They  shall  not  go  in  to  see 
when  the  holy  things  are  covered.  Thi.s 
translation  is  disputed.  The  word  rendered 
"are  covered"  is  the  Piel  infinitive  from 
hala,  to  swallow,  and  so  to  destroy.  It  may 
signify  the  extreme  rapidity  with  which  the 
most  holy  things  were  hidden  from  sight 
and  removed  from  touch,  so  as  to  become, 
as  it  were,  non-existent  for  the  time.  So 
the  Syriac,  Arabic,  Samaritan,  and  the  Tar- 
gums  of  Onkelos  and  Palestine.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  may  be  a  proverbial  expression, 
"in  a  swallow,  at  a  gulp,"  i.  e.  "for  an  in- 
stant," as  in  Job  vii.  19.  And  so  the  Septna- 
gint, i^a-iriva,  and  most  modem  scholars. 
Whichever  way,  however,  we  take  it,  the 
phrase,  "  they  shall  not  go  in  to  see,"  seems 
to  limit  the  prohibition  under  pain  of  death  to 
the  deliberate  act  of  entering  the  tahemarde 
out  of  curiosity  duringthe  process  of  packing 
up  the  holy  things.    The  case  of  the  men  of 


§6 


tflfe  fiOOK  OP  NUifBEfeS. 


tea.  tt.  1—49. 


Bethshemesh,  therefore  (1  Sam.  yi.  19),  does 
not  fall  within  the  letter  of  this  law,  although 
it  does  within  its  spirit.  The  command, 
thus  limited,  is  no  doubt  an  addition  to  the 
preyious  command  not  to  touch,  but  it  is 
altogether  in  keeping  with  it.  If  it  was 
the  will  of  God  to  hedge  about  these  sacred 
symbols  of  his  presence  and  his  worship  with 
an  awful  sanctity,  it  is  obvious  that  he  was 
as  much  bound  to  defend  them  against  the 
irreverent  prying  of  the  eye  as  against  the 
irreverent  touch  of  the  hand  ;  and  the  prying 
here  prohibited  would  have  been  distinctly 
wilful  and  inexcusable. 

Ver.  25. — They  shall  bear  the  curtains, 
&c.  For  these  four  coverings,  of  tapestry, 
of  goats'  hair,  of  rams'  skins,  and  of  sea- 
cow  skin  respectively,  see  Exod.  xxvi.  In 
addition  to  these,  the  Gershonites  carried  all 
the  hangings  belonging  to  the  tabernacle 
and  to  the  outer  court,  with  the  single  ex- 
ception of  the  "veil"  which  was  wrapped 
round  the  ark. 

Ver.  26. — And  their  cords,  and  all  the 
instrnments  of  their  service.  Taking  this 
verse  in  connection  with  ver.  37,  we  must 
understand  the  word  "  their"  as  applying  to 
the  things  mentioned  in  the  previous  verse. 
The  Merarites  carried  the  cords,  &c.  of  the 
hangings  of  the  court. 

Ver.  28. — Under  the  hand  of  Ithamar,  as 
also  were  the  Merarites.  He  had  been  already 
engaged  in  overseeing  the  construction  of  tlie 
tabernacle  (Exod.  xxxviii.  21). 

Ver.  31.  —  This  is  the  charge  of  their 
burden,  viz.,  all  the  solid  parts  of  the  fabric 
of  the  tabernacle  and  its  court  ;  by  far  the 
heaviest  burden,  and  so  allotted  to  the  largest 
number. 

Ver.  32. — By  name  ye  shall  reckon  the 
instrnments  of  the  charge  of  their  burden. 
This  injunction  only  occurs  here.  The 
fieptuagint  has  "number  them  by  name, 
and  aU  the  articles  borne  by  them."  Per- 
haps the  solid  parts  of  the  fabric  were 
numbered  for  convenience  of  setting  up, 
and,  therefore,  were  assigned  each  to  its 
own  bearer. 

Ver.  48. — Those  that  were  numbered  of 
them  were  eight  thousand  and  five  hundred 
and  fourscore.  The  census  of  each  family 
is  described  in  the  same  form  of  words  with 
much  particularity.  No  doubt  it  was  carried 
out  with  extreme  solicitude,  as  made  for  a 
purpose  especially  sacred  and  important. 
The  results  are  remarkable  in  more  ways 
than  one.  The  following  table  presents  the 
numbers  in  each  family  above  one  month, 
tnd  between  the  ages  of  thirty  and  fifty. 

Kohath,  8600  2750  percent.  32 
Gershon,  7500  2630  „  ,,  35 
Mentri,         6200        3200     „     „      51 

22,300        8680     „    „      38 


The  first  conclusion  which  naturally  arises 
from  these  figures  is,  that  after  all  the  num- 
bering must  have  been  made  by  tens,  and 
not  by  individuals.     As  it  was  impossible 
that  3000  persons  could  be   employed  in 
carrying  the  various  portions  of  the  taber- 
nacle, it  may  be  that  each  group  of  ten 
undertook  a  unit  of   responsibility.     The 
second  consideration  is,  that  the  average  of 
men  between  thirty  and  fifty  in  all  Levi  is 
higher  than  modern  statistics  show  (it  is  said 
to  be  twenty-five  per  cent,  now  in  the  whole 
population),  although  not  very  materially. 
The  third  is,  that  this  average  is  very  un- 
equally distributed,  rising  to  a  most  remark- 
able proportion  in  the  case  of  Merari.     It  is 
quite  clear  that  something  must  have  dis- 
turbed the  relative  numbers  as  between  the 
Merarites  and  the  other  families.     It  has  been 
suggested  that  the  small  number  of  male 
Levites  generally,  and  the  small  number  of 
male   Kohathites,  between  thirty  and  fifty 
especially,  may  have  been  caused  by  heavy 
losses  incurred  in  carrying  out  the  Divine 
sentence  upon  the  worshippers  of  the  golden 
calf  (Exod.  xxxii.).     But— 1.  The  slow  in- 
crease of  Levi  continued  to  be  very  observable 
down  to  the  time  of  David  ;  while  the  other 
tribes  grew  from   600,000  to  1,300,000,  he 
only  increased  to  38,000  (1  Chron.  xxiii.  3). 
2.  The  average  of  males  over  thirty  is  already 
higher  among  the  Kohathites  than  might 
have  been  expected ;  it  is  the  largeness  of 
the  number,  not  the  smallness,  which  needs 
to  be  explained.     3.  It  is  Merari,  and  not 
Kohath,  that  is  markedly  distinguished  from 
the  other  two :  there  is  little  difference  be- 
tween Kohath  and  Gershon.     It  is  evident 
that  something  must  have  happened  to  the 
tribe  of  Levi,  and  in  especial  to  the  family 
of  Merari,  to  reduce  very  greatly  the  number 
of  births  within  the  last  thirty  years.     We 
do  not  know  what  the  causes  were,  or  why 
they  should  have  pressed  much  more  heavily 
on  one  tribe,  or  one  family,  than  on  another ; 
but  it  is  easy  to  see  that  many  such  causes 
may  have  acted,  and  acted  unequally,  under 
the  ci-uel  tyranny  of  Pharaoh.     The  children 
may  have  been  systematicaDy  slaughtered, 
or  marriages  may  have  largely  ceased,  while 
Moses  was  in  'the  land  of  Midian.     If  this 
were  generally  the  case,   it    would   much 
diminish  the  estimated  total  of  tlie  nation, 
and  still  more  the  estimated  difficulties  of 
the  march. 

Ver.  49. — Thug  were  they  numbered  of 
him.  Literally,  "  and  his  mustering."  It 
may  have  the  meaning  given  to  it  in  the 
A.  y.  (and  so  the  Septuagint  and  Targums), 
or  it  may  be  translated  "mustered  things," 
i.  e.  things  assigned  to  him  in  the  mustering, 
and  read  with  the  previous  words,  "  Every 
one  to  his  service,  and  to  his  burden,  and 
his  mustered  things. " 


6±  IV.  1—49.3  ttiE  ]&00S;  OP  irtJMBtefiS.  27 


HOMILETICS. 

Ch.  iv. — Duties  of  the  Church  militant.  In  this  chapter  we  have,  spiritually, 
certain  duties  of  the  Church  on  the  way  to  heaven  in  respect  of  faith  and  worship, 
and  the  spirit  in  which  matters  of  religion  ought  to  be  conducted.  Consider, 
therefore — 

I.  That  the  Divine  rule  in  the  care  of  the  sanctuary  was  one  op  distri- 
bution. Each  family  within  the  tribe,  each  group  within  the  family,  perhaps  each 
individual  in  the  group,  had  his  own  allotted  "burden."  Kohath  did  not  interfere 
with  Merari,  nor  did  Merari  come  into  collision  with  Gershon.  Even  so,  in  all 
religious  and  ecclesiastical  labours,  distribution  is  the  rule  of  the  gospel,  the  Holy 
Spirit  dividing  to  each  severally  as  ho  will  (1  Cor.  sii.  passim;  Bph.  iv.  11 — 18). 
And  note  that  this  distribution  was  not  made  according  to  any  superiority  that  we 
know  of,  but  rather  the  reverse.  Levi  himself  was  by  far  the  smallest  of  the  twelve 
tribes,  and  Merari  was  by  far  the  largest  (for  the  purpose  in  hand)  of  the  three 
families.  Even  so  under  the  gospel  no  rules  of  humnn  pre-eminence  restrict  the 
Divine  distribution  of  gifts  and  offices  ;  rather,  the  first    liall  be  last,  and  the  last  first. 

II.  That  the  whole  fabric  of  the  tabernacle  had  to  be  continually  taken 
TO  pieces  and  reconstructed,  as  the  host  moved  on  in  its  appointed  path.  Even 
so,  in  the  onward  progress  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  the  outward  form  and  frame  of 
religion  has  to  be  constantly  built  up  afresh  with  ceaseless  labour.  For  each  succeed- 
ing century,  for  each  new  generation  that  comes  up,  for  each  new  nation  added  to 
the  Church,  the  fabric  of  its  faith  and  worship  has  to  be  built  up  from  the  beginning. 
If  not,  religion,  like  the  tabernacle,  would  be  left  far  behind,  the  empty  monument 
of  a  forsaken  faith. 

III.  That,  on  the  other  hand,  the  fubnitdkb  of  the  tabernacle  and  its  con- 
stituent PARTS,  though  perpetually  BEING  RECONSTRUCTED,  YET  REMAINED  IDENTIC- 
ALLY THE  SAME.  Nothing  lost,  nothing  added.  Even  so  the  elements  of  our  faith 
and  worship  must  remain  unchangeably  the  same  from  age  to  age ;  nothing  really  old 
cast  away,  nothing  really  new  introduced.  "  The  faith  once  (for  all)  delivered  to  the 
saints."  Worship  primitive  and  apostolic.  However  fresh  the  putting  together,  the 
substance  eternally  the  same. 

IV.  That  while  the  whole  fabric  was  to  be  carried  with  great  care  and 

REVERENCE,  YET  THE  MOST  SOLICITOUS  CARE  AND  THE  MOST  PROFOUND  REVERENCE  WERE 
RESERVED   FOB   THOSE   HOLY   THINGS   WHICH   THE    FABRIC   ENSHRINED.      Even  SO  all  that 

is  any  part  of  our  religion,  claiming  any  Divine  authority,  is  to  be  handed  down  and 
carried  on  with  care  and  with  respect ;  but  it  is  the  few  central  facts  and  truths  of 
revelation  upon  which  the  loving  veneration  and  extreme  solicitude  of  Christian 
teachers  and  people  must  be  concentrated. 

V.  That  amongst  these  the  ark  was  first  and  foremost,  having  three  cover- 
ings, and  being  distinguished  outwardly  also  by  its  blue  cloth.  Even  so  it  is  the 
incarnation  of  God  in  Christ — the  doctrine  of  Emmanuel,  God  with  us — which  is 
before  all  other  things  precious  and  holy,  to  be  guarded  with  the  most  reverent  and 
jealous  care,  to  be  distinguished  openly  with  the  most  evident  honour.     And  note 

(1)  that  as  the  mercy-seat,  resting  on  the  ark,  and  forming  its  lid,  was  carried  whither- 
soever the  ark  went,  and  shared  in  all  its  honour,  so  the  doctrine  of  propitiation  and 
of  God  reconciled  to  men,  resting  as  it  does  essentially  upon  the  doctrine  of 
Emmanuel — God  with  us — is  carried  ever  with  it,  and  honoured  with  it.     And  note 

(2)  that  as  blue  is  the  colour  of  heaven,  so  the  blue  outer  covering  of  the  ark  (alone) 
may  signify  that  the  greatest  efEort  of  the  Church's  teachers  should  be  so  to  present 
thedoctrine  of  God  in  Christ  before  men  that  it  may  appear  clad  in  heavenly  love 
and  beauty. 

VI.  That  the  shew-bread  was  not  allowed  to  fail  from  its  table  even  during 
THE  journey,  but  was  carefully  placed  upon  it  and  so  carried,  and  thus  answered  to 
its  name  of  "  continual  bread."  Even  so  it  is  certain  that  the  "  living  Bread  which 
came  down  from  heaven  "  must  be  with  the  Church  as  her  "  continual  Bread  "  in  all 
her  marches.  But  it  is  more  commonly  considered  that  the  shew-bread  in  its  twelve 
loaves  represents  the  whole  people  of  God,  in  all  its  sections,  as  always  present  to  tin 


Sd  THE  BOOK  OF  KUMBEKS.  [ch.  iv.  1-49. 

eye  of  God,  and  always  remembered  before  him  for  good ;  in  which  case  this  would 
emphasise  the  truth  that  we  must  without  any  intermission  b^  had  in  merciful 
remembrance  before  God,  lest  we  die.  And  note  (1)  that  as  the  shew-bread  on  the 
table  was  covered  with  a  cloth  ,of  scarlet,  which  is  the  colour  of  atoning  blood,  this 
may  signify  that  it  is  as  covered  by  and,  so  to  speak,  seen  through  the  precious 
blood  of  Christ  that  the  Church  in  all  her  travail  is  remembered  before  God  for 
good.  And  note  (2)  that  as  the  ark  and  the  table  were  more  honoured  in  their  cover- 
ings than  the  rest,  though  the  ark  most  of  all,  this  may  intimate  that  the  two  doctrines 
of  chiefest  honour  in  the  faith  are  those  of  Christ  and  of  his  Church,  {.  e.  of  God  in 
Christ,  and  Christ  in  us  ;  God  present  with  us  through  Christ,  and  we  present  before 
God  through  Christ  (John  xvii.  20—23,  26). 

VII.  That  the  sons  of   Kohath    were   to   carry  those  holy  things,  but 

NEITHER   TO   TOUCH    THEM    NOB   TO   GO    IN    TO   SEE   THEM    FOR   AN    INSTANT,    LEST   THEY 

SHOULD  DIE.  Even  SO  the  holy  mysteries  of  the  gospel  are  ever  to  be  borne  onwards, 
but  neither  to  be  handled  with  irreverent  carelessness  nor  pried  into  with  irreverent 
curiosity,  else  they  become  the  savour  of  death  rather  than  of  life.  It  is  indeed  true 
that  in  Clirist  "  the  veil  is  taken  away,"  and  that  now  the  gospel  is  openly  declared 
to  all  nations  ;  but  it  is  also  true,  as  to  its  central  doctrines,  that  wilful  irreverence 
and  idle  curiosity  are  visited  with  severer  punishments,  because  purely  spiritual,  now 
than  then.  It  ie  not  possible  that  any  one  be  saved  by  faith  if  he  handle  the  faith 
with  rude  familiarity,  as  having  nothing  sacred  for  him,  or  with  cold  curiosity,  as  a 
matter  of  mere  intellectual  interest  (cf.  Matt.  xxi.  44;  Luke  ii.  34;  2  Cor.  ii.  16. 
Of.  also  1  Cor.  xi.  29,  30). 

VIII.  That  the  priests  were  charged  not  to  "cut  off"  the  Kohathites,  i.e. 

NOT  to  cause  THBIB  DEATH  BY  GIVING  THEM  EXAMPLE  OR  OPPORTUNITY  OF  IRREVER- 
ENCE   IN   THEIR   NECESSARY   WORK   ABOUT  THE  SACRED   THINGS  WHICH    WOULD   BB    FATAL 

TO  THEM.  Even  so  an  enormous  responsibility  is  laid  upon  all  who  are  set  over 
others  in  the  Lord,  especially  with  respect  to  those  who  are  necessarily  brought  into 
outward  contact  with  religion.  Those  who,  being  custodes  of  sacred  treasures,  set  an 
example  of  irreverence  to  those  associated  with  them,  or  give  them  the  impression  of 
secret  unbelief  in  what  they  preach  or  minister  (an  impression  how  quickly  caught  I ), 
will  be  held  respoiisible  for  any  souls  that  may  perish  thereby.  How  miserably  true 
that,  "  the  nearer  the  Church,  the  further  from  God  ;  "  that  none  are  so  hardened  as 
those  whose  outward  duties  are  concerned  with  the  maintenance  of  public  worship  ; 
that  no  families  are  so  notoriously  irreligious  as  those  of  Church  dignitaries  and  other 
ministers  of  God  1  And  this  due  not  more  to  the  subtle  danger  arising  from  famili- 
arity with  the  forms  of  religion,  than  to  the  subtler  danger  arising  from  the  irreverent 
and  careless  conduct  and  temper  of  the  ministers  of  religion.  How  often  do  such,  by 
their  behaviour  at  home,  or  when  o£E  duty,  leave  an  impression  of  unbelief  or  of 
indifierence,  which  they  do  not  really  feel,  upon  their  families,  dependants,  subordin- 
ates I  How  awful  the  responsibility  of  such  an  one  I  He  has  "  cut  off  "  souls  which 
were  most  nearly  in  his  charge  from  amongst  the  people  of  God.  The  poison- 
breath  of  his  (it  may  be,  heedless)  irreverence  has  blighted  their  eternal  future. 
And  this  holds  true,  in  its  measure,  of  fathers,  masters,  all  who  lead  the  religion  of 
others.  And  note  that  as  Aaron  and  his  sons  could  only  escape  responsibility  for 
any  catastrophe  among  the  Kohathites  by  doing  exactly  as  the  Lord  commanded 
in  the  matter  (see  ver.  19),  even  so  we  can  only  escape  responsibility  for  the  loss  of 
other  souls  by  following  exactly  the  Divine  precepts ;  if  we  allow  ourselves  to  deviate 
from  them  at  all,  others  through  our  example  will  deviate  from  them  more:  we  are 
our  brothers'  keepers  to  the  uttermost  reach  of  our  example. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — None  may  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord  hut  Levites  at  their  best. 
From  the  giving  of  the  law  till  the  building  of  Solomon's  temple,  a  space  of  about 
600  years,  the  Lord  at  no  time  "dwelt  in  any  house,  but  walked  in  a  tent 
and  in  a  tabernacle  "  (2  Sam.  vii.  6).  The  sanctuary  was  a  moving  tent,  and  one 
principal  part  of  the  business  of  the  Levites,  the  most  honourable  function  assigned 
io  them,  was  the  carriage  of  it  from  place  to  place.    Moses,  who  regulated  so  exactly 


OH.  IV.  1—49.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBBES. 


tne  order  of  all  the  tribes,  both  for  the  march  and  the  encampment,  did  not  omit  to 
appoint  to  every  division  of  the  Levites  its  duty  in  relation  to  the  tabernacle  and  its 
holy  furniture — what  each  was  to  carry,  and  in  what  order  they  were  to  pitch  their  tents. 
In  this  chapter  of  detailed  regulations,  special  interest  attaches  to  the  law  laid  down 
regarding  thb  Levites'  period  op  service  in  carrying  the  tabernacle.  It  was  from 
thirty  j-earsold  till  fifty  (vers.  3,  23,  30).  This  must  be  taken  along  with  chap.  viii. 
24,  where  the  age  for  entering  on  service  is  fixed  at  twenty-five.  The  explanation  of  the 
seeming  discrepancy,  no  doubt,  is  that  the  first  five  years  were  a  kind  of  apprentice- 
ship. Certain  other  sorts  of  work  about  the  tabernacle  the  Levites  might  do  between 
twenty-five  and  thirty,  and  these  they  might  continue  to  do,  so  far  as  their  strength 
served,  long  after  fifty ;  but  except  between  thirty  and  fifty  they  might  not  bear  the 
tabernacle  and  its  vessels.  When  David  gave  to  the  ark  a  permanent  abode  at 
Jerusalem,  and  the  service  of  the  Levites  was  readjusted  accordingly,  the  age  for 
entering  on  duty  was  lowered  to  twenty,  and  at  that  point  it  thereafter  stood  (see  1 
Chron.  xxiii.  27  ;  Ezra  iii.  8).  The  principle  underlying  the  law  was  still  the  same. 
The  service  of  God,  especially  in  its  most  sacred  parts,  requires  and  deserves  the 
best  of  our  years,  our  strength,  our  affections.  His  soul  desires  the  first  ripe  fruit. 
There  are  three  errors  men  are  apt  to  fall  into  in  this  matter  of  service  ;  I  refer  more 
especially  to  ofiiciat  service.  1.  Some  enter  on  it  too  young.  No  hard  and  fast  line 
can  be  drawn  for  all  men  and  every  service.  One  kind  of  service  demands  greater 
maturity  than  another,  and  one  man  ripens  earlier  than  another.  But  the  rule  here 
prescribed  to  the  Levites  is  a  good  one  for  the  average  of  cases.  To  speak  only  of 
the  Christian  ministry :  few  men  under  twenty-five  are  ripe  for  it,  and  places  of 
special  trust  would  require  a  man  of  thirty.  Undue  haste  is  neither  reverent  nor 
safe.  The  first  sermon  of  our  blessed  Lord  was  not  preached  till  "  he  began  to  be 
about  thirty  years  of  age  "  (Luke  iii.  23)  ;  a  touching  and  most  suggestive  example. 

2.  Some  delay  entering  till  they  are  too  old.  This  is  most  frequently  seen  in 
unofficial  service.  Many  meji,  not  destitute  of  piety,  think  it  incumbent  on  them  to 
give  their  prime  so  entirely  to  "  business  "  that  they  have  no  time  for  anything  else. 
Church  work,  home  mission  work,  charity  services,  participation  in  these  they  look  for- 
ward to  as  the  employment  of  their  leisure,  after  they  shall  have  retired  from  business. 
That,  at  the  best,  is  giving  to  the  Lord  not  the  first-fruits,  but  the  gleanings.  It  will 
be  found  that,  as  a  rule,  it  is  not  these  tardy  labourers  whom  God  honours  to  be  most  use- 
ful. He  honours  those  rather  (thank  God,  they  are  many,  and  increasing  in  number) 
who  consecrate  to  him  a  fair  proportion  of  their  strength  when  they  are  at  their  prime. 

3.  Some  do  not  know  when  it  is  time  for  them  to  resign.  The  Levites'  period  of 
active  service,  whether  it  began  at  thirty,  or  twenty-five,  or  twenty,  always  ended  at 
fifty.  Not  that  the  law  thrust  them  out  of  the  sanctuary  when  their  term  expired  ; 
that  would  have  been  cruelty  to  men  who  loved  the  service.  They  might  still  fre- 
quent the  sanctuary,  and  perform  occasional  ofBces  (see  ch.  viii.  26).  But  after  fifty 
they  ceased  to  be  on  the  regular  staff.  Here  too  the  rule  has  to  be  applied  to  the 
Christian  Church  with  discrimination.  For  services  which  are  chariicteristieally 
mental  and  spiritual,  a  man's  prime  certainly  does  not  cease  at  fifty.  Nevertheless, 
the  principle  at  the  root  of  the  rule  is  of  undying  vahdity  and  importance.  The 
Levites'  maintenance  did  not  cease  at  fifty  ;  and  any  Church  system  which  does  not 
make  such  provision  as  enables  its  ministers  to  retire  when  their  strength  fails  is 
unscripturnl  (ind  defective.  On  the  other  part,  it  is  the  duty  and  will  be  the  wisdom 
of  the  Church's  servants  to  seek  retirement  when  they  are  no  longer  able  to  minister  to 
the  Lord  with  fresh  vigour. — B. 

Vers.  17—20. — The  Lord  is  to  he  served  with  fear.  "  Lest  they  die  :  "that  note  of 
warning  is  often  heard  in  the  law.  If  any  man  or  woman  touched  the  flaming  mount, 
it  was  death  (Exod.  xix.  12).  It  was  death  if  the  high  priest  entered  into  the  holiest 
on  any  day  but  one,  or  on  that  day  if  he  omitted  to  shroiid  the  mercy-seat  in  a  cloud 
of  fragrant  incense  (Levit.  xvi.  3—13).  It  was  death  if  any  son  of  Aaron  transgressed 
the  ritual,  were  it  only  by  officiating  in  any  other  than  the  appointed  garments 
(Exod.  xxviii.  43).  In  the  same  strain,  this  law  in  Numbers  malies  it  death  for  any 
common  Levite  to  touch,  or  gaze  upon,  the  holy  things  till  the  priest  has  piicked 
thsm  up  in  their  thick  wrappings  (vera.  19,  ?0;  cf.  c|i, ».  b\ ;  iii.  10).    I'he  example 


30  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [ch.  iv.  1—49. 


first  of  Nadab  and  Abihu,  and  afterwards  of  Korah  and  his  company,  shonred  that 
these  threats  were  spoken  in  earnest.  We  cannot  marvel  that,  after  hearing  and 
seeing  all  this,  the  people  were  smitten  with  terror,  and  cried  out  to  Moses,  "  We 
perish,  we  perish,  we  all  perish.  Whosoever  cometh  anything  near  unto  the 
tabernacle  of  the  Lord  shall  die.  Shall  we  be  consumed  with  dying  ?  "  (Numb, 
xvii.  13). 

I.  This  FEATUJiE  of  the  law  will  help  Yotr  to  understand  the  dbpreciatoby 

TEEMS   IN   WHICH  IT   IS   SO  OFTEN   MENTIONED   IN   THE   NEW  TESTAMENT,  especially  by 

the  Apostle  Paul.  The  law  was  "  the  ministration  of  death  and  of  condemnation  " 
(2  Cor.  iii.  7,  9);  it  "worketh  wrath"  (Rom.  iv.  15);  it  breathed  a  "spirit  of 
bondage"  and  fear  (Rom.  viii.  15);  it  "gendered  to  bondage"  (GaL  iv.  24);  it 
was  "  an  intolerable  yoke  "  (Acts  xv.  10).  Not  that  the  whole  contents  of  the 
Pentateuch  fell  under  this  description.  Much  of  promise  was  spoken  in  presence  of 
the  mountain  of  the  law.  But  let  the  law  be  taken  by  itself,  and  let  the  gospel 
veiities  foreshadowed  by  its  ritual  be  shut  out  from  view,  and  does  it  not  answer  to 
the  disparaging  descriptions  ?  It  was  full  of  wrath,  condemnation,  fear.  No  doubt 
there  was  an  element  of  grace  even  in  the  covenant  of  Sinai.  It  was  a  benefit  done 
to  Israel  when  the  Lord  delivered  to  them  the  commandments,  pitched  his  tabernacle 
among  them,  and  suffered  them  to  draw  near  under  the  conditions  of  the  ritual. 
Nevertheless,  the  conditions  were  hard  and  terrible ;  we  may  well  thank  God  for 
abolishing  them.  They  are  utterly  abolished.  The  veil  is  rent  from  top  to  bottom  ; 
the  yoke  is  broken ;  we  have  received  the  spirit  of  adoption,  not  the  spirit  of  bond- 
age again  to  fear ;  we  have  boldness  to  enter  into  the  holiest. 

II.  Nothing  that  has  been  said  implies  that  the  Levitical  law  was  really 
UNWOETHY  OF  THE  WISDOM  OR  THE  GRACE  OF  GoD.  For  the  time  then  present  it 
was  the  best  thing  that  could  be.  Certain  truths  of  primary  importance  men  wore 
everywhere  forgetting :  among  others,  the  holy  majesty  of  God  ;  that  communion 
■H'ith  God  is  to  the  soul  of  man  the  very  breath  of  life ;  that  man  is  a  sinner  for  wliora 
there  is  no  remission,  no  access,  without  atonement.  These  lessons  the  law  was 
meant  and  fitted  to  teach.  These  lessons  it  did  teach,  burning  them  into  the 
conscience  of  the  nation.  The  law  was  not  the  gospel,  but  it  led  forward  to  the 
gospel.     A  service  beyond  all  price. 

III.  Nob  has  the  beneficent  office  of  the  law  ceased  with  the  advent  of  the 
BETTER  TIME.  Men  are  ready  to  abuse  the  grace  of  God,  to  give  harbour  to  licentious- 
ness on  pretext  of  Christian  liberty.  If  you  doubt  it,  search  well  your  own  heart. 
What  is  the  remedy  ?  It  is  found  sometimes  in  the  rod  of  God's  afflicting  providence, 
sometimes  in  the  searching  discipline  of  the  law.  For  the  law,  although  in  its  letter 
abrogated,  abides  for  ever  in  its  substance.  We  are  not  bound — we  are  not  at  liberty 
— to  slay  sin  offerings  or  bum  incense.  But  we  are' bound  to  ruminate  on  the  law  of 
sacrifice  and  intercession.  The  Levitical  ritual  belongs  in  this  sense  to  us  as  much 
as  it  ever  belonged  to  the  Jews.  It  admonishes  us  of  the  reverence  due  to  God.  A 
certain  filial  boldness  he  will  welcome,  but  presumptuous  trifling  with  his  majesty 
and  holiness  he  will  not  suffer.  If  we  would  be  accepted,  we  must  worship  God  with 
reverence  and  godly  fear,  for  our  God  is  still  a  consuming  fire  (Heb.  xii.  29). — B. 

Vers.  15 — 20. — The  perils  of  distinguished  service.  The  sons  of  Kohath  had  the 
most  honourable  of  the  duties  assigned  to  the  Levites,  in  being  permitted  to  cajry 
the  sacred  vessels  of  the  tabernacle.  But  they  were  thus  exposed  to  temptations  and 
perils  from  which  their  less  favoured  brethren  were  exempt.  To  touch  or  even  to  see 
the  holy  things  was  death.  Similar  temptations,  to  those  intrusted  with  distinguished 
service  in  God's  Church,  may  arise  from — 

I.  Curiosity.  Illustratefrom  thesinof  themenof  Bethshemesh  (1  Sam.  vi.).  Men 
brought  by  their  duties  into  close  contact  with  Divine  mysteries  may  yield  to  the 
curiosity  of  vmauthorised  speculations  to  which  ignorant  and  grovelling  minds  are 
not  exposed  (of.  Col.  ii.  18).  Illustrate  from  speculations  on  the  Trinity,  me  incar- 
nation, or  the  profitless  inquiries  of  some  of  the  schoolmen  as  to  angels,  <fcc.  Caution 
applicable  to  theological  speculations  of  to-day  (Deut.  xxix.  29). 

II.  Thoughtlessness.  A  thoughtless  disregard  of  God's  strict  injunctions,  by 
either  8  priest  (vers  J8,  ;9)  or  s  ^oh^tbite,  might  hsye  bgen  fctft!,    §9  ngw  tjios? 


CH.  IV.  1—49.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  31 

who  have  perpetually  to  deal  with  Divine  things  are  in  danger  of  irreverence  from 
thoughtlessness.  E.  g.  Christian  ministers,  who  have  to  be  constantly  praying  and 
preaching,  as  part  of  their  service  for  God.  Christians  who  have  a  reputation  for 
saintliness  above  their  brethren  need  special  reverence,  lest  tliey  should  handle  Divine 
things  in  a  familiar,  unauthorised  manner.  Apply  to  some  habits  of  modern  public 
worship  tending  to  sad  irreverence. 

III.  Distrust.  Illustrate  from  the  sin  of  Uzzah  (2  Sam.  vi.  6,  7).  We  are  tlius 
warned  against  using  illegitimate  means  in  support  of  the  cause  of  God  which  we 
think  to  be  in  danger.  Carnal  methods  must  not  be  resorted  to  for  the  defence  of 
spiritual  truths.  Some  of  the  most  devoted  servants  of  Christ  have  profaned  the  ark 
of  God,  when  they  thought  it  in  danger,  by  touching  and  propping  it  by  supports 
God  has  never  sanctioned,  ^.g^.  persecutions  oxi\>&\ia\i.ot  the  truth  of  God.  Caution 
to  those  who  now  rely  on  worldly  alliances  and  statesmanship  on  behalf  of  God's 
Church,  From  such  perils  we  may  be  preserved  by  the  spirit  of  (1)  profound  humility, 
at  the  privilege  of  being  allowed  to  come  so  near  and  to  deal  with  the  mysteries  of 
God  (Eph.  iii.  8 ;  Heb.  xii.  28,  29)  ;  (2)  reverential  obedience  to  every  item  of  the 
instructions  God  has  given  us  (1  Chron.  xv.  12,  13;  Ps.  cxix.  128);  (3)  fearless 
trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus'  Christ,  who  has  guarded  his  Church  hitherto,  is  saving  us, 
and  who  will  protect  his  people  and  hig  truth  by  his  own  power  to  the  end  (2  Tim. 
iv.  18).— P. 

Ch.  iv. — The  Levites  and  the  regulation  of  their  duties.  One  tribe  has  been  set 
apart  in  lieu  of  the  first-bom  of  all  Israel,  and  to  this  tribe  is  entrusted  the  service  of 
the  tabernacle.  The  nature  and  distribution  of  that  service  are  now  placed  before 
us.     Note — 

I.  The  eegard  fob  the  principle  of  inheritance.  As  the  tribes  had  their 
appointed  place  around  the  tabernacle,  so  the  three  great  natural  divisions  of  the 
tribe  of  Levi  had  their  appointed  place  in  it.  So  in  the  service  of  the  Church  of 
Christ  there  must  ever  be  something  corresponding  to  this  natural  division  in  Levi. 
The  great  Head  has  given  some  apostles,  some  prophets,  some  evangelists,  some 
pastors  and  teachers.  There  are  always  some  Christians  rather  than  others 
who  may  be  taken  as  spiritual  children  of  certain  in  the  spiritual  generation  be- 
fore them,  those  on  whom  the  prophet's  mantle  may  fall,  as  did  that  of  Elijah  on 
Elisha. 

II.  The  limitations  of  service.  No  Levite  could  do  the  work  of  an  an(nnf.ed 
priest.  The  Kohathites  were  to  bear  the  things  of  the  holy  place,  but  they  were  not 
to  see  them  or  prepare  them  for  rerackval.  There  was  a  gulf  of  difference  between 
Aaron  and  the  noblest  of  the  Kohathites,  though  they  belonged  to  the  same  tribe. 
So  between  Christ  and  even  the  best  of  his  people.  There  is  so  much  to  link  ug  to 
our  Lord,  so  much  to  reveal  him  as  walking  about  on  the  same  level,  that  we  cannot 
be  too  careful  to  remember  the  difEerences  between  our  services,  humble  even  the 
most  honourable  of  them,  and  that  glorious  peculiar  service  where  Christ  is  Priest 
and  Atonement  in  one.  The  limitations  of  age.  None  under  thirty,  none  over  fifty. 
At  twenty  a  man  may  have  strength  and  courage  for  fighting  (ch.  i.  3),  but  ten  years 
more  must  pass  over  his  head  before  he  is  judged  to  have  the  sobriety  and  sedateness 
needed  for  tabernacle  service.  Then  at  fifty  he  retires.  God  has  consideration  for 
failing  strength.  The  burdens  of  the  tabernacle  must  be  carried,  therefore  God 
provides  that  the  bearers  shall  be  strong.  There  were  constantly  fresh  and,  we  may 
suppose,  often  eager  accessions  at  the  younger  limit  of  the  service.  Jesus  was  about 
thirty  when  he  entered  on  his  public  life  (Luke  iii.  23),  and  the  Baptist  would  be 
about  the  same.  Let  these  limitations  of  God  be  considered  by  all  whom  they 
concern.  There  are  duties  of  manhood  which  youth  has  not  the  experience,  nor  age 
the  strength,  to  perform. 

III.  The  SECUBiNQ  of  personal  service  (vers.  19,  49).  Only  certain  persons 
were  fit  to  do  the  work,  but  all  who  were  fit  had  some  work  to  do.  In  the  Church  of 
Christ  fitness  for  anything,  clearly  seen,  distinctly  felt,  has  in  it  the  nature  of  a 
command.  We  need  not  fear  that  there  will  ever  be  too  many  persons  engaged 
in  the  service  of  the  true  tabemaola.  There  were  between  eight  and  nine  thousand 
«t  this  first  appointment,  but  thp  ?<ord'B  promise  run»  (Jer.  xwjii.  ??),  "As  tba 


82 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[OH.  V.  k- 


host  of  heaven  cannot  be  numbered,  neither  the  sand  of  the  sea  measured,  so  I 
will  multiply  the  Levites  that  minister  unto  me."     We  are  all  Levites  now. 

IV.  The  work  was  all  necessary  work.  No  doubt  a  certain  honour  attached  to 
the  Kohathitea,  but  great  risk  went  with  it ;  and  after  all,  the  honour  was  more  in  the 
eyes  of  men  than  of  G  od.  All  that  is  needful  to  be  done  for  him  is  honourable.  The 
least  peg  or  cord  was  not  to  be  left  behind,  any  more  than  the  ark  itself.  There 
should  be  a  spirit  of  humble  joy  and  gratitude  in  us  that  we  are  counted  worthy  to 
do  anything  for  God.  All  are  needed  to  make  up  the  perfection  of  service.  To  the 
complete  body  the  little  finger  is  as  needful  as  the  complex  and  powerful  brain.  For 
the  circulation  of  the  blood  the  capillaries  are  as  needful  as  the  great  arteries  and 
veins.  God  calls  for  no  superfluous  work  from  us.  He  has  no  mere  ornaments  in 
the  Church.     If  a  thing  is  not  of  use,  it  is  no  ornament,  however  it  be  decorated. 

Application :  —  Find  your  work  and  burden.  Every  one  has  his  own  burden 
(^opriov)  to  bear.  No  one  else  then  can  carry  your  burden  than  you.  Seek  your  place. 
Take  the  lowest  one,  tlien  nssuredly  you  will  come  in  time  to  the  right  one.  The 
lowest  place  in  the  tabernacle  service  is  better  than  the  highest  among  the  ungodly 
(Ps.  Ixxxiv.  10).— Y. 


Interior  Sanctities  of  Israel  (chs,  v.,  vi.). 

Ch.  v.  1 — 4  :  Removal   of   the  unclean.     Vers.  5 — 10 :  Restitution  of   tbbsfass. 
Vers.  11—31 :  Jealousy  purged. 

Ch.  vi.  1 — 21 :  Nazirites  dedicated.     Vers.  22 — 27  :   Blessing  of  the  people. 

Whether  these  portions  of  the  Divine  legislation  are  connected  with  the  surrounding 
Uarrative  (1)  by  an  order  of  time,  as  having  been  given  at  this  point,  or  (2)  by  a  harmony 
of  subject,  as  completing  on  its  inward  side  the  perfection  of  the  camp,  or  whether  (3)  their 
insertion  here  was  in  a  sense  accidental,  and  not  now  to  be  accounted  for,  must  remain 
uncertain.  Against  (1)  it  must  be  observed  that  there  is  a  decided  break  in  the  order  of 
time  at  the  beginning  of  ch.  vii. ;  against  (2)  that  a  large  part  of  the  Levitical  enactmen  ts 
might  have  been  added  here  with  an  equal  propriety. 


EXPOSITlOli. 


CHAPTER  V. 


The  unclean  to  be  removed  (vers.  1 — 
4).  Ver.  2. — Every  leper.  The  law  of  the 
leper  had  been  given  in  great  detail  in  Levit. 
xiii.  and  xiv.,  and  it  had  lieen  already  ordered 
that  he  should  be  put  out  of  the  camp  (Levit. 
xiii.  46,  and  cf.  xiv.  3).  Every  one  that 
hath  an  issue.  These  defilements  are  treated 
of  in  Levit.  xv.  ;  where,  however,  it  is  nut 
expressly  ordered  that  those  so  pollu'Kil 
should  be  |iut  out  of  the  camp.  V/ho- 
Boever  is  defiled  by  the  dead.  The  fact  of 
being  thus  deiiled  is  recognised  in  Levit  xi. 
24  ;  xxi.  1,  but  the  formal  regulations  con- 
cerning it  are  not  given  until  ch.  xix.  21. 
Prohilily  the  popular  o])iiiion  and  practice 
was  sufflcientlydulinite  to  explain  tlie  present 
command. 

Ver.  3. — That  they  defile  not  their  camps, 
in  the  midst  whereof  I  dwell.  Clcanliuuss, 
decency,  and  the  anxious  reiiiov;i.l  evt^n  of 
'in  witting  pollutions  were  things  due  to  God  ' 


himself,  and  part  of  the  awful  reverence  to 
be  paid  to  his  presence  in  the  midst  oi 
Israel.  It  is  of  course  easy  to  depreciate  the 
value  of  such  outward  cleanness,  as  compared 
with  inward ;  but  when  we  consider  the 
frightful  prevalence  of  filthiness  in  Christian 
countries  (1)  of  pers&n  and  dresa,  (2)  of  talk, 
(3)  of  habit  in  respect  of  things  not  so  mucl 
sinful  as  uncleanly,  we  may  indeed  acknow- 
ledge the  heavenly  wisdom  of  these  regula- 
tions, and  the  incalculable  value  of  the  tone 
of  mind  engendered  by  them.  With  the 
Jews  "cleanliness"  was  not  "next  to  god- 
liness," it  was  part  of  godliness. 

Ver.  4. — So  did  the  children  of  Israel. 
It  is  difiBcult  to  form  any  estimate  of  the 
numbers  thus  separated  ;  if  we  may  judge  at 
all  from  the  prevalence  of  such  defilements 
(especially  those  under  the  second  head) 
now,  it  must  have  seriously  aggravated  both 
the  labour  and  the  dilhculty  of  th«  awtfcb. 
Here  v,'ns  a  tri^l  of  thejr  faitjj. 


OH.  7.  1—4.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  83 


HOMILETICS. 

Vera.  1—4. — The  necessity  of  putting  away  sin.  In  this  section  we  have,  spiritually , 
the  necessary  sentence  of  banishment  upon  those  defiled  with  sin,  and  the  duty  of 
separating  them.     Consider,  therefore — 

I.  That  no  lepee  might  stay  in  the  camp  op  Israel  ;  he  must  bk  "  without." 
Even  so  it  is  the  necessary  fate  of  the  sinner,  who  is  the  true  leper, — a  fate  which  God 
himself,  as  we  may  reverently  believe,  cannot  alter, — that  he  must  be  for  ever  separated 
from  the  company  of  all  pure  and  holy  beings  (Heb.  xii.  14 ;  Rev.  xxi.  27  ;  xxii.  15). 
Until  he  is  healed  he  may  be  with,  but  not  of,  the  people  of  God ;  numbered  with 
them  indeed,  and  following  the  earthly  fortunes  of  the  Church,  as  the  lepers  in  the 
wilderness  ;  but  really  separated  from  them,  and  this  the  more  profoundly  because 
of  the  outward  proximity.  If  a  sinner  could  go  to  heaven  as  a  sinner,  even  there  be 
would  be  a  banished  man,  beholding  the  joy  of  the  saints  from  outside  with  a  seSise 
of  difEerence,  of  farness,  which  would  itself  be  hell. 

II.  That  no  one  unclean  thbough  any  issue  might  stay  in  the  camp  op  Israel. 
And  this  was  more  severe,  because  it  was  a  much  more  common  and  much  less 
dreadful  case  than  leprosy,  being  in  most  cases  neither  very  apparent  nor  very  pei-- 
raanent ;  yet  this  also  entailed  banishment  while  it  lasted.  Even  so  all  habits  of  sin, 
however  little  shocking  to  the  natural  mind,  exclude  the  sinner  until  he  be  healed 
from  the  true  fellowship  of  the  saints.  They  are  indeed  "  natural "  enough  to  the 
fallen  soul,  as  these  issues  are  natural  to  our  present  body  of  humiliation,  but  they 
are  not  therefore  harmless.  One  sinful  habit,  however  common  amongst  men,  would 
disqualify  and  unfit  the  soul  for  the  companionship  of  heaven,  and  so  would  entail 
an  inward  and  real  exile  even  there.  A  habit  of  lying  is  one  of  the  commonest  out- 
comes of  human  life  as  it  is  ;  but  "whatsoever  .  .  maketh  a  lie  "  must  be  "without." 

III.  That  no  one  even  who  had  touched  a  dead  body  might  stay  in  the 
CAMP  OP  Israel.  The  deiilement  of  death  passed  over  with  the  taint  of  it  upon  all 
that  came  in  contact  with  the  dead.  Even  so  that  contact,  to  which  we  are  daily  and 
hourly  exposed,  with  those  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  is  enough  to  unfit  us  for 
fellowship  with  pure  and  holy  beings.  If  only  the  taint,  the  subtle  contagion,  the 
imperceptible  communication  of  spiritual  death  pass  upon  us,  as  it  almost  must  in 
daily  intercourse  with  the  world,  it  separates  pro  tanto  from  the  communion  of 
saints.  It  must  be  purged  by  the  daily  prayer  of  repentance  and  supply  of  grace 
ere  we  can  be  at  home  and  at  one  with  the  really  holy.  And  note  that  these  three 
forms  of  unoleanness — (1)  leprosy,  which  was  rare  and  dreadful;  (2)  issues,  which 
are  common  and  little  noticed  ;  (3)  the  taint  of  death,  which  was  imperceptible  save 
to  God — represent  in  a  descending  scale  the  three  foT-ms  of  sin  which  separate  from 
God  and  his  saints,  viz.  (1)  open  and  notorious  wickedness ;  (2)  sinful  habits  such  as 
spring  out  of  ordinary  life,  and  are  little  regarded  ;  (3)  the  subtle  taint  of  spiritual 
death  caught  by  careless  contact  with  the  evil  world. 

IV.  That  it  was  the  duty  of  Israel — a  duty  to  be  discharged  at  cost  of 
much  inconvenience ;  a  duty  in  which  all  must  help,  not  sparing  their  own — to  put 

AWAY  ALL  WHO  WERE  KNOWN  TO  BE  POLLUTED  PROM   THE  CAMPS.      Even  SO  it  is  the 

duty  of  the  Churches  of  Christ  to  separate  open  sinners  from  their  communion,  not 
only  lest  others  be  defiled,  but  lest  God  be  offended  (Matt,  xviii.  17  ;  1  Cor.  v.  2,  11, 
13  ;  2  Thess.  iii.  6).  And  note  that  many  unclean  may  have  remained  in  the  camp, 
whose  uncleanness  was  not  suspected,  or  could  not  be  proved  ;  bnt  if  so,  they  alone 
were  responsible.  Even  so  there  be  very  many  evil  men  in  the  Church  who  cannot 
now  be  separated  ;  but  if  the  principle  be  zealously  vindicated,  the  Church  shall  not 
suffer  (Matt.  xiii.  47,  49  ;  1  Cor.  xi.  19  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  20). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  expulsion  and  restoration  of  the  unclean.    The  host  has  now 
been  marshalled.     The  several  tribes  have  taken  the  places  allotted  to  them  in  rela- 
tion to  the  tabernacle  and  to  one  another.     They  are  about  to  set  forth  on  the  march 
from  the  wildernesB  of  Sinai.     Before  the  signal  is  given,  certain  final  instructions 
VUUBBBa,  B 


34  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [ch.  t.  1—4 

for  the  regulation  of  the  camp  have  yet  to  be  delivered,  and  this  about  the  removal 
of  unclean  persons  is  one  of  them.  The  general  intention  of  it  is  intimated  in  the 
terms  employed.  The  host  is  to  be  so  ordered,  both  in  the  camp  and  on  the  march, 
as  to  make  it  a  living  picture  of  the  Ciiuroh,  and  the  Church's  relation  to  God.  It  is 
to  be  made  manifest  that  he  dwells  and  walks  among  the  covenant  people  (Levit. 
xxvi.  11,  12),  that  he  is  of  pure  eyes,  and  cannot  suffer  evil  to  dwell  with  him. 
Accordingly,  there  must  in  no  wise  abide  in  the  camp  any  man  or  woman  that  is 
unclean.  Persons  afflicted  with  uncleanness  must  be  removed,  and  live  outside  of  the 
sacred  precinct.     Such  is  the  law  here  laid  down. 

I.  In  attributing  to  this  law  a   BELIOIOnS  INTENTION,   I  DO  NOT   FOBQBT  THAT 
A  LOWER  AND   MOKE  PROSAIO  INTERPRETATION  HAS   SOMETIMES   BEEN    PUT   ON  IT.      There 

are  commentators  who  remind  one  of  the  man  with  the  muck-rake  in  the  '  Pilgrim's 
Progress.'  They  have  no  eye  except  for  what  is  earthly.  To  them  the  removal  of  the 
unclean  is  simply  a  sanitary  measure.  I  freely  admit  that  there  was  a'  sanitary 
intention.  The  sequestering  of  lepers,  the  early  and  "  extramural "  burial  of  the 
dead — these  are  valuable  sanitary  provisions,  and  it  is  plain  that  this  law  would  lead 
to  them.  But  I  need  not  wait  to  prove  that  the  law  looks  higher,  and  that  its  para- 
mount intention  is  moral  and  spiritual. 

II.  Passing  on,  therefore,  to  the  religious  intention  of  this  law,  observe  who  ex- 
actly are  excluded  by  it  from  the  camp.  They  are  of  three  sorts,viz.,  lepers,  persons 
affected  with  issues  of  various  kinds,  and  persons  who  had  come  in  contact  with  the 
dead.  This  does  not  by  any  means  exhaust  the  catalogue  of  defilements  noted  in  the 
Levitical  law.  But  these  were  the  gravest.  Only  these  three  disabled  from  residence  in 
the  camp.  My  reason  for  calling  attention  to  this  point  you  will  understand  when  I 
mention  that  these  three  uncleannesses,  so  prominent  in  the  law  of  Moses,  received 
the  same  kind  of  prominence  in  the  gracious  ministry  of  Christ.  Bead  the  story  of 
tlie  leper  (Mark  i.  41)  ;  of  the  woman  with  the  issue  of  blood  (Mark  v.  27 — 30)  ;  of 
the  raising  of  Jairus'  daughter  and  the  widow's  son  at  Nain  (Mark  v.  41  and  Luke 
vii.  14).  In  no  one  of  these  passages  is  the  Levitical  law  named.  Much  the  greater 
number  of  those  who  read  or  hear  them  fail  to  perceive  that  in  Christ's  mode  of  per- 
forming the  miracles  there  was  any  reference  to  what  the  law  had  said  about  the 
defiling  quality  of  the  evils  on  which  his  gracious  power  was  put  forth.  That  there 
truly  was  a  reference  surely  needs  no  proof.  No  Jew  ever  forgot  what  the  penalty 
would  be  if  he  suffered  himself  to  be  in  contact  with  a  dead  body,  with  a  leper,  with 
a  person  having  an  issue  of  blood.  Certainly  our  Lord  did  not  forget.  Nor  would  it 
be  doing  justice  to  the  truth  to  say  that  our  Lord  touched  as  he  did,  notwithstand- 
ing the  defilement  thereby  contracted,  and  its  troublesome  consequences.  He,  of  set 
purpose,  sought  occasion  to  put  himself  in  contact  with  every  one  of  the  three  causes  of 
defilement  noted  in  the  law.  Keeping  this  in  mind,  let  us  ask  the  meaning  of  the  law. 
1.  The  general  intention.  It  was  to  be  a  memorial  of  the  truth  that  our  nature  is 
deeply  infected  with  sin,  and  that  sin  disables  all  in  whom  it  is  found  for  enjoying  the 
fellowship  of  God  here  and  hereafter.  In  this  Levitical  statute,  I  admit,  the  lesson  is 
not  taught  explicitly.  There  was  nothing  morally  wrong  in  any  one  of  the  three 
sources  of  defilement  named.  The  teaching  is  by  symbol — a  kind  of  object  lesson — 
and  not  the  less  impressive  on  that  account.  2.  The  meaning  of  the  several  symbols.  ' 
(1)  Defilement  by  the  dead.  Why  is  this  ?  Because  death  is  the  wages  of  sin  (Gen.  ii. 
17 ;  iii.  19).  Compare  the  representation  of  death  which  pervades  Ps.  xc. — '  the  prayer 
of  Moses."  (2)  Defilement  by  leprosy.  A  touching  symbol.  It  admonishes  us  that 
sin,  besides  being  blameworthy  and  deserving  of  death,  is  a  vile  thing,  to  be  loathed 
and  recoiled  from,  as  men  loathe  and  recoil  from  a  leper ;  contagious  also,  and  apt  to 
spread.  (3)  Of  the  third  symbol  I  need  say  only  this,  that  it  reminds  us  that  sin  is 
an  hereditary  evil  (Ps.  li.  6).  3.  The  relation  of  this  law  to  Christ  and  his  work. 
That  it  has  a  relation  has  been  already  pointed  out.  The  relation  may  be  conceived 
of  thus : — The  law  is  the  dark  ground  on  which  the  redemptive  work  of  Christ  unfolde 
the  brightness  of  its  grace.  Christ  did  not  keep  aloof  from  the  evils  which  afflict  our 
fallen  nature,  and  which  perpetually  remind  us  how  deep  our  fall  has  been.  He  took 
occasion  to  put  himself  in  contact  with  them.  He  touched  the  leprous  man.  Not 
that  leprosy  was  sweet  to  him ;  it  was  to  him  as  loathsome  as  to  any  man  in  Pales- 
tine that  day.     Nevertheless,  he  touched  the  leprous  man,  and  the  leprosy  fled  before 


CH.  V.  1—4.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  U 

the  power  of  that  touch.  Leprosy,  wasting  issues,  death — these  are  the  memorial* 
and  tokens  of  the  sin  that  is  the  fatal  heritage  of  our  fallen  race ;  and  one  who  would 
know  our  need  of  redemption  cannot  do  better  than  meditate  on  them  as  they  are  set 
forth  in  the  Levitical  law.  Leprosy,  wasting  issues,  death — these  evils  our  blessed 
Lord  went  up  to  in  liis  ministry ;  he  touched  them,  and  their  flight  the  instant  that 
they  felt  his  touch  gave,  and  continues  still  to  give,  assurance  to  men  that  he  is 
indeed  the  Saviour.  He  can  forgive  sin  ;  he  can  make  us  clean ;  he  is  the  resurrection 
and  the  life. — B. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  public  exclusion  of  the  unclean.  This  law,  like  many  others,  in 
part  a  sanitary  law ;  but  also  educational  in  spiritual  truth,  and  typical  of  eternal 
realities.     Two  truths  taught: — 

I.  The  holiness  of  God.  This  lesson,  so  hard  to  the  Israelites,  was  impressed  on 
them  in  many  ways,  e.  g.,  sacred  men  ministering  in  sacred  places,  on  sacred  days, 
&c.  This  holy  God  dwelt  in  the  midst  of  their  tents,  and  walked  among  them  (Levit. 
xxvi.  11, 12).  The  God  of  life  and  purity  was  utterly  alien  from  death  and  impurity. 
Deiilement,  whether  wilful  or  unavoidable,  could  not  be  tolerated  in  his  presence.  If 
the  polluted  are  retained,  God  withdraws.  Sin  is  "  the  abominable  thing  "  which  God 
hates.     He  is  "  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil "  (Jer.  xliv.  4  ;  Hab.  i.  13). 

II.  Tub  excommunicatinq  poweb  of  sin.  The  consequences  to  the  ezcluded 
Hebrews,  though  limited,  were  by  no  means  light.  They  had  to  sufEer  loss  of 
privileges,  ceremonial  and  spiritual,  and  a  sense  of  humiliation  from  the  notoriety  of 
their  position.  For  the  time  they  were  out  of  communion  with  God  and  his  people. 
Thus  sin  has  an  isolating  power.  Apart  from  an  act  of  ecclesiastical  excommunication 
or  Divine  judgment,  its  tendency  is  to  separate  us  from  the  people  of  God  through 
want  of  sympathy.  We  cease,  to  enjoy  their  privileges  even  if  not  debarred  from 
them.  We  lose  self-respect  when  sin  is  exposed,  if  not  before.  We  are  out  of 
communion  with  God,  into  whose  presence  we  cannot  truly  come  with  sin  indulged  in 
our  hearts  (Ps.  Ixvi.  18  ;  Ezek.  xiv.  3).  God's  salvation  is  from  sin,  not  in  sin.  No 
wonder,  therefore,  that  the  impure  are  sentenced — (1)  to  excommunication  from  the 
Church  on  earth  (1  Cor.  v.  9 — 13,  Ac),  (2)  to  exclusion  from  the  Church  in  heaven 
(Rev.  xii.  27).— P. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — Things  that  defile.  The  book  up  to  this  point  is  occupied  with  the 
counting  and  discipline  of  the  people,  both  those  for  war  and  those  for  tabernacle 
service.     Now  the  cleansing  of  the  camp  is  to  be  attended  to. 

I.  The  classes  who  were  declared  unclean.  Certainly  we  must  not  be  too 
curious  in  our  inquiiies  here,  or  we  may  soon  pass  the  verge  of  what  is  edifying. 
But  there  are  some  points  of  note  with  regard  to  all  three  classes.  The  leper.  Why 
should  he  be  declared  unclean?  Perhaps  as  suffering  from  a  more  manifest  disease 
than  others,  maybe  a  peculiarly  offensive  one,  and  one  of  the  most  difficult  to  cure. 
These  are  conjectures  which  give  a  little  light,  but  the  great  reason  for  ceremonial 
unoleanness  in  the  case  of  human  beings,  as  in  the  case  of  lower  animals,  is  to  be 
found  in  Jehovah's  positive  injunction.  Leprosy  was  thus  to  be  one  of  the  great 
types  in  the  body  of  the  deiiling  effect  of  sin  upon  the  soul.  It  is  clear  that  in  the 
course  of  ages  the  idea  got  fixed  in  the  Israelite  mind  that  the  cure  of  leprosy  was 
to  be  considered  as  a  cleansing.  Jesus  commanded  his  apostles  to  heal  the  sick, 
cleanse  the  lepers.  The  leper  was  not  a  common  victim,  but  singled  out  to  impress 
the  fact  that  the  ultimate  cause  which  produces  disease  is  a  strange  and  polluting 
thing;  no  necessary  element  in  human  nature,  though  now  it  be  actually  present  in  us 
all.  The  person  with  am,  issue.  Thus  uncleanness  is  connected  with  birth  as  well  as 
with  death.  Whenever  a  child  is  bom,  a  being  is  brought  into  the  world,  which 
certainly  will  add  something  to  the  evil  in  it,  though  possibly  it  may  add  much  to  the 
good.  The  saintliest  of  believers  has  had  in  him  the  possibilities  of  the  worst  of 
unbelievers.  Human  nature  is  truly  the  creation  of  God,  fearfully  and  wonderfully 
made ;  but  there  is  also  the  fact  of  birth  from  sinful  human  parents  to  be  remembered. 
This  is  a  great  mystery,  to  be  delicately  handled ;  but  the  uncleanness  here  indicated 
may  be  taken  as  intended  to  remind  parents  how  one  generation  transmits  not  only 
nature,  but  sinful  nature,  to  another.     The  person  defiled  by  the  dead.    There  is  greal 

d2 


86 


THE  BOOK  OF  NDMBEKS. 


[cH.  V.  5—10. 


Bignifioance  in  being  made  unclean  by  the  dead.  Of  all  things  in  the  world  that 
manifest  the  eifects  of  sin,  this  is  the  greatest — death.  By  sin  came  death.  All  lesser 
results  lead  up  to  this.  A  dead  body,  in  one  sense  as  sacred  a  thing  as  there  is  in 
the  world,  is  yet  also  one  of  the  most  unclean.  As  long  as  there  is  life  there  is 
something  to  protest  against  the  reign  of  sin,  and  resist  it ;  but  life  being  gone,  sin 
riots  and  revels  in  the  corruption  of  what  was  once  fair  and  strong.  The  cofHn  and 
the  gravestone  hide,  but  they  only  hide.  It  was  one  of  our  Lord's  most  terrible  words 
to  the  Pharisees  to  compare  them  to  whited  sepulchres. 

II.  The  line  of  separation.  There  are  large  details  in  Leviticus  respecting  all 
these  instances  of  uncleanness  (chs.  xii. — xv.).  The  line  of  separation  was  clearly 
marked,  sternly  enforced.  To  go  out  of  the  camp  meant  much  personal  inconveni- 
ence, perhaps  pain— suffering  added  on  to  existing  suffering.  Imagine  the  mother 
tending  her  sick  child,  waiting  its  expiring  breath,  closing  its  eyes,  composing  its 
body,  then  compelled  to  go  without  the  camp.  This  typical  ceremonial  uncleanness 
indicates  the  sharp  separation  between  good  and  had  men.  The  word  of  God  accords 
in  all  its  references  to  this.  There  are  two  classes,  and  only  two — the  clean  and  the 
unclean,  the  sheep  and  the  goats,  the  wheat  and  tares,  the  children  of  God  and  the 
children  of  wrath.  It  also  indicates  the  extent  to  which  discipline  can  he  carried  in 
the  Church  of  Christ  on  earth.  There  are  some  offences  so  plain  that  the  guilty  may 
at  once  be  cut  off  from  outward  communion.  But  there  may  be  others  quite  as 
unworthy  who  yet  do  and  must  escape,  because  their  life  makes  no  crying  scandal. 
Many  a  professed  and  long-continued  adherent  to  the  true  Church  is,  nevertheless,  as 
worldly,  hard,  and  selfish  as  any  of  the  ungodly.  God  reckons  all  such  outside  the 
camp.  He  alone  has  the  knowledge  and  authority  to  reckon.  Learn  then  the  danger 
of  all  spiritual  uncleanness.  That  so  much  was  declared  typically  unclean,  shows 
that  spiritual  uncleanness  is  a  very  great  danger.  The  boundary  between  the  Cluirch 
and  the  world  cannot  be  too  strictly  kept.  Since  we  are  all  advancing  to  death,  it 
is  proof  of  the  power  of  sin  in  our  nature.  We  are  all  unclean  with  the  worst  of 
uncleanness.  It  only  waits  for  us  to  feel  all  the  evil,  and  the  way  is  clear  to  the 
remedy  (1  J.>hn  i.  7— 10).— Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


Restitution  to  be  made  for  tres- 
passes (vers.  6 — 10).  Ver.  6.  — Shall  com- 
mit any  sin  that  men  commit.  Literally, 
"  [one]  of  all  the  transgressions  of  men,"  i.  e. 
the  wrongs  current  amongst  men.  To  do  a 
trespass  against  the  Lord.  This  qualifies 
the  former  expression,  and  restricts  its  refer- 
ence to  the  sins  mentioned  in  Levit.  vi.  2, 
3,  5,  viz.,  wrongs  done  to  the  property  of 
another.  Such  wrongs,  perhaps  because  they 
were  considered  legitimate  as  long  as  they 
were  not  found  out,  were  taken  up  by  the 
Lord  himself  as  involving  a  trespass  against 
his  own  righteousness. 

Ver.  8. — If  the  man  have  no  kinsman. 
No  goel,  or  personal  representative.  This 
supposes  that  the  wronged  man  himself  is 
dead,  and  it  is  an  addition  to  the  law  of 
restitution  as  given  in  Levit.  vi. ,  an  addition 
clearly  necessary  to  its  completeness.  The 
wrong-doer  must  in  no  case  be  the  gainer  by 
his  own  wrong,  and  if  the  trespass  could  not 
be  "recompensed"  to  man,  it  must  be  "re- 
compensed "  to  the  Lord,  who  was  as  it  were 
joint-plaintiff  in  the  cause.  To  the  priest.  On 
the  general  principle  that  the  priest  was  the 
nuible  representative  of  the  invisible  majesty. 


Ver.  9. — ^Every  offering.  Hebrew,  teru- 
mdh,  heave  offering  (Exod.  xxiz.  28).  Sep- 
tuagint,  oTrapx^-  Those  offerings,  orportions 
of  offerings,  which  were  not  consumed  on  the 
altar,  but  "  presented  "  at  the  altar.  Having 
been  offered,  they  were  the  property  of  the 
Lord,  and  were  given  by  him  to  the  priests, 

Ver.  10. — Every  man'»  hallowed  things. 
Dedicatory  offerings,  such  as  first-fruits,  not 
exactly  of  the  nature  of  sacrifices.  His,  i.  «. 
the  priest's.  Whatsoever  any  man  giveth 
the  priest,  it  shall  be  his.  A  general  prin- 
ciple, including  and  confirming  the  previous 
rules ;  subject,  of  course,  to  the  other  and 
greater  principle,  that  whatever  the  Lord 
claimed  for  himself  by  fire  must  first  be 
consumed.  These  directions  concerning  the 
rights  of  the  priests  to  offerings  are  very 
often  repeated  in  various  connections.  There 
was  probably  a  strong  tendency  amongst  the 
people  to  cheat  the  priests  of  their  dues,  or  to 
represent  their  claims  as  exorbitant.  It  ii 
in  the  spirit  of  covetousness  which  underlie* 
all  such  conduct  that  we  are  to  find  the  con- 
nection between  these  two  verses  and  thetMt 
of  the  paragraph. 


OB.  V.  &-IO.3  'tm  fiOOK    P  NtJMBEfi9.  W 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  6 — 10. — JVo  fraud  permitted  by  God.  We  have  here,  as  part  of  the  moral 
law  of  God  which  changeth  not,  the  duty  of  making  confession  of,  and  satisf ixotion 
for,  any  wrong  done  to  another,  and  the  duty  of  not  withholding  what  is  rightly 
theirs  from  the  ministers  of  God.     Consider,  therefore — 

I.  That  every  wrong  done  to  another  in  respect  of  his  property  was  assumed 
BY  the  Lord  as  a  trespass  aqainst  himself.  So  now  every  wrong  or  fraud,  and 
all  cheating  or  sharp  dealing,  practised  by  one  of  us  against  another,  is  not  merely 
an  ofEence  against  man, — such  as  may  be  excused  by  the  necessity  of  the  times,  or 
the  custom  of  business,  or  the  universal  prevalence  of  such  practices, — but  is  an  out- 
rage against  the  righteousness  of  God  which  he  will  never  overlook.  To  such  a  man 
God  himself  is  "  the  adversary  "  (Matt.  v.  25)  ;  and  if  he  be  not  repaid,  then  will  he 
himself  "repay"  that  man  (Isa.  lix.  18;  Rom.  xii.  19).  He  that  hath  cheated  his 
neighbour  of  a  penny  hath  gained  unto  himself  an  eternal  and  immeasurable  loss, 
except  he  repent,  confess,  restore  (Exod.  xxxiv.  7 ;  Isa.  Ixi.  8). 

II.  That  every  one  who  had  done  such  wrong  must  (1)  confess,  (2)  make 
RESTITUTION.  So  uow  there  is  no  true  repentance  for,  and  no  real  forgiveness  of, 
8uch  wrongs — from  the  least  even  to  the  greatest — unless  they  are  (1)  humbly 
acknowleged,  (2)  liberally  made  good  (Luke  xix.  8).  Those  wrongs  (alas,  how  many  I) 
which  are  never  found  out,  which  are  not  acknowledged  through  false  shame,  and 
not  made  good  through  covetousness,  are  like  bullets  lodged  in  the  body,  which  will 
not  cease  to  cause  misery,  disease,  and  death. 

III.  That  if  the  wronged  man  was  dead,  and  had  left  no  representative, 

THE    trespass    MUST    STILL    BE    EEOOMPBNSED    TO    THE   LORD   BY   BEING   PAID   TO   THE 

PRIEST.  So  now  it  is  a  certain  maxim  of  Christian  morality  (as  of  law)  that  no  man 
be  a  gainer  by  his  own  wrong.  If  he  cannot  repay  to  the  person  wronged,  directly 
or  indirectly,  he  is  bound  to  make  recompense  to  God  by  devoting  it  to  some  pious 
purpose.  If  a  man  has  made  a  fortune  by  fraud,  his  repentance  is  vain  unless  hf 
make  over  the  whole  of  it  to  the  good  of  his  neighbours.  This  will  not  cleanse  his 
conscience, — only  the  one  Sacrifice  can  do  that, — but  without  it  his  conscience  cannoi 
be  cleansed. 

IV.  That  God  did  oarefully  insist  that  his  priests  should  receive  theib 
PORTION,  and  SHOULD  not  BE  OVER-REACHED.  Eveu  SO  Is  the  law  of  Christ  (1  Cor.  ix 
7—14  ;  Gal.  vi.  6  ;  1  Tim.  v.  17,  18). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  5 — 10. — Conscience  money.  This  precept  is  a  continuation  of  the  one  laid 
down  in  the  preceding  verses,  and,  like  it,  admonishes  the  people  regardino-  tlie 
parity  which  ought  to  prevail  in  a  camp  honoured  with  the  presence  of  the  Holy 
One.  Since  the  Lord  dwells  in  the  midst  of  the  camp,  there  must  not  abide  in  it 
anything  that  defileth — any  leper,  any  one  having  an  issue,  any  one  who  has  been  in 
contact  with  the  dead.  Nor  is  it  bodily  defilement  only  that  entails  this  disability. 
The  man  "that  doeth  hurt  to  his  neighbour"  is  unclean  in  God's  sight.  Fraud  is  as 
defiling  as  leprosy.  Even  if  it  is  such  as  the  criminal  law  cannot  reach,  God's  eye 
sees  it,  and  is  offended  with  it;  and  the  wrong-doer  must  regard  himself  as  excluded 
from  the  camp  till  he  has  made  restitution  to  his  wronged  neighbour,  and  brought  a 
sacrifice  of  atonement  to  the  Lord. 

I.  Keeping  in  view  the  scope  of  the  law  as  I  have  described  it,  you  will  without 
diflBculty  master  the  particulars  laid  down,  especially  if  you  read  along  with  it  the 
law  in  Levit.  vi.  1 — 7.  It  is  essential  to  observe  that  this  injunction  is  not  a  part  of 
'  the  criminal  code.  It  is  not  laid  down  for  the  guidance  of  the  judges,  but  for  the 
guidance  of  a  man's  own  conscience.  The  restitution  enjoined  is  similar  to  that  known 
•mong  ourselves  as  conscience  money.  Take  an  example.  A  man  finds  a  pruning- 
hook  by  the  highway-side,  evidently  left  there  by  mistake.  He  takes  it  home.  "  An 
excellent  pruning-hook ;  the  very  thing  I  was  in  need  of.  I  need  not  maire  a  noiaa 
about  the  lucky  find  ;  I  will  keep  it  to  myself."     A  few  days  after,  the  loser  tuni» 


ns  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oa.  v.  5—10. 

up,  and  makes  inquiries  about  his  hook.  But  the  finder  denies  all  knowledge  of  it, 
and  it  remains  in  his  possession.  Among  us  the  criminal  law  would  have  something^ 
to  say  to  this  dishonest  finder.  The  meshes  of  the  Hebrew  criminal  code  seem  to 
have  been  wide  enough  to  let  him  go.  But  the  holy  law  of  God  speaks  to  his  con- 
science. 1.  He  is  to  confess  his  fault.  Even  in  matters  belonging  to  the  criminal 
law,  the  Jews  laid  great  stress  on  confession.  It  was  a  maxim  among  them,  that  if  a 
man  brought  an  offering  for  his  offence,  but  omitted  to  confess  the  evil  he  had  donR, 
his  offering  would  not  avail  for  atonement  (cf.  1  John  i.  9).  2.  He  is  to  make 
restitution  to  the  person  wronged.  In  the  instance  supposed  the  prucing-hook  must 
be  restored,  or  its  equivalent  in  money,  with  one-fifth  part  added.  This,  let  me 
observe  in  passing,  shows  that  the  trespass  contemplated  is  not  a  trespass  such  as 
fell  within  the  scope  of  the  criminal  law ;  for  the  restitution  enjoined  in  the  criminal 
law  was  much  ampler.  A  thief  restored  double  ;  a  sheep-stealer  fourfold  ;  a  cattle- 
Hfter  fivefold  (Exod.  xxii.  1 — 4).  Mild  penalties  certainly,  but  more  severe  than 
the  restitution  enjoined  here.  3.  A  ram  is  to  be  brought  to  the  Lord  as  a  trespass 
offering  for  atonement.  4.  If  the  person  who  was  wronged  is  dead,  the  restitution 
is  to  be  made  to  the  next  heir, — the  kinsman,  or  god  (ver.  8), — whom  failing,  it  is 
to  be  made  to  the  Lord  in  the  person  of  the  priest.  In  connection  with  this,  the 
people  are  admonished  that  all  gifts  solemnly  dedicated  to  the  priest  fall  under  the 
same  rule  as  conscience  money  paid  by  way  of  compensation  for  fraud.  Omission 
to  pay  them  will  defile  the  camp. 

II.  What  does  this  statute  of  conscience  money  teach  us?  1.  When  a  man 
does  wrong  to  his  neighbour  he  sins  against  God,  aiid  must  crave  God's  pardon  for 
the  wrong.  There  have  been  religious  systems — the  old  Greek  and  Roman  paganism, 
for  example — which  completely  disconnected  religion  from  morality.  A  tendency  in 
the  same  direction,  who  that  knows  himself  has  not  caught  a  glimpse  of  in  his  own 
heart  ?  Against  that  fatal  divorce  the  whole  word  of  God  is  a  protest  and  warning. 
Bead  Psalm  xv.  2.  When  a  man  does  wrong  to  his  neiglibour  he  must  make  com- 
pensation to  his  neighbour.  It  will  not  do  simply  to  confess  the  wrong  to  God,  and 
beg  his  pardon.  That  is  only  one  half  of  what  the  case  demapds.  Satisfaction  must 
be  made  to  the  person  wronged.  In  many  cases  the  civil  magistrate  will  see  to  this. 
In  many  other  cases  the  wrong-doing  is  of  a  kind  which  his  sword  cannot  reach — 
fraudulent  bankruptcies  often  elude  the  law.  In  all  cases  alike,  God  commands  the 
person  who  has  wronged  his  neighbour  to  repay  him  with  increase.  3.  The  wrong- 
doer who  omits  to  repay  as  required  is  admonished  that  he  is  an  unclean  person,  whose 
presence  deliles  God's  sanctuary.  In  God's  sight  the  camp  is  defiled  by  the  presence 
of  a  man  who  defrauds  as  much  as  by  a  leper.  If  you  would  see  how  deeply  this 
aspect  of  the  precept  before  us  impressed  itself  on  consciences  in  Israel,  read  Psalm 
XV.,  a  psalm  fitted  surely  to  suggest  alarm  to  those  amongst  us  who  in  business 
habitually  violate  the  golden  rule,  and  yet  claim  a  place  in  God's  sanctuary.  4.  In 
the  complications  of  modem  life  it  will  happen  far  more  frequently  than  in  ancient 
Israel  that  satisfaction  for  fraud  cannot  be  made  directly  to  the  parties  defrauded. 
In  this  case  the  money  is  to  be  devoted  to  charitable  and  pious  uses.  To  be  sure, 
ill-gotten  wealth  is  a  very  undesirable  source  of  income  for  either  Church  or  charity. 
I  much  doubt  whether  God  honours  it  to  do  much  good.  But  if  the  fraudulent  per- 
son is  truly  penitent,  and  has  done  his  best  to  make  compensation  to  his  victims, 
he  may  hope  to  escape  the  defilement  and  curse  that  cleave  to  dishonest  gains  by 
bestowing  thom  where  they  may  possibly  do  some  good. — B. 

Vers.  5 — 8. —  Confession  and  restitution.  These  trespasses  are  explained  and  illus- 
trated in  Levit.  vi.  1 — 7.  In  both  passages  provision  is  made  for  confession,  resti- 
tution, interest,  and  atonement — in  Leviticus  the  atonement  being  spoken  of  more 
fully  than  here.     Notice  that  three  parties  are  provided  for  in  the  directions  given. 

I,  The  wrong-doer.  The  wrong-doer  has  done  injury  to  himself  as  well  as  an- 
other. In  one  sense  the  injury  is  even  greater.  What  we  suffer  from  others, 
grievous  and  irritating  as  it  may  be  at  the  time,  need  not  be  an  abiding  ill ;  but  the 
injury  we  inflict  on  others  is  great  spiritual  danger  to  ourselves.  Hence  the  man  truly 
confessing  the  wrong  lie  had  done  was  proving  himself  in  a  better  state  of  mind,  no 
longer  the  victim  of  selfishness,  and  glorying  in  his  shame,  but  showing  an  awakened 


OH.  V.  11—31.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


39 


conscience,  and  a  repentance  needing  not  to  be  repented  of.  Consirler  the  benefit 
David  got  (Pa.  li.).  Confession,  restitution,  and  atonement  cleanse  tlie  bosom  of  a 
great  deal  of  "  perilous  stuff."  Restitution,  though  a  loss  in  possessions,  is  a  gain  in 
peace.  Reparation  of  a  wrong  done  to  a  fellow-man  is  to  be  valued  for  the  injured 
person's  sake ;  but  it  is  a  great  deal  more  that  the  wrong-doer  for  his  own  sake  has 
been  brought  right  with  God. 

II.  The  person  wronohd.  He  is  provided  for  as  far  as  he  can  be  provided  for. 
To  make  reparation  in  all  respects  is  indeed  impossible.  A  wrong-doer,  with  all  hia 
efforts,  cannot  put  things  exactly  as  they  were  before.  Still  he  must  do  what  he  can. 
Hence  the  provision  to  add  a  fifth  over  the  principal.  Doubtless  a  truly  repentant 
trespasser  would  not  stop  even  at  that  to  show  his  sincerity  in  reparation.  Zaocheus 
restored  fourfold.  Surely  there  are  some  injured  persons  to  whom  it  would  be  a 
greater  joy  and  a  greater  benefit  to  see  their  enemies  altogether  altered  than  if  they 
had  never  been  hurt  by  them  at  all.  One  groat  good,  as  concerned  the  person  wronged, 
was  that  confession  and  restitution  would  do  much  to  allay,  and  perhaps  obliterate, 
the  sense  of  injustice.  "  It  is  not  what  a  man  outwardly  has  or  wants  that  constitutes 
the  happiness  or  misery  of  him.  It  is  the  feeling  of  injustice  that  is  insupportable 
to  all  men.  The  brutalest  black  African  cannot  bear  that  he  should  be  used  unjustly  " 
(Oarlyle).  Again,  injured  persons  themselves  may  be  injurers.  A  sense  of  wrong 
suffered  is  not  always  effectual  in  hindering  the  sufferer  from  wronging  others.  So 
the  confession  and  repentance  of  one  might  lead  to  the  confession  and  repentance  of 
another.  Who  knows  the  total  effect  produced  on  the  persons  to  whom  Zaccheus  made 
his  fourfold  restitution  ? 

III.  Jehovah  himself.  Acknowledgment  and  restitution  were  not  enough  with- 
out atonement.  To  injure  a  fellow-man  is  to  rebel  against  the  government  of  God, 
robbing  him  of  some  possible  servicp  from  the  person  injured.  The  wrong-doer, 
from  prickings  of  conscience,  or  mere  uneasiness  of  mind,  may  make  some  reparation 
to  his  fellow-man,  whom  he  can  see ;  but  if  he  thinks  he  has  then  done  all,  he  may 
find,  from  continued  uneasiness,  that  something  is  yet  unaccomplished.  It  is  the 
greatest  blot  on  sinful  men,  not  that  they  ai-e  unjust  to  one  another,  but  that  they 
have  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God.  That  glory  must  be  restored,  and  God  take  the 
place  of  self,  if  human  relations  are  to  come  right.  There  is  no  scheme  of  teaching 
or  example  that,  acting  on  natural  lines,  will  ever  make  men  perfectly  just  to  one 
another.  Things  must  be  put  right  with  God,  for.  of  him,  and  through  him,  and  to 
him  are  all  things.  Let  no  one.  therefore,  make  confession  and  restitution  here 
look  large,  and  atonement  be  pushed  into  the  corner  as  an  unimportant  detail.  Just 
•s  the  confession  and  restitution  point  forward  to  the  pure  and  vigorous  ethics  of  Jesus, 
so  the  slain  animals  point  forward  to  him  who  takes  away  the  sin  of  the  world. — Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


The  teial  op  jealottst  (vers.  11 — 31). 
Ver.  12.  —  If  any  man's  wife  .  .  .  com- 
mit a  trespass  against  him.  The  adultery 
of  the  wife  is  here  regarded  only  from  a 
social  point  of  view  ;  the  injury  to  the 
husband,  the  destruction  of  his  peace  of 
mind,  even  by  the  bare  suspicion,  and  the 
consequent  troubling  of  Israel,  is  the  thing 
dwelt  upon.  The  punishment  of  adultery 
as  a  sin  had  been  already  prescribed  (Levit. 
xx  10). 

Ver.  13.— If  it  be  hid.  Or,  "  if  he  be  hid.  " 
This  verse  is  explanatory  of  the  former. 
Taken  with  the  manner.  The  latter  words 
«re  not  in  the  Hebrew.  It  means  no  doubt 
"  taken  in  the  act "  (of.  John  viii.  4) 
Airfi  nf)  y  (tvvii\riii}iivr],  Sep'uagint. 

Ver.  14. — And  she  be  not  defiled.  As 
far  M  th«  mischief  here  dealt  with  was  con- 


cerned, it  was  almost  equally  great  whether 
the  woman  was  guilty  or  not. 
•  Ver.  15. — He  shall  bring  hor  offering  for 
her.  ajaiD," her  offering;"  117.1?,  "on her 
account."  It  was  to  be  a  meat  offering — ^not 
connected  on  this  occasion  with  any  other 
sacrifice — of  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  symbolis- 
ing the  fruits  of  her  guilty,  or  at  least  care- 
less and  suspicious,  conduct.  As  of  barley 
meal,  not  of  fine  wheat  flour,  it  indicated 
her  present  low  and  vile  estate  (deserved  or 
undeserved)  ;  as  without  incense  or  oil,  it 
disclaimed  for  itself  the  sanctifying  influences 
of  God's  grace  and  of  prayer.  Thus  every 
detail  of  the  offering,  while  it  did  not  condemn 
the  woman  (for  one  found  guilty  could  not 
have  made  any  offering  at  all),  yet  repre- 
sented herquestionable  repute  andunquestion- 
able  dishonour,  for  even  the  unjust  suspicion 


4U 


tSft  BOOK  Of  NtJMfiEtlS. 


[cM.  V.  11-41. 


of  the  husband  is  a  dishouour  to  the  wife. 
Barley  meal.  In  the  days  of  Elisha  half  the 
price  of  fine  flour  (2  Kings  vii.  1),  and  only 
eaten  by  the  poor  (Ezek.  iv.  12  ;  John  vi  9). 
An  offering  of  jealousy.  Literally,  "of 
jealousies."  riKJi?,  an  intensive  plural.  An 
offering  of  memorial,  bringing  iniquity  to 
remembrance.  Qvaia  fivrjiioavvov,  Septua- 
gint.  An  offering  to  bring  the  woman  into 
judicial  remembrance  before  the  Lord,  in 
order  that  her  sin  (if  any)  might  be  remem- 
bered with  him,  and  be  declared. 

Ver.  16.— Before  the  Lord.  Either  at  the 
brazen  altar  or  at  the  door  of  the  taber- 
nacle. 

Ver.  17. — Holy  water.  Probably  from 
the  laver  which  stood  near  the  altar  (E.xod, 
ixx.  18).  The  expression  is  nowhere  else 
used.  The  Septuagint  has  vSiop  tcadaobv  ^uiv, 
pure  running  water.  In  an  earthen  vessel- 
Cheap  and  coarse,  like  the  offering.  Of  the 
dust  that  ii  in  the  floor  of  the  tabernacle. 
This  is  the  only  place  where  the  floor  of  the 
tabernacle  is  mentioned.  As  no  directions, 
were  given  concerning  it,  it  was  probably  the 
bare  earth  cleared  and  stamped.  The  cedar 
floor  of  the  temple  was  overlaid  with  gold 
(1  Kings  vi.  16,  30).  This  use  of  the  dust 
has  been  held  to  signify  the  fact  (a)  that  man 
was  made  of  dust,  and  must  return  to  dust 
(Gen.  iii.  19) ;  or  (J)  that  dust  is  the  serpent's 
meat,  i.  e.  that  shame  and  disgust  are  the 
Inevitable  fruit  of  sin  (Gen.  iii.  14  ;  Isa.  Ixv. 
25).  Of  these,  {a)  is  not  appropriate  to  the 
matter  in  question,  since  mortality  is  com- 
mon to  all,  and  (J)  is  far  too  recondite  to 
have  been  intended  here.  It  is  very  unlikely 
that  the  spiritual  meaning  of  Gen.  iii.  14 
was  known  to  any  of  the  Jews.  A  much 
simpler  and  more  intelligible  explanation  is 
to  be  found  in  the  obvious  fact  that  the  dust 
of  the  tabernacle  was  the  only  thing  which 
belonged  to  the  tabernacle,  and  which  was, 
so  to  speak,  impregnated  with  the  awful 
holiness  of  him  that  dwelt  therein,  that 
could  be  mixed  with  water  and  drunk.  For 
a  similar  reason  the  "  sin  "  of  the  people,  thp 
golden  calf,  was  ground  to  powder,  and  the 
people  made  to  drink  it  (Exod.  xxxii.  20). 
The  idea  conveyed  to  the  dullest  apprehen- 
sion certainly  was  that  with  the  holy  dust 
Divine  "  virtue  "  had  passed  into  the  water — 
virtue  which  would  give  it  supernatural 
eiEcacy  to  slay  the  guilty  and  to  leave  the 
guiltless  unharmed. 

Ver.  18.  —  irncover  the  woman's  head. 
In  token  that  she  had  forfeited  her  glory  by 
breaking,  or  seeming  to  have  broken,  her 
allegiance  to  her  husband  (1  Cor.  xl  5 — 10) ; 
perhaps  also  with  some  reference  to  the  truth 
that  "all  things  are  naked  and  open  to  the 
eyes  of  him"  with  whom  she  had  to  do 
(Heb.  iv.  13).  Put  the  offering  of  memorial 
in  her  hands     That  she  herself  might  pre- 


sent, as  it  were,  the  fruits  of  her  life  befor« 
God,  and  challenge  investigation  of  them. 
Bitter  water.  It  was  not  literally  bitter, 
but  it  was  so  fraught  with  conviction  and 
judgment  as  to  bring  bitter  suffering  on  the 
guilty. 

Ver.  19.  — If  no  man.  The  oath  pre- 
supposed her  innocence.  With  another 
instead  of  thy  husband.  Hebrew, ' '  under  thy 
husband,"  i.  e.  as  a  wife  subject  to  a  husband 
(Ezek.  xxiii.  5  ;  lies.  iv.  12).  "XiravipoQ 
outrn,  Septuagint.  It  was  only  as  a  femme 
amverte  that  she  could  commit  this  sin. 

Ver.  21.— Then  the  priest  shall . .  sayunto 
the  woman.  These  words  are  parenthetical, 
just  as  in  Matt.  ix.  6.  The  latter  part  of 
the  oath  is  called  "  an  oath  of  cursing," 
because  it  contained  the  imprecations  on 
the  guilty.  To  rot.  Hebrew,  "  to  fall. "  TAv 
fiTlpSv  aou  iiairtTTTUKOTa,  Septuagint.  To 
swell.  The  Hebrew  zabeh  is  not  of  (]^uite 
certain  meaning,  but  probably  this. 

Ver._  22.— Into  thy  bowels.  Cf.  Ps.  cix. 
18.  Ei'c  Ti)v  KoiXiav  aoVf  Septuagint.  It  has 
been  thought  that  these  symptoms  belonged 
to  some  known  disease,  such  as  dropsy  (J ose- 
phus,  'Ant.,'  iii.  11,  6),  or  ovarian  dropsy. 
Bpt  it  is  clear  that  the  whole  matter  was 
outside  the  range  of  the  known  and  of  the 
natural.  An  innocent  woman  may  suffer 
from  dropsy,  or  any  foi-m  of  it ;  but  this  was 
a  wholly  peculiar  infliction  by  direct  visita- 
tion of  God.  The  principle  which  underlay 
the  infliction  was,  however,  clear  :  di'  &v  yip 
rj  afiapTtajStd  Tovrtjjv  t)  Tifitopia — the  organs 
of  sin  are  the  seat  of  the  plague.  Amen, 
amen.  Doubled  here,  as  in  the  Gospel  of 
John.  The  woman  was  to  accept  (if  she 
dared)  the  awful  ordeal  and  appeal  to  God 
by  this  response  ;  if  she  dared  not,  she  pro- 
nounced herself  guilty. 

Ver.  23.  —  In  a  book.  On  a  roll  Blot 
them  out  with  the  bitter  water.  Rather, 
"wash  them  off  into  the  bitter  water,"  in 
order  to  transfer  the  venom  of  the  curses  to 
the  water.  'EkaXii^n  .  .  .  ci'i- to  i'Jup,  Septu- 
agint. The  writiug  on  the  scroll  was  to  be 
washed  off  in  the  vessel  of  water.  Of  course 
the  only  actual  consequence  was  that  the  ink 
was  mixed  with  the  Water,  but  in  the  imagina- 
tion of  the  people,  and  to  the  frightened  con- 
science of  a  guilty  woman,  the  curses  were 
also  held  in  solution  in  the  water  of  trial. 
The  direction  was  founded  on  a  world-wide 
superstition,  still  prevalent  in  Africa,  and 
indeed  amongst  most  semi-barbarous'peoples. 
In  the  'Romance  of  Setnan,'  translated  by 
Brugsch.  Bey,  the  scene  of  which  is  laid  in 
the  time  of  Rameses  the  Great,  a  magical 
formula  written  on  a  papyrus  leaf  is  dissolved 
in  water,  and  drunk  with  the  effect  of  impart- 
ing all  its  secrets  to  him  that  drinks  it. 
So  iii  the  present  day,  by  a  similar  supersti- 
tion, do  sick  Mahomedans  swallow  texts  ol 


ea.  i.  li-Si.] 


Hm  BOOK  0^  NtJMBEM 


41 


the  Koran ;  and  so  in  the  middle  ages  the 
csnoTiised  Archbishop  Edmund  Rich  (1240) 
on  his  death-bed  waiied  a  crucifix  in  water 
and  drank  it,  saying,  "Ye  shall  drink  water 
from  the  wells  of  salvation." 

Ver.  24. — He  shall  cause  the  woman  to 
drink.  This  is  said  by  anticipation,  becaAse 
she  did  not  really  drink  it  nntU  after  the 
offering  (ver.  26). 

Ver.  25. — Offer  it  upon  the  altar.  Accord- 
ing to  the  law  of  the  minchah  (Levit.  ii.), 
only  an  handful  was  burnt  as  a  "  memorial " 
(Hebrew,  azkdrdh),  the  rest  being  "pre- 
sented," and  then  laid  at  the  side  of  the  altar 
to  be  subsequently  eaten  by  the  priests.  All 
this  was  done  before  the  actual  ordeal  by 
drinking  the  water,  in  order  that  the  woman 
might  in  the  most  solemn  and  complete  way 
possible  be  brought  face  to  face  with  the 
holiness  of  God.  She  stood  before  him  as 
one  of  his  own,  yet  as  one  suspected  and 
abashed,  courting  the  worst  if  guilty,  claim- 
ing complete  acquittal  if  innocent. 

Ver.  27. — Shall  enter  into  her,  and  be- 
come bitter.  Eather,  "as  bitter,"  or  "as 
bitterness,"  i.  e.  as  producingbittersuflerings. 
Shall  be  a  curse,  i.  e.  shall  be  used  as  an 
example  in  the  imprecations  of  the  people. 

Ver.  28. — ^And  shall  conceive  seed.  As 
a  sign  of  the  Divine  favour ;  to  a  Jewish 
woman  the  surest  and  most  regarded  (1  Sam. 
iL  5  ;  Ps.  cxxvii.  3  ;  Luke  i.  58). 

Ver.  29.  r— This  is  the  law  of  jealousies. 
A  law  prescribed  by  God,  and  yet  in  sub- 
stance borrowed  from  half  civilised  heathens ; 
a  practice  closely  akin  to  yet  prevalent  super- 
stitions, and  yet  receiving  not  only  the 
toleration  of  Moses,  but  the  direct  sanction 
of  God ;  an  ordeal  which  emphatically  claimed 
to  be  infallibly  operative  through  super- 
natural agencies,  yet  amongst  other  nations 
obviously  lending  itself  to  collusion  and  fraud, 
as  does  the  trial  by  red  water  practised  by  the 
tribes  of  West  Africa.  In  order  to  justify 
heavsnly  wisdom  herein,  we  must  frankly 
admit,  to  begin  with — (1)  That  it  was  founded 
upon  the  superstitious  notion  that  immaterial 
virtue  can  be  imparted  to  physical  elements. 
The  holiness  of  the  gathered  dust  and  the 
awfulnesa  of  the  written  curses  were  both 
supposed  to  be  held  in  solution  by  the  water 
of  jealousy.  The  record  does  not  say  as 
much,  but  the  whole  ordeal  proceeds  on  this 
supposition,  which  would  undoubtedly  be  the 
popuUr  one.  (2)  That  it  was  only  fitted  for 
a  very  rude  and  comparatively  barbarous  state 


of  society.  The  Talmud  states  that  the  uat 
of  it  ceased  forty  years  before  the  destruction 
of  Jerusalem  (if  so,  during  our  Lord's  earthly 
lifetime) ;  but  it  may  be  held  certain  that  it 
ceased  long  before — indeed  there  is  no  recorded 
instance  of  its  use.  It  was  essentially  an 
ordeal,  although  one  Divinely  regulated,  and 
as  such  would  have  been  morally  impossible 
and  highly  undesirable  in  any  age  but  one 
of  blind  and  uninquiring  faith.  And  we  find 
the  justification  of  it  exactly  in  the  fact  that 
it  was  given  to  a  generation  which  believed 
much  and  knew  little ;  which  had  a  profound 
belief  in  magic,  and  no  knowledge  of  natural 
philosophy.  It  was  ever  the  wisdom  of  God, 
as  revealed  in  the  sacred  volume,  to  take  men 
as  they  were,  and  to  utilise  the  superstitious 
notions  which  could  not  at  once  be  destroyed, 
or  the  imperfect  moral  ideas  which  could  not 
at  once  be  reformed,  by  making  them  work 
for  rigliteousness  and  peace.  It  is,  above  aU, 
the  wisdom  of  God  not  to  destroy  the  im- 
perfect, but  to  regulate  it  and  restrain  its 
abuses,  and  so  impress  it  into  his  service, 
until  he  has  educated  his  people  for  some- 
thing higher.  Everybody  knows  the  ex- 
treme violence  of  jealousy  amongst  an  un- 
civilised people,  and  the  widespread  misery 
and  crime  to  which  it  leads.  It  may  safely 
be  affirmed  that  any  ordeal  which  should 
leave  no  place  for  jealousy,  because  no  room 
for  uncertainty,  would  be  a  blessing  to  a 
people  rude  enough  and  ignorant  enough  to 
believe  in  it.  Ordeals  are  established  in  a 
certain  stage  of  civilisation  because  they  are 
wanted,  and  are  on  the  whole  useful,  as  long 
as  they  remain  in  harmony  with  popular 
ideas.  They  are,  however,  always  liable  to 
two  dangers.  (1)  They  occasionally  fail,  and 
are  known  to  have  failed,  and  so  fall  into 
disrepute.  (2)  They  always  lend  themselves 
readily  to  collusion  or  priestcraft.  The  trial 
of  jealousy  being  adopted,  as  it  was,  into  a 
system  really  Divine,  and  being  based  upon 
the  knowledge  and  poVer  of  God  himself, 
secured  all  the  benefits  of  an  ordeal  and 
escaped  all  its  dangers.  It  is  probable 
enough  that  the  avpful  side  of  it  was  never 
really  called  iato  play.  No  guilty  woman 
would  dare  to  challenge  so  directly  a  visit- 
ation so  dreadfal,  as  long  as  she  retained  any 
faith  or  any  superstition.  Before  the  time 
came  when  any  Jewish  woman  had  discarded 
both,  the  increasing  facilities  of  divorce  had 
provided  another  and  easier  escape  from 
matrimonial  troubles. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver8.  11 — 31. — The  tin  of  adultery.  We  have  here,  in  the  letter,  a  piece  of 
legislation  altogether  obsolete,  because  adapted  to  on  age  and  to  ideas  utterly'  foreign 
to  our  own  ;  yet,  in  the  spirit,  we  liave,  as  part  of  the  moral  law  of  God  which 
cbangeth  not,  the  unspeakable  abhorrence  in  which  the  sin  of  adultery  is  held  with 


4«  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERa  L™-  ▼•  »!— Si 

him,  and  the  great  displeasure  with  which  he  regards  the  mere  suspicion  of  it.  Foi 
tliis  ordeal  was  not  merely  or  primarily  to  punish  guilt  or  to  restore  domestic  peace 
but  to  remove  sin  and  passion  from  before  the  eyes  of  God.     Consider,  therefore — 

I.  That  God  reserved  his  most  awful  visitation  of  old  times  for  such  adultery 

AS  HAD  successfully  ESCAPED  HUMAN  OBSERVATION.  So  there  is  no  ein  which  more 
snrely  destroys  a  nation  or  a  class  by  kindling  the. wrath  of  God  against  it  than 
adultery.  So  the  Jews  in  the  time  jf  the  later  prophets  (Jer.  v.  8  ;  Hos.  iv.  2),  and 
in  the  time  of  our  Lord  (John  viii.  7 ;  the  Talmud,  as  above) ;  so  the  upper  classes  in 
France  before  the  Revolution  ;  so  perhaps  our  own  to-day. 

II.  That  God  did  not  appoint  divohcB  as  a  remedy  against  conjugal  unfaith- 
fulness. For  it  is  no  remedy  against  the  sin,  but  only  against  some  of  its  painful 
consequences.  The  glosses  and  traditions  of  the  Jewish  lawyers  made  divorce  easy 
and  common,  because  they  no  longer  believed  in  the  righteousness  of  God  or  in  the 
hatefulness  of  sin,  as  sin. 

III.  That  nothing  is  more  abhorrent  from  the  will  of  God  concerning  us  than 

THAT  FIERCE  JEALOUSY  AND  CRUEL  SUSPICION  SHOULD  INVADE  FAMILIES,  and  poison  tho 

purest  source  of  human  happiness.  Both, therefore,  sin  greatly — the  wife  who  gives 
the  least  ground  for  suspicion  by  levity  or  carelessness  of  conduct,  the  husband  who 
nurses  a  spirit  of  jealousy,  and  does  not  try  to  bring  it  to  the  test  of  facts, 

IV.  That  the  sin  of  adultery  was  punished  under  the  law  with  miserable  death, 
WHEREAS  Christ  refused  to  award  any  secular  punishment  to  it  (John  viii.  11). 
And  this  is  (1)  because  of  the  greater  mercifulness  of  the  gospel,  calling  men  to 
repentance  (Rom.  ii.  4 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  9) ;  but  also  (2)  because  of  the  greater  severity 
of  the  moral  law  now  revealed,  threatening  eternal  death  to  all  adulterers  (Gal.  v.  19, 
21 ;  Heb.  xiii.  4). 

V.  That  this  special  and  awful  provision  was  made  only  against  the  sin  of 
THB  wife,  because  it  is  from  her  sin  thiit  jealousy  and  its  consequent  crimes  do  as  a 
fact  arise  in  rude  communities.  But  under  the  more  perfect  law  of  Christ  there  is  no 
difference  made  between  the  same  sin  in  men  and  women,  but  rather  the  sin  of  the 
man  is  denounced  because  it  is  more  lightly  accounted  by  the  world  (Matt  T.  28  ; 
1  Thesi.  iv.  6,  "  in  the  matter  "). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver«.  11 — 31. — The  trial  of  jealousy.  Just  previously,  regulations  are  laid  down 
with  respect  to  offences  in  general.  Here  is  an  offence  which  needed  to  be  dealt  with 
in  a  special  way,  as  being  one  where  restitution  was  impossible.  The  offence  also 
destroyed  a  relation  of  peculiar  saoredness  and  importance,  and  the  discovery  of 
guilt  was  difficult,  perhaps  impossible  of  attainment,  by  ordinary  lines  of  proof. 

I.  The  husband's  position  is  recognised.  The  spirit  of  jealousy  is  not  condemned 
as  in  itself  an  evil  passion.  In  it  he  might  be  angry  and  sin  not.  The  spirit  of 
jealousy  could  not  be  too  much  excited  or  too  amply  satisfied,  if  only  the  facts 
corresponded  to  his  feelings.  No  mention  is  made  of  a  similar  ordeal  for  the  husband 
to  pass  through  if  a  spirit  of  jealousy  were  awakened  in  the  wife,  and  so  it  may  seem 
that  more  severity  was  meted  out  to  the  woman  than  the  man.  But  the  offence  of  an 
unfaithful  husband,  equally  great  of  course  as  a  sin,  might  not  be  equally  dangerous 
as  a  crime.  The  principles  of  human  law  which  compel  men  to  graduate  crime  and 
punishment  had  to  be  remembered  in  the  theocracy.  An  examination  of  the  Mosaic 
laws  against  sexual  impurity  shows  that  they  provided  stringently  for  both  sexes. 
The  adulterer  was  punishable  with  death.  A  guilty  wife  in  the  discovery  of  her 
guilt  dragged  down  her  paramour  (Levit.  xx.  10). 

II.  The  wipe's  position  is  recognised.  To  punish  her  more  severely  for  a  lapse 
of  conjugal  fidelity  was  really  to  honour  her,  showing  that  in  one  respect  more  was 
expected  from  her.  It  became  every  Israelite  to  walk  circumspectly;  it  peculiarly 
became  the  Israelite  matron.  May  we  not  say  that  the  spirit  of  jealousy,  though  it 
might  often  be  manifested  on  insufficient  grounds,  was  nevertheless  in  itself  a 
provision  of  God,  through  nature  ?  The  reputation  of  a  wife  is  a  very  delicate  thing, 
and  was  meant  so  to  be.  The  tenth  commandment  specifies,  "  Thou  shalt  not 
covet  thy  neighbour's  wife."     Hence  we  may  infer  there  was  some  temptation  to  men 


en.  n.  1—21.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


43 


to  commit  this  sin,  and  wives  needed  to  be  specially  on  their  guard.  The  ordeal  to 
which  God  called  them,  hard  as  it  might  seem,  had  a  most  honourable  side.  Let  it 
not  be  said  that  Mosaic  legislation  showed  the  Oriental  depreciation  of  woman.  God 
was  caring  for  her  even  then,  but  she  had  to  partake  of  the  severity  of  the  law,  even 
as,  long  after,  represented  by  the  woman  taken  in  adultery,  she  shared  in  the  clemency 
and  tenderness  of  the  gospel. 

III.  The  unekwng  disoovehy  of  guilt.  God  took  the  matter  away  out  of  the 
obscurities  of  circumstantial  evidence.  The  very  nature  of  the  ofEence  made  it 
difficult  for  a  suspicious  husband  to  get  beyond  presumption.  "The  eye  of  the 
adulterer  waiteth  for  the  twilight"  (Job  xxiv.  15).  But  God  called  the  accused  wife 
among  the  solemnities  of  the  tabernacle,  and  concealment  and  evasion  thenceforth 
became  impossible.  Notice  how  the  ordeal  was  painless  in  itself.  There  was  no 
walking  on  burning  ploughshares  nor  demand  on  physical  endurance.  It  was  inde- 
pendent also  of  anything  like  chance,  as  if  the  casting  of  a  lot  had  been  held  to  settle 
the  matter.  The  bitter  water  was  drunk,  and  God,  who  brings  all  secret  things  into 
judgment,  showed  the  indubitable  proof  in  the  swollen  body  and  the  rotted  thigh. 
Proof,  sentence,  and  punishment  were  all  in  one. 

IV.  The  discoveby,  equally  u.veering,  of  innocence.  One  wonders  what  the 
history  of  this  ordeal  was  in  practice  ;  how  often  used,  and  with  .what  results.  We 
know  not  what  terrible  tragedies  it  may  have  prevented,  what  credulous  Othello  it 
may  have  restored  to  his  peace  of  mind,  what  Desdemona  it  may  have  vindicated, 
and  what  lago  it  may  have  overthrown  in  .his  villanous  plots.  "God  shall  bring 
forth  thy  righteousness  as  the  light,  and  thy  judgment  as  the  noonday"  (Ps.  xxxvii. 
6).  There  will  be  a  final  clearing  of  all  the  innocent,  however  many  have  been 
condemned  at  a  human  bar.  The  whole  matter  assumes  its  most  significant  aspect 
when  we  note  how  the  apostasy  of  God's  people  is  figured  by  gross  and  shameful 
breaches  of  the  marriage  vow  (Ezek.  xvi.).  The  doom  of  the  adulterous  wife  fore- 
shadows the  doom  of  the  backsliding  believer. — Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  VI. 


The  row  or  the  Nazikitb  (vers.  1 — 21). 
Note. — The  Hebrew  Nazir  has  been  written 
Nazarite  in  English  under  the  mistaken  im- 
pression that  there  is  some'  connection  be- 
tween Nazir  and  Nazarene  (Matt.  ii.  23).  A 
very  little  reilection  will  show  that  "the 
Nazarene  "  not  only  was  no  Nazir,  tut  that 
he  even  took  pains  to  let  it  be  seen  that  he 
was  not.  John  the  Baptist  was  the  Nazir  of 
the  New  Testament,  and  in  all  outward 
things  the  contrast  was  strongly  marked 
between  them  (Luke  vii.  14,  33,  34 ;  John 
ii.  2). 

Ver.  2. — Either  man  or  woman.     It  was 

not  a  little  remarkable  that  women  could  be 
Kazirites,  because,  generally  speaking,  the 
Tdligious  condition  of  women  under  the  law 
was  so  markedly  inferior  and  so  little  con- 
sidered. But  this  is  altogether  consistent 
with  the  true  view  of  the  Nazirite  vow,  viz. , 
that  it  was  an  exceptional  thing,  outside  the 
narrow  pale  of  the  law,  giving  scope  and 
allowance  to  the  free  movements  of  the  Spirit 
in  individuals.  In  this  too  it  stood  on  the 
sama  plane  as  the  proijhetlc  office,  for  which 


room  was  left  in  the  religious  system  of 
Moses,  and  which  was  designed  to  correct 
and  supplement  in  its  spiritual  freedom  the 
artificial  routine  of  that  system.  As  the  pro- 
phetic office  might  be  exercised  by  women, 
so  the  Nazirite  vow  might  be  taken  by 
women.  In  either  case  we  find  a  tribute  to 
and  a  recognition  of  the  Divine  liberty  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  an  anticipation  of  the  time 
when  the  spirit  of  self-devotion  should  be 
poured  out  without  distinction  upon  men  and 
women.  Shall  separate  themselves  to  vow 
a  vow  of  a  Nazarite,  to  separate  themselves 
nnto  the  Lord.  Bather,  "shall  make  a 
solemn  vow,  a  Nazirite  vow,  to  live  con- 
secrated unto  the  Lord."  The  two  words 
translated  "separate"  are  not  the  same.  The 
first  (from  pala,  to  sever,  to  consecrate,  to 
distinguish  as  exceptional)  is  of  somewhat 
doubtful  use  here.  In  Judges  xiii.  19  it 
appears  to  be  used  as  an  intensitive,  "did 
wonderously,"  and  the  Septuagint  has  here 
liiyaKmg  ev$i}rai  fvx^v.  The  other  word 
(from  "ItJ,  to  separate)  is  used  in  a  general 
sense  in  Oen.  xlix.  26 ;  Deut.  xxxiii.  16,  oi 
with  the  addition,  "unto  the  Lord,"  as  in 
Judges  xiii.  5.  It  had,  however,  acquired  a 
technical  sense  before  this,  as  appears  from 
Levit.  XXV.  5,  11,  where  the  undressed  vines 
ire  called  "Nazirites  "  as  recalling  the  na- 


a 


TfiE  BOOK  69  KUMSEM 


[08.  tl  1-21. 


ehom  locks  of  those  who  had  taken  the  vow . 
It  is  evident  indeed,  from  the  way  in  which 
the  Nazirite  vow  is  here  sjoken  of,  that  it 
had  been,  perhaps  long,  familiaT  among  the 
people.  Au  that  this  commandment  did  was 
to  recognise  the  practice,  to  regulate  it 
minutely,  and  to  adopt  it  into  the  religious 
code  of  Israel.  Whence  the  custom  was 
derived  is  wholly  uncertain,  for  although  the 
separate  elements  existed  in  many  different 
quarters,  yet  the  peculiar  combination  of 
ttiem  which  made  the  law  of  the  Nazirite  is 
entirely  peculiar.  Vows  of  abstinence  have, 
of  course,  been  common  among  all  religions. 
Mingled  with  much  of  superstition,  self-will, 
and  pride,  they  have  sprung  in  the  main 
from  noble  impulses  and  yearnings  after  a 
higher  life,  prompted  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of 
God ;  and  it  may  be  said  with  some  con- 
fidence, that  in  spite  of  all  reproaches  (de- 
served or  undeservfed),  such  voluntary  vows 
of  abstinence  have  done  more  than  anything 
else  to  save  religion  from  becoming  an  unrefil 
profession.  Hair  offerings,  on  the  other  hand, 
springing  from  a  simple  and  natural  senti- 
ment, have  been  common  enough  amongst 
the  heathen.  Compare  the  sacred  lock  of 
Achilles  ('Iliad,' xxiii.  142,  sgq.),  and  the 
various  use  of  the  tonsure  in  pursuance  of  vows 
among  the  ancient  Egyptians  (Herod.,  it 
65)  and  amongst  modern  Mahomedans  and 
Christians.  The  physical  fact  on  which  all 
these  hair  offerings  rest  is  that  the  hair  is 
the  only  portion  of  oneself  which  can  be 
conveniently  detached  and  presented. 

Ver.  3. — Strong  drink.  Behrevi,  shehar  ; 
aiKipa  (Levit.  x.  S  ;  Luke  i.  15).  Any  in- 
toxicating drink,  other  than  wine,  including 
the  beer  of  the  Egyptians.  Vinegar.  Hebrew, 
chamets.  It  seems  to  have  been  freely  used 
by  the  poorer  people  (Ruth  ii.  14),  and  was, 
perhaps,  a  thin,  sour  wine  ("  vile  potet  ace- 
tum,"  Horat.).  Liquor  of  grapes.  A  drink 
made  by  soaking  grape-skins  in  water. 

Ver.  4. — From  the  kernels  even  to  the 
hnsk,  or  skin.  Of  grape-skins  it  is  said  that 
cakes  were  made  which  were  considered  a 
delicacy  (Hos.  iii.  1,  mistranslated  "flagons 
of  wine  "),  but  this  is  doubtful.  The  Septua- 
gint  has  olvov  aith  artiKpiXiov  eutQ  yiyap- 
Tov,  "wine  of  giape-skins  (the  liquor  of 
grapes  mentioned  before)  even  to  the  kernel." 
The  expression  is  best  understood  as  includ- 
ing -anything  and  everything,  however  un- 
likely to  be  used,  connected  with  the  grape. 
It  is  clear  that  the  abstinence  of  the  Nazir- 
ite extended  beyond  what  might  possibly 
intoxicate  to  what  was  simply  pleasant  to 
the  taste,  like  raisins,  or  refreshing,  like 
ehamets.  The  vine  represented,  by  an  easy 
parable,  the  tree  of  carnal  delights,  which 
yields  to  the  appetite  of  men  such  a  variety 
of  satisfactions.  So  among  the  Romans  the 
Vlamen  Dialis  might  not  even  touch  a  vine. 


Ver.  6. — There  shall  no  razor  come  upon 
his  head.  The  meaning  of  this  law  is  best 
understood  from  the  case  of  Samson,  whose 
strength  was  in  his  hair,  and  departed  from 
him  when  his  hair  was  cut.  No  doubt  that 
strength  was  a  more  or  less  supernatural  gift, 
and  it  went  and  came  with  his  hair  accord- 
ing to  some  supernatural  law  ;  but  it  is  clear 
that  the  connection  was  not  merely  arbitrary, 
but  was  founded  on  some  generally  received 
idea.  To  the  Jew,  differing  in  this  from  the 
shaven  Egyptian  and  the  sliort-haired  Greek, 
the  hair  represented  the  virile  powers  of  the 
adult,  growing  with  its  growth,  and  failing 
again  with  its  decay.  To  use  a  simple 
analogy  from  nature,  the  uncropped  locks  of 
the  Nazirite  were  like  the  mane  of  the  male 
lion,  a  symbol  of  the  fulness  of  his  proper 
strength  and  life  (cf.  2  Sam.  xiv.  25,  26,  and, 
for'  the  disgrace  of  baldness,  2  Kings  ii.  23). 
In  later  ages  Western  and  Greek  feeling  on 
the  subject  prevailed  over  Eastern  and  Jewish, 
and  a  "Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews''  was  able 
to  argue  that  "even  nature  itself"  teaches 
us  "  that  if  a  man  have  long  hair  it  is  a 
shame  unto  him  "  (1  Cor.  xi.  14).  No  doubt 
"  nature  itself  "  taught  the  Greek  of  Corinth 
that  lesson ;  but  no  doubt  also  "  nature 
itself"  taught  the  Jew  of  Palestine  exactly 
the  opposite  lesson ;  and  the  Apostle  him- 
self did  not  quite  discard  the  earlier  senti- 
ment, for  he  too  made  a  Nazirite  vow,  and 
suffered  his  hair  to  grow  while  it  lasted 
(Acts  xxi.  24).  The  meaning,  therefore,  of 
the  law  was  that  the  whole  fulness  of  the 
man's  vitality  was  to  be  dedicated  without 
any  diminution  to  the  Lord,  as  typified  by 
the  free  growth  of  his  hair.  It  has  been 
conjectured  that  it  was  allowed  to  the  Nazir- 
ite to  "poll"  (Ktipaffdoi)  his  hair  during  his 
vow,  although  not  to  "shave"  it  (fupaaSai) ; 
and  in  this  way  the  statement  is  explained 
that  St.  Paul  "polled  his  head"  {Kupa/iivoe 
T^v  Ki^aXi^v,  Acts  xviii.  18,  compared  with 
zxi.  24)  in  Cenchrsea,  because  he  had  a  vow. 
It  is,  however,  quite  evident  that  any  per- 
mission to  cut  the  hair  is  inconsistent  with 
the  whole  intention  of  the  commandment ; 
for  if  a  man  might  "poU  his  head  "  when  he 
pleased,  he  would  not  be  distinguished  from 
other  men.  If  it  was  allowed  in  the  Apostle's 
time,  it  is  only  another  instance  of  the  way 
in  which  the  commandments  of  God  were 
made  of  none  effect  by  the  traditions  of  men. 

Ver.  7. — He  shall  not  make  himself  un- 
clean for  his  father,  or  for  his  mother.  The 
same  injunction  had  been  given  to  the  priests 
(Levit.  xxi.  12) — "for  the  crown  of  the  anoint- 
ing oil  of  his  God  is  upon  him."  A  similar 
reason  restrained  the  Nazirite.  Because  the 
consecration  of  his  God  is  upon  his  head,  i.  e. 
because  he  wears  the  unshom  locks  which 
are  the  outward  sign  of  his  separation  unto 
God.     The  hair  of  the  Nazuite  was  to  him 


SH.  n.  1—21.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


41 


just  what  the  diadem  on  the  mitre  was  to 
the  high  priest,  what  the  sacred  christn  was 
to  the  sons  of  Aaron.  Both  of  these  are  called 
by  the  wordmexer  (Exod.  xxfx.  6 ;  Levit.  xxi. 
12),  from  the  same  root  as  nazir.  It  was 
thqught  by  some  of  the  Jewish  doctors  that 
in  these  three  particulars — the  Untouched 
growth  of  the  hair,  the  abstinence  from  the 
fruit  of  the  vine  (cf.  Gen.  ix.  20),  and  the 
seclusion  from  the  dead — the  separated  life  of 
the  Nazirite  reproduced  the  unfallen  life  of 
man  in  paradise.  This  may  have  had  some 
foundation  in  fact,  but  the  true  explanation 
of  the  three  rules  is  rather  to  be  found  in  the 
spiritual  truth  they  teach  in  a  simple  and 
forcible  way.  He  who  has  a  holy  ambition 
to  please  God  must  (1)  devote  to  God  the 
whole  forces  of  hia  being,  undiminished  by 
any  wont  and  use  of  the  world  ;  (2)  abstain 
not  only  from  pleasures  which  are  actually 
dangerous,  but  from  such  as  have  any  savour 
of  moral  evil  about  them  ;  (3)  subordinate  his 
most  sacred  private  feelings  to  the  great  pur- 
pose of  his  life. 

Ver.  9.  If  any  man  die  very  suddenly  by 
him.    'n^y,  in  hia  presence,  or  neighbourhood, 

BO  that,  having  hastened  to  his  assistance,  he 
found  himself  in  contact  with  a  corpse.  This 
case  is  mentioned  particularly,  because  it  was 
the  only  one  in  which  simple  humanity  or 
mere  accident  would  be  likely  to  infringe 
upon  the  vow.  In  the  day  of  Ms  cleansing, 
on  the  seventh  day.  This  appears  to  be  an 
anticipation  of  the  law  given  below  (ch.  xix. 
11) ;  but  that  law  may  nave  only  sanctioned 
the  existing  custom.  Shall  he  shave  it. 
Because  "  the  consecration  of  hia  God  upon 
his  head  "  was  desecrated  by  the  pollution  of 
death,  it  must,  therefore,  be  made  away  with 
and  begun  over  again. 

Ver.  10. — Two  turtles,  or  two  young 
pigeons.  The  same  oiferings  had  been  pre- 
scribed for  those  defiled  by  divers  unclean- 
nesses  in  Levit.  xv.  (cf.  I>vit.  xii.  8). 

Ver.  11.— For  that  he  sinned  by  the  dead. 
This  is  one  of  the  cases  in  which  the  law 
seemed  to  teach  plainly  that  an  outward, 
accidental,  and  involuntary  defilement  was 
sin,  and  had  need  to  be  atoned  for.  The 
opposite  principle  was  declared  by  our  Lord 
(Mark  vii.  18 — 23).  The  Septuagint  has  here 
the  strange  reading  vipi  dv  i)/jo()re  -irtpt  Trj{ 
'I'^'X^C-  Shall  hallow  his  head.  By  dedi- 
cating again  to  God  the  free  growth  of  his 
hair. 

Ver.  12. — For  a  trespass  offering.  Rather, 
"for  a  guilt  offering."  Hebrew,  asham,  (see 
Levit.  v.).  The  asham  always  implied  guilt, 
even  though  it  might  be  purely  legal,  and  it 
was  to  be  offered  in  thjs  case  in  acknow- 
ledgment of  the  offence  involved  in  the  in- 
'  voluntary  breach  of  vow.  In  the  education 
of  conscience,  on  anything  lower  than  the 


"perfect  law  of  liberty,"  it  was  only  possible 
to  secure  thoroughness  and  consistency  at 
the  cost  of  introducing  much  that  was  arbi- 
trary and  destined  to  pass  away.  Something 
sitnilar  must  always  be  tolerated  in  the  moid 
education  of  children.  The  days  that  were 
before  shall  be  lost.  Ijiumlly,  "shall 
fall."  Septuagint,  dXo^oi  iaovrat,  "shall 
not  be  counted. " 

Ver.  13. — When  the  days  of  Us  geparation 
are  fulfilled.  The  original  law  contemplated 
only  a  vow  for  a  certain  period,  longer  or 
shorter.  AU  the  Nazirites,  however,  of  wliom 
we  read  in  Scripture  were  lifelong  Naziriles  : 
Samson  (Judges  xiii  5),  Samuel  (1  Sam.  i. 
11),  John  the  Baptist  (Luke  i  15).  In  all 
these  cases,  however,  the  vow  was  made  for 
them  before  their  birth.  Hegesippus  (in 
Euseb.  ii.  23)  tells  us  that  James,  the  J/oid's 
brother,  was  a  Mazirite  :  "  He  did  not  drink 
wine  nor  strong  drink,  and  no  razor  came  on 
his  head." 

Ver.  14.— He  shall  offer  his  offering.  This 
offering  included  all  the  four  ordinary  sacri- 
fices— tlie  sin  olfering,  the  burnt  offering,  the 
peace  offering,  and  the  meat  offering.  For 
the  meaning  of  these  see  Levit.  iv.,  i.,  iii.,  ii. 

Ver.  15. — A  basket  of  unleavened  bread 
.  .  .  anointed  with  oil.  Required  for  every 
sacrifice  of  thanksgiving,  as  this  was  (liCvit. 
vii.  12).  And  their  meat  offering,  and  their 
drink  offerings,  i.e.  the  gifts  of  meal,  oil, 
and  wine  which  belonged  to  burnt  oHeiings 
and  peace  offerings  (see  below,  ch.  xv.  3,  sqq. ). 

Ver.  18.— Shall  take  the  hair  of  the  head 
of  his  separation,  and  shall  put  it  in  the 
fire  which  is  under  the  sacrifice  of  the  peace 
offerings.  It  is  not  said,  nor  intended,  that 
the  hair  was  offered  to  God  as  a  sacrifice.  If 
so,  it  would  have  been  burnt  with  the  burnt 
offering  which  represented  the  self-dedication 
of  the  worshipper.  It  had  been  holy  to  the 
Lord,  growing  uncut  all  the  days  of  the  vow. 
The  vow  was  now  at  an  end ;  the  last  solemn 
act  of  sacrifice,  the  peace  offering,  which 
completed  all,  and  typified  that  fearless  and 
thankful  communion  with  God  which  is  the 
end  of  all  religion,  was  now  goirs  on ;  it  was 
fitting  that  the  hair  which  must  now  be 
shorn,  but  could  not  be  disposed  of  in  any 
ordinaiy  way,  should  be  burnt  upon  the 
altar  of  God.  In  the  fire,  t. «.  on  the 
brazen  altar.  In  later  days  it  seems  to  have 
been  done  in  a  room  assigned  to  the  Nazirites 
in  the  court  of  the  women :  another  devia- 
tion from  the  original  law. 

Ver.  19. — ^The  sodden  shoulder,  or  boiled 
shoulder ;  the  left.  The  right,  or  heave 
shoulder,  was  already  the  priest's,  according 
to  the  general  rule  (Levit.  vii.  32).  That  the 
other  shoulder  was  also  "waved"  andacceplid 
by  God  as  his  portion,  to  be  consumed  in  hii 
name  by  the  priest,  was  a  further  token  of  the 


46  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBBES.  [ch.  vi.  1—21. 


giacions  acceptance  of  the  self-dedication  of 
we  Kazirite,  and  of  the  fulness  of  eucharistic 
communion  into  which  he  had  entered  with 
his  God. 

Ver.  20. — Shall  wave  them.  By  putting 
his  hands  under  the  hands  of  the  Nazirite. 
Ou  the  symbolism  of  this  see  Levit.  vii. 
Drink  wine.    Perhaps  at  the  sacrificial  feast. 

Ver.  21. — This  is  the  law  of  the  DTazarite 
who  hath  vowed,  and  of  his  ofEering.  "  And 
of"  are  not  in  the  text.  We  should  probably 
read,  "This  is  the  law  of  the  Nazirite  who 


hath  vowed  his  offering  nnto  the  Lord  in 
accordance  with  his  consecration,"  t.  «.  these 
are  the  offerings  which,  as  a  Nazirite,  he  is 
Viound  to  make.*  Beside  that  his  hand  shall 
get.  Literally;  "grasp."  If  he  can  afford 
or  can  procure  anything  more  as  a  &ee-will 
offering,  he  may  well  do  so.  In  later  days 
it  became  customary  for  richer  people  to 
defray  for  their  poorer  brethren  the  cost  of 
their  sacrifices  (Josephus,  '  Ant.,'  zix.  8,  1 ; 
and  cf.  Acts  zxi.  24). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 21. — Individual  consecration  to  God.  In  this  section  we  have,  spiritually, 
the  consecration  of  the  individual  life  to  God  as  a  reasonable,  holy,  and  lively  sacrifice 
(Bom.  xii.  1).  This  consecration  was  the  ideal  for  all  Israel  (Bxod.  xix.  6) ;  but  inas- 
much as  the  people  at  large  could  not  attain  unto  it  fully,  a  tribe  and  a  family  were 
in  varying  degree  "  separated  "  unto  the  Lord.  In  order,  however,  that  individuals 
might  not  be  hindered  from  obeying  the  call  to  self-dedication  as  the  Spirit  moved 
them,  the  vow  of  the  Nazirite  was  allowed,  encouraged,  and  regulated.  Consider, 
theiefore — 

I.  That  any  individual  in  Israel  who  was  of  age  to  take  a  vow  might 
BECOME  A  Nazirite,  whether  man  ob  woman,  whether  of  the  priesthood  ob  of 
THE  people.  John  the  Biiptist  was  u  priest ;  Samuel  a  Levite  ;  Samson  of  the 
tribe  of  Dan.  Even  so  it  is  the  fundamental  character  of  the  gospel  that  every  indi- 
vidual Christian,  without  any  distinction  of  male  or  female,  clerical  or  lay,  is  free 
to  obey  the  call  of  the  Spirit  to  an  individual  consecration  of  self  to  God.  All  are 
indeed  called  to  "  die  unto  sin,  and  rise  again  unto  righteousness ; "  unto  all  it  is 
said,  "  Ye  are  dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God  "  (Col.  iii.  3) ;  but  yet  it  is 
palpably  true  that  individuals  here  and  there  are  specially  moved  by  the  Spirit  to 
realise  this  their  consecration',  to  translate  into  practical  life  their  professed  detach- 
ment from  the  world  and  attachment  unto  God.  And  this  action  of  the  Spirit  is  per- 
fectly free ;  none  can  say  beforehand  who  may  be  moved  to  dedicate  himself  or 
herself  to  a  life  of  entire  self-sacrifice  and  of  unlimited  obedience. 

II.  That  the  child  of  Israel  bo  called  inwardly  by  the  Spirit  was  per- 
mitted AND  ENCOURAGED  TO  TAKE  A  VOW.  Yet  this  VOW  limited  as  to  obligations 
and  as  to  time,  so  as  it  should  not  become  a  snare.  And  it  appears  that  a  Christian 
apostle  took  a  vow  of  the  sort  (Acts  xviii.  18).  Even  so  it  would  seem  that  religious 
VOWS  are  not  now  in  themselves  unlawful  or  displeasing,  provided  they  be  really  free, 
and  that  there  be  provision  for  being  discharged  from  them.  And  note  that  almost 
all  the  Nazirites  of  Scripture  appear  to  have  been  lifelong  Nazirites,  we  know  not 
why.  Probably  it  is  the  tendency  of  all  vows  to  become  perpetual,  because  there 
seems  something  arbitrary  and  incomplete  in  any  self-devotion  or  self-denial  which 
ends  before  life  itself  ends.  Nevertheless,  it  is  plain  that  the  Divine  command  con- 
templated only  vows  for  a  specific  time. 

III.  That  the  first  obligation  of  the  Nazirite  was  to  abstain  from  every- 
thing PEODUCBD  BY,  OB  MADE  FROM,  THE  VINE,  HOWEVER  HARMLESS.  Even  80,  if 
any  man  will  dedicate  himself,  according  to  his  Christian  liberty  and  the  impulse  of 
the  Spirit,  to  the  nearer  following  of  Christ,  he  must  renounce  all  the  excitements  of 
this  world,  all  those  stimulants  of  pleasure,  gain,  or  ambition  which  intoxicate  the 
mind  and  distract  it  from  the  service  of  God ;  and  not  only  that  which  is  plainly  evil 
and  confessedly  dangerous,  but  also  that  which  has  any  savour  of  evil,  any  suspicion 
of  danger,  about  it.  The  wisdom  of  nim  who  would  at  any  cost  please  God  is  not 
to  walk  as  near  the  border  line  of  things  unlawful  or  unwise  as  possible,  but  rather 
to  give  them  a  clear  berth,  so  as  through  no  mischance  he  may  be  entangled  therein  ; 
and  this  because  of  human  weakness,  whereby  (1)  we  glide  so  easily  from  pleasures 
or  cares  lawful  to  the  like  unlawful,  and  (2)  we  find  it  so  much  easier  to  take  a 
•imple  and  decided  line,  even  against  ourselves,  than  a  wavering  and  uncertain  opjj 


CH.  n.  1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  47 

(Luke  ix.  24 ;  x.  42 ;  xviii,  22 ;  xxi.  34 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  12  ;  ix.  26,  27 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  4  ; 
and  cf.  Matt.  xix.  12 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  32). 

IV.  That  the  second  obligation  of  the  Naziritb  was  to  dedicatb  the  free, 
UNTOUCHED  GROWTH  OF  HIS  HAIR  TO  THE  LoRD.  Even  SO  the  servant  of  God  miisf 
dedicate  to  him  the  whole  forces  of  his  nature,  unrestrained  and  undiminished  by 
any  conventionalities  of  the  world,  by  those  customs  and  fashions  of  society  which 
cramp  and  limit  on  every  side  the  possibilities  of  usefulness  and  of  power  which  are 
in  man.  The  true  servant  of  Christ,  neither  acknowledging  the  principles  nor  guided 
by  the  maxims  of  the  world,  must  be  content  to  be  singular,  to  be  wondered  at,  to  be 
regarded  as  extreme  (cf.  Luke  vii.  33 ;  2  Cor.  xi.,  xii. ;  Gal.  vi.  14 ;  Phil.  iii.  8).  "  Let 
your  moderation"  (Greek,  rb  eTrieidc,  "forbearance")  "be  known  unto  all  men  "is  a 
text  much  more  often  misquoted  in  the  devil's  service  than  quoted  in  Christ's. 

V.  That  the  third  obligation  of  the  Nazirite  was  not  to  come  into  con- 
tact WITH  death,  even  FOR  HIS  NEAREST  RELATIONS.  Even  SO  the  servant  of  God 
must  cross  his  nearest  earthly  affections,  and  do  violence  to  his  most  natural  feelings, 
rather  than  expose  himself  to  the  contagion  of  spiritual  death.  Where  this  danger 
really  exists  may  indeed  be  known  only  to  God  and  to  him ;  but  where  he  knows  it  to 
exist  he  is  bound  to  avoid  it  at  any  cost  of  affection  or  of  appearance,  so  as  he 
make  it  not  a  cloak  for  escaping  duty  (Matt.  x.  35 — 37  ;  Luke  xiv.  26, 33;  ix.  60 — 62; 
and  cf.  Matt.  v.  29,  30;  1  Cor.  v.  11 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  14).  Few  have  strength  and  vigour 
of  soul  to  mix  with  impunity  in  the  society  of  those  spiritually  dead ;  wisdom  and 
loyalty  alike  demand  that  we  avoid  them  except  we  ca'-  '•eally  do  them  good. 

VI.  That  the  case  op  the  Nazirite  being  unavoidably  defiled  with  death 
WAS  provided  for,  and  provision  made  for  his  beginning  afresh.  Even  so 
God  knows  that  in  the  confusions  and  mixtures  of  life  it  is  hard  indeed  to  escape 
altogether  from  the  subtle  contagion  of  spiritual  deadness,  which  will  often  seize 
upon  a  soul  most  unexpectedly  from  unavoidable  contact  with  others.  No  pro- 
fession and  no  earnestness  of  self-devotion  is  a  safeguard  against  this  danger.  But 
if  it  come  to  pass  that  the  soul  be  thus  defiled,  and  deadness  come  over  it,  all  is 
not  therefore  lost,  nor  is  its  consecration  at  an  end.  It  must  offer  the  sacrifice  of  a 
contrite  heart,  and  begin  again  with  penitence  and  patience,  not  counting  that  which 
is  behind,  nor  dwelling  on  its  loss,  but  reaching  forth  after  those  things  which  lie 
before  it  (Ps.  xxxvii.  24 ;  Micah  vii.  8  ;  Phil.  iii.  13,  14). 

VII.  That  when  the  self-devotion  of  the  Nazirite  was  perfected,  it  still 
needed  to  be  commended  unto  God  through  the  fourfold  sacrifices  of  the 
Levitical  law.  Even  so  our  highest  service  and  greatest  self-denial  is  not  accept- 
able to  God  except  it  be  offered  through  and  with  the  prevailing  sacrifice  of  Christ. 
And  inasmuch  as  one  of  these  sacrifices  was  a  sin  offering,  so  is  there  need  that  the 
best  of  our  best  things  should  be  purged  from  the  sin  which  clings  to  them  by  the 
atoning  death  of  Christ. 

VIII.  That  the  hair,  the  symbol  of  sbpabation,  was  at  last  to  be  put  in 
the  altar  fire  under  the  peace  offering.  Even  so  the  good  will,  the  earnest 
desire,  the  single  purpose  with  which  we  have  been  enabled  to  serve  God,  is  to  be 
brought  at  last — when  its  work  on  earth  is  done — and  simply  laid  upon  the  altar  of 
the  love  of  God,  and  of  our  thankful  communion  with  him  in  peace  through  Christ ; 
and  this  not  as  being  anything  worthy  in  itself,  but  only  as  being  part  of  our 
gratitude  to  God. 

IX.  That  on  this  occasion,  and  this  alone,  the  second  shoulder  was  accepted 
BY  God  as  his  own  portion  from  the  peace  offering.  Even  so  it  is  undeniable 
that  a  more  devoted  life  does  infallibly  lead  to  a  greater  acceptance  with  God  and 
to  a  fuller  communion  in  peace  and  thankfulness  with  him. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 21. — Separated  to  the  service  of  God  (the  law  of  the  Nazarite).  This 
passage,  barren  and  unpromising  as  it  looks,  is  nevertheless  invested  with  an  undying 
interest  by  the  circumstance  that  three  of  the  most  famous  men  in  the  sacred  history 
belonged  to  the  order  whose  rule  is  here  prescribed.  Samson,  with  all  hLs  faults, 
was  a  heroic  character,  and  he  was  a  Nazarite  from  his  mother's  worab.     Samuel, 


48  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES.  [oh.  vl  1—21. 

his  contemporary,  was  a  hero  of  a  purer  and  higher  type,  the  earliest  of  the  great 
prophets  after  Moses,  and  he  too  was  a  Nazirite,  by  his  mother's  consecr:ition,  before 
he  was  born.  As  Samuel  was  the  first,  John  the  Baptist  was  the  last,  of  the  old 
prophets,  and  he  likewise  was  a  Nazarite  from  his  birtli. 

I.  What,  then,  was  a  Na2AEIte  ?  The  term  (more  correctly  written  Nadr,  or 
Nazirite)  is  a  Hebrew  one,  and  signifies  separated,  or  set  apart.  In  Israel  there 
were  three  orders  of  men  who  may  be  said  to  have  been  separated  to  God's  service. 
1.  The  priests.  Their  oflBce  was  hereditary.  The .  separation  attached  to  Aaron's 
house.  The  work  to  which  they  were  separated  was  to  offer  sacrifice,  to  burn  in- 
cense, and  to  bless  the  people.  2.  The  prophets.  Their  office  was  not  hereditary. 
The  true  prophet  was  such  by  a  Divine  call  addressed  to  him  individually.  His  work 
was  purely  spiritual.  He  delivered  to  the  people  the  word  of  the  Lord.  3.  The 
Nazarites  proper.  Their  separation  was  neither  hereditary,  like  the  priests',  nor 
necessarily  by  special  Divine  call,  like  the  prophets'.  It  was  by  their  own  act,  or 
that  of  their  parents,  and  was  sometimes  spoiitaneoun^sometimes  by  a  more  or  less 
stringent  Divine  direction.  Any  free  man  or  woman — any  man  or  woman  not  under 
some  prior  obligation  incompatible  with  it — could  separate  himself  or  herself  by  the 
Nazarite's  vow.    The  separation  might  be  either  for  a  limited  period  or  for  life. 

II.  Regarding  the  duties  pertaining  to  the  order,  nothing  is  here  laid  down 
It  is  simply  implied  that  the  Nazarite  was  to  show  an  example  of  pre-eminent 
devotedness  to  God.  To  judge  by  the  lives  of  Samuel  and  John  the  Baptist,  the 
Nazarite's  devotedness  was  to  be  manifested  in  the  best  of  all  ways,  namely,  by  a 
life  of  active  labour  in  diffusing  the  knowledge  and  fenr  of  the  Loid.  However,  tlie 
law  did  not  prescribe  this.  It  simply  put  around  the  Nazarite's  separation  the  hedge 
of  legal  recognition  and  ceremonial  regulation.  How  the  garden  thus  protected  was 
to  be  filled — what  flowers  and  fragrant  herbs  and  fruit  it  was  to  yield — ^was  left  to  be 
determined  by  the  motions  of  God's  free  Spirit  in  the  individual  Nazarite's  heart. 
Anyhow,  the  practical  working  of  this  kind  of  separation  in  Israel  came  to  be  such 
that  it  was  looked  upon  as  a  sure  sign  that  piety  was  flourishing  when  the  Nazaritea 
abounded  (see  Amos  ii.  11,  12). 

III.  Turning  to  the  law  as  laid  down  here  in  Numbers,  it  is  to  be  observed  that 
the  Nazarite's  separation  was  to  be  expressed  in  three  ways.  1.  By  entire  abstin- 
ence not  only  from  wine  and  strong  drink,  but  from  all  the  produce  of  the  vine 
(vers.  3,  4).  John  Baptist  came  neither  eating  nor  drinking.  2.  By  absolutely 
refusing  to  defile  themselves  for  the  dead  (vers.  7 — 12).  The  rule  was  as  absolute 
on  this  head  for  the  Nazarite  as  for  the  high  priest.  Not  even  for  father  or  mother, 
for  wife  or  child,  might  he  contract  defilement.  If  by  any  chance  he  should  come 
in  contact  with  a  dead  body,  the  law  demanded  a  sin  offering  for  atonement  and 
a  burnt  offering  in  token  of  renewed  dedication,  and  his  term  of  separation  had 
to  begin  anew.  3.  By  letting  the  hair  of  the  head  grow  unshorn  (ver.  5  ;  cf .  1  Cor. 
xi.  10,  marg.).  Every  child  remembers  the  seven  locks  of  Samson's  head.  When 
the  period  of  separation  was  expired,  the  head  was  shaved  and  certain  prescribed 
offerings  were  presented,  besides  any  free-will  offering  the  person  might  choose 
to  bring  (vers.  13—21).  As  these  last  offerings  were  costly,  it  was  not  uncommon 
for  wealthy  persons  to  come  forward  and  bear  the  Nazarites'  charges  (Acts  xxi.  24). 

IV.  What  concern  have  we  with  this  law  of  the  Nazarite  ?  Is  any  corre- 
sponding vow  of  separation  to  be  in  use  under  the  New  Testament  ?  The  Church  of 
Borne,  I  need  hardly  say,  founds  on  the  Nazarite's  vow  an  argument  for  her  religious 
orders,  so  called — orders  of  men  and  women  who  are  bound  by  oath  to  lifelong 
poverty,  celibacy,  and  obedience.  But  there  is  no  real  correspondence  between  the 
two  institutions.  Not  one  of  the  three  vows  of  the  religious  orders  was  included  in 
the  vow  of  the  Nazarite.  He  could  hold  property  ;  he  was  generally  married  ;  he 
submitted  his  conscience  to  no  man's  authority.  No  warrant  can  be  extracted  from 
this  law  for  ensnaring  consciences  with  the  threefold  vow.  Yet  it  by  no  means  fol- 
lows that  this  Old  Testament  vow  has  no  lesson  for  us.  It  furnishes  a  valuabl* 
analogy.  The  Apostle  Paul  evidently  felt  this,  for  he  liked  to  think  of  himself  as 
a  man  "  separated  unto  the  gospel  of  God  "  (Rom.  i.  l),Bnd  to  think  of  this  separation 
■8  having  taken  place  (like  Samuel's  and  John  Baptist's)  before  he  was  born  (Gal. 
L  16).    This  does  not  refer  merely  to  his  being  separated  to  preach  the  word,  foi 


OH.  VI.  1—41.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


that  was  common  to  him  with  all  ministers  of  the  gospel ;  nor  does  it  refer  simply 
to  his  apostolate.  It  refers  but  to  his  special  work  as  the  great  missionary  apostle. 
There  is  room  and  need  in  the  Christian  Church  not  only  for  men  separated  by  the 
authority  and  call  of  the  Church  to  official  service,  but  for  men  also  who  are  moved 
to  separate  themselves  to  free  and  unofficial  service.  Robert  Haldane  of  Airthrey 
nas  not  an  ordained  minister,  never  held  a  pastoral  charge,  never  administered  jthe 
sacraments,  yet  he  devoted  his  whole  time  and  wealth  to  the  cause  of  Christ.  Sell- 
ing Airthrey  Castle,  he  purchased  a  mansion-house  where  he  could  live  at  less  expense, 
and  he  thenceforward  lived  for  the  diffusion  of  true  religion  at  home  and  abroad. 
Blessed  be  God,  Mr.  Haldune  was  not  singular  in  this  sort  of  separation.  It  answers 
exactly,  under  the  Christian  and  spiritual  dispensation,  to  the  separation  of  the 
Nazarite  under  the  law.  Without  doubt  men  and  women  separated  thus  to  God  will 
have  a  great  part  to  play  in  the  victorious  progress  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  It 
should  be  the  constant  prayer  of  the  Church  that  Christ  would,  of  her  young  men, 
raise  up  not  only  prophets  (he  is  doing  that),  but  Nazarites  also, — B. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  temporary  vow  of  the  Nazarite  symbolical  of  the  lifelong  vow  o/_  the 
Christian.  Though  the  Israelites  had  a  priesthood,  they  were  themselves  "  a  king- 
dom of  priests."  Individual  responsibility  toward  God  was  pressed  upon  their  con- 
sciences in  many  ways ;  e.  g.  Deut.  xxvi.  1 — 14,  &c.  And  private  persons  might 
aspire  to  the  honour  of  an  especial  priestly  consecration.  Since  temporary  vows 
were  acceptable  to  God  under  the  old  covenant,  they  may  be  under  the  new  cove- 
nant, if  taken  for  a  limited  time  and  for  Christian  ends ;  e.  g.  celibacy  or  abstinence 
(cf.  Acts  xviii.  18  j  xxi.  6).  But  a  higher  form  of  vow  is  that  of  entire  consecration 
for  life,  that  we  may  be  daily  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  live  the  life  of  faith  on 
the  Son  of  God.  Our  Nazarite  state  is  to  be  lifelong.  None  can  disallow  the  Chris- 
tian's vow  to  Christ  (cf.  ch.  xxx.  1 — 5  with  Matt.  x.  37).  The  consecration  which 
we  avow  must  be  marked  by  three  facts,  of  which  we  see  symbols  in  this  chapter — 
I.  Sblf-denial  (vers.  3,  4)  ;  II.  Visible  pbofbssion  (ver.  5) ;  III.  Pbbsonal  pdrity 
(vers.' 6—8). 

I.  The  priests  had,  when  "  on  duty,"  to  exercise  the  self-denial  required  of  the 
Nazarite  (Levit.  x.  9).  The  kind  of-  self-denial  demanded  is  a  significant  testimony 
in  favour  of  total  abstinence  (see  Milton's  words  in  '  Samson  Agonistes:'  "  Oh,  mad- 
ness, to  think  use  of  strongest  wines,"  &c.).  Self-denial,  in  a  wider  sense,  at  any 
rate,  always  required  of  us,  because  we  are  always  "  on  duty  "  (Matt.  x.  38 ;  Luke 
ix.  23  :  John  xii.  26). 

II.  The  Nazarites'  locks  marked  their  separation.  Our  consecration  must  be 
marked  not  by  tonsures  or  cowls,  but  by  verbal  avowals  (Rom.  x.  9,  10)  and  good 
works  (Matt.  v.  16  ;  Phil.  ii.  14 — 16),  which  shall  excel  those  of  men  who  make  no 
profession  to  the  supernatural  life  of  the  disciples  of  Christ  (cf.  Matt.  v.  47,  48). 

III.  We  are  "called  to  be  saints,"  personally  pure  and  separated  from  the  world 
and  its  dead  works  (John  xvii.  11 — 19;  2  Cor.  vi.  17).  Christ's  claims  on  ub  are 
paramount  (Luke  ix.  69,  60)  and  perpetual  (Rev.  ii.  10).  We  cannot  violate  our 
pledges  and  go  on  as  though  our  relations  to  Christ  were  unchanged,  but  must  renew 
our  vows  (ver.  12 ;  Bzek.  xxxiii.  12,  13).  When  the  period  of  the  vow  ended,  the 
restraints  were  removed,  but  the  honour  remained.  So  will  it  be  with  us  at  death 
(John  xii.  26,  &c.).— P. 

Ver.  2. — The  Nazaritb's  Vow.  "  When  either  man  or  woman  shall  separate 
themselves  to  vow  a  vow  of  a  Nazarite,"  &o.  Here  we  meet  with  the  Nazarite's 
vow  as  something  already  in  existence,  and  needing  to  be  regulated.  The  fact 
that  such  regulations  were  necessary  points  to  a  class  of  persons,  not  perhaps 
very  large,  but  likely  to  be  permanent  in  Israel,  who  felt  it  laid  upon  them  to  be 
separate  for  a  while  from  the  common  track  of  their  neighbours.  There  are  several 
instances  of  vows  recorded  in  Scripture.  A  person  might  vow  that  if  a  certain  wish 
were  granted,  a  certain  thing  would  be  done  in  return ;  e.  g.  Hannah,  Jephthah.  Here 
we  are  on  different  ground.  There  is  nothing  like  a  bargaining  with  the  Almighty. 
The  Nazarite's  vow  is  of  a  higher  kind,  and  demands  special  consideration.  It  does 
not  rise  among  such  natural  feelings  as  aj^e  conamon  to  all  human  br^aBts     Tha 


M>  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES.  [ch.  vi.  1—21. 

motive  shows  a  class  of  men  to  whom  the  common  level  of  their  neighbours' thoughts 
concerning  reh'gion  was  quite  insufficient. 

I.  Consider  the  statb  from  which  the  Nazaritb  separated  himself.  The  name 
signified  the  state — separation.  The  average  of  religious  feeling  and  activity  in  the 
minds  of  the  Israelites  must  have  been  very  low.  Jehovah  for  his  purposes  had 
constrained  them  into  a  special  relation  to  him,  but  as  for  them,  they  had  not  with  all 
their  hearts  chosen  him  in  return.  They  were  groaning  over  Egypt  lost,  and  the 
perils,  trials,  and  discomforts  of  the  wilderness.  They  did  not  delight  in  the  law  of 
the  Lord.  They  learned  how  to  go  through  the  routine  of  outward  ceremonies,  but 
that  perfect  law  which  converts  the  soul,  rejoices  the  heart,  and  enlightens  the  eyes 
was  foreign  to  all  their  sympathies. 

II.  Hence  THE  separation  of  those  who  sought  a  holier  and  8FIBIT1TAL  LIFE. 

Some,  at  all  events,  out  of  the  multitude  at  Sinai  must  have  been  impressed  with  its 
solemn  circumstances,  and  with  the  claims  which  Jehovah  made  for  himself  in  the  first 
four  commandments  of  the  Decalogue.  What  contented  their  neighbours  in  the  way 
of  compliance  with  God's  wishes  fell  far  short  of  contenting  them.  Others  had  to  be 
dragged.  The  wish  of  a  Nazarite  was,  "  I  will  run  in  the  way  of  thy  commandments, 
when  thou  hast  enlarged  my  heart."  Such  were  the  true  successors  of  Enoch,  who 
walked  with  God,  and  Noah,  who  preached  righteousness.  Such  men,  in  the  ruling 
wish  of  their  spirits,  are  set  before  us  in  the  Psalms  of  David,  wh6re  he  expresses  the 
heights  and  depths  of  personal  religion  as  it  was  possible  in  the  old  dispensation. 
We  may  well  believe  there  were  thousands  who  could  adopt  and  sing  such,  as  the 
language  of  their  experience.  It  was  from  men  of  the  Nazarite  spirit  that  prophets 
could  be  taken,  burning  with  zeal  for  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  for  justice  and  com- 
passion among  men.     Note  the  connection  of  prophets  and  Nazarites,  Amos  ii.  11, 12. 

III.  The  Nazabite  thus  becomes  a  type  op  what  should  ever  be  sought  in 
THE  Christian  life.  It  is  easy  enough  to  get  into  a  routine,  the  omission  of  which 
would  offend  the  conscience,  yet  the  observance  of  which  does  nothing  to  bring  the 
life  nearer  to  God.  We  must  not  measure  ourselves  by  the  attainments  and  opinions 
of  nominal  adherents  to  the  Church  of  Christ.  It  is  no  business  of  ours  to  judge 
them,  but  what  satisfies  them  should  not  satisfy  us.  We  must  try  to  find  out  for 
ourselves  in  a  satisfactory  way  what  God  would  have  us  be  and  do,  not  falling  in 
easily  with  what  the  crowd  may  profess  to  Le  his  will.  "  What  do  ye  more  than 
others  ?  "  Avoid  that  fatal  question  which  so  completely,  yet  so  unconscimi.'.ly,  reveals 
the  unspirituality  of  the  person  who  asks  it — "  Where's  the  barm  ?  "  (lium.  xiL  1, 2 ; 
Phil.  iii.  12— 16).— Y. 

Vers.  3 — 21. — The  regulations  for  observance  of  the  Nazarites  vote.  As  a  vow  of 
separation,  it  was  to  be  observed  in  as  significant  a  way  as  possible.  It  was  not  only 
a  separation  in  heart  and  sympathy,  but  it  had  its  signs,  which  plainly  indicated  the 
separation  to  others.  These  regulations  were  also  helpful  to  the  Nazarite  himself  as 
remembrancers.  We  may  conclude  that  not  only  the  details  of  them,  but  the  very 
substance,  was  of  God's  appointment.  Thus  security  was  taken  that  all  should  be  in 
harmony  with  the  great  body  of  the  law,  and  also  give  the  greatest  chance  of  profit 
to  the  Nazarite  himself,  and  the  greatest  chance  of  instruction  to  the  people. 

I.  Regulations  during  the  continuance  of  the  vow.  1.  Abstinence  from  the 
fruit  of  the  vine.  It  was  to  be  a  rigorous  abstinence.  This  we  may  take  to  signify 
a  protest  in.  the  most  comprehensive  way  against  all  seeking  of  mere  pleasure  and 
comfort.  The  grape  was  the  symbol  of  sensual  delights.  The  spies  brought  back 
grapes  of  Eshcol  more  than  any  other  produce  to  testify  the  riches  of  Canaan : 
this  shows  how  much  the  Israelites  thought  of  the  fruit.  There  was,  of  course,  no 
peculiar  merit  and  advantage  in  abstaining  from  the  grape  itself.  The  abstinence 
was  simply  a  sign  indicating  a  desij-e  to  rise  above  the  common  pleasures  of  men. 
The  Nazarites  were  not  ascetics.  They  did  not  refrain  from  a  good  creature  of  God 
by  way  of  penance.  But  in  the  grape  there  was  the  possibility  of  wine  and  strong 
drink,  and  the  wine  and  strong  drink  were  the  testimony  of  the  worldly  soul  that  he 
loved  to  gratify  his  sensual  nature,  and  cared  not  that  his  body  should  be  so  disci- 
plined and  restrained  as  to  be  the  effectual  minister  of  God.  The  appropriate  joys  of 
biiiuftn  life  nre  not  to  b«  foimd  among  the  powers  tbitt  link  ua  to  tiie  lower  r-reatioii. 


OH.  VI.  1—21.1 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEKS. 


51 


We  are  to  look  for  them  in  communion  with  God  and  following  Christ.  Our  joy  ia 
in  the  Holy  Ghost.  "  Is  any  merry,  let  him  sing  Psalms."  2.  The  unshorn  head. 
The  Nazarite  was  not  his  own.  Not  even  the  least  thing  about  his  person  was  at  bis 
own  disposal.  He  was  not  allowed  to  cast  away  even  a  thing  so  easily  and  painlessly 
separated  as  the  hair,  seemingly  of  so  little  consequence,  and  so  quickly  growing 
again.  It  was  just  because  the  hair  seemed  so  little  a  thing  that  leaving  it  unshorn 
was  sc  fit  for  a  sign  (Matt.  v.  36 ;  x.  30).  So  when  we  become  Christ's  we  become 
his  altogether.  We  must  be  faithful  in  that  which  ia  least.  All  of  life  is  for  him, 
though  there  are  many  things  that,  hastily  considered,  look  as  little  important  as  the 
short  light  hairs  clipped  from  the  head.  The  unshorn  head  also  made  a  manifest 
difference  in  the  sight  of  men.  Abstaining  from  the  vine  was  only  known  at  the 
s  )cial  board  ;  the  unshorn  head  revealed  the  Nazarite  to  every  one  he  met.  It  was 
an  unostentatious  challenge  and  rebuke  to  the  more  easy-going  multitude.  God  had 
accepted  the  Nazarite,  and  stamped  his  acceptance  by  this  simple,  impressive  regula- 
tion. 3.  The  avoidance  (if  the  dead.  Death  was  uncleanness  (oh.  v.  2).  The  Nazarite 
as  a  consecrated  one  dare  not  touch  the  dead.  "  Separated  for  God,  in  whose  presence 
death  and  corruption  can  have  no  place,  the  Nazarite  must  ever  be  found  in  the 
habitations  and  society  of  the  living."  Not  even  dead  kindred  may  the  Nazarite — 
man  or  woman — ^touch.  What  a  striking  reminder  in  ver.  7  of  the  requirements  of 
Christ  I  (Luke  zviii.  29,  30).  He  that  would  please  God  and  rise  to  higher  attain- 
ments in  Divine  things  must  suboTdinate  all  human  kinship  to  higher  claims.  Christ 
divides  the  family  against  itself,  and  makes  a  man's  foes  those  of  his  own  household. 
The  nearest  kindred  may  be  an  obstacle  to  the  regenerate,  as  still  dead  in  trespasses 
and  sins.  "  Let  the  dead  bury  their  dead."  A  Nazarite  in  the  observance  of  his  vow 
was  ever  on  the  watch  against  all  occasion  of  uncleanness,  for  the  very  least  defile- 
ment compelled  a  fresh  start  from  the  beginning. 

II.  Rbqulationb  fob  the  retdbn  to  obdinaet  lifb.  This  was  to  be  done  in  a 
public,  deliberate,  and  sacred  way.  Precisely  ordained  ofPerings  had  to  be  made 
before  the  Nazarite  again  put  razor  to  his  head  or  wine  to  his  lips.  These  offerings 
doubtless  had  relation  both  to  the  period  just  expired  and  the  freer  life  to  be  presently 
resumed.  There  was  thanksgiving  for  the  vow  successfully  observed,  atonement  for 
the  sin  that  nevertheless  had  mingled  in  it,  and  something  to  express  his  purposes  for 
the  future.  The  freer  life  was  still  to  find  him  a  Nazarite  in  heart.  To  be  nearer 
God  for  a  time  and  then  go  away  to  a  distance,  to  taste  the  pleasures  of  holiness 
for  a  season  and  then  go  back  to  pollution,  such  conduct  would  have  made  the  vow 
a  mockery  and  abomination.  We  must  all  be  Nazarite  in  spirit,  opposed  to  the  world 
as  resolutely  as  was  the  Baptist,  but  not,  like  him,  fleeing  to  the  wilderness.  Our 
guide  and  example  is  Jesus  himself,  the  holiest  of  all  Nazarites,  who  kept  himself 
unspotted  even  at  the  table  of  the  glutton  and  wine-bibber.  His  prayer  for  ub  is  not 
that  we  should  be  taken  out  of  the  world,  but  kept  from  the  evil. — Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


The  pkiestlt  benidiotion  (vera.  22 — 27). 
Ver.  22.  — The  Lord  spake  unto  Hoses. 
It  ia  a  matter  of  mere  conjecture  at  what 
point  of  time  this  command  was  given.  As 
it  concerned  the  priests  and  their  daily 
ministration,  it  would  be  natural  to  suppose 
that  it  was  given  at  the  time  when  the  teber- 
naole  service  was  set  up,  i.  e.  at  the  precise 
point  fixed  by  the  first  verse  of  the  following 
chapter.  That  the  command  was  given  to 
Moses,  and  to  Moses  alone,  and  that  after 
the  consecration  of  Aaron  to  the  high  priest- 
hood, serves  to  bring  out  into  clear  relief  the 
relative  position  of  the  two.  Aaron  and  his 
sons  alone,  as  the  "  oflicial"  representatives  of 
the  Lord,  conld  bless  in  his  name  and  put 
his  aa^e  upon  the  people  |  but  the  formula 


of  blessing  was  delivered  to  Aaron  hlmaext 
through  Moses,  as  the  "  personal "  represent- 
ative of  the  Lord,  the  mediator  of  the  old 
covenant.  *0  v6fiOQ .  ,  diaraytlg  .  .  Iv  x^'P^ 
Itiairov  (Gal.  iii.  19).  Our  Lord  is  both  the 
Moses  (Acts  iii.  22)  and  the  Aaron  (Heb.  vi. 
20)  —  0  /ifaiTtn  and  4  <ipx«pew£  —  of  this 
dispensation. 

Ver.  23. — On  this  wise  ye  shall  bless. 
In  Levit.  iz.  22  it  is  recorded  that  Aaron 
blessed  the  people,  first  by  himself  from  the 
brazen  altar  of  sacrifice,  and  afterwards  in 
conjunction  with  Moses,  when  they  came  out 
of  the  tabernacle ;  and  that  he  might  so 
bless  the  people  is  mentioned  aa  one  object 
of  his  consecration  (Deut.  xzi.  fi  ;  and  cf.  1 
Phr^n-  xxiii  IS).    Blessing  in  or  with  tha 

9i 


u 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES. 


[oh.  VI.  22—27. 


name  of  the  Supreme  Being  was  an  important 
part  of  all  primitive  religion,  as  appears  from 
the  case  of  Melehizedec  and  Abraham,  of 
Isaac  and  his  sons,  of  Jacoh  and  Pharaoh. 
And  this  act  of  blessing  was  far  from  being  a 
mere  expression  of  good  will,  or  from  being 
a  simple  prayer  ;  for  "  without  all  contradic- 
tion the  less  is  blessed  of  the  greater  "  (Heb. 
vil.  7),  t.  e.  the  blessing  must  be  given  by  one 
who  stands  nearer  to  God  to  one  who  stands 
less  near.  The  name  of  God  could  not  be 
used  in  blessing  save  by  one  who  had  some 
right  to  such  use  of  it,  whether  as  prophet, 
as  priest,  or  as  patriarch.  For  that  name  in 
which  the  blessing  was  given  was  not  in- 
operative, but  was  mighty  with  untold 
spiritual  efficacy  where  rightly  used  as  the 
name  of  blessing.  To  Aaron  and  to  his  sons 
was  now  confided  this  use  of  the  Divine 
name,  that  all  Israel  might  know  and  might 
hear  in  their  appointed  words  the  voice  of 
God  himself.  Saying  unto  them.  The 
benediction  here  appointed  consists  of  three 
clauses,  each  complete  in  itself,  and  each 
consisting  of  two  members,  the  second  of 
which  seems  to  present  the  application  and 
resolt  in  experience  of  the  grace  besought  in 
the  first.  Both,  therefore,  in  its  form  and  its 
contents  this  benediction  is  one  of  the  most 
profound  and  most  fruitful  of  the  Divine 
oracles  ;  and  this  indeed  we  might  have 
expected,  because  (if  we  may  venture  to  say 
so)  God  is  never  so  entirely  and  absolutely 
himself  as  in  blessing. 

Vers.  24— 26.— The  lord,  . .  the  lord,  .  . 
the  Iiord.  Are  we  to  see  in  this  threefold 
use  of  the  Divine  name  a  shadowing  forth  of 
the  Holy  Trinity  1  It  is  obvious  that  it  can- 
not be  proved,  and  that  it  would  not  even 
have  suggested  any  such  idea  to  the  priest 
who  gave,  or  to  the  people  who  received,  the 
benediction.  To  them  the  threefold  form 
merely  added  beauty  and  fulness  to  the 
blessing  (cf.  Eccles.  iv.  12).  But  that  is 
not  the  question.  The  real  question  ia 
whether  the  Old  Testament  was  written  for 
our  sakes  (1  Cor.  ii.  10 ;  X.  11 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  16, 
16),  and  whether  the  God  of  the  Jews  was 
indeed  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
(John  V.  17  i  viii.  64).  If  so,  it  is  not  pos- 
sible for  us  to  avoid  seeing  in  this  benediction 
a  declaration  of  the  threefold  Being  of  God, 
and  it  is  not  possible  to  avoid  believing  that 
he  meant  us  to  see  such  a  declaration,  veiled 
indeed  from  the  eyes  of  the  Jew,  but  clear 
enough  to  the  Christian.  For  a  somewhat 
similar  case  compare  Isa.  vi.  3  ;  Rev.  iv.  8. 
Ver.  25. — The  Lord  make  his  face  shine 
upon  thee.  The  "face"  of  God  is  his  per- 
sonality as  turned  towards  man,  or  else 
turned  »w»y  from  him.  His  face  hidden  or 
turned  away  is  despair  and  death  (Deut. 
xxxi.  17  IS  :  Job  xiii.  24)  ;  his  face  turned 
against  m  n  i.9  4°stn}ction  and  death  (Ijevit. 


xviLlO;  Ps.  xxxiv.  16);  his  face  turned  upon 
man  in  love  and  mercy  is  life  and  salvation 
(Ps.  zzvii.  1  ;  zliv.  8).  It  is  to  the  soul  of 
man  what  the  blessed  snn  of  heaven  is  to 
his  body.  And  be  graoions  unto  thee. 
'BXtijaat  tti,  Septuagint.  Be  kind  and  bene- 
ficent to  thee :  the  effect  in  and  on  the  soul 
of  the  clear  shining  upon  it  of  the  face  of 
God. 

Ver.  26. — ^The  lord  lift  np  his  counte- 
nance upon  thee.  'Evapat ,  .  ri  Trp6auTrov 
avTnu  cTTJ  ai,  Septuagint.  This  clause  seems 
to  repeat  the  last  in  a  somewhat  stronger 
form,  as  implying  more  personal  and  indi- 
vidual attention  from  the  Lord.  His  &ce 
shines  npon  all  that  love  him,  as  the  sun 
shines  wherever  no  clouds  intervene ;  but 
his  face  is  lifted  np  to  that  soul  for  which  he 
has  a  more  special  regard.  7^  D*J^  Kbj 
seemsto  mean  the  same  thing  as  O^yif,  iWi 
or  D*if  (Gen.  xliii.  29,  ipafiXi^iac .  .  roic 
J^daX/toTc  airov  ;  xliv.  21).  To  lift  np  the 
eyes  or  the  face  npon  any  one  is  to  look 
upon  that  one  with  peculiar  and  tender 
interest.  And  give  thee  peace  (shalom). 
This  peace,  being  the  perfect  fruit  in  experi- 
ence of  the  grace  which  comes  from  God, 
forms  'the  climax  and  conclusion  of  the 
benediction. 

Yer.  27. — They  shall  put  my  name  apon 
the  children  of  Israel.    The  "name"  of 
God  is  uniformly  treated  in  Scripture  as 
something  very  different  from  a  mere  arrange- 
ment of  letters  or  an  arbitrary  vocal  sonnd. 
All  nations  have  had  names  for  the  Supreme 
Being,  but  there  was  nothing  sacred  about 
them,  except  from  association.    TA«name  of 
God  was  not  of  man,  nor  from  man,  but  of 
his  own  direct  revelation  (Exod.  vi.  3),  and 
was  therefore  of  an   unspeakable  sanctity 
(Exod.  XI.  7  ;  xxiiii  19).    Like  the  "word " 
of  God,  it  cannot  be  (Ussociated  from  God 
himself.     It  is  in  some  sense  an  extension 
outwards,  into  the  sphere  of  the  created  and 
sensible,  of  the  ineffable  virtues  of  the  God- 
head itself.     It  stands  in  a  real,  though  un- 
assignable, relation  to  infinite  goodness  and 
power,  and  therefore  it  comes  fraught  with 
untold  blessing  (or  perchance  cursing)  to 
those  on  whom  it  lights.     Hence,  to  put  the 
name  of  God — the  covenant  name — upon  the 
people  had  a  real  meaning.    No  one  could  do 
it  except  by  his  express  direction ;  and  when 
it  was  so  done  there  was  an  invisible  reality 
answering  to  the  audible  form ;  with  the 
name  pronounced  in  blessing  cauie  the  bless- 
ing itself,  came  the  special  providence  and 
presence  of  God,  to  abide  upon  such  at  least 
as  were  worthy  of  it.     It  is  ^  fact,  the  signi- 
ficance of  which   cannot   be   denied,    that 
the  Tiame  which  was  commanded  to  be  put 
upon  the  people  was  lost,  and  irrecoverably 
logt,  by  the  later  Jews.     Out  of  an  exagget" 


oa.  VI.  Ste— 27.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


58 


ated  dread  of  possible  profanation,  they  first 
disobeyed  the  command  by  substituting 
Adonai  for  that  name  outside  the  sanctuary ; 
and  finally,  after  the  death  of  Simeon  the 
Just,  the  priests  ceased  to  pronounce  that 
name  at  all,  and  therefore  lost  the  tradition 
by  which  the  pronunciation  was  fixed.  Our 
method  of  spelling  and  pronouncing  the 
name  as  Jehovah  is  merely  conventional,  and 
almost  certainly  incorrect.  It  would  seem 
to  be  the  more  devout  opinion  that  the  name 
itself,  as  revealed  by  God  and  uttered  by 
many  generations  of  priests,  was  forfeited 
(like  Paradise),  was  withdrawn,  and  ought 


not  to  be  inqnirpd  after.  And  I  will  bless 
them.  Here  is  the  precise  truth  of  all  effec- 
tual benediction  :  they  shall  put  my  name ; 
.  .  .  I  will  bless.  The  outward  form  was 
ministered  by  the  priests,  the  inward  reality 
was  of  God  and  from  God  alone.  It  is  ob- 
servable that  the  form  of  blessing  is  expressed 
in  the  singular ;  either  (1)  because  all  Israel 
was  regarded  as  one,  even  as  the  first-bom  son 
of  God  (Exod.  iv.  22,  23  ;  Hos.  xi.  1),  or  (2) 
because  all  real  blessing  must  in  truth  be 
individual — a  nation  can  only  be  blessed  in 
its  several  members. 


HOMILETICS.    . 

Vers.  22 — 27. — The  Blessing  of  God  Almighty.  In  this  benediction  we  h«T« 
spiritually  the  love  of  God,  and  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Clirist,  and  the  com- 
munion of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  imparted  unto  us  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  into 
which  we  are  called,  that  we  may  inherit  a  blessing  (2  Cor.  xiii.  14 ;  1  Pet.  iii  9). 
Consider,  therefore — 

I.  That  all  blessing  in  the  Name  was  given  by  Aaron  and  hib  bons  only, 
because  they  were  the  chosen  representatives  of  God.  Even  so,  all  blessing  in  the 
Triune  Name  is  given  by  Christ  alone,  the  High  Priest  of  our  profession,  and  the  only 
channel  of  blessing.  All  ministerial  blessing  is  only  the  continuation  made  audible 
in  times  and  places  of  that  blessing  which  our  Lord  was  pronouncing  when  he  left 
the  world  (Luke  xxiv.  60,  61),  which  blessing,  as  it  was  never  finished  upon  earth, 
so  it  was  taken  up  with  him,  and  became  eternal  in  the  heavens,  and  is  still  the 
benediction  wherewith  his  servants  are  blessed. 

II.  That  to  bless  the  peoplb,  as  it  wab  the  peodliak  privilege,  bo  it  was 
THE  BODNDEN  DUTY,  OF  THE  PRIESTS,  and  that  in  which  their  office  towards  the  people 
was,  as  it  were,  summed  up  (Deut.  xii.  5).  Even  so  Jesus  Christ  was  "  sent  to  bless 
us  "  (Acts  iii.  26),  and  "Benedictus  benedicat"  is  the  simplest  and  surest  of  all 
Ch  ristian  prayers  ;  and  it  is  the  object  and  the  office  of  such  as  are  called  in  any  wise 
to  minister  the  priestly  authority  of  Christ  to  bring  home  his  benediction  to  the 
souls  of  men. 

Ill;  That  the  first  CLAnsK  of  the  blessing  intimates  the  love  of  God  the 
Father,  through  which  wb  abb  preserved.  For  it  is  of  his  blessing  that  the 
whole  world,  and  the  race  of  men,  and  we  ourselves  have  been  kept  from  the  de- 
stroyer, and  held  in  life  and  plenty  (Gen.  i.  28 ;  ix  1 ;  Acts  xiv.  17 ;  xvii.  28).  And 
it  is  of  his  blessing  that  we  have  escaped  the  destruction  which  threatened  our  souls 
(Gen.  ii.  17) ;  and  that  because  he  had  a  favour  unto  us  (Deut.  vii.  8 ;  x.  15),  and 
because  he  had  predestinated  us  in  love  (Ephes.  i.  4,  5,  Iv  Ayairf  vpooploat  ^/tat),  and 
because  he  is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish  (2  Peter  iii.  9). 

IV.  That  the  second  clause  intimates  the  love  of  God  the  Son  wherbbi 
WE  have  obtained,  and  do  obtain,  grace.  For  in  the  Incarnation  of  tlie  Son  the  face 
of  God  is  made  to  shine  upon  us,  and  that  clearly  and  brightly,  as  the  natural  sun 
being  risen  shines  upon  the  earth  which  lay  in  darkness  or  in  twilight  (MaL  iv.  2 ; 
Luke  i.  78 ;  John  i.  14, 17 ;  xiv.  9 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  18 ;  iv.  4,  6 ;  Heb.  i.  3).  Thus  Moses 
not  being  permitted  to  see  the  face  of  God,  but  only  bis  back  parts  (Exod.  xxxiii. 
23),  signified,  that  before  the  Incarnation  the  revelation  of  God  in  grace  and  truth 
could  not  be  made. 

V,  That  the  third  clause  intimates  thb  love  of  God  the  Holt  Ghost, 
whereby  we  obtain  peace  through  the  fellowship  of  the  Spirit.  Fct  the  lov- 
ing regard  of  God — his  tender  gaze  upon  the  soul  which  he  loves — is  the  coming 
forth  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  abide  upon  and  within  that  soul,  bringing  with  him  the 
life  of  the  Inoarnfite  Son  (John  xvi.  14, 15 ;  1  John  v.  11),  and  the  love  of  the  Eternal 
Father  (Bom.  v.  6),  and  uniting  us  to  both  (1  John  i.  3).  And  this  life  (Gal.  ii.  20) 
and  this  love  ( Jude  21)  are  peace  (Qal.  v.  22 ;  Som.  viii.  6 ;  1  John  it.  18) ;  »a4 


t4  tfiS  600k  Off  iltMBtefefl.  ton.  n.  22-S?. 

Seace  is  the  ripened  fruit  and  accomplished  purpose  of  the  gospel  (Luke  ii.  14 ; 
ohn  zx.  19  ;  Ephes.  ii.  16). 

VI.  That  thb  people  of  Israei.  webe  to  bear  the  covenant  Name  op  Qod, 
whereby  he  was  revealed  to  them  alone.  Even  so  is  the  holy  and  awful  and  Triune 
Name  of  our  God  called  down  upon  us  (Matt,  xxviii.  19,  tit  t4  Svo/ta ;  James  ii.  7,  tA 
coXiv  ofofia  rb  liricXqdiv  If'  »;iac),  and  we  bear  it  as  a  most  potent  talisman  to  shield  us 
from  all  harm,  as  a  most  precious  jewel  to  be  our  secret  joy  and  pride  (Rev.  ii.  7) ; 
of.  Ps.  xci.  14;  ii.  10,  &c.).  Note,  that  the  name  of  the  Holy  Trinity  is  often 
apparently  interchanged  with  the  name  of  Jesus  (Acts  iL  38 ;  xix.  5),  because  in 
"  Jesus  "  is  the  whole  fulness  of  the  Godhead  (Col.  ii.  9),  and  "  Jesus  "  is  the  name 
under  which  the  Divine  Being  is  personally  made  known  unto  us,  as  under  that  now 
forgotten  name  to  the  Jews  (Acts  iii.  16 ;  iv.  10).  And  note  again,  that  amongst 
Israel,  as  amongst  ourselves  now,  the  sacred  Name  is  put  upon  the  people  of  God, 
yet  so  as  it  may  pass  away  from  them  like  the  thin  air,  and  leave  no  trace  of  sanctity 
behind :  whereas  in  "  him  that  overcometh  "  the  Name  shall  be  written,  and  that 
indelibly,  because  by  Christ  himself  (Rev.  iii.  12). 

VII.  That  the  Jews  lost  the  holt  Name  becacsb  they  used  it  rot  aright, 
FEARING  TO  MAKE  IT  KNOWN.  Of  that  Name  which  wrought  so  many  miracles 
(Isa.  XXX.  27)  nothing  remains  but  four  letters  without  any  certain  meaning,  or 
any  possible  use.  But  the  Name  in  which  we  trust  can  never  be  lost,  because  it  is 
preached  unto  every  creature  under  heaven  (Acts  xvii.  3 ;  Phil.  ii.  10),  and  its  sweet- 
ness is  everywhere  diffused  (Cant.  i.  3).  And  so  it  is  with  all  which  that  name  means 
to  us, — we  keep  it /or  ourselves  exactly  in  proportion  as  we  do  not  keep  it  to  ourselves. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  22 — 27. — The  benediction.  So  far  as  I  have  observed,  the  blessing  ofthe  people 
has  less  consideration  bestowed  upon  it  than  any  other  of  the  stated  ordinances  of  Divme 
service.  It  is  seldom  made  the  subject  of  discourse  from  the  pulpit;  divines  seldom 
treat  of  it  in  their  books ;  there  is  reason  to  fear  that  it  seldom  gets  its  due  place  in 
the  minds  and  hearts  of  the  people.  The  Benediction  occurs  in  Scripture  in  several 
f onns.  Of  these,  two  are  in  most  frequent  use  in  our  Churches :  the  "  Apostolic 
benediction  "  in  2  Cor.  Xiii.  14,  and  the  "  Aaronic  benediction  "  in  the  text.  Properly 
these  are  not  two  benedictions,  but  only  two  forms  of  one  and  the  same.  The 
benefits  expressed  are,  in  substance,  the'  same.  The  principal  difference  is  that  the 
thrice-holy  Name,  and  the  benefits  of  God's  salvation,  are  declared  more  plainly  and 
articulately  in  the  later  than  they  could  well  be  in  the  earlier  form.  There  is  nothing 
expressed  in  the  apostolic  benediction  which  was  not  implied  in  the  Aaronic,  "  What 
mean  ye  by  this  service  ?  "   When  our  children  ask  this  question,  what  are  we  to  reply  ? 

I.  It  is  a  PROCLAMATION  OP  THE  NAME  OF  GoD.  In  blessing  the  people  Aaron 
was  to  "  put  the  name  of  the  Lord  upon  the  children  of  Israel "  (ver.  27),  thus  con- 
stituting them  his  witnesses.  Compare  Micah  iv.  6.  This  desigpis  plain  in  the  case 
of  the  apostolic  form.  Every  time  that  form  is  used  in  the  Church,  it  is  as  much  as 
to  say,  Let  all  men  know  that  the  Name  called  upon  in  this  place  is  the  name  of  the 
Father  Almighty,  and  of  Jesus  Christ  his  only-begotten  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
The  older  form  fulfilled  the  same  purpose  for  the  older  time.  There  lurked  in  it  a 
suggestion  of  the  Trinity,  to  be  brought  to  light  in  due  time ;  and  for  the  time  then 
present,  it  loudly  proclaimed  at  once  the  Unity  and  the  personality  of  God — a  proclama- 
tion sorely  needing  to  be  repeated  in  our  time  also.  There  is  a  philosophy  walking 
abroad,  which  invites  us  to  substitute  for  the  living  God,  whose  name  is  Love,  an 
impersonal  "tendency  tliat  makes  for  righteousness."  It  is  the  old  Pagan  substitu- 
tion of  nature  for  God.  In  opposition  to  it  and  to  all  similar  error,  the  Aaronic  bene- 
diction is  a  standing  witness,  that  the  God  in  whom  all  things  live  and  move  and 
subsist,  is  the  Lord,  a  personal  God,  who  can  think  upon  us,  and  be  gracious  to  us. 

II.  A  DECLARATION  OP   THB   BENEFITS  GOD  HAS   LAID  DP   FOR  THEM   THAT  SEEK  HIM 

If  you  would  understand  its  true  intention,  you  must  bear  in  mind  that  the  bene- 
diction is  not  spoken  to  men  indiscriminately.  It  is  for  the  Israel  of  God  ;  for 
those  on  whom  Christ's  name  is  called,  and  who  walk  in  his  name.  It  is  a  solemn 
and  authoritative  declaration  of  the   relation  which  subsists   between    him  and 


6k.  vi.  22-i7.j  DflB  BOOIt  OP  NUiiBESS.  61 

them ;  and  of  the  benefits  flowing  therefrom.  1.  "  27t«  Lord  bless  thee,  and  keep 
thee"  q.  d.  The  Lord  is  the  keeper  of  Israel.  He  will  care  for  thee.  He  will  keep 
thy  land  and  thine  house ;  he  will  preserve  thy  going  out  and  coming  in,  and  will 
guard  thy  life  ;  he  will  keep  thy  soul.  He  will  deliver  thy  soul  from  death,  thy  feet 
from  falling,  thine  eyes  from  tears.  Compare  Ps.  cxxi.,  where  the  Church,  opening 
its  heart  and  drinking  in  the  benediction,  turns  it  into  a  song,  "  Jehovah  Shomer." 
2.  "  TheLord  make  his/ace  shine  upon  thee,  and  be  graciotis  unto  thee:"  q.  d.  There 
is  grace  in  God's  heart  for  thee.  He  has  given  proof  of  this  times  without  number. 
To  many  a  man  stained  with  sin  and  utterly  cast  down,  he  has  said,  Live ;  has  taken 
him  by  the  hand,  and  brought  him  near,  and  made  him  glad  with  his  loving  counten- 
ance. The  best  commentary  on  this,  also,  is  to  be  found  in  the  Psalms.  A  glance  at 
the  references  in  the  margin  will  show  that  the  benediction — and  especially  this  par- 
ticular member  of  it — was  welcomed  in  many  hearts  in  Israel,  and  was  responded  to 
with  peculiar  ardour.  From  it  the  Church  borrows  the  refrain  of  the  eightieth  psalm 
(vers.  3,  7,  19).  Peculiar  interest  attaches  to  the  form  which  the  Church's  response 
takes  in  Psalm  Ixvii.  :  "  God  . .  ,  bless  us,  and  cause  his  face  to  shine  upon  us ;  that 
thy  way  may  be  known  on  earth,  thy  saving  health  among  all  nations :  "q.  d.  Not  for 
our  own  sakes  alone  do  we  beseech  thee  to  make  us  glad  with  thy  face,  but  that  we, 
being  sanctified  and  gladdened,  may  bear  thy  name  to  the  nations  who  know  thee 
not.  3.  "  The  Lord  lift  up  his  countenance  upon  thee,  and  give  thee  peace."  Take 
this  member  and  the  foregoing,  and  what  do  they  amount  to  but  this,  "  Grace  be  to 
you,  and  peace  from  God  the  Father,  and  from  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  (Rom.  i.  7 ; 
1  Cor.  i.  3,  &c.  &o.).  There  is  a  look  of  God  which  fills  with  dismay,  and  makes 
men  call  to  the  mountains  to  hide  them  from  his  presence.  But  there  is  a  look  of 
God  which  fills  the  soul  with  peace.  The  Lord  can,  with  a  glance  of  his  eye,  say  to 
the  soul,  "  I  am  thy  salvation  :  "  he  can  so  lift  up  his  countenance  upon  us  as  to  give 
uB  rest. 

III.    A  CALLING  DOWN   OF   GOD'S  BLESSING   ON  THOSE  WHO  SEEK  HIM.      A  Benediction 

is  a  Beatitude.  It  is  also  a  Prayer.  But  it  is  more  than  either  or  both  of  these.  To 
speak  of  the  latter  only,  every  benediction  is  a  prayer,  but  every  prayer  is  not  a  bene- 
diction. Into  a  benediction  there  enters  an  element  of  authority  not  found  in  every 
prayer.  Joseph's  sons  may  very  well  have  prayed  for  Jacob  ;  but  we  cannot  fancy 
the  lads  putting  their  hands  on  the  head  of  the  venerable  patriarch  and  blessing  him. 
"  Without  all  contradiction,  the  less  is  blessed  of  the  better  "  (Heb.  vii.  7).  The  case 
of  Jacob  may  remind  us,  that  it  was  not  the  priests  only  who  blessed  the  congrega- 
tion. Moses  did  it ;  David  and  Solomon  did  it ;  any  aged  saint  may  bless  his  younger 
brethren.  So,  also,  the  minister  of  the  gospel,  when  the  Lord  calls  him  to  preside  in 
public  worship,  may  bless  the  people  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  in  the  assured  hope 
that  the  Lord  will  indeed  bless  them,  and  keep  them,  and  give  them  his  grace  and 
peace. — B. 

Vers.  22 — 27. — The  priestly  blessing.  I.  Certain  notewokthy  points  in  regard 
TO  this  blessing.  1.  One  of  the  special  duties  of  the  priests  was  to  be  the 
medium  of  blessing  (Deut.  xxi.  5).  The  priests  had  much  to  do  with  slaughter  and 
sacrifice  ;  here  we  have  a  pleasant  view  of  one  of  their  higher  functions.  Yet  to  enter 
heartily  into  this  duty  required  an  elevation  of  character  which  the  mechanical 
duties  of  the  altar  did  not  call  for.  Every  servant  of  God  who  is  faithful  in  that 
which  is  least  may  find  opportunities  for  higher  spiritual  services  (Matt.  xiii.  12 ; 
XXV.  29).  2  The  triple  repetition  of  the  name  Jehovah  was  supposed  by  the  Jews 
themselves  to  contain  some  mystery.  At  any  rate  it  suggested  that  as  there  was  in 
God  an  infinity  of  holiness  that  no  one  term  could  express  (Isa.  vi.  3),  so  God  has 
for  his  people  a  fulness  of  blessing  beyond  what  any  single  utterance  of  his  favour 
would  have  suggested  (cf .  Bxod.  xxxiii.  19  ;  xxxiv.  6,  7  ;  Jsa.  Ixiii.  7 ;  Eph.  ii.  4 — 
10).  To  us  the  mystery  is  further  revealed  by  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity.  For  it 
is  to  be  noted  thai  in  the  IS'ew  Testament  that  doctrine  is  always  presented  in  some 
practical  aspect,  often  in  connection  with  privileges  conferred  by  the  triune  "  God 
of  our  salvation  "  (e.  g.  John  xiv.  16,  17  ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  14 ;  Eph.  ii.  18,  &c.).  3.  The 
Divine  blessing,  though  uttered  on  the  nation,  was  designed  for  each  individual. 
The  "  thee  "  brings  the  blessing  home  to  each  bouse  and  heart,    God,  who  has  blesp- 


M  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [cH.  vt.  22—27. 

inga  full  enough  for  the  whole  world,  has  an  appropriate  benediction  for  the  neediest 
of  his  children  (Ps.  xl.  17).  The  sunlight  is  for  the  sake  of  the  tiniest  insect  and  seed- 
ling as  well  as  for  the  whole  human  race;  and  God's  blessing  is  for  the  sick  child  in 
the  cottage  ta  much  as  for  "  the  holy  Church  throughout  all  the  world "  (Ps.  xxv. 
10 ;  Sora.  viii.  28).  4.  This  priestly  benediction  supplied  or  suggested  the  sub- 
stance of  many  prayers  and  benedictions  in  later  days.  Echoes  of  it  are  heard 
repeatedly  in  the  Book  of  Psalms  («.  g.  Ps.  iv.  6  ;  xxix.  11 ;  zxsi.  16  ;  Ixvii.  1  ;  Izzx. 
3;  cxxi. ;  cxxxiv.).  As  God's  mercies  are  from  everlasting  to  everlasting,  and  are 
"  new  every  morning,"  so  God's  words  of  benediction  are  like  germs  of  beauty  and 
fruitfulneas,  reproducing  themselves  from  generation  to  generation  in  new  and 
precious  forms.  "The  form  of  sound  words"  may  be  a  valuable  heritage  in  the 
Church  of  God. 

II.  The  pabhculars  of  the  blupsino.  Each  clause  of  the  triple  blessing  con- 
tains a  promise  from  God.  Combining  these,  we  find  that  the  blessing  includes  these 
three  favours:  protection  (ver.  24),  pardon  (ver.  25),  peace  (ver.  26).  1.  Pro- 
tection. "  The  blessing  of  God,"  says  Calvin,  "  is  the  goodness  of  God  in  action,  by 
which  a  supply  of  all  good  pours  down  to  us  from  his  favour,  as  from  its  only 
fountain."  We  can  confidently  commend  ourselves,  and  all  who  are  the  "blessed  of 
the  Lord,"  to  his  keeping,  both  in  regard  to  spiritual  preservation  (1  Thess.  v.  23,  24) 
and  temporal  deliverances  (Ps.  xci.  11 ;  Isa.  xxvii.  3).  Because  our  High  Priest  has 
offered  the  prayer  (John  xvii.  11),  we  may  utter  the  doxology  (2  Tim.  iv.  18  ;  Jude 
24,  25).  2.  Pardon  (ver.  25).  The  face  of  the  Lord  represents  the  aspect  which 
God  bears  towards  man,  whether  of  sunshine  and  favour  (Ps.  xxi.  6;  xxxiv.  15; 
cxix.  135;  Dan.  ix.  17)  or  cloud  and  wrath  (Exod.  xiv.  24;  Ps.  xxxiv.  16;  Levit. 
xvii.  10 ;  XX.  3),  The  shining  of  God's  countenance  is  an  assurance  that  God  will 
be  gracious;  its  shining  upon  "thee"  a  pledge  that  we  have  received  the  grace 
and  pardon  we  need  (Ps.  xxxi.  16 ;  Ixxx.  3).  The  little  child  feels  the  dijBEerence 
between  the  shining  and  the  averted  face  of  the  mother,  and  the  Christian  cries, 
Ps.  cxliii.  3,  7.  If  God  grants  us  to  hear  "  the  joyful  soimd  "  of  forgiveness,  we 
"walk  all  day  long  in  the  light  of  his  countenance."  3.  Peace  (ver.  26).  The 
lifting  up  of  God's  countenance  may  suggest  his  active  intervention  to  secure  to  us 
the  blessing  of  peace.  Illustrate,  sun  rising  on  the  world,  "  with  healing  in  its 
wings."  Such  looks  from  God  will  compensate  for  earthly  privations  (Ps.  iv.  6,  7), 
and  the  expectation  of  them  may  sustain  us  in  the  night  of  trouble  (Ps.  xlii.  5). 
The  Christian's  peace  is  "  the  peace  of  God,"  "  my  peace,"  communicated  by  Divine 
power  to  the  soul  (John  xiv.  27 ;  xv.  11  ;  Phil.  iv.  6,  7).  These  prayers  of  blessing 
remind  us  that  all  the  relations  of  life  may  be  thus  sanctified,  and  our  warmest 
wishes  breathed  forth  in  the  form  of  prayers :  e.  g.  pastor  for  flock  (Eph.  vi.  23,  24  j 
2  Thess.  iii.  16) ;  Christian  for  fellow-worshipper  (Ps.  cxviii.  26  ;  cxxxiv.  3)  ;  master 
for  servants  (Ruth  ii.  4 ;  2  Sam.  vi'.  18, 20) ;  friend  for  correspondent  (2  Tim.  iv.  22). 
But  our  words  of  blessing  avail  not  unless  God  adds  his  "  Amen,"  as  he  promises  in 
ver.  27.  Our  benediction,  whether  of  men  or  God,  is  only  in  words  ;  God's  blessing 
is  in  deeds.  His  blessing  when  pledged  cannot  be  reversed  (Gen.  xxii.  15 — 18  ; 
Numb,  xxiii.  19,  20).  Spiritual  blessings  are  part  of  the  new  covenant,  which  by 
faith  we  may  enjoy  for  ourselves  and  invoke  on  others  (Eph.  i.  1 — 3,  15 — 19). — P. 

Vers.  22 — 26. — The  benediction  through  the  priests.  A  beautiful  and  touching 
benediction,  and  more  beautiful  for  the  place  in  which  we  come  upon  it.  It  is  found 
in  the  midst  of  stern  commandments  and  restrictions,  minute  specifications  of  duty, 
dreadful  punishments  for  disobedience  and  rebellion.  How  clearly  it  thus  shows 
that  all  Jehovah  was  requiring  and  doing  was  for  the  people's  good.    Note — 

L  The  vbbbal  chankel  of  this  benediction.  Spoken  through  Aaron  and  hii 
ton*.  It  became  an  ofSce  of  the  priest  as  much  as  were  any  of  the  sacrifices.  He 
was  not  only  the  way  from  men  to  God,  but  very  tenderly  from  God  to  men.  It 
was  not  a  blessing  to  each  tribe  to  be  pronounced  by  its  head,  nor  for  each  household 
to  be  spoken  by  the  father,  though  doubtless  in  many  families  it  was  repeated, 
explained,  and  impressed.  Aaron  was  the  great  official  mediator  between  God  and 
the  people.  Doubtless  this  benediction  was  to  form  a  part  in  all  solemn  approaches 
•f  VM  priest  to  the  people.    It  would  come  to  them  when  in  the  discharge  of  sacred 


ea.  VI.  «2— 2?.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  57 

duties,  at  times  of  holy  festival  and  Divine  forgiveness.  Others  might  utter  idle, 
powerless  good  wishes,  sinking  with  oft  petition  into  mere  politeness.  The  priest's 
words  official^,  solemn,  spoken  from  the  tabernacle.  Thus  they  expressed  the  perma- 
nent good  will  of  God,  in  spite  of  all  negligence  and  forgatfulness  towards  him. 
We  have  a  better  Aaron,  seeing  perfection  was  not  by  the  Levitical  priesthood. 
The  life  and  work  of  Jesus  give  one  long  and  various  utterance  of  this  benediction. 
He  the  Minister  of  the  sanctuary  and  true  tabernacle  which  the  Lord  pitched,  and 
not  man.  God's  good  will  to  the  true  Israel  is  expressed  in  no  doubtful,  grudging 
way  in  Jesus.  All  that  Aaron  said  to  the  people  in  respect  of  temporal  blessings, 
Jesus  says  to  the  spiritual  seed  of  Abraham  in  respect  of  spiritual  blessings. 

II.  The  elements  of  the  benediction.  1.  As  to  the  attitude  of  God.  (1)  He 
blesses,  which  we  may  take  to  mean  an  expression  of  his  favourable  disposition,  in 
the  most  general  sense  of  the  term.  "Let  it  be  an  nndei'stood  thing,  O  Israel,  that 
God  favours  you."  In  the  eyes  not  only  of  Israelites,  but  of  other  nations,  it  was  a 
serious  thing  to  be  under  the  favour  or  frown  of  Deity.  Favour  meant  the  best  of 
good,  frown  the  worst  of  evil.  Balak  tli  ought  all  his  ends  would  be  served  if  ho 
could  get  Balaam  only  to  curse  the  Israelites.  Thus  there  would  come  on  them  in 
some  mysterious  but  certain  way  an  irresistible  blight.  (2)  He  makes  his  face  to 
shine.  The  sun  may  and  does  bless  even  when  not  shining,  but  shining  it  speaks 
for  itself.  The  Lord  is  a  sun  as  well  as  a  shield,  a  sight  that  is  sweet,  and  a  pleasant 
thing  for  the  eyes  to  behold.  The  face  of  Jesus  shone  as  the  sun  upon  the  mount  of 
transfiguration.  (3)  He  lifts  up  his  countenance.  What  expressiveness  there  is  in 
the  face  I  The  language  of  men  s  tongues  was  confounded  at  Babel,  but  the  language 
of  the  countenance  all  Babel's  confusion  could  not  touch.  The  language  of  the  face 
needs  no  interpreter.  When  we  see  the  face  of  a  fellow-man  shining,  and  his 
countenance  lifted  on  us,  then  we  know  he  will  help  us  if  he  can.  Just  so  sure  were 
the  Israelites  to  be  of  God's  interest  in  them.  No  intermediate  voice  was  needed  to 
maintain  the  reality  of  his  good  will.  And  we  are  to  behold  the  glory  of  God  in  the 
face  of  Jesus.  "  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father."  And  he  who  has  seen 
Jesus  knows  all  the  grace  in  those  features,  how  his  countenance  is  ever  lifted  on  the 
unstable,  wandering  children  of  men.  2.  As  to  tlie  communications  which  God  makes. 
(1)  He  keeps  his  people.  Security  the  first  of  blessings  to  those  wlio  have  much  to 
lose.  The  rich  man  had  increase  of  goods,  and  built  bigger  barns,  but  the  bams 
could  not  keep  Jiim  against  death.  Perhaps  it  is  worthy  of  note  that  in  Matt.  vi.  is 
the  warning  to  keep  our  treasures  in  lieaven.  Not  until  we  come  to  Matt.  xiii.  is  the 
pearl  of  great  price  set  before  us.  Insecurity  was  the  mark  of  Eden.  God's  face 
shone,  his  countenance  was  lifted  up  on  Adam  and  Eve,  but  he  warned  them  there 
was  danger  in  the  midst  of  all  their  blessings.  Perfect  security  belongs  to  the  New 
Jerusalem.  He  who  crept  into  Eden  can  never  be  found  where  enteretli  nothing  that 
defileth  or  maketh  a  lie.  (2)  He  is  gracious  to  them.  He  heaps  on  them  tokens  of 
his  favour,  just  as  one  friend  heaps  presents  on  another.  If  we  see  one  person 
enjoying  a  great  number  of  gifts  from  another,  we  judge  that  he  is  regarded  with 
special  interest.  There  are  gifts  to  the  evil  and  the  good,  the  common  attendants  of 
nature,  but  there  are  special  gifts  for  God's  own  people.  Saved  from  Egypt,  they 
might  have  been  turned  loose  in  the  wilderness,  but  instead  they  were  guided  through 
into  the  promised  land.  (3)  He  gives  peace.  His  lifted  countenance  and  benignant 
eye  speak  reconciliation  so  soon  as  the  atonement  is  offered  and  the  fruits  meet  for 
repentance  brought  forth.  If  his  people  are  at  peace  with  him,  in  hearty  and  diligent 
obedience,  what  matter  all  other  foes  ? 

God's  benediction  then,  thus  considered,  appears  suitable  to  man's  needs,  and 
perfectly  definite.  Our  trust  and  expectation  should  agree  with  what  is  a  benediction 
to  w  through  Christ,  aa  much  as  it  wu  to  the  Israelites  through  Aaron.^T* 


^ 


'±nk  feoofe  oi*  ijttMfeERa 


fcB.  Vll.  i— 4&. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  VII. 


Thb  offerings  of  the  princes  (ch.  vii.). 
Ver.  1. — On  the  day  that  Moses  had  fally 
set  up  the  tabernacle.  This  expression,  "  on 
the  day "  (Hebrew,  Di»3  ;  Septuagint,  y 
Vfipf)}  has  given  rise  to  considerable  diffi- 
culty. Strictly  speaking  it  should  mean  the 
first  day  of  the  first  month  of  the  second  year 
(Exod.  il.l7) ;  and  so  the  Targnm  of  Palestine, 
"  It  was  on  the  day  which  begins  the  month 
Nisan."  It  is,  however,  quite  clear  from  the 
narrative  itself,  as  well  as  from  its  position, 
that  the  offerings  were  not  actually  made 
until  after  the  taking  of  the  census  and  the 
distribution  of  their  respective  duties  to  the 
Levitical  families,  t. «.  until  the  eve  of  the 
departure  from  _  Sinai.  Moreover,  since  the 
same  phrase,  DVS,  occurs  in  ver.  10,  it  is 
certain  that  it  cannot  apply  to  the  actual 
presentation  of  the  offerings,  which  was  spread 
over  twelve  days  (ver.  11).  The  majority, 
therefore,  of  the  commentators  would  read 
DV3  here  as  in  Gen.  ii  4,  "at  the  time." 
It  is,  however,  impossible  to  admit  that  there 
is  any  similarity  whatever  between  the  two 
passages.  In  Gen.  ii.  i  the  context  itself,  as 
well  as  the  subject  matter,  oblige  us  to  un- 
derstand the  phrase  in  the  looser  sense  ;  but 
in  a  plain  historical  account  such  as  the 
present  the  obligation  is  all  the  other  way. 
Either  the  date  here  given  is  »  mistake 
(which,  on  any  supposition,  is  most  im- 
probable), or  it  must  be  referred  to  the  in- 
tention and  inception  of  the  princely  offer- 
ings, the  actual  presentation  being  made  at 
the  time  indicated  in  the  narrative,  i. «.  in 
the  first  half  of  the  second  month.  And  had 
•nointed  it.  From  Levit.  viii.  10,  as  com- 
pared with  Exod.  xL  35,  it  would  rather  appear 
that  Moses  did  not  anoint  the  tabernacle  on 
the  day  it  was  set  up,  but  on  some  subsequent 
day.  It  is,  however,  a  mistake  to  suppose 
that  the  tabernacle  and  the  holy  things  were 
anointed  through  seven  successive  days  :  the 
statement  in  Levit.  viii.  83 — 35  refers  only  to 
the  consecration  of  the  priests.  Since  the 
anointing  of  the  tabernacle  was  connected 
with  the  setting  of  it  up,  as  the  last  act  of 
one  ceremonial,  and  was  only  unavoidably 
postponed,  there  is  nothing  remarkable  in 
the  two  things  being  spoken  of  as  If  they  had 
taken  place  on  one  and  the  same  day. 

Ver.  2. — ^The  princes  of  Israel.  These  are 
the  same  men,  and  are  called  by  the  same 
titles,  as  those  Divinely  nominated  in  ch.  i. 
4,  sq.  No  doubt  they  were  the  heads  of  the 
nations  according  to  some  established  rules 
of  precedence  before  the  exodus.  And  were 
•ver  them  that  were  numbered.     Fieb'-ew, 


_"  stood  over."  The  most  natural  reference 
is  to  the  fact  of  their  presiding  over  the 
census,  and  so  the  Septiiagint,  ovtoi  ol  Trapeir- 
ri/Korff  l^ri  rijc  ImaKovijc,  But  it  may  mean 
sirnply  that  they  were  the  leaders  of  the 
numbered  hosts,  and  offered  as  their  natural 
representatives. 

Ver.  3.— They  brought  their  offering  be- 
fore the  Lord,  i.  e.  probably  to  the  entrance 
of  the  tabernacle.  Six  covered  wagons.  DS 
n?jl^.  The  meaning  of  the  qualifying  word 
3y  is  extremely  doubtful.  The  Targuma 
render  it  as  the  A.  V.  On  the  other  hand, 
Gesenius  and  De  Wette  render  it  "litters," 
as  the  similar  word  D'SV  in  Isa.  Ixvi.  20 
(where  the  Septuagint  has  iv  XafntiivaiQ 
riiiiovuiv).  The  reading  of  the  Septuagint, 
aiidtae  \aixiTT\viKaQ,  is  equally  doubtful, 
KaiiTTJivji,  itself  probably  a  foreign  word,  is 
explainedby  theScholiasts  as  a/iuin  /Sno-iAuc^, 
or  as  cipfia  axiiraarov ;  and  Aquila  has  here 
afia^ai  aKfiraarai,  and  the  Vulgate  plaustra 
tecta.  But  Euseb.  Emis.  understands  it  as 
meaning  "two-wheeled  vehicles."  It  is  a 
matter  of  little  importance,  but  the  nature 
of  the  countiy  itself  and  the  small  number 
of  oxen  to  each  carriage  point  to  the  pro- 
bability that  they  had  no  wheels,  and  were 
carried  by  the  oxen,  one  in  front,  and  one 
behind,  by  means  of  shafts,  as  is  still  the 
case  in  parts  of  India. 

Ver.  4. — ^Ihe  Lord  spake  unto  Koses.  The 
Targum  of  Palestine  here  inserts  the  state- 
ment that  Moses  was  not  willing  to  receive 
them.  He  may  very  well  have  doubted 
whether  God  would  sanction  their  use,  as  it 
had  not  been  commanded  ;  and  it  may  be 
that  some  delay,  perhaps  of  several  days, 
occurred  before  he  was  able  to  accept  them 
and  to  assign  them  to  their  future  uses.  In 
this,  or  some  similar  way,  must  be  explained 
the  apparent  discrepancy  of  time. 

Ver.  5. — Take  it  of  them.  It  was  the  first 
absolut-ely  voluntary  offering  made  for  the 
service  of  God,  and  as  such  altogether  accept- 
able. Former  "free-will  offerings"  had  been 
at  the  least  invited — this  had  not. 

Ver.  8. — ^Pour  wagons  ...  he  gave  unto 
the  sons  of  Merari.  The  heavy  portions 
of  the  fabric,  which  were  intrusted  to  the 
Merarites,  especially  required  this  means  of 
transport. 

Ver.  9. — TTpon  their  Bhonlderi.  For  which 
purpose  poles  or  bearing-frames  had  been 
provided,  as  implying  more  honour  and  care 
than  the  use  of  carriages.  The  death  of  Uzzah 
seems  to  have  been  the  melancholy  conne- 
quence  of  neglecting  this  rule  (2  Sam.  vi  3, 
7,  as  compared  with  1  Chron.  xv.  13), 


ta.  ni.  i— ed.] 


*fetE  Book  OiP  NtJMBERS. 


Ver.  10. — For  dedicating  of  the  altar. 
Th«  altar  was  "dedicated"  in  the  sense  of 
being  consecrated,  by  the  anointing  with  tbe 
sacred  oil  and  with  the  blood  of  the  appointed 
sacrifices  (Levit.  viii.  10,  15).  But  it  could 
still  be  "  dedicated  "  in  another  sense  by  the 
sacrificial  gifts,  freely  offered  for  the  purpose, 
of  the  people.  No  rules  appear  to  have  been 
made  as  to  dedications,  but  there  is  an  al- 
lusion in  Deut.  zx.  6  to  the  dedication  of 
bouses,  which  may  have  been  accompanied 
with  religious  rites,  and  we  know  that  as  a 
fact  the  temple  was  dedicated  by  Solomon 
(2  Chron.  vii.  5),  and  re-dedicated  by  the 
Maccabees  (1  Mace.  iv.  54,  sq.),  and  the  wall 
of  Jerusalem  was  dedicated  by  iNehemiah 
(Neh.  xii.  27,  sg.).  The  Septuagint  has  here 
lis  Tbv  iyKaivtaiiiv,  as  in  1  Mace.  iv.  56, 
and  cf.  John  z.  22.  Offered  their  offering 
before  the  altar.  This  assuredly  points  to 
an  offering  made  in  common,  and  made  at 
one  time,  viz..  On  the  day  when  the  altar 
was  anointed.  It  may  be  that  the  twelve 
princes  all  came  for  the  purpose  of  making 
their  offerings  on  that  day,  the  day  they 
would  naturally  choose  for  the  purpose  ;  but 
on  account  of  the  great  number  of  other 
sacrifices,  and  the  fewness  of  the  priests, 
their  offerings  were  postponed  by  the  Divine 
command,  and  were  actually  received  later. 
Thus  in  will  and  in  meaning  the  offerings 
were  made  "on  the  day"  of  the  consecration, 
but  were  publicly  and  solemnly  received  at 
some  subsequent  time. 

Ver.  11. — The  Lord  said  unto  Moses. 
Doubtless  in  answer  to  his  inquiry  (see  ver. 
89),  at  tbe  time  when  the  princes  desired  to 
make  their  offerings.  Each  prince  on  his 
day.  For  more  convenience  and  solemnity, 
that  the  sacrifices  might  not  be  hurried  over, 
and  that  none  might  feel  neglected. 

Ver.  12. — KTahshon.  The  same  appointed 
to  act  with  Moses  in  the  census,  and  to  be 
captain  of  the  children  of  Judah  (oh.  i.  7  ; 
ii.  3).  The  names  of  the  other  princes  are 
to  be  found  in  the  same  passages,  and  their 
order  in  presenting  is  their  order  for  the 
march.  This  seems  to  show  that  their  offer- 
ings were  actually  made  after  the  arrangement 
of  the  camps  had  been  settled. 

Ver.  13. — His  offering  was.  And  exactly 
♦he  same  was  the  offering  of  each  of  the  rest. 
This  was  right  and  good,  because  it  showed 
an  equal  zeal  and  thankfulness  and  forward- 
ness to  give  unto  the  Lord,  and  it  took  away 
all  occasion  for  jealousy  or  boasting.  One 
silver  charger,  or  dish.  Hebrew,  kearah,  a 
deep  vessel  (Exod.  xxv.  9).  Septuagint, 
rpu/SXiov  (cf.  Matt.  xxvi.  23).  An  hundred 
and  thirty  shekels — weighing  about  as  much 
as  325  shillings.  One  silver  bowl.  Hebrew, 
mixrale,  from  zdrale,  to  scatter ;  a  bowl  for 
pouring;  translated  bason  Exod.  xxvii  8. 
peptuaguit,  ^ia\i|  (c£  Bev.  ▼.  8 ;  zr.  7). 


After  the  shekel  of  the  sanctnary.  Accord- 
ing to  the  standard  weiglit  kept  in  the  taber- 
nacle (see  Exod.  xxx.  13).  It  seems  to  have 
weighed  about  as  much  as  half-a-crown.  Pull 
of  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil.  This  was  foi 
a  present  meat  offering  to  accompany  the 
animal  sacrifices,  and  also  to  intimate  the 
future  use  of  the  vessels — the  larger  as  u 
measure  for  the  fine  flour,  the  smaller  as  a 
measure  for  the  oiL 

Ver.  14. — One  spoon,  or  small  cup,  with  a 
handle.  Hebrew,  kaph,  as  in  Exod.  xxv.  29. 
Septuagint,  SmicKri.  Of  ten  shekels  of  gold — 
weighing  about  as  much  as  eleven  and  a  half 
sovrans,  but  the  value  of  the  precious  metals 
was  much  greater  then.  Full  of  incense. 
Both  for  a  present  incense  offering,  and  as 
intimating  the  use  of  the  cups. 

Ver.  15. — One  young  bullock,  one  ram, 
one  lamb.  One  of  each  kind  that  might  be 
offered  for  a  burnt  offering  (Levit.  i.  2). 

Ver.  16. — One  kid  of  the  goats.  Literally, 
"one  shaggy  one."  Hebrew,  «a '««r.  Septua- 
gint, xi/jiapop  (see  on  Levit.  iv.  23).  It  is 
noticeable  that  while  the  burnt  offerings  and 
peace  offerings  were  multiplied,  the  sin  offer- 
ing remained  a  single  victim. 

ver.  17. — For  a  sacrifice  of  peace  offer- 
ings. See  Levit.  iii.  1,  6,  12.  These  were 
the  most  multiplied,  as  befitted  an  occasion 
of  joy  and  of  thankful  communion  with  the 
God  of  Israel. 

Ver.  23.  —  This  was  the  offering  of  He- 
thaneel  the  son  of  Zuar.  His  offering,  and 
that  of  all  the  rest,  is  described  in  exactly 
the  same  words  and  phrases,  with  the  single 
minute  exception,  that  in  ver.  19  we  have, 
"he  offered  for  his  offering,"  instead  of  "his 
offering  was."  Even  the  small  peculiarity  of 
omitting  the  word  shekels  from  the  state- 
ment of  the  weight  of  the  silver  chargers  and 
the  golden  spoons  appears  throughout  (cf 
Gen.  IX.  16).  No  doubt  the  record  was 
copied  or  enlarged  from  some  document 
written  at  the  time,  and  its  studied  same- 
ness reflects  the  careful  and  equal  solemnity 
with  which  the  offerings  of  the  several  princes 
were  received. 

Ver.  48. — On  the  seventh  day.  This  did 
not  necessarily  fall  on  the  sabbath ;  but  if 
the  days  of  offering  were  consecutive,  one  of 
them  must  have  done  so,  and  the  order  of 
offering  was  the  same  as  on  other  days. 

Ver.  84. — This  was  the  dedication  of  the 
altar.  The  sacrificial  gifts  for  present  sacri- 
fice, and  for  the  use  of  the  altar,  were  its 
dedication. 

Ver.  85. — Two  thousand  and  four  hun- 
dred shekels.  In  weight  equal  to  about 
.£300  of  our  money. 

Ver.  86.— An  hundred  and  twenty  shekel*. 
About  ;£138.  These  values  were  not  very 
great,  nor  was  the  number  of  the  animals 
very  large^  aa  compared  with  the  lavish,  and 


•0 


THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS. 


[oh.  Tn.  1 — 89. 


perhaps  extravagant,  profaaion  displayed  at 
the  dedication  of  the  temple  and  altar  hy 
Solomon ;  but  we  may  believe  they  were  at 
least  as  acceptable.  The  verb  substantive 
should  be  removed  from  these  verses  (86 — 
88),  which  simply  continue  the  totals  oi  the 
offerings  which  formed  the  dedication. 

•Ver.  89. — And  when  Hoses  was  gone  into 
the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation.  Bather, 
"  the  tent  of  meeting."  Hebrew,  ohel  moed, 
where  God  had  promised  to  meet  with  him 
(Exod.  zxv.  22).  To  apeak  with  him,  i.  t. 
with  God,  as  implied  in  the  word  "meet- 
ing." He  heard  the  voice  of  one  speaking 
unto  him.  Rather,  "he  heard  the  voice 
conversing  with  him,"  making  itself  audi- 
ble to  him.  *13';!P,  part.  Hithpael,  as  in 
Ezek.  ii.  2.  Here  is  a  distinct  statement  of 
the  supernatural  fact  that  God  spake  to 
Moses  with  an  audible  human  voice,  and  (no 
doubt)  in  the  Hebrew  language,  from  out  the 
empty  darkness  behind  the  veil.  In  the  fact, 
indeed,  of  God  so  speaking  audibly  there  was 
nothing  new  (see  Gen.  iii.  8 ;  xvii.  1,  &c.), 
nor  in  the  fact  of  his  so  speaking  to  Moses 


(see  Exod.  iii.  4  and  zxziii.  9) ;  but  this  re- 
cords the  fulfilment  of  that  promise  which 
was  part  of  God's  covenant  with  Israel,  that 
he  would  at  all  times  converse  with  Moses  as 
their  mediator  from  above  the  mercy-seat 
(see  on  Exod.  xxv.  20 — 22,  and  cf.  Dent.  r. 
23—28).  And  he  spake  nnto  him,  i.  e.  God 
spake  unto  Moses:  the  voice  made  itself 
audible,  and  by  the  voice  God  himself  spake 
unto  him.  It  is  quite  obvious  that  this 
statement  more  properly  belongs  to  an  earlier 
period,  viz.,  to  that  immediately  succeeding 
the  consecration  of  the  tabernacle.  On  the 
day  it  was  set  up  Moses  was  not  able  to  enter 
it  (Exod.  zL  86),  but  no  doubt  he  did  so 
very  soon  afterwards,  and  received  from  the 
mouth  of  the  Lord,  speaking  in  the  holiest,  all 
the  commandments  and  ordinances  recomed 
in  Leviticus  and  in  the  beginning  of  this 
book.  Perhaps  the  first  commimicanon  made 
to  him  in  this  way  concerned  the  offerings  of 
the  princes  when  first  brought  near  (vers.  4, 
11),  and  for  that  reason  the  statestent  may 
have  been  appended  to  th«  teeoii.  fif  those 
offerings. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ch.  vii. — Acceptable  offerings.  In  this  chapter  we  have,  ipiritually,  '«he  free- 
will offering,  acceptable  unto  God,  of  what  they  have  and  what  they  ej«,  by  hia 
people.     Consider,  therefore — 

I.  That  thb  offeeings  were  connected  in  time  with  the  day  of  consecration, 
BUT  WEBB  ACTUALLY  PRESENTED  LATER.  Even  80  all  Christian  offerings,  whether  of 
ourselves  or  of  our  substance,  date  from  the  day  when  the  altar  of  the  cross  was 
consecrated,  and  the  mercy-seat  sprinkled  with  the  precious  blood ;  it  is  from  that 
day  they  draw  their  inward  inspiration  and  their  meaning,  but  they  are  outwardly 
dispersed  through  many  days  (2  Cor.  v.  14). 

II,.  That  the  common  offering  of  the  princes  was  fob  the  easieb  onward 
MOVEMENT  OF  THE  SANCTUARY,  the  pattern,  centre,  and  microcosm  of  the  Church. 
Even  80  all  the  faithful  are  bound  to  give  common  help  to  further  the  onward 
progress  of  the  Church  in  her  ceaseless  extension  and  her  journey  towards  her  con- 
summation. 

III.  That  all  the  several  offsbings  of  the  pbinceb  were  received  with  like 
FAVOUB  and  solemnity  :  that  of  Dan  as  much  as  that  of  Judah.  Even  so  all  equal 
offering  or  sacrifice  on  the  part  of  Christian  Churches  or  individuals  is  equally  accept- 
able with  God,  and  comes  into  the  same  remembrance  with  him.  Only  this  equality 
is  not  now  a  material  equality  (as  then),  but  is  proportioned  to  advantages  and 
opportunities  (Mark  xii,  43  ;  Luke  xii.  48  ;  2  Cor.  viii.  12). 

IV.  That  the  offerings  weee  in  each  case  minutely  becobdbd,  having  evidently 
been  entered  in  some  roll  kept  in  the  sanctuary.  Even  so  there  is  nothing,  however 
trivial,  done  for  God  or  given  to  him  which  shall  ever  be  forgotten  (Mai.  iii.  16: 
Matt.  X.  42  ;  xxv.  40;  Heb.  vi.  10  ;  xiii.  16). 

V.  That  while  the  burnt  offerings  and  (still  more)  the  pbaoi  offerings 

WERE  multiplied,  THE  SIN  OFFERING  REMAINED  (iN  EACH  CASE)  BUT  ONE.      Even  SO  it 

is  open  to  all  good  jjeople  to  multiply  their  self-oblations  and  their  offerings  of 
thankfulness  and  praise,  but  there  is  for  each  (and  can  be)  but  the  one  offering  for 
sin,  even  he  who  was  in  himself  the  Lamb  of  God,  and  yet  in  respect  of  the  sin  which 
he  assumed,  and  the  curse  he  endured,  was  as  it  were  "the  shaggy  one  of  the  goata." 
Note  that  this  word,  ta  'eer,  is  translated  "  devil "  (Levit.  xvii.  7 ;  2  Chron.  xi.  I5)f 
ftnd  "  satyr  "  in  Isa.  xiii.  21 ;  xxxiv.  14,  being  a  most  manifest  type  of  Christ. 


08.  TO.  1—89.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  61 

VL  That  God  spake  unto  Moses  acooedinq  to  his  peomisb,  from  above  the 
UERCT-SEAT  (avuSiv  rov  IXairrqpiov).  Even  SO  the  Divine  intercourse  with  inan  in 
Christ  rests  upon  the  incarnation  and  the  atonement,  of  which  the  ark  and  the 
mercy-seat  were  the  types.  But  note  that  whereas  these  holy  things  were  but 
figures,  God  hath  now  spoken  unto  us  plainly  by  his  Son,  whom  he  set  forth  as  the 
propitiation  through  faith  (iv  vpoidtro  iXaariipiov  Sta  rrjs  wiariuic).  And  note  that  then 
the  voice  spake  out  of  the  darkness  behind  the  veil,  but  in  Christ  the  veil  is  taken 
away,  and  heaven  laid  open,  and  God  himself  revealed  and  declared  (Matt.  xxviL  61 ; 
John  i  18 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  14  ;  Heb.  ix.  8). 

VII.  That  whenever  (ab  it  would  seem)  Moses  went  in  to  speak  unto  God,  he 
HEARD  the  Divine  voice  speaking  to  him.  Even  so  as  often  as  we  go  to  God  in 
Christ,  having  somewhat  really  to  say  to  him,  we  shall  not  fail  also  to  hear  the  Divine 
voice  speaking  unto  us  in  answer. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ch.  vii. — 2%«  princes  and  thdr  princely  offering.  Here  is  perhaps  the  longest 
chapter  in  all  the  Bible.  What  is  it  occupied  with?  It  is,  in  effect,  a  List  of 
Subscribers.  Certain  costly  articles  were  wanted  to  complete  the  furnishing  of  the 
tabernacle.  Twelve  men  of  chief  note  in  their  respective  tribes  came  forward,  of 
their  own  accord,  and  offered  to  provide  the  articles.  The  offer  was  accepted ;  and 
in  this  chapter  of  God's  word  the  Holy  Spirit  has  inscribed,  one  by  one,  the  names  of 
the  donors,  together  with  an  inventory  of  the  articles  which  each  of  them  brought. 
Some  people  affect  to  despise  the  piety  which  expresses  itself  in  costly  gifts  to 
the  Church  of  Christ,  and  deem  Lists  of  Subscribers  an  exhibition  of  ostentatious 
vulgarity.  Bat  in  this  chapter  there  is  the  best  of  warrants  for  these  despised 
features  of  our  modem  Christianity. 

I.  Observe  the  occasion  of  the  gifts  here  commemorated.  The  Lord's  tabernacle 
has  been  constructed,  furnished,  anointed,  and  (what  is  best  of  all)  occupied  by  the 
King  whose  pavilion  it  was  intended  for.  Yes ;  and  the  construction  and  furniture 
of  this  royal  tent  have  been  effected  by  the  voluntary  gifts  of  a  willing  people.  The 
tabernacle  and  its  furniture  are  completed  according  to  the  pattern  shown  to  Moses 
on  the  mount.  No  necessary  part  is  wanting.  Still  there  is  room  for  some  supple- 
mentary gifts.  Take  two  examples.  1.  When  the  tabernacle  was  first  dedicated  there 
would  no  doubt  be  a  golden  spoon  for  Aaron's  use  when  he  burned  incense  at  the 
golden  altar.  One  such  spoon  was  all  that  was  strictly  necessary.  But  it  would 
occasionally  happen  that  there  would  be  more  than  one  call  to  burn  incense  about 
the  same  time,  and  it  was  evidently  unbecoming  that  in  the  palace  of  the  King  any 
worshipper  should  have  to  wait  till  the  golden  spoon  was  available.  Hence  the  gift 
of  the  twelve  golden  spoons  now  presented  by  the  princes.  2.  The  Levites  have  been 
appointed  to  bear  the  tabernacle  and  its  furniture.  They  are  able  to  do  it ;  but  not 
without  difficulty,  especially  during  the  sojourn  in  the  wilderness,  where  it  is  to  be 
emphatically  a  moving  tent.  There  was  room,  therefore,  for  a  present  of  carriages 
and  draught  oxen.  There  are  Christian  congregations  to  whom  this  chapter  teaches 
a  much-needed  lesson.  The  roll  of  their  membership  includes  men  of  substance, 
yet  they  suffer  the  sanctuary  to  wear  an  aspect  of  threadbare  penury  and  its  services 
to  be  hunger-bitten.    This  ought  not  so  to  be. 

IL  The  inventory  of  t^  gifts.  1.  Some  were  for  the  tabernacle  in  its  wander- 
ing state.  Six  waggons  were  provided, — ^they  seem  to  have  been  small  covered 
chariots, — and  a  yoke  of  oxen  was  attached  to  each.  These  waggons  were  distributed 
among  theLevitical  families  according  to  the  nature  and  amount  of  the  burdens  which 
had  been  assigned  them  respectively.  2.  Others  were  for  the  handselling  of  the 
tabernacle  service.  These  consisted  partly  of  gold  and  silver  utensils  for  the  stated 
service  ;  partly  of  offerings  to  be  presently  consumed.  The  offerings  included  all 
the  principal  kinds  in  use  under  the  law.  There  were  burnt  offerings,  sin  offerings, 
peace  offerings.  The  first  sort  and  the  last  were  much  the  most  numerous.  It  was 
■  time  when  the  congregation  might  well  rejoice  before  the  Lord — freely  devoting 
themselves  to  him,  and  expatiating  on  the  blessedness  of  communion  witii  him.    A 


n  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  [ch.  vii.  1— «a 

time  of  spontaneous  bountifulness  in  God's  service  is  always  a  time  of  gladness.  Yet 
even  at  such  times  we  are  not  to  forget  that  we  are  sinners.  The  sin  offering  may 
not  be  prominent  in  this  chapter  of  gifts,  yet  it  has  a  place  in  every  one  of  the  twelve  i> 
lists  of  offerings.  What  has  been  said  about  the  nature  of  the  gifts  will  explain  the 
circumstance  that  the  presenting  of  them  was  spread  over  twelve  days.  The  peace 
offerings  far  exceeded  in  number  all  the  rest.  While  the  sin  offering  in  each  case 
consisted  of  a  solitary  kid,  and  the  burnt  offering  consisted  of  only  three  animals,  a, 
bullock,  a  ram,  and  a  lamb,  the  animals  included  in  the  peace  offering  were  no  fewer 
than  seventeen.  Now  the  specialty  of  the  peace  offering  was  this,  that  the  person 
who  presented  it  thereafter  feasted  upon  it  with  his  friends  before  the  Lord.  It  was 
a  becoming  arrangement,  therefore,  that  the  disposal  of  this  offering  should  be  spread 
over  several  days. 

in.  A  word  or  two  about  the  men  by  whom  the  gifts  were  brought.  They  were 
the  hereditary  princes  of  the  tribes — the  princes  of  the  congregation  who  had  taken 
charge  of  the  census.  This  deserves  to  be  noted,  for  it  explains  a  certain  feature  of 
the  present  gifts  in  which  they  differ  from  almost  all  other  gifts  recorded  in  Scripture. 
The  rule  laid  down  in  the  Bible  for  all  ordinary  cases  is  that  every  man  is  to  give 
according  as  God  hath  prospered  him.  Here,  on  the  contrary,  the  gifts  of  the  princes 
are  identical  in  number  and  value — doubtless  by  prior  concert.  There  would  be 
richer  and  poorer  among  the  princes,  yet  they  all  give  alike.  It  was  not  so  at  the 
erection  of  the  tabernacle.  On  that  occasion  there  was  the  utmost  diversity :  the  mite 
of  the  poor  widow  was  made  as  welcome  as  the  rich  man's  ingot  of  gold.  Although 
a  man  could  bring  no  more  than  a  handful  of  goat's  hair,  he  was  not  denied  the  honour 
of  having  a  share  in  the  work.  There  are  times  for  both  sorts  of  giving.  When  a 
place  of  worship,  where  rich  and  poor  are  to  meet  together,  is  to  be  built,  it  would  be 
wrong  to  exclude  any  fjom  the  subscription  list,  however  poor.  When  a  college  of 
sacred  learning  is  to  he  built  or  endowed,  it  may  be  the  fittest  plan  to  limit  the 
subscription  list  to  twelve  or  twenty  "  princes  of  the  congregation  "  who  are  able  to 
contribute  every  man  his  thousand  or  his  five  thousand  pounds.  It  is  a  good  omen 
for  a  nation  when  its  "  nobles  put  their  necks  to  the  work  of  the  Lord."  And  it  is 
good  for  the  nobles  themselves  when  they  have  the  heart  to  do  this.  They  who  are 
honourable  should  show  themselves  serviceable.  Noblesse  oblige.  When  the  nobles 
forget  their  duty  in  this  respect,  God  will  not  long  maintain  their  nobility. 

IV.  Does  any  hearer  complain  that  we  have  been  doing  him  wrong  in  preaching 
to-day  from  this  chapter  of  the  law — barren  and  secular  (as  he  thinks) — instead  of 
conducting  him  into  the  green  pastures  of  the  gospel  ?  Let  such  a  hearer  remember 
how  Christ  sat  over  against  the  treasury  and  marked  what  every  one  cast  into  it. 
That  scene  in  the  gospel  and  this  chapter  in  the  law — is  not  the  scope  of  them  the 
very  same? — B. 

Vers.  1 — 88. — The  free-viill  offering  of  the  princes.  The  completion  of  the  taber- 
nacle was  celebrated  by  offerings  of  the  pnnces,  as  representatives  of  the  tribes. 
Lessons  may  be  derived  from  two  points  noted,  viz. — I.  Their  spontanbitt.   II.  Theib 

PNIFOBMITY. 

I.  1.  The  princes  had  already  given  offerings  towards  the  erection  of  the  tabernacle 
(Bxod.  XXXV.  27, 28),  and  now  they  bring  further  offerings  for  its  conveyance  (ver.  3) 
and  for  its  complete  furnishing  (vers.  10 — 17).  The  power  and  will  to  give  are  a 
"grace  "  bestowed  (2  Cor.  viii.  7),  and  the  more  we  give  the  more  of  the  grace  of 
giving  we  may  enjoy  (Matt.  xiii.  12).  2.  If  regarded  simply  as  a  duty,  it  was  right 
that  the  princes  should  take  the  lead,  as  now  it  is  a  duty »f or  men  in  authority  and 
men  of  wealth,  pastors  and  officers  in  Christ's  Church,  to  be  "  zealous  for  good  works." 
3.  But  the  chief  excellence  of  these  and  similar  gifts  was  the  "  willing  mind  "  (2  Cor. 
viii.  12).  Under  the  law  of  Moses  much  was  left  to  spontaneity  (cf.  Exod.  xxxv.  5  ; 
Levit.  1.  3,  &c.),  how  much  more  under  the  law  of  Christ  (Matt.  x.  8 ;  2  Cor.  ix.  7). 
The  absence  of  willinghood  may  change  the  fine  gold  into  base  metal  in  the  sieht 
of  God. 

II.  1.  The  uniformity  of  the  gifts  might  possibly  have  been  the  result  of  fashion  ; 
Nahshon,  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  setting  the  fashion,  and  the  other  princes  following 
H,    The  "f fashion"  of  i^enerous  g^ivin^  ma^  well  be  Bet  and  foUo^ocl,  that  t^ 


«.  VII.  1—89.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBBB8.  U 

illiberal  may  be  shamed  out  of  their  mean  devices.  But,  2.  The  uniformity  here  was 
probably  the  result  of  previous  arrangement,  and  the  sign  of  an  honourable  emula- 
tion. ThiB  God  approves  (Heb.  x.  24),  and  St.  Paul  seeks  to  employ  (2  Cor.  viii. 
1 — 7;  ix.  1 — 5).  With  this  object  public  benefactions  (subscription-lists,  &c.)  are 
acceptable  to  God  if  the  spirit  of  the  precept  (Matt.  vi.  3,  4)  is  not  violated.  The 
details  here  published  for  posterity  remind  us  that  every  particular  of  our  gifts  and 
Bervices  is  recorded  before  God.  B.g.  a  coin  and  its  value,  absolute  and  relative 
(Mark  xii.  41 — 44).  A  jewel,  a  family  heirloom,  and  how  much  it  cost  to  give  it  up 
(2  Sam.  xxiv.  15).  3.  The  uniformity  Was  a  sign  that  each  tribe  had  an  equal  share 
in  the  altar  and  its  blessings ;  even  as  different  families,  races,  and  individuals,  have 
in  the  world-wide  redemption  of  Christ  (Rom.  x.  11 — 13). — P. 

Ver.  16. — The  univergalUy  of  the  sin  offering.  The  sin  offering  waB  one  of  the 
expiatory  sacrifices  of  the  law.  We  meet  with  it  so  often  and  under  such  varied 
circumstances  that  it  bears  a  striking  testimony  (1)  to  the  universality  of  sin,  and 
(2)  to  the  need  of  an  absolute,  world-wide,  everlasting  atonement.  Classifying  the 
references  to  the  sin  ofEering,  we  find  various  illustrations  of  this  truth,  fruitful  of 
application  to  our  need  of  the  great  offering  for  sin  at  all  times,  and  under  the  manifold 
circumstances  of  private  and  public  life.  The  sin  offering  was  required,  and  pre- 
sented— 1.  From  one  end  of  the  year  to  the  other,  on  every  return  of  the  new  moon 
(ch.  xxviii.  15).  2.  On  feasts  as  well  as  fasts  ;  at  the  feasts  of  Pentecost,  trumpets, 
and  tabernacles  (Levit.  xxiii.  19 ;  ch.  xxix.  5, 16),  as  well  as  on  the  day  of  atonement 
(Levit,  xvi.).  3.  In  connection  with  voluntary  dedication,  whether  of  gifts  (ch.  vii. 
16),  or  of  personal  consecration,  as  of  the  Nazarite  (ch.  vi.  14).  4.  At  the  consecration 
to  sacred  offices,  as  e.  g.  Aaron  (Exod.  xxix.  14),  or  the  Levites  (ch.  viii.  5 — 12). 
5.  At  the  consecration  of  sacred  things,  «.  g.  the  altar  of  incense  (Exod.  xxx.  10). 
A  sin  offering  was  presented  every  year  for  the  sanctuary  (Levit.  xvi.  15, 16).  6.  For 
sins  of  all  classes  of  men  ;  «.  y.  a  priest,  the  whole  congregation,  a  ruler,  "  one  of  the 
common  people  "  (Levit.  iv.).  In  these  offerings  there  were  gradations,  according  to 
position  and  privilege,  or  according  to  means  (Levit.  v.  6, 7).  7.  For  purification  from 
unavoidable  defilement,  whether  of  leprosy  (Levit.  xiv.  22)  or  childbirth  (Levit  xii. 
6 — 8).  8.  These  offerings  were  for  sins  of  omission  or  of  ignorance,  but  not  for 
presumptuous  sins  (Levit.  v. ;  ch.  iv.  22 — 31 ;  Heb.  i.  26,  27). — P. 

Ver.  89. — Iniercowrse  with  God.  The  position  of  this  verse,  after  vers.  1 — 88,  is 
significant.  But  the  words  refer  not  to  a  single  occasion,  but  to  a  continued  privilege. 
The  promise  (Exod.  xxv.  17 — 22)  is  now  fulfilled,  and  Moses,  as  mediator,  enjoys 
exceptional  privileges  even  beyond  the  high  priest,  his  brother  (cf.  Levit.  xvi.  2  with 
text,  and  ch.  xii.  6 — 8).  We  are  reminded  of  a  truth  respecting  all  times  of  inter- 
course with  God  in  prayer.  When  we  speak  to  God,  we  ought  to  expect  God  to  speak 
to  us. 

L  The  sotn,  inqdiring.  Our  privilege  (Heb.  x.  19 — 22)  greater  than  that  of 
Moses.  Every  place  may  be  as  "  a  tabernacle  "  (Gen.  xxviii.  17  ;  John  iv.  2.3).  Yet 
good  to  have  some  special  place,  consecrated  by  hallowed  associations  (IIlus.  2  Sam. 
vii  18;  Dan.  vi.  10;  Matt.  vi.  6;  Acts  i.  13).  Then  we  go  to  "speak  with"  God, 
words  which  imply  holy  boldness  and  confidence.  As  Moses  brought  to  God  the 
burdens  of.  his  ofiice  and  his  own  temptations  and  sins,  so  may  we  (cf.  Ps.  xxvii.  6; 
Ixxiii.  16,  17  ;  Ixxvii.  1 ;  Heb.  iv.  16  ;  James  iv.  8). 

II.  God  kbsponding.  "Then,"  &c. — perhaps  sometimes  even  before  Moses  began 
to  speak.  So  at  times  Isa.  Ixv.  24  fulfilled.  See  Esther  v.  3.  If  we  hear  no  voice 
from  God  at  the  first  moment  of  approaching  him,  we  ought  not  to  be  satisfied 
unless,  while  we  are  speaking  to  God,  God  speaks  to  us  (Ps.  xxviii.  1 ;  xxxv.  3 ; 
cxliii.  7, 8).  The  response  we  desire  and  receive  will  be  from  the  same  spot  as  Moses' 
answer  "  from  off^  the  mercy-seat. "  To  sinners,  God  in  nature  keeps  silence :  God 
on  the  throne  of  judgment  is  "a  consuming  fire  ;  "  God  on  the  mercy-seat  is  "God 
in  Christ,"  &o.  (2  Cor.  v.  19).  Such  manifestations  and  voices  of  God  are  eame»t« 
of  further  answers,  if  not  immediate,  yet  certain  («.  g.  Matt  vii.  7 ;  wvi,  38 — 44 ; 
Apts  ?.  3—6 ;  %  Cor.  pi,  8— 10).— P, 


«4  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [ch.  vu.  1—8* 

Vers.  1 — 9. — The  waggons  fm-  the  Levites.  This  chapter  describes  two  sets  of  gifts, 
one  of  waggons  to  help  the  Levites  in  transporting  the  tabernacle,  the  other  for  the 
dedication  at  the  anointing  of  the  altar.  The  first  gift,  when  we  look  into  it,  is  seen 
to  be  peculiarly  beautiful  and  significant. 

I.  It  was  voluntary.  Jehovah  had  made  no  provision  that  these  wagons  should 
be  got.  The  Levites  had  the  bearing  of  the  tabernacle  assigned  them,  and  there  was 
nothing  to  show  but  they  must  use  their  own  backs  and  hands  for  the  purpose.  What 
was  essential  had  been  pointed  out.  But  this  did  not  prevent  voluntary  additions 
where  such  did  not  contradict  commands  already  given.  There  were  men  enough — 
at  least,  so  it  would  seem — among  the  Gershonites  and  Merarites  to  have  borne  the 
heavy  furniture.  God  had  not  laid  on  them  a  work  heyond  their  skill  and  strength. 
We  may  conclude,  therefore,  that  the  gift  of  the  waggons  was  an  act  of  pure  good 
will  from  these  princes  to  the  Levites.  It  was  a  fresh  bond  in  the  unity  of  the 
nation. 

II.  It  was  suitable.  Many  gifts  of  good  will  are  mere  ornaments.  Sometimes 
they  are  white  elephants.  It  is  a  great  deal  when  a  gift  shows  both  a  loving  heart 
and  a  sound  judgment.  These  wagons  and  oxen  were  just  the  thing  to  help.  Pro- 
bably there  had  been  careful  estimates,  so  as  to  secure  a  sufficient  number.  These 
waggons  were  well  used  (see  ch.  xxxiii.). 

III.  It  was  a  united  gift.  Something  to  express  the  interest  of  all  Israel  in  the 
Levites.  The  whole  nation,  in  an  indirect  yet  real  way,  had  its  part  in  the  service  of 
the  tabernacle.  It  is  a  good  thing  to  have  many  joined  in  a  good  work.  It  is  better 
to  have  a  hundred  people  interested  in  a  hundred  good  institutions  to  the  extent  of  a 
pound  a  piece,  than  one  man  in  one  institution  to  the  extent  of  a  hundred  pounds. 
God  sends  down  his  clouds  in  the  wide-scattering,  tiny  drops  of  rain. 

IV.  It  was  duly  pbopoetionatb.  Each  tribe  had  its  share  in  the  gift  and  its 
share  in  the  credit.  It  was  such  a  kind  of  gift  that  each  tribe  might  reasonably  give 
an  equal  share.  It  was  the  gift  of  all  and  the  gift  of  each.  The  niggardliness  of 
the  individual  should  not  be  hidden  away  in  the  munificence  of  the  community. 

V.  It  was  accepted  of  God.  A  contrast  with  the  way  in  which  he  treated  the 
rashness  and  presumption  of  Nadab  and  Abihu.  God  is  glad  to  have  us  lighten 
burdens  and  help  one  another,  when  it  does  not  lead  to  a  mean  shirking  of  personal 
duties.  It  was  right  for  these  princes  to  take  care  that  the  strength  of  the  bearers 
of  burdens  should  not  be  decayed  (Neh.  iv.  10).  We  see  moreover  a  certain  honour 
put  upon  the  lower  creation  ;  it  was  an  honour  to  be  used  for  sacrifice,  an  honour  to 
bear  the  tabernacle  furniture. 

VI.  When  accepted,  THE  GIFT  was  peoportioned  by  God.  The  ^Wtocm  gave,  but 
God  arranged.  It  was  not  fit  that  brute  beasts  should  carry  the  vessels  of  the 
sanctuary,  therefore  the  Kohathites  could  not  avail  themselves  of  the  waggons.  The 
Merarites,  we  may  presume,  had  more  to  bear  than  the  Gershonites,  and  they  had 
more  in  the  way  of  help.  If  even  among  these  minute  specifications  of  God's  com- 
mands to  Moses  there  was  this  room  for  voluntary  gifts,  how  much  more  under  the 
gospel  Where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  liberty,  a  great  deal  more  liberty 
in  giving  than  most  believers  avail  themselves  of. — Y. 

Ver.  13. — The  shekel  of  the  sanctuary.  Mentioned  several  times  in  Exodus,  Levit- 
icus, and  Numbers.  Was  there  a  different  standard  for  the  sanctuary  from  that  used 
in  ordinary  trade  ?  or  was  the  sanctuary  shekel  the  standard  to  which  all  were  sup- 
posed to  conform  ?  The  very  uncertainty  teaches  a  lesson.  One  cannot  err  in  being 
on  the  right  side  and  taking  the  sanctuary  shekel  as  a  standard.  The  mention  of 
this  weight  may  be  taken  to  illustrate  the  following  line  of  thought.  The  fixed 
standard  of  God  as  contrasted  with  the  Jluctuating  standards  of  men.  We  should 
have  a  fixed  standard — 

I.  In  dealing  with  God.  His  claims  are  first.  He  took  the  first  born  and  the 
first  fruit.  The  great  exactness  that  was  required  in  all  offerings  as  to  quality  and 
quantity.  These  sacrifices,  perfect  after  their  fashion,  were  only  valuable  as  sym- 
bolising the  entire  consecration  and  genuine  penitence  of  those  who  brought  them. 
Worship  must  be  according  to  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary.  We  must  have  a  full 
■enge  of  the  reality  of  his  existence,  and  adequate  conceptions  of  all  that  belongs  to 


CH.  VII.  1—89.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES. 


66 


his  glory  and  sovereignty  over  creation.  Also  correct  notions  of  ourselves  as  teor- 
shippers.  Not  with  the  humility  of  sinless  angels  v;rho  veil  their  faces,  but  as  the 
polluted  children  of  men,  with  their  hands  on  their  mouths,  and  their  mouths  in  the 
dust.  Our  praise  must  be  especially  for  his  love,  wisdom,  and  power  in  our  redemp- 
tion. Our  expectations  from  God  must  be  according  to  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary. 
We  must  not  lust  for  the  comforts  of  Egypt.  We  must  have  expectations  that 
correspond  with  the  greatness  of  our  redemption.  Our  Father  in  heaven  treats  us  to 
an  exhibition  of  the  good  and  perfect  gifts — be  ours  the  desire  for  them.  To  look 
for  temporal  comforts  is  to  look  for  trifles,  things  not  promised,  things  that  come 
without  prayer  and  seeking,  if  we  would  only  look  for  such  things  as  God  would 
have  us  seek.  Ask  for  God's  Spirit — you  are  then  supplicating  according  to  the 
sTiekel  of  the  sanctuary.  Seek  for  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteousness — you 
are  then  seeking  according  to  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary.  The  sanctuary  measure 
of  expectation  is  in  the  Lord's  prayer.  The  daily  conduct  of  life  must  be  according 
to  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary.  Everything  in  which  our  voluntary  powers  are 
concerned  should  be  done  as  for  God.  The  world  is  hard  to  please,  but  even  when 
it  is  pleased,  it  is  with  a  low  standard.  We  are  careful  when  the  eyes  of  men  are 
upon  us,  for  that  means  reputation ;  let  us  be  careful  also  when  no  human  eye  can 
see,  for  that  means  character.  Bach  daily  presentation  of  the  living  sacrifice  should 
make  that  sacrifice  holier,  more  acceptable  to  God. 

II.  In  dealing  with  men.  The  Israelites  were  to  do  no  unrighteousness  in  meteyard, 
in  weight,  or  in  measure.  They  were  not  to  have  divers  weights  and  measures,  great 
and  small.  Solomon  tells  us  all  the  weights  of  the  bag  are  the  Lord's  work.  Amos 
spoke  of  the  wickedness  of  the  people  who  waited  for  the  Sabbath  to  be  gone  that 
they  might  sell  their  corn,  making  the  ephah  small  and  the  shekel  great.  The  Almighty 
is  just  as  particular  about  our  work  as  our  worship.  Trade  customs  are  no  excuse 
in  his  sight.  The  eye  that  never  misses  anything  or  mistakes  anything  is  on  the 
weights  and  measures  of  all  dishonest  traffickers.  God  is  just  as  angry  when  a  man 
defrauds  his  neighbour  as  when  he  breaks  the  Sabbath.  How  many  have  been 
hindered  in  their  religion,  lost  their  peace  of  mind,  and  finally  backslidden  from  tha 
ways  of  God,  because  all  was  not  right  in  their  daily  business.  Remember  also  all 
the  other  relations.  Commercial  relations  only  a  small  part  of  human  intercourse. 
Husband  and  wife,  parents  and  children,  brothers  and  sisters,  friends  and  neighbours, 
rulers  and  subjects,  debtor  and  creditor,  rich  and  poor,  well  and  sick,  young  and  old, 
believer  and  unbeliever :  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary  has  its  place  in  all  such  inter- 
course. We  need  then  to  live  in  continual  watchfulness  and  prayer,  to  have  every- 
thing agreeable  to  this  standard.  One  set  of  principles  we  should  have,  and  one  only, 
got  from  the  teaching  and  example  of  our  Divine  Master.  We  must  deal  with  one 
another  as  God  has  dealt  with  us,  he  who  so  loved  the  world  that  he  gave  his  only 
begotten  Son  to  redeem  it.  The  actions  of  the  Almighty  himself  are  weighed 
Bccoiding  to  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary. — Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  Vlll. 

The  LIGHTING  OF  THE  lAMPS  (vers.  1 — 4). 
Ver.  1. — The  lord  spake  unto  Moses.  It 
does  not  appear  when.  The  attempt  of 
modem  commentators  to  find  a  real  connec- 
tion between  this  section  and  the  offering 
of  the  princes  or  the  consecration  of  the 
Levites  is  simply  futile.  Such  connection 
may  be  imagined,  bnt  the  same  ingenuity 
would  obviously  be  equally  successful  if  this 
section  had  been  inserted  in  any  other  place 
from  Exod.  xxxvii.  to  the  end  of  this  book. 
The  more  probable  explanation  will  be  given 
below. 

NUMBEBB. 


Ver.  2. — When  thou  lightest  the  lamps. 
The  command  to  light  the  lamps  had  been 
given  generally  ("  they  shall  light  the  lamps 
thereof")  in  Exod.  xxv.  37,  and  the  care  of 
them  had  been  speoially  confided  to  Aaron 
and  his  sons  ("  from  evening  to  morning  ")  iu 
Exod.  xxvii.  21.  The  actual  lighting  of  the 
lamps  for  the  first  time  by  Moses  is  recorded 
in  Exod.  xl.  25.  In  the  face  of  these  pas- 
sages it  is  incredible  that  the  lamps  had  not 
been  regularly  lighted  by  Aaron  for  moiv 
than  a  month  before  the  offering  of  the 
princes.  The  seven  lamps  shall  give  light 
over  against  the  candlestick.  It  is  some- 
what uncertain  what  this  expression,  here 


66 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[oh.  vm.  1 — 4. 


repeated  from  Ezod.  xxv.  37,  means.  The 
Targums  give  no  explanation  of  it  ;  the 
Septnagint  merely  renders  verbally,  Kard 
'jrpoauTTov  rrji  Xvxvia^  ^wTtovffiv ;  the  Jewish 
expositors  seem  to  have  thought  that  the 
light  was  to  be  thrown  inward  towards  the 
central  shaft ;  most  modern  commentators, 
with  more  probability,  understand  it  to  mean 
that  the  lamps  were  to  be  so  placed  as  to 
throw  their  light  across  the  tabernacle  to- 
•ruii,  the  north  side. 

Ver.  4.— And  this  work  of  the  candle- 
stick. For  the  meaning  of  the  details  here 
given  see  Exod.  xxv.  31,  sq.  According 
onto  the  pattern  which  the  Lord  had  shewed 
Hoses, — viz.,  in  the  mount  (see  Exod.  xxv. 
40)  —  80  he  made  the  candlestick.  This 
has  been  recorded  in  Exod.  xxxvli.  17.     The 


repetition  of  the  statement  in  this  place  seems 
to  be  conclusive  that  these  verses  are  out  ol 
their  historical  position,  and  that  their  in- 
sertion here  is  due  to  some  fact  connected 
with  the  original  records  with  which  we  are 
not  acquainted.  It  may  be  simply  this,  that 
these  verses  originally  followed  verse  89  of 
the  previous  chapter,  and  followed  it  still 
when  it  was  inserted,  for  reasons  already 
suggested,  after  the  narrative  of  the  .offerings 
of  the  princes.  Why,  or  how,  such  an  ad- 
mission should  discredit  the  sacred  narrative 
or  imperil  the  truth  of  its  inspiration  it 
would  be  hard  to  say.  llie  only  thing  really 
likely  to  imperil  the  sacred  narrative  is  to 
persistently  deny  the  obvious  literary  con- 
clusions which  arise  from  an  honest  considera- 
tion of  the  text. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1^-4. — The  sacred  lamps.  In  this  section  we  have,  spiritually,  the  Divine 
concern  that  the  light  of  revelation  should  be  made  to  shine  out  and  to  illumine  iiie 
whole  Churcli  of  God  by  the  ministers  of  his  word.     Consider,  therefore — 

I.  That  the  repetition  here  of  what  had  been  sufficiently  declared  before 
BHOWS  THE  Divine  concern  on  the  subject.  Even  so  there  is  nothing  which  more 
concerns  God  than  that  the  light  of  his  revelation  in  Christ  should  be  made  to  shine 
abroad  strong  and  clear  (Matt.  xxviiL  19,  20  ;  Mark  xvi.  15 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  16  ;  2  Cor. 
iv.  4—7). 

II.  That  the  lamps  were  to  be  so  arranged  as  that  theib  light  should  be 
thrown  right  across  the  holy  place,  and  fall  upon  the  table  with  its  loaves. 
Even  BO  the  light  of  the  gospel — without  which  the  Church  were  in  total  darkness, 
as  the  holy  place  without  the  candelabrum — is  to  be  so  shed  abroad  as  that  it 
illumine  the  whole  breadth  of  the  Church,  and  fall  especially  upon  the  faithful, 
represented  by  the  loaves  of  remembrance  (John  viii.  12 ;  Acts  xiii.  47 ;  Eph.  v.  14 ; 
2  Pet.  i.  19). 

III.  That  Aaron  did  so,  as  commanded,  and  the  lamps  did  bo  bhine.  Even  so 
the  light  of  revelation  has  never  ceased  to  shine  out  in  the  Church,  and  to  illumine 
the  faithful — even  if  not  always  very  brightly — amidst  all  the  changes  of  time,  ..nd 
the  commotions  of  the  world. 

IV.  That  it  is  repeated  here  (as  if  vert  important)  that  the  candelabrum 
WAS  wholly  of  beaten  work,  and  was  made  after  the  pattern  in  the  mount.  As 
made  of  beaten  work,  it  was  of  human  art  and  much  labour ;  as  made  after  the  pattern 
in  the  Mount,  it  was  Divine  in  conception,  and  that  even  in  detail.  Exactly  so  is  the 
Divine  revelation  wliich  is  the  light  of  the  Church  on  earth :  in  its  outward  presenta- 
tion to  the  senses  and  the  understanding  of  men  it  is  beholden  to  human  labour  and 
elaboration ;  but  in  its  essence,  its  "  idea,"  it  is  Divine,  proceeding  from  the  mind 
of  God. 

V.  That  it  is  specially  recorded  that  it  was  all  of  gold  from  the  central 
shaft  to  the  ornamental  flowers.  Even  so  the  revelation  of  God,  which  givetli 
light  (Ps.  cxix.  105),  is  altogether  pure  and  precious  from  the  main  stem  of  sacred 
history  even  to  the  lightest  flowers  of  sacred  poetry. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  lamps  of  the  sanctuary.  This  passage  is  to  be  considered  in 
connection  with  Rev.  i.  9 — 20.  Moses  had  revelations  in  Sinai  even  as  John  had  in 
Patmos.     Matt.  v.  14 — 16  will  serve  for  a  link  to  connect  the  two  passages. 

I.  There  was  a  time  to  light  the  lamps.  "When  thou  lightest  the  lamps." 
Dressing  them  was  morning  work :  they  were  then  ready  for  Aaron  to  light "  at  •▼•n  " 


OH.  VIII.  I — 4.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


«T 


(Exod.  XXX.  7, 8).  The  light  was  symbolic  only  wten  it  was  clearly  useful.  By  day 
no  light  was  needed,  but  it  was  fitting  that  at  night  the  holy  place  of  him  who  is 
light  and  in  whom  is  no  darkness  at  all,  should  be  well  illuminated.  Seven  is  said  to 
be  a  number  of  perfection ;  if  we  take  it  so  seven  lamps  would  denote  perfect  illumina- 
tion. Similarly  the  Churches  of  Christ  are  to  be  as  lamps  in  a  darkened  world,  that 
by  their  light  the  things  of  God  may  be  discerned.  The  words  to  the  seven  Churches 
are  thus  words  to  every  Church,  admonishing  it  to  tend  and  replenish  the  lamp  that 
has  been  lighted  at  even. 

II.  The  lamps  were  to  be  lighted  ovib  against  the  candlestick.  This,  taken 
together  with  the  reference  in  ver.  4  to  the  construction  of  the  candlestick,  seems  to 
indicate  that  the  candlestick  with  its  richness  and  beauty  was  to  be  revealed  by  the 
lamps.  Bezaleel  and  Aholiab  had  been  specially  endowed  to  make  this  and  like 
elaborate  work  (Exod.  xxxv.  30 — 35 ;  xxxvii.  17 — 24).  If  the  Churches  then  are  as 
the  lamps,  we  may  take  the  candlestick  to  signify  the  doctrines,  the  promises,  the 
duties,  the  revelations  to  be  found  in  the  word  of  God.  Law  and  gospel  are  inter- 
mingled by  prophet  and  apostle  in  a  splendour  and  richness  of  which  Bezaleel's  work 
was  a  feeble  type.  The  candlestick  supports  the  lamps,  which  in  turn  reveal  the 
candlestick.  The  truths  of  God's  word  are  in  charge  of  his  Churches.  They  rest 
upon  that  word,  and  their  lives,  conspicuous  for  abiding  purity  and  brightness,  must 
recommend  the  word.  The  lamps  must  reveal  that  the  candlestick  holds  them,  and 
it  must  be  made  obvious  that  the  candlestick  is  for  this  purpose. 

III.  It  was  Aaron  who  lighted  these  lamps,  and  so  it  is  from  Christ  the  true 
Aaron  that  every  Church  gets  its  light.  We  cannot  recommend  God's  word  by 
anything  save  the  holy,  beautiful,  benign  life  which  his  Son,  by  the  Spirit,  can  create 
within  us.  Then,  and  only  then,  will  our  light  so  shine  that  men  will  glorify  our 
Father  who  is  in  heaven. 

IV.  The  lamps  revealed  the  glory  of  Aaron's  own  vesture — those  holy  garments 
which  were  for  glory  and  beauty.  Read  carefully  Exod.  xxviii.,  and  then  consider  that 
Aaron  arrayed  in  all  these  splendours  was  the  type  of  the  true  Intercessor  afterwards 
to  come.  That  is  an  unworthy  Church  which  does  not  reveal  much  of  Christ ;  which 
does  not,  by  the  shining  of  its  life,  attract  attention  more  and  more  to  the  glories  of 
his  person.  We  cannot  glorify  our  Father  in  heaven,  unless  by  glorifying  the  Son 
whom  he  has  sent. 

Lessons:  —  1.  That  which  is  useful  may  also  be  beautiful,  and  in  its  use  its 
beauty  will  be  revealed.  2.  The  candlestick  was  something  permanent,  made  of 
gold,  and  not  needing  renewal.  We  have  no  occasion  for  a  new,  an  altered,  or  an 
increased  gospel ;  all  required  of  us  is  to  show  it  forth,  by  daily  replenishings  from 
the  beaten  oil  of  the  sanctuary, — Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


The  HALL0WIN8  OF  THE  Levitbs  (vers. 
6—23).  Yer.  6.  — The  Lord  spak?  imto 
XToses.  At  some  time  subsequent  to  the 
command  given  in  eh.  iii.  6 — 13,  and  no 
doubt  before  the  passover. 

Ver.  6. — And  cleanse  them.  Before  they 
actually  entered  upon  their  new  duties  they 
were  to  be  solemnly  hallowed.  This  hallow- 
ing, however,  is  not  called  ^\>,  as  is  that  of 
the  priests  (Exod.  zxix.  1),  but  IHtt,  cleans, 
ing.  There  was  in  their  ease  no  ceremonial 
washing,  no  vesting  in  sacred  garments,  no 
anointing  with  holy  oil,  or  sprinkling  with  the 
blood  of  sacrifices.  The  Levites,  in  fact,  re- 
mained simply  representatives  of  the  con- 
gregation, whereas  the  priests  were  repre- 
■entatives  also  of  Christ. 

Yar.  7. — Sprinkle  water  of  pnri^ring  upon 


them.  Rather,  "water  of  sin,"  so  called 
because  it  had  to  do  with  the  removal  of 
sin,  just  as  "  water  of  separation  "  (ch.  xix. 
9,  13)  was  that  which  delivered  from  the 
legal  state  of  separation.  It  is  not  likely  to 
have  been  prepared  in  the  same  manner  aa 
this  latter  (ch.  xix.  9),  both  because  of  the 
great  difference  between  the  two  oases,  and 
becaxise  the  ordinance  of  the  red  heifer  be- 
longed to  a  later  period.  Nor  is  it  hkely  to 
have  resembled  that  used  for  cleansing  the 
leper,  or  the  water  of  jealousy.  But  it  is 
rash  to  conclude  that,  because  we  do  not 
read  any  special  directions  for  its  preparation, 
it  must,  therefore,  have  been  nothing  bat 
water  from  the  laver  which  stood  in  the 
outer  court.  That  water  appears,  indeed,  to 
be  called  "holy  water"  in  ch.  v.  17,  which 
Is  intelligible  enough ;  but  no  probable  reason 
r  2 


M 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[oh.  Tin.  6 — 29 


emn  be  shown  why  it  should  be  called  "  sin 
water  ; "  it  would  seem  as  reasonable  to  call 
the  water  which  our  Lord  turned  into  wine 
"  sin  water,"  because  it  stood  there  "  for  the 
purifying  of  the  Jews."  It  is  better  to  say 
that  we  do  not  know,  because  it  is  not  re- 
corded, how  this  water  was  prepared,  or  how 
it  corresponded  to  its  name.  The  Levites 
who  were  to  be  sprinkled  would  seem  to 
have  included  all  the  males,  some  twenty 
thousand  in  number ;  because  it  was  all  the 
males,  and  not  only  those  between  thirty  and 
fifty,  who  were  to  be  dedicated  in  place  of  the 
first-born.  In  any  case  it  was,  of  course, 
impossible  that  Moses  could  have  sprinkled 
them  individually  (see  below  pn  ver.  11). 
Let  them  shave  all  their  flesh.  Literally, 
"  let  them  cause  the  razor  to  pass  over  their 
whole  body."  Some,  distinguish  between 
nyj^  "lar  here  and  PIpJ  in  Levit.  xiv.  8,  9, 
as  though  the  latter  meant  a  much  more 
complete  shaving  off  of  the  hair  than  the 
former  ;  but  this  difference  is  doubtful ;  the 
fact  that  the  whole  body  as  well  as  the  head 
was  to  be  shaved  implies  that  it  was  more 
than  a  mere  cutting  short  of  the  hair.  Let 
them  wash  their  clothes.  This  was  con- 
stantly enjoined  on  all  the  faithful  as  a  pre- 
paration for  any  special  religious  service  (see 
on  Exod.  xix.  10).  And  so  make  themselves 
clean.  The  shaving  and  washing  had,  no 
doubt,  a  symbolic  significance,  but  their 
primary  object  was  simply  and  obviously 
personal  cleanliness ;  it  is  the  hair  and  the 
clothes  that  chiefly  harbour  impurities,  espe- 
cially in  a  hot  climate. 

Ver.  8. — Another  young  bullock  shalt 
thou  take  for  a  sin  offering.  The  ordinary 
sin  offering  was  a  shaggy  one  of  the  goats 
(see  on  ch.  vii.  16) ;  but  a  bullock  had  been 
prescribed  for  the  sin  of  the  high  priest,  and 
for  the  sin  of  the  congregation,  in  certain 
circumstances,  and  the  analogy  is  followed 
here.  It  might  seem  as  if  the  larger  animal 
were  meant  to  distinguish  aggregate  or  col- 
lective guilt  (see  on  Levit.  iv.  3) ;  but  the 
■cape-goat  offered  for  the  sin  of  the  whole 
people  makes  against  such  a  supposition. 

Ver.  10. — Before  the  Lord.  As  in  ch.  v. 
16,  cither  near  the  brazen  altar,  or  more  pro- 
bably before  the  entrance  of  the  tabernacle. 
And  the  children  of  Israel  shall  put  their 
hands  upon  the  Levites.  Presumably  by 
means  of  their  representatives,  probably  the 
tribe  princes.  This  laying  on  of  hands  signi- 
fied that  the  obligation  to  assist  personally  in 
the  service  of  the  sanctuary  was  transferred 
from  the  whole  congregation  to  the  Levites. 
Ver.  11.  —  And  Aaron  shall  offer  the 
Levites  before  the  Lord  for  an  offering. 
Bather,  "Aaron  shall  wave"  them  "for  a 
wave  offering"  (Hebrew,  nuph;  see  Exod. 
zxix.  24) ;  and  so  in  vers.  18,  16,  and  21, 
Thia  ii^  unction  leAius  conclusive  that  the 


whole  ceremonial  was  to  be  symbolically  per- 
formed, for  the  Levites  could  not  possibly  be 
waved  in  any  Uteral  sense.  Some  have  sup- 
posed that  they  were  marched  up  and  down 
before  the  altar,  forgetting  that  the  court 
would  scarcely  afford  standing  room  for  1000 
people,  while  the  Levites  between  thirty  and 
fifty  numbered  more  than  8000.  It  is  certain 
that  the  Levites  could  only  be  brought  be- 
fore the  Lord,  could  only  be  waved  ^lowso- 
ever  that  was  done),  could  only  lay  their 
hands  upon  the  bullocks,  by  representation. 
If  we  suppose,  e.  g.,  that  a  hundred  men  of 
position  and  command  among  them  entered 
the  court  as  representatives  of  the  tribe,  then 
we  can  understand  how  the  ceremonial  here 
commanded  might  have  been  effectively 
carried  out.  That  they  may  execute  the 
service  of  the  Lord.  literally,  "  that  they 
may  be  to  execute  the  service  of  the  Lord." 
Their  being  waved  made  them  over  in  a 
figure  to  the  Lord  to  be  wholly  his,  and  to 
live  only  for  his  service,  and  at  his  command. 
But  just  as  wave  offerings  were  assigned  by 
Divine  permission  to  the  use  of  the  priests, 
so  were  the  Levites  given  to  Aaron  and  his 
sons  for  ever. 

Ver.  12. — Shall  lay  their  hands  upon  the 
heads  of  the  bullocks.  In  token  that  they 
constituted  these  victims  the  ritual  represent- 
atives and  embodiments,  the  one  of  their  sin, 
to  be  consumed  and  done  away  as  by  fire,  the 
other  of  their  life  and  strength,  to  be  wholly 
offered  unto  God  and  accepted  as  by  fire. 

Ver.  13. — And  thou  shalt  set  the  Levites 
before  Aaron.  This  is  not  an  additional 
command,  but  repeats  in  a  slightly  different 
form  the  previous  orders.  A  similar  repeti- 
tion occurs  in  ver.  16  J. 

Ver.  16. — For  they  are  wholly  given  nnto 
me.  See  ch.  iii.  6—13,  the  substance  of 
which  is  emphatically  repeated  here. 

Ver.  19  b. — To  make  an  atonement  for  the 
children  of  Israel.  This  is  a  remarkable 
expression,  and  throws  light  upon  the  nature 
of  atonement.  It  is  usually  confined  to 
purely  sacerdotal  ministrations,  but  it  clearly 
has  a  somewhat  different  scope  here.  The 
idea  that  the  Levites  "  made  an  atonement " 
by  assisting  the  priests  in  the  subordinate 
details  of  sacrifice  hardly  needs  refutation  : 
as  well  might  the  Gibeonites  be  said  to  "  make 
an  atonement"  because  they  supplied  the 
altar  fire  with  wood.  The  real  parallel  to 
this  is  to  be  found  in  the  case  of  Phinehas, 
of  whom  God  testified  that ' '  he  hath  turned 
my  wrath  away  from  the  children  of  Israel," 
and  "  made  an  atonement  for  the  children  of 
Israel "  (ch.  xxv.  11, 18).  It  is  evident  that 
Phinehas  turned  away  the  wrath  of  God  not 
by  offering  any  sacrifices,  but  by  making  the 
sin  which  aroused  that  wrath  to  cease  ;  ha 
made  an  atonement  for  the  people  by  di»- 
charging  for  them  that  holy  and  boundan 


CH.  VIII.  5 — 26.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS, 


duty  (of  putting  away  sin)  which  the  rest  of 
them  failed  to  perform.  Similarly  the  Levitea 
made  an  atonement  not  by  offering  sacrifice 
(which  they  could  no  more  do  than  the 
children  of  Judah),  hut  by  rendering  unto 
God  those  personal  duties  of  attendance  and 
service  in  his  courts  which  all  the  people 
ought  to  have  rendered  had  they  only  been  fit. 
That  there  he  no  plague  among  the  children 
of  Israel,  when  the  children  of  Israel  come 
nigh  unto  the  sanctuary.  See  ch.  i.  53.  The 
children  of  Israel  were  in  this  strait.  As 
"  an  holy  nation,"  they  were  all  bound,  and 
their  first-bom  as  redeemed  from  the  destroyer 
were  specially  bound,  to  render  certain  re- 
ligious duties  to  God.  But  if  they  had 
attempted  to  render  them  they  would  have 
erred  through  ignorance  and  foolishness,  and 
so  have  incurred  Divine  wrath  and  punish- 
ment, when  they  came  nigh  unto  the  sanctu- 
ary. From  this  strait  the  substitution  of  the 
Levites  delivered  them. 

Ver.  21.  —  Were  purified,  or  "purified 
themselves."  It  refers  not  to  the  ceremonial 
sprinkling,  but  to  the  personal  preparation' 
prescribed. 

Ver.  22. — In  the  tabernacle  of  the  con- 
gregation. This  can  only  mean  that  they 
went  in  after  the  holy  things  had  been  packed 
up  in  order  to  take  the  fabric  to  pieces  ;  no 
one  but  the  priests  went  into  the  tabernacle 
for  any  other  purpose,  or  at  any  other  time. 


Ver.  24. — From  twenty  and  five  years  old 
and  upward.  A  short  time  before  the  mini- 
mum age  had  been  fixed  at  thirty  (ch.  iv.  8). 
That  direction,  however,  concerned  the  trans- 
port of  the  tabernacle  and  its  belongings ; 
this  was  a  permanent  regulation  designed  for 
the  ordinaiy  labours  of  the  sanctuary  at  a 
time  when  the  Levites  would  be  scattered 
throughout  their  cities,  and  could  only  serve 
by  courses.  For  the  latter  purpose  many 
more  would  be  rec[uired ;  and  indeed  they 
were  found  insufficient  as  it  was  .in  the  latter 
days  of  David,  when  the  wealth  and  devotion 
of  the  kingdom  were  fast  increasing  (see  on 
1  Chron.  xxiii.  24—27).  To  wait  upon  the 
service.  Literally,  "  to  war  the  warfare ; " 
the  idea  of  the  militia  sacra  is  kept  up. 

Ver.  26. — Shall  minister  ...  to  keep  the 
charge,  and  shall  do  no  service.  The  word 
"  charge  "  (Hebrew,  mishmereth)  seems  to 
signify  the  care  of  the  furniture  and  belong- 
ings of  the  tabernacle,  while  "  service  "  means 
the  laborious  work  of  transport,  or  of  pre- 
paring sacrifice.  The  duties  of  the  Levite 
over  fifty  were  in  fact  honorary,  given  to  him 
probably  for  his  own  sake,  that  he  might  have 
some  place  and  post  in  the  house  of  God. 
This  careful  provision  for  those  who  should 
attain  the  age  of  fifty  shows  that  the  com- 
mandment was  designed  for  the  promised 
land  rather  than  for  the  wilderness. 


HOMILETICa 

Vers.  5 — 23. — The  dedication  of  the  Levites.  In  this  section  wo  hare  the  dne 
preparation  o£  those  who  are  specially  devoted  to  the  service  of  God.  Consider, 
therefore — 

I.  That  before  they  codld  serve  they  must  be  cleansed.  Even  so  all  that 
would  do  God  service,  or  be  useful  to  others  in  religious  concerns,  must  first  them- 
selves be  cleansed ;  because  all  that  is  human  is  unclean  (Job  xv.  14),  and  nothing 
that  is  unclean  can  do  God  service,  for  he  requireth  holiness  in  his  servants  (Prov. 
XX.  9 ;  Ps.  V.  6  ;  Isa.  Hi.  11 ;  Hab.  i.  13  ;  Matt.  v.  48 ;  xxii.  12). 

II.  That  this  cleansing  was  twofold,  partly  WRonoHT  upon  them,  pabtlt 
WBOUGHT  BY  THEM.  Even  80  the  cleansing  which  prepares  for  the  service  of  God, 
and  for  hig  nearer  presence,  is  twofold ;  partly  it  is  done  for  us  by  the  Mediator, 
partly  by  us  through  our  own  efforts  (Ps.-li.  7 ;  2  Cor.  vii.  1). 

III.  That  the  cleansing  a  parte  Dei  was  by  sprinkling  of  sin  water,  the 
EXACT  nature  of  which  is  disputed.  Even  so  every  one  that  would  belong  to  the 
kingdom  of  God  must  receive  that  washing  of  water  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which 
is  in  its  nature  mysterious,  and  in  definition  controverted  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  25 ;  John 
iii.  5  ;  Acts  xxii.  16  ;  Heb.  x.  22). 

IV.  That  the  cleansing  a  parte  sua  was  by  sedulously  getting  bid  of  any 
possible  impurity  which  might  adhere  from  without.  Even  so  he  who  would 
truly  serve  God  must  be  not  only  careful,  but  conscious,  and  according  to  the  ordin- 
ary standard  extreme,  to  detaclj  and  remove  from  himself  all  those  impurities  of 
common  life  which  so  easily  cling  to  us  ;  to  reform  those  private,  social,  and  domes- 
tic habit?,  which  sit  as  closely  to  us  as  our  clothes,  which  seem  as  much  a  part  of  ut 
as  our  hair,  and  which,  as  it  were,  absorb  and  retain  the  inherent  sinfulness  of  our 
nature  (1  John  iii.  3 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  14 ;  James  i.  21 ;  iv.  8). 

V.  That  fob  the  Levites  were  offered  first  a  sin  offering,  and  a  burnt 


W  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBEES.  [oh.  viii.  6—26, 

OFFEEINQ,  FOB  AN  ATONEMENT.  Even  SO  no  service,  however  able  and  laborious,  k 
acceptable  unto  God  except  it  have  been  sanctified  through  the  sacrifice  and  self- 
sacrifice  of  Christ  (Heb.  x.  10). 

■  VI.  That  the  children  of  Israel  laid  their  hands  upon  the  Levites  ■when 
THEY  WERE  DEVOTED.  Even  SO  wliatevcr  labour  be  undertaken  for  the  body  of 
Christ,  should  receive  recognition  and  sympathy  from  all  members  of  the  body,  for 
all  are  concerned  (1  Cor.  xvi.  15,  16 ;  Acts  xiii.  3  ;  xiv.  26  ;  1  Cor.  xii.  26). 

VII.  That  the  Levites  were  "  waved."  Even  so  all  who  would  labour  in  holy 
things  must  present  themselves  as  a  living  sacrifice  to  God,  to  be  wholly  his  and  no 
longer  sum  potesfatis.  Those  who  do  religious  worlc,  because  they  like  it  themselves, 
"  have  their  reward  ; "  but  where  the  Pharisees  had  it,  in  this  world  only  (Bom.  xii 
1 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  20 ;  Gal.  ii.  20). 

VIII.  That  only  after  their  cleansing  and  waving  could  they  enter  in  to 
WAR  the  warfare  OF  THE  TABERNACLE.  Even  SO,  none  can  do  real  service  to  God 
unless  they  are  wholly  converted  and  have  given  themselves  to  him  (Luke  xxii. 
32  6. ;  Acts  viii.  21  ;  James  i.  8 ;  and  cf.  Judges  vii.  4,  7). 

IX.  That  after  the  fiftieth  year  they  were  released  from  doing  service, 
BUT  were  still  PERMITTED  TO  KEEP  THE,  CHARGE.  Even  SO  it  is  part  of  the  good- 
ness  of  God  that  no  one  should  be  held  to  do  laborious  work  in  the  Church  when  he 
is  old ;  but  also  part  of  his  goodness  that  he  should  still  keep  such  charge  as  is  fitted 
to  his  years. 

Note,  that  the  Levites  are  said  to  have  made  an  atonement  for  the  children  of  Itrael. 
— 1.  By  taking  upon  themselves,  in  their  separated  but  representative  character, 
those  religious  obligations  of  the  congregation  (especially  of  the  first-bom)  which 
they  dared  not  attempt.  2.  By  performing  such  obligations  rightly,  which  those 
could  not  have  done.  There  is  none  of  us  that  can  do  this,  because  we  cannot  even 
do  our  own  duty,  far  less  another's  (Ps.  xlix.  7  ;  Luke  xvii.  10 ;  Gal.  vi.  5)  Where- 
fore this  applies  only  unto  Christ,  by  whom  we  have  received  the  atonement  (Rom. 
V.  11),  and  throws  an  important  light  upon  that  atonement.  Consider,  therefore — 
1.  Christ  hath  "  made  atonement "  for  us,  as  having  undertaken  for  us  those  duties 
of  a  human  life  and  ministry  wholly  and  perfectly  devoted  and  consecrated  to  the 
Father,  which  we  for  our  unworthiness  durst  not  even  have  attempted  (Luke  ii.  49  ; 
John  iv.  34 ;  vi.  38  ;  Heb.  x.  5 — 9 ;  ix.  14).  2.  Christ  hath  "  made  atonement "  for 
us,  as  having  lived  that  perfect  life,  and  rendered  that  perfect  ministry,  which  we 
never  could  have  lived  or  rendered,  and  therefore  never  could  have  pleased  God,  nor 
satisfied  his  just  and  necessary  requirements  (Matt.  iii.  17  ;  xii.  18  ;  xvii.  5 ;  John 
xvii.  4 ;  xix.  30 ;  James  iii.  2).  3.  Christ  hath  "  made  atonement"  for  us,  as  having 
thus  pleased  God,  as  man,  and  as  our  separated  and  accepted  representative,  "the 
Son  of  man  " — "  the  second  man."  4.  Christ  hath  saved  us  thereby  from  the  sorrow 
which  even  in  heaven  itself  (could  we  have  got  there)  our  want  of  will  and  want  of 
power  to  serve  God  acceptably  would  have  brought  upon  us  (Ephes.  i.  6),  having 
appeared  in  our  behalf  in  the  presence  of  God  with  the  offering  of  a  peifect  human 
life. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  14. — The  separation  of  the  Levites  ;  or  an  ordination  service  in  the  vrildemess. 
"Thusshalt  thou  separate  the  Levites  from  among  the  children  of  Israel:  and  the 
Levites  shall  be  mine."  There  was  a  threefold  reason  why  the  Levites  were  separated 
from  the  rest  of  the  nation  and  wholly  dedicated  to  the  Lord's  service.  In  the  first 
place,  they  were  to  stand  instead  of  the  first-bom,  whom  the  Lord  had  specially 
claimed  for  himself  (vers.  16 — 18).  It  was  judged  expedient  that  to  the  service  of 
the  sanctuary  one  whole  ti-ibe  should  be  dedicated,  rather  than  individuals  out  of  all 
the  tribes.  Secondly,  the  due  serving  of  the  tabernacle  being  much  too  burdensome 
for  the  single  family  of  Aaron,  their  brethren  of  the  tribe  of  Levi  were  appointed 
\o  help  them.  But  there  was  a  third  and  deeper  reason.  All  the  chosen  people  are 
the  Lord's,  and  he  claims  their  service.  But  all  cannot,  in  person,  serve  him  in  the 
way  of  keeping  the  charge  of  the  sanctuary.  Some  of  them  must  be  separated  to  this 
ministry.     Official  service  is  necessary  under  the  gospel.    Much  more  was  it  necessary 


OH.  viit  6—26.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBEBS.  71 


under  the  law.  Hence  the  separation  of  the  Levites.  When  the  time  came  for  the 
Levites  to  enter  on  duty,  they  were  set  apart  in  a  service,  not  so  solemn  indeed  as 
the  service  on  the  occasion  of  Aaron's  consecration,  nevertheless  highly  impressive,  and 
fitted  to  suggest  many  a  lesson  worthy  to  be  laid  to  heart  by  us  on  similar  occasions. 

I.  Let  us  begin  by  taking  A  QfiNBRAL  view  of  this  obdination  sbeviob.  The 
outstanding  features  were  these.  It  took  place  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  and  in 
presence  of  the  whole  congregation.  The  Levites  being  marched  in,  the  congre- 
gation put  their  hands  on  them,  a.  d. :  "  We  are  thine,  0  Lord.  Thou  hast  redeemed 
us  and  brought  us  out  for  thyself,  to  be  to  thee  a  kingdom  and  priests.  With  respect 
to  the  charge  of  this  thy  sanctuary,  thou  hast  made  choice  of  these  our  brethren  to 
minister  to  thee  in  our  stead;  We  freely  give  them  up  to  thee,  and  renounce  all  the 
rightful  clsim  we  should  otherwise  have  had  upon  their  service  in  peace  and  war." 
This  done,  Aaron  "offered  "  the  Levites  to  the  Lord  as  a  "  wave  offering."  Finally, 
Aaron  in  turn  accepted  the  Levites  as  the  Lord's  gift  to  him,  to  aid  him  in  the  taber- 
nacle. Who  can  fail  to  see  the  significance  of  all  this?  Besides  suggesting  (1) 
how  fit  it  is  that  men  who  are  entering  on  a  life  of  official  service  in  the  Church 
should  be  solemnly  set  apart  to  their  oiHce  and  charge,  it  plainly  teaches  (2)  that 
ordination  to  sacred  office  should  take  place  in  the  face  of  the  congregation.  It 
ought  not  to  be  performed  in  a  comer.  The  people  are  vitally  interested,  and  have 
a  right  to  be  present.  This  is  the  rule,  I  believe,  in  all  evangelical  Churches.  (3) 
When  a  man  has  been  set  apart  to  sacred  service,  at  the  instance  of  his  brethren  and 
in  their  presence,  a  relation  is  formed  between  him  and  them  which  involves  recipro- 
cal obligation.  He  is  to  lay  out  his  strength  in  their  service ;  and  they  are  to  charge 
themselves  with  his  maintenance  while  he  does  so.  The  people  of  Israel  having  laid 
their  hands  on  the  Levites,  were  thenceforward  to  communicate  with  them  in  all  good 
things  (see  Deut.  xii.  19  ;  xiv.  27).  When  Dr.  Carey  consented  to  go  down  into  the 
pit  of  heathendom,  it  was  only  fair  and  just  that  the  brethren  at  whose  instance  he 
went  should  "  hold  the  rope,"  as  he  stipulated  that  they  should. 

II.  Besides  these  more  catholic  and  spiritual  services,  the  Levites'  ordina- 
tion WAS  ACCOMPANIED  WITH  OTHERS  PURELY  CEREMONIAL.  These  were  of  three 
kinds.  1.  Lustral  (ver.  7).  First,  Aaron  sprinkled  the  Levites  with  water  of  puri- 
fying— either  that  described  ch.  xis.,  or,  more  likely,  spring-water,  such  as  was  used 
in  the  laver.  Then  the  Levites,  on  their  part,  shaved  off  their  hair  and  washed  their 
clothes,  q.  d.:  "  Lord,  we  are  not  meet  for  thy  house  and  service.  Holiness  beoometh 
thine  house  Thou  art  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil.  And  we  are  unclean.  But 
thou  canst  make  us  clean.  As  thou  hast  sprinkled  our  persons  with  clean  water,  so 
do  thou  remove  all  filthineas  from  our  hearts.  And  we,  for  our  parts,  are  resolved  by 
thy  grace  to  put  away  the  evils  of  our  past  lives  and  to  £611ow  after  holiness  hence- 
forward." 2.  Expiatory  (yera.i,!^).  The  Levites  were  to  bring  a  sin  offering  for 
atonement ;  laying  their  hands  upon  it  with  confession  of  sin  (see  Levit.  iv.).  'They 
were  thus  reminded  of  their  guilt  as  well  as  impurity,  and  were  encouraged  to  believe 
that  there  is  forgiveness  with  God,  on  the  ground  of  which  they  might  hope  to  be 
accepted  in  their  persons  and  service.  3.  Dedicatory.  The  sin  offering  was  to  be 
followed  by  a  burnt  offering  to  signify  that  the  Levites  presented  their  whole 
persons  to  the  Lord,  a  living  sacrifice,  to  he  employed  in  his  service  all  their  days. 
Blessed  be  God,  we  are  rid  of  these  burdensome  and  carnal  rites.  Care  must  be 
taken  not  to  let  anything  like  them  creep  again  into  the  sanctuary.  But  the  ideas  they 
set  forth — the  great  realities  of  purification,  and  pardon,  and  dedication — ought  to  be 
often  present  to  our  minds  and  hearts  in  the  house  of  God. — B. 

Vers.  12,  and  19. — An  offering  to  God,  needing  for  itself  an  atonement.  The  tribe 
of  Levi  was  set  apart  for  God's  service  in  the  tabernacle  in  place  of  all  the  firstborn. 
Before  they  could  enter  on  that  service  they  needed  a  special  call  and  consecration, 
JBcluding  atoning  sacrifices  (vers.  5 — 12).  Thus  we  are  reminded  of  the  obvious 
tlBtl)  that,  without  a  sacrifice  for  us,  we  can  never  ourselves  be  acceptable  sacrifices 
to  God.  Illustrate  from  the  position  of  Rom.  xii.  1  in  the  Epistle,  coming  after 
the  exposition  of  the  mercies  of  God,  including  the  atonement  of  Christ  (Rom.  iii.). 
But  in  ver.  19  the  services  of  the  Levites  (or  the  I  evites  themselves)  are  said  to  be 
an  atonement.     The  Levites  were  regarded  as  a  vicarious  offering  to  God  (versi 


THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS. 


[oh.  ix.  1 — 14» 


10,  11).  In  the  wider  sense  of  the  word  atonement,  they  are  said  to  make  (or  to  be) 
an  atonement.  ("The  priests  made  an  atonement  by  sacrifice;  the  Levues  by 
attendance."— M.  Henry.)  Yet  even  this  vicarious  offering  needs  to  be  atoned  for 
(ver.  12).,  Hence  the  lesson,  that  every  human  saint  (separated  to  God.^ver.  14), 
service,  or  sacrifice  needs  an  atonement.  This  is  needed  for— 1.  All  God's  chosen 
servants,  "  a  kind  of  first-fruits  of  his  creatures."  (Illustrate  from  1  John  L  7—10;  iL 
1,  2,  and  from  John  xiii.  10.)  2.  All  God's  selected  ministers  (pastors,  missiomines, 
&c.).  Illustrate  from  TertuUian's  request  to  his  brethren :  "  Ye  have  sought,  and  ye 
have  found ;  ye  have  knocked,  and  it  is  opened  to  you.  Thus  much  I  ask,  that  when 
you  seek  again,  you  remember  me,  Tertulliau,  a  sinner ; "  or  from  W.  Carey  the 
missionary's  selected  epitaph— ^ 

"A  guilty,  weak,  and  helpless  worm, 
Un  thy  kind  arms  I  fall." 

3.  All  the  most  sacred  services  of  the  most  saintly  men.  Their  prayers  need  to  be 
prayed  for ;  their  tears  to  be  washed  from  impurity  ;  their  gifts  of  gold  to  be  refined 
from  the  dross  of  earthly  motives.  Though  all  Christians  are  priests  unto  God, 
their  most  solemn  priestly  acts  need  the  blood  of  Christ  to  cleanse  them  from  aU 
sin.— P. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IX. 


The  PASsovBUi  at  Sikai  (vers.  1 — 14). 
Ver,  I. — ^In  the  first  month  of  the  second 
year.  Before  the  census,  and  all  the  other 
events  recorded  in  this  book,  except  in  part 
the  offerings  of  the  princes  (see  ch.  vii.  1). 
There  was,  however,  an  obvious  reason  for 
mentioning  together  the  two  passovers,  the 
second  of  which  immediately  preceded  the 
departure  from  Sinai. 

Yer.  2. — Let  the  children  of  Israel  also 
keep  the  paesover  at  his  appointed  season. 
Septuagint,  iroteiTuiaav  to  iraaxa.  Cf. 
Matt.  xxvi.  18,  itoiSi  rh  vaax<t,  and  Luke 
xxii.  19,  roSro  iroitirf  ti'c  t^v  inffv  ava/ivq- 
aiv.  They  may  have  been  in  doubt  as  to 
whether  they  were  to  keep  it  in  the  wilder- 
ness, and  indeed  they  do  not  seem  to  have 
attempted  to  keep  it  again  until  they  reached 
the  promised  land  (see  on  Josh.  v.  5,  6). 
The  passover  had  indeed  been  made  an 
"ordinance  for  ever,"  but  only  when  they 
were  come  to  the  land  which  the  Lord 
should  give  them  (Exod.  xii.  24,  25 ;  xiii. 
6).  Apart,  therefore,  from  express  command, 
it  would  have  been  doubtful  whether  the 
feast  should  not  at  least  be  postponed.  Inas- 
much, however,  as  they  had  been  detained  at 
Sinai  by  Divine  direction  (albeit  partly  in 
consequence  of  their  own  idolatry,  but  for 
which  they  might  already  have  been  "at 
nome"),  it  pleased  God  that  they  should 
not  lack  the  blessing  and  support  of  the 
passover  at  its  proper  season. 

Yer.  3. — At  even.  See  on  Exod.  xii.  6. 
According  to  all  the  rites  of  it,  and  accord- 
ing to  all  the  ceremonies  thereof  This 
must  be  understood  only  of  the  essential 
rite*  and    ceremonies  of  the  passover,   as 


mentioned   below   (vers.    11,    12).      It    Is 

singular  that  no  mention  is  made  of  the 
considerable  departure  which  oircumstanoes 
necessitated  from  the  original  institution.  It 
was  not  possible,  e.  g.,  to  strike  the  blood  of 
the  lamb  upon  the  lintel  and  the  side-posts 
of  the  doors,  because  in  the  wilderness  they 
had  no  doors.  In  after  ages  this  rite  (which 
was  of  the  essence  of  the  institution)  was 
represented  by  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of 
the  lambs  on  the  altar  (2  Oliron.  xxx.  16), 
but  no  command  is  on  record  which  expressly 
authorised  the  change.  In  Levit.  xvii.  3—6 
there  is  indeed  a  general  direction,  applying 
apparently  to  all  domestic  animals  slain  for 
food,  that  they  be  brought  to  the  tabernacle 
to  be  slain,  and  that  the  priest  sprinkle  the 
blood  upon  the  altar  ;  and  in  Deut.  xvL  6 — 
7  there  is  an  order  that  in  future  times  the 
passover  was  only  to  be  slain  at  the  place 
which  the  Lord  should  choose.  The  actual 
practice  in  later  ages  seems  to  have  been 
founded  partly  upon  the  command  in  Deu- 
teronomy, which  restricted  the  kUling  of 
the  passover  to  Jerusalem  (not,  however,  to 
the  temple),  and  partly  on  the  command  in 
Leviticus,  which  really  applied  (at  any  rate  in 
the  letter)  to  the  time  of  wandering  only. 
As  the  celebration  of  the  paschal  feast  had 
apparently  been  neglected  from  the  time  of 
Joshua  until  that  of  the  later  kings  (Josh. 
V.  10 ;  2  Kings  xxiii.  22),  they  were  no 
doubt  guided  in  the  obseiTance  of  it  by  the 
analogy  of  other  sacrifices  in  the  absence  of 
express  commands.  It  would,  however,  be 
an  obvious  source  of  error  to  assume  that  the 
practice  of  the  age  of  Josiah  or  Hezekiah  was 
the  practice  of  the  earliest  passovers  ;  so  far 
as  these  necessarily  differed  from  the  original 
institution,  it  is  absolutely  uncertain ,  how 


CH.  IX.  1 — 14.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


73 


the  difficulty  was  solved.  Notliing  perhaps 
better  illustrates  the  mingled  rigidity  and 
elasticity  of  the  Divine  ordinances  than  the 
observance  of  the  passover,  in  which  so  much 
of  changed  detail  was  united  with  so  real 
and  so  unvarying  a  uniformity. 

Ver.  5. — And  they  kept  the  passover.  It 
is  a  question  which  inevitably  arises  here, 
how  they  obtained  a  sufficient  number  of 
lambs  for  tlie  requirement  of  so  many  people, 
and  how  they  were  slain  sacrificially  within 
the  appointed  time.  The  first  difficulty  does 
not  seem  serious  when  we  consider,  (1)  that 
kids  were  available  as  well  as  lambs  (see  on 
Exod.  xii.  3) ;  (2)  that  the  desert  tribes  would 
have  abundance  of  lambs  and  kids  for  sale  at 
this  season,  and  that  the  Israelites  certainly 
had  money  ;  (3)  that  in  view  of  their  speedy 
departure  they  would  be  disposed  to  kill  off 
the  young  of  their  own  flocks.  The  second 
difficulty  is  more  serious,  and  would  be  in- 
surmountable if  we  had  to  believe  that  the 
ritual  of  this  passover  was  the  same  which 
afterwards  prevailed.  Josephus  tellsus  ('  Bell. 
Jud.,'  vL  9,  3)  that  in  his  day  256,000 
lambs  were  slain  and  their  blood  sprinkled 
upon  the  altar  within  the  three  hours  "be- 
tween the  evenings."  At  that  time,  accord- 
ing to  the  same  authority,  a  lamb  was  shared 
by  ten,  and  often  by  as  many  as  twenty 
people.  The  number  of  males  who  would 
partake  of  the  paschal  meal  in  the  wilderness 
may  be  set  down  as  not  more  than  800,000. 
If  the  women  partook  of  it  at  all  (which  is  very 
doubtful ;  cf.  Exod.  xii.  44,  48),  they  would 
doubtless  content  themselves  with  the  scraps 
left  by  the  men.  Allowing  twenty  souls  to 
each  lamb,  the  number  required  would  be 
not  more  than  40,000.  It  is  obvious  at  once 
that  the  three  priests  could  not  possibly  kill 
40,000  lambs  in  three  hours,  much  less 
sprinkle  their  blood  upon  the  altar  ;  indeed 
the  same  may  be  said  for  10,000,  or  even 
5000,  especially  as,  they  could  not  have  ac- 
quired the  extreme  dexterity  and  despatch 
which  long  practice  taught  to  the  later  priests. 
Nor  is  it  satisfactory  to  reply  that  the  priests 
did  the  work  "  out  of  the  h.ind  of  the  Levites  " 
(2  Chron.  xxx.  16),  (1)  because  this  passover 
took  place  before  the  Levites  were  formally 
separated  for  the  service  of  God  and  of  the 
priests  (see  ch.  viii.  22)  ;  (2)  because  the 
smallness  of  the  space  about  the  altar  would 
not  allow  of  many  people  assisting ;  (3) 
because  the  actual  slaying  and  sprinkling, 
which  was  restricted  to  the  priests  (being 
distinctively  sacrificial  in  nature),  aie  the 
very  things  which  we  find  impossible  in  the 
time.  There  are  but  two  alternatiite  con- 
clusions, froni  one  or  other  of  which  there  is 
no  honest  escape  :  either  (a)  the  numbers  of 
the  people  are  greatly  exaggerated,  or  {b)  the 
titual  of  after  days  was  not  observed  on  this 
occasion.    As  to  la),  see  what  is  said  on  the 


whole  question  of  numbers  in  the  Intro- 
duction. As  to  (b),  it  must  be  borne  in 
mind  that  no  direction  whatever  had  been 
given,  as  far  as  we  know,  either  that  the 
lambs  must  be  slain  by  tlie  priests  only,  or 
that  their  blood  must  be  poured  upon  the 
altar.  If  the  Jews  were  left  to  follow  the 
original  institution  as  nearly  as  possible,  they 
would  have  killed  the  lambs'themselves,  and 
sprinkled  the  blood  around  the  doors  of  their 
tents.  It  is  true  that  according  to  the 
Levitical  ritual,  now  recently  put  into  use, 
all  other  animals  slain  in  sacrifice  (or  indeed 
for  food)  must  be  slain  at  the  tabernacle  by 
the  priest,  and  the  blood  sprixkled  on  the 
altar ;  and  it  is  true  that  this  general  rule 
was  afterwards  held  especially  binding  in 
the  case  of  the  passover.  But  there  is  nothing 
to  show  that  it  was  held  binding  then  :  the 
passover  had  been  ordained  before  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  Levitical  priesthood  and  law 
of  sacrifice  ;  and  it  might  very  well  have  been 
considered  that  it  retained  its  primal  character 
unaffected  by  subsequent  legislation,  and  that 
the  priesthood  of  the  people  (in  other  rites 
transferred  to  Aaron  and  his  sons)  was  re- 
called and  revived  in  the  case  of  this  special 
rite.  If  this  was  the  case  both  at  this  pass- 
over  and  at  that  under  Joshua,  it  is  easy 
enough  to  understand  why  the  later  practice 
was  so  entirely  different ;  the  neglect  or 
disuse  of  centuries  obliterated  the  tradition 
of  the  passover,  and  when  it  was  revived  by 
the  later  kings,  they  naturally  followed  the 
analogy  of  all  other  sacrifices,  and  the  appar- 
ently express  command  of  Levit.  xvii.  3^—6. 
They  could  not  indeed  obey  this  command  in 
their  daily  life,  but  they  could  and  did  obey 
it  in  the  striking  .and  typical  case  of  the 
paschal  feast. 

Ver.  6. — There  were  certain  men.  It  has 
been  supposed  by  many  that  |hese  men  must 
have  been  Mishael  and  Elizaphan,  who  had 
recently  (cf.  Exod.  xl.  17 ;  Levit.  ix.  1  ;  x.  4) 
been  defiled  by  burying  their  cousins  Nadab 
and  Abihu.  This,  however,  is  based  upon 
the  assumption  that  the  totals  given  in  Exod. 
xxxviii.  26  and  in  ch.  i.  46  are  really  inde- 
pendent, and  that  therefore  no  one  belonging 
to  any  other  tribe  than  that  of  Levi  had  died 
in  the  interval.  As  that  assumption  is  un- 
tenable (see  above  on  ch.  i.  46),  so  this 
"coincidence"  falls  to  the  ground.  We 
know  indeed  that  Mishael  and  Elizaphan 
were  defiled  at  this  time,  and  we  do  not 
know  that  any  one  else  was  ;  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  words  "  the  dead  body  of  a 
man  "  seem  to  point  to  a  single  corpse  only. 
Dead  body.  Hebrew,  nephesh,  as  in  ch.  v.  2  ; 
vi.  11,  and  other  places.  It  is  inexplicable 
how  this  word,  which  properly  means  "soul," 
should  have  come  to  be  used  of  a  corpse ; 
perhaps  it  is  an  additional  testimony  to  the 
complete  absence  from  Jewish  teaching  <rf 


74 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEKS. 


tea.  IX.  1—14. 


any  doctrine  of  aD  immortal  spirit.  The 
Septuagint  uses  ^lixv  here. 

Ver.  7. — Wherefore  are  we  kept  hack? 
The  direction  to  remove  from  the  camp  all 
that  were  defiled  by  the  dead  (ch.  v.  2)  had 
not  apparently  been  given  at  this  time,  nor 
was  there  any  express  command  that  such 
should  not  partake  of  the  passover,  for  Levit. 
vii  20  may  probably  refer  only  to  such  un- 
cleannesses  as  are  mentioned  in  Levit.  xv.  3 ; 
but  that  men  were  in  fact  considered  as  defiled 
by  contact  with  the  dead  is  clear  from  Levit. 
xxi.  1.  The  men,  therefore,  had  reason  for 
asking  why  they  were  excommunicated,  and 
Moses  for  refeiTing  the  matter  to  the  Divine 
decision. 

Ver.  10. — If  any  man  of  you  or  of  your 
posterity.  The  particular  case  of  these  men  is 
made  the  occasion  for  a  general  provision  for 
aU  succeeding  times.  Shall  be  unclean  by 
reason  of  a  dead  body,  or  be  in  a  journey. 
It  is  somewhat  strange  that  these  two  cases 
only  were  provided  for :  a  man  otherwise  un- 
clean (as,  e.  g.,  m  the  case  described  Levit. 
XV.  13),  even  if  actually  recovered,  was  unable 
to  take  advantage  of  the  little  passover. 
Probably  the  real  reason  of  it  is  to  be  found 
in  this,  that  both  the  far  journey  and  the 
burial  of  the  dead  would  presumably  be  works 
of  charity.  Afar  off.  This  word,  TifTO,  is 
one  of  ten  in  the  Pentateuch  distinguished 
in  the  Hebrew  Bibles  with  puncta  extraordin- 
aria,  for  some  unknown  and  probably  trifling 
reasons.  The  Rabbins  ruled  that  it  meant  a 
distance  of  fifteen  miles  or  more  from  the 
temple  at  sunrise  of  the  fourteenth  of  Abib. 

Ver.  11. —  The  fourteenth  day  of  the 
second  month.  The  interval  gave  ample  time 
to  return  from  any  ordinai-y  journey,  or  to  be 
purified  from  pollution  of  death.  It  was  in 
the  spirit  of  this  command,  though  not?  in 
the  letter  of  it,  that  Hezekiah  acted  (2  Chron. 
XXX.  2).  And  possibly  it  was  in  the  spirit  of 
this  command  that  our  Lord  acted  when  he 
ate  the  passover  by  anticipation  with  his  dis- 
ciples twenty-four  hours  before  the  proper 


time — at  which  time  he  was  himself  to  be  tha 
Lamb  slain.  With  nnleavened  bread  and 
bitter  herbs.  These  and  the  following  di- 
rections are  expressly  added  for  fear  lest  any 
should  think  that  the  little  passover  might 
be  celebrated  with  less  solemnity  and  with 
less  carefulness  than  the  great  passover. 

Ver.  12. — According  to  all  the  ordinances 
of  the  passover.  The  later  Jews  held  that 
this  passover  need  only  be  kept  for  one  day, 
and  that  leaven  need  not  be  put  away  from 
the  house.  But  this  was  a  clear  departure 
from  the  original  rule,  for  it  was  evidently 
intended  that  it  should  be  in  all  respects  a 
true  passover,  and  in  this  case  six  clear  days 
were  allowed  for  the  keeping  of  it  (see  on  ch. 
X.  11). 

Ver.  13. — But  the  man  that  is  clean,  and 
is  not  in  a  journey.  This  threat  was  added 
no  doubt  in  order  to  prevent  men  from  taking 
advantage  of  the  permission  to  keep  a  sup- 
plemental passover  in  order  to  suit  their  own 
convenience  or  interest.  Only  two  reasons 
could  absolve  a  man  from  the  absolute  neces- 
sity of  keeping  the  passover  at  the  due  sea- 
son, and  these  reasons  must  be  bond  fide, 
and  not  pretended.  Because  he  brought  not 
the  offering  of  the  Lord.  In  the  original 
institution  the  paschal  lamb  did  not  appear 
distinctly  in  the  character  of  an  ofl['ering 
made  to  God,  although  undoubtedly  it  was 
such.  It  was  rather  the  eating  of  the  lamb 
that  was  insisted  upon,  as  placing  the  par- 
taker in  communion  with  the  God  and  Church 
of  Israel,  and  so  in  a  state  of  salvation.  But 
after  the  law  of  sacrifices  had  been  elaborated, 
then  the  paschal  lamb,  though  prior  to  them 
all,  naturally  took  its  place  amongst  them  as 
the  greatest  of  them  all,  and  as  uniting  in 
itself  the  special  beauties  of  all. 

Ver.  14. — Te  shall  have  one  ordinance. 
This  is  repeated  from  Exod.  xiL  49  as  a  fur- 
ther warning  not  to  tamper  more  than  abso- 
lute necessity  required  with  the  unity,  either 
in  time  or  in  circumstance,  of  the  great 
national  rite. 


HOMILETICS 

Vers.  1 — 14. — The  paschal  feast.  In  the  keeping  of  the  passover  we  have,  under 
the  law,  what  the  celebrating  of  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  is  under 
the  gospel ;  for  it  was  the  nature  and  U!5e  of  that  to  show  the  Lord's  death  until  he 
came  the  first  time,  as  of  this  to  show  the  Lord's  death  until  he  come  the  second 
time.     Consider,  therefore — 

I.  That  it  was  the  will  of  God,  bpboiallt  declaeed,  that  all  Israel  should 

BE  partakers  thereof  ERE  THEY  LEFT  THE  HOLY  MOUNT  OP  CONSECRATION  AND  PLUNGED 

INTO  THE  DESERT  OF  WANDERINGS.  Even  SO  it  is  the  Will  of  God  that  all  his  people, 
when  they  have  been  taught  of  him,  should  be  partakers  of  "that  one  bread,"  and 
thereby  be  brought  into  closer  union  with  one  another  and  with  him  for  the  journey 
of  life  (John  vi.  66  ;  Acts  ii.  42  ;  1  Cor.  x.  17). 

II.  That  the  Israelites  kept  that  passover  under  difficulties,  little  drbam- 
INU  THAT  it  was  to  BE  THEIR  LAST  ;  for  only  Caleb  and  Joshua  survived  to  take  part 


Oft.  n.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  7ft 

in  the  next.  How  often  have  faithful  people  made  special  effort  to  join  in  keeping 
the  Christian  pasaover,  and  it  has  proved  to  be  their  last !  (Luke  xxii.  15 ;  1  Cor. 
V.  7). 

III.  That  the  passoveb  was  kept  "  according  to  all  the  kites  op  it,"  and  yet 

THEEE    WEBE    SOME    RITES    AND    CEREMONIES    WHICH    MUST    OP    NECESSITY    HAVE     BEEN 

altered  ;  but  this  did  not  mar  the  Divinely-ordered  uniformity.  Even  so  there  be 
things  in  the  Christian  passover  which  have  been  altered,  yet  if  the  alteration  have 
not  been  wilfully  nor  needlessly  made,  it  leaves  the  religious  identity  of  the  rite 
untouched. 

IV.  That  the  passoveb  was  eaten  in  the  wilderness,  as  in  Egypt  before,  and 
IN  Canaan  afterwards  (Josh.  v.  10),  on  the  eve  op  great  journeys  and  battles. 
Even  so  is  the  Christian  made  partaker  of  heavenly  food  that  he  may  be  stronger 
and  braver  for  the  journey  and  the  conflict  of  life  (cf .  1  Kings  xix.  7). 

V.  That  one  defiled  by  the  dead  could  not  join  in  the  passover.  So  he  that 
hath  suffered  in  soul  by  contact  with  the  spiritually  dead  cannot  be  partaker  of  the 
Lord's  Table  until  he  be  recovered  from  that  contagion  (cf.  1  Cor.  x.  21  ;  xi.  27 — 30). 

VI.  That  the  unclean,  and  they  that  were  apar  opp,  were-  nevertheless 

ADMITTED  TO  THE  PELLOWSHIP  OP  TEE  PASSOVEB   AS  SOON  AS  THET  WERE  CLEANSED  AND 

RETURNED.  Even  so  none  need  be  banished  from  the  communion  of  the  body  of 
Christ  because  he  is  unclean,  for  time  is  given  him  to  be  cleansed ;  nor  because  he 
is  afar  ofE,  for  time  is  given  him  to  return  (Mark  i.  41 ;  Luke  xv.  20  ;  James  iv.  8)  ; 
only  the  cleansing  and  the  returning  must  be  in  due  time,  and  not  too  late  (Matt. 
XXV.  10  h.  ;  Luke  xiii.  25  ;  2  Cor.  vi.  2). 

VII.  That  two  reasons  only,  and  they  of  unavoidable  necessity,  would 

ABSOLVE  ANY   ONE  FROM   THE  DUTY   OF    KEEPING  THE  PASSOVER   WITH  ALL  THE   PEOPLE. 

Even  so  no  light  excuses,  but  only  (1)  compulsory  absence  or  (2)  unworthiness  to 
approach,  will  avail  any  one  who  wilfully  neglects  the  invitation  of  Christ  to  his 
feast  (Luke  xiv.  24 ;  xxii.  19  6. ;  1  Cor.  xi.  26  6.). 

VIII.  That  it  was  again  and  again  declared  that  there  should  be  "one 

ORDINANCE  "    ONLY    POR    ALL    FROM   ALL   QUARTERS    AS   CONCERNED   THE    PASSOVER,    for 

it  was  the  ordinance  of  unity.  Even  so  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  is  above 
all  things  the  sacrament  of  unity  (1  Cor.  x.  17),  and  therefore  the  manner  of  it  is 
especially  declared  (1  Cor.  xi.  23,  and  the  three  Gospels). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  6 — 14. — A  communicant  in  Israel,  disabled  by  some  mischance  from  eating 
the  passover  an  the  right  day,  may  eat  it  a  month  after.  The  law  here  laid  down  is 
supplementary  to  the  law  of  the  passover  set  forth  at  large  in  Exod.  xii.  The  supple- 
ment, beside  being  of  some  interest  in  itself,  is  specially  important  on  account  of 
certain  general  principles  relative  to  God's  worship  which  come  into  view  in  it. 

I.  The  OCCASION  which  led  to  this  supplementary  direction.  From  Exod.  xii. 
25  and  xiii.  5  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  passover  was  not  intended  to  be  statedly 
observed  till  the  tribes  should  have  received  their  inheritance  in  Canaan ;  and  the 
inference  is  confirmed  by  the  circumstance  that  there  seems  to  have  been  no  celebra- 
tion of  the  passover  during  the  thirty-eight  years  between  the  departure  from  Sinai 
and  the  crossing  of  the  Jordan.  For  reasons  not  difEcult  to  understand,  the  first 
anniversary  of  the  night  of  deliverance,  since  it  found  the  people  still  encamped 
at  Sinai,  was  commanded  to  be  observed.  Hence  the  charge  vers.  1 — 5.  This, 
since  it  was,  in  some  sense,  the  first  of  all  the  regular  passovers,  was  ordained  to  be 
kept  with  great  solemnity.  All  the  greater  was  the  chagrin  felt  by  certain  men  of 
Israel  who,  on  account  of  a  mischance  which  had  befallcTi  them,  were  disabled  from 
taking  part  in  the  general  solemnity.  A  relative  or  neighbour  had  died  on  the  eve  of. 
the  feast.  They  had  not  shirked  the  duty  of  laying  out  and  burying  the  dead.  Thus 
they  were  ceremonially  unclean,  and  might  not  eat  the  passover.  It  seemed  hard  to 
be  debarred  from  the  joyous  rite,  especially  since  no  blame  attached  to  themselves 
in  the  matter.  Was  there  no  remedy  ?  They  brought  the  matter  before  Moses  and 
Aaron ;  Moses  brought  it  before  the  Lord,  with  the  result  to  be  presently  described. 

II.  The  law  fob  those  disabled  in  providence  prom  eating  the  passover  in  thb 


76  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [ch.  ix.  1—14. 

APPOINTED  SEASON  (vers.  10,  11).  1.  The  person  disabled  by  uncleanness  at  the  full 
moon  of  the  first  month  might  keep  the  feast  at  the  full  moon  of  the  second.  This 
■was  not  a  perfect  remedy.  The  passover  was  a  national  solemnity.  It  was  a  witness 
to  the  religious  unity  of  the  tribes.  It  was  designed  at  once  to  express  and  to  foster 
the  communion  of  the  whole  people  in  the  faith  and  worship  of  the  God  of  Abraham. 
These  very  attractive  aspects  of  the  ordinance  failed  to  come  into  view  when  the 
passover  was  observed  only  by  a  few  individuals,  and  on  another  than  the  appointed 
day.  However,  there  were  other  and  more  private  aspects  of  the  ordinance  to  which 
this  did  not  apply,  so  that  the  permission  to  keep  the  passover  in  the  second  month  was 
a  valuable  concession.  2.  The  concession  was  extended  not  only  to  persons  defiled  by 
the  dead,  but  to  all  who  might  be  defiled  from  any  cause  beyond  their  own  control.  For 
example,  if  a  man  happened  unavoidably  to  be  on  a  distant  journey  on  the  fourteenth 
day  of  the  first  month,  he  might  keep  the  passover  at  the  next  full  moon.  3.  The 
concession  was  expressly  extended  to  the  foreigner  as  well  as  to  the  bom  Israelite. 
It  ought  never  to  be  forgotten  that,  although  the  passover  was  so  emphatically  a 
national  feast,  provision  was  carefully  made,  from  the  first,  for  the  admission  of 
foreigners  to  it.(Exod.  xii.  48,  49).  Let  the  foreigner  accept  circumcision,  "  he  and 
all  his,"  and  he  is  entitled  to  sit  down  at  the  paschal  table,  as  a  communicant  in  the 
Hebrew  Church,  just  as  if  he  had  been  born  in  the  land.  The  Old  Testament  Church 
was  not  a  missionary  Church.  It  was  not  enjoined  to  preach  to  the  Gentiles  and  compel 
them  to  come  in.  But  if  a  Gentile  desired  to  come  in,  he  was  to  be  made  welcome. 
The  law  before  us,  besides  presupposing  the  right  of  the  proselyte  to  be  admitted, 
emphatically  declares  the  parity  of  right  which  was  to  be  accorded  him  on  his 
admission.  4.  Care  was  to  be  taken  not  to  abuse  the  concession.  Liberty  is  one 
thing  ;  license  is  another  and  very  different  thing  ;  yet  history  and  daily  experience 
bear  witness  that  the  two  are  apt  to  bs  confounded.  Many,  when  they  hear  liberty 
proclaimed,  think  that  license  is  to  reign.  See  how  carefully  this  is  guarded  against 
in  the  present  instance.  In  two  ways : — (1)  Wilful  neglect  to  observe  the  passover  in 
its  appointed  season  was  still  to  be  deemed  presumptuous  sin  (ver.  13) — a  warning 
which  the  habitual  neglecters  of  the  Lord's  Supper  would  do  well  to  lay  to  heart. 
We,  as  evangelical  Protestants,  believe  that  participation  in  the-Srfird's  Supper  is  not 
the  indispensable  means  of  communion  in  the  body  and  blood  of  the  Lord  ;  never- 
theless, we  hold  that  no  man  can  habitually  withdraw  himself  from  the  Lord's  Supper 
without  sin  and  loss.  (2)  The  supplementary  passover  was  not,  because  supple- 
mentary, to  be  a  passover  of  maimed  rites  (vers.  11,  12).  It  was  to  be  observed 
with  all  the  rites  ordained  for  the  great  festival  of  the  first  month.  With  this  law 
compare  the  history  of  Hezekiah's  passover  in  2  Chron.  xxx. 

III.  The  principle  which  lies  at  the  root  of  this  law  is  this,  namely,  that 
rigid  exactness  in  points  of  external  order  ought  to  be  waived  when  adherence  to  it 
would  hinder  the  edification  of  souls.  The  same  principle  was  laid  down  by  our 
Lord  in  reference  to  the  observance  of  the  day  of  rest  when  he  said,  "  The  sabbath 
was  made  for  man,  and  not  man  for  the  sabbath."  The  principle  must,  of  course,  be 
used  with  discretion.  It  was  dutiful  and  expedient  that  the  passover  should  be 
observed,  not  by  every  man  when  he  pleased,  but  on  the  anniversary  of  the  exodus,  and 
by  the  whole  congregation  at  once.  Nevertheless,  this  good  rule  was  not  to  defraud 
of  the  passover  those  disabled  from  keeping  it  on  the  right  day.  If  this  principle  was 
so  carefully  recognised  under  the  comparatively  servile  dispensation,  much  more 
ought  it  to  prevail  under  the  dispensation  of  evangelical  liberty.  Points  of  external 
order  are  not  to  be  despised,  especially  when  they  are  such  as  have  express  warrant 
of  Holy  Scripture.  The  wilful  contempt  of  them  may  amount  to  presumptuous  sin. 
Nevertheless,  the  edification  of  souls  must  ever  be  treated  as  the  paramount  consider- 
ation to  which  all  else  must  yield. — B. 

Vers.  1 — 14. — The  letter  and  the  spirit  of  the  law  of  the  passover.  We  learn  from 
this  narrative  certain  lessons  which  may  illustrate  the  relation  of  the  letter  to  the 
spirit  of  Divine  precepts  on  other  subjects  beside  the  passover. 

I.  The  letter  of  the  law  was  strikgent.  The  observance  of  the  feast  was 
binding,  even  under  inconvenient  circumstances  (ver.  6),  at  fixed  times  (ver.  3),  and 
with  prescribed  rites  (ver.  3).     No  trifling  allowed  (ver.  13).    Neglect  of  any  one 


CH.  re.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS.  77 

law  may  be  fatal  (James  ii.  10).  Yet  this  stringent  law  could  be  modified.  It  wa» 
flexible,  because  God  was  a  paternal  King,  and  not  a  despotic  martinet.  But  God 
alone  could  modify  the  law  (ver.  8),  or  condone  for  its  literal  non-observance  (e.  g, 
2  Chron.  xxx.  15. — 20).  Pro\'i  lion  was  made  for  disabilities  arising  from  (1) 
uncleanness,  contracted  unavoidably,  or  in  the  path  of  duty  (cf.  Ps.  ciii.  14);  or  (2) 
absence  from  home,  for  such  journeys  were  not  prohibited  because  the  passover  was 
near.    To  meet  such  cases — 

II.  The  spirit  op  the  lj>w  was  beneficent.  Neglect  was  not  sanctioned ;  it 
never  is.  Great  care  needed  lest,  while  claiming  liberty  to  set  aside  the  letter  of  the 
law  in  favour  of  the  spirit,  we  neglect  the  spirit  also  (apply,  e.  g.,  to  the  sanctification 
of  the  Lord's  day).  But  God  provided  a  substitute  for  the  literal  observance  (vers. 
9—12). 

Learn — 1.  The  laws  of  Christ  are  not  "grievous,"  but  may  not  be  trifled  with. 
A  difficulty  in  the  way  of  observing  some  law  may  arise  from  circumstances,  or 
character.  Illustrate,  the  Lord's  Supper.  In  the  early  history  of  some  of  the 
Polynesian  missions,  where  no  bread  or  "  fruit  of  the  vine  "  was  to  be  had,  the 
service  was  not  neglected  on  account  of  these  circumstances,  but  bread  fruit  and 
water,  or  other  beverage,  was  used.  If  the  hindrance  to  our  observance  should  arise 
from  any  "  uncleanness,"  we  need  not  wait  for  a  lengthened  process  of  purification, 
but  may  apply  to  our  cleansing  High  Priest  at  once  (John  xiii.  1 — 10).  2.  Precepts 
that  are  called  "positive"  mustnot  be  neglected  because  moral  precepts  are  observed. 
Illustrate  from  Matt.  v.  23,  24  (cf.  Matt,  xxiii.  23  ;  Deut.  iv.  2  ;  Ps.  cxix.  128). 
Christ  having  redeemed  us  unto  God  by  his  blood,  his  law  extends  to  every  depart- 
ment of  our  life. — P. 

Vor.^  14. — The  beneficent  aspect  of  the  law  of  Moses  towards  foreigners.  _  Judaism, 
according  to  the  "law  given  by  Moses,"  was  not  the  exclusive  and  repulsive  system 
that  many  have  imagined.  The  gate  into  Judaism,  through  circumcision,  &c.,  may 
seem  strait  to  us ;  hut  a  thorough  separation  from  the  corrupt  heathen  world  was  a 
necessity  and  a  blessing,  just  as  the  utter  renunciation  of  Hinduism  by  breaking  caste 
is  now.  Laws  relating  to  strangers  occupy  no  inconsiderable  place  in  the  legislation 
of  Moses.  These  laws  have  a  most  beneficent  aspect,  which  may  suggest  lessons 
regarding  our  duties  as  Christians  towards  aliens,  whether  of  blood  or  creed.  We  find 
precepts  recognising  for  the  strangers — 

I.  EQnALiTT  BEFORE  THE  LAW.  This  is  taught  in  our  text  and  in  several  other 
passages  (Exod.  xii.  49 ;  Levit.  xxiv.  22  ;  Numb.  xv.  15,  16,  29).  This  is  especially 
noticeable  in  regard  to  the  laws  of  the  sabbath  (Exod.  xx.  10;  xxiii.  12  ;  Deut.  v. 
14),  and  of  the  cities  of  refuge  (Numb.  xxxv.  15).  Hence  the  Israelites  were 
repeatedly  warned  against  oppressing  the  stranger  (Exod.  xxii.  21 ;  xxiii.  9),  though 
he  might  be  a  hired  servant,  at  the  mercy  of  his  employer  (Deut.  xxiv.  14,  15),  or  an 
Egyptian  (Deut.  xxiii.  7).  In  administering  these  laws  strict  impartiality  is  demanded 
of  the  judges  (Deut.  i.  16 ;  xxiv.  17).  Such  equality  is  recognised  under  the  laws  of 
Christian  England,  but  needs  to  be  most  carefully  guarded.  £.  g.  in  our  treatment 
of  coolies  or  other  coloured  people  in  our  colonies,  foreign  sailors  in  our  ports,  &c. 
Oppression  of  strafigers  one  great  crime  before  the  fall  of  the  Jewish  monarchy 
(Ezek.  xxii.  7,  29).  Ill-treatment  of  non-Christian  races  outside  its  borders  one  of 
England's  national  crimes  (Chinese  opium  traffic  ;  some  of  our  colonial  wars,  &o.). 

II.  A  CLAIM  ON  BENEVOLENCE.  Strangers  were  not  only  guarded  from  oppression, 
but  commended  to  the  love  of  the  Israelites.  See  precepts  in  Levit.  xix.  33,  34  , 
Deut.  X.  18,  19;  Levit.  xXv.  35,  blossoming  into  the  beautiful  flower,  "Thou  shalt 
love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself,"  which  our  Lord  plucks  from  its  hiding.-place  in 
Leviticus  and  exhibits  and  enforces  on  the  whole  world.  Hence  follow  the  precepts 
requiring  that  gleanings  be  left  for  the  strangers  (Levit.  xix.  10 ;  xxiii.  22),  and 
that  they  should  be  allowed  to  share  "  in  every  good  thing"  God  bestowed  on  Israel 
(Deut.  xiv.  29  ;  xvi.  11,  14 ;  xxvi.  11).  God  be  praised  for  all  the  philanthropic 
agencies  of  England  on  behalf  of  foreigners.  Let  us  see  that  our  personal  benefi- 
cence is  not  limited  by  race  or  creed  (Isa.  Iviii.  6 — 11,  &c.). 

III.  Invitations  to  national  and  personal  blessings.  Gentiles  were  welcomed 
to  all  privileges  of  Judaism  through  conformity  to  it«  laws.     They  could  enter  into 


n  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oh.  a.  1—14 

the  covenant  (Deut.  xxii.  10 — 13),  offer  sacrifices  (Levit.  xxii.  18),  and  keep  th« 
passover  (Exod.  xii.  43 — 49  :  Numb.  ix.  14).  And  it  was  required  that  they  be 
instructed  in  the  law  of  God  (Deut.  xxxi.  10 — 13,  read  in  the  light  of  Josh.  viii.  33 — 
35).  Having  all  these  privileges,  they  were  liable  to  the  same  punishments  as  the 
Israelites  (Levit.  xvii.  8,  12,  15;  xxiv.  16,  &c.).  We  need  not  wonder  that  the 
adhesion  and  conversion  of  strangers  was  anticipated  (1  Kings  viii.  41 — 43 ;  Isa. 
Ivi.  3,  &c.).  Apply  to  the  missionary  work  of  the  Church,  which  can  speak  to 
strangers  of  "  a  better  covenant,"  "Christ  our  passover,"  "grace  and  truth  by  Jesus 
Christ."— P. 

Vers.  1 — 5.— A  needed  reminder.  When  Jehovah  ordered  Moses  to  prepare  the 
Israelites  against  the  visit  in  which  he  smote  the  firstborn,  he  also  said  the  day  was 
to  be  kept  as  a  feast  through  all  their  generations  by  an  ordinance  for  ever.  And 
now  it  was  nearly  twelve  months  since  the  great  deliverance  by  which  in  haste  and 
pressure  Israel  departed  out  of  Egypt.  The  instructions  (Exod.  xii.)  are  plain  enough; 
but  God  deemed  it  needful,  as  the  anniversary  time  drew  near,  to  give  his  people  a 
special  reminder.  Why  wa»  it  needed?  1.  Because  much  had  happened  in  the 
interval.  At  the  time,  many  of  the  Israelites  would  say,  "  Surely  we  shall  never 
forget  this  wonderful  and  terrible  night  1 "  But  since  then  there  had  been  the 
crossing  of  the  Bed  Sea,  and  all  the  impressive  dealings  of  God  with  his  people  at 
Sinai.  One  event  retreats  as  another  comes  on.  Men  march  forward  into  the  future, 
and  great  events  are  soon  lost  to  view,  even  as  great  mountains  are  upon  a  journey. 

2.  Because  the  trials  of  the  ivildemess  made  many  long  for  the  comforts  of  Egypt. 
They  soon  forgot  the  hardsliips  of  bondage.  Less  than  two  months  was  enough  to 
make  them  wish  they  had  died  iii  Egypt,  by  the  flesli-pots,  where  they  had  bread  to 
the  full  (Exod.  xvi.).  What  then  of  forgetting  might  not  happen  in  twelve  months  ? 
Thus,  by  all  the  details  of  the  memorial  celebration,  God  would  have  them  bring  back 
lo  mind  distinctly  the  extraordinary  mercy  of  that  night  in  which  they  left  Egypt. 

3.  Because  an  emphatic  reminder  helped  to  distinguish  the  passover  from  other  great 
events.  The  smiting  of  the  firstborn  was  the  decisive  blow  to  PhUraoh.  It  liberated 
the  Israelites  from  their  thraldom.  All  previous  chastisements  led  up  to  it,  and  the 
wonders  of  the  Red  Sea  were  the  inevitable  sequence.  Above  all,  there  was  the  gi'eat 
typical  import  of  the  passover.  Christ  our  passover  is  slain  for  us  (1  Cor.  v.  7). 
What  the  passover  was  to  the  Israelites,  the  atoning  death  of  Jesus  is  to  us,  an  event 
which  there  is  a  solemn  obligation  on  us  to  recollect  and  commemorate  in  a  peculiar 
way.  4.  Because  there  was  need  of  preparation  and  care  in  the  celebration.  It  was 
on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  month  at  even  that  it  was  to  be  kept.  It  was  in  the 
first  month  of  the  second  year  that  the  Lord  spoke  to  Moses.  Hence  we  may  suppose 
that  he  saw  no  signs  of  preparation,  nothing  to  indicate  that  the  people  were  being 
stirred  by  the  thought  of  the  glorious  deliverance.  This  admonition  of  the  Lord  to 
Moses  may  be  applied  to  such  as,  admitting  the  permanent  obhgation  of  the  Lord's 
Supper,  yet  are  negligent  and  irregular  in  practising  the  obligation.  If  the  passover 
and  the  sprinkled  blood  of  the  lamb  demanded  a  yearly  memorial  from  Israel, 
even  more  does  the  sprinkled  blood  of  Christ  demand  a  regular  commemoration.  He 
seems  to  have  provided  for  our  naturally  forgetful  ways  in  sajdng,  "  Do  this  in 
remembrance  of  me." — Y. 

Vers.  6 — 13. — A  difficulty  removed.  I.  The  difficulty  stated.  Certain  men, 
ceremonially  unclean,  could  not  partake  of  the  passover  (ch.  v.  1 — 4).  One  ceremonial 
observance,  therefore,  might  clash  with  another.  No  one  could  with  certainty  be 
clean  at  the  passover  time.  Hence  we  see  how  all  ceremonial  is  purely  subordinate 
to  higher  considejatioiis.  If  one  ceremonial  obligation  could  interfere  with  another, 
how  clear  that  the  claims  of  justice,  mercy,  and  necessity,  rise  above  ceremony 
altogether  (Matt.  xii.  1 — 8 ;  xv.  1—6).  The  very  existence  of  such  a  difficulty 
showed  that  rites  and  ceremonies  were  only  for  a  time.  The  distinction  of  clean  and 
unclean  is  gone  now.  There  is  no  more  uncleanness  in  the  leper,  in  the  mother  with 
her  new-born  ofEspring,  in  the  attendant  on  the  dead.  We  have  to  guard  against  a 
deeper  than  ceremonial  uncleanness.  "  Let  a  man  examine  himself,  and  so  let  him 
eat  of  that  bread  and  drink  of  that  cup  "  (Matt.  xv.  18—20 ;  1  Cor.  li.  28 ;  2  Cor 
▼ii.  1). 


CH.  tt.  16—23.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


T» 


II.  How  THE  DIFFICULTY  WAS  KEMOVED.  Moses  IS  coDsulted,  and  he  consults  God. 
The  example  of  Moses  in  this  matter  needs  our  study  and  imitation.  God  will  leave 
none  of  his  servants  in  doubt  if  they  only  truly  seek  to  him,  and  lean  not  to  their  own 
understanding.  In  God's  answer  notice — 1.  His  appreciation  of  the  difficulty. 
Ceremonial  unoleanness  was  a  very  serious  thing,  as  being  the  type  of  the  unclean 
heart.  To  keep  these  men  back  from  the  passover  was  not  the  act  of  ecclesiastical 
martinets,  God  himself  being  witness.  2.  The  duty  that  cannot  be  done  to-day  may 
he  done  to-morrow.  We  should  take  care  that  what  has  to  be  deferred  is  only 
deferred.  Just  because  the  passover  was  too  sacred  to  be  touched  by  unclean  hands, 
it  was  too  sacred  to  be  passed  over  altogether.  3.  The  removal  of  one  difficulty  gives 
an  opportunity  for  removing  another.  Ceremonial  observances  were  regulated  with 
regard  to  the  claims  of  ordinary  life.  "  If  a  man  be  in  a  journey  afar  ofi."  He  did 
not  say  that  every  man  was  bound  to  be  home  that  day,  at  whatever  cost.  God 
makes  allowance  for  the  urgency  of  a  man's  private  affairs.  4.  Ood's  consideration 
for  these  real  difficulties  made  the  observance  all  the  more  important  where  such 
difficulties  did  not  exist.  God  listens  to  reasons ;  he  will  see  them,  even  when  they 
are  not  expressed ;  but  mere  excuses,  in  which  men's  lips  are  so  fruitful,  he  cannot 
tolerate.  If  we  are  prevented  fi'om  joining  the  assembly  for  worship,  or  approaching 
the  Lord's  table,  let  us  be  quite  sure  that  our  reason  is  sound,  based  in  conscience  and 
not  in  self-will,  not  a  mere  pretext  for  indolpnce  and  uiispirituality.  Where  the 
heart  is  right  towards  God,  and  an  obedient  spirit  towards  all  his  commandments,  he 
will  take  every  difficulty  away. — Y. 


EXPOSITION 


The  signals  or  God  (vera.  16  —  23). 
Ver.  15. — On  the  day  that  the  tabernacle 
was  reared  up.  Here  we  are  sent  back 
again  to  the  great  day  of  Israel's  sojourn  at 
Sinai,  when  God  took  visible  possession  of 
his  dwelling  in  the  midst  of  them  (Exod.  xl. 
84).  Everything  after  that  was  but  pre- 
paratory to  the  approaching  departure,  and 
therefore  is  narrated  not  in  any  order  of 
time,  but  either  as  it  referred  back  to  the 
first  day  of  the  first  month,  or  forward  to 
the  twentieth  day  of  the  second  month. 
The  cloud  coveced  the  tabernacle,  namely, 
the  tent  of  the  testimony.  The  testimony 
was  the  decalogue  written  on  the  two  tables 
of  stone,  and  enshrined  within  the  ark,  the 
moral  law  which  lay  at  the  heart  of  Judaism. 
The  tent  of  the  testimony  was  the  holy  of 
holies  in  which  the  ark  dwelt  (see  on  ch.  x. 
11  ;  xviii.  2).  The  exact  meaning  of  the 
woidB  n"JJJn  ^nS^  tSfP  is  disputed,  or 
rather  the  significance  of  the  /,  with  which 
the  phrase  "tent  of  the  testimony"  is  ap- 
pended to  the  word  "tabernacle"  (dwell- 
ing). Some  take  it  as  equivalent  in  con- 
struction to  the  genitive,  "  the  dwelling  of 
the  tent  of  the  testimony  ; "  in  which  case 
it  would  simply  mean  that  the  cloud  covered 
the  whole  tabernacle,  the  mishcan  which 
enveloped  and  enclosed  the  ohel,  which 
again  enshrined  the  ark  and  the  testimony. 
Others  take  ?  here  in  the  sense  of  "at"  or 
"  towards,"  aindread,  "  covered  the  dwelling, 
towards  the  tent  of  the  testimony,"  i.  e.  over 
that  part  of  it  in  which  the  testimony  was 


kept.  Apart  from  the  strict  grammatical 
qiiestion,  the  comparison  of  other  passages 
cited  (especially  Exod.  xl.  34)  seems  in 
favour  of  the  first  interpretation,  and  so 
apparently  the  Septuagint  and  the  Targums. 

Ver.  16.— So  It  was  alway.  This  super- 
natural phenomenon  was  not  transitory,  like 
the  glory-cloud  within  the  tabernacle  (Exod. 
xl.  35  ;  cf  1  Kings  viii.  10),  but  permanent, 
as  long  at  least  as  the  Israelites  were  in  the 
wilderness. 

Ver.  17. — When  the  cloud  was  taken  up. 
This  verse  and  the  following  to  the  end  of 
the  chapter  are  an  amplification  of  Exod.  xL 
36—38  (cf  Exod.  xiii.  21,  22;  Neh.  ix. 
12  ;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  14).  It  would  appear  from 
Exod.  xiii.  21  that  there  was  nothing  new 
in  the  fact  of  the  cloudy  fiery  pillar  directing 
the  movements  of  the  host,  but  only  in  the 
fact  of  its  resting  on  the  tabernacle  when  in 
repose.  In  the  place  where  the  cloud  abode, 
or  "came  down."  tgL"'.  As  the  tabernacle 
was  taken  all  to  pieces,  and  its  portions 
widely  separated  on  the  march,  the  cloud 
could  not  rest  upon  it  as  a  signal  for  halting. 
We  must  probably  picture  to  ourselves  the 
cloud  rising  to  some  considerable  height  when 
it  was  "  taken  up,"  so  as  to  be  visible  fora 
great  distance,  and  as  settling  down  again 
over  the  spot  where  the  tabernacle  was  to  be 
set  up.  In  this  way  the  signals  given  by  the 
cloud  would  be  immediately  perceived  by  a 
vast  multitude. 

Ver.  19. — Tarried  long.  Hebrew,  H'lN, 
"  to  prolong,"  i.  «.  the  resting.  The  Septua- 
gint has  t^eXicqrai  .  ,  tijiipai  irXiiovs. 


80 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS. 


[CH.  IX.  15—23. 


Ter.  20.— And  so  it  was.  Eather,  "did 
It  happen  that."  I^S  B^!1,  hypothetical 
clause  introducing  several  other  eases  which 
actually  occurred,  and  by  which  their  perfect 
obedience  was  proTed. 

Ver.  21. — ^From  even  unto  the  morning. 
Allowing  but  a  single  night's  rest. 

Ter.  22.— Or  a  year.  Rather,  "days" 
{yamim) :  an  undefined  period  (Gen.  iv.  3  ; 
Jd.  4),  often  equivalent  to  a  year  (Levit.  xxv. 
29).     It  is  not  known  whether  or  on  what 


occasion  the  Israelites  actually  remained  in 
camp  for  a  year.  But  it  is  evident  that  this 
passage  must  have  been  written  after  the 
wanderings  were  over,  because  it  is  a  kind  ol 
retrospect  of  the  whole  period  as  regards  one 
important  feature  of  it.  It  may  of  course 
have  been  added  here  by  the  hand  of  Moses 
on  the  eve  of  entry  upon  the  promised  land ; 
or  it  may  have  been  added  by  a  later  hand, 
perhaps  that  of  Ezra  when  he  revised  these 
books  (see  the  Introduction). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  15 — 23. — Divine  guidance.  In  this  section  we  have,  spiritually,  the 
Divine  guidance  of  the  faithful  through  the  wilderness  of  this  life.  Consider, 
therefore — 

I.  That  the  Theophant,  or  Divine  appearance  upon  the  tabernacle,  was  as  a 
CLOUD  BT.  DAT  AND  AS  FIRE  BY  NIGHT.  Even  SO  IS  the  Lord  unto  his  people  both 
shelt*  and  illumination, — shade  that  they  faint  not,  light  that  they  wander  not 
astray  (Ps.  xxvii.  1 ;  xxxvi.  9 ;  cxzi.  6  ;  Isa.  xxv.  4 ;  Matt.  xi.  29 ;  John  viii.  12). 

II.  That  thb  cloud  was  upon  the  tabernacle  of  witness,  without,  and  yet  in 

A  manner  connected  with   thb  "  TESTIMONY  "  ENGRAVEN  UPON  THB  TABLES   OF  BTONE. 

Even  so  the  comfort  and  illumination  of  the  faithful,  albeit  not  of  themselves  but  of 
God,  are  yet  vitally  connected  with  the  law  of  holiness  which  is  enshrined  in  their 
hearts  (John  xiv.  16,  23 ;  Heb.  xii.  14). 

III.  That  this  Theophany  was  the  infallible  guide  to  their  movements, 
WHETHER  TO  REST  OR  TO  ADVANCE.  Bven  SO  the  Lord  himself,  even  God  made 
manifest  in  Christ,  is  our  only  guide  along  the  way  to  heaven  (Ps.  xlviii.  14;  Lak« 
i.  79 ;  John  xxi.  22  6. ;  1  Thess.  iii.  11). 

IV.  That  the  behaviour  of  the  cloud  was  apparently  arbitrary,  sometimes 
linqeeinq  long  as  though  it  had  forgotten  how  to  move,  sometimes  hastening  on 
without  rest.  Even  so  the  Divine  guidance,  whether  of  the  Church  or  of  the 
individual,  is  often  unintelligible  and  sometimes  apparently  perverse :  how  unequal 
are  the  advances  of  the  Church,  or  of  the  soul,  towards  jjierfection  (John  xiii.  7)  : 
what  need  of  (1)  patience,  and  (2)  preparedness  (Luke  ix.  69,  sq.  ;  xii.  36 ;  xxi. 
19 ;  Eph.  vi.  15 ;  Rev.  xiii.  10  b.). 

V.  That  the  people  were  strictly  obedient  in  this,  that  they  journeyed  not 

EXCEPT    by   the   direction   OF   THE   CLOUD,  BECAUSE   THEY  FEARED  TO   BE  WITHOUT   IT. 

Even  SO  the  faithful  will  follow  him  that  leadeth  them  as  obediently  as  they  can, 
because  away  from  him  and  his  guidance  they  would  neither  be  able  to  endure,  nor 
to  progress  (John  vi.  68  ;  x.  4 ;  xiii.  37 ;  xiv.  6). 

VI.  That  when  once,  and  only  once,  they  presumed  to  go  on  when  the  cloud 
BID  THEM  not,  THEY  MET  DISASTROUS  DEFEAT  (ch.  xiv.  44,  45).  Even  80  if  any  will 
presume  to  go  beyond  the  command  and  permission  of  his  Lord  (even  in  zeal)  he 
will  be  overthrown  of  Satan  (cf.  Luke  xxii.  56  6.  sq. ;  1  Cor.  vii.  5  6.), 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Vers.  16 — 23. — The  guiding  pillar  of  cloud  and  flame.  This  pillar  served  more 
purposes  than  one ;  but  without  doubt  the  purpose  noted  here  by  Moses  himself  wag 
that  principally  intended.  It  was  the  signal  by  which  the  Lord  guided  the  march 
of  the  tribes  (Neh.  ix.  12,  19 ;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  14).  Some  such  signal  was  absolutely 
necessary.  To  direct  the  march  of  a  nation  through  the  wilderness  was  no  easy 
matter.  When  Alexander  the  Great  led  his  array  across  the  wide  levels  of  Babylonia 
he  caused  a  grating  filled  with  a  blazing  fire  to  be  borne  aloft  on  a  long  pole,  that  its 
smoke  might  guide  the  march  by  day,  and  its  fire  by  night.  A  similar  device  ia 
constantly  made  use  of  by  the  caravans  which  make  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca.  The 
march  of  the  tribes  from  Egypt  had  the  Lord  himself  for  its  Guide,  and  the  cloud 


CH.  IX.  16—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  81 

of  his  presence  showed  the  way.  No  feature  of  the  long  march  has  more  deeply 
impressed  itself  on  the  imagination  of  the  Church  than  this  guiding  pillar.  It  has  been 
instinctively  accepted  as  a  sign  in  which  we  too  may  claim  an  interest.  For  are  not 
we  also,  as  truly  as  the  Church  in  the  wilderness,  making  the  journey  from  the  land 
of  bondage  to  the  promised  rest  ?  Is  not  our  life  a  wilderness  journey ;  a  march 
along  a  path  we  never  trod  before?  The  forty  years'  wanderings  being  thus  a 
parable  of  our  life  on  earth,  may  we  not  warrantably  see  in  the  pillar  of  the  cloud 
a  token  of  certain  happy  conditions  of  the  journey  which  it  is  the  business  of  faith  to 
apprehend  ? 

I.  Observe  that  the  children  of  Israel  had  theib  eodte  determined  fob  them.  It 
was  the  hand  of  God  which  chalked  out  the  strangely  circuitous  line  of  their  march  ; 
which  measured  the  several  stages ;  which  fixed  upon  the  halting-places ;  and 
determined  the  length  of  the  stay  at  each.  "  At  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  they 
rested,  and  at  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  they  journeyed."  No  doubt  there  still 
remained  large  scope  for  the  exercise  of  judgment  on  the  part  of  leaders  so  familiar 
with  the  desert  as  Moses  and  Hobab.  There  were  a  thousand  details  to  care  for. 
But  the  general  fact  remains,  and  is  noted  with  extreme  care  in  the  history,  that — so 
far  as  regards  the  line  of  march  and  the  successive  stages — ^the  ordering  of  the 
journey  from  first  to  last  was  by  tne  Lord.  It  would  not  be  difficult  to  prove  that  our 
route  also  is  determined  for  us.  God  has  determined  our  appointed  times,  and  the 
bounds  of  our  habitation  (Acts  xvii.  26).  The  mapping  out  of  our  lives  is  his  doing 
This,  I  say,  is  capable  of  proof.  Yet  I  should  imagine  that,  to  such  as  have  been 
reasonably  careful  to  observe  their  own  course,  no  formal  array  of  evidence  will  be 
needed.  They  know  how  often  their  own  plans  and  those  of  friends  have  been  upset, 
and  the  whole  circumstances  of  their  lives  arranged  quite  otherwise  than  they  ever 
contemplated,  and  yet  with  a  most  wise  and  considerate  regard  for  their  good.  What 
then?  (1)  Do  not  forget  to  give  God  the  glory.  Acknowledge  his  overruling 
hand  (Ps.  cvii.  43).  Many  forget  to  do  this  ;  and  accordingly  they  learn  nothing 
of  his  mind,  even  when  his  providence  speaks  most  plainly.  A  thing  dishonouring  to 
God  and  entailing  great  loss  to  them.  (2)  Thankfully  commit  your  way  to  him  for 
the  time  to  come. 

II.  The  Lord  not  only  determined  the  route  of  the  tribes  but  gave  them  A  visible 
SIGN  of  his  guidance.  Here,  it  may  be  supposed,  the  parallel  fails,  and  we  must  resign 
ourselves  to  a  more  uncertain  and  precarious  guidance  than  the  tribes  enjoyed.  But 
it  is  not  so.  For  the  guiding  pillar  in  the  wilderness  was  meant  for  the  comfort  of 
tho  Church  in  all  times.  Eemember  the  principle  laid  down  by  the  apostle  in  1  Oor. 
X.  11.  The  moving  cloud  was  an  "ensample"  or  type  which  did  not  cease  to  speak 
when  it  disappeared  from  view  as  the  tribes  entered  the  land.  To  faith  it  continues 
still  to  attest  the  Lord's  presence  and  guiding  wisdom.  The  Divine  guidance  was  not 
more  patent  in  the  desert  to  the  sight  of  the  tribes  than  it  is  this  day  to  the  faith  of 
the  Church.  "  Thy  rod  and  thy  stafE  they  comfort  me."  Patent  to  faith  I  That 
saying  lays  bare  the  difficulty  of  which  we  complain.  A  visible  guide — every  one  can 
appreciate  that.  An  invisible  guide,  discerned  only  by  the  mind,  or  rather  by  faith 
alone — that  is  too  shadowy,  intangible,  precarious.  So  men  are  apt  to  judge.  But 
without  reason.  Arduous  our  faith  certainly  is.  But  precarious,  barren,  impotent  to 
sustain  and  comfort,  it  certainly  is  not.  God's  presence  visible  to  the  eye  availed  to 
guide  and  cheer  the  tribes  in  the  wilderness  ;  but  God's  presence  seen  by  faith  has 
availed  much  more  to  guide  and  cheer  the  Church  of  Christ  these  nineteen  centuries. 
To  walk  by  faith  is  the  achievement  of  the  Church's  maturity.  To  walk  by  sight 
belonged  to  the  Church's  childhood.  And  we  can  trace  all  through  the  Scripture  a 
gradual  weaning  of  the  Church  from  the  one,  and  a  gradual  training  of  it  to  the  other. 
In  the  wilderness  the  Church's  weakness  was  comforted  with  the  pillar  of  cloud  and 
&e  towering  high  in  the  sight  of  the  whole  camp :  during  the  time  of  the  first  temple 
the  cloud  was  seen  only  within  the  holy  place:  during  the  period  of  the  second 
temple  it  was  quite  withdrawn.  Yet  Ezra  and  his  company  made  the  journey  as 
safely  as  Moses  and  the  tribes ;  and  the  glory  of  the  latter  house  was  greater  than  of 
the  former.  "  He  hath  said,  I  will  never  leave  thee ;  so  that  we  may  boldly  say,  I 
will  not  fear." — B. 

NUUBEBB.  • 


82  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [ch.  ix.  16— 2a 

Ver.  23. — God!s  ceaseless  providence  a  motive  to  prompt  obedience.  God's  presence 
with  Israel  was  perpetual  (Exod.  iii.  12 ;  xiii.  17 — 18).  The  sign  of  it  in  the  cloud 
was  given  as  soon,  and  was  continued  as  long,  as  it  was  needed  (Exod.  xiiL  21,  22  ; 
xl.  38).  God's  active,  providential  presence  was — I.  A  soubcb  of  safety;  II.  A 
GROUND  OF  FAITH ;  and  therefore.  III.  A  motive  to  obedience. 

I.  The  cloud  (1)  led  them  the  safest  way  (Exod.  xiii.  17).  (2)  Ensured  protection 
from  foes  when  near  at  hand  (Exod.  xiv.  19,  20,  24).  (3)  Gave  light  on  the  camp  in 
moonless  nights  (Neh.  ix.  19).  (4)  Was  a  pledge  of  safety  to  sinners,  as  it  rested  on 
the  mercy-seat  (Levit.  xvi.  2).  This  visible  cloud  a  symbol  of  protection  by  an 
invisible  God  (Isa.  iv.  6).  Illustrations,  bird  and  young  (Ruth  ii.  12 ;  Ps.  xvii.  8 ; 
xoi.  4).  father  carrying  his  child  by  day  (Deut.  i.  31),  and  watching  by  him  at  night 
(Ps.  cxxi).     There  is  safety  for  sinners  not  away  from  God  but  in  God  (Ps.  cxliii.  2, 9). 

II.  God  showed  himself  in  the  cloud  for  the  very  purpose  of  guiding.  He  took 
the  lesponsibility  out  of  the  hands  of  the  people  and  Moses  that  they  might  have  the 
privilege  of  trusting  (Exod.  xxxiii.  9 — 17  ;  Deut.  i.  33).  Such  a  guiding  presence  we 
may  enjoy  by  the  aid  of  God's  written  counsels,  providential  acts,  and  inward 
monitions  (Ps.  xxv.  4,  5,  9,  14).  See  how  these  three  are  combined  in  the  narrative 
(Acts  viii.  26—35). 

III.  Ver.  23  is  very  emphatic.  They  obeyed  even  if  at  times  the  journey  was  very 
arduous  (Numb.  xxi.  4),  or  the  halt  very  tedious  (ver.  22),  or  the  start  was  sudden,  as 
when  a  midnight  alarm  of  the  trumpets  was  a  sign  that  the  cloud  had  begun  to  move 
(ver.  21).  Hence  we  learn  (1)  not  to  take  for  granted  that  any  place  is  our  rest  (Job 
xxix.  18 ;  Micah  ii.  10).  (2)  To  be  willing  to  go  to  the  wilderness  with  God,  rather 
than  to  stay  in  the  choicest  paradise  without  God.  (3)  To  be  willing  to  endure,  at 
God's  bidding,  protracted  toil  or  enforced  inactivity.  (4)  To  be  ready  at  any  time  to 
strike  our  tent  and  go  home.  Thus  waiting  on  God  and  waiting  for  God,  we  are 
safely  led,  and  have  the  rest  of  trustful  obedience  (Ps.  v.  11,  12;  xlviii.  14; 
Ixxxiv,  11,12).— P. 

Vers.  15 — 23. — The  cloud  upon  the  tdbemacle.  There  is  a  fuller  account  of 
the  rearing  of  the  tabernacle  and  the  descent  of  the  cloud  upon  it  in  Exod.  xl. 
Note— 

I.  The  connection  of  this  cloud  with  past  experiences.  It  is  spoken  of  as  "  the 
cloud  " — something,  therefore,  already  known.  It  was  known  as  associated  with  the 
glorious  doings  of  Jehovah  in  the  midst  of  the  people.  A  remembrancer  of  the, 
perilous  march,  with  the  Red  Sea  before  and  the  Egyptians  behind,  when  he  who 
made  his  presence  known  by  the  pillar  of  cloud  so  gloriously  delivered  his  people 
and  overwhelmed  their  enemies  (Exod.  xiv.  19).  A  remembrancer  of  the  provided 
manna,  when,  after  God  had  promised  it,  the  people  looked  toward  the  wilderness, 
and  behold,  the  glory  of  the  Lord  appeared  in  the  cloud  (Exod.  xvi.  10).  A  remem- 
brancer, again,  of  the  solemn  waiting  upon  Jehovah's  will  at  Sinai  (Exbd.  xix.  9 ;  xxiv. 
15 — 18).  Compare  with  these  experiences  under  the  law  the  great  and  abiding 
experience  under  the  gospel.  "  The  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us  (and 
we  beheld  his  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father)  full  of  grace 
and  truth  "  (John  i.  14).  He  who  afterwards  tabernacled  in  the  flesh,  made  his  glory 
to  rest  on  the  tabernacle  in  the  wilderness.  When  Jesus  came,  God  showed  his  favour 
resting  not  only  on  the  Israelites,  but  on  all  mankind. 

II.  The  connection  of  this  cloud  with  obeyed  commandments.  The  clouvl  that 
had  hitherto  rested  on  Sinai  now  came  down  on  the  tabernacle.  This  showed 
Jehovah's  approval  of  the  tabernacle.  All  had  been  fashictned  according  to  the 
pattern  in  the  mount.  The  tabernacle  and  the  holy  place,  themselves  made  of  perisj.- 
able  materials,  were  nevertheless  typically  perfect.  They  were  not  inspired  by  tLe 
invention  of  men,  but  by  the  revelation  of  God.  God  will  give  indubitable  signs  of 
approval  when  we  are  doing  things  according  to  his  will.  This  tabernacle  and  its 
contents  were  the  types  of  the  truths,  duties,  and  privilege  of  the  gospel,  and  only 
as  we  receive  the  truths,  practise  the  duties,  and  employ  the  privileges,  shall  we  have 
the  glory  of  God  resting  upon  us.  Until  that  time  we  come  short  of  the  glory  of 
God.  We  may  talk  as  we  like  about  the  glorious  achievements  of  human  thought, 
making  our  little  clouds  and  fires  about  the  earth,  and  calling  them  immortal  asii 


OK.  n.  16—23.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


a 


imperishable,  but  God  will  approve  no  man  until  his  life  is  ordered  in  all  things  by 
the  requirements  of  the  gospel. 

IIL  The  cloud  so  appearing  was  a  proof  op  God's  pavoub,  visible  to  all  and 
APPRECIABLE  BY  THEM.  All  Israel  could  see  the  tabernacle  and  the  cloud.  God  had 
told  his  people  they  were  not  to  make  any  graven  image,  or  likeness  of  any  created 
thing,  but  they  found  the  first  and  second  commandments  very  hard  to  obey.  They 
hankered  after  something  they  could  see.  The  idolatries  of  Egypt  had  infected  them, 
and  even  within  sight  of  Sinai  they  made  a  golden  calf,  for  which  gross  transgression 
the  Lord  terribly  plagued  them.  Nevertheless,  though  there  is  no  material  or  shape 
on  earth  fit  to  indicate  Jehovah,  he  will  minister  to  human  weakness,  remembering 
that  we  are  dust,  and  he  gives  the  glory-cloud  for  all  to  see.  What  a  help  to  faith  I 
What  a  warning  to  unbelief  I  What  mercy  amid  severity  I  So  God,  whom  no  man 
hath  seen  or  can  see,  becomes  God  manifest  in  the  flesh.  He  who  has  seen  the  Son 
has  seen  the  Father. 

ly.  Tub  cloud  so  apfbahinq,  varied  in  its  appearance,  accobdino  to  human 
NECESSITY.  There  was  a  cloud  by  day,  and  the  appearance  of  fire  by  night.  We 
need  not  suppose  any  change  in  the  cloud  itself  as  day  slipt  into  night,  and  night 
back  again  into  day.  As  darkness  fell  upon  the  scene  the  fiery  element  in  the  cloud 
became  more  noticeable  and  valuable.  So  there  is  encouragement  for  wandering  and 
bewildered  souls.  The  darker  life  becomes,  and  the  more  perplexing  our  path,  the 
more  manifest  becomes  the  presence  of  God.  During  the  days  of  a  man's  content 
with  natural  possessions  and  resources,  when  the  sunshine  of  nature  is  falling  on  his 
life,  then  the  cloud  of  God's  providence  appears,  but  let  the  night  of  spiritual  distress, 
the  great  difBculties  of  sin,  and  death,  and  eternity  darken  the  soul,  then  the  bright, 
conspicuous  fires  of  grace  at  once  appear. 

V.  The  cloud  by  its  movements  became  an  infallible  guide.  Thus  Jehovah 
showed  that  he,  the  invisible  one,  was  the  leader  of  the  people.  The  resting  and  the 
moving  cloud  meant  the  resting  and  the  moving  people.  It  was  ever  with  them  to 
point  the  way.  God's  goodness  does  not  pass  away  as  the  morning  cloud  and  the 
early  dew.  The  cloud  said  plainly,  "Follow  me."  So  Jesus  says,  "Follow  me," 
reiterating,  emphasizing,  and  illustrating  the  command.  If  we  are  ever  to  reach  the 
rest  that  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God,  it  must  be  by  acting  towards  Jefius  as  the 
Israelites  did  towards  the  cloud  in  the  wilderness  (Deut.  xxxii.  10 — 12  ;  2  Chron.  ▼. 
13;  Ps.  xliii.  3;  Isa.  iv.  6;  xlix.  10).— Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  X. 

The  silver  trumpets  (vers.  1 — 10).  Ver. 
1. — And  the  Lord  spake.  The  command  to 
make  the  silver  trumpets  is  introduced  here, 
because  one  principal  use  of  them  was  con- 
nected with  the  order  of  march.  It  does  not 
necessarily  follow  that  the  command  was 
actually  given  exactly  at  this  time,  or  that 
all  the  different  directions  for  use  formed 
part  of  one  communication.  They  may  have 
been  gathered  together  for  convenience'  sake. 
See  the  Introduction  on  this  subject.  It  is, 
however,  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  this  use 
of  trumpets  has  been  anticipated  in  Levit. 
XXV.  9,  or  elsewhere,  for  the  "trumpets" 
there  mentioned  were  altogether  different  in 
shape,  as  in  material 

Ver.  2.— Make  thee  two  trumpets.  He- 
brew, khatsotserah.  From  the  testimony  of 
Josephus,  from  the  representation  on  the  arch 
of  Titus,  and  from  a  comparison  of  ancient 
Bgyptiau  trumpets,  it  is  clear  that  these 


trumpets  were  straight,  long,  and  narrow, 
with  an  expanded  mouth.  The  shophS/r,  or 
trumpet  of  the  Jubilee,  on  the  other  hand, 
was  a  buccina  or  comet,  either  made  of  a 
ram's  horn,  or  shaped  like  one.  Of  a  whole 
piece.  Eather,  "of  beaten  work."  Hebrew, 
milcshah  (see  on  Exod.  xxv.  18).  Septuagint, 
iXar&g  iroirtauQ  aiiTuQ.  Probably  they  were 
made  of  a  single  plate  of  silver  beaten  out 
into  the  required  shape,  which  was  very 
simple. 

Ver.  8. — When  they  shall  Wow  with 
them,  i.  e.  with  both  of  them.  All  the  as- 
sembly, i.  e.  by  their  natural  or  customary 
representatives. 

Ver.  5. — When  ye  blow  an  alarm.  Hebrew, 
n^-njjl.  This  seems  to  signify  a  continuous 
peal,  easily  distinguished,  wherever  audible, 
from  the  blowing  m  short,  sharp  tones  (He- 
brew, V!^Pi)  mentioned  below,  ver.  7.    The 

peal  of  alarm  was  to  be  blown — D^'JUZIQ?  — 
"for  their  breaking  up" — for  that  purpona, 
a2 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS. 


[oh.  X.  1—10. 


and  no  other.  The  camps.  Only  those  on 
the  east  (Judah,  with  Issachar  and  Zebulun) 
and  on  the  south  (Reuben,  with  Simeon  and 
Gad)  are  here  mentioned.  It  may  be  that  the 
sUver  trumpets  themselves  were  carried  with 
the  sacred  utensils  after  the  southern  camps, 
and  that  some  other  means  were  employed  to 
start  the  remaining  tribes  ;  or  it  may  be  that 
the  omission  is  due  to  some  accidental  cir- 
cumstance. The  Septuagint  inserts  in  ver.  6, 
"  And  ye  shall  sound  a  third  alarm,  and  the 
camps  which  are  pitched  westwards  shall 
moTO ;  and  ye  shall  sound  a  fourth  alarm, 
and  the  camps  which  are  pitched  northwards 
shall  move."  No  doubt  this"  was  the  actual 
order  of  starting,  however  the  signal  was 
given. 

Ver.  8. — ^The  sons  of  Aaron,  the  priests, 
shall  blow.  It  was  natural  that  they  should 
be  made  responsible  for  the  custody  and  use 
of  these  trumpets,  not  because  their  sound 
represented  the  voice  of  God,  but  because 
they  were  used  for  religious  purposes,  and 
could  only  be  safely  kept  in  the  sanctuary. 
An  ordinance  for  ever.  The  accustomed 
formula  for  some  sacred  institution  which 
was  to  have  a  permanent  character  and  an 
eternal  meaning  (cf.  Exod.  zii  24).  The 
truth  of  these  words  cannot  be  exhausted 
by  an  actual  use  of  1500  years,  followed  by 
complete  disuse  for  1 800  years.  The  "  ordin- 
ance" of  the  silver  trumpets  must  be  per- 
petuated "for  ever"  in  the  gospel,  or  else 
the  Divine  word  has  failed. 

Ver.  9.— If  ye  go  to  war.  niSTOp,  K^, 
"come  into  war,"  or  "be  engaged,"  denoting 
actual  hostilities.  In  your  land.  The  prac- 
tical use  of  the  trumpets  ceased  with  the 
years  of  wandering  ;  the  ceremonial  use  was 
continued  as  long  as  the  people  dwelt  in 
"their  land;"  the  spiritual  use  remains  an 
"  ordinance  for  ever,   as  long  as  the  Church 


is  militant  here  on  earth.  That  the  use  o( 
the  two  silver  trumpets  was  ceremonial,  and 
not  practical,  after  the  conquest  of  Canaan  is 
evident  &om  the  purpose  and  effect  ascribed 
to  that  use.  Whether  in  war  or  in  wor- 
ship, that  purpose  was  not  to  convoke  the 
people,  nor  to  give  signals  to  the  host,  but 
to  put  God  in  mind  of  his  promises,  and  to 
invoke  his  covenanted  grace.  Indeed,  two 
trumpets,  as  here  prescribed,  could  not  be  * 
otherwise  than  ceremonially  used  after  the 
nation  was  spread  abroad  over  the  whole 
face  of  Canaan  ;  and  there  is  no  direction  to 
make  more  than  two  such  trumpets.  The 
use  of  trumpets  ia  subsequent  times  is  indeed 
often  mentioned  both  in  war  and  in  holy 
festivities,  and  it  was  undoubtedly  founded 
upon  this  Divine  ordinance  ;  but  it  was  not 
in  literal  cpmpliance  with  it,  for  the  obvious 
reason  that  many  trumpets  were  used  instead 
of  two  only  (see  1  Chron.  xv.  24  ;  2  Cliron. 
V.  12  ;  Neh.  xU.  35).  In  these  passages  (and 
probably  in  2  Chron.  xiii  12)  we  have 
abundant  evidence  of  one  of  those  expan- 
sions and  adaptations  of  the  Mosaic  ritual 
which  were  so  freely  made  under  the  house 
of  David.  Ch.  xxxi.  6,  and  (perhaps)  1  Chron. 
xvi.  6,  and  Ps.  IxxxL  3  may  be  quoted  as 
pointing  to  the  strict  fulfilment  of  the  law 
as  it  stands. 

Ver.  10. — In  the  day  of  your  gladness. 
Any  day  of  national  thanksgiving,  celebrated 
with  religious  services,  as  the  feast  of  the 
dedication  (John  x.  22)  or  of  Pnrim  (Esther 
ix.W,sqg.).  In  your  solemn  days.  Dnj?JD. 
The  feasts  appointed  to  be  observed  by  the 
law  (see  chs.  xxviiL  and  xxix.).  In  the 
beginnings  of  your  months.  New  moon  days 
(Ps.  Ixxxi.  3).  Only  the  first  day  of  the 
seventh  month  was  properly  a  feast  (Levit. 
xxiii.  24),  but  all  were  distinguished  by 
special  sacrifices  (ch.  zxTiiL  11). 


H0MILETIC3. 

Vers.  1 — 10. — The  sacred  trumpets.  Spiritually  we  have  in  the  two  silver  trumpets 
the  gospel  in  its  twofold  use — (1)  as  preached  to  men,  (2)  as  pleaded  before  God ;  for 
that  which  is  preached  to  men  must  also  be  pleaded  by  and  for  men.  The  substance 
of  our  faith  is  also  the  substance  of  our  intercession.  L&o  credendi,  lex  orandi.  "  Our 
Father,  .  .  .  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,"  is  the  norm  at  once  of  every  true  ser- 
mon, and  of  every  right  prayer.  The  death  of  Christ,  preached,  is  the  voice  of  God 
to  start  the  faithful  on  their  way  to  heaven  ;  the  death  of  Christ,  shovm,  is  the  voice 
of  the  faithful  to  put  God  in  mind  of  his  sure  mercies,  to  bring  themselves  into  re- 
membrance before  him.     Consider,  therefore-  - 

I.  That  THE  SACRED  TRUMPET  MUST  BE  OF  ONE  WHOLE  PIECE  OF  SILVER,  NEITHER 
ALLOYED   WITH    BASER   METAL,   NOB   MADE   UP  OF   FRAGMENTS.       The    gOSpel   which   We 

preach  or  plead  must  be  the  whole  faith,  and  the  pure  faith  once  delivered  to  the 
saints,  neither  alloyed  with  human  inventions  nor  pieced  together  out  of  fragments 
and  remnants  of  the  Divine  revelation.  Human  art  and  labour  has  no  further  place 
than  in  bringing  the  gospel — as  the  trumpet — into  such  a  shape  as  that  it  can  ba 
efEectually  used,  without  adding  aught  to  it,  or  diminishing  aught  from  it 


CH.  X.  1—10.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  a6 

II.  That  the  peimart  use  of  the  sacred  trumpet  was— (1)  for  summoning  tha 
people  into  the  more  immediate  presence  ojE  God ;  (2)  for  ordering  their  march 
towards  Canaan.  The  gospel  is  preached,  on  the  one  hand,  to  call  men  from  their 
cares,  and  pleasures,  and  earthly  ties,  in  order  to  present  themselves  for  pardon  and 
for  blessing  before  him  who  is  their  covenanted  God  and  King  ;  on  the  other  hand, 
to  instruct  men  in  an  orderly  Christian  walk,  seeking  the  kingdom,  not  as  isolated' 
individuals,  but  as  members  of  one  body,  soldiers  in  one  army,  units  in  one  vast  and 
organised  whole. 

III.  That  a  plain  distinction  op  sound  was  to  be  made  in  calling  the 
ASSEMBLY,  AND  IN  OBDERINS  THE  MARCH.  The  persuasions  of  the  gospel,  by  which 
we  call  men  to  draw  nigh  unto  God,  must  needs  differ  in  sound  and  in  tone  from 
the  precepts  of  the  gospel  by  which  we  seek  to  direct  their  onward  march  ;  but  both 
are  equally  sacred,  and  equally  necessary  to  be  observed. 

IV.  That  the  subsequent  use  of  the  sacred  trumpets  was  to  invoke,  with 

HOLY  and  consecrated  SOUND,  THE  DiVINE  AID  AGAINST  THE  FOE,  THE  DiVINE  ACCEPT- 
ANCE UPON  THE  SACRED   FEAST  OB  OFFERING:     IN    DANGER    OR    IN  WORSHIP   TO  BRING 

HIS  OWN  INTO  REMEMBRANCE  WITH  THEIR  GoD.  The  faots  of  the  gospel  which  we 
preach,  and  whereby  we  "persuade  men,"  the  same  do  we  plead;  and  thereby  we 
"  persuade  God."  All  true  prayer  and  intercession  of  the  faithful  for  aid  against 
spiritual  enemies,  for  acceptance  of  spiritual  sacrifices,  is  not  only  founded  upon  the 
gospel ;  it  is  the  gospel,  pleaded  (whether  in  holy  words  or  in  holy  rites)  before 
high  heaven ;  it  is  "  the  Lord's  death  "  shown  "  until  he  come ;  "  it  is  the  sacred 
trumpet  sounded  in  the  ears  of  God  prevailingly  according  to  his  command. 

V.  That  the  use  of  the  trumpets  for  those  purposes  was  to  be  "  an  ordin- 
ance FOR  EVER."  The  calling  of  men  to  draw  nigh  unto  God;  the  ordering  of  their 
onward  walk  ;  the  cry  to  heaven  for  promised  aid  against  our  unseen  foes ;  the  plead- 
ing of  the  finished  work  of  Christ  wherein  we  trust,  will  never  cease  until  there  shall 
be  no  more  time.  Neither  can  the  Church  at  large,  nor  can  any  faithful  soul,  dare  to 
despise  or  to  ignore  any  of  these  uses  of  the  gospel  trumpet ;  for  they  are  of  Divine 
and  perpetual  appointment. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vera.  1 — 10. — The  silver  trumpets.  The  blowing  of  the  silver  trumpets  by  Aaron 
and  his  sons  has  generally  been  taken  to  denote  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  But 
the  interpretation  is  a  mistaken  one,  and  arises  from  confounding  the  trumpet  of 
jubilee  (Levit.  xxv.  9  ;  Luke  iv.  16)  with  the  silver  trumpet.  Although  bearing  the 
same  name  in  the  English  Bible,  these  are  quite  different  instruments,  and  are  called 
by  different  Hebrew  names.  The  former  is  the  shophar  or  cornet,  which,  as  its  name 
implies,  was  of  horn,  or  at  least  horn-shaped ;  whereas  the  latter,  the  chatsotser,  was 
a  long  straight  tube  of  silver  with  a  bell-shaped  mouth.  The  true  intention  of  the 
silver  trumpets  is  distinctly  enough  indicated  in  the  law  before  us.  They  were  to 
be  to  the  children  of  Israel  for  a  memorial  before  their  God  (ver.  10)  ;  the  promise 
was  that  when  the  trumpets  were  blown,  the  people  should  be  remembered  before  the 
Lord  their  God,  and  he  would  save  them  from  their  enemies  (ver.  9).  In  other  words, 
the  blowing  of  the  silver  trumpets  was  a  figure  of  prayer  (c£  Actsx.  4).  An  exceed- 
ingly striking  and  suggestive  figure  it  is. 

L  It  presents  certain  aspects  of  prayer  which  can  hardly  be  too  much 
REMEMBERED.  For  one  thing,  it  admonishes  us  that  prayer  ougM  to  he  an  effectual 
fervent  exercise  (James  v.  16).  A  trumpet-tone  is  the  opposite  of  a  timid  whisper. 
There  is  a  clear  determinate  ring  in  the  call  of  a  silver  trumpet.  This  is  not 
meant  to  suggest  that  there  ought  to  be  loud  and  vehement  speaking  in  prayer. 
But  it  does  mean  that  we  are  to  throw  heart  into  our  prayers  and  put  forth  our 
strength.  The  spirit  of  adoption  a-ies,  Abba  Father  (see  2  Chron.  xiii.  14).  When 
we  call  on  God  we  ought  to  stir  ourselves  up  to  take  hold  of  him  (Isa.  Ixiv.  7.)_  More- 
over, the  silver  trumpet  emits  a  ringing,  joyous  sound.  In  almost  every  instance 
in  which  the  blowing  of  these  trumpets  is  mentioned  in  Scripture,  it  is  suggestive  of 
gladness,  hope,  exultation.  And  ought  not  a  note  of  gladness,  hope,  exultation  to 
pervade  our  prayers?    When  we  pray  we  are  to  use  a  certain  holy  boldness  ;  we  •!• 


8i  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  (aa.  x.  1— 10. 

to  driiw  near;  we  are  to  speak  in  full  assurance  of  faith.  This, I  confess,  may  be 
pressed  too  far.  There  was  nothing  of  the  trumpet-tone  in  the  publican's  prayer. 
There  may  be  acceptable  prayer  in  a  sigh,  in  a  cry  of  anguish,  in  the  groaning  of  a 
prisoner.  But  it  is  not  the  will  of  God  that  his  children's  ordinary  intercourse  with 
him  should  be  of  that  sort.  They  are  to  call  on  him  with  a  gladsome  confidence  that 
he  ia  able  and  ready  to  help  them.  And  many  of  them  do  this.  There  are  Christian 
people  whose  prayers  are  always  rising  into  the  ringing  tones  of  the  silver  trumpet. 
I  have  spoken  first  of  the  general  design  or  spiritual  intention  of  this  ordinance  of 
the  silver  trumpets. 

Let  us  now  note  the  pakticulaes: — 1.  It  belonged  to  the  priest's  office  (ver.  8). 
It  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  Levitical  service  of  song,  instituted  long  after 
by  David.  2.  It  served  a  variety  of  secular  uses.  Public  assemblies  were  convened 
by  the  sounding  of  the  trumpets,  as  they  are  convened  among  us  by  the  ringing  of  bells 
(vers.  2,  3,  7).  And  they  were  the  bugles  by  which  military  signals  were  given 
(vers.  4^6).  That  it  was  the  priests  who  blew  the  trumpets  on  all  such  occasions 
reminds  us  that  Israel  was,  in  a  special  sense,  "  an  holy  nation ;  "  and  may  also 
carry  forward  our  minds  to  the  time  when  "  holiness  to  the  Lord  "  will  be  written  on 
the  life  of  all  Christian  nations  in  all  their  relations.  3.  The  blowing  of  the  silver 
trumpets  found  place  chiefly  in  the  service  of  the  sanctuary.  The  particulars  are 
noted  in  ver.  10,  and  are  of  uncommon  interest  for  the  Christian  reader.  (1)  The 
trumpets  were  to  be  blown  over  the  sacrifices.  How  this  was  done  appears  from  the 
example  related  in  2  Chron.  xxix.  26 — 28.  The  intention  was  as  much  as  to  say, 
"  0  thou  that  dwellest  in  the  heavens,  give  ear  to  us  when  we  cry  ;  remember  all  our 
offerings  and  accept  our  burnt  sacrifice.  Grant  us  the  wish  of  our  heart,  and  fulfil 
all  our  counsel."  (2)  The  sacrifices  particularly  named  as  to  be  thus  signalised  are 
the  burri  offering  and  the  peace  offering.  Not  the  sin  offering.  The  omission  can 
hardly  h»ve  been  accidental.  When  I  have  fallen  into  some  notable  sin,  I  am  to 
humble  myself  before  God  with  shame.  The  cry  of  the  publican  is  what  befits  me, 
rather  than  trumpet-toned  exultation.  The  sin  offering  is  most  acceptably  presented 
without  blowing  of  trumpets.  As  for  the  burnt  offering,  which  denotes  dedication ; 
and  the  peace  offering,  which  speaks  of  communion  with  God  and  of  our  communion 
with  each  other  in  the  Lord  ;  these  are  most  acceptable  when  they  are  attended  with 
gladness  and  thankful  exultation  in  God.  (3)  The  blowing  of  the  silver  trumpets  was 
especially  to  abound  at  the  great  solemnities.  That  is  to  say,  at  the  new  moons,  at 
the  three  great  festivals,  the  "  solemn  days  "  of  the  Jewish  year,  and  on  all  days  of 
special  gladness  (cf.  2  Chron.  v.  12  ;  vii.  6  ;  Ezra  iii.  10 ;  Neh.  xii.  35).  (4)  Above 
all  other  solemn  days,  the  first  day  of  the  seventh  month  was  to  be  thus  distinguished. 
The  seventh  month  was  that  in  which  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  happened — at  the 
full  moon,  in  the  end  of  September  or  beginning  of  October,  after  the  Lord  had 
crowned  the  year  with  his  goodness.  The  new  moon  of  this  month  was  the  Feast  of 
the  Blowing  of  Trumpets  (cf.  Levit.  xxiii.  24)  ;  and  fitly  ushered  in  the  Feast  of 
Ingathering,  the  most  joyous  of  all  the  festivals  of  the  year. — B. 

Vers.  1 — 10. — The  use  of  the  trumpets.  There  is  a  manifest  connection  between 
the  cloud  and  the  trumpets.  At  Sinai  there  was  "  a  thick  cloud  upon  the  mount,  and 
the  voice  of  the  trumpet  exceeding  loud  "  (Exod.  xix.  16).  This  seems  to  have  been 
a  miraculous  sound,  but  Jehovah  now  orders  Moses  to  have  two  silver  trumpets  made 
for  permanent  use.  Thus  trumpets  as  well  as  cloud  were  remembrancers  of  Sinai. 
God  uses  sound  along  with  light  to  signify  his  will  to  his  people  ;  he  appeals  not 
only  to  their  eyes,  but  also  to  their  ears.  Though  the  cloud  was  there  they  were  not 
ever  watching  it.  The  longer  it  rested,  the  less  conscious  of  its  presence  they  became. 
Therefore  God  added  the  sound  of  the  trumpets,  a  sudden,  startling  sound,  to  stop 
each  one  in  his  work,  or  raise  him  out  of  his  sleep. 

I.  God  takes  supficient  means  to  convey  to  men  all  that  it  k  needful  fob 
THEM  TO  KNOW.  Exactly  where  they  would  next  pass,  and  how  long  stay  there, 
and  how  long  be  in  the  wilderness,  the  Israelites  knew  not ;  but  when  the  hour  cams 
for  them  to  move,  it  was  of  the  first  importance  that  none  should  be  in  ignorance  or 
doubt  So  with  regard  to  the  practical  matters  of  the  gospel ;  we  may  take  it  as 
perfectly  certain  that  difScultiea  with  regard  to  aalyation  and  Christian  duty  are  in 


dR.  X.  11- 


THB  BOOK  OP  NUMBBBS. 


ft7 


MS,  not  in  God.  Men  have  eyes,  yet  see  not ;  ears,  yet  hear  not.  They  clamour  for 
more  light,  more  evidence,  more  signs.  "  If  they  hear  not  Moses  and  the  prophets, 
neither  will  they  be  persuaded  though  one  rose  from  the  dead."  And  now  they  have 
also  Christ  and  the  apostles  to  listen  to.  All  the  great  appeals  and  proclamations  of 
the  gospel  have  the  trumpet  sound  in  them  ;  only  men  are  so  drenched  and  stupefied 
with  the  opiates  of  sin  that  the  sound  is  as  if  it  were  not. 

II.  God  cottld  usk  the  one  agent  to  indicate  many  bequikements.  There  were 
always  the  same  two  trumpets,  but  sounded  in  different  ways  for  different  purposes, 
rhere  was  one  sound  for  the  princes,  and  another  for  the  people.  The  trumpet  called 
them  to  the  march,  and  in  later  days,  when  the  marching  was  over,  it  called  them  to 
the  battle.  It  had  to  do  with  great  religious  occasions,  and  times  of  special  gladness, 
e.  g.  the  jubilee  year  (Levit.  xxv.  9).  So  there  is  one  Spirit  and  diversity  of  opera- 
tions. There  is  the  Spirit  calling  the  attention  of  men  by  signs  and  wonders ;  there 
is  the  same  Spirit  breathing  through  the  men  who  wrote  book  after  book  of  the 
Scriptures.  And  now  these  Scriptures  lie  like  a  silent  silver  trumpet,  till  the  same 
Spirit,  breatliing  through  them,  makes  them  to  teach,  console,  promise,  warn,  accord- 
ing to  the  need  of  the  individual  who  listens.  The  trumpet  of  God  gives  no  uncer- 
tain sound  (1  Oor.  xiv.  8).  Paul  trusted  it  with  the  most  complete  confidence  in  his 
missionary  work  (Acts  xvi.  6 — 10).  There  is  a  trumpet  sound  telling  us  not  only  to  do 
something  for  God,  but  exactly  what  to  do.     "  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear." 

III.  The  trumpet  was  for  special  occasions.  It  was  not  a  daily  sound.  It 
indicated  fresh  departures,  and  was  associated  with  great  celebrations.  Between  the 
soundings  there  were  intervals  for  the  quiet  practice  of  every  day  duties.  It  is  good 
thus  to  have  the  ordinary  and  the  extraordinary  mingled  in  our  life.  It  is  an  ill 
thing  both  for  individuals  and  communities  to  be  settled  too  long  in  the  same  circum- 
stances. Too  much  change  is  bad,  but  too  much  rest  is  worse.  Times  of  quiet, 
plodding  toil  scarcely  noticed,  faithfulness  in  little  things  day  after  day — then  the 
trumpet  sounds  and  there  is  change  and  strife.  But  though  the  trumpet  is  there  for 
special  occasions,  God  has  voices  for  every  day  to  all  who  have  the  listening  ear. 
(2  Chron.  v.  12 — 14 ;  Isa.  xviii.  3 ;  xxvii.  13 ;  Iviii.  1 ;  Jer.  iv.  6 ;  vi.  1 ;  xlii.  14  ; 
li.  27 ;  Ezek.  xxxiii.  1 — 6 ;  Hosea  viii.  1 ;  Joel  ii.  1 ;  Amos  iii.  6 ;  Zeph.  L  16 ;  Zech. 
ix.  14 ;  Kev.  i.  10.>— Y 


EXPOSITION. 


The  order  of  march  from  Sinai  (vers. 
11 — 28).  Ver.  11. — On  the  twentieth  day 
of  the  second  month.  This  answered  ap- 
proximately to  our  May  6th,  when  the 
spring  verdure  would  still  be  on  the  land, 
but  the  heat  of  the  day  would  already  have 
become  intense.  We  may  well  suppose  that 
the  departure  would  have  taken  place  a  month 
earlier,  had  it  not  been  necessary  to  wait  for 
the  due  celebration  oi  the  second  or  supple- 
mental passover  (ch.  ix.  11).  As  this  march 
was,  next  to  the  actual  exodus,  the  great  trial 
of  Israel's  faith  and  obedience,  it  was  most 
important  that  none  should  commence  it 
otherwise  than  in  fuU  communion  with  their 
God  and  with  one  another.  The  cloud  was 
taken  np.  For  the  first  time  since  the  taber- 
nacle had  been  reared  up  (Exod.  xl.  3i). 
This  being  the  Divine  signal  for  departure, 
the  silver  trumpets  would  immediately  an- 
nounce the  fact  to  all  the  hosts. 

Ver.  12. — Took  their  journeys.  Literally, 
"marched  according  to  their  journeys" 
(an''J?DDS).  Septuagint,  i^fav  aiv  iirap- 
riatt  avriiv,  set  forward  with  their  baggage. 
And  the  cloud  reated  in  the  wildeniesi  of 


Paran.  Taken  by  itself  this  would  seem 
to  apply  to  the  first  resting  of  the  cloud 
and  the  first  halt  of  the  host  after  break- 
ing up  from  "the  wilderness  of  Sinai."  It 
appears,  however,  from  ch.  xii.  16  that  "  the 
wilderness  of  Paran  "  was  only  reached  after 
leaving  Hazeroth  at  the  end  of  three  days' 
journey  from  Sinai,  nor  would  a  shorter  space 
of  time  suffice  to  carry  the  host  across  the 
mountain  barrier  of  the  Jebel  et-Tih,  which 
forms  the  clearly-marked  southern  limit  of 
the  desert  plateau  of  Paran  (see  next  note). 
Some  critics  have  arbitrarily  extended  the 
limits  of  "  the  wilderness  of  Paran  "  so  as  to 
include  the  sandy  waste  between  Sinai  and 
the  Jebel  et-Tih,  and  therefore  the  very  first 
halting-place  of  Israel.  This,  however,  is 
unnecessary  as  well  as  arbitrary;  for  (1)  vers. 
12,  13  are  evidently  in  the  nature  of  a  sum- 
mary, and  the  same  subject  is  confessedly 
taken  up  again  in  ver.  83,  sq. ;  and  (2)  the 
departure  from  Sinai  is  expressly  said  to  have 
been  for  a  "three  days' journey"  (ver.  33), 
which  must  mean  that  the  march,  although 
actually  divided  into  three  stages,  was  re- 
garded as  a  single  journey,  because  it  brougM 


88 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[oh.  X.  11—2 


them  to  their  immediate  destination  in  the 
wilderness  of  Paran.  Here  then  is  a  plain 
reason  for  the  statement  in  this  verse :  the 
cloud  did  indeed  rest  twice  between  the  two 
wildernesses,  hut  only  so  as  to  allow  of  a 
night's  repose,  not  so  as  to  break  the  con- 
tinuity of  the  march.  "  TJie  wiMemess  of 
Paran."  Septuaglnt,  Iv  rj  ipriiiip  tov  ^apav. 
This  geographical  expression  is  nowhere  ex- 
actly defined  in  Holy  Scripture,  and  the  name 
itseU  has  disappeared ;  for  in  spite  pf  the 
resemblance  in  sonnd  (a  resemblance  here,  as 
in  80  many  cases,  wholly  delusive),  it  seems 
to  have  no  connection  whatever  with  the 
"Wady  Feiran,  the  fertile  valley  at  the  base 
of  Serbal,  or  with  the  town  which  oiice 
shared  the  name.  All  the  allusions,  how- 
ever, in  the  Old  Testament  to  Paran  point  to 
a  district  so  clearly  marked  out,  so  deeply 
stamped  with  its  own  characteristics,  by 
nature,  that  no  mistake  is  possible.  This 
district  is  now  called  et-Tih,  i.  e.  the  wan- 
dering, and  is  still  remembered  in  the  tra- 
ditions of  the  Arabs  as  the  scene  of  the  wan- 
derings of  the  people  of  God.  Little  known, 
and  never  thoroughly  explored,  its  main 
features  are  nevertheless  unmistakable,  and 
its  boundaries  sharply  defined.  Measuring 
about  150  miles  in  Bither  direction,  its  south- 
ern frontier  (row  called  the  Jebel  et-Tih) 
ia  divided  by  the  broad  sandy  waste  of 
er-Eamleh  irom  the  Sinaitic  mountains  and 
the  Sinaitic  peninsula  properly  so  called ; 
its  northern  mountain  mass  looks  across 
the  deep  fissure  of  the  Wady  Murreh  (or 
desert  of  Zin),  some  ten  or  fifteen  miles 
broad,  into  er-Eachmah,  the  mountain  of  the 
Amorite,  the  southern  extension  of  the  pla- 
teau of  Judah  ;  on  the  east  it  falls  abruptly 
down  to  the  narrow  beach  of  the  Elanitic 
Gulf,  and  to  the  Arabah  ;  on  the  west  alone 
it  sinks  slowly  into  the  sandy  desert  of  Shur, 
which  separates  it  from  the  Mediterranean 
and  from  Egypt.  Et-Tih  is  itself  divided 
into  nearly  equal  halves  by  the  Wady  el 
Arish  (or  "river  of  Egypt "),  which,  rising  on 
the  northern  slopes  of  the  jebel  et-Tih,  and 
running  northwards  through  the  whole  pla- 
teau, turns  off  to  the  west  and  is  lost  in  the 
desert  of  Shur.  That  the  western  half  of 
the  plateau  went  also  under  the  name  of 
Paran  is  evident  from  the  history  of  Ishmael 
(see  especially  Gen.  xxi.  21 ;  xxv.  18),  but  it 
was  through  the  eastern  portion  alone  that 
the  wanderings  of  the  Israelites,  so  far  as  we 
can  trace  them,  lay.  This  "  wilderness  of 
Paran  "  is  indeed  "  a  great  and  terrible  wil- 
derness" (Deut.  i.  9),  lacking  for  the  most 
part  the  precipitous  grandeur  of  the  granite 
mountains  of  Sinai,  but  lacking  also  their 
fertile  valleys  and  numerous  streams.  A  bare 
limestone  or  sandstone  plateau,  crossed  by 
low  ranges  of  hills,  seamed  with  innumerable 
diy  water-covrses,  and  intenpersed  with  large 


patches  of  sand  and  gravel,  is  what  now 
meets  the  eye  of  the  traveller  in  this  forsaken 
land.  It  is  true  that  a  good  deal  of  rain  falls 
at  times,  and  that  when  it  does  fall  vegeta- 
tion appears  with  surprising  rapidity  and 
abundance ;  it  is  true  also  that  the  district 
has  been  persistently  denuded  of  trees  and 
shrubs  for  the  sake  of  fuel.  But  whatever 
mitigations  may  have  then  existed,  it  is  clear 
from  the  Bible  itself  that  the  country  was 
then,  as  now,  emphatically  frightful  (cf.  Deut. 
i.  19 ;  viii.  15;  xxxiL  10;  Jer.  iL  6).  Some- 
thing may  be  set,  no  doubt,  to  the  account 
of  rhetoric,  and  much  may  be  allowed  for 
variety  of  seasons.  Even  in  Australia  the 
very  same  district  will  appear  at  one  time 
like  the  desolation  of  a  thousand  years,  and 
in  the  very  next  year  it  will  blossom  as  the 
rose.  But  at  certain  seasons  at  any  rate  et- 
Tih  was  (as  it  is)  a  "howling"  wilderness, 
where  the  dreadful  silence  of  a  lifeless  land 
was  only  broken  by  the  nightly  howling  of 
unclean  beasts  who  tracked  the  footsteps  of 
the  living  in  order  to  devour  the  carcases  of 
the  dead.  Perhaps  so  bad  a  country  has 
never  been  attempted  by  any  army  in  modem 
days,  even  by  the  Eussian  troops  iu  Central 
Asia. 

Amongst  the  many  Wadys  which  drain 
the  uncertain  rain-fall  of  the  eastern  half  of 
et-Tih  (and  at  the  same  time  testify  to  a 
greater  rain-fall  in  bygone  ages),  the  most 
important  is  the  Wady  el  Terafeh,  which,  also 
rising  on  the  northern  slopes  of  Jebel  et-Tih, 
runs  northwards  and  north-westwards,  and 
finally  opens  into  the  Arabah.  Towards  its 
northern  limit  et-Tih  changes  its  character 
for  the  worse.  Here  it  rises  into  a  precipitous 
quadrilateral  of  mountains,  about  forty  miles 
square,  not  very  lofty,  but  exceedingly  steep 
and  rugged,  composed  in  gi-eat  measure  of 
dazzling  masses  of  bare  chalk  or  limestone, 
which  glow  as  in  a  furnace  beneath  the  sum- 
mer sun.  This  mountain  mass,  now  called 
the  AzSzimat,  or  mountain  country  of  the 
Az3,zimeh,  rising  steeply  from  the  rest  of  the 
plateau  to  the  southward,  is  almost  completely 
detached  by  deep  depressions  from  the  sur- 
rounding districts ;  at  the  north-west  comer 
alone  it  is  united  by  a  short  range  of  moun- 
tains with  er-Rachmah,  and  so  with  the  high- 
lands of  Southern  Palestine.  From  this 
comer  the  Wady  Murreh  descends  broad  and 
deep  towards  the  east,  forking  at  the  eastern 
extremity  towards  the  Arabah  on  the  south- 
east, and  towards  the  Dead  Sea  on  the  north- 
east. The  interior  of  this  inaccessible  country 
has  yet  to  be  really  explored,  and  it  is  the 
scanty  nature.of  our  present  knowledge  con- 
cerning it  which,  more  than  anything  else, 
prevents  us  from  following  with  any  certainty 
the  march  of  the  Israelites  as  recorded  in  thii 
book. 

Yer.  18. —And   they  first    took   thcis 


CH.  X.  11—28.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES. 


89 


Jonmey.  The  meaning  of  this  is  some- 
what doubtfal.  The  Septuagint  has  ISppav 
irpfiroi,  the  foremost  set  out ;  the  Vulgate, 
frofedi  sunt  per  turmas  suas.  Perhaps  it 
means,  "  they  journeyed  in  the  order  of  jjre- 
cedence  "  assigned  to  them  by  their  marching 
orders  in  ch.  ii. 

Ver.  14. — According  to  their  aijpies.  In 
each  camp,  and  under  each  of  the  four  stand- 
ards, there  were  three  tribal  hosts,  each  an 
army  in  itself. 

Ver.  17. — And  the  tabernacle  was  taken 
down.  That  is,  the  fabric  of  it ;  the  boards, 
curtains,  and  other  heavy  portions  which 
were  packed  upon  the  six  waggons  provided 
for  the  purpose  (ch.  vii,  5 — 9).  And  the 
sons  of  Oershon  and  the  sons  of  Ilerari  set 
forward.  Between  the  first  and  second 
divisions  of  the  host.  In  ch.  ii.  it  had  been 
directed  in  general  terms  that  "  the  taber- 
nacle "  should  set  forward  with  the  camp  of 
the  Levites  in  the  midst  of  the  host,  between 
the  second  and  third  divisions.  At  that  time 
the  duties  of  the  several  Levitical  families 
had  not  been  specified,  and  the  orders  for 
the  taking  down  and  transport  of  the  taber- 
nacle and  its  furniture  had  not  been  given 
in  detail.  It  would  be  historically  an  error, 
and  theologically  a  superstition,  to  imagine 
that  Divine  commands  such  as  these  had  no 
elasticity,  and  left  no'  room  for  adaptation, 
under  the  teaching  of  ezperionce,  or  for  the 
sake  of  obvious  convenience.  Whether  the 
present  modification  was  directly  commanded 
by  God  himself,  or  whether  it  was  made  on 
the  authority  of  Moses,  does  not  here  appear. 
There  can  be  no  question  that  subsequent 
theocratic  rulers  of  Israel  claimed  and  used 
a  large  liberty  in  modifying  the  Divinely- 
originated  ritual  and  order.  Compare  the 
case  of  the  passover,  the  arrangements  of 
Solomon's  temple  as  corresponding  with 
those  of  the  tabernacle,  and  even  the  use  of 
the  silver  trumpets.  The  Septuagint  has  the 
future  tense  here,  KaBiKovat  riiv  sKijvtjv  k. 
T.  \. ,  as  if  to  mark  it  as  a  fresh  command. 

Ver.  21. — ^The  sanctuary.  Rather,  "the 
holy  ihings."     E''!!i?Sn,   equivalent  to  the 

D*t5'?i?!l  tJ^P  of  ch.  iv.  i.  Septuagint,  ri 
ayia.  The  sacred  furniture  mentioned  in 
oh.  iii.  31  (but  cf.  ver.  33).  The  other  did 
set  np  the  tabernacle.  Literally,  "  they  set 
up,"  but  no  doubt  it  means  the  Gershonites 
and  Merarites,  whose  business  it  was. 

Ver.  25. — The  rereward  of  all  the  camps. 
Literally,  "the collector,"  or  "the  gatherer, 
of  all  the  camps."  The  word  is  applied  by 
Isaiah  to  God  himself  (Isa.  Iii  12 ;  Iviii.  8) 
as  to  him  that  "gathereth  the  outcasts  of 
Israel."  Dan  may  have  been  the  collector 
of  all  the  camps  simply  in  the  sense  that  his 
host  closed  in  all  the  others  from  behind, 
and  in  pitching  completed  the  fiiU  number. 


Under  any  ordinary  circumstances,  however 
(see  next  note)  the  work  of  the  rear-guard  in 
collecting  stragglers  and  in  taking  charge  of 
such  as  had  fainted  by  the  way  must  have 
been  arduous  and  important  in  the  extreme. 
Ver.  28. — Thus  were  the  journeylngs. 
Rather,  "these  were  the  joumeyings,"  the 
marchings  of  the  various  hosts  of  which  the 
nation  was  composed.  The  question  may 
here  be  asked,  which  is  con.sidered  more  at 
large  in  the  Introduction,  how  it  was  possible 
for  a  nation  of  more  than  two  million  souls, 
containing  the  usual  proportion  of  aged 
people,  women,  and  children,  to  march  as 
here  represented,  in  compact  columns  closely 
following  one  another,  without  straggling, 
without  confusion,  without  incalculable  suf- 
fering and  loss  of  life.  That  the  line  of 
march  was  intended  to  be  compact  and  un- . 
broken  is  plain  (amongst  other  things)  from 
the  directions  given  about  the  tabernacle. 
The  fabric  was  sent  on  in  advance  with  the 
evident  intent  that  it  should  be  reared  up 
and  ready  to  receive  the  holy  things  by  the 
time  they  arrived.  Yet  between  the  fabric 
and  the  furniture  there  marched  more  than 
half  a  million  of  people  (the  camp  of  Reuben), 
all  of  whom  had  to  reach  the  camping  ground 
and  turn  off  to  the  right  before  the  Kohath- 
ites  could  rejoin  their  brethren.  Now  dis- 
cipline and  drill  will  do  wonders  in  the  way 
of  ordering  and  expediting  the  movements 
even  of  vast  multitudes,  if  they  are  thoroughly 
under  control ;  the  family  organisation  also 
of  the  tribes,  and  the  long  leisure  which  they 
had  enjoyed  at  Sinai,  gave  every  opportunity 
of  perfecting  the  necessary  discipline.  But 
it  is  clear  that  no  discipline  could  make  such 
an  arrangement  as  the  one  above  mentioned 
feasible  under  the  ordinary  circumstances  of 
human  life.  It  would  be  absolutely  necessary 
to  eliminate  all  the  casualties  and  aU  the 
sicknesses  which  would  naturally  clog  and 
hinder  the  march  of  such  a  multitude,  in 
order  that  it  might  be  compressed  within 
the  required  limits  of  time  and  space.  Have 
we  any  ground  for  supposiug  that  these 
casualties  and  sicknesses  were  eliminated  ? 
In  answering  this  question  we  must  clearly 
distinguish  between  the  jouniey  from  Sinai 
to  Kadesh,  on  the  borders  of  Palestine,  which 
was  a  journey  of  only  eleven  days  (Dent.  i. 
2),  and  the  subsequent  wanderings  of  the 
people  of  Israel.  It  is  the  eleven  days'  jour- 
ney only  with  which  we  are  concerned,  because 
it  was  for  this  journey  only  that  provision 
was  made  and  orders  were  given  by  the  God 
of  Israel  During  the  subsequent  years  of 
wandering  and  of  excommunication,  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  marching  orders 
fell  into  abeyance  as  entirely  as  the  sacrificial 
system  and  the  rite  of  circumcision  itself. 
During  these  years  the  various  camps  may 
have  scattered  themselves  abroad,  marched. 


90 


THE  BOOK  OF  NDMBEBS. 


[CH.  X.  11—28. 


and  halted  very  much  as  the  circumstances 
of  the  day  demanded.  But  that  this  was 
not  and  could  not  be  the  case  during  the 
short  journey  which  should  have  landed 
them  in  Canaan  is  obvious  from  the  whole 
tone,  as  well  as  from  the  particular  details, 
of  the  commandments  considered  above.  It 
is  further  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  Divine 
promise  and  undertaking  at  the  exodus  was, 
impliedly  if  not  explicitly,  to  bring  the  whole 
people,  one  and  all,  small  and  great,  safely 
to  their  promised  home.  When  the  Psalmist 
asserts  (Ps.  cv.  37)  that  "  there  was  not  one 
feeble  person  among  their  tribes,"  he  does 
not  go  beyond  what  is  plainly  intimated  in 
the  narrative.  If  of  their  cattle  "  not  an 
hoof  "  must  be  left  behind,  lest  the  absolute 
character  of  the  deliverance  be  marred,  how 
much  more  necessary  was  it  that  not  a  soul 
be  abandoned  to  Egyptian  vengeance  ?  And 
how  could  all  depart  unless  all  were  pro- 
videntially saved  from  sickness  and  infirmity  ? 
But  the  same  necessity  (the  necessity  of  his 
own  goodness)  held  good  when  the  exodus 
was  accomplished.  God  could  not  bring  any 
individual  in  Israel  out  of  Egypt  only  to 
perish  in  the  wilderness,  unless  it  were 
through  his  own  default.  He  who  had 
brought  them  <nit  with  so  lavish  a  display  of 
miraculous  power  was  (we  may  say  with 
reverence)  bound  also  to  bring  them  in ; 
else  they  had  been  actual  losers  by  obedience, 
and  his  word  had  not  been  kept  to  them. 
Under  a  covenant  and  a  dispensation  which 
assuredly  did  not  look  one  hand's  breadth 
beyond  the  present  life,  it  must  have  seemed 
to  be  of  the  essence  of  the  promise  which 
they  believed  that  not  one  of  them  should 


die  or  have  to  be  left  behind.  And  as  th« 
death  or  loss  of  one  of  God's  people  would 
have  vitiated  the  temporal  promise  to  them, 
so  also  it  would  have  vitiated  the  etemu 
promise  to  us.  For  they  were  ensamples  of 
us,  and  confessedly  what  was  done  for  them 
was  done  at  least  as  much  for  our  sakes  as 
for  theirs.  Now  the  promise  of  God  is  mani- 
fest untS  every  one  that  is  included  within 
his  new  covenant,  viz.,  to  bring  him  safely 
at  last  unto  the  heavenly  Canaan,  and  that 
in  spite  of  every  danger,  if  only  he  do  not 
draw  back.  The  whole  analogy,  therefore, 
and  the  typical  meaning  of  the  exodus 
would  be  overthrown  if  any  single  Israelite 
who  had  crossed  the  Bed  Sea  failed  to  enter 
into  rest,  save  as  the  consequence  of  his  own 
sin.  "We  conclude,  therefore,  with  some  con- 
fidence that  theordinary  incidents  of  mortality 
were  providentially  excluded  from  the  present 
march,  as  from  the  previous  interval;  that 
none  fell  sick,  none  became  helpless,  none 
died  d  natural  death.  We  know  that  the 
great  difficulty  of  a  sufficient  supply  of  food 
was  miraculously  met ;  we  know  that  in 
numberless  respects  the  passage  from  Egypt 
to  Canaan  was  hedged  about  with  super- 
natural aids.  Is  there  any  difficulty  in  sup- 
posing that  he  who  gave  them  bread  to  eat 
and  water  to  drink,  who  led  them  by  a  cloudy 
and  a  fiery  pillar,  could  also  give  them  health 
and  strength  to  "walk  and  not  be  weary"  ? 
Is  it  unreasonable  to  imagine  that  he  who 
spake  in  his  tender  pity  of  the  flight  from 
Judasa  to  Pella,  "  Woe  to  them  that  are  with 
chUd,  and  to  them  that  give  suck  in  those 
days,"  miraculously  restrained  for  that  season 
the  natural  increase  of  his  people  I 


HOMILETICS. 

Vera.  11 — 28. — The  journey  hrnne.  Spiritually,  we  have  in  this  section  the 
Divinely-appointed  order  of  the  Church  of  God,  the  ideal  method  of  her  journeying, 
towards  the  eternal  rest.  AH  the  time  which  the  children  of  Israel  spent  beneath  the 
holy  mount  was  to  prepare  them  for  a  speedy  and  triumphant  march  by  the  shortest 
way  into  Canaan.  All  which  we  have  learnt  of  the  law  of  Christ,  and  in  his  school, 
is  to  fit  us  to  make  our  way  right  onwards  through  the  difficulties  of  this  trouble- 
some world  to  the  home  beyond  j  and  this  is  the  practical  test  of  all  we  have  acquired. 
Consider,  therefore — 

I.  That  the  immediate  march  of  Israel  was  out  op  the  "  wilderness  of  Sinai  ' 

INTO  THE  "  wilderness  OF  PABAN,"   FROM  ONE  DESERT  TO  ANOTHER.      Even  SO  is  the 

onward  course  of  the  Church,  or  of  the  faithful  soul,  in  this  world.  The  only  change 
is  from  one  set  of  difficulties  and  hardships  to  another,  from  an  unrest  of  one  kind 
to  an  unrest  of  another  kind.  After  the  green  level  of  Egypt,  Sinai  was  awful,  but 
Paran  was  worse.  To  the  natural  mind  the  difficulties  which  surround  the  beginning 
of  a  Christian  life  are  terrible,  but  those  which  beset  its  middle  course  are  mostly 
harder,  because  drearier,  even  if  less  striking.  The  young  always  think  that  when 
the  special  temptations  of  youth  are  past  it  will  be  an  easy  and  simple  matter  to  walk 
uprightly.  In  truth  the  whole  of  this  life  is  a  desert-journey,  and  we  only  remove 
from  the  awful  precipices  of  Sinai  to  encounter  the  rugged  and  barren  expanse  of 
Paran.     The  hope  which  cheers  and  sustains  lies  beyond  (Matt.  x.  22  ;  James  i.  12). 

II.  That  the  children  of  Isbabl,  as  soon  ab  the  cloud  bbmoyed,  could  not 


CH.  X.  11—28.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  91 

BTAY   WHERR   THEY   WERE,  BUT   MUST   SET   FORTH    THROUGH  THE  RUGGED  WrLOERMESS  OF 

Paban,  if  they  were  ever  to  reach  Canaan.  Even  so  the  Church  cannot  attain 
her  rest  by  studying  divinity  or  perfecting  the  definitions  of  morality  or  the  appli- 
ances of  worship  ;  it  must  walk  in  faith  and  righteousness  amidst  the  endless  contra- 
dictions of  time.  Even  Mary  cannot  always  eit  at  the  Master's  feet ;  the  hour  will 
come  when  he  will  be  taken  away,  and  when  she  must  follow  in  the  hard  way  of 
practical  goodness  and  self-denial,  if  she  would  see  him  again. 

III.  That  the  marching  orders  given  by  God  to  Israel  seem  on  the  face 

OF  THEM  TO  BE  INCONSISTENT  WITH  THE  ENORMOUS  NUMBER  OF  THE  PEOPLE  ON  THE 
ONE   HAND,    AND   THE  EXTREME  DIFFICULTY  OF    THE    COUNTRY   ON   THE    OTHER;   there 

seems  no  room  left  for  any  physical  incapacity,  or  for  the  least  human  failure.  And 
these  orders  were  in  fact  more  or  less  departed  from  before  long.  The  Divine  ideal 
of  the  Christian  life,  whether  as  lived  by  the  Church  at  large  or  by  the  individual 
soul,  as  drawn  out  in  the  New  Testament,  seems  to  be  too  high  and  too  perfect  to  be 
possible  in  the  face  of  the  contradictions  of  the  world  and  the  perversities  of  human 
nature.  It  is  apparently  true  that  the  infinite  complications  of  modem  life,  and  the 
infinite  variety  of  human  dispositions,  have  made  the  lofty  purity  and  the  unbroken 
unity  of  the  gospel  plan  a  thing  practically  unattainable  in  the  Clmrch. 

IV.  That  the  appointed  order  of  march  was  not  in  fact  observed  in  its  entirety 
EXCEPT  AT  THE  VERY  FIRST,  because  slu  and  rebellion  altered  the  face  of  things  and 
made  it  impossible.  The  holy  picture  of  the  Christian  community,  drawn  in  Scrip- 
ture, was  only  realised  in  the  earliest  days,  and  was  soon  made  obsolete  in  many 
points  by  sin  and  unbelief. 

V.  That  in  spite  of  all  apparent  diflSoulties  the  march  to  Canaan  would  have 

BEEN    ACCOMPLISHED    WITHOUT    A  CHECK,    without    a    loSS,    IF    ONLY    THE    PEOPLE    HAD 

OBEYED  THE  DiviNB  COMMANDS,  and  relied  upon  the  supernatural  aid  extended  to 
them.  Had  Christians  remained  faithful,  and  responded  to  the  heavenly  graces 
promised  to  them,  the  Church  would  have  gone  on  as  it  began,  in  spite  of  all  difficul- 
ties ;  the  whole  eartk  had  been  evangelised,  the  number  of  the  elect  accomplished, 
and  the  heavenly  rest  attained  long  (it  may  be)  ere  this. 

VI.  That  the  great  secret,  humanly  speaking,  of  the  onward  progress  of 
THE  host  was  order,  in  that  every  single  person  had  his  place  and  his  work,  and 
knew  it.  Without  order  carefully  maintained  that  multitude  had  become  an  un- 
manageable mob,  which  could  not  have  moved  a  mile  or  lived  a  day.  Humanly 
speaking,  order,  discipline,  due  subordination,  allotted  division  of  labour,  is  the 
secret  of  the  Church's  success;  and  the  absence — still  mqfe  the  contempt — of  such 
order,  is  the  obvious  cause  of  the  Church's  failure. 

VII.  That  the  great  secret,  divinely  speaking,  of  Israel's  safety  and 
progress  was  the  fact  that  the  Lord  himself  was  in  their  midst  when  they 
rested,  at  their  head  when  they  marched,  by  the  ark  and  by  the  cloud.  In  the 
deepest  and  truest  sense  the  secret  of  pur  safety  and  of  our  victory  is  the  super- 
natural presence  of  God  with  the  Church  and  in  the  soul,  by  his  incarnate  Word  and 
by  his  Spirit.  There  is  at  once  the  real  bond  of  union,  and  the  real  source  of  strength. 
It  may  also  be  noted — 1.  That,  as  soon  as  their  time  of  preparation  was  fulfilled,  the 
cloud  led  Israel  into  the  wilderness  of  Paran,  to  be  tried  by  the  manifold  temptations 
of  that  way.  Even  so,  when  the  preparation  of  Jesus  for  his  work  was  finished,  he 
was  led  up  of  the  Spirit  into  the  wilderness  to  be  tempted  of  the  devil.  Israel,  called 
out  of  Egypt,  was  a  type  of  Christ  (Matt.  ii.  15),  and  the  cloud  was  the  symbol  of  • 
the  Divine  Spirit.  2.  That  the  fabric  of  the  tabernacle  was  sent  on  in  order  to  be  set 
up  in  readiness  to  receive  the  ark  and  sacred  vessels  when  they  arrived.  It  is  not 
always  an  idle  nor  a  useless  thing  to  set  up  the  external  formalities  of  religion  ia 
advance  of  the  true  spirit  of  worship,  in  faithful  expectation  that  ttus  too  will  ooiBCi, 
and  with  it  the  promised  blessine  of  God. 


n 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[CH.  X.  29—32 


EXPOSITION. 


The  invitation  to  Hobab  (vers.  29—32). 
Ver.  29. — Hobab,  the  son  of  Eaguel  (or 
rather  Reuel,  of  which  Eaguel  is  simply  the 
Septuagint  and  Vulgate  variation),  Moses' 
father-in-law.  It  is  not  quite  certain  who 
this  "Hobab"  was.  The  name  occurs  only 
here  and  in  Judges  iv.  1 1 .  The  older  opinion, 
followed  by  the  A.  y. ,  identified  Hobab  with 
Jethro,  and  Jethro  with  Reuel  the  "  priest  of 
Midian,"  and  father  of  Zipporah,  Moses' 
wife.  It  is,  of  course,  no  real  objection  to 
this  opinion  that  Hobab  is  here  called  the 
"  son  of  Reuel ; "  for  the  nams  may  quite 
well  have  been  an  hereditary  one,  like 
Abimelech  and  so  many  others.  Nor  need 
the  multiplicity  of  names  given  to  one  indi- 
vidual astonish  us,  for  it  is  of  frequent 
occurrence  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  not 
infrequent  in  the  New.  The  father-in-law 
of  Moses  was  a  priest,  holding  (probably  by 
right  of  birth)  the  patriarchal  dignity  of 
tribal  priest,  as  Job  did  on  a  smaUer,  and 
Melchizedec  on  a  larger,  scale.  He  may  very 
well,  therefore,  have  had  one  or  more  "  official " 
names  in  addition  to  his  personal  name.  If 
this  is  accepted,  then  it  may  serve  as  one 
instance  amongst  many  to  remind  us  how 
extremely  careless  the  inspired  writers  are 
about  names — "  careless  "  not  in  the  sense  of 
not  caring  whether  they  are  right  or  wrong, 
but  in  the  sense  of  not  betraying  and  not 
feeling  the  least  anxiety  to  avoid  the  appear- 
ince  and  suspicion  of  inaccuracy.  Even  in 
the  lists  of  the  twelve  apostles  we  are  forced 
to  believe  that  "  Judas  the  brother  of  James  " 
is  the  same  person  as  '*Lebba3us"  and 
"  Thaddseus  ;  "  and  it  is  a  matter  of  endless 
discussion  whether  or  no  "Bartholomew" 
was  the  same  as  "Nathanael."  On  the  face 
of  it  Scripture  proclaims  that  it  uses  no  arts, 
that  it  takes  no  pains  to  preserve  an  appear- 
ance of  accuracy — that  appearance  which  is 
so  easily  simulated  for  the  purposes  of  false- 
hood. Holy  Scripture  may  therefore  fairly 
claim  to  be  read  without  that  captiousness, 
without  that  demand  for  minute  carefulness 
and  obvious  consistency,  which  we  rightly 
apply  to  one  of  our  own  histories.  The 
modem  historian  avowedly  tells  his  story  as 
a  witness  does  in  the  presence  of  a  hostile 
counsel ;  the  sacred  historian  tells  his  as  a 
man  does  to  the  children  round  his  knee. 
Surely  such  an  obvious  fact  should  disarm  a 
good  deal  of  the  petty  criticism  which  carps 
at  the  sacred  nanative. 

Many,  however,  will  think  that  the 
balance  of  probahility  is  against  the  older 
opinion.  It  is  certain  that  the  word  trans- 
lated "  father-in-law  "  has  no  such  definite- 
ne«  either  in  the  Hebrew  or  in  the  Septua- 


gint. It  means  simplya  "marriage  relation," 
and  is  even  used  by  Zipporah  of  Moses 
himself  (Exod.  iv.  25,  26— Hebrew.  The 
Septuagint  avoids  the  word).  It  is  just 
as  likely  to  mean  "  brother-in-law "  when 
applied  to  Hobab.  As  Moses  was  already 
eighty  years  old  when  Jethro  is  first  men- 
tioned (Exod.  iii.  1),  it  may  seem  probable 
that  his  father-in-law  was  by  that  time  dead, 
and  succeeded  in  his  priestly  office  by  his 
eldest  son.  In  that  case  Hobab  would  he  a 
younger  son  of  Reuel,  and  as  such  free  to 
leave  the  home  of  his  ancestors  and  to  join 
himself  to  his  sister's  people. 

Ver.  31. — rorasmneh  as  thou  knowest 
how  we  are  to  encamp  in  the  wilderness, 
and  thou  mayest  be  to  us  instead  of  eyes. 
It  is  an  obvious  conclusion,  from  the  reasons 
here  urged  by  Moses,  that  the  many  and 
wonderful  promises  of  Divine  guidance  and 
Divine  direction  did  not  supersede  in  his 
eyes  the  use  of  all  available  human  aids.  It 
is  not  indeed  easy  to  say  where  any  room 
was  left  for  the  good  offices  and  experience 
of  Hobab  ;  the  cloud  of  the  Divine  Presence 
seemed  to  control  absolutely  the  journeying 
and  encamping  of  the  people ;  yet  if  we 
really  knew  in  detail  the  actual  ordering  of 
that  wondrous  march,  we  should  doubtless 
find  that  the  heavenly  guidance  did  bui 
give  unity  and  certainty  to  all  the  wisdom, 
caution,  and  endeavour  of  its  earthly  leaders. 
Indeed  if  we  recall  to  mind  that  the  host  is 
calculated  at  more  than  two  millions  of 
people,  it  is  quite  evident  that  even  during 
the  march  to  Eadesh  (and  much  more  in 
the  long  wanderings  which,  followed)  it 
must  have  been  extremely  difficult  to  keep 
the  various  divisions  together.  In  the  broken 
and  difficult  country  which  they  were  to 
traverse,  which  had  been  familiar  to  Hobab 
from  his  youth,  there  would  be  scope  enough 
for  all  his  ability  as  a  guide.  And  it  would 
seem  that  it  was  just  this  prospect  of  being 
really  useful  to  the  people  of  Israel  that  pre- 
vailed with  Hobab.  He  must  indeed  have 
felt  assured  that  a  wonderful  future  awaited 
a  nation  whose  past  and  present  were,  even 
witiim  his  own  knowledge,  so  wonderful. 
But  that  alone  could  not  move  him  to  leave 
his  own  land  and  his  own  kindred,  a  thing 
so  unspeakably  repugnant  to  the  feelings  and 
traditions  of  his  age  and  country.  Doubtless 
to  the  child  of  the  desert,  whose  life  was  a 
never-ending  struggle  with  the  dangers  and 
vicissitudes  of  the  wilderness,  the  land  of 
promise,  flowing  with  milk  and  honey, 
watered  with  the  rain  of  heaven,  seemed 
like  the  garden  of  Eden.  Yet  the  offer  ot 
an  heritage  within  that  land  moved  bin 


OH.  T,  29—32.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NDMBBK8. 


98 


not  80  mnch,  it  would  appear,  as  the  claim 
upon  his  own  good  offices  in  helpins  the 
chosen  people  to  reach  their  own  abode. 
The  Septuagint  translation,  or  rather  para- 
phrase, of  this  verse  is,  "  Leave  us  not,  foras- 
much  as  thou  wast  with  ns  in  the  wilderness, 
and  thou  shalt  be  an  elder  among  ns."  This 
seems,  on  the  one  hand,  to  identify  Hobab 
with  Jethro ;  on  the  other,  to  imply  that  he 
was  shortly  afterwards  one  of  the  seventy 
elders  upon  whom  the  spirit  came.  This, 
however,  is  not  likely.  Hobab  does  indeed 
seem  to  have  gone  with  the  people,  but  his 


descendants  were  not  incorporated  into  Israel ; 
they  were  with  them,  but  not  of  them. 

Ver.  32. — If  thou  go  with  ns.  From 
Judges  i.  16  we  learn  that  the  sons  of  Hobab 
joined  themselves  to  the  sons  of  Judah,  and 
dwelt  amongst  them  on  the  southern  border 
of  the  land.  Here  is  an  "  undesigned  coin- 
cidence," albeit  a  slight  one.  Judah  led  the 
way  on  the  march  from  Sinai  to  Canaan,  and 
Hobab's  duties  as  guide  and  scout  would 
bring  him  more  into  contact  with  that  tribe 
than  with  any  other. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  29 — 32. — The  friendly  invitation.  Spiritually,  we  have  here  the  voice  ol 
the  saints  calling  to  the  wavering  and  undecided  to  cast  in  their  lot  with  them,  and 
to  be  partakers  with  them  in  those  good  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them 
that  love  him.  Thereupon  we  have  the  voice  of  the  wavering  and  undecided  urging 
the  ties  and  afEections  of  this  world  as  supreme.  Then  again  the  voice  of  the  saints 
holding  up  the  prospect  at  once  of  greater  usefulness  and  of  higher  reward  in  the 
service  of  God.  Finally  (in  the  subsequent  history),  we  have  the  assurance  that 
these  persuasions  prevailed,  and  that  these  promises  were  made  good.     Consider — 

I.  That  the  invitation  was  addressed  to  Hobab.  This  Hobab  was — 1.  A 
child  of  the  desert,  a  "  Kenite,"  whose  home  was  in  the  wild  country  outside  the 
promised  land :  a  country  which  had  a  certain  wild  freedom  and  a  precarious  abund- 
ance, but  withal  full  of  dangers,  of  drought,  and  of  the  shadow  of  death.  2.  A 
child  of  a  patriarchal  family;  his  father,  "the  priest  of  Midian,"  and  a  worshipper 
of  the  true  God  according  to  tradition.  3.  A  child  of  Eeuel,  "  Moses'  father-in-law," 
and  therefore  connected  by  family  ties  with  Israel,  and  moreover  an  eye-witness  to 
some  extent  of  the  power  and  mercy  of  the  God  of  Israel.  Hobab  is  the  child  oj 
this  world,  whose  home  is  amidst  the  precarious  beauties  and  fading  hopes  of  time  ; 
who  has  a  knowledge  of  God  by  tradition,  and  a  knowledge  of  religion  by  observa- 
tion, yet  of  both  rather  as  belonging  to  others  than  to  himself. 

II.  That  the  invitation  came  prom  the  Israel  of  God.  "  Come  with  us." 
From  a  people  redeemed  and  separated,  and  sanctified,  a  "  holy  nation,  a  royal 
priesthood,"  whom  God  had  chosen  to  be  the  peculiar  instruments  of  his  glory,  the 
peculiar  recipients  of  his  bounty.  The  Israel  of  God  are  we  who  are  indeed  in  this 
world,  but  not  of  it,  having  our  true  and  certain  home  beyond  the  reach  of  chance 
and  change.  Note,  that  countless  individuals  amongst  the  tribes  of  Israel  never 
reached  that  land,  and  never  tried  to— but  the  people,  as  a  people,  reached  it ;  even 
80,  countless  numbers  of  professing  Christians  will  never  get  to  heaven,  and  do  not 
try  to,  but  the  Church  of  God,  as  a  Church,  will  attain  to  eternal  life.  Therefore, 
"  come  with  "us." 

III.  That  the  invitation  was  to  go  with  teem,  i.  e.,  1.  To  be  partner  and 
partaker  in  their  pilgrimage,  their  toils,  and  trials  ;  2.  To  be  partner  and  partaker  in 
their  promised  home  to  which  they  were  journeying,  in  the  blessings  unto  which  they 
were  called.  As  God  "  would  have  all  men  to  be  saved,"  so  is  it  the  chiefest  desire  of 
our  hearts  that  all  around  us  (and  especially  those  connected  with  us)  should  share 
our  blessings  and  our  hopes,  should  be  partakers  with  us  (if  need  be)  of  that  "  light 
affliction  "  which  worketh  an  "eternal  weight  of  glory"  (cf.  Eom.  ix.  3  and  x.  2). 

IV.  That  the  inducement  was,  "  we  will  do  thee  good."  Not  of  their  own 
ability,  or  of  their  own  abundance,  but  by  communicating  unto  him  the  good  things 
which  God  should  bestow  on  them.  We  may  fearlessly  say  to  the  child  of  this 
world,  "  we  will  do  thee  good."  Christianity  is  not  individualism,  but  we  are  called 
"  in  one  body,"  and  spiritual  blessings  flow  chiefly  in  one  way  or  another  through 
human  channels.  As  a  fact  men  find  peace,  support,  sympathy,  consolation  here — 
heaven  hereafter — in  the  society  of  the  faithful,  not  out  oi  it  (c£  Mark  z.  30). 


94  THE  BOOK  OP  NDMBEBS.  [ch.  x.  29—32, 

V.  That  the  hindrancb  to  his  going  was  the  prior  claim  of  an  earthly 
HOME  AND  kindred.  "  To  mine  own  land,  and  to  my  kindred."  His  own  land, 
although  not  half  so  good  as  the  promised  land,  was  familiar  and  accustomed.  So 
were  his  relations,  although  they  could  not  do  half  so  much  for  him  as  Moses  and  the 
elders  of  Israel.  Even  so  the  great  hindrance  to  a  really  religious  walk  are  to  be  found 
in  the  habits  of  life  which  are  so  familiar,  and  in  the  associates  who  have  so  much 
influence.  Many  find  an  insuperable  difficulty  in  breaking  with  the  evil  or  vain 
traditions  of  their  home,  their  education,  their  "  set "  or  class :  they  would  go — but 
the  bondage  of  custom  is  too  strong  for  them  (cf.  Luke  ix.  59 — 62  ;  xiv.  25,  26). 

VI.  That  the  fdrtheb  and  (as  it  seems)  the  prevailing  inducement  with 
him  to  go  was  the  help  he  might  affokd,  the  good  he  might  do.  Perhaps  it 
was  after  all  as  much  for  Hobab's  sake  as  for  the  people's,  that  Moses  suggested  to 
him  of  how  much  use  he  might  be  ;  but  no  doubt  his  training  and  qualifications  did 
fit  him  for  this  service,  and  he  felt  that  it  was  so.  Even  bo  there  is  a  nobler,  and 
often  more  potent,  incentive  to  a  religious  life  than  even  the  glory  which  is  to  come. 
The  prospect  of  being  really  useful  to  others,  of  making  the  utmost  of  all  their  gifts 
and  acquirements — and  that  in  the  service  of  the  Most  High — is  the  great  ambition 
which  we  ought  to  set  before  the  eyes  of  men.  A  worldly  life  is  a  wasted  life ;  a 
rehgious  life  is  (or  at  least  may  be,  and  ought  to  be)  a  life  of  unselfish  activity ;  and 
this,  of  all  prospects  and  attractions,  has  the  strongest  charm  for  each  nobler  soul 
(cf.  Matt.  iv.  19 ;  Luke  xix.  31,  34 ;  Acts  ix.  16  ;  xxvi.  16 — 18).     Consider,  also^ 

VII.  That  Hobab's  work  and  service  on  the  march  were  not  superfluous 
Iff  rendered,  nor  yet  essential  IP  denied.  The  supernatural  guidance  vouch- 
safed to  Israel  left  plenty  of  room  for  his  human  skill  and  experience ;  but  if  Israel 
had  been  deprived  of  them,  no  doubt  the  supernatural  guidance  would  somehow  have 
BufBced.  Even  so  there  is  room  in  tlie  work  of  salvation  of  souls  for  all  human  effort 
and  wisdom,  however  Divine  a  irialtor  it  appears  ;  and  yet  if  any  man  withhold  his 
co-operation  the  work  shall  not  therefore  be  really  injured  (cf.  1  Cor.  i.  27,  28  j 
iii.  7,  9). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vera.  29 — 32. — Hohah  invited;  or,  the  GhwrcKs  call  to  them  thai  are  withmtt. 
This  incident  carries  one  back  in  thought  to  the  day,  one  and  forty  years  ago,  when 
Moses,  a  fugitive  from  Egypt,  arrived  at  the  well  in  Midian,  and  there  met  with  the 
daughter  of  Jethro.  At  the  expiry  of  fort^'  years  the  call  of  the  Lord  constrained 
Moses  to  forsake  Midian,  that  he  might  be  the  leader  of  Israel ;  but  it  did  not  finally 
sever  him  from  all  connection  with  the  house  of  his  Midianite  father-in-law.  When^ 
Israel,  on  the  march  from  Egypt,  arrived  at  the  border  of  the  wilderness  of  Sinai, 
Jethro  came  out  to  meet  him,  and  to  welcome  him.  This  done,  he  returned  to  his 
own  house  and  sheep-walks.  But  his  son  Hobab  stayed  behind,  and  witnessed  the 
givingof  the  law.  When  the  march  was  about  to  be  resumed,  Hobab  proposed  to  bid 
farewell  to  his  sister  and  Moses.  But  Moses  would  not  hear  of  it.  Reminding 
Hobab  of  the  inheritance  awaiting  Israel  in  the  land  of  the  Canaanites,  he,  in  his 
own  name,  and  in  the  name  of  the  whole  people,  invited  him  to  join  himself  to  their 
company,  and  share  in  all  the  goodness  which  the  Lord  was  about  to  do  to  them  in 
fulfilment  of  his  promise.  This  invitation,  addressed  by  Moses  and  the  congregation 
to  one  who  did  not  belong  to  the  seed  of  Jacob,  is  of  no  small  interest  historically. 
And  its  practical  interest  is  still  greater  ;  for  it  exhibits  a  bright  example  of  a  desire 
which  ought  always  to  find  place  in  the  hearts  of  the  faithful — the  desire  to  allure 
into  their  fellowship  "  them  that  are  without,"  whether  these  are  the  heathen  abroad, 
or  the  careless  and  vicious  at  home.  Viewing  the  text  in  this  light,  it  presents  three 
topics  which  claim  consideration. 

L  The  Church's  profession  of  faith  and  hope.  "  We  are  journeying  unto  the 
place  of  which  the  Lord  said,  I  will  give  it  you.  .  .  .  The  Lord  hath  spoken  good 
concerning  Israel."     On  the  lips  of  Moses  and  the  congregation  this  was  really  a 

Erofession  and  utterance  of  faith.     From  the  day  that  God  called  Abraham,  he  and 
is  seed  were  taught  to  expect  Canaan  as  their  inheritance ;  and  it  was  faith's  busi- 
uess  to  embrace  the  promise  and  look  for  its  accomplishment.     In  the  faith  of  thii 


CH.  X.  29—32.1  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  96 


promise  Abraham  and  Isaac  and  Jacob  lived  and  died.  In  the  faith  of  it  Joseph, 
when  he  died,  gave  commandment  concerning  his  bones.  In  the  faith  of  it  Moses 
forsook  Pharaoh's  house.  In  the  faith  of  it  he  refused  to  cast  in  his  lot  with  Jethro's 
Midianites,  and  called  the  son  born  to  him  in  Midian  Gershom,  "a  stranger  there." 
In  the  faith  of  the  same  promise  Israel  was  now  resuming  the  march  towards  Canaan. 
It  is  no  idle  fancy  which  sees  in  all  this  a  parable  of  the  Christian  faith  and  the  Chris- 
tian profession.  We  also  look  for  an  inheritance  and  rest.  "  We  believe  that  we 
shall  be  saved."  We  have  been  begotten  to  a  living  hope  by  the  resurrection  of 
Christ.  As  truly  as  the  tribes  in  the  wilderness,  we  (unless  we  have  believed  in 
vain)  have  turned  our  backs  upon  Egypt,  and  have  set  our  faces  towards  the  better 
country.  We  are  journeying.  We  are  strangers  and  pilgrims.  1  admit  that 
among  professing  Christians  there  are  many  who  have  no  real  hope  of  the  kind 
described ;  many,  also,  whose  hope  is  anything  but  bright  and  strong.  Nevertheless, 
the  world  is  certainly  mistaken  when  it  persuades  itself  that  the  Christian  hope  is  an 
empty  boast.  There  are  tens  of  thousands  whose  lives  are  sustained  and  controlled 
by  it  continually. 

II.  The  Church's  invitation  to  them  that  aeb  without.  "Come  thou  with 
us."  The  words  remind  us  of  a  truth  too  often  forgotten,  namely,  that  even  under 
the  Old  Testament  the  Church  was  by  no  means  the  exclusive  body  which  some  take 
it  to  have  been.  It  had  an  open  door  and  a  welcome  for  all  who  desired  to  enter. 
In  point  of  fact,  a  considerable  proportion  of  those  who  constituted  the  Hebrew  com- 
monwealth at  any  given  time  were  of  Gentile  descent.  Moses  did  not  act  without 
warrant  when  he  invited  Hobab  to  come  in— he  and  all  his.  At  the  same  time  it  is  to 
be  remembered  that  the  gospel  Church  is  not  to  be  contented  with  simply  maintain- 
ing the  attitude  of  the  Old  Testament  Church  towards  them  that  are  without.  We  are 
not  only  to  keep  an  open  door  and  make  applicants  welcome,  we  are  to  go  forth  and 
compel  them  to  come  in.  Christ's  Church  is  a  missionary  Church.  A  religious  society 
which  neglects  this  function — which  refuses  to  obey  the  command  to  go  and  preach 
the  gospel  to  every  creature — lacks  one  of  the  notes  of  the  Christian  Church.  We 
are  to  charge  ourselves  with  the  duty  of  sending  the  gospel  to  the  far-off  heathen. 
As  for  the  careless  and  ungodly  who  are  our  neighbours,  we  are  not  only  to  send 
to  them  the  word,  but  ought  personally  to  invite  them  to  come  with  us. 

III.  The  abghments  with  which  the  invitation  is  foktipibd.  I  refer  especially 
to  those  urged  by  Moses  and  the  congregation  here.  1.  It  will  be  well  for  Hobab 
and  hig  house  if  he  will  come  (ver.  32).  No  doubt  the  man  who  follows  Christ 
must  be  prepared  to  take  up  the  cross^ — must  be  ready  to  suffer  reproach,  to  encoun- 
ter tribulation,  to  take  in  hand  self-denying  work.  These  things  are  not  pleasant  to 
flesh  and  blood.  Yet  after  all,  Wisdom's  ways  are  the  ways  of  pleasantness.  Com- 
pared with  the  devil's  yoke,  the  yoke  of  Christ  is  easy.  Godliness  has  the  promise  of 
both  worlds.  Those  who  have  given  Christ's  service  a  fair  trial  would  not  for  the 
world  change  masters.  2.  Hobab  is  to  come,  for  the  Lord  hath  need  of  him  (vers, 
30,  31).  It  seems  that  Moses'  brother-in-law  feared  he  might  be  an  intruder  and  a 
burden.  No  such  thing.  A  son  of  the  desert  would  be  of  manifold  service  to  the 
congregation  in  the  desert.  There  is  great  wisdom  in  this  argument.  It  is  a  great 
mistake  to  suppose  that  people  seriously  inquiring  after  salvation  will  attach  them- 
selves most  readily  to  the  Church  which  will  give  them  nothing  to  do.  The  nobler  sort 
will  be  attracted  rather  by  the  prospect  of  being  serviceable.  To  sura  up — the  argu- 
ment which  will  carry  the  greatest  weight  with  unbelievers  and  despisers  of  God  is  that 
which  utters  itself  in  the  Church's  profession  of  its  own  faith  and  hope.  A  Church 
whose  faith  is  weak  and  whose  hope  is  dim  will  be  found  to  have  little  power  to  rouse 
the  careless  and  draw  them  into  its  fellowship.  Men  are  most  likely  to  be  gained  to 
Christ  and  the  way  of  salvation  by  the  Church  whose  members  manifest  by  their  words 
and  lives  the  presence  in  their  hearts  of  a  bright  and  living  hope  of  eternal  life. — B. 

Vers.  29 — 32. — Moses  and  Hohah.  I.  The  wondeeful  changes  God  makes  in 
human  life.  What  men  do  themselves,  the  history  of  self-made  men,  is  often  very 
astonishing,  yet  nothing  to  the  history  of  God-made  men.  For  forty  years  Mosea 
had  been  a  shepherd  in  this  wilderness  ;  as  we  may  conjecture,  an  oft  companion  with 
Hobab  in  these  very  scenes.     Suddenly  he  goes  away  to  Egypt  to  visit  his  brethren, 


9«  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES.  [oh.  x.  29-32. 

and  in  the  course  of  a  few  months  returns  to  the  wilderness  with  over  600,000  fight- 
ing men,  beside  women  and  cliildren.  So  in  the  Scriptures  we  find  many  other 
wonderful  God-made  changes  in  human  life.  Joseph  leaving  his  brethren  a  slave — 
his  brethren  finding  him  again  prime  minister  to  Pharaoh.  The  lad  David  brought 
from  the  recluse  pastoral  scene  to  stand  before  armies  and  slay  the  dreaded  foe  of 
Israel.  Jesus  visiting  Nazareth  to  be  a  wonderment  and  stumbling-block  to  those 
who  had  known  him  from  infancy.  Saul  among  the  persecutors  when  he  left  Jeru- 
salem— among  the  perseouted  when  he  returns. 

II.  These  wonderful  changes  may  bb  exhibited  so  as  to  make  others  the  sub- 
JECTB  OF  THEM.  Hobab  had  probably  been  much  with  Moses,  for  old  acquaintance' 
sake,  while  the  people  of  God  were  round  about  Sinai.  The  recollections  of  the  past 
were  comparatively  fresh,  and  Moses  had  a  natural  interest  in  a  kinsman.  But  now 
the  time  has  come  to  move,  and  what  must  Hobab  do  ?  The  necessities  of  God's 
kingdom  bring  a  separation  sooner  or  later  in  all  friendship,  unless  both  parties  are 
in  the  kingdom.  It  is  the  critical  moment  of  Hobab's  life,  and  he  must  decide  at 
once.  Not  but  what  he  might  change  his  mind,  and  follow  afterwards,  only  the 
chances  were  that  it  was  now  or  never.  Thus  Hobab  is  the  illustration  ot  all  who 
are  asked  and  pressed  to  join  the  people  of  God.  To  such  persons  every  narration 
of  God's  experienced  grace  to  others-brings  a  cordial  invitation  in  the  very  telling  of 
it.  It  is  our  own  fault  if  we  be  mere  spectators  of  the  cloud,  hearers  of  the  trumpet. 
God  had  made  most  gracious  provision  for  the  stranger  to  come  into  Israel.  No 
word  could  be  more  cordial  and  pressing  than  that  of  Moses  here.  It  was  not  hatred 
of  outsiders  as  outsiders,  but  as  abominably  wicked,  that  brought  God's  vengeance 
un  them. 

III.  These  wonderful  changes  mat  be  exhibited  without  producing  stm- 
PATHT  and  appreciation.  The  reply  of  Hobab  illustrates  the  natural  man  in  his 
want  of  sympathy  with  spiritual  struggles.  "  The  natural  man  receiveth  not  the 
things  of  the  Spirit  of  God."  How  many  there  have  been  of  such  spectators  in  every 
nge,  those  who  have  seen  some  old  companion  suddenly  borne  away,  come  under  the 
influence  of  new  powers,  and  turn  what  is  called  fanatic  and  enthusiast  I  The  old 
ties  are  all  broken,  or,  if  any  remain,  there  is  no  substance  in  them.  Believer  and 
unbeliever  may  continue  to  meet  in  the  commerce  of  the  world,  but  in  closer  relations 
they  can  meet  no  longer.  When  Pitt  was  told  of  the  great  religious  change  that  had 
passed  over  Wilberforce,  he  suggested  to  his  friend  that  he  was  out  of  spirits,  and 
that  company  and  conversation  would  be  the  best  way  of  dissipating  his  impressions. 
Hobab  was  quite  contented  with  bis  sheep  in  the  desert.  He  did  not  want  to  be  cir- 
cumcised, and  held  in  with  such  rigorous  restrictions.  Doubtless  he  had  a.  warm 
place  in  his  heart  for  Moses,  but  he  could  not  say  as  Buxton  once  signed  himself  in 
a  letter  to  J.  J,  Guruey,  "Yours,  in  the  threefold  cord  of  taste,  affection,  and 
religion." — Y. 

Ver.  29. — A  right  feeling  and  a  Christian  invitation.  J.  The  feeling  which 
should  be  in  all  Christian  hearts.  "  We  are  journeying  unto  the  place  of  which 
the  Lord  said,  I  will  give  it  you."  Thus  our  view  of  the  future  should  be  regulated 
as'  a  future  not  of  our  achieving,  but  of  God's  giving.  The  end  is  definite  and 
assured,  however  devious  and  tedious  the  way  may  be.  The  end  is  one  not  to  be 
reached  immediately  ;  the  place  which  God  will  give  us  must  be  at  a  secure  distance 
from  spiritual  Egypt,  with  its  bondage  and  tyranny.  The  feeling  which  we  entertain 
■with  respect  to  this  place  must  be  a  confident  one,  and  expressed  in  a  manner  corre- 
sponding. The  feeling  thus  entertained  and  expressed  must  have  all  our  actions  in 
harmony  with  it.  Our  closest  connections  with  earth  should  be  as  nothing  more  than 
the  pegs  of  the  Israelite  tents,  here  to-day  and  gone  to-morrow  (John  xiv.  1 — 3 ;  xvii. 
24 ;  2  Cor.  v.  1—9 ;  Heb.  iv.  11 ;  xi.  13—16  ;  xii.  27  ;  1  Pet.  i.  3,  4). 

II.  The  invitation  which  should  come  from  all  Christian  lips.  "  Come  thou 
with  us,  and  we  will  do  thee  good."  Addressed  to  those  who  may  think  they  have 
a  true  home  among  things  seen  and  temporal,  but  who  are  as  really  without  a  home 
as  is  the  Christian.  If  Christians  are  sure  they  are  going  onward  to  the  true  home 
chosen,  secured,  and  enriched  by  God,  what  is  more  Christ-like  than  that  they  should 
ask  their  Hobab-neighbours  to  join  their  well-protected,  well-provisioned  caravan  ? 


W— 32.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  91 

If  even  now  sweet  influences  from  the  rest  that  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God 
possess  our  souls,  these  should  be  used  to  win  others  from  the  illusions  of  this  passing 
scene.  What  a  blessed  occupation  to  be  drawing  human  spirits  into  that  sphere  of 
the  unseen  and  eternal  which  alone  gives  thetti  a  fitting  service  here,  and  a  true  rest 
and  reward  hereafter !  The  invitation  must  be  a  loving  and  constraining  one.  To 
promise  good  to  others,  we  must  feel  and  show  that  we  have  got  good  ourselves. 
The  invitation  can  only  come  when  we  ourselves  feel  that  we  are  in  the  right  way 
to  the  desired  end. 

III.  The  nEASoN  bt  which  the  invitation  is  enforced.  "  The  Loid  hath  spoken 
good  concerning  Israel."  Concerning  Israel.  Concerning  other  nations  he  had 
spoken  ill  for  their  idolatries  and  abominations.  Sodom  was  a  witness  to  his  con- 
suming wrath,  and  his  hand  had  been  laid  heavily  on  Egypt.  But  concerning  Israel 
he  had  spoken  good  in  a  large  and  loving  way  (Exotl.  iii.  6 — 8;  vi.  6^8;  zxiii. 
20 — 33).  The  stranger  then  must  cealse  to  be  a  stranger,  and  enter  by  circumcision 
of  the  heart  into  the  spiritual  Israel.  '  The  force  of  the  invitations  does  not  depend 
on  our  sanguine  anticipations.  Others  are  as  well  able  tO  consider  what  the  Lord  has 
spoken  as  we  are.  His  word  is  the  guarantee.  If  even  the  Jewish  nation,  the 
typical  Israel,  has  still  to  have  prophecies  fulfilled,  how  much  more  its  antitype,  the 
spiritual  Israel,  those  who  are  Jews  inwardly  I  Consider  for  yourselves  then  all  the 
good  that  God  has  spoken  concerning  Israel. — ^Y 

Ver.  31. — A  fresh  appeal.  Moses  has  failed  in  appealing  to  Hobab  by  a  regard 
for  his  own  best  interests,  but  he  has  a  second  arrow  in  his  quiver.  He  will  touch 
Hobab's  sense  of  friendship,  his  manliness,  anything  that  was  chivalrous  in  him ; 
he  will  put  him  on  his  honour  to  render  just  the  one  service  he  was  able  to  render. 
Note— 

I.  The  services  which  the  world  can  render  to  the  Church.  We  may  fairly 
assume,  considering  Judges  i.  16,  that  Hobab  went  with  Moses  after  all  (Matt.  xxi.  29). 
He  will  help  Moses  the  man,  when  he  cares  nothing  for  Moses  the  prophet  of  God. 
Theie  may  be  a  certain  sense  of  duty  even  when  there  is  none  of  sin  and  spiritual 
need,  a  certain  power  to  help,  even  though  the  highest  power  be  utterly  lacking. 
The  peculiar  strength  of  the  Church  is  in  God ;  when  it  does  spiritual  work  with 
spiritual  instruments ;  but  the  world  may  also  be  tributary  in  its  own  way.  The 
wealth  of  the  world  is  not  a  spiritual  thing,  but  it  has  been  helpful  to  the  Church. 
Men  of  the  world  have  neither  the  Christ-like  love  nor  the  self-denial  to  initiate  enter- 
prises, which,  nevertheless,  they  will  generous!)'  support.  In  person  they  will  do 
nothing;  in  purse  they  will  do  much.  The  printer  who  cares  nothing  for  Christ, 
who  to-day  prints  the  scoffs  and  quibbles  of  an  atheist,  or  some  frivolous  fiction,  may 
to-morrow  print  a  Bible,  or  a  precious  biography  of  some  departed  saint.  Places 
of  worship  have  been  built  by  men  who  had  no  religion  in  them.  Fishers'  boats 
ferried  Jesus  across  the  lake  of  Galilee ;  trading  ships  took  Paul  on  his  missionary 
journey ;  and  soldiers  of  Caesar  conveyed  him  to  Borne,  where  for  so  long  a  time  he 
had  panted  to  preach  the  gospel. 

II.  The  hold  which  the  Church  keeps  on  the  world.  Hobab  said  very 
bluntly  he  would  not  go  with  Moses  ;  but  he  had  not  thought  of  all  the  considerations 
that  might  be  brought  to  bear  upon  him.  The  grasp  of  Moses  was  firmer  than  he 
thought.  Let  no  worldly  man  despise  what  he  deems  the  dreams  and  delusions  of 
the  Christian.  They  may  have  a  greater  power  on  him  in  the  end  than  at  present  he 
has  any  conception  of.  Human  friendships  and  old  associations  are  part  of  the  bait 
with  which  Christ  furnishes  his  fishers  of  men.  Those  who  will  not  read  the  Scrip- 
tures for  salvation,  and  who  laugh  at  the  schemes  of  doctrine  drawn  from  them,  yet 
find  in  the  same  Scriptures  too  much  of  poetry  and  interest  to  be  slightingly  passed 
by.  What  a  strange  thing,  too,  to  hear  men,  even  in  all  their  vehement  denials  of 
the  supernatural,  extolling  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  admiring  his  spirit,  and  recommend- 
ing his  ethics.  However  they  try,  they  cannot  get  away  from  him.  "  I,  if  I  be 
lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me."  We  must  not  despair  of  unbelievers,  even 
after  many  refusals  fLuke  xiii.  6 — 9).  In  connection  with  Moses  and  Hobab,  a 
reference  to  Tennysoirs  '  In  Memoriam,'  Ixiii.,  "  Dost  thou  look  back  on  what  hath 
been  ?  "  &o.,  may  be  found  homiletically  helpful. — Y. 

NDMBSBS.  a 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBa 


[oB.  z.  3ft— S& 


EXPOSITION. 


The  aotttal  departure  from  Sinai 
(vers.  33—36).  Ver.  33.— And  they  de- 
parted. These  words  mark  the  moment  of 
actual  departure,  which  has  been  anticipated 
in  the  general  statement  of  ver.  12.  It  was 
one  of  the  supreme  moments  in  the  life  of 
Israel — one  of  those  beginnings  or  "depar- 
tures "  which  lead  to  untold  gain  or  loss ;  it 
was,  in  fact,  although  they  knew  it  not,  the 
commencement  of  a  march  which  for  almost 
all  of  them  should  know  no  end  except  within 
a  hasty  grave.  No  doubt,  during  the  months 
spent  at  Sinai,  every  preparation  had  been 
made  for  the  onward  journey;  but  none  the 
less  it  was  a  stupendous  enterprise  to  march 
that  vast  host,  so  largely  composed  of  women 
and  children,  so  little  inured  to  such  fatigue, 
and  so  impatient  of  such  discipline,  for  three 
consecutive  days  into  a  wilderness.  Three 
days'  j  onrney .  This  expression  is  apparently 
a  general  one,  and  not  to  be  strictly  pressed 
(of.  Gen.  XXX.  36 ;  Exod.  iii.  18 ;  xv.  22). 
At  the  same  time  it  implies  (1)  that  the  host 
twice  halted  for  the  night  during  the  journey, 
and  (2)  that  the  whole  journey  was  regarded 
as  one  and  in  some  sense  as  complete  in  itself. 
The  terminus  ad  quem  of  this  three  days' 
journey  is  given  us  in  ver.  12  ;  it  was  to  take 
them  across  the  intervening  belt  of  sand,  and 
to  land  them  fairly  within  the  "wilderness 
of  Paran. "  During  this  journey  no  doubt  the 
march  would  be  pushed  on  as  steadily  as 
possible,  but  it  is  not  likely  that  it  would  cover 
so  much  as  thirty  miles.  A  modem  army, 
unencumbered  with  non-Bombatants,  does  not 
make  more  than  ten  miles  a  day  over  difficult 
country,  nor  can  cattle  be  driven  faster  than 
that.  Even  to  accomplish  that  rate,  and  to 
keep  the  whole  multitude  together,  as  the 
narrative  implies,  required  supernatural  aid 
and  strength.  For  the  direction  of  the  march 
see  notes  on  ch.  xiiL  The  ark  of  the  cove- 
sant  of  the  Lord  went  before  them.  It  is 
obvious  that  what  is  apparently  affirmed  here 
is  apparently  at  variance  with  ch.  ii.  17  and 
ver.  21  of  this  chai.ter,  which  speak  of  the 
"  holy  things  " — of  which  the  ark  was  the 
most  holy — as  carried  by  the  Kohathites  in 
the  very  midst  of  the  long  line  of  march. 
Three  opinions  have  been  held  on  the  subject, 
1.  That  the  ark  was  really  carried  with  the 
other  "holy  things," and  only  "went before" 
metaphorically,  as  a  general  may  be  said  to 
lead  his  troops,  although  he  may  not  be  actu- 
ally in  front  of  them  ;  to  which  it  is  obvious 
to  reply  that  if  the  ark  did  not  actually  pre- 
cede the  host,  there  was  no  possible  way  in 
which  it  could  direct  their  movements ;  the 
cloud  alone  would  be  the  visible  expression 
«f  the  Divine  guidance.  2.  That  the  "holy 
things  "  generally  were  ordered  to  be  carried 


in  the  midst  of  the  host  by  the  Kohathites, 
but  that  God  reserved  the  place  of  the  ark 
itself  to  his  own  immediate  disposition.  A 
general  does  not  include  himself  in  his  own 
marching  orders,  however  minute  j  and  the 
ark  was  the  outward  symbol  of  God's  own 
personal  presence  and  guidance.  It  is,  there- 
fore, not  at  all  surprising  that  the  first  inti- 
mation of  the  position  of  the  ark  on  the  march 
should  be  given  at  the  mom  ent  when  the  march 
actually  commenced.  3.  That  the  usual  place 
for  the  ark  was  no  doubt  with  the  sanctuary, 
as  implied  in  the  orders,  but  that  on  this 
special  occasion  the  ark  went  to  the  front  in 
consequence  of  some  Divine  intimation,  just 
as  it  (ud  at  the  crossing  of  Jordan  and  at  the 
taking  of  Jericho,  Certainly  there  is  much 
reason  in  this  view,  considering  how  mo- 
mentous and  formidable  was  their  first  assay 
at  marching  from  their  temporary  home 
towards  that  unknown  land  beyond  the 
northern  horizon.  If  the  deep  waters  of 
Jordan  might  fright  them,  or  the  walls  of 
Jericho  de^  them,  well  might  they  shrink 
from  plnnging  into  the  broken,  stony,  and 
intractable  country  into  which  the  ark  and 
the  cloud  now  led  them.  We  shall  pro- 
bably think  that  either  habitually  or  at  least 
occasionally  the  ark  did  go  before,  and  that 
the  feet  of  them  that  bare  it  were  super- 
naturally  directed,  either  by  the  movements 
of  the  cloud,  or  by  some  more  secret  intima- 
tion, towards  the  destined  place  of  rest.  It 
is  allowed  by  all  that  the  cloud  preceded  and 
directed  the  march,  and  it  would  be  strange 
indeed  if  these  twin  symbols  of  the  Divine 
presence  had  been  so  far  separated  from  one 
another ;  for  the  accustomed  place  of  the 
cloud  was  above  the  tabernacle,  i.  e.  above  the 
ark,  yet  outside  of  the  tabernacle,  so  as  to  be 
visible  to  all. 

Ver.  84. — The  clond  of  the  lord  was  upon 
them  by  day.  It  would  seem  as  if  the  cloud, 
which  was  luminous  by  night,  dense  and  dark 
by  day,  spread  itself  upwards  and  backwards 
from  over  the  ark,  overshadowing  the  host  as 
it  followed — a  refreshment  at  any  rate  to  those 
who  were  near,  perhaps  to  all,  and  a  guiding 
beacon  to  those  who  were  afar.  To  what 
extent  the  people  at  large  were  able  to  enjoy 
this  shade  amidst  the  burning  heats  of  the 
desert  we  cannot  possibly  tell,  but  there  is^ 
no  doubt  that  it  dwelt  in  the  memory  of  the' 
nation,  and  gave  meaning  to  such  expressions 
as  the  "shadow  of  the  Almighty  "  (Ps.  xci. 
1),  and  "the  shadow  of  o  cloud"  (Isa.  xxv. 
4,5). 

Ver.  35. — When  the  ark  set  forward. 
These  words,  taken  in  connection  with  the 
words  "when  it  rested,"  in  the  following 
verse,  confirm  the  belief  that  at  this  time 


OH.  X.  83—36.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS. 


(at  any  late)  the  aik  went  before  the  host ; 
ibr  if  it  had  remained  in  the  midst,  it  would 
not  have  stirred  until  half  the  tribes  had 
moyed  off,  nor  would  it  have  halted  until 
half  the  camp  was  pitched,  whereas  it  is 
evident  that  its  setting  forward  and  stand- 
ing still  were  the  decisive  moments  of  the 
day.  They  had,  as  it  were,  a  sacramental 
character ;  they  were  visible  signs,  corre- 
sponding to  invisible  realities,  as  the  move- 
ments of  the  hands  on  the  dial  correspond 
to  the  action  of  the  machinery  within. 
When  the  ark  and  the  cloud  set  forward,  it 
was  the  Almighty  God  going  on  befoi-e  to 
victory  ;  when  the  ark  and  the  cloud  rested, 
it  was  the  all-merciful  God  returning  to  pro- 
tect and  cherish  his  own.  This  is  clearly 
recognised  in  the  morning  and  evening  prayer 
of  Moses.  The  typical  and  spiritual  charac- 
ter of  that  setting  forward  and  that  resting 
could  not  well  have  been  lost  upon  any  re- 
ligious mind — that  God  going  before  us  is 
the  certain  and  abiding  pledge  of  final  victory, 
that  God  returning  to  us  is  the  only  hope 
of  present  safety.  Bise  up,  Lord,  and  let 
thine  enemies  be  scattered.  The  sixty-eighth 
Psalm,  which  we  have  learnt  to  associate 
with  the  wonders  of  Pentecost  and  the  tri- 
umphs of  the  Church  on  earth,  seems  to  be 
an  expansion  of  Moses'  morning  prayer. 
Vei.  36.  — Beturn,  0  Lord,  unto  the  many 


thonsands  (literally,  myriad  thousands ;  sea 
ch.  i.  16)  of  Israel.  H^-l^  being  construed 
with  the  accusative  is  of  somewhat  doubtful 
interpretation.  It  may  be  as  in  the  beautiful 
and  familiar  rendering  of  the  A.  V.,  than 
which  nothing  could  be  more  obviously  in 
harmony  with  the  circumstances,  and  the 
feelings  which  gave  rise  to  the  prayer.  Or  it 
may  be  necessary  to  translate  it  by  a  transi- 
tive verb,  and  then  it  will  be  either,  with 
many  modems,  "Restore,  0  Lord,  the  myriad 
thousands  of  Israel,"  i.  e.  to  their  promised 
home  ;  or,  with  the  Septuagint,  "  Gowoerl,  0 
Lord  (e7ri(jrpe0e,  Kupit),  the  thousand  myri- 
ads of  Israel."  If  the  ordinary  reading  be 
(as  it  appears)  grammatically  defensible,  it  is 
unquestionably  to  be  preferred.  Only  Moses, 
as  he  looked  upon  that  huge  multitude  cover- 
ing the  earth  far  and  wide,  could  rightly  fee] 
how  unutterably  awful  their  position  would 
be  if  on  any  day  the  cloud  were  to  rise  and 
melt  into  the  evening  sky  instead  of  poising 
itself  above  the  sanctuary  of  Israel.  The  Sep- 
tuagint transposes  ver.  3i  from  its  proper 
place  to  the  end  of  the  chapter,  apparently 
in  order  to  keep  together  the  verses  which 
speak  of  the  movements  of  the  ark.  Many 
Hebrew  MSS.  mark  vers,  35,  36  with  inverted 
nuns,  C,  but  the  explanations  given  are  fanci- 
ful, and  the  meaning  uncerlaiu. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  33 — 36. — The  heavenward  march.  Spiritually,  we  have  here  the  journey  of 
the  Church  of  God,  or  of  the  faithful  soul,  towards  heaven  under  the  guidance  of  the 
Savioiir.  For  the  ark,  whereon  rested  the  Shechiiiah,  and  in  which  was  carried  the 
law,  is  the  type  of  Jesus^  in  whom  dwelt  the  whole  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily 
(of.  2  Cor.  iii.  18  ;  iv.  6  b. ;  Col.  ii.  9),  and  in  whom  as  manifested  to  us  is  found  the 
new  law  of  love  and  liberty  (Ps.  -xL  8 ;  of.  Mark  xii.  30,  31  ;  Eom.  vii.  6  ;  Jas.  i. 
25  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  21  6.).  Therefore  we  have  here  Jesus  going  before  his  own,  (1)  to  guide 
them  in  the  daily  path,  (2)  to  lead  them  to  their  rest  when  the  journey  is  over  (of.  John 
X.  4  ;  liv.  2).  In  the  cloud,*again,  we  have  (it  may  be)  the  refreshment  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  ("  another  Comforter  " ),  when  we  face  the  burden  and  heat  of  life.  Lastly,  we 
have  the  devout  prayers  of  the  faithful  for  the  help  of  God  in  their  spiritual  warfare, 
for  the  presence  of  God  with  their  souls.     Consider,  therefore,  on  vers.  33,  34 — 

I.  That  the  hour  of  dbpabtceb  from  Hoeeb,  so  long  delayed,  and  the  plunge 

INTO    THE    STONY   DESEET,   SO   OFTEN    ANTICIPATED,   CAME    AT   LAST.      Many   may    have 

thought  it  would  never  really  arrive,  but  it  did  ;  and  in  a  few  hours  the  mount,  which 
had  been  the  scene  of  such^wondrous  events,  was  hidden  for  ever  from  their  eyes. 
Even  so  we  cannot  abide  on  the  heights  of  contemplation  (with  Moses),  or  in  the 
plains  of  instruction  (with  the  people).  There  is  a  time  to  receive  marching  orders  ; 
there  is  a  much  longer  and  more  trying  time  to  march  accordingly  amidst  hard  trials 
and  diflScult  undertakings — and  this  time  will  surely  come  to  each  and  all  (Matt.  i. 
38 ;  Acts  xiv.  22  6. ;  2  Tim.  ii.  12 ;  iii.  12). 

II.  That  the  Iseablitbs  webe  not  ebqdired  to  find  their  own  way,  ob  trust 
TO  HUMAN  guidance:  THE  ARK  WENT  BEPOBB  THEM.  They  only  had  to  foUow  as  best 
they  might.  Even  so  Jesus  goes  before  his  own ;  once  for  all,  by  his  death,  resurrec- 
tion, and  ascension  ;  daily,  by  his  example  and  encouragement.  As  he  bias  gone 
before  us  all  into  heaven  to  prepare  a  "rest"  for  the  people  of  God,  so  he  goes 
before  each  weary  soul  in  life  and  death  to  find  out  resting-places  and  places  at 
refreshment  for  it  (Ps.  zxiii.  4 ;  John  viii.  12 ;  xii.  26 ;  xiv.  2,  6). 

h2 


100  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [ch.  x.  83—36. 

III.  That  the  Israelites  webb  in  pabt  shielded  from  the  fierce  and  fatal 

HEATS  OF  THE  DESERT  MARCH  BT  THE  CLOUD  tVHICH  OVERSHADOWED  THEM  FROM  ABOVE 

THE  ABK.  For  that  luminous  cloud  which  rested  permanently  over  the  ark  wae 
spread  over  the  following  host  when  on  the  march.  St.  Paul  says  that  the  Jews  were 
"  baptized  unto  Moses  in  the  eloud  and  in  the  sea  "  (1  Cor.  x.  2),  whence  it  appears 
that  as  the  passage  of  the  sea  represented  in  a  figure  the  baptism  of  water  which 
separates  outwardly  unto  Christ  (the  Moses  of  the  bfetter  covenant),  so  did  tiie  over- 
hanging cloud  with  its  moiat  coolness  represent  the  baptism  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  an 
abiding  refreshment  to  the  faithful  while  (but  only  while)  they  follow  Chrisi  And 
thus  the  old  hymn,  Vmi  Sanctus  Spiritus—^ 

Thou  of  Comforters  the  best ; 
Thou  the  soul's  most  welcome  guest  j 
Sweet  refreshment  here  below; 

In  our  labour  rest  most  sweet, 
Grateful  coolness  in  the  heat. 
Solace  in  the  midst  of  woe. 

Even  BO,  therefore,  the  overshadowing  presence  (cf.  Luke  i.  35)  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
the  blessed  solace,  comfort,  and  refreshment  of  the  faithful  in  fierj-  trials,  fierce 
temptatiorts,  and  weary  disappointments ;  and  this  overshadowing  Presence  reaches 
us  only  from  and  through  the  glorified  humanity  of  Jesus  (our  Ark),  and  only  while 
we  walk  in  faith  and  patience  (cf.  John  vii.  39 ;  xvi.  7 ;  Bom.  viii.  14 ,  1  John  ii.- 
20 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  14).  Note,  that  the  unrecorded  sufferings  and  vexations  of  such  a 
host  on  such  a  march  must  have  been  beyond  description  ;  but  this  much  appears, 
that  the  nearer  they  kept  to  the  ark  the  more  they  were  sheltered  by  the  cloud :  if 
any  staid  in  camp,  he  had  no  shade.  The  more  closely  we  follow  Jesus,  the  more 
comfort  of  the  Spirit  shall  we  have  amidst  the  imavoidable  sorrows  and  sufferings  of 
life.  And  note,  that  there  are  in  the  Old  Testament  very  few  symbols  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  whereas  there  are  an  endless  number  of  types  of  Christ— ^and  this,  no  doubt, 
in  accordance  with  the  deep  saying  of  John  vii.  39  {ovwia  ydp  fiv  irvivfta  liyiov).  "When, 
therefore,  we  find  one  which  is  recognised  in  the  New  Testament,  it  is  the  more 
precious.     Consider,  again,  on  vers.  36,  36 — 

I.  That  evert  day  of  the  march  had  for  Moses  its  two  supreme  moments,  of 

BETTING  OUT  AND  OF  SETTLING  DOWN,  AND  EACH   HAD  ITS  OWN  DANGERS  AND  ANXIETIES. 

Even  so  every  day  in  a  Christian's  life  has  its  morning  and  evening,  its  opening  and 
closing ;  its  going  forth  to  work,  to  business,  to  converse  with  the  outer  world,  to 
manifold  encounter  with  the  strange,  tbe  unexpected,  the  difBcult,  perhaps  the 
terrible ;  its  coming  in  to  rest,  to  ease,  to  unguarded  relaxation,  to  the  little  circle 
where  self  is  paramount,  where  the  individual  is  all  important.  These  two  points  are 
the  critical  points  in  the  Christian's  daily  life.  • 

II.  That  Moses  made  his  morning  prater  fob  Divine  defence  and  aid  against 
THE  FOE.  He  knew  that  many  enemies  were  hovering  round  (like  the  Aroalekites) 
who  might  attack  them  at  any  time,  even  when  least  expected,  and  might  find  them, 
humanly  speaking,  an  easy  prey,  fie  prayed  that  God  would  undertakp  their  cause, 
and  put  to  flight  their  foes.  Even  so  the  faithful  soul,  looking  forward  to  the  active 
hours  of  the  day,  knows  from  sad  experience  that  spiritual  foes  will  dog  its  path  to 
assail  it  by  temptation  and  overthrow  it  by  sin  when  least  prepared.  Therefore, 
before  it  ventures  forth,  it  beseeches  God  to  be  ita  succour  and  defence  against  all 
the  cr^ft  and  subtlety  of  its  foes. 

III.  That  Mosbs  made  his  evening  prates  for  the  continuance  of  the  Divine 
Presence  in  their  midst.  He  knew  that  the  people  were  helpless,  and  moreover 
•tifE-necked  and  hard-hearted,  and  that  mischief  would  breed  in  the  camp  as  readily 
as  it  might  meet  them  on  the  march,  and  that  they  must  perish  miserably  if  left  to 
themselves.  He  prayed  that  God  would  stay  with  them,  and  be  their  worship,  and 
remain  the  centre  of  their  life  ah  intra,  as  well  as  their  defence  ah  extra.  Even  so 
the  Christian's  evening  prayer  is, "  Abide  with  us."  The  faithful  soul,  when  it  ceases 
from  outward  cares  and  is  most  thrown  upon  itself,  feels  most  how  lost  would  be  its 
■tate  without  the  abiding  Presence  and  grace  of  God  ;  and  then  it  beseeches  him — 
whom  it  has  more  or  less  ofEended — to  return  to  it,  because  without  bim  it  wer« 


(iW.  ^.  88—36,]  THE  BOOK  OF  IJUMBEBS.  101 

empty,  desolate,  and  destroye4,  Note,  that  if  we  read  with  some,  "Eestora  the 
many  thousands  of  Israel,"  i.  e.  to  their  promised  land,  then  it  is  the  voice  of  the 
faithful,  recognising  at  each  paqse  in  life  that  we  are  still  strangers  and  wanderers 
here,  and  beseeching  God  to  bring  us  to  our  true  and  only  rest  (of.  2  Cor.  v.4 ;  Phil, 
iii.  11 ;  Rev.  vi.  10,  11).  And  cf.  the  ancient  prayer,  "Beseeching  thee  shortly  to 
accomplish  the  number  pf  thine  elect,  and  to  hasten  thy  kingdom,  that  we  with  all 
those  that  are  departed  in  the  true  faith  of  thy  holy  name,  may  have  our  perfect 
consummation  arid  joy  in  thy  eternal  and  everlasting  glory." _  Or,  if  we  read  with 
the  Septuagint,  "  convert  the  many  thousands  of  Israel,"  then  it  is  the  voice  of  the 
faithful  in  the  intervals  of  labour  supplicating  God  for  all  who  in  any  wise  belong  to 
the  Israel  of  God,  that  the  grace  of  a  true  and  entire  conversion — which  is  the  one 
thing  needful — may  be  granted  unto  them  (cf.  Luke  xxii.  32  &. ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  9  b.  ; 
1  Thess.  iil  10  6.). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vera.  85,  86. — The  prayers  at  the  moving  and  resting  of  the  arh.  Here  are  two 
petitions — one  as  the  cloud  rose  to  point  the  way,  the  other  as  it  settled  down  again 
to  indicate  the  time  for  rest.  ,  The  morning  and  the  evening  prayer  cannot  be  the 
same ;  there  is  one  set  of  needs  to  be  supplied  during  the  day,  and  another  during 
the  night. 

The  FIB8T  PETITION.  It  was  fixed  on  the  one  thing  needed,  as  the  Israelites 
journeyed  on  into  unknown  territory,  looses  needed  npt  to  pray  for  guidance. 
They  were  being  guided,  and  had  nothing  to  do  but  follow.  Behind  the  ark 
and  the  cloud  there  was  the  evident  duty  of  obedience,  but  what  was  there  in 
front?  Moses  could  make  some  guess  from  what  he  had  already  experienced. 
Before  the  Israelites  had  been  three  months  out  of  Egypt,  they  were  met  by  Amalek 
at  Rephidim,  blocking  the  way  to  Sinai.  Moses,  therefore,  recognises  the  great 
likelihood  of  more  enemies  in  front,  now  they  have  left  Sinai.  The  great  bulk  of  his 
followers  doubtless  thought  more  of  the  present  than  the  future,  and  both  present  and 
future  they  wanted  to  be  like  the  past  in  Egypt,  full  of  good  things  for  their  sinful 
cravings.  But  Moses,  with  a  different  spirit,  felt  there  were  enemies  in  the  way. 
Getting  into  Canaan  meant  not  only  journeying  but  fighting.  It  is  a  serious  defect 
in  us  that  we  do  not  think  enough  of  the  spiritual  enemies  in  front.  There  are 
examples  to  warn :  Peter  overrating  natural  courage ;  Demas,  overcome  by  the  allure- 
ments of  the  present  age.  Notice  that,  in  its  otvn  way,  the  New  Testament  is  every 
whit  as  warlike  in  its  spirit  as  the  old  (Matt.  x.  34 ;  Rom.  vii.  23 ;  2  Cor.  vii.  6  ;  2 
Cor.  I.  3—5 ;  Eph.  vi.  10—17;  1  Tim.  i.  18;  Heb.  iv.  12 ;  Rev.  i.  16:  indeed  the 
Revelation  is  fuU  of  spiritual  war  and  conquest).  These  enemies  in  front  are  con- 
sidered also  as  God's,  enemies.  "  Thine  enemies."  As  men  attack  one  another 
tlirough  their  property,  so  God's  enemies  attack  him  through  his  people,  God  in  the 
blessedness  and  security  of  his  own  nature  is  unassailable,  but  in  the  workings  of  his 
manifold  creation  the  powers  of  evil  may  attack  him,  maintaining  a  long  and  bitter 
struggle  ('Paradise  Lost,'  B.  ii.  310 — 370),  Do  not  think  of  these  powers  as  aiming 
simply  at  our  destruction.  This  is  but  a  means  to  an  end.  There  is  a  far  sublimer 
and  more  encouraging  view,  that  they  are  aiming  to  destroy  the  government  of  God. 
We  never  find  out  the  purpose  of  a  battle  by  looking  at  the  conflicts  of  the  private 
soldiers  and  inferior  officers.  We  must  cpme  to  the  supreme  authorities.  It  is  they 
who  inspire  and  direct  everything.  So  there  may  be  a  struggle  going  on  in  the 
universe  of  which  we,  with  our  little  horizon,  can  form  but  a  feeble  conception. 
Lastly,  it  is  prayed  that  these  enemies  should  be  decisively  dealt  with.  It  is  an  awful 
thing  to  think  of,  but  we  must  not  shut  our  eyes  to  plain  and  solemn  facts,  that  as  we 
look_  backwards  from  this  point  to  the  beginning  of  the  Scriptures,  we  find  the 
Almighty,  in  three  instances,  acting  against  the  iniquity  of  the  world  in  a  most 
decisive  and  comprehensive  way.  The  deluge  was  a  scattering,  so  was  the  destruc- 
tion of  Sodom,  so  was  the  overwhelming  of  Pharaoh  and  his  hosts,  which  last  great 
punitive  act  of  God,  Moses  had  seen  with  his  own  eyes,  and  celebrated  with  his  own 
lips.  Ther«  is  enough  to  assure  his  people  that  he  will  make  a  final  scctterin|;  in  his 
own  time. 


lOf 


THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS. 


[oh.  M.  1—8. 


The  seoond  petition.  1.  It  vms  a  welcome  to  the  conqueror.  God  was  doing 
something  for  his  people  in  conquest  every  day.  We  may  be  sure  there  was  no  day 
in  all  these  long  forty  years  but  something  was  done  to  undermine  the  huge  and 
threatening  powers  that  opposed  advancing  Israel.  As  the  huge  tree  is  slowly 
hollowed  and  eaten  away,  leaving  a  mere  shell  to  come  down  at  last  with  a  crash,  so 
the  strongholds  of  iniquity  are  effectually  sapped,  little  by  little.  Jericho  seeined  to 
fall  as  in  a  day  before  the  trumpet  blasts  of  Israel ;  in  reality  it  had  been  nodding  to 
its  fall  for  years.  So  we  may  be  constantly  welcoming  Jesus  as  the  Captain  of  our 
salvation  (Exod.  xv.  2 ;  Luke  iv.  14,. 16 ;  Acts  xiv.  26 — 28).  2.  It  indicated  theme 
to  he  made  of  the  victwy.  The  enemies  of  God  were  scattered  and  dispossessed  in 
order  that  his  own  people  may  come  in  and  exercise  a  faithful  stewardship  for  him. 
His  victories  open  up  regions  which  could  not  otherwise  be  attained.  E.  g.  the  risen 
Saviour,  having  triumphed  over  sin,  death,  and  the  grave,  returned  to  his  disciples  in 
Galilee,  telling  them  that  all  power  was  given  to  him  in  heaven  and  on  earth,  and 
thence  he  drew  this  consequence  in  the  way  of  duty  for  them,  that  they  were  to  go 
and  disciple  all  nations,  etc.  (Matt,  xxviii.  18 — 20).  If  the  risen  Lord  be  indeed 
with  us,  then,  because  he  is  risen,  we,  having  still  our  fight  with  sin  and  death  to 
accomplish,  are  nevertheless  assured  of  ultimate  victory. — Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XI. 


The  place  or  burning  (vers.  1 — 3). 
Yer.  1.— And  wlien  the  people  complained, 
it  displeased  tlie  Lord.  There  is  no  "when" 
in  the  original.  It  is  literally,  "And  the 
people  were  as  complainers  evil  in  the  ears 
of  the  Lord."  This  may  be  paraphrased  as 
in  the  A.  V.  ;  or  it  may  be  rendered  as  in 
the  Septuagint,  ^v  6  Xabg  yoyyvZaiv  irovtipd 
ivavri  Kvpiov  (cf.  1  Cor.  x.  10),  where  irovripd 
means  the  wicked  things  they  uttered  in 
their  discontent;  or  the  "evil"  may  mean 
the  hardships  they  complained  of.  The 
Targums  understand  it  in  the  same  way  as 
the  Septuagint,  and  this  seems  to  agree  best 
with  the  context.  As  to  the  time  and  place 
of  this  complaining,  the  narrative  seems  to 
limit  it  within  the  three  days'  march  from 
the  wilderness  of  Sinai ;  but  it  is  not  possible 
to  fix  it  more  precisely.  It  is  sufficient  that 
the  very  first  incident  in  the  great  journey 
thought  worthy  of  record  was  this  sin  and 
its  punishment,  and  the  natural  conclusion 
is  that  it  came  to  pass  very  shortly  after  the 
departure.  As  to  the  reason  of  the  com- 
plaining, although  it  is  not  stated,  and 
although  there  does  not  seem  to  have  been 
any  special  cause  of  distress,  we  can  hardly 
be  mistaken  about  it.  The  fatigue  and 
anxiety  of  the  march,  after  a  year's  com- 
parative idleness,  the  frightful  nature  of 
the  country  into  which  they  were  marching, 
and  the  unknown  terrors  of  the  way  which 
lay  before  them,  these  were  quite  enough  to 
shake  their  nerves  and  upset  their  minds. 
Such  things  could  only  be  borne  and  faced 
in  a  spirit  of  faith  and  trustful  dependence 
upon  God  and  their  appointed  leaders,  and 
that  spirit  they  knew  nothing  of.  Slavery, 
even  when  its  outward  pressure  is  past  aiid 


gone  like  a  bad  dream,  leaves  behind  it  above 
all  things  an  incurable  suspicion  of,  and  a 
rooted  disbelief  in,  others,  which  shows  itself 
outwardly  by  blank  ingratitude  and  persistent 
complaint  of  bad  treatment.  This  is  the  well- 
known  mental  attitude  of  liberated  slaves 
even  towards  their  benefactors  and  liberators ; 
and  in  the  case  of  Israel  this  temper  extended 
to  the  King  of  Israel  himself,  whom  they  held 
responsible  for  all  the  privations  and  terrors 
of  an  apparently  needless  journey  through  a 
hideous  waste.  The  Targum  of  Palestine 
says  here,  "  There  were  wicked  men  of  the 
people  who,  being  discontent,  devised  and 
imagined  evil  before  the  Lord."  The  com- 
plaining, however,  seems  to  have  been  general 
throughout  the  host,  as  the  Psalmist  more 
truly  acknowledges  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  17  —  22). 
And  the  fire  of  the  Lord  burnt  among 
them.  The  "fire  of  the  Lord"  may  mean 
one  of  three  things.  1.  Lightning,  as  ap- 
parently in  Job  i.  16 ;  for  lightning  to  the 
unscientific  is  the  fiery  bolt,  even  as  thimder 
is  the  angry  voice,  of  God  (cf.  1  Sam.  xii.  18, 
19).  2.  A  miraculous  outburst  of  flame  from 
the  Presence  in  the  tabernacle,  such  as  slew 
Nadab  and  Abihu  (Levit.  x.  2),  and  after- 
wards the  250  men  who  offered  incense  (ch. 
xvi.  35).  3.  A  miraculous  descent  of  fire 
from  heaven,  as  apparently  in  2  Kings  i.  10 — 
12  (cf.  Rev.  xiii.  13).  Of  these  the  second 
seems  to  be  excluded  by  the  fact  that  the 
conflagration  was  in  the  outskirts  of  the 
camp  furthest  removed  from  the  tabernacle. 
If  we  suppose  the  fire  to  have  been  natural, 
we  may  further  suppose  that  it  set  alight  to 
the  dry  bushes  and  shrubs  which  abound  in 
parts  of  the  desert,  and  which  blaze  with 
great  fury  when  the  flame  is  driven  by  the 
wind.  It  is,  however,  at  least  as  likely  that 
a  wholly  supernatural  visitation  of  God  ia 


DS.  u.  1—3.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS. 


108 


here  intended.  What  is  most  important  to 
notice  is  this,  that  the  punishment  in  this 
case  followed  hard  and  sore  upon  the  sin, 
whereas  before  they  came  to  Sinai  the  Lord 
had  passed  over  similar  murmurings  without 
any  chastisement  (Exod.  xv.  24 ;  xvi.  2). 
The  reason  of  this  difference  was  twofold. 
In  the  first  place,  they  had  now  had  abundant 
opportunity  to  become  acquainted  with  the 
power  and  goodness  of  the  Lord,  and  had 
solemnly  entered  into  covenant  with  him, 
and  he  had  taken  up  his  abode  among  them ; 
wherefore  their  responsibilities  grew  with 
their  privileges,  their  dangers  kept  pace  with 
their  advantages.  In  the  second  place,  they 
had  while  at  Sinai  committed  an  act  of 
national  apostasy  (Exod.  xxxii.),  the  pun- 
ishment of  which,  although  suspended  (ver. 
14),  was  only  suspended  (ver.  34),  and  was 
always  capable  of  being  revived ;  Israel  was 
plainly  warned  that  he  was  under  sentence, 
and  that  any  disobedience  would  awake  the 
terrors  of  the  Lord  against  him.  And  con- 
sumed ...  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the 
camp.  Probably  setting  fire  to  the  outer 
line  of  tents,  or  some  pitched  outside  the 
line,  and  consuming  the  people  that  were  in 
them.  The  Targum  of  Palestine  aflBrms 
that  it  "destroyed  some  of  the  wicked  in  the 
outskirts  of  the  house  of  Dan,  with  whom 
was  a  graven  image ; "  but  this  attempt  to 
shift  the  responsibility,  and  to  alter  the 
character  of  the  sin,  is  clearly  worthless,  and 
only  suggested  by  occurrences  wholly  uncon- 
nected with  the  present  (see  Judges  xviii.). 


Ver.  2. — ^And  the  people  cried  unto  Moses. 
Fear  brought  them  to  their  senses,  and  they 
knew  that  their  only  hope  was  in  their  medi- 
ator, who  had  already  saved  them  by  his 
intercession  from  a  worse  destruction  (Exod. 
xxxii.  30 — 34).  The  fire  was  quenched. 
Bather,  "went  out."  As  its  begiTining  was 
supernatural,  or  at  least  was  so  ordered  as  to 
appear  so,  its  end  also  was  due  to  the  Divine 
intervention,  not  to  human  efforts. 

Ver.  3. — And  he  called  the  name  of  the 
place  Taberah.  OrTabeerah(n'5J!3ri).  This 
name  does  not  occur  in  the  list  of  stations  in 
ch.  xxxiii. ,  which  mentions  nothing  between 
Sinai  and  Kibroth-Hattaavah.  It  would  seem 
probable,  however,  that  the  conflagration 
occurred  while  Israel  was  encamped,  or  else 
there  could  hardly  have  been  a  burning  "  in 
the  end  of  the  camp."  We  may  therefore 
suppose  either  that  Tabe^rah  was  some  spot 
in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  Sinai 
whither  the  people  gathered  for  their  first 
long  march ;  or  that  it  was  one  of  the  halting- 
places  on  the  "  three  days'  Journey "  not 
mentioned  in  the  list,  because  that  journey 
was  considered  as  all  one  ;  or  that  it  was  the 
same  place  afterwards  called  Kibroth-Hatta- 
avah. There  is.  nothing  in  the  narrative  to 
decide  a  question  which  is  in  itself  unim- 
portant. It  is  necessary  to  remember  that 
where  the  ancient  and  local  names  derived 
from  marked  natural  features  were  not  avail- 
able, such  names  as  Tabeerah  given  to  the 
halting-places  of  so  vast  a  host  must  have 
had  a  very  loose  significance. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — S. — Wrath  awaked  and  vyraih  appeased.  In  this  short  passage  w«  have, 
in  a  microcosm,  the  whole  sad  history  of  the  Church.  For  the  history  of  the  Church, 
as  it  is  glorious  on  the  side  of  God  and  his  faithfulness,  so  it  is  sad  indeed  on  the  side 
of  man  and  his  unfaithfulness.  Here  we  may  see  trial  followed  at  once  by  failure, 
temptation  by  sin ;  failure  and  sin  followed  by  fiery  wrath.  Yet  wrath  is  never 
without  mercy,  for  the  fire  is  quenched  by  the  voice  of  the  mediator.  Consider, 
therefore — 

I.  That  the  tjsby  first  incident  becoeded  between  Sinai  and  Canaan  was 
BIN.  There  was  no  gradual  descent ;  it  broke  out  all  at  once.  So  it  was  in  the  begin- 
ning— immediately  after  the  creation,  the  fall ;  and  so  it  was  in  the  second  begin- 
ning of  the  race  (Gen.  ix.  21).  Even  so  it  is  still :  the  first  actual  fact  which  meets 
us  in  the  history  of  a  soul  on  its  way  to  heaven  is  some  sin  or  failure  on  its  part.  It 
is  the  one  thing  which  more  than  any  other  determines  the  character  of  practical 
religion,  as  distinguished  from  theoretical  (James  iii.  2  ;  1  John  i.  8). 

II.  That  the  boot  of  this  evil  plant  was  to  be  found  in  the  natuke  op 
the  people,  made  ceooked  by  qenehations  of  sebvithde,  and  not  eadically 
ALTERED  BY  THE  DISCIPLINE  OF  A  YEAB.  Even  SO  human  nature,  terribly  corrupt  as 
it  is,  is  the  nature  of  the  elect  too :  it  is  indeed  sanctified  and  improved  by  the 
operations  of  grace,  but  not  superseded  ;  it  remains  human  nature  still,  and  as  such 
is  sure  to  assert  itself.  Therefore  "  regeneration,"  which  signifies  the  renewal  of  this 
nature,  is  indeed  bestowed  in  time  (John  iii.  5 ;  Titus  iii.  5),  but  is  also  reserved  for 
eternity  (Matt,  xix,  28),  in  testimony  that  it  is  only  partial  here.  One  of  the  saddest, 
Hxe  most  obvious,  and  yet  most  unlooked-for  and  perplexing  of  facts  about  regenerat* 


104  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBBES.  [ch.  m.  1—8, 

humanity  is  the  persistence  within  it  of  evil,  whether  proper  to  the  age,  the  race,  th« 
family,  or  the  individual  (Rom.  vii.  18 — 25). 

III.  That  the  fbuit  of  this  evil  plant  was  thus  suddenly  ripened  by  the 
OUTWARD  HARDSHIPS  AND  TRIALS  OF  THE' MARCH.  Encamped  at,  comparative  ease 
about  Sinai,  the  tendency  to  sin  lay  dormant,  the  root  seemed  dead ;  a  few  days,  a 
few  hours  perhaps,  of  scorching  heat  and  unaccustomed  toil,  and  the  poison  fruit  was 
already  matured,  the  whole  camp  was  in  rebellion  against  God.  Even  so  there  are 
evil  dispositions  latent  in  many  (if  not  in  all)  of  us  wliich  need  but  a  little  stress  of 
circumstance  to  bring  them  into  active  play,  to  ripen  them  into  open  sin,  and  that 
with  startling  quickness,  unless  restrained  by  grace.  The  sudden  falls  of  good  men 
are  only  sudden  because  we  do  not  see  the  strength  of  evil  in  them  which  is  waiting 
its  opportunity.  Hence  the  absolute  necessity  of  trial  and  conflict  to  test  the  worth 
of  our  religion  (Matt,  x.  22 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  12  ;  James  i.  12 ;  Rev.  i.  9  ;  ii.  11,  &c. ; 
vii.  14). 

IV.  That  the  form  which  their  rebellion  took  was  that  of  complaining — 
there  being  indeed  nothing  that  they  could  do  under  the  circumstances.  Even  so 
the  fruit  of  sinful  feelings  and  desires  is  quite  as  often  discontent  as  anything  more 
active,  because  the  more  active  forms  of  sin  are  so  often  out  of  our  reach.  An  evil 
heart  is  the  source  of  all  sins,  and  the  evil  heart  almost  always  shows  itself  in  a  state 
of  inward  discontent  which  finds  vent  in  outward  complaints.  Hence  the  "  unthank- 
ful "  are  next  door  to  the  "  unholy  "  (2  Tim.  iii.  2),  and  all  one  with  the  "  evil " 
(Luke  vi.  35).  A  discontented  heart  is  a  hot-bed  of  every  kind  of  sin  (cf.  Mark  ziv. 
10 ;  John  xii.  4—6). 

V.  That  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  more  hot  against  them,  and  their 
punishment  more  severe,  than  before  they  came  to  Sinai.  For  they  had  received 
the  law,  and  entered  into  the  covenant,  and  had  the  worship  and  presence  of  God  in 
the  midst  of  them.  Eveij  so  the  more  light  and  grace  we  have,  the  more  awful  will 
it  be  to  sin  against  that  light,  in  despite  of  that  grace.  So  the  sin  of  the  Jew  was 
worse  than  that  of  the  heathen ;  of  the  Christian  than  of  the  Jew  ;  of  the  Christian 
in  an  enlightened  age  than  of  the  Christian  in  a  dark  age.  What  must  be  the 
wrath  of  God  against  the  sins  of  an  age  and  people  such  as  this  I  (Luke  xii.  47,  48  ; 
John  ix.  41 ;  Rom.  ii.  12  ;  Heb.  ii.  2,  3  ;  i.  2&-51). 

VI.  That  the  people  in  their  fear  cried  to  Moses.  They  dared  not  cry  to 
God,  by  reason  of  their  unworthiness,  but  they  inew  that  if  Moses  prayed  for  them 
he  would  be  heard,  because  he  was  their  mediator  (Gal.  iit  19,  20).  Even  so  we,  in 
our  sin  and  our  distress,  are  neither  able  nor  worthy  to  pray  to  God  save  through  the 
mediation  of  Jesus  Christ.  All  prayer  must  be  addressed,  consciously  or  uncon- 
sciously, through  him.  Even  the  prayer  of  the  heathen,  who  knows  no  mediator,  will 
be  heard  because  the  Son  of  man  receives  his  prayer  and  ofiers  his  own  intercession 
with  it  How  presumptuous  is  it  in  Christian  people  to  join  in  prayers  which  are  not 
offered  in  the  name,  or  through  the  mediation,  of  the  one  Mediator  I  (John  liv.  14  ; 
1  Tim.  ii.  5  ;  Heb.  xii.  24,  and  cf.  Rev.  viii.  3).  And  note,  that  the  Lord's  Prayer 
may  be  objected  to  this  doctrine  of  mediation.  But  it  is  to  be  noted — (1)  that  it 
was  modelled  on  the  synagogue  prayers  before  the  atonement ;  (2)  that  as  a  Christian 
prayer,  it  is  the  prayer  of  Christ  in  us,  in  which  we  share  by  virtue  of  our  sonship  in 
him  (John  xx.  17  ;  1  John  iii.  1). 

VII.  That  the  people  cried  to  Moses  only.  They  did  not  resort  to  Aaron  or 
to  Miriam,  because  they  were  relations  of  Moses,  or  to  Joshua,  because  he  was  an 
eminent  servant  of  Moses,  and  had  great  influence  with  him  ;  for  Moses  only  was 
their  mediator.  Even  so  Cliristian  people  must  not "  cry"  to  any  but  the  one  Mediator, 
if  the  fire  of  God's  anger  against  sin  is  to  be  quenched.  It  is  one  thing  to  ask  the 
prayers  of  a  fellow-suppliant ;  it  is  another  and  very  different  thing  to  address  oneself 
to  God  under  the  protection,  and  tlirough  the  mediation,  of  some  favourite  of  Heaven 
(Heb.  viii.  6  ;  ix.  16 ;  cf .  Acts  viii.  22—24). 

VIII.  That  when  Moses  prayed,  the  fire  went  out.  No  doubt  in  answer  to 
the  prayer.  Even  so  the  intercession  of  Christ  quenches  the  flames  of  the  Divine 
anger  against  sin.  Not  that  the  anger  and  the  mercy  of  God  are  rival  powers  striving 
against  one  another :  in  eternity  they  act  in  perfect  harmony ;  nevertheless,  in  the 
sphere  of  time   and   space  they  display  themselves   separately,  and  in  apparent 


CH.  II.  1—8.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBEE8.  106 

antagonism.  It  pleased  God  that  his  anger  against  sin  and  rebellion  should  be 
visibly  kindled  by  the  complaints  of  the  people  ;  that  his  mercy  should  be  moved  by 
the  prayer  of  Moses.  Thus  was  signified  the  eternal  purpose  of  God  to  show  mercy 
and  forgiveness  to  all  men  through  the  atonement  of  Christ  (Bom.  viii.  34 ;  Heb. 
vii.  25  ;  ix.  24 ;  1  John  ii.  1 ;  of.  Luke  xxiii.  34). 

And  consider  again — 1.  That  the  very  next  place  after  Sinai  was  Taherah — a 
hurtling.  Even  so  it  is  but  one  short  journey  without  a  break  for  sinful  man  from 
the  revelation  of  the  moral  law  to  the  fires  of  hell.  The  law  is  holy  and  good  ;  but 
sinful  man  cannot  keep  it,  nor  can  God  suffer  it  to  be  broken.  Wherefore  by  the 
law  came  death ;  after  the  law,  condemnation ;  behind  the  commandment,  fiery  wrath 
against  the  transgressors  thereof.  Thus  also  the  moral  law  of  Christ  without  his 
atonement  (as  some  would  have  it)  would  only  be  worse  condemnation — a  Taberah 
without  a  Moses  (Rom.  iii.  20;  v.  20  a. ;  vii.  7 — 13 ;  viii.  1 — 4).  2.  That  Israel 
vxmld  have  got  no  further  than  Taherah  had  they  not  had  a  mediator.  Even  so 
burnings  had  been  our  everlasting  portion,  except  Christ  had  delivered  us  (Isa.  zzxiii. 
14;  Mark  ix.  44,  &c. ;  1  Thess.  i  10). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Vers.  1,  %r—A  summary  view  of  sin  and  its  remedy.  I.  A  chain  of  moral 
SEQUENCES,  containing  the  following  links: — 1.  The  people's  sin.  The  complaints 
probably  various,  as  may  be  illustrated  from  other  narratives.  2.  Their  sin  noticed. 
"The  Lord  heard  it,"  as  he  hears  every  idle  word,  and  reads  every  sinful  thought 
(see  outline  on  ch.  xii.  2).  3.  This  notice  awakens  God's  anger.  By  the  necessity 
of  his  nature,  "  God  is  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day."  4.  His  anger  flamed 
forth  in  visible  judgments.  "The  fire  of  the  Lord  burned  among  them,"  for  "our 
God  is  a  consuming  fire,"  either  to  purge  us  from  our  sins,  or  to  destroy  ua  in  our 
sins.  6.  These  judgments  are  fatal,  "and  consumed  them"  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  7).  For 
another  chain  of  sequences  cf.  James  i.  14,  15. 

II.  A  CHAIN  OP  REMEDIAL  BLESSINGS.  1.  God's  mercy  tempers  judgment.  The 
fire  only  destroys  '•  those  in  the  utmost  part  of  the  camp  "  (Ps.  ciii.  8 — 10).  2.  The 
judgments  inflicted  humble  the  people,  and  lead  them  to  appeal  to  Moses.  Such 
judgments  are  blessings.  Servants  of  God  sought  for  by  sinners,  or  even  despia  'ra, 
in  the  day  of  trouble  (cf.  Isa.  Ix.  14).  3.  Moses,  when  appealed  to,  himself  appeals 
to  God.  We  disclaim  all  power  as  saviours,  but  look  and  point  to  the  one  Saviour 
(Pa.  Ix.  11 ;  Acts  iii.  12).  4.  God  appealed  to  in  acceptable  intercession,  turns  from 
the  fierceness  of  his  wrath  (Ps.  xcix.  6).  And  the  High  Priest  of  sinners,  by  a  more 
costly  mediation  and  a  prevailing  intercession,  still  interposes  for  sinners  who  "  come 
unto  God  by  him  ''  (Rom.  viii.  34  ;  Heb.  vii.  25).— P. 

Vers.  1 — 9. — Murmuring,  lusting,  and  loathing.  We  have  here  a  very  painful 
self-revelation.  Through  prophets  and  apostles,  and  especially  through  his  Sun, 
God  has  said  many  humiliating  things  of  the  children  of  men,  but  nothing  more 
humiliating  than  by  their  own  actions  they  have  written  down  against  themselves. 
Note— 

I.  A  SPIRIT  nNAPFECTED  BY  CHASTISEMENT.  The  people  run  away  from  pain,  but 
do  not  cease  from  lust.  They  forget  the  blow  of  Jehovah  almost  before  the  wound 
is  healed.  Nor  let  us  wonder  at  their  stupidity,  for  this  fire  of  God  was  only  a  more 
rapid  and  more  manifest  form  of  that  fire  of  Divine  chastisement  which  comes  in 
some  form  to  us  all.  We  treat  all  pain  as  the  Israelites  did.  As  they  cried  to  Mo^cs, 
BO  we  cryto  our  fellow-men,  and  make  no  mention  of  our  sin  against  God.  We  never 
stop  to  think  of  the  fire  of  God  as  having  his  anger  in  it,  or  a  check  upon  us  in  our 
selfish  career  (Ps.  Ixxviii. ;  Isa.  i.  2 — 6;  ix.  13;  Jer.  vii.  23^ — 28). 

II.  A  SPIRIT  UNCHANGED  BT  BENEFITS.  So  far  as  any  word  or  action  here  shows, 
they  might  have  utterly  forgotten  everything  God  had  done  for  them.  They  do 
recollect  the  manna,  but  only  to  grumble  at  it  and  despise  it.  God  had  indeed 
abounded  toward  them  in  grace  and  power,  wisdom  and  prudence,  yet  not  one  of  all 
hia  doingi  is  remembered  to  his  glory.     What  then  of  our  state  of  mind  in  regard  of 


iOe  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBEBS.  toH.  xi.  1—8. 

the  wonderful  manifestations  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus?  We,  even  more  than  the 
Israelites,  are  the  objects  of  God's  gracious  interposition.  It  seemed  of  no  use  to 
remind  them  of  God  the  Deliverer  and  Provider.  And  so  now,  although  Jesus  is  the 
Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life,  although  he  has  conquered  sin  and  death  for  all  mankind, 
yet  mankind  is  far  more  concerned  about  matters  a  long  way  less  important.  The 
truth  was,  the  Israelites  had  not  yet  been  delivered,  in  the  highest  sense  of  the  word. 
The  body  was  free,  but  the  spirit  was  in  bondage.  Egypt  had  still  a  strong  hold  upon 
their  hearts.  Their  experience  there  must  have  been  a  strange  mixture  of  oppression 
and  pampering.  Compelled  to  make  bricks  without  straw,  and  yet  they  had  flesh 
to  eat. 

III.  A  SPIRIT  THAT  SOON  FOEGOT  PAST  GRIEVANCES.      It  waS  not  BO  long  ago  that 

they  had  been  sighing  and  crying  by  reason  of  their  bondage  (Exod.  ii.  23).  Then 
their  lives  were  bitter,  and  all  the  flesh  they  got  could  not  sweeten  them.  These  past 
grievances  were  immeasurably  greater  than  anything  they  had  to  complain  of  now. 
Tlun  there  was  really  no  comfort  in  life  at  all — oppression  and  injustice  gave  worm- 
wood flavour  to  everything ;  nmn  they  are  but  itiima  some  old  comforts-  They  have 
plenty  to  eat,  and  that  of  special  miraculous  food,  by  which  God  said  to  them  at 
every  meal, "  Open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  I  will  fill  it."  It  was  well  for  them  even  in 
the  wilderness  troubles  that  they  were  not  as  Egypt ;  for  though  Egypt  might  have 
flesh  to  eat,  it  was  surely  eaten  amid  many  groans  and  sighs.  The  ten  plagues  and 
the  destruction  of  Pharaoh  and  his  army  were  a  very  serious  set-ofE  against  the  most 
savoury  of  creature  comforts. 

IV.  A  SPIRIT  UTTERLY  INSENSIBLE  TO  THE  GLORIODS  VOCATION  WHEREWITH  GOD  HAD 

CALLED  THEM  (Eph.  iv.  1).  What  a  difference  is  here  revealed  between  Moses  and 
the  people !  As  Moses  talks  with  Hobab,  and  lifts  his  prayer  to  God,  all  is  expectancy, 
ardour,  and  exultation.  No  complaints  of  the  manna,  no  hankerings  after  Egypt, 
come  from  that  noble  soul.  But  as  for  the  people,  Paul  exactly  describes  them  in 
Phil.  iii.  18.  Their  end  was  destruction,  their  God  was  their  belly,  their  glory  was 
in  their  shame,  they  minded  earthly  things.  Even  though  the  ark  rested  on  the 
many  thousands  of  Israel,  they  are  blind  to  the  glory  and  profit  coming  from  the 
presence  of  it.  They  will  go  anywhere  if  only  they  can  get  the  lost  delicacies  of 
Egypt.  Such  a  table  as  Milton  represents  the  tempter  spreading  out  before  Jesus 
would  just  have  been  to  their  taste  ('  Paradise  Eegained,'  li.  337 — 365).  Their  cry  is 
not  that  of  natural  hunger,  but  the  passionate  screaming  of  a  pampered  child.  Plain 
living  and  high  thinking,  the  Nazarite  vow  and  the  Nazarite  aspiration,  manna  for 
the  body  and  true  bread  of  heaven  for  the  spirit — ^with  these  things  they  had  no 
sympathy. 

Practical  truths: — 1.  Let  every  pain  that  comes  to  us  have  its  proper  effect  in 
the  way  of  discipline.  Thus  that  which  otherwise  will  be  loss  is  turned  to  substantial 
gain.  2.  In  the  midst  of  the  greatest  privileges  we  may  be  near  to  the  most  subtle 
temptations.  Where  God  is  nearest,  there  Satan  also  may  be  most  active.  3.  We  need 
a  great  work  of  God  to  bring  us  to  a  due  appreciation  of  the  spiritual  blessings  in 
heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus.  It  takes  a  great  deal  to  make  us  see  that  godliness 
is  profitable,  having  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is. 

"  Trouble  is  grudgingly  and  hardly  brook'd, 
While  life's  sublimest  joys  are  overlook'd." 

4.  Let  the  estimate  of  our  wants  and  the  provision  for  them  be  left  to  God.  For  ns 
to  live  is  Christ,  and  the  highest  occupation  of  life  to  seek  the  kingdom  of  God  and 
his  righteousness  ;  then  all  other  needed  things  will  be  added  unto  us.  Never  fear 
but  God  will  give  food  convenient  for  us.  N.  B.  John  vi.  gives  a  most  instructive 
New  Testament  parallel  to  this  passage. — Y. 

EXPOSITION. 


KiBKOTH  Hattaatah  (vers.  4 — 35).  Ver. 
4.  —  The  mixed  multitude.  Hebrew,  ha- 
laphsuph,  the  gathered;  the  riff-raff,  or 
rabble,  which  had  followed  the  fortunes  of 


Israel  out  of  Egypt,  whera  they  had  probably 
been  strangers  and  slaves  themselves.  What 
the  nature  and  the  number  and  the  fate  of 
this  rabble  were  is  a  matter  of  mere  coqjectUTa 


OH.  zi.  4—35.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS. 


107 


and  of  someiperplexity.  There  does  not  seem 
any  room  for  them  in  the  regulations  laid 
down  for  Israel,  nor  are  they  mentioned  in 
any  other  place  except  at  Exod.  xii.  38.  In 
Levit.  xxiv.  10  we  read  of  the  son  of  an 
Israelitish  woman  by  an  Egyptian  father,  and 
this  might  lead  ns  to  conjecture  that  a  great 
part  of  the  "  mixed  multitude  "  was  the  off- 
spring of  such  left-handed  alliances.  These 
half-breeds,  according  to  the  general  rule  in 
such  cases,  would  follow  their  mothers ;  they 
would  be  regarded  with  contempt  by  the 
Jews  of  pure  blood,  and  would  accompany 
the  march  as  hangers-on  of  the  various  tribes 
with  which  they  were  connected.  As  to 
their  fate,  it  may  be  probably  concluded,  from 
the  reason  of  things  and  from  the  absence  of 
any  further  notice  of  them,  that  they  found 
their  way  back  to  the  slavery  and  the  indulg- 
ences of  Egypt ;  they  were  bound  by  no  such 
strong  restraints  and  animated  by  no  such 
national  feelings  as  the  true  people  of  the  Lord. 
And  the  children  of  Israel  also  wept  again. 
This  expression,  again  (Hebrew,  D^C,  used 
adverbially),  would  seem  to  point  to  some 
former  weeping,  and  this  is  generally  found 
in  the  "murmuring"  of  which  they  had 
been  guilty  in  the  desert  of  Sin  (Exod.  xvi. 
2,  3).  This,  however,  is  unsatisfactory  for 
several  reasons :  first,  because  that  occurrence 
was  too  remote,  having  been  more  than  a 
year  ago ;  second,  because  there  is  no  men- 
tion of  any  "  weeping"  at  that  time  ;  third, 
because  the  matter  of  complaint  on  the  two 
occasions  was  really  quite  different :  then 
they  murmured  faithlessly  at  the  blank  starv- 
ation which  apparently  stared  them  in  the 
face  ;  now  they  weep  greedily  at  the  absence 
of  remembered  luxuries.  It  is  therefore 
much  more  likely  that  the  expression  has 
regard  to  the  "complaining  "  which  had  just 
taken  place  at  Tabeerah.  It  was  indeed 
wonderful  that  the  punishment  then  inflicted 
did  not  check  the  sin ;  ■9^onderful  that  it 
burst  out  again  in  an  aggravated  form  almost 
immediately.  But  such  was  the  obstinacy  of 
this  people,  that  Divine  vengeance,  which 
only  perhaps  affected  a  few,  and  only  lasted 
for  a  brief  space,  was  not  sufficient  to  silence 
their  wicked  clamour.  Who  shall  give  us 
flesh  to  eat  ?  ^B'3 — Septuagiut,  xpka — ^means 
flesh-meat  generally.  They  had  flocks  and 
herds  it  is  true,  but  they  were  no  doubt  care- 
fully preserved,  and  the  increase  of  them 
would  little  more  than  suffice  for  sacrifice ; 
no  one  would  dream  of  slaughtering  them 
for  ordinary  eating. 

Ver.  5. — We  remember  the  fish,  which 
we  did  eat  in  Egypt  freely,  i.  e.  gratis.  No 
doubt  this  was  an  exaggeration  on  the  part 
of  the  murmurers,  but  it  is  attested  by  clas- 
sical writers  that  fish  swarmed  in  the  Nile 
waters,   and  cost  next  to  nothing  (Diod. 


Sic,  1.  86,  B2  ;  Herod.,  ii.  93  ;  Strabo,  xvfi. 
p.  829).  CuoumherB.  D^K^j?.  Cucumbers  of 
peculiar  softness  and  flavour  are  spoken  of 
by  Egyptian  travellers  as  fructtis  in  Egypto 
imvs.     Melons.     D''nt23X- 


Water-melons,  still  called  lattieh,  grow  in 
Egypt,  as  in  aU  hot,  moist  lands,  like  weeds, 
and  are  as  much  the  luxury  of  the  poorest 
as  of  the  richest.  Leek*.  "l^VO-  '^^^  word 
usually  means  grass  (as  in  Ps.  civ.  14),  and 
may  do  so  here,  for  the  modem  Egyptians 
eat  a  kind  of  field-clover  freely.  The  Septu- 
agiut, however,  translates  it  by  rd  vpdaa, 
leeks  or  chives,  which  agrees  better  with  the 
context.  Pliny  (Nat.  Hist.  19,  33)  speaks  of  it 
as  "lawdatissim/usporrusin, Egypto."  Onions. 
D*i>y3.  Garlic.  D'^O-IB'.  These  are  men- 
tioned in  the  well-known  passage  of  Herodotus 
(ii.  125)  as  forming  the  staple  food  of  the 
workmen  at  the  pyramids ;  these  still  form  a 
large  part  of  the  diet  of  the  labouring  classes 
in  Egypt,  as  in  other  Mediterranean  coun- 
tries. If  we  look  at  these  different  articles  of 
food  together,  so  naturally  and  inartificially 
mentioned  in  this  verse,  we  find  a  strong 
argument  for  the  genuineness  of  the  narra- 
tive. They  are  exactly  the  luxuries  which 
an  Egyptian  labourer  of  that  day  would  have 
cried  out  for,  if  deprived  of  them  ;  they  are 
not  the  luxuries  which  a  Jew  of  Palestine 
would  covet,  or  would  even  think  of.  The 
very  words  here  used  for  the  cucumber,  the 
melon,  and  the  garlic  were  probably  Egyptian, 
for  they  may  stiU  be  recognised  in  the  com- 
mon names  of  those  vegetables  in  Egypt. 

Ver.  6.— Our  soul  is  dried  away.  This 
exaggerated  statement  expressed  th  eir  craving 
for  the  juicy  and  savoury  food  of  which  they 
had  been  thinking,  and  which  was  obviously 
unattainable  in  the  wilderness.  There  is  a 
physical  craving  in  man  for  variety  of  diet, 
and  especially  for  such  condiments  and 
flavours  as  he  has  been  used  to  aU  his  life, 
which  makes  the  lack  of  them  a  real  hard- 
ship. It  is  not  necessary  to  condemn  the 
Israelites  for  feeling  very  keenly  the  loss  of 
their  accustomed  food,  which  is  notoriously 
the  one  thing  which  the  poorest  classes  are 
least  able  to  bear ;  it  is  only  necessary  to 
condemn  them  for  making  this  one  loss  of 
more  account  than  all  their  gain.  There  is 
nothing  at  all,  beside  this  manna,  before 
our  eyes.  Rather,  "we  have  nothing  (?3  pi[{) 
except  that  our  eye  (falls)  upon  this  manna." 
These  graphic  words  speak  of  the  longing 
looks  which  turned  in  every  direction  after 
the  accustomed  dainties,  only  to  fall  with 
disgust  upon  the  inevitable  manna.  It  was 
very  ungrateful  of  them  to  speak  disparag- 
ingly of  the  manna,  which  was  good  and 
wholesome  food,  and  sufficient  to  keep  them 
in  health  and  strength ;  but  it  is  useless  t« 


108 


THE  BiOQK  QP  NUMBEES. 


[OH.  XI.  i— S5. 


deny  that  maima  only  for  people  who  had 
been  accustomed  to  a  rich  and  varied  diet 
must  have  been  exceedingly  trying  both  to 
the  palate  and  the  stomach  (c£  ch.  zxi.  5). 

Ver.  7. — The  manna  was  as  coriander 
seed.  On  the  name  and  the  nature  of  the 
manna  see  Exod.  zvi.  31.  It  is  commonly 
supposed  that  the  brief  description  here  in- 
serted was  intended  to  show  the  unreason- 
ableness of  the  popular  complaints.  There 
is  no  trace  whatever  of  any  such  purpose. 
So  far  as  the  description  conveys  fresh  in- 
formation, it  was  simply  suggested  by  the 
occurrence  of  the  word  "  manna,"  according 
to  the  artless  gtyle  of  the  narrative.  If  any 
moral  purpose  must  be  assigned  to  this 
digression,  it  would  rather  be  to  suggest  that 
the  people  had  some  real  temptation  to  com- 
plain. It  is  often  forgotten  that,  although 
the  manna  was  supernatural,  at  least  as  to 
the  amount  and  regularity  of  its  supply,  yet 
as  an  article  of  food  it  contained  no  super- 
natural elements.  If  we  had  to  live  upon 
nothing  but  cakes  flavoured  with  honey  or 
with  olive  oil,  it  is  certain  that  we  should 
soon  find  them  pall  upon  our  appetite.  To 
the  eye  of  the  Psalmist  the  manna  appeared 
as  angels'  food  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  25) ;  but  then 
the  Psalmist  had  not  lived  on  manna  every 
day  for  a  year.  We  have  to  remember,  in 
this  as  in  many  other  cases,  that  the  Israelites 
would  not  be  "  our  ensamples  "  {rviroi  v/iiuv, 
1  Cor.  X.  6)  if  they  had  not  succumbed  to 
real  temptations.  As  the  colour  of  bdellium. 
See  on  Gen.  ii,  12.  As  no  one  knows  anything 
at  all  about  bdeUium,  this  adds  nothing  to 
our  knowledge  of  the  manna.  The  Septu- 
agint  has  here  eWof  icpvaTaWov,  "the  ap- 
pearance of  ice,"  or  perhaps  "  of  hoar-frost." 
As  it  translates  bdellium  in  Gen.  ii.  12  by 
dvipa%  (carbuncle),  it  is  probable  that  the 
comparison  to  ice  here  is  due  to  some  tradition 
about  the  manna.  Taking  this  passage  in  con- 
nection with  Exod.  xvi.  31,  we  may  reason- 
ably conjecture  that  it  was  of  an  opalescent 
white,  the  same  colour  probably  which  is 
mentioned  in  connection  with  manna  in 
Eev.  ii.  17. 

Yer.  8. — And  the  people  .  .  .  ground  it 
in  mills.  This  information  as  to  the  pre- 
paration of  the  manna  is  new.  It  may  be 
supposed  that  at  first  the  people  ate  it  in  its 
natural  state,  but  that  afterwards  they  found 
out  how  to  prepare  it  in  different  ways  for  the 
sake  of  variety.  SmallhandmlUs  and  mortars 
for  the  preparation  of  grain  they  would  have 
brought  with  them  from  their  Egyptian 
hoipes.  As  the  taste  of  fresh  oil.  In  Exod. 
xvi.  31  it  is  said  to  have  tasted  like  wafers 
niade  with  honey.  Nothing  is  more  impos- 
sible adequately  to  describe  than  a  fresh  taste. 
It  is  sufficient  to  note  that  the  two  things 
suggested  by  the  taste  of  the  manna,  honey 
iqd  oil,  present  the  greatest  possible  contrast 


to  the  heavy  or  savouiy  food  which  thej 
remembered  in  Egypt. 

Yer.  9.— And  when  the  dew  fell,  .  .  .  the 
manna  fell  upon  it.  We  know  from  Exod. 
xvi  14  that  when  the  dew  evaporated  in 
the  morning  it  left  a  deposit  of  manna  upon 
the  ground ;  we  learn  here  that  the  manna 
fell  upon  the  dew  during  the  night.  Now 
the  dew  is  deposited  in  the  cool  of  the  night 
beneath  a  clear  sky,  when  radiation  of  heat 
goes  on  uninterruptedly  from  the  earth's  sur- 
face ;  it  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  manna 
was  let  fall  in  some  way  beyond  human  ex- 
perience from  the  upper  air.  What  possible 
physical  connection  there  could  be  between 
the  dew  and  the  manna  we  cannot  teU.  To 
the  untaught  mind,  however,  the  dew  seemed 
to  come  more  directly  than  any  other  gift  of 
nature  from  the  clear  sky  which  underlay 
the  throne  of  Ood ;  and  thus  the  Jew  was 
led  to  look  upon  the  manna  too  as  coming 
to  hipi  day  by  day  direct  from  the  storehouse 
of  heaven  (cf.  Ps.  Ixxviii.  23,  24  ;  cv.  40). 

Ver.  10.  —  Throughout  their  families. 
Every  family  weeping  by  itself.  Such  was 
the  contagion  of  evil,  that  every  family  was 
infected.  Compare  Zech.  xiL  12  for  a  de- 
scription of  a  weeping  similar  in  character, 
although  very  different  in  its  cause.  Every 
man  in  the  door  of  his  tent.  So  that  his 
wailing  might  be  heard  by  all.  So  public 
and  obtrusive  a  demonstration  of  grief  must 
of  course  have  been  pre-arranged.  They 
doubtless  acted  thus  under  the  impression  that 
if  they  made  themselves  sufficiently  trouble- 
some and  disagreeable  they  would  get  all 
they  wanted ;  in  this,  as  in  much  else,  they 
behaved  exactly  like  ill-trained  children. 
Moses  also  was  displeased.  The  word 
"also"'  clearly  compares  and  unites  his  dis- 
pleasure with  that  of  God.  The  murmuring 
indeed  of  the  people  was  directed  against 
God,  and  against  Moses  as  his  minister.  The 
invisible  King  and  his  visible  viceroy  could 
not  be  separated  in  the  regard  of  the  people, 
and  their  concerted  exhibition  of  misery  was 
intended  primarily  for  the  eye  of  the  latter. 
It  was,  therefore,  no  wonder  that  such  con- 
duct roused  the  wrath  of  Moses,  who  had  no 
right  to  be  angry,  as  well  as  the  wrath  of 
God,  who  had  every  right  to  be  angry.  Moses 
sinned  because  he  failed  to  restrain  his  temper 
within  the  exact  limits  of  what  befits  the 
creature,  and  to  distinguish  carefully  between 
a  righteous  indignation  for  God  and  an  angry 
impatience  with  men.  But  he  sinned  under 
very  sore  provocation. 

Ver.  11. — Wherefore  hast  thou  afflicted 
thy  servant  I  These  passionate  complaints 
were  clearly  wrong,  because  exaggerated. 
God  had  not  thro^vn  upon  Moses  the  responsi- 
bility of  getting  the  people  safely  into  Canaan, 
or  of  providing  flesh  for  them ;  and  apart 
from  these  exaggerations,  it  was  a  selfish  and 


CH.  XI.  4—85.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


W6 


cowardly  thing  thus  to  dwell  upon  his  own 
grievance,  and  to  leave  out  of  sight  the  grave 
dishonour  done  to  God,  and  the  awful  danger 
incurred  hy  the  people.  It  was  the  more 
blameworthy  in  Moses  because  upon  a  former 
occasion  he  had  taken  upon  him,  with  almost 
perilous  boldness,  to  remonstrate  with  God, 
and  to  protest  against  the  vengeance  he 
threatened  to  inflict  (Exod.  xxxii.  11 — 13). 
In  a  word,  Moses  forgot  himself  and  his  duty 
as  mediator,  and  in  his  indignation  at  the 
sin  of  the  people  committed  the  same  sin 
himself.  It  is  a  strong  note  of  genuineness 
that  so  grave  (and  yet  so  natural)  a  fault 
should  be  recorded  with  such  obvious  sim- 
plicity. Compare  the  cases  of  EUjah  (1 
Kings  xix.)  and  of  Jonah  (ch.  iv.). 

Ver.  12. — Carry  them  in  thy  bosom,  as 
a  nursing  father.  Probably  he  meant  to 
say  that  this  was  the  part  and  the  duty  of 
God  himself  as  the  Creator  and  Father  of 
Israel.  Compare  the. reading,  which  is  per- 
haps the  coiTect  one,  in  Acts  xiii.  18 : 
TtaaapaKovraSTij  \p6vov  iTpofo^opriffiv  ah- 
Toiq  iv  ry  eprj^tf). 

Ver.  14. — I  am  not  able  to  bear  all  this 
people  alone.  This  complaint,  while  reason- 
able in  itself,  shows  how  unreasonable  the 
rest  of  his  words  were.  However  many  he 
might  have  had  to  share  his  responsibilities, 
be  could  not  have  provided  flesh  for  the 
people,  nor  enabled  them  to  live  one  day  in 
the  wUilerness ;  this  had  never  been  laid 
upon  him. 

Ver.  15.-^KU1  me,  I  pray  thee,  out  of 
hand,  or  "quite."  Hebrew,  JIO,  inf.  abs. 
And  let  me  not  see  my  wretchedness.  Let 
me  not  live  to  see  the  total  faUure  of  my 
hopes  and  efforts. 

Ver.  16. — And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses. 
The  Divine  dignity  and  goodness  of  this 
answer,  if  not  an  absolutely  conclusive  testi- 
mony, are  at  least  a  very  strong  one,  to  the 
genuineness  of  this  record.  Of  what  god, 
.  except  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
was  it  ever  witnessed,  or  could  it  have  been 
ever  imagined,  that  he  should  answer  the 
passionate  injustice  of  his  servant  with  such 
forbearance  and  kindness !  The  one  thing  in 
Moses'  prayerwhich  was  reasonable  heallowed 
at  once  ;  the  rest  he  passed  over  without 
answer  or  reproof,  as  though  it  had  never 
been  uttered.  Gather  unto  me  seventy  men 
of  the  elders  of  Israel.  That  the  number 
seventy  has  a  symbolic  significance  in  Scrip- 
ture will  hardly  be  denied  (cf.  Exod.  i.  5 ; 
Dan.  ix.  2,  24 ;  Luke  x.  1),  although  it  is 
probably  futile  to  afiix  any  precise  meaning 
to  it.  Perhaps  the  leading  idea  of  seventy 
is  fulness,  as  that  of  twelve  is  symmetry 
(see  on  Exod.  iv.  27).  The  later  Jews  be- 
lieved that  there  were  seventy  nations  in  the 
world.  There  is  no  reason,  except  a  reckless 
desire  to  confound  the  sacred  narrative,  to 


identify  this  appointment  with  that  narrated 
in  Exod.  xviii.  21,  sq.  and  Dent,  i  9,  sq. 
The  circumstances  and  the  purposes  appear 

Suite  distinct :  those  were  appointed  to  assist 
loses  in  purely  secular  matters,  to  share  his 
burden  as  a  judge  ;  these  to  assist  him  in  re- 
ligious matters,  to  support  him  as  a  mediator  ; 
those  used  the  ordinary  gifts  of  wisdom,  dis- 
cretion, and  personal  authority ;  theSe  the 
extraordinary  gifts  of  the  Spirit.  It  is  more 
reasonable  to  suppose  that  these  seventy  were 
the  same  men  that  went  up  into  Mount  Sinai 
with  Moses,  and  saw  the  God  of  Israel,  and 
ate  of  the  consecrated  meal  of  the  covenant, 
about  a  year  before.  Unless  there  was  some 
decisive  reason  against  it,  an  elder  who  had 
been  chosen  for  that  high  religious  privilege 
could  hardly  fail  to  be  chosen  on  this  occasion 
also ;  an  interview  with  God  himself,  so 
mysteriously  and  awfully  significant,  must 
surely  have  left  an  ineffaceable  stamp  of 
sanctity  on  any  soul  at  aU  worthy  of  it.  It 
would  be  natural  to  suppose  that  while  the 
present  selection  was  made  de  novo,  the  indi- 
viduals selected  were  personally  the  same. 
Compare  note  on  ch.  i.  5,  and  for  "the  elders 
of  Israel "  see  on  Exod.  iii.  16.  Vniom  thou 
knowest  to  be  elders  of  the  people,  and 
officers  over  them.  On  the  ofScers  (Hebrew, 
shoterim),  an  ancient  order  in  the  national 
organisation  of  Israel,  continued  from  the 
days  of  bondage,  see  Exod.  v.  6.  The 
Targ.  Pal.  paraphrases  the  word  shoterka 
by  "who  were  set  over  them  in  Mizraim." 
The  Septuagint  has  here  vpia^irfpoi  roB 
\aov  Kai  ypafinarslg  ahrSnf,  words  so  familiar 
to  the  reader  of  the  Greek  Gospels.  The 
later  Jews  traced  back  their  Sanhedrim,  or 
grand  council  of  seventy,  to  this  appoint- 
ment, and  found  their  elders  and  scribes  in 
this  verse.  There  was,  however,  no  farther 
historical  connection  between  the  two  bodies 
than  this — that  when  the  monarchy  failed 
and  prophecy  died  out,  the  ecclesiastical 
leaders  of  the  Jews  modelled  their  institu- 
tions upon,  and  adapted  their  titles  to,  this 
Divinely-ordered  original. 

Ver.  17.— I  will  take  of  the  spirit  which 
is  upon  thee,  and  will  put  it  upon  them. 
The  Holy  Spirit  is  one  and  indivisible.  But 
in  the  language  of  Scripture  "the  Spirit" 
often  stands  for  the  charismata,  or  gifts  of 
the  Spirit,  and  in  this  sense  is  freely  spoken 
of  as  belonging  to  this  or  that  man.  So  the 
"  spirit  of  Elijah"  (2  Kings  ii.  9, 15),  which 
was  transferred  to  Elisha,  as  it  were,  by  be- 
quest. It  was  not,  therefore,  the  personal 
indweUing  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
Moses  which  God  caused  him  to  share  with 
the  seventy  eldersj  for  that  can  in  no  case 
be  a  matter  of  transfer  or  of  arrangement,  but 
simply  those  charismata  or  extraordinary 
gifts  of  the  Spirit  which  Moses  had  hitherto 
enjoyed  alone  as  the  prophet  of  Israel.     It  ii 


110 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[oh.  II.  4—36. 


strange  that  in  the  face  of  the  clear  teaching 
of  St.  Paul  in  1  Cor.  xii.,  xiii.,  and  in  view 
of  such  cases  as  those  of  Saul  (1  Sam.  x.  10 ; 
3dx.  23)  and  David  (1  Sam.  xvi.  13),  any 
difficulty  should  have  heen  felt  about  this 
passage.  They  shall  hear  the  burden  of  the 
people  with  thee.  It  does  not  appear  how 
they  were  to  do  this,  nor  is  there  any  record 
of  their  work.  Their  gifts,  however,  were 
spiritual,  and  we  may  probably  assume  that 
their  usefulness  lay  in  producing  and  main- 
taining a  proper  religious  tone  among  the 
people.  The  real  difficulty  which  stood  in 
the  way  of  Moses  was  not  one  of  outward 
organisation  or  of  government,  for  that  had 
been  amply  provided  for  ;  it  lay  in  the  bad 
tone  which  prevailed  among  the  people,  and 
threatened  to  destroy  at  any  moment  the 
very  foundations  of  their  national  hope  and 
safety.  We  may  see  in  these  seventy  not 
indeed  a  Sanhedrim  to  exercise  authority  and 
discipline,  but  the  first  commencement  of 
that  prophetic  order  which  afterwards  played 
so  large  a  part  in  the  religious  history  of 
Israel  and  of  the  early  Christian  Church — 
an  order  designed  from  the  first  to  supple- 
ment by  the  freedom  and  originality  of  their 
ministry  the  more  formal  and  unvarying 
offices  of  the  priesthood.  If  this  was  the 
nature  of  their  usefulness,  it  is  not  surprising 
that  they  are  never  mentioned  again  ;  and  it 
is  observable  that  a  similar  obscurity  hangs 
over  the  activity  of  the  prophets  of  the  New 
Testament,  who  yet  formed  a  most  important 
part  of  the  gospel  regime  (cf.  1  Cor.  xiv.  29 
—32  ;  Eph.  ii.  20). 

Ver.  18. — Sanctify  yourselves  against  to- 
morrow. By  certain  ablutions,  and  by  avoid- 
ance of  legal  pollution  (see  Exod.  xix,  10, 
li,  15).  The  people  were  to  prepare  them- 
selves as  for  some  revelation  of  God's  holi- 
ness and  majesty.  In  truth  it  was  for  a 
revelation  of  his  wrath,  and  of  the  bitter 
consequences  of  sin.  There  is  about  the 
words,  as  interpreted  by  the  result,  a  depth 
of  very  terrible  meaning ;  it  was  as  though  a 
traitor,  unknowing  of  his  doom,  were  bidden 
to  a  grand  ceremonial  on  the  morrow,  which 
ceremonial  should  be  his  own  execution. 
For  it  was  well  with  us  in  Egypt.  These 
false  and  wicked  words,  in  which  the  base 
ingratitude  of  the  people  reached  its  highest 
pitch,  are  repeated  to  them  in  the  message 
of  God  with  a  quiet  sternness  which  gave  no 
sign  to  their  callous  ears  of  the  wrath  they 
had  aroused. 

Ver.  20.  —  But  even  a  whole  month. 
There  is  some  little  difficulty  about  these 
words,  because  the  Israelites  do  not  seem  to 
have  made  a  long  stay  at  Kibrolh-Hattaavah, 
and  the  miraculous  supply  does  not  seem  to 
have  followed  them.  The  words  are  words 
of  stem  irony  and  displeasure,  and  need  not 
be   literally  pressed :    it  was  enough   that 


animal  food  was  given  them  in  quantity 
sufficient  to  have  gorged  the  whole  nation 
for  a  month,  if  they  had  cared  to  go  on 
eating  it  (see  below  on  ver.  33). 

Ver.  21. — And  Moses  said.  Moses  had 
not  recovered  from  the  impatient  and  de- 
spairing temper  into  which  the  ill-behaviour 
of  the  people  had  betrayed  him.  He  could 
not  really  have  doubted  the  Divine  power 
to  do  this,  after  what  he  had  seen  in  the 
desert  of  Sin  (Exod.  xvi.  13),  but  he  spoke 
petulantly,  and  indeed  insolently,  out  of  the 
misery  which  was  yet  in  his  heart. 

Ver.  22. — Shall  the  flocks  and  herds  be 
slain?  Which  they  had  brought  out  of 
Egypt  with  them  (see  on  Exod.  xii.  32),  and 
which  no  doubt  were  carefully  husbanded, 
partly  in  order  to  supply  them  with  milk 
and  other  produce,  partly  in  order  to  main- 
tain the  sacrifices  of  the  law.  All  the  flsh  of 
the  sea.  A  wild  expression  from  which 
nothing  can  be  fairly  argued  as  to  the  pre- 
sent position  of  the  camp. 

Ver.  23. — Is  the  Lord's  hand  waxed  short  ? 
So  that  it  cannot  reach  far  enough  to  fulfil 
his  purposes.  This  simple  and  expressive 
figure  of  speech  is  adopted  by  Isaiah  (ch.  1. 
2  ;  lix.  1). 

Ver.  24. — ^Uoses  went  out,  i.  e.  out  of 
the  tabernacle.  It  is  not  stated  that  he  went 
into  the  tabernacle  to  bring  his  complaint 
before  the  Lord,  but  the  narrative  obviously 
implies  that  he  did  (see  on  ch.  vii.  89). 

Ver.  25. — The  lord  came  down  in  a  cloud. 
i.  e.  in  the  cloud  which  was  the  symbol  of 
his  perpetual  presence  with  them.  At  other 
times  this  cloud  dwelt  (IDS')  above  the  taber- 
nacle, soaring  steadily  above  it  in  the  clear 
air  ;  but  on  certain  occasions,  for  greater 
impressiveness,  the  cloud  came  down  and 
filled  the  tabernacle,  or  at  any  rate  the 
entrance  of  it,  while  Moses  stood  without 
(cf.  ch.  xii.  5  and  Exod.  xxxiii.  9  ;  xl.  35). 
Took  of  the  spirit  which  was  upon  him. 
Not  certainly  in  anger,  or  by  way  oJ 
diminishing  the  fulness  of  the  spirit  which 
was  in  Moses,  but  in  order  that  the  seventy 
might  participate,  and  be  known  to  partici- 
pate, in  a  gift  originally  and  specially  given 
to  Moses.  .  The  whole  intention  of  the  cere- 
monial was  to  declare  in  the  most  unmistak- 
able way  that  the  gifts  of  the  seventy  were 
to  be  exercised  only  in  union  with  and  in 
subordination  to  the  mediator  of  Israel. 
The  Targums  are  substantially  correct  iu 
their  paraphrase  :  "The  Lord  made  enlarge- 
ment of  the  spirit  that  was  upon  him,  and 
imparted  to  the  seventy  men,  the  elders." 
Theodoret  very  happily  observes  on  this 
passage,  "Just  ag  a  man  who  kindles  a 
thousand  flames  from  one  does  not  lessen 
the  first  in  communicating  light  to  the  others, 
so  God  did  not  diminish  the  grace  imparted 


OH.  XI.  4—35.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


Ill 


to  Ifoses  by  the  fact  that  he  communicated 
of  it  to  the  seventy."  They  prophesied. 
The  phenomenon  here  mentioned  for  the 
first  time  was  no  doubt  an  ecstatic  utterance, 
not  exactly  beyond  the  control,  but  certainly 
beyond  the  origination,  of  those  who  pro- 
phesied. It  must  not  be  confounded  with 
that  state  of  calm,  spiritual  exaltation  in 
which  such  men  as  Isaac  and  Jacob  spake 
concerning  things  to  come  (Heb.  xi.  20  ;  cf. 
Gen.  xxvii.  29  ;  xlix.  28).  The  Hebrew 
•1X331^!  means  literally  "were  caused  to  pour 
forth,"  and  the  fundamental  idea  is  that 
those  affected  became  for  the  time  being 
vents  for  the  audible  utterance  of  thoughts 
and  expressions  which  were  not  theirs,  but 
the  Holy  Ghost's.  Compare  the  thought  in 
Job  xxxii.  18 — 20,  and  the  case  of  Saul  and 
his  messengers,  as  above.  As  to  the  matter 
of  these  prophesyings,  we  may  probably  con- 
clude that  they  were  of  the  same  nature  as  the 
ecstatic  utterances  of  the  tongues  on  the  day 
of  Pentecost  and  afterwards ;  not ' 'prophecy  " 
in  the  ordinary  sense,  but  inspired  glorifica- 
tion of  God,  and  declaration  of  his  wonderful 
works  (Acts  ii.  4,  11),  And  did  not  cease. 
Bather,  "  did  not  add,"  or  "repeat."  -IfipJ 
K^l.  Septuagint,  xai  oix  tri  irpoaiSfvro. 
The  ecstatic  utterance  did  not  continue  or 
reappear.  The  New  Testament  history  no 
doubt  supplies  us  with  the  explanation  of 
this.  The  supernatural  sign  thus  accorded 
was  of  little  use  in  itself,  and  was  of  much 
danger,  because  it  attracted  to  its  exhibition 
an  attention  which  was  rather  due  to  more 
inward  and  spiritual  things.  As  a  sign  it 
was  sufficient  that  it  should  be  once  unmis- 
takably manifested  before  all  the  people. 
(of.  1  Cor.  xiv.  22;  xiii.  8).  The  perma- 
nent charisma  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  the 
seventy  received  and  retained  from  this  time 
forth  was  no  doubt  the  avTiXrjxjjte  or  xvliep- 
vriais  of  1  Cor.  xii.  28  ;  the  gift  of  "help  " 
or  "  governance,"  not  in  temporal  matters, 
but  in  the  religious  education  and  direction 
of  the  people. 

Ver.  26. — There  remained  two  of  the  men 
in  the  camp.  No  reason  is  here  given  why 
they  did  not  accompany  the  rest  to  the 
tabernacle ;  but  as  they  did  not  thereby 
forfeit  the  gift  designed  for  them,  it  is  cer- 
tain that  some  necessity  or  duty  detained 
them.  They  were  of  them  that  were  writ- 
ten. This  incidental  notice  shows  how  usual 
the  practice  of  writing  was,  at  any  rate  with 
Moses,  who  was  "  learned  in  all  the  wisdom 
of  the  Egyptians  "  (Acts  vii.  22).  And  they 
prophesied  in  the  camp.  As  a  sign  that 
they  too  had  received  the  charisma  from  the 
Lord.  Seeing  that  it  was  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  there  was  of  course  nothing 
really  more  wonderful  in  their  case  than  in 
the  case  of  the  others,  but  no  doubt  it  seemed 


so.  That  men  in  the  camp,  and  away  from 
the  visible  centre  and  scene  of  Divine  mani- 
festations, should  be  accessible  to  the  heavenly 
afflatus  was  a  vast  astonishment  to  an  ignor- 
ant people.  We  may  compare  the  surprise 
felt  by  the  Jewish  Christians  when  the  sign 
of  tongues  was  shown  among  the  Gentiles 
(Actsx.  45,  46). 

Ver.  27. — And  there  ran  a  young  man. 
Literally,  "the  young  man," — 13/311;  bviav- 
ittKOQ,  Septuagint, — by  which  some  under- 
stand the  young  men  of  the  camp  collectively, 
but  this  is  doubtful  in  grammar  and  unsatis- 
factory in  sense.  If  this  book  was  compiled 
from  previous  records,  of  which  there  are 
many  apparent  traces,  we  may  suppose  that 
the  name  of  this  young  man  was  there  given, 
but  here  for  some  reason  omitted. 

Ver.  28. — Joshua  the  son  of  Nun.  See  on 
Exod.  xvii.  9.  As  before,  he  is  called  Joshua 
by  anticipation.  One  of  his  young  men. 
Tiis  implies  that  there  were  others  who  to 
some  extent  shared  his  duties  towards  Moses ; 
but  that  Joshua  stood  in  a  peculiar  relation 
to  his  master  is  evident  from  Exod.  xxiv.  13 
and  xxxii.  17,  as  well  as  from  this  passage 
itself.  My  lord  Moses,  forbid  them.  Pro- 
bably he  did  not  know  that  they  had  been 
enrolled,  and  he  was  naturally  jealous  for 
the  honour  of  Moses — a  jealousy  which  was 
not  at  all  unnecessary,  as  the  events  of  the 
next  chapter  proved.  The  prophesying  of 
Eldad  and  Medad  in  the  camp  might  well 
seem  like  the  setting  up  of  an  independent 
authority,  not  in  harmony  with  that  of 
Moses. 

Ver.  29. — Enviest  thou  for  my  sake  %  In 
this  answer  speaks  for  once  "  the  meekest  of 
men."  It  was  his  sad  fate  that  his  position 
as  representative  of  God  obliged  hira  to  see 
repressed  with  terrible  visitations  any  re- 
bellion against  his  sole  and  absolute  authority. 
But  he  was  devoid  of  personal  ambition  at  all 
times,  and  at  this  time  weary  and  disgusted 
with  the  responsibility  of  ruling  such  a 
people.  How  much  more  for  the  glory  of 
God,  and  for  his  own  peace,  would  it  be 
if  not  only  these,  but  all  the  people,  shared 
the  gifts  of  the  Spirit !  Mark  ix.  38,  39  pre- 
sents a  partial,  but  still  a  striking,  parallel. 

Ver.  30. — Hoses  gat  him  into  the  camp. 
Although  the  tabernacle  stood  in  the  midst 
of  the  camp,  yet  it  was  practically  separated 
from  the  tents  of  the  other  tribes  by  an  open 
space  and  by  the  encampments  of  the  Levites. 
There-  is,  therefore,  no  ground  for  inferring 
from  this  and  similar  expressions  that  the 
record  really  belongs  to  a  time  when  the 
tabernacle  was  pitched  outside  the  camp. 

Ver.  31. — A  wind  from  the  Lord.  A 
wind  Divinely  sent  for  ■fttis  purpose.  In  Ps. 
Ixxviii.  26  it  is  said  to  have  'been  a  wind 
from  the  east  and  south,  t.  t.  a  wind  blow- 
ing up  the  Red  Sea  and  across  the  GiUf  oi 


112 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS. 


[OH.  xr.  4— M. 


Akabah.  And  brought  qnails  from  the  sea. 
On  the  "quails "  (Hebrew,  salvim — ^probably 
the  common  quail)  see  Exod.  xvi.  18.  The 
Septuagint  has  in  both  places  17  ipTvyofiriTpa, 
"the  quail-mother,"  the  sense  of  which  is 
nncertain.  These  birds,  which  migrate  in 
spring  in  vast  numbers,  came  from  the  sea, 
but  it  does  not  follow  that  the  camp  was 
near  the  sea.  They  may  have  been  following 
up  the  Gulf  of  Akabah,  and  been  swept  far 
inland  by  the  violence  of  the  gale.  Let  them 
fill  by  the  camp.  Rather,  "threw  them  down 

on  the  camp."  njilBn  7]?  tytj*.  Septuagint, 
c5rt/3rtXev  iirl  rr/v  wape^fSoXtjv,  Either  the 
sudden  cessation  of  the  gale,  or  a  violent 
eddying  of  the  wind,  threw  the  exhausted 
birds  in  myriads  upon  the  camp  (cf.  Ps. 
Ixxviii.  21,  28).  Two  cubits  high  upon  the 
face  of  the  earth.  The  word  "high"  ia 
not  in  the  original,  but  it  probably  gives  the 
true  meaning.  The  Septuagint,  iiati  Sittjixv 
d:ro  Tjjs  yjjc,  is  somewhat  uncertain.  The 
Targums  assert  that  ths  quails  "ilew  upon 
the  face  of  the  ground,  at  a  height  of  two 
cubits  ; "  and  this  is  followed  by  the  Vulgate 
("  volabant  in  aere  duohus  cubitis  altUudine 
super  terram")  and  by  many  commentators. 
This  idea,  however,  although  suggested  by 
the  actual  habits  of  the  bird,  and  adopted  in 
order  to  avoid  the  obvious  difficulty  of  the 
statement,  is  inconsistent  with  the  expres- 
sions used  here  and  in  Ps.  Ixxviii,  If  the 
birds  were  "thrown"  upon  the  camp,  or 
"  rained  "  upon  it  like  sand,  they  could  not 
have  been  flying  steadily  forward  a  few  feet 
above  the  ground.  It  is  certainly  impossible 
to  take  the  statement  literally,  for  such  a 
mass  of  birds  would  have  been  perfectly  un- 
manageable ;  but  if  we  suppose  that  they 
were  drifted  by  the  wind  into  heaps,  which 
in  places  reached  the  height  of  two  cubits, 
that  will  satisfy  the  exigencies  of  the  text : 
anything  like  a  uniform  depth  would  be  the 
last  thing  to  be  expected  under  the  circum- 
stances. 

Yer.  32.— And  the  people  stood  up  .  .  . 
next  day.  A  statement  which  shows  ns 
how  greedy  the  people  were,  and  how  in- 
ordinately eager  to  supply  themselves  with 
an  abundance  of  animal  food.  They  were  so 
afraid  of  losing  any  of  the  birds  that  they 
stayed  up  all  night  in  order  to  collect  them  ; 
probably  they  only  ceased  gathering  and 
began  to  eat  when  the  available  supply  was 
spent.  Ten  homem.  It  is  difficult  to  cal- 
culate the  capacity  of  the  homer,  especially 
as  it  may  have  varied  from  age  to  age.  If 
it  contained  ten.ephahsj  as  seems  to  bo  im- 
plied in  Ezek.  ilv.  11,  and  if  the  estimate  of 
the  Rabbinists  (which  is  less  than  that  of 
Josephus)  be  correct  that  the  ephah  held  nearly 
four  and  a  half  gallons  of  liquid  measure, 
then  half  a  million  of  men  must  have  collected 


more  quails  apiece  than  would  have  filled  a 
450  gallon  tun.  No  doubt  the  total  number 
was  something  enormous,  and  far  above  any- 
thing that  could  have  been  supplied  by 
natural  agencies.  The  gift  of  quails,  like 
that  of  manna,  was  one  of  the  gifts  of  nature 
proper  to  that  region  Divinely  inultiplied 
and  extended,  so  as  to  show  forth  in  the 
most  striking  way  the  boundless  power 
and  beneficence  of  God.  They  spread  them 
all  abroad.  In  order  to  dry  them  in  the 
sun,  as  the  Egyptians  used  to  do  with  fish 
(Herod.,  it  77),  and  as  the  South  Americans 
do  with  beef.  Flesh  thus  cured  does  not 
need  salt,  which  the  Israelites  would  not 
have  in  sufficient  quantities. 

Ver.  83. — And  while  the  flesh  was  yet 
between  their  teeth,  ere  it  was  chewed.  If 
this  were  taken  in  the  most  literal  sense,  it 
would  mean  that  no  one  of  the  people  had 
time  to  swallow  a  single  morsel  of  the  coveted 
food  ere  he  was  stricken  down  by  the  Divine 
visitation.  We  can  scarcely  imagine,  however, 
that  such  was  the  case  in  every  single  in- 
stance. It  would  indeed  appear  as  if  they 
had  with  one  consent  postponed  the  enjoy- 
ment of  eating  the  quails  until  they  had 
gathered  as  huge  a  quantity  for  future  use 
as  possible ;  as  if  in  defiance  and  contempt 
of  the  Divine  warning  that  their  greed  would 
turn  to  satiety  and  loathing  (see  vers.  19  and 
32).  If  this  were  so,  then  the  feast  to  which 
they  so  eagerly  looked  forward  would  begin 
throughout  the  camps  on  the  second  night, 
and  the  visitation  of  God  might  well  have 
had  the  sudden  and  simultaneous  character 
attributed  to  it  here  and  in  Ps.  Ixxviii.  30, 
31.  At  any  rate  the  statement  of  the  text 
positively  excludes  the  idea  that  they  went 
on  eating  quails  for  a  whole  month,  according 
to  the  promise  (or  threat)  of  ver,  20,  There 
was  flesh  enough  to  have  secured  the  literal 
fulfilment  of  that  promise  by  gorging  them 
for  a  whole  month ;  but  it  is  evident  that 
the  Divine  wrath  anticipated  any  sucn  tardy 
revenges,  and  smote  its  victims  in  the  very 
moment  of  their  keenest  gratification.  The 
Lord  smote  the  peopld  with  a  very  great 
plague.  Both  ancients  and  modems  state 
that  the  flesh  of  quails  is  unwholesome  (cf 
Pliny,  I.  23),  but  this  appears  to  have  no 
very  valid  foundation.  Unquestionably 
quails  eaten  for  a  month  by  people  unused 
to  a  flesh  diet  would  produce  many  and  fatal 
sicknesses ;  but  there  is  no  room  for  any 
such  natural  results  here.  Whatever  form 
the  plague  may  have  taken,  it  was  as  clearly 
supernatural  in  its  suddenness  and  intensity 
as  the  supply  of  quails  itself.  We  do  not 
know  anything  as  to  who  were  smitten,  or 
how  many  ;  the  Psalmist  tells  us  that  they 
were  "the  fattest"  and  "the  chosen"  in 
Israel,  and  we  may  naturally  suppose  that 
those  who  had  been  foremost  in  the  lusting 


OB.  XI.  4^^5.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBa 


113 


md  the  mnrmnring  were  foremost  in  the 
ruin  which  followed. 

Ver.  34. — Eibroth-Hattaavah.  The  grares 
of  greediness.  Septuagint,  MvfiiiaTa  Trjs 
iiriSviiiac.  This  name,  like  Tabe6rah,  waB 
given  to  the  place  by  the  Israelites  them* 
selves  in  connection  with  their  own  histoiy ; 
the  name,  therefore,  like  the  sad  memoay  it 
enshrined,  lived  only  in  the  sacred  record. 
It  is  utterly  uncertain  where  it  1*7,  except 
that  it  was  apparently  the  terminus  of  a  three 
days'  journey  from  Sinai,  and  In  the  desert  of 
Paran.  How  long  they  stayed  at  Kibroth- 
Hattaavah  is  also  quite  uncertain.  If  the 
plague  followed  hard  upon  the  coming  of  the 
quails,  a  few  days  would  suffice  for  all  the 
events  recorded  in  tl/H  chapter,  and  we  may 
well  believe  that  the  people  would  be  only  too 
glad  to  receive  the  signal  of  departure  as  soon 
as  they  had  burierJI  their  unhappy  brethren. 

Yer.  85. — And  abode  at  Hazeroth.  Or, 
"were  in  Hs^eroth."  Septuagint,  ifivero 
i  \abc  if   Arfjfiii,    Hazeroth,  from  IVH 


to  «hut  in,  means  "  enclosures ; "  so  named 
perhaps  from  some  ancient  stone  enclosures 
erected  by  wandering  tribes  for  their  herds 
and  flocks.  It  has  been  identified  with  Ain  el 
Hadhera,  a  fountain  eighteen  hours  north- 
east of  Sinai,  but  on  no  satisfactory  grounds 
beyond  a  partial  resemblance  of  name.  As- 
suming that  the  march  lay  in  a  northerlj 
direction  through  the  desert  of  Paran,  the 
Israelites  would  naturally  follow  the  road 
which  leads  across  the  southern  mountain 
barrier  of  et  Tih,  and  on  by  the  Wady  es- 
Zulakeh  into  the  desert  plateau.  On  this 
road  there  is  a  large  fountain,  with  pasturage, 
at  a  place  called  el  Ain,  and  another  some- 
what further  at  Bir  ed-Themmed.  One  or 
other  of  these  was  probably  the  site  of  Haze- 
roth (of.  Stanley,  '  Sinai,'  p.  84).  It  is,  how- 
ever, entirely  a  matter  of  conjecture,  and  of 
little  real  interest.  The  progiess  of  Israel 
which  is  of  unfading  importance  to  us  is  a 
moral  and  religious,  and  not  a  geographical, 
progress 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  4 — 35. — The  sin  of  concupiscence,  and  its  punishment.  We  have  in  this 
section  a  Divine  commentary,  in  dark  and  terrible  characters,  on  the  commandment, 
"Thou  shalt  not  covet."  And  we  know  that  the  record  was  given  to  us  "to  the 
Jntent  that  we  should  not  lust  after  evil  things  as  they  also  lusted  "  (1  Cor.  x.  6). 
We  have  also,  intermingled  with  the  dark  record  of  sin  and  wrath,  a  beautiful  picture 
»f  the  long-sufEering  of  God  with  the  errors  and  impatience  of  his  servant,  and  of  the 
enfettered  energy  of  his  free  Spirit.  In  all  these  things  they  were  riiroi  rifuiv,  our 
•samples.    Consider,  therefore — 

I.  That  all  this  sin  and  misery  began  with  "  lust,"  i.  e.  unhallowed  and  unbk- 
flTRAiNED  DESIBB,  which  is  indeed  the  inner  source  of  all  iniquity,  because  it  is  the 
will  of  the  creature  setting  itself  upon  that  which  the  Creator  has  forbidden  or  denied ; 
nence  it  is  the  simplest  and  readiest  way  in  which  the  creature  can  rebel  against  the 
Creator,  for  it  is  always  possible,  and  indeed  easy,  to  lusit,  and  there  is  no  one  who  is 
not  tempted  to  it.  Thus  Eve  lusted  for  the  forbidden  fruit,  and  brought  death  into 
the  world.  Even  so  St.  James  says,  "Every  man  is  tempted,  when  he  is  drawn 
away  of  his  own  lust,  and  is  enticed.  Then  when  lust  hath  conceived,  it  bringeth 
forth  sin."  And  our  Saviour,  that  all  evil  proceeds  out  of  the  heart,  which  is  the 
seat  of  the  emotions  and  desires.  If,  therefore,  our  desires  were  held  in  subjection 
to  the  will  and  word  of  God,  there  would  be  no  sin  in  us ;  but  as  long  as  concupi- 
Bcence  is  in  us,  it  will  assuredly  draw  us  into  evil  (cf.  Bom.  vii.  7,  8,  11 ;  Eph. 
ii.  3 ;  1  John  ii.  16). 

II.  That  the  first  expression  (at  ant  rate)  of  this  unhaj.lowed  DEbiBB 
CAME  FROM  THE  MIXED  MULTITUDE — the  aliens,  Or  half-breeds,  who  had  come  with 
them,  not  from  faith  in  God,  but  from  Inferior  motives.  Even  so  the  low  moral  tone 
and  the  frequent  enormities  chargeable  upon  Christians  are  due  in  the  first  instance 
to  those  who  are  only  nominally  Christian,  who  have  been  attracted  into  the  fellow- 
ship either  by  accident  of  birth  or  by  worldly  and  unspiritual  motives.  Jt  is  the 
fate  of  every  great  and  successful  movement  to  carry  away  with  it  many  who  have 
(inwardly)  no  sympathy  with  it  and  no  part  in  it.  So  it  was  with  Israel,  so  with 
the  Church  of  Christ,  so  with  any  religious  revival.  Here  is  the  great  danger  of  an 
established  and  fashionable  Christianity ;  it  numbers  a  multitude  of  nominal  ad- 
herents, whose  motives  and  desires  are  wholly  unchastened,  and  who  are  always 
ready  to  set  the  worst  example,  and  to  encourage  the  most  pernicious  practices. 
Compare  the  "false  brethren,"  2  Cor.  xi.  26. 

xniiBEBS.  I 


114  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [ch.  xi.  4-35. 

*^™—  ■■^^—  ^^— ^— — ■        ■ 

III.  That  the  childkbn  of  Israel  were  carried  awat  with  iTj  in  bfite  of  thb 
WARNING  they  HAD  SO  RECENTLY  RECEIVED  AT  Tabe^rah.  No  doubt  it  Spread  the  more 
rapidly  because,  (1)  it  fell  in  with  tlieir  own  secret  feelings,  (2)  it  was  recommended 
by  consideratioDS  of  friendship  and  relationship,  (3)  the  voice  of  prudence  is  scarcely 
ever  a  match  for  the  promptings  of  desire.  Even  so  it  is  the  most  striking  feature  of 
sin  in  feeling  or  in  act  that  it  becomes  an  epidemic  which  only  a  very  sound  and  vigorous 
spiritual  state  can  resist.  Compare  the  case  of  Judas  and  the  other  apostles  (Matt.  xxvi. 
8,  9  ;  John  xii.  4,  5)  ;  compare  St.  Peter  and  the  Judaisers  (Gal.  ii.  12, 13)  ;  compare 
the  Corinthians  (1  Cor.  v.  1,  2,  6, 11) ;  and  the  sins  which  each  generation  of  Chris- 
tians has  committed  or  does  commit  in  common — such  as  lying,  duelling,  swindling. 
There  is  no  sin  against  which  more  fearful  warnings  and  examples  lie  than  that  of 
covetousness ;  yet  there  is  none  of  which  Christians  are  more  generally  guilty  under 
stress  of  bad  example  and  the  low  moral  tone  and  degraded  traditions  of  society,  of 
trade,  of  business,  &c.  The  warnings  of  the  New  Testament,  though  always  fresh 
in  the  hearing  and  clear  in  the  remembrance  of  Christian  people,  are  absolutely  in- 
effective as  against  the  common  promptings  of  evil  desire. 

IV.  That  what  they  evilly  desired  was  not  evil  in  itself.  There  was  no 
harm  in  eating  flesh,  nor  were  any  of  the  cheap  luxuries  they  coveted  objectionable 
in  themselves.  Even  so  we  ever  excuse  ourselves  for  wanting,  because  what  we 
want  is  not  forbidden,  but  only  denied.  There  is  no  harm  (absolutely)  in  being  rich, 
therefore  we  take  no  shame  at  covetousness.  There  is  no  harm  (absolutely)  in  the 
pleasures  of  the  flesh,  therefore  we  are  ready  to  excuse  any  indulgence  in  them. 
Christian  morality  is  a  law  of  liberty,  unbound  by  formal  rules,  therefore  we  boldly 
strain  that  liberty  to  our  immediate  advantage,  and  fancy  that  the  absence  of  pro- 
hibition is  tantamount  to  actual  allowance  on  the  part  of  God. 

V.  That  what  they  desired  was  wrong,  because,  (1)  it  was  superfluous, 
(2)  belonged  to  the  days  of  bondage,  (3)  had  been  withheld  by  God,  who 
ALONE  COULD  GIVE  IT.  (1)  Inasmuch  as  the  food  they  had  given  them  was  nutritious, 
wholesome,  and  abundant  for  the  short  journey  which  lay  before  them.  (2)  Inas- 
much as  the  savoury  and  luscious  things  they  wept  for  were  peculiarly  Egyptian, 
and  went  hand  in  hand  (as  they  do  still)  with  cruel  oppression  and  degradation :  it 
was  the  food  of  slavery.  (3)  Inasmuch  as  such  things  were  clearly  not  to  be 
expected  in  a  wilderness  such  as  God  was  leading  them  through.  Even  so  sinful 
greed  among  Christians  is  known  by  the  same  three  tokens.  (1)  It  is  a  craving  for 
superfluities.  What  God  has  given  us  (however  little  compared  with  our  desires)  is 
enough ;  for  it  will  suffice,  if  well  used,  to  bring  us  to  our  home  in  health  and 
strength  (Philip,  iv.  11 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  6 — 8 ;  Heb.  xiii.  5).  More  than  we  have  must  be 
more  than  enough,  for  God  is  pledged  to  give  us  that  (Matt.  vi.  33,  34 ;  Luke  xii. 
32 ;  Bom.  viii.  32).  (2)  It  is  a  craving  for  things  essentially  connected  with  the 
bondage  of  sin  and  worldliness,  from  which  we  are  escaped.  Such  luxuries  as 
wealth,  rank,  or  fashion  can  afford  are  (without  being  in  themselves  evil)  so  closely 
connected  with  evil  that  every  earnest  Christian  must  dread  rather  than  covet  them 
(Matt.  vi.  19,  21,  31,  32  a.  ;  Luke  vi.  24;  xvi.  19,  25;  James  v.  1).  (3)  It  is  an 
open  contempt  of  God's  appointment,  who  hath  not  given  us  any  inheritance  here, 
and  hath  told  us  to  expect  tribulation,  and  to  love  poverty  and  reproach,  because 
it  is  good  for  us  (Luke  vi.  20,  22  ;  John  xvi.  33 ;  Acts  liv.  22  ;  Bom.  viii.  24 ;  2  Cor. 
iv.  18 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  9 ;  Heb.  xiii.  14  ;  James  ii.  5). 

VI.  That  the  unrestrained  weeping  of  the  people  fob  the  dainties  they 

CODLD  not  have  WAS  EXCEEDING  HATEFUL    IN  THB    SIGHT    OF  GoD.       It  did    indeed 

make  no  account  of  all  his  mercies,  but  rather  reproached  him  for  bringing  them  out 
of  Egypt  and  setting  them  free.  It  was  as  good  as  saying  they  wished  he  had 
never  troubled  himself  about  them.  Even  so  the  greed  of  Christians  is  an  open 
reproach  against  him  that  loved  them  and  gave  himself  for  them,  as  though  he  had 
done  nothing  to  earn  their  trust  and  gratitude,  and  had  rather  treated  them  unkindly. 
He  who  passionately  desires  earthly  gains,  or  bitterly  laments  earthly  losses,  flings 
contempt  upon  the  gifts  of  Heaven  and  reproach  upon  his  God  and  Saviour. 
Wherefore  it  speaks  of  "  tlie  covetous,  whom  the  Lord  abhorreth "  (Ps.  x.  3 ;  of. 
Luke  xii.  15 ;  Bph.  v.  3  ;  Co],  iii.  5 ;  James  iv.  3,  4). 

VII.  That  the  Lord,  in  ordbb  to  punish  the  people,  qatb  thsm  an  abundanoi 


OB.  XL  4—85.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  Ill 

OF  WHAT  THEY  ASKBD  JOB.  Even  BO  God  pnnishes  our  greed  by  letting  us  have  oa 
much  as  we  want  of  the  coveted  thing.  The  covetous  person  is  punished  by  ampis 
wealth,  the  slothful  by  abundance  of  ease,  the  proud  by  success  and  flattery,  the 
vain  by  large  admiration,  the  sensual  by  unstinted  gratification.  Thus  the  man 
punishes  himself,  the  Lord  providing  him  with  the  means  of  destruction.  Whether 
we  like  it  or  not,  this  is  the  law  of  Providence ;  and  to  us  it  is  the  justice  of  God. 
Compare  the  case  of  Pharaoh  (Kom.  ix.  17, 18) ;  of  the  rich  fool  (Luke  xii.  16) ;  of 
Herod  (Acts  xii.  22). 

VIII.  That  thb  peoplk  in  theie  greed  laboured  day  and  night  to  accumu- 
late PRODIGIOUS  quantities  of  food  which  they  never  ate.  Even  80  do  vain  men 
labour  and  toil  to  lay  up  treasures  upon  earth,  never  resting  as  long  as  anj'thing 
remains  to  be  got — ^treasures  which  after  all  they  shall  never  enjoy,  and  shall  perhaps 
eternally  regret  (Matt.  xix.  24 ;  Luke  xii  21 ;  xvi.  25 ;  James  v.  2 ;  Eev.  iii.  17). 

IX.  That  the  people,  apart  from  any  supernatural  intervention,  would 

HAVE    sickened    of  THE    QUANTITY    OF    ANIMAL    FOOD    THEY    THOUGHT  TO    BAT,   AND 

FOUND  IT  "LOATHSOME."  Even  SO  self-indulgence  soon  reaches  its  natural  limits, 
even  when  left  to  itself,  and  provokes  a  natural  reaction  of  disgust.  If  this  world 
were  all,  moderation,  self-restraint,  and  contentment  with  a  little  would  still  make 
a  happier  life  than  luxury  and  dissipation.  The  "  roses  and  raptures  of  vice  "  which 
are  sung  by  many  poets,  ancient  and  modem,  do  not  only  fade  very  quickly,  but 
leave  a  very  evil  smell  behind  them. 

X.  That  the  justice  of  God  left  not  the  Israelites  to  the  slow  revenge  of 
NATURAL  satiety  ;  hardly  had  they  tasted  the  flesh  ere  the  plague  began  among 
them.  Even  so  greed  has  its  natural  reaction  of  misery,  even  in  the  life  of  this 
world,  but  it  has  its  Divine  punishment  in  the  soul.  "  He  gave  them  their  request, 
but  sent  leanness  into  their  aoul,"  says  the  Psalmist  (Ps.  cvi.  15),  revealing  the 
spiritual  truth  which  lay  hid  in  this  history.  There  is  a  balance  Divinely  held  be- 
tween the  bodily  life  and  that  of  the  soul,  so  that  if  the  first  is  full  and  fat  and  well- 
liking,  the  second  is  empty  and  lean  and  ill-favoured.  No  man  can  cater  greedily  for 
his  body  without  impoverishing  his  soul;  no  man  can  gratify  eagerly  his  carnal 
appetites  without  incurring  spiritual  disease  (Luke  vi.  24 — 26). 

XI.  That  one  of  the  earliest  stations  on  the  way  to  Canaan  was  "the 
GRAVES  of  greed,"  AND  THAT  THB  NEXT  WAS  "  ENCLOSURES."  Even  80  in  the  heaven- 
ward journey  of  the  Church  we  soon  come  (alas,  how  soon  1)  to  the  graves  of  greed, 
to  the  dishonourable  sepulchres  of  such  as  perished  through  love  of  money  or  of 
pleasure.  Behold  the  graves  of  Ananias,  of  Sapphira,  of  those  who  "slept"  at 
Corinth  (1  Cor.  xi.  30),  of  "  that  woman  Jezebel "  (Bev.  ii.  20),  of  Demas.  And 
after  this  we  come  to  "  enclosures  " — long  series  of  outward  restrictions,  and  regula- 
tions, some  apostolic  and  some  later,  which  mark  a  stage  in  the  Church's  journey, 
and  testify  to  her  efforts  to  maintain  her  moral  purity  (cf.  1  Cor.  v.  9,  11 ;  xi.  34  &. ; 
1  Tim.  V.  9).  And  what  is  true  of  the  Church  is  true  of  many  an  individual  member. 
As  memory  retraces  the  onward  path,  how  soon  come  the  "  graves  of  greed,"  the  sad 
memorials  of  passions  sinfully  indulged  and  sharply  revenged  1  and  after  that  the 
"  enclosures  " — the  restraints  and  restrictions  by  which  liberty  was  perforce  abridged 
in  order  that  sin  and  folly  might  be  fenced  out. 

Consider,  again,  unth  respect  to  the  manna — 

I.  That  the  people  were  really  tempted  to  weary  of  the  sameness  and 
insipidity  of  the  manna,  their  staple  food.  To  a  palate  accustomed  to  the  pungent 
condiments  and  varied  delicacies  of  Egypt,  it  was  a  great  trial  to  have  nothing  but 
manna  for  a  year ;  no  doubt  it  failed  to  satisfy  the  appetite,  and  cloyed  upon  the 
taste,  in  spite  of  its  wholesome  and  nutritious  qualities.  Even  so  it  is  a  real  trial  to 
one  who  has  known  the  excitements  of  sin  and  the  dissipations  of  the  world  to  satisfy 
himself  with  the  spiritual  joys  and  interests  of  religion,  and  we  ought  to  recognise 
the  fact  that  it  is  a  real  trial.  In  many  who  have  been  recovered  from  a  life  of 
indulgence  the  craving  for  excitement  is  at  times  almost  intolerable.  Nature  itself, 
even  when  not  depraved  by  long  habit,  longs  for  excitement  and  change,  and  wearies 
of  the  calm  monotony  of  faith,  hope,  and  charity.  Even  the  "  sweetness  "  of  the 
bread-of  life,  which  is  at  first  aa  "honey"  and  as  "fresh  oil"  to  the  starved  and 

i2 


116  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oh.  h.  4—3* 

Bickly  Boul,  palls  upon  it  aftef  a  while,  and  the  old  longings  reassert  themselves, 
How  many  tire  of  "  angels'  food  "  who  took  to  it  eagerly  enough  at  first  I  (of.  1  Tun. 
V.  11—13,  15 ;  Rev.  ii.  4). 

II.  That  the  manna  was  in  form  as  "  coriandbb  seed,"  which  wb  know  ;  in 
COLOUR  AS  "  BDELLIUM,"  WHICH  WB  DO  NOT  KNOW.  Even  SO  there  is  about  the  true 
bread  of  heaven  a  mizture  of  the  known  and  the  unknown,  of  that  which  can  be 
expressed,  and  of  that  which  passes  human  understanding.  The  coriander  seed  is  of 
common  use,  but  the  bdellium  is  of  paradise  (Gen.  ii.  12).  And  so  may  we  all  know 
the  beauty  of  Christ  in  part,  but  in  part  we  shall  never  know  until  we  see  him  as  he 
is  (of.  Eev.  ii.  17,  "  hidden  manna  ; "  iii.  12,  "  my  new  name  j  "  six.  12). 

IIL  That  the  people  habitually  pbepabed  the  manna  fok  eating  in  various 
WATS,  as  experience  and  their  own  preference  guided  them.  Even  so  the  manna  of 
souls,  although  it  does  not  need,  yet  it  does  not  reject,  the  use  of  human  means  and 
art  in  order  to  present  it  acceptably  to  the  spiritual  needs  of  men.  Ood  has  nowhere 
said  that  all  men,  of  whatsoever  habit  of  mind,  must  receive  the  word  and  sacrament 
of  Christ  in  the  simplest  and  barest  form,  or  not  at  all ;  it  is  only  needful  that  Christ, 
however  received,  be  the  sole  and  substantial  sustenance  of  the  soul  (John  vi.  50,  58 ; 
1  Cor.  iii.  11 ;  Gal.  i.  9 ;  Philip,  i,  18). 

Consider,  again,  with  respect  to  Moses  and  the  seveiUy— 

I.  That  the  sin  op  the  people  led  to  a  different  sin  in  Mostes.  He  would 
never  have  murmured  at  hardships,  or  have  lusted ;  but  he  lost  his  temper,  and  spake 
unadvisedly  with  his  lips.  Even  so  sin  constantly  leads  to  sin,  even  where  it  has  no 
direct  influence,  and  other  people's  faults  are  often  not  less  dangerous  temptations 
to  ns  because  we  abhor  them.  Thus  a  frivolous  wife  may  make  a  soured  husband  ; 
an  unprincipled  father  a  hard  and  stem  child ;  a  worldly  clergyman  a  sarcastic  and 
incredulous  congregation  (cf.  Matt.  zxiv.  12  ;  Luke  xviii.  11 ;  Bom.  ii.  22  h.). 

II.  That  the  temptation  under  which  Moses  fell  was  a  peculiarly  insidious 
ONE.  His  passionate  anger  with  the  people  and  disgust  with  his  position  as  their 
leader  might  seem  only  a  noble  indignation  against  wrong.  Even  so  many  are 
tempted  to  feel  nothing  but  scorn  at  "  baptized  heathenism,"  and  impatience  with  the 
moral  failures  of  the  age,  without  due  consideration  either  of  the  wise  and  loving 
purposes  of  God  or  of  their  own  duties  (Ps.  xxxvii.  8  ;  Jonah  iv.  9 ;  Eph.  iv.  26,  27 ; 
James  i.  19,  20). 

III.  That  in  his  sorrow  and  resentment  by  reason  of  the  wicked  he  was 
guilty  of  grave  injustice  and  insolence  against  God.  Even  so  we,  if  we  are 
carried  away  by  indignation  against  un-Christlike  Christians,  are  in  danger  of  sinning 
against  God,  who  has  borne  with  them,  and  bears  with  them  still,  and  who  has  made 
us  responsible  not  for  their  perfection,  but  only  for  our  own,  and  has  not  given  to 
any  a  greater  burden  than  be  is  able  to  bear  (Luke  ix.  55,  56;  2  Cor,  ii.  11 ;  2  Tim. 
ii21,  25,  26;  2  Pet.  iii.  15). 

IV.  That  Moses  also  ebbed  by  forming  far  too  high  an  estimate  of  his 
own  official  importance  and  responsibility,  as  though  he  had  been  the  real  father 
of  his  people,  whereas  "  one  was  their  Father,  which  was  in  heaven."  Even  so  it  is 
very  easy  and  natural  for  us,  if  we  are  in  earnest,  to  exaggerate  the  importance  of 
our  work,  and  to  mistake  the  nature  of  our  responsibility  in  the  Church.  It  is  only 
God  who  by  his  one  Spirit  does  all  good  work  in  the  Church,  and  he  wUl  take  care 
that  it  is  done  to  his  own  mind ;  we  are  but  instruments,  who  have  no  responsibility, 
save  that  of  being  "  meet  for  the  Master's  use  "  (1  Cor,  iii.  6  ;  iv,  2 ;  xii.  4—6). 

V.  That  God  was  exceeding  merciful  to  the  sin  of  Moses,  because  it  was  of 
human  infirmity,  and  because  it  was  the  petulant  outbreak  of  a  mind  and  heart  over- 
charged with  grief  and  failure.  Even  so  did  our  Lord  bear  with  his  apostles,  and 
will  bear  with  all  the  errors  and  outbreaks  of  an  honest  heart  (Fs.  ciii.  13,  14 ;  Luke 
xxii,  31—34,  61 ;  John  xx.  27). 

VI.  That  God  allowed  the  one  complaint  of  Moses  which  was  reasonable, 

AND  founded  the  PROPHETIC  OBDEB  TO  ASSIST  IN  THE  RELIGIOUS  DIRECTION  OF  THE 
PEOPLE.  Even  SO  out  of  complaints  and  difficulties  have  arisen  many  permanent  gifts 
i>f  the  Spirit  to  the  Church,  for  in  this  as  in  other  ways  man's  extremity  is  God's 
opportunity.    Thus  out  of  the  murmuring  of  the  Grecians  arose  the  diaconate  CAct* 


OH.  XI.  4.— 35.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  IIT 


vi.  1,6);  out  of  the  troubles  at  Corinth  the  better  regulation  of  the  Agape  and  th« 
Eucharist  (1  Cor.  xi.  17—34). 

VII.  That  it  was  the  Spibtt  whioh  bested  upon  Moses  which  was  communi- 
OATED  to  the  seventt,  Inasmuch  as  their  prophetic  office  was  to  be  held  and  exer- 
cised in  unity  with,  and  subordination  to,  the  mediator  of  Israel.  Even  so  it  is  the 
Spirit  of  Jesus  which  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy — ^the  Spirit  of  Christ  and  from  Christ 
whioh  must  rest  upon  every  Christian  teacher.  The  anointing  which  qualifies  to 
speak  Divine  mysteries  must  be  from  him  who  was  anoint«d  t£e  one  Mediator  and 
the  only  Prophef  (John  i.  16,  83;  xvi.  13, 14,  &o.). 

VIII.  That  the  anointing  op  the  Spibit  showed  itself  in  the  seventy  by 
ecstatic  uttebance — A.  thing  nbveb  becobded  of  Moses  himself.  Even  so  the 
first  evidence  of  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  upon  the  disciples  was  that 
they  spake  with  tongues,  which  our  Lord  had  never  done ;  for  all  such  manifesta- 
tions are  for  a  sign,  and  are  no  evidence  of  any  superior  greatness  or  holiness  in  the 
person  so  endowed.  How  often  are  mere  "gifts"  mistaken  for  intrinsic  worth,  and 
"  the  disciple  "  really  esteemed  "  above  his  master,"  because  he  is  not "  as  his  master  "  I 
(John  xiv.  12  6. ;  1  Cor.  xiii.). 

IX.  That  the  manifestation  of  the  Spibit  was  independent  of  outwabd 
accidents,  though  not  of  outwabd  oedbb.  The  designation  of  the  seventy  was 
left  to  Moses,  and  Bldad  and  Medad  were  among  the  number  selected ;  they  were 
prevented  from  attending  at  the  tabernacle,  but  they  received  the  same  gift  as  th» 
others.  Even  bo  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit  are  not  independent  of  ecclesiastical  order, 
nor  are  they  bestowed  at  random ;  but  they  are  not  restrained  by  anything  unavoid- 
able or  accidental.  It  is  the  purpose  of  God  which  is  operative,  not  the  ceremonial, 
however  authoritative.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  a  free  Spirit,  even  where  he  elects  to 
act  through  certain  channels  (of.  Acts  i,  26 ;  xiii.  2 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  11 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  17). 

X.  That  the  jealousy  of  Joshua  fob  his  masteb  was  bight  in  pbinciplb, 
although  wbong  in  the  pabtioulab  application.  It  was  impossible  for  him 
always  to  distinguish  between  a  right  and  a  wrong  jealousy  for  the  authority  and 
supremacy  of  Moses.  Even  so  jealousy  for  the  sole  pre-eminence  of  Christ  is  deeply 
rooted  in  all  true  Christian  hearts,  but  it  constantly  shows  itself  in  the  most  mistaken 
forms.  The  most  opposite  bigotnes  derive  their  strength  from  this  principle  in  ignor- 
ant or  prejudiced  minds,  and  indeed  the  very  best  and  wisest  may  often  err  in  this 
matter.  Good  people  do,  as  a  fact,  constantly  denounce  this  or  that  as  an  interfer- 
ence with  the  prerogatives  of  Christ,  when  it  is  in  truth  only  a  carrying  out  of  his 
work  in  his  name.  Since,  however,  the  principle  is  right,  we  must  bear  with  the 
wrong  application  of  it ;  we  must  not  be  angry  even  with  intolerance  if  it  spring 
from  genuine  loyalty  to  the  one  Lord  and  only  Mediator,  Christ  (of.  Mark  ix.  38 — 40 ; 
1  Cor.  xii.  3  with  Gal.  v.  12 ;  2  John  10,  11 ;  Jude  19). 

XI.  That  Moses  desikbd  nothing  so  little  as  a  monopoly  of  spieitual  gifts. 
If  he  ever  had  been  personally  ambitious,  a  larger  knowledge  of  his  people  and 
experience  of  his  work  had  quite  delivered  him  from  it.  Even  so  every  true  Chris- 
tian teacher  and  leader,  howsoever  he  may  feel  bound  to  magnify  his  office,  will 
greatly  long  for  the  time  when  "  all  will  be  taught  of  God,"  and  when  all  distinctions 
will  be  for  ever  abolished,  save  such  as  depend  on  personal  nearness  to  God.  How 
hateful  is  the  idea  that  the  flock  should  be  kept  in  darkness  in  order  that  the  shep- 
herds may  have  a  monopoly  of  influence  1  How  happy  were  the  pastor's  charge  if 
all  were  "  spiritual "  I  (Jer.  xxxL  34 ;  John  vi  45 ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  6  •,  iv.  8  6. ;  1  Pet  r.  3 ; 
1  John  iL  20,  27). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  16,  17,  24,  25. — The  seventt/  elders,  and  how  they  were  fitted  Jor  their  high 
office.  The  murmuring  of  the  people  so  soon  after  setting  out  on  the  march  from  Horeb 
reminded  Moses  again,,  very  painfully,  what  a  heavy  burden  had  been  laid  upon  him 
in  the  leadership  of  so  great  a  multitude  of  people  newly  escaped  from  slavery.  He 
complained  to  the  Lord.  His  complaint  was  graciously  heard.  He  was  directed  to 
gather  around  him  a  company  of  seventy  elders,  who  might  aid  him  with  their 
ooonsel,  and  share  his  burden. 


118  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oh.  xi.  4—36. 

I.  Regarding  the  status  and  functions  op  this  company  of  seventy  there  have 
been  many  debates.  Some  have  identified  them  with  the  Sanhedrim  or  Council  of 
Seveitty  whom  we  meet  with  so  often  in  the  Gospels  and  the  Acts.  Passing  by  these 
questions,  let  us  note  the  facts  recorded  in  the  text  itself.  What  was  wanted  was 
not  the  appointment  of  ordinary  rulers  or  judges.  Every  tribe  had  already  a  prince, 
a  body  of  elders  and  officers,  and  nilers  of  tens  and  fifties  and  hundreds  and  thou- 
sands, who  judged  between  man  and  man.  What  was  wanted  was  a  council  to  aid 
Moses  with  their  advice  and  assistance  in  the  administration  of  the  national  affairs. 
(Compare  the  Governors  and  Council  in  a  British  dependency. ) 

II.  The  manner  of  the  appointment  of  the  seventy  is  carefully  described. 
1.  No  one  was  appointed  who  was  not  in  public  office  already.  "  Gather  unto  me 
seventy  men,  whom  thou  knowest  to  be  the  elders  of  the  people,  and  ofBcers  over 
them  ; "  i.  e.  they  were  not  to  be  raw,  inexperienced,  untried  men.  Only  those  were 
eligible  who  had  given  proof  of  ability  and  faithfulness  in  the  public  service,  either 
as  elders  or  as  officers  (i.  e.  writers  or  scriveners — this  is  the  literal  meaning  of 
the  Hebrew  shoterim.  The  reference  is  to  professional  scribes,  the  assessors  of 
non-professional  magistrates,  such  as  the  Hebrew  elders  were).  This  rule  was  a 
good  one.  No  man  should  be  raised  at  one  bound  to  high  office,  either  in  Church  or 
State.  2.  They  were  nominated  hy  Moses.  In  this  respect  the  procedure  was  ex- 
ceptional. There  was  far  less  of  centralisation  in  the  government  of  Israel  than  a 
modem  and  Western  reader  of  the  Bible  is  apt  to  think.  To  be  sure,  there  were  no 
representative  bodies  such  as  we  are  familiar  with.  Nevertheless,  the  government 
was  truly  popular.  Even  in  Egypt  the  people  were  ruled,  in  the  first  instance,  by 
their  own  elders — the  heads  of  families  and  tribes ;  and  this  primitive  system  was 
continued  in  a  more  perfect  form  in  Palestine.  But  although  local  government  could 
be  best  administered  by  local  magistrates,  it  was  otherwise  with  the  supreme  and 
central  government  with  which  Moses  was  charged.  A  council  such  as  he  required 
could  only  be  had  by  freely  calling  forth  men  of  outstanding  ability  and  approved 
wisdom.  3.  They  were  invested  with  office  in  the  face  of  the  congregation,  and 
before  the  Lord.  In  the  face  of  the  congregation,  to  remind  them  that  they  were  to 
act  for  the  public  good,  and  not  in  pursuance  of  any  private  interest.  Before  the 
Lord,  to  remind  them  that  "  there  is  no  power  but  of  God ;  "  their  authority  is  from 
God,  and  is  to  be  used  as  they  shall  answer  to  him.  4.  They  were  endowed  from 
above  with  new  gifts  to  qualify  them  for  their  new  office.  When  Moses  gathered 
them  before  the  tabernacle,  "  the  Lord  came  down  in  a  cloud,  and  spake  unto  him, 
and  took  of  the  spirit  that  was  upon  him,  and  gave  it  unto  the  seventy  elders."  This 
has  been  interpreted  to  mean  that  there  was  abstracted  from  Moses  some  part  of  the 
spirit  by  which  he  had  hitherto  been  sustained.  But  that  is  certainly  a  perverse 
misinterpretation.  Twenty  lamps  may  be  lighted  from  one  lamp  without  diminish- 
ing its  brightness  (cf.  2  Kings  ii.  9).  God  sendeth  no  man  to  warfare  at  his  own 
charges.  When  he  calls  any  man  to  public  service,  whether  in  Church  or  State,  the 
man  so  called  may,  without  doubting,,  ask  and  expect  the  wisdom,  strength,  courage 
which  the  service  requires  (James  i.  5 — 8). 

III.  The  most  picturesque  feature  in  the  narrative  is  that  which  remains  yet  to  be 
noticed — the  striking  sign  by  which  notification  was  given  that  the  seventy 

ELDERS  HAD  TRULY  BEEN  CALLED  BY  GOD  AND  WOULD  BE  COUNTENANCED  BY  HIM.    "  When 

the  Spirit  rested  on  them,  they  prophesied,  and  added  no  more  "  (such  is  the  render- 
ing now  preferred  by  all  the  best  translators).  "They  prophesied,"  that  is,  they 
spoke  as  men  who  were  for  the  time  lifted  above  themselves — as  men  under  the  in- 
fluence of  an  irresistible  power  external  to  themselves.  We  may  presume  that  what 
they  did  say  would  be  of  such  a  kind  as  to  make  it  plain  that  the  power  acting  upon 
them  was  Divine  and  heavenly.  This  prophesying  was  intended  to  signalise  the 
inward  gifts  with  which  the  newly-appointed  elders  were  now  being  endowed.  This 
is  plain  from  the  parallel  case  related  in  1  Sam.  x.  The  Lord  in  appointing  Saul 
to  be  king  over  Israel  promised  to  "be  with  him  ;  "  to  "  give  him  another  heart," 
so  that  he  should  "  be  turned  into  another  man. "  With  the  kingly  office  he  was  to  get 
from  the  Lord  the  kingly  mind.  In  token  of  this,  the  Spirit  came  upon  him,  and  he 
prophesied  (cf.  Acts  ii.  3,  4;  x.  44 — 47).  The  impulse  was  only  a  transient  one. 
"  They  prophesied,  and  added  no  more.''    The  miracle,  having  served  its  purpose, 


«. «.  4-«5.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  tl» 

ceased ;  but  the  spiritual  endowment  of  which  it  was  the  token  remained.  This 
prophesying,  if  you  consider  it  well,  will  be  seen  to  be  more  than  a  token.  Besides 
notifying  the  Lord's  approval  of  the  elders,  and  assuring  them  of  help,  itsuggested 
much  instruction  regarding  the  principles  which  should  regulate  their  administration. 
The  tongues  of  fire  and  the  rapturous  speaking  with  tongues  on  the  day  of  Pentecostj 
we  know  what  that  miracle  meant.  It  admonished  the  disciples  that  the  warfare  of 
Christ's  kirigdom  ip  to  be  accomplished  not  with  the  sword,  but  with  the  tongue ; 
not  with  violence  and  bloodshed,  out  by  the  earnest  and  living  manifestation  of  the 
truth.  It  was  a  lesson  of  the  same  kind  which  the  Lord  suggested  by  the  miracle 
wrought  on  the  seventy  elders  in  front  of  the  tabernacle.  They  were  admonished 
that  in  their  administration  of  affairs  they  ought  to  make  use  rather  of  wise  and 
persuasive  speech  than  of  brute  force.  And  is  not  this  a  lesson  for  us  also?  The 
time  is  not  come  yet — perhaps  will  never  come  in  the  present  state — ^f  or  rulers  to  lay 
aside  the  sword  altogether.  Violent  men,  if  they  will  not  listen  to  reason,  must  be 
restrained  with  violence.  Nevertheless,  even  for  civil  rulers,  the  employment  of 
force  is  the  less  honourable  function  of  their  ofBce.  Better  to  restrain  and  guide  and 
govern  men  with  wise,  firm,  persuasive  words  than  with  the  sword. — B. 

Vers.  26 — 30. — Eldad  and  Medad;  or,  irregtilar  prophesying.  This  narrative 
brings  up  a  subject  which  is  at  once  of  great  practical  importance  and  of  great 
delicacy,  on  which  men  have  been  apt  to  run  to  extremes  on  the  one  side  or  the  other. 
It  will  be  our  wisdom,  therefore,  to  begin  by  weighing  carefully  the  lacts  as  they  are 
set  forth  in  the  sacred  narrative. 

I.  The  facts  are,  shortly,  these : — Moses  having  complained  that  the  leadership  of 
the  nation  was  a  burden  greater  than  he  could  bear,  the  Lord  gave  direction  that  i, 
Council  of  Seventy  should  be  associated  with  him  in  it.  This  was  done.  From 
among  the  acting  elders  and  officers  of  the  congregation  Moses  called  out  seventy 
and  they  were  solemnly  set  apart  to  the  new  office,  before  the  Lord  and  the  congre- 
gation. This  consecration-service  (as  it  may  be  called)  did  not  pass  without  a  palp- 
able token  of  the  Divine  approval,  a  palpable  token  that  appropriate  gifts  would  be 
forthcoming  to  the  new  rulers  as  they  had  been  to  Moses.  When  the  Seventy  were 
being  set  apart,  the  Spirit  fell  upon  them,  and  they  prophesied.  While  this  was 
going  on  at  the  tent  of  meeting,  a  young  man  came  running  with  the  tidings  that  two 
men  were  prophesying  in  the  camp.  On  inquiry  it  turned  out  that  these  were  two  of 
the  seventy  whom  Moses  had  nominated  for  the  council.  For  some  reason  or  other 
they  had  not  come  forward  with  the  rest  to  the  tent  of  meeting.  Notwithstanding 
of  this,  the  Spirit  had  come  on  them  in  the  camp  exactly  as  he  had  come  on  their 
brethren,  and  they  were  prophesying.  Clearly  there  was  in  this  a  breach  of  due 
order.  Eldad  and  Medad  ought  to  have  presented  themselves  along  with  the  rest. 
They  were  chargeable  with  an  irregularity.  Accordingly,  Joshua,  who  is  already  the 
trusted  "minister  of  Moses,"  suggests  that  they  should  be  silenced.  "My  lord 
Moses,  forbid  them."  But  Moses  is  of  another  mind.  Is  it  certain  that  Eldad  and 
Medad  are  prophesying  ?  If  so,  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  we  may  presume,  is  in  the 
matter.  Spiritual  gifts  are  not  such  cheap  and  common  things  that  we  can  afford  to 
throw  them  away.  Possibly  enough  these  prophets  in  the  camp  have  failed  to  make 
due  acknowledgment  of  me  as  the  Divinely-appointed  leader  of  the  congregation. 
But  let  no  man  look  with  an  evil  eye  on  them  for  my  sake.  Would  that  the  Spirit 
were  put  on  all  the  people  I  I  should  rejoice  to  see  my  light  outshone  in  such  a 
general  brightness  I  ' 

II.  What  have  these  pacts  to  sat  to  its?  What  lesson  do  they  teach  ?  1.  At 
first  sight  it  might  seem  as  if  they  taught  us  to  make  light  of  office,  solemn  ordination 
to  office,  official  service,  and  to  attach  importance  only  to  the  possession  and  exercise  of 
gifts.  But  that  certainly  is  not  intended.  The  new  council  was  not  to  consist  of  men 
simply  obeying  an  internal  call.  No  one  was  admissible  without  prior  experience  in 
office,  and  without  election  by  Moses.  And  it  was  by  Divine  command  that  the 
sixty-eight  were  solemnly  set  apart  before  the  Lord  and  the  congregation.  I  need 
not  prove  that  in  the  State  it  is  the  will  of  God  that  there  should  be  magistrates,  laws, 
and  strict  enforcement  of  the  laws.  In  the  Church  there  is,  no  doubt,  a  difEerence  ; 
for  the  Church  has  no  coercive  power.    Its  weapons  are  the  truth  and  the  tongue  of 


**>  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oh.  xi.  4— SS. 


fire,  not  the  sword.  Nevertheless,  order  is  quite  as  necessary  in  the  Church  as  in  the 
State.  "  In  all  churches  of  the  saints  God  is  the  author  of  peace,  not  of  confusion, ' 
and  all  things  are  to  be  "  done  decently  and  in  order"  (1  Cor.  xiv.  33—40).  2.  The 
narrative  admonishes  us  that  office  and  order  and  official  service,  necessary  as  they 
may  be,  are  not  everything.  They  are  not  everything,  even  in  the  State,  much  less 
are  they  everything  in  the  Church.  The  salvation  and  edification  of  souls  will  not  go 
forward  unless  there  is  a  continual  ministration  of  the  Spirit  in  gifts  and  in  grace. 
That  is  a  general  lesson  the  facts  teach.  More  particularly  they  admonish  us  that  we 
need,  not  be  surprised  if  it  should  occasionally  happen  that  men  who  are  walking 
irregularly  give  evidence  of  having  been  richly  endowed  with  spiritual  gifts.  I  wifl 
not  discuss  the  question,  How  such  a  thing  can  be ;  how  the  God  of  order  can,  with- 
out contradicting  himself,  bestow  his  valuable  gifts  on  men  who  do  not  quite  conform 
to  the  good  order  of  his  house.  For  the  fact  is  plain.  Whether  we  can  account  for 
it  or  no,  the  fact  is  indubitable.  Has  not  Christ  raised  up  men  like  Pascal  within  the 
Bomish  communion  ?  Yet  every  Protestant  believes  that  the  Church  of  Borne  has 
grievously  erred  both  in  respect  to  Church  order,  and  in  the  weightiest  points  of 
faith  and  holiness.  Do  not  suppose  that  these  and  similar  facts  are  to  be  accounted 
for  by  alleging  that  Christendom  has  for  a  long  while  fallen  away  into  anarchy.  For 
facts  of  the  same  kind  found  place  in  connection  with  the  personal  ministry  of  Christ 
himself.  _  The  Twelve  were  Christ's  apostles,  and  it  was  the  duty  of  all  disciples  to 
follow  with  them.  Did,  therefore,  Christ  withhold  his  gifts  from  all  save  those  in 
the  apostles'  company  ?  On  the  contrary,  there  was  found  an  individual  now  and 
then  who,  though  he  followed  not  with  the  apostles,  nevertheless  both  spoke  in 
Christ's  name,  and  spoke  to  such  good  purpose  that  devils  were  oast  forth  (cf.  Mark 
ix  38 — iO).  3.  What,  then,  is  the  conclusion  to  which  we  are  led  ?  "  Quench  not  the 
Spirit :  despise  not  prophesying."  I  do  not  say  that  it  was  the  duty  of  Moses,  or  is  our 
duty  in  similar  circumstances,  to  go  forth  to  Eldad  and  Medad,  and  identify  ourselves 
with  them  in  their  work.  That  will  depend  on  circumstances.  Sometimes  one  can- 
not take  part  with  the  irregular  prophets  without  concurring  in  what  would  for  us  be 
sin.  Christ's  command  was  not,  Go  and  join  yourselves  to  the  man  who  is  casting 
out  devils  in  my  name,  irregularly.  But  it  was,  Forbid  him  not.  Is  a  man  really 
prophesying  ?  Is  he  casting  out  devils  ?  Is  he  setting  forth  the  truth  and  doing 
good  ?  Then  do  not  forbid  him.  Bring  him,  if  you  can,  to  a  fuller  knowledge  of 
the  truth,  and  to  more  regular  courses,  but  do  not  look  on  him  with  jealous  eyes,  or 
try  to  put  him  down.  If  Christ  is  preached,  whether  it  be  in  pretence  or  in  truth,  I 
therein  do  rejoice,  yea,  and  will  rejoice  (Phil.  i.  14 — 28). — B. 

Vers.  4 — 16 ;  31 — 36. — The  complainers,  and  how  God  made  answer  to  their  com- 
plaints. This  eleventh  of  Numbers  is  a  chapter  of  complainings.  First,  at  Taberah, 
vague  murmurings  are  heard  throughout  the  camp.  Then  at  Kibroth-Iiattaavah,  a  stage 
further  on,  the  vague  murmurings  take  shape  in  bitter  complaint  because  of  the  fare 
to  which  the  congregation  wa«  now  confined.  Manna  I  nothing  but  manna  I  While 
the  people  were  harping  on  this  grievance  Moses  also  lifted  up  his  voice  in  com- 
plaint. "  Why  has  the  Lord  dealt  so  hardly  with  him  as  to  lay  on  him  the  burden  of 
so  great  a  company  ?  Better  kill  him  out  of  hand,  and  not  let  him  see  his  wretched- 
ness I "  Consider  this  scene  at  Kibroth-hattaavah.  It  is  not  pleasant  to  look  at, 
especially  when  one  becomes  aware  that  it  is  a  glass  in  which  are  to  be  seen  passages 
in  one's  own  history  which  one  would  gladly  forget.  Scenes  not  pleasant  may 
nevertheless  be  profitable. 

I.  Tbb  ooMPLAjNiNGS  OF  THB  PEOPLE.  1.  Where  Hie  sin  began.  It  was  among 
"the  mixed  multitude."  A  great  crowd  of  foreigners  who  had  been  neighbours  to 
the  Israelites  in  Egypt,  came  forth  with  them  at  the  Exodus,  moved  some  by  one 
motive  and  some  by  another  (Exod.  xii.  38).  It  is  instructive  to  observe  that  these 
were  the  first  to  break  out  into  rebellious  murmurs ;  equally  instructive  to  observe 
that  the  evil  generated  amongst  them  spread  from  them  into  the  body  of  the  people. 
Every  community  has  its  mixed  multitude,  its  pariahs,  its  residuum.  To  the  exist- 
ence of  this  class  men  have  been  too  willing  to  shut  their  eyes.  I  know  no  better 
■ign  of  the  present  age  than  its  wide-spread  desire  to  take  note  of  these  masses, 
and  if  possible  bring  them  to  God.    Were  there  no  higher  motive,  self-preservation 


cm.  XL  4—86.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  121 

might  well  plead  with  men  to  labour  in  this  work.  When  destitution  and  filth  are 
suffered  to  generate  typhus  among  the  poor,  the  deadly  infection  will  make  its  way 
into  the  palaces  of  the  rich.  So  when  sin  is  suffered  to  become  rampant  in  one  class 
the  other  classes  will  not  long  escape  the  contagion.  2.  The  matter  of  complaint 
was  little  to  the  credit  of  the  complainers.  So  long  as  the  congregation  lay  en- 
camped in  Horeb,  the  fare  would  be  occasionally  diversified  with  herbs  and  the  like. 
In  the  wilderness  of  Paran  there  is  only  the  manna.  Certainly  no  just  ground  of 
complaint.  The  daily  miracle  ought  rather  to  have  moved  to  daily  thanksgiving. 
But  even  of  manna  the  people  wearied.  They  craved  greater  variety.  3.  How 
the  complaint  is  answered  (vers.  18 — 21,  31 — 33).  The  people  demand  flesh,  and 
flesh  is  given  them  beyond  their  utmost  thought.  They  get  their  desire,  hut  not 
God's  blessing  with  it.  So  it  becomes  to  them  a  curse  in  the  end.  Such  a  plague 
followed  the  "  shower  of  flesh  "  that  the  place  has  ever  since  borne  the  ghastly  name 
of  Kibroth-hattaavah,  the  graves  of  lust.  It  is  an  admonition  to  us  not  to  give  way 
to  impatience  on  account  of  real  or  imagined  hardships  in  our  lot;  above  all,  not  to 
let  our  impatience  hurry  us  into  rebellious  demands  for  a  change.  Many  a  time  such 
demands  are  granted  to  the  confusion  of  those  who  made  them.  Before  leaving  this 
■tory  of  the  people's  sin  at  Kibroth-hattaavah,  let  me  caution  you  against  supposing 
that  it  is  a  mere  parable,  a  late  fiction,  not  the  history  of  a  real  transaction.  It  is  at 
present  the  fashion  in  some  quarters  to  get  rid  of  the  miracles  of  the  Exodus  and  of  the 
forty  years  in  the  wilderness,  by  denying  the  historical  truth  of  the  Pentateuch,  and 
interpreting  it  as  at  best  an  allegory  or  parable.  But  the  Spirit  of  God  has  been 
careful  to  leave  on  the  narrative  indubitable  marks  of  historical  verity  to  confound 
such  interpretations.  For  example,  in  this  narrative  (1)  observe  the  terms  in  which 
the  people  utter  their  complaint.  "We  remember,  the  fish,  .  .  encumbers,  melons, 
leeks,  onions,  garlic."  Egypt  all  over  I  These  are  precisely  the  articles  of  food  which 
were  distinctively  Egyptian.  Ko  one  writing  in  Judah  or  Ephraim  would  ever  have 
thought  of  putting  such  a  bill  of  fare  into  the  mouths  of  the  complainers.  (2) 
Observe  the  nature  of  the  miracle  by  which  the  people  were  fed.  A  shower  of 
quails.  This  is  as  characteristic  of  the  Sinaitic  peninsula  as  the  bill  of  fare  was  of 
Egypt.  It  was  spring  when  the  congregation  arrived  at  Kibroth-hattaavah  ;  at  this 
season  the  quails  "are  annually  in  the  habit  of  crossing  the  desert  in  countless 
myriads,  flying  very  low,  and  often  in  the  morning  so  utterly  exhausted  by  their 
night's  flight  that  they  are  slaughtered  by  the  thousand  "  (Tristram).  This  chapter  is 
history,  not  fable. 

II.    MOSBS,  TOO,  WAS  A  COMPLAINEB  AT  KiBROTH-HATTAAVAH   (read  vers.  11 — 15). 

His  words  are  sufiSciently  bitter  and  impatient.  There  is  in  them  no  little  sin ;  yet 
they  are  not  resented  as  the  people's  were.  Moses  is  not  taken  at  his  word  and 
smitten  with  a  plague.  On  the  contrary,  the  Lord  comforts  him  with  cheering  words, 
and  grants  him  a  council  of  elders  to  alleviate  the  burden.  This  is  the  more  worthy 
of  notice,  because  it  is  by  no  means  singular  (see  1  Kinf!;s  xix.  4).  Do  you  ask. 
What  can  be  the  reason  of  this  V  Why  deal  so  gently  with  the  complaints  of  Moaes 
»nd  Elijah,  when  the  complaints  of  the  congregation  are  so  sliarply  punished?  The 
difference  can  be  explained.  Observe  where  and  to  whom  Moses  expressed  the  grief 
and  weariness  of  his  heart.  It  was  not  to  the  Egyptians  from  whom  they  had  come 
out ;  nor  was  it  to  the  congregation  of  Israel.  It  was  in  the  ear  of  God  himself ;  he 
complains  not  of  the  Lord,  but  to  the  Lord — two  very  different  sorts  of  complaint. 
A  dutiful  son  may  remonstrate  with  his  father  when  the  two  are  alone,  but  he  will 
not  cry  out  against  his  father  to  strangers.  When  the  child  of  God  has  a  complaint 
to  make,  it  is  to  God  he  carries  it.  And  complaints  carried  to  God,  even  although 
there  should  be  much  impatience  and  unbelief  at  the  root  of  them,  will  be  listened  to 
very  graciously.  The  Lord,  so  great  is  liis  condescending  love,  would  rather  that  we 
should  pour  out  the  griefs — even  the  unreasonable  griefs — of  our  hearts,  than  that 
we  should  let  them  rankle  in  our  bosoms. — ^B. 

Ver.  10. — The  disastrous  consequences  of  the  sin  of  discontent.  Discontent  springs 
from_  distrust  Z>istrust  is  a  root-sin  from  which  different  kindred  evils  spring,  such 
as  rfisoontent,  rfwsatisfaction,  disgast,  rfwobedience,  and  other  disagreeable  states  of 
Oiind.    But  "  those  that  know  thy  name,"  &o.  (Pa.  is.  10  j  Lam.  iii.  24).    From  thes« 


122  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES.  [CH.  n.  4—85. 

strange  cairns  in  the  wilderness,*  "  tlie  graves  of  lust,"  we  hear  a  voice  (1  Cor.  x. 
e).    I.  The  discontent  of  the  Isbaelites.    IL  Its  disastrous  conseqdknces. 

I.  1.  Its  disgraceful  origin:  "the  mixed  multitude,"  "hang«r8-on,""riffi-ra£E."  The 
chosen  people  of  God  listened  and  sympathised  with  them  rather  than  with  Moses  and 
God.  Apply  to  worldlings  grumbling  about  weather,  homes,  situations,  incomes,  &c. 
(Prov.  i.  10 ;  Eom.  xii.  2 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  14).  2.  The  gross  ingratitude  of  it  They  were 
dissatisfied  with  the  manna,  which  was  wholesome,  abundant,  and  adapted  to  various 
uses  (vers.  7 — 9),  as  though  Hindoos  should  quarrel  with  their  rice  or  the  English 
with  their  wheat  (1  Tim.  vi.  8).  They  recollect  certain  casual  sensual  advantages  of 
past  bondage,  but  forget  its  cruelties  and  degradation  (vers.  4 — 6).  Why  not 
remember  the  whips  and  fetters  and  infanticide  ?  They  think  of  suppers  more  than 
BufEerings,  of  full  stomachs  rather  than  of  famished  souls.  Let  Christians  beware  of 
hankering  after  the  indulgences  of  their  old  life  (Prov.  zziii.  3;  1  John  ii.  15).  And 
they  complain  of  temporary  deprivations,  though  hastening  to  a  home  of  permanent 
and  abundant  good.  They  were  passing  through  "  that  great  and  terrible  wilder- 
ness "  (Paran)  because  it  was  the  direct  route  to  the  promised  land  (Deut.  i.  19 ; 
of.  1  Pet.  L  13  ;  ii.  11).  3.  The  aggravations  of  it.  For  they  had  seen  God's  power 
already  (Exod.  xvi.  13 ;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  19,  20).  And  have  not  we  ?  (cf.  Ps.  xxii.  4,  5, 
9,  10).  And  they  overlooked  recent  chastisement  (ver.  1).  God  forbid  that  Isa. 
xxvi.  11  should  be  true  of  us,  lest  Prov.  xxix.  1  should  be  also. 

II.  The  disastrous  results  of  their  sin.  1.  They  angered  Jehovah.  Discontent  in 
the  guests  of  his  bounty  dishonours  their  generous  host,  as  though  Reuben  had  com- 
plained because  Joseph  gave  more  to  Benjamin  (Gen.  xliii.  34).  2.  They  grieved 
Moses,  and  even  infected  him  with  their  own  desponding  spirit  (vers.  11 — 16;  see 
sketch  below).  Note  bow  sin  may  become  epidemic,  spreading  from  the  mixed 
multitude  to  the  Israelites,  and  thence  to  Moses,  like  a  disease  introduced  by  foreign 
Bailors  spreading  to  our  homes  and  palaces.  Beware  of  carrying  infection  (Illustration, 
Asaph,  Ps.  Ixxiii.  11 — 15).  3.  They  got  what  they  desired,  but  are  ruined  thereby. 
Moses'  prayer  for  help  is  answered  in  mercy  (vers.  16,  17)  ;  theirs  for  flesh,  in  judg- 
ment (vers.  18 — 20).  They  probably  added  gluttony  to  lust,  and  perished  in  the 
sight  of  plenty  and  at  the  moment  of  gratilication  (cf.  Job  xx.  22,  23;  Ps 
IxxviiL  30,  31). 

Learn — 1.  Prayers  of  discontent  may  bring  answers  of  destruction.  S!.  g.  Rachel 
demanding  children,  and  the  Israelites  a  king.  Greater  wealth  but  worse  health 
(Ecoles.  vi.  1,  2) ;  worldly  prosperity,  but  leanness  of  soul  (Ps.  cvi.  15 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  9  ; 
James  iv.  4).  2.  The  blessedness  of  a  contented  trust  (Philip,  jv.  11 — 13;  Heb. 
xiii.  5).— P. 

Vers.  11 — 15. — 7%«  sin  of  despondency  in  a  servant  of  God.  Moses  is  infected  by 
the  people's  sin  of  discontent,  though  in  the  milder  form  of  despondency.  The  signs 
and  effects  of  it  are  as  follows  : — 

I.  Moses  foegbts  that  the  burdens  of  responsibility  and  the  afflictions  thet 

BEING  WITH  THEM,  INSTEAD   OF   BEING  A  SIGN  THAT  HE  HAS  "  NOT  FOUND  FAVOUR  "   IN 

God's  sight,  are  a  proof  of  the  honour  put  upon  him.  Illustration :  a  diplomatist 
or  a  general  (e.  g.  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley)  selected  out  of  all  the  Queen's  servants  for 
some  arduous  enterprise.  Christian  wife  honoured  by  God  with  the  responsibilitiea 
and  burdens  of  motherhood. 

II.  He  forgets  that  our  duties  are  not  limited  by  cub  natural  relation- 
ships (ver.  12).  We  are  all  "members  of  one  another"  (Rom.  xiv.  7  ;  Philip,  ii. 4). 
All  are  in  danger  of  a  selfish  disregard  of  those  afar  off  (savage  Caffres,  idolatrous 
Hindoos),  or  even  of  those  at  our  doors,  not  our  own  kindred,  respecting  whose 
spiritual  welfare  we  may  be  selfishly  indifferent  or  despondent. 

III.  He  speaks  as  though  the  burden  was  thrown  entirely  on  himself.  The 
questions  in  vers.  12,  13  are  very  unworthy  of  him.  The  cold  fog  of  despondency 
chills  him  and  obscures  the  light  of  God's  presence  which  was  promised  to  him 
(Exod.  xxxiii.  14). 

IV.  His  despondency  leads  to  unworthy  reflections  on  God  and  exagger- 
Atid  statements  about  himself  (vers.  13,  14).    A  smaller  burden  would  hav« 

>  '  Our  Work  in  Palestine,'  pp.  284-6. 


CH.  XI.  4—35.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  IS! 

been  too  great  for  him  "  alone  ; "  a  heavier  not  too  great  with  God  (cf.  John  xv.  6 ; 
Philip,  iv.  13). 

V.  It  prompts  him  to  a  sinfuI/  peatbr  (ver.  15).  Imagine  that  the  prayer  hadi 
been  answered,  and  Moses  had  died  on  the  spot ;  what  a  humiliating  end  1  (cf.  1  Kings 
xix.  4). 

Let  us  learn  the  lesson  Ps.  Ivi.  3,  and  thus  climb  to  the  level  of  a  still  higher 
experience  :  "  I  will  trust,  and  not  be  afraid  "  (Isa.  xii.  2 ;  xxvi.  3). — P. 

Ver.  17. — The  communication  of  a  spiritual  endowm,ent.  The  endowment  of  the 
elders  for  official  duties  was — 1.  A  Divine  gift  imparted  by  God  himself  (1  Cor.  xii. 
4 — 6  ;  James  i.  17).  2.  Yet  mediate,  through  Moses,  who  was  the  first  to  enjoy  it, 
but  was  thankful  to  share  it  with  men  in  sympathy  with  himself  (of.  1  Cor.  iii.  21, 
22  ;  iv.  6,  7).  3.  A  means  of  relief  to  Moses  and  of  blessing  to  the  people.  The 
communication  did  not  impoverish  Moses,  but  enriched  him.  He  was  like  a  lamp 
from  which  seventy  other  lamps  were  lit.  The  communication  of  the  gift,  like 
mercy,  was  twice  blessed — ^to  him  that  gives  and  him  that  takes.  It  relieved  Moses 
and  enriched  the  elders,  yet  not  for  their  own  advantage,  but  as  a  means  of  discharg- 
uig  their  new  and  solemn  trust.  All  "gifts,"  however  received,  are  to  be  looked  on 
as  talents  and  trusts.  The  law  of  the  stewardship  is  found  in  Bom.  xii.  3 — 8 ; 
1  Pet  iv.  10,  11. 

Learn — 1.  The  value  of  every  spiritual  gift.  Men  should  not  envy  the  possessor 
of  it,  but  thank  God  for  him,  since  the  gift  is  communicable.  If  there  had  been  no 
inspired  Moses,  there  would  have  been  no  inspired  elders.  An  Elisha  is  the  heir  of 
an  Elijah  (2  Kings  ii.  9,  10);  a  Timothy  is  tlie  son  of  a  Paul  (2  Tim.  i.  2,  6).  2.  The 
privilege  of  being  the  medium  of  communicating  a  spiritual  gift  (Bom.  i.  11 ;  Phil.  i. 
6).  3.  The  importance  of  "  coveting  the  best  gifts  "  which  God  can  bestow,  without 
human  intervention,  through  his  beloved  Son.-^P. 

Vers.  26 — 29. — Largeness  of  heart.  The  brevity  of  the  narrative  prevents  us 
forming  an  adverse  judgment  of  the  conduct  of  Eldad  and  Medad,  for  we  do  not 
know  their  motive  for  remaining  in  the  camp.  It  may  have  been  ignorance  of  the 
call,  or  shrinking  through  timidity  from  a  duty  which,  nevertheless,  God  would  not 
allow  them  to  escape.  But  the  narrative  is  not  too  brief  to  enable  us  to  see  in  Moses' 
words  a  fine  illustration  of  largeness  of  heart.     Note — 

I.  Joshua's  appeal.  His  love  of  order  may  have  been  ofFended.  He  feared  lest 
the  unity  of  the  camp  under  the  leadership  of  Moses  should  be  disturbed.  He  was 
anxious  for  the  honour  of  his  master,  and  desired  that  political  and  ecclesiastical 
discipline  should  be  not  only  really,  but  ostensibly,  in  his  hands.  Tlie  call  of  the 
seventy  elders  with  prophetic  powers  was  a  new  departure  in  the  history  of  the 
theocracy,  and  now  the  prophesying  of  Eldad  and  Medad,  apart,  threatened  still 
further  apparently  to  derogate  from  the  honours  of  Moses.  Thus  now  narrow  minds 
or  small  hearts  may  be  fearful  of  that  which  is  novel,  and  envious  of  those  who  take 
a  course  independent  of  established  authorities  and  Church  traditions,  even  though 
they  "seem  to  have  the  Spirit  of  God."  They  may  forbid,  or  at  least  "despise, 
prophesyings  "which  are  not  according  to  rule. 

II.  MosBs'  REPLY.  The  only  question  with  Moses  is  one  not  of  place  or  method, 
but  of  reality.  Are  the  prophesyings  and  the  spirit  "  of  God  "  ?  Largeness  of 
heart  cannot  exempt  us  from  this  duty  (1  Thess.  v.  21  ;  1  John  iv.  1 — 3).  Moses 
could  not  recognise  the  falsehoods  uttered  in  the  tabernacle  of  Korah,  though  he 
rejoiced  in  the  prophesyings  of  Eldad.  Spurious  charity  is  traitorous  to  truth;  true 
charity  can  only  rejoice  "in  the  truth"  (1  Cor.  xiii.  6).  The  lesson  taught  us  is 
illustrated  by  various  incidents  in  the  New  Testament.  A  large-hearted  Christian 
will  not  be  offended — 1.  If  those  who  are  clearly  working  in  the  name  of  Christ,  and 
with  the  seal  of  his  approval,  do  not  follow  with  him  (Mark  ix.  38 — 40).  2.  If 
(heir  success  seems  to  imperil  the  prosperity  of  his  party  or  denomination  (John 
iii.  26,  &c.).  3.  He  will  rejoice  in  the  work,  though  unofficial  and  obscure  men  have 
originated  it  (Acts  xi.  19 — 24).  4.  He  will  not  "  envy,"  but  delight,  in  the  proclama- 
tion of  the  gospel,  even  if  the  motives  of  the  preachers  are  marred  by  "  envy  and 
strife  "  (Philip,  i.  15 — 18).  Large-heartedness  will  "  covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts  " 
for  others,  whatever  the  consequences  may  be  to  ourselves.— P. 


124  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS,  [oH.  XI.  4—35 

Ver.  4. — The  mixed  multitude.  L  How  came  it  there?  It  left  Egypt  with 
them  (Exod.  xii.  38).  It  had  been  accumulating,  one  knows  not  how  long,  and  in 
how  many  ways.  Egypt  had  not  been  a  very  comfortable  place  even  for  the^ 
Egyptians  just  before  the  exodus.  Ten  plagues  in  swift  succession  and  increasing 
severity  would  make  many  outside  Israel  to  desire  another  abode.  The  tyranny  of 
Pharaoh  may  have  been  grievous  to  many  of  his  own  people.  Many  would  join 
departing  Israel  uninvited ;  many  also  may  have  been  asked  by  well-wishers  and 
acquaintances, "  Come  with  us,  and  we  will  do  you  good  "  (ch.  x.  29).  iSo  now  there  is 
a  mixed  multitude  in  the  Church  of  Christ.  It  cannot  be  kept  out.  The  supreme 
relation  among  men  is  no  doubt  that  of  union  in  Christ,  spiritual  brotherhood, 
fellowship  ever  becoming  more  intimate  and  precious ;  but  the  relations  that  arise 
out  of  nature,  all  domestic  and  social  bonds  in  short,  must  also  exert  their  influence 
during  the  earthly  course  of  the  Church.  Who  can  tell  what  efEect  natural  feelings 
have  had  in  modifying,  sometimes  even  in  obscuring,  the  full  force  of  Divine  truth? 
How  hard  it  was  to  keep  the  first  generation  of  Hebrew  Christians  from  mixing  the 
bondage  of  Judaism  with  the  liberty  which  is  in  Christ  I  Nor  must  we  forget  that 
in  every  individual  Christian  there  is  something  of  the  spirit  of  the  mixed  multitude, 
the  old  man  not  yet  dead,  and  struggling  to  keep  his  hold,  even  while  the  new  man 
is  growing  in  grace  and  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 
Whatever  precaution  mnd  strictness  the  Church  may  observe,  it  cannot  keep  the  spirit 
of  the  world  out. 

II.  The  dangeb  fbom  its  presence.  The  mixed  multitude  began  to  lust,  therein 
acting  according  to  its  nature.  There  was  no  covenant  with  it,  no  promise  to  it,  no 
assurance  of  Canaan.  It  had  no  lot  in  the  tabernacle,  and  what  share  it  got  of  the 
manna  was  to  be  regarded  as  one  in  later  days  regarded  the  Saviour's  boon  to  her : 
"The  dogs  eat  of  the  crumbs  which  fall  from  their  masters'  table."  Hence  it  was 
free  to  think  without  let  or  hindrance  on  the  much-loved  delicacies  of  Egypt.  Just 
so  there  is  a  mixed  multitude  in  and  about  the  Church  of  Christ,  which,  with  the 
spirit  of  the  world  dominant  in  its  heart,  soon  makes  the  ways  of  the  world  to  appear 
in  its  life.  From  many  temptations  you  can  escape  by  running  away  from  the  scene 
of  them ;  but  what  must  you  do  if  temptations  beset  you  in  the  very  paths  of  religion 
themselves  ?  This  is  the  peculiar  danger  from  the  mixed  multitude.  When  Jesus 
foils  the  third  temptation  in  the  wilderness,  Satan  departs  from  him  for  a  season ;  but 
what  shall  he  do  when  Peter,  the  chosen,  daily  companion,  in  the  impulse  of  his 
carnal  heart,  would  turn  him  from  the  cross  ?  We  know  what  Jesus  did,  but  none 
the  less  was  he  exposed  to  the  spirit  of  the  mixed  multitude  then.  Or  what  shall  Paul 
do,  intrepid  enough  against  avowed  enemies,  when  his  friends  at  Caesarea  assail  him 
in  a  way  to  break  his  heart  (Acts  xxi.  12,  13).  There  is  a  subtle,  unconscious, 
unintended  way  in  which  the  prophecy  may  be  carried  out  that  a  man's  foes  shall  be 
they  of  his  own  household.  The  mixed  multitude  may  have  been  dangerous  most  of 
all  in  this,  that  it  did  not  mean  to  be  dangerous  at  all. 

III.  How  TO  GUARD  AGAINST  THE  DANGER.  There  is  but  One  way,  and  that  to  live 
more  and  more  in  pursuit  of  heavenly  objects.  The  mixed  multitude  will  not  alter 
in  the  olgects  of  its  love ;  when  any  of  its  number  cease  to  do  so,  it  is  because  they 
have  passed  over  to  join  the  true  Israel.  The  change  then  must  be  in  us — more  of 
ardour  and  aspiration.  Note  Paul's  counsel  to  Timothy:  "Flee  also  youthful  lusts: 
but  follow  {iiiiKi)  righteousness,  faith,  charity,  peace,  with  them  that  call  on  the 
Lord  out  of  a  pure  heart "  (2  Tim.  ii.  22).  The  fleeing  is  not  a  mere  fleeing ;  it  is  a 
■pursuing ;  a  fleeing  because  it  is  a  pursuing.  Many  temptations  will  pant  in  vain 
after  the  ardour  and  simplicity  in  Christ  Jesus  of  such  a  man  as  Paul  (2  Cor.  iv.  18 ; 
V.  14—17 ;  Eph.  iv.  17—24 ;  Phil.  i.  21—23 ;  ill.  7—14),  And  even  the  subtlest 
temptations  of  the  mixed  multitude  are  turned  gently  aside,  as  by  Jesus  himself,  when 
his  mother  and  brethren  desired  to  speak  with  him  (Matt.  xii.  46 — 50),  We  must 
not  only  say,  but  feel  it,  that  the  Father's  business  is  the  main  thing.  From  the  very 
depths  of  our  hearts  must  rise  the  cry,  almost  a  groaning  that  cannot  be  uttered, 
"  Thy  will  be  done  on  earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven,"  Thy  will,  not  the  wishes  of 
corrupted  human  affections,  however  strong  and  entauglinfi;  the  afEections  mav  b( 
(1  Coi.  T.  9, 10;  vii  10-16),— Y. 


OH.  XI.  4-35.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NDMBEKa  125 

Vera.  10 — 15. — The  expostulation  of  Mosea.  Jehovah  and  his  servant  Moses  ara 
very  difiEerently  affected  oy  this  universal  complaint  of  the  Israelites.  "The  anger 
of  the  Lord  was  kindled  greatly ; ' '  how  it  was  expressed,  we  see  later  on.  At  present 
we  have  to  consider  the  displeasure  of  Moses.  G-od  was  made  angry  hy  the  unbelief 
and  ingratitude  of  the  people,  but  Moses  is  chiefly  concerned  because  of  the  great 
straits  into  which  he  himself  is  being  brought.    Hence  his  expostulation. 

I.  It  contains  a  clear  recognition  of  duty.  Duty  may  be  perfectly  clear,  even 
when  there  is  much  perplexity  as  to  how  it  is  to  be  performed.  Moses  had  no 
manner  of  doubt  that  God  had  put  him  in  his  present  position.  Intolerable  was  the 
burden  and  keen  the  pain,  but  they  had  not  come  through  any  ambition  of  his  own, 
and  this  in  itself  made  a  great  deal  of  difference.  If  Moses  had  led'the  Israel.'tes  into 
the  wilderness  for  his  own  purposes,  he  could  not  have  spoken  in  the  way  he  did. 
From  the  intolerable  burden  there  were  two  ways  of  escape,  flight  and  death — death 
did  suggest  itself,  but  flight  never.  Moses  even  in  his  very  complaining  is  nobler 
than  Jonah  running  away.  As  we  see  him  thus  suffering  this  great  pressure  for  the 
sins  of  the  people,  we  cannot  help  thinking  of  Jesus  in  the  garden,  praying  that,  if 
possible,  the  cup  might  pass  from  him.  So  Paul  tells  us  that,  in  addition  to  things 
from  without,  the  care  {iicpifiva)  of  all  the  Ghurches  came  upon  him  (2  Cor.  xi.  28). 
It  may  be  our  duty,  in  the  name  of  God,  and  at  his  clear  command,  to  attempt  what 
the  world,  following  out  its  own  order  of  thinking,  calls  impossible. 

II.  It  indicates  a  too  favottrablb  estimate  of  human  nature,  A8  having  been 
ENTERTAINED  BY  MosES.  He  must  have  thought  better  of  his  followers  and  fellow- 
countrymen  than  they  deserved.  Not  that  he  who  had  seen  so  much  of  them  could 
possibly  be  blind  to  their  faults ;  but  we  may  well  suppose  that  ha  expected  too  great 
a  change  from  the  influences  of  the  sojourn  near  Sinai.  He  gave  them  credit, 
probably,  for  something  of  hia  own  feeling,  full  of  expectation  and  of  joy  in  the 
abiding  favour  and  protection  of  God.  And  now,  when  the  reality  appears  in  all  its 
hideousness,  there  is  a  corresponding  reaction.  Unregenerate  human  nature  must 
always  be  regarded  with  very  moderate  expectations.  At  its  best  it  is  a  reed  easily 
broken.  How  much  higher  than  Moses  is  Jesus  I  He  knew  what  was  in  man  (Matt, 
vii.  13, 14 ;  xiii.  13—16 ;  xviii.  21—22 ;  xxvi.  31—35 ;  Mark  xiv.  18—20).  And  what 
light  he  gave  to  his  apostles  on  this  subject,  e.  g.  to  Paul,  who  saw  and  declared  so 
distinctly  the  weakness  of  law  to  do  anything  save  expose  and  condemn.  It  is  not 
possible  for  us  to  make  too  much  allowance  for  the  corruption  and  degradation  of 
human  nature  through  sin.  Only  thus  shall  we  appreciate  the  change  to  be  effected 
before  men  are  what  God  would  have  them  to  be. 

III.  The  reaction  from  this  too  favourable  estimate  shows  itself  in  the 
DESPAIRING  LANGUAGE  OP  MosES.  He  goes  from  one  extreme  to  the  other.  Having 
thought  too  well  of  Israel  he  now  speaks  of  them  below  the  truth.  They  are  but 
sucking  children.  The  many  thousands  of  Israel  have  been  thrown  like  helpless 
infants  on  his  hands.  We  see  presently  that  seventy  men  out  of  this  very  multitude 
are  found  fit  to  assist  him,  but  in  his  confusion  and  despair  he  cannot  stop  to  think 
of  anything  but  death.  He  saw  only  the  cloud  and  not  the  silver  lining.  Life 
henceforth  meant  nothing  but  wretchedness,  and  God's  greatest  boon  would  be  to 
take  it  away.  He  wanted  to  be  in  that  refuge  which  Job  sought  after  his  calamities, 
where  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and  the  weary  are  at  rest  (Job  iii.  the  whole 
chapter).  It  is  worth  while  again  contrasting  Moses  under  the  law  with  the  apostles 
under  the  gospel.  When  Moses  feels  the  heavily-pressing  burden,  he  loses  his 
presence  of  mind  and  begins  to  talk  of  death.  When  the  apostles  have  the  murmurers 
coming  to  them,  they  at  once  in  a  calm  and  orderly  way  prepare  to  get  assistance 
(Acts  vi.  1— 6).— Y. 

Vers.  16,  17. — The  answer  of  Ood.  1.  He  does  not  openly  and  directly  reprove 
the  reckless  language  of  his  servant.  Both  Moses  and  the  people  had  sinned,  but  with 
Buoh  a  difference  that  while  God  visits  the  people  with  immediate  and  condign 
punishment  he  stretches  forth  his  hand  to  Moses,  even  as  Jesus  did  to  Peter  sinking 
in  the  sea.  God  treated  Moses  here  very  much  as  he  treated  the  complaining  Elijah 
(1  Kings  six.).  Moses  was  just  the  sort  of  man  who  might  be  trusted  to  rebuk» 
himself,  and  bitterly  repent  all  the  unjust  and  unbelieving  thoughts,  which,  upon 


W6  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS.  [oh.  xi.  4—36. 

this  sudden  temptation,  had  come  into  his  mind.  2.  The  firtt  word  of  God  tends  to 
bring  Moses  to  a  calmer  mind.  It  sets  hefore  him  something  practical  and  not  very 
difEcult.  Left  to  himself,  he  knows  not  how  to  begin  dealing  with  this  anarchy, 
especially  with  his  own  mind  in  such  a  distressed  state.  But  it  was  a  task  quite 
within  his  reach,  to  pick  out  from  a  limited  and  probably  well-known  circle,  seventy 
elders,  official  and  experienced  men.  As  he  went  through  this  work,  he  would  be 
brought  to  feel,  and  not  without  a  sense  of  shame,  that  he  had  been  overtaken  by 
panic.  He  has  talked  about  sucking  children ;  he  now  learns  that  there  are  at  least 
seventy  elders  upon  whose  experience  and  influence  he  can  lean.  We  soon  find  out, 
if  we  only  listen  to  God,  that  temporal  troubles  are  never  so  bad  as  they  seem. 
3.  The  way  in  which  this  help  was  made  as  effectual  as  possible.  As  God  had  given 
a  certain  spirit  to  Mosea,  so  he  would  give  it  also  to  these  seventy  assistant  elders. 
This  was  a  reminder  that  he  had  not  afflicted  his  servant  and  frowned  upon  him,  as 
he  so  recklessly  said  (ver.  11).  We  often  murmur  and  complain  against  Providence 
for  neglecting  us,  when  the  real  neglect  is  with  ourselves  in  making  a  bad  use  of 
gifts  bestowed.  God  never  tells  his  people  to  do  things  beyond  natural  strength, 
without  first  assuring  a  sufSciency  of  power  for  the  thing  commanded.  "  I  can  do 
all  things,  through  Christ  who  inwardly  strengthens  me,"  said  Paul.  There  is  further 
encouragement  in  God's  promise  here,  as  being  an  illustration  of  how  the  spirit  is 
given  without  measure.  There  was  not  a  certain  limited  manifestation  to  Moses,  so 
that  if  others  shared  the  spirit  with  him,  he  must  have  less.  Neither  his  power  nor 
his  honour  were  one  whit  diminished.  The  question  always  is.  What  is  the  need 
of  men  in  the  sight  of  God  ?  Then,  according  to  that  need,  and  never  coming 
short  of  it,  are  the  communications  of  his  Holy  Spirit.  Moses,  instead  of  being 
poorer,  was  really  richer,  for  the  spirit  was  working  in  a  mind  to  which  a  precious 
experience  had  been  added.  4.  In  the  sight  of  these  directions  we  are  reminded  how 
Moses  spoke  out  of  a  comparative  inexperience  of  the  burden.  Moses  said  there  war 
nothing  left  for  him  but  to  die.  The  history  tells  us,  that  so  far  from  dying,  he  had 
yet  in  him  nearly  forty  years  of  honourable  mediatorship  between  God  and  men.  His 
proper  word  was,  "  I  shall  not  die,  but  live,  and  declare  the  works  of  the  Lord  "  (Pa. 
cxviii.  17).  It  is  marvellous  to  think  what  some  men  have  gone  through  in  the  way 
of  difficulties,  losses,  and  trials.  Even  the  natural  man  has  greater  strength  in  the 
hoUr  of  trouble  than  at  first  he  is  conscious  of — a  great  deal  of  trouble,  when  it  is  once 
fairly  over,  comes  in  the  course  of  time  to  look  a  very  small  thing — and  if  we  have 
God's  strength,  then  we  shall  not  merely  endure  tribulation,  but  glory  in  it.  From 
these  words  of  Moaes  and  the  practical  gentle  reply  of  God,  learn  one  great  lesson — 
how  easy  it  is  to  exaggerate  our  difficulties  and  underrate  our  resources. — Y. 

Vers.  18 — ^20 ;  31 — ^b.— Self-will  surfeited  and  punished.  I.  God's  treatment 
OF  SELF-WILL.  This  is  always  to  be  well  considered  where  instances  of  it  are  found 
in  the  Scriptures,  because  one  of  the  great  ends  of  God's  dealings  with  us  is  to  establish 
his  holy,  wise,  and  righteous  will  in  place  of  our  low,  jealous,  ignorant  self-will. 
The  way  of  parents  dealing  with  children  is  to  curb  and  restrain  them  at  once  ;  but 
children  grow  to  be  men,  and  what  then  ?  We  cannot  deal  efEectually  with  one 
another,  for  self-will  is  in  all  of  us,  and  so  far  as  temporal  circumstances  are  con- 
cerned, it  not  unfrequently  gets  much  of  its  own  way.  When  we  come  to  the 
discipline  of  the  whole  man,  God  only  can  efEectually  deal  with  self-will.  He  might 
curb  him  in  at  once ,  but  such  would  not  be  discipline  fit  for  a  man.  It  might  break  the 
spirit,  but  it  would  do  nothing  to  enlighten  and  change  ;  we  see  here  that  God's  treat- 
ment is  to  let  people  walk  awhile  in  their  own  way.  Self-will  breaks  out  in  complaints 
against  the  manna :  self-will  then  shall  have  its  desire,  and  what  satisfaction  it  can 
get  from  the  flesh  for  which  it  craves.  Its  mouth  waters  at  the  thought  of  the  fish 
of  Egypt ;  it  shall  have  quails,  which  we  may  presume  were  an  even  greater  delicacy. 
So  when,  in  later  years,  Israel,  in  envy  of  surrounding  nations,  clamoured  for  a  king, 
forgetting  that  the  King  of  kings  was  theirs,  God  gave  them  their  wish.  The  bulk 
of  men  will  only  learn  by  experience.  The  prodigal  son  must  know  the  end  of 
riotous  living  for  himself.  It  is  better  to  take  God's  word  at  the  beginning  and  not 
sow  to  the  flesh  ;  but  men  shall  have  the  opportunity  if  they  choose.  So  God  causes 
bis  wind  to  blow  and  the  quails  come,  an  exceeding  great  multitude  (Ps.  Ixviii.  23 — 29). 


OH.  XI.  4—36.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  12T 

II.  God's  test  of  self-control.  He  g^ves  the  quails,  not  for  one  day's  luxury, 
but  to  be  the  food  of  a  month.  As  nothing  is  said  to  the  contrary,  we  must  presume 
the  manna  was  still  continued.  Indeed  we  can  easily  see  the  reason  for  its  continu- 
ance. God  in  giving  the  quails,  adds  an  express  and  solemn  warning.  They  are  to 
be  taken  with  -all  their  consequences.  Sweet  at  first,  they  shall  turn  to  objects  of 
bitter  loathing.  They  were  given,  not  in  complacency,  but  in  anger,  hence  they 
had  in  them  the  efficacy  of  a  test.  Surely  the  whole  of  Israel  was  not  rebellious 
and  murmuring.  There  must  have  been  men  of  the  Nazarite  spirit  even  then,  and  the 
question  for  them  is  :  "  Shall  we  go  out  after  our  wont  and  gather  the  manna  (Exod. 
xvi.),  or  shall  we,  like  the  rest,  gratify  our  appetites  with  these  delicious  quails  ?  " 
Who  can  doubt  that  God  was  watching  his  own  faithful  ones,  the  Israelites  indeed 
in  whom  there  was  no  guile  ?  There  are  doubtless  many  things  in  the  world,  the 
chief  use  of  which  is  to  test  the  disposition  of  man  to  obey  God  (Gen.  ii.  16,  17). 
These  quails  were  given,  but  there  was  no  obligation  to  eat  them.  Every  Israelite 
was  free  to  refuse.  A  timely  repentance,  and  another  wind  would  have  blown 
away  the  quails  as  rapidly  as  they  came.  There  was  a  lesson  if  the  people  would 
learn  it,  from  the  submissive  birds  to  the  rebellious  human  beings. 

III.  God's  penalty  fob  self-indulqence.  There  is  a  seeming  contradiction 
between  vers.  19, 20,  and  ver.  33,  but  it  is  only  seeming.  God  hastened  his  judgment 
and  thereby  really  showed  his  mercy.  As  David  chose  the  brief  pestilence,  and  to 
fall  into  the  hand  of  the  Lord  (2  Sam.  xxiv.),  so  here  God  comes  with  an  immediate 
and  sweeping  visitation.  Besides,  it  is  possible  the  people  neglected  the  command 
to  sanctify  themselves,  and  thus  further  provoked  the  anger  already  stirred  up ;  when 
people  get  lust  into  their  hearts  all  sense  of  law  is  apt  to  vanish.  It  was  well  the 
people  should  see  clearly  the  close  connection  between  disobedience  and  retribution. 
Thus  did  God  show,  even  in  these  quails,  the  spirit  of  a  good  and  perfect  gift. 
Nothing  in  creation  is  a  blessing  in  itself  ;  God  must  make  it  so,  and  he  can  easily  in 
his  anger  turn  it  to  a  curse.  God,  in  making  the  efEect  of  eating  the  quails  so  con- 
spicuous and  sudden,  still  further  illustrated  by  contrast  the  glory  of  the  manna,  for 
this  manna  was  a  beautiful  type  of  the  true  bread  that  cometh  from  heaven.  The 
people  had  never  gathered  the  manna  with  such  greed  and  application  as  they  had 
gathered  the  quails.  When  a  man  breaks  the  law  he  is  at  once  guilty,  and  the 
punishment,  if  it  be  deferred,  is  so  as  a  matter  of  expediencjr,  not  of  right.  The 
lapse  of  time  only  makes  the  connection  between  sin  and  punishment  less  obvious, 
not  at  all  less  certain  (Ps.  cvi.  15 ;  Gal.  vi.  7 — 9). — Y. 

Vers.  21 — 23. — Deeper  in  unbelief.  I.  Moses  in  his  reply  shows  an  imperfect 
APPRECIATION  OF  WHAT  GoD  HAD  SAID.  1.  As  to  GocFs  py,rpose.  He  had  spoken  in 
holy  anger,  promising  flesh,  but  threatening  retribution  along  with  it.  The  threat 
is  quite  as  emphatic  as  the  promise,  but  somehow  Moses  does  not  heed.  At  Sinai, 
when  the  people  made  the  golden  calf,  he  was  so  oppressed  with  the  sense  of  their 
great  sin,  and  so  solicitous  for  their  pardon,  as  to  beg  if  the  pardon  were  not  granted 
that  he  might  himself  be  blotted  out  of  God's  book.  Where  was  this  anxiety  now  ? 
His  great  concern  is,  not  how  God  may  be  propitiated  and  the  people  spared,  but  how 
the  people  may  be  propitiated  and  he  himself  spared.  Contrast  Moses  here  with 
Christ  at  all  times.  Think  of  the  Son's  never-failing  remembrance  of  the  Father's 
glory.  The  Son  saw  and  appreciated  all  things  the  Father  showed  %im  ;  hence  the 
confidence  with  which  we  look  to  Christ  for  a  revelation  of  all  God's  purposes  con- 
cerning us,  so  far  as  it  is  right  for  us  to  know  them.  Jesus  could  ever  go  out  and 
declare  in  fitting  words  and  with  proper  emphasis  all  the  will  of  God,  for  be  had  a 
perfect  appreciation  of  that  will  himself.  But  how  was  Moses  to  go  out  and  speak 
iroperly  to  the  people  when  he  himself  had  only  half-heard,  as  it  were,  what  God 
ad  said  to  him?  Doubtless  he  repeated  the  message  of  God  in  the  very  same 
words ;  but  one  fears  that  while  he  made  it  quite  clear  to  the  people  they  should 
have  flesh,  he  made  it  not  quite  so  clear  that  God  was  sending  it  in  anger.  Let  us 
ever  get  to  the  spirit  of  God's  messages  to  us ;  never  content  till  their  fulness  of 
meaning  has  passed  into  our  heart,  so  that  something  like  the  fulness  of  service  may 
pass  out  of  it  again.  2.  As  to  God's  power.  History  repeats  itsell  Unbelie:^ 
natural  ignorance  of  God,  slowness  of  heart  to  take  in  what  he  has  spoken, — theM 


I 


128  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  [ch.  xi.  4—36. 

repeat  themselvea  in  their  manner  of  receiving  God's  promises.  Moses  talks  here  as 
the  disciples  did  at  the  feeding  of  the  five  thousand  (Matt.  xiv.  16).  And  yet,  after 
all  his  wonderful  experiences,  there  should  not  have  been  the  slightest  difficulty  in 
receiving  what  God  had  said.  Of  all  possible  convictions,  this  should  have  rested  on 
solid  ground — that  what  God  had  promised  he  assuredly  had  power  to  perform.  Is  not 
this  one  of  the  great  differences  between  God  and  men  ?  Men  promise  and  forget, 
or  fall_  short ;  God  is  always  better  than  his  promises,  for  they  have  to  be  spoken  in 
defective  human  words,  while  they  are  fulfilled  in  complete  Divine  actions. 

IL  The  cause  of  this  impebpect  appeeciation.  Can  we  not  detect,  and  especi- 
ally in  the  light  of  his  subsequent  language,  something  like  doubt,  something  like 
leaning  upon  creature  supports  instead  of  God,  in  the  invitation  which  he  gave  to 
Hobab  ?  If  this  be  so,  we  wonder  little  at  his  language  of  bitter  complaint  and 
despair  (vers.  11 — 15)j  and  we  wonder  less  that  he  bo  soon  showed  himself  out  of 
sympathy  with  the  Divine  purposes.  The  eye  of  faith  had  become  dim ;  self-preserv- 
ation, escape  from  an  intolerable  burden,  occupied  his  thoughts.  Was  it  astonishing 
that,  unbelief  having  found  a  temporary  lodgment  in  the  heart  of  the  leader,  the 
followers  should  have  failed  to  take  in  all  the  purport  of  God's  message  ?  Learn  from 
this  how  carefully  spirituality  of  mind  needs  to  be  guarded.  We  must  not  be  seduced 
into  leaning  upon  men  instead  of  trusting  in  God.  Men  may  solace  and  encourage 
us  as  companions ;  they  are  never  to  take  the  place  of  Providence.  So  neither  are 
we  to  be  terrified  and  paralysed  by  sudden  and  stupendous  revelations  of  hiiman 
wickedness.  In  the  midst  of  them  all  we  hear  the  one  voice  speaking,  "  Be  still,  and 
know  that  I  am  God." — Y, 

Vers.  26-t29. — Foolish  advice  toisely  rejected.  God  fulfils  his  promise,  and  gives 
to  these  seventy  men  a  spirit  which  doubtless  brings  them  into  more  active  sympathy 
with  Moses,  and  takes  away  the  carnal  and  selfish  views  which  had  prevailed  in  their 
minds.  The  difference  between  their  present  and  former  state  was  probably  much 
like  that  between  the  state  of  the  apostles  after  and  before  the  day  of  Pentecost 
They  had  a  perspicacity,  a  power,  a  courage,  a  zeal,  which  did  not  belong  to  them 
before.  As  they  prophesied,  may  we  not  suppose  that  Moses  heard  from  them  ex- 
pressions quite  new  to  his  ears  as  coming  from  Israelite  lips?  And  to  make  the 
occasion  more  memorable  and  significant,  two  of  the  seventy,  who  for  some  un- 
explained reason  remained  in  the  camp,  nevertheless  prophesied,  as  did  those  in  the 
tabernacle.  The  intelligence  was  very  quickly  brought  to  Moses.  Some  of  the 
Israelites  would  be  greatly  shocked  by  such  an  irregular  proceeding,  though  perhaps 
they  had  seen  nothing  very  censujsWs  in  the  general  cry  of  the  people  for  flesh. 
Punctiliousness  in  ceremony  ind  etiquette  is  often  joined  with  laxity  in  things  of 
moment  (Matt,  zriii,  23).    The  reception  of  the  news  is  followed  by — 

I.  The  foolish  advice  of  Joshua.  Foolish,  although  given  hi/  a  devoted  friend. 
Joshua  would  probably  have  died  for  Moses,  but  he  could  not,  therefore,  give  him 
good  counsel.  Attachment  itself  has  not  unfrequently  a  blinding  effect  on  the  judg- 
ment. A  stranger  might  advise  more  wisely.  It  is  the  right  of  friendship  to  offer 
advice,  but  it  is  often  the  height  of  friendship,  the  very  bloom  and  delicacy  of  it,  to 
refrain.  We  find  similar  instances  (Matt.  xvi.  21 — 23 ;  Acts  xxi.  12,  13).  Foolish, 
because  emdentiliy  given  without  consideration.  The  circumstances  were  quite  novel 
to  Joshua.  The  grounds  on  which  he  dashed  out  his  advice  were  mere  matters  of 
hearsay.  There  was  enough  to  have  made  him  cautious.  Eld  ad  and  Medad  were 
among  the  chosen  ones ;  those  present  had  been  gifted  with  the  spirit ;  what  more 
likely  then  upon  consideration,  what  more  worthy  of  reverent  acceptance,  than  that 
the  absentees  should  have  been  similarly  visited  ?  Advice,  when  it  is  given  with 
full  knowledge  of  circumstances  and  full  consideration  of  them,  may  be  indeed 
precious,  the  very  salvation  and  security  of  a  perplexed  mind.  Otherwise,  the  greater 
the  ignorance  the  greater  the  mischief.  Advice  should  mostly  come  in  lesponse  to  a 
request  for  it.  Foolish,  because  it  concerned  the  status  of  Moses  rather  than  the  glory 
of  God.  Much  of  the  advice  of  friendship  is  vitiated,  through  shutting  out  all  save 
personal  considerations.  One  friend  advises  another  as  a  counsel  does  his  client,  not 
that  justice  may  be  done,  but  that  his  client  may  gain  his  end.  Joshua  was  consider- 
itur  bow  the  reputation  and  influence  of  "Ms  lord  Moses"  would  be  affected. 


OB.  XII.] 


THE  BOOK  OW  NUMBBEa 


129 


Foolish  because  it  was  given  to  a  man  who  was  in  no  doubt.  Moses  was  rejoicing 
in  escape  from  a  heavy  burden,  and  the  visitation  upon  Eldad  and  Medad  was  the 
very  thing  still  further  to  comfort  him.  The  folly  of  the  advice  is  crowned,  as  we 
observe  that  it  recommended  an  impossibility.  "Forbid  them."  Forbid  what? 
That  they  should  prophesy  I  As  well  forbid  the  branches  not  to  sway  with  a  strong 
wind  as  forbid  men  to  prophesy  when  the  Spirit  comes  upon  them.  Even  Balaam 
could  not  help  uttering  the  Lord's  prophecies  and  blessing  Israel  from  the  very 
mouth  that  would  fain,  in  its  greed  of  filthy  lucre,  have  uttered  a  curse. 

II.  This  foolish  advice  wisely  kejectbd.  1.  As  to  the  substance  of  the  rejec- 
tion. Possibly  if  Moses  had  been  a  different  kind  of  man,  he  might  have  said  to 
himself,  "  There  is  something  in  what  Joshua  says."  But  he  was  not  one  of  the  aut 
OcBsar  aut  nullus  order.  Joshua,  in  his  impetuous  word^  was  concerned  for  his 
master's  honour ;  the  master  himself  was  concerned  about  his  grievous  burden.  Not 
even  Joshua  understood  the  bitter  experiences  through  which  Moses  had  lately 
passed.  "  Would  that  all  the  Lord's  people  were  prophets  I  "  Our  measure  before 
God  does  not  depend  on  our  standing  among  men.  Moses  would  not  have  been  one 
whit  less  esteemed  in  heaven  if  every  other  Israelite  had  been  as  spiritually-minded 
as  himself.  Joshua  had  been  speaking  to  a  man  who,  like  Christian,  had  been  toil- 
ing on  with  a  weary  weight  on  his  back.  He  has  just  got  rid  of  it,  and  "  Forbid 
them  "  really  meant,  "  Take  the  burden  up  again."  2.  As  to  the  spirit  of  the  rejec- 
tion. Moses  shows  here  the  meekness  and  gentleness  with  which  he  is  so  emphatic- 
ally ciedited  in  the  next  chapter.  Advice,  when  it  cannot  be  taken,  even  when  it  is 
most  foolish  and  meddlesome,  should  be  pushed  gently  away ;  and  if  the  spirit  in 
which  it  has  been  given  is  evidently  kind  and  generous,  let  the  refusal  be  mingled 
with  gratefulness.  Joshua  loved  Moses,  and  Moses  loved  Joshua.  "  Enviest  thou  for 
my  Bake  i  "    Thus  Moses  recognises  the  devotion  and  honafdet  o£  his  friend. — ^Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  Xn. 


ThB      sedition      and      PUNISHMBNl      OP 

Miriam  (oh.  xii.).  Ver.  1. — And  Uiriam 
and  Aaron  spake  against  Moses.  While 
the  people  were  encamped  at  Hazeroth  (see 
ver.  16),  and  therefore  probably  very  Boon 
after  the  events  of  the  last  chapter.  That 
Miriam's  was  the  moving  spirit  in  the  matter 
is  sufficiently  evident,  (1)  because  her  name 
stands  first ;  (2)  because  the  verb  "  spake  " 
is  in  the  feminine  (I^IITil,  "and  she  said")  ; 
(3)  because  the  ground  of  annoyance  was  a 
peculiarly  feminine  one,  a  mesalliance ;  (4) 
because  Miriam  alone  was  punished  ;  (5)  be- 
cause Aaron  never  seems  to  have  taken  the 
lead  in  anything.  He  appears  uniformly  as 
a  man  of  weak  and  pliable  character,  who 
was  singularly  open  to  influence  from  others, 
for  good  or  for  evU.  Superior  to  his  brother 
in  certain  gifts,  he  was  as  inferior  to  him  in 
force  of  character  as  could  well  be.  On  the 
present  occasion  there  can  be  little  question 
that  Aaron  simplyallowed  himself  tobedrawn 
by  his  sister  into  an  opposition  with  which 
he  had  little  personal  sympathy  ;  a  general 
discontent  at  the  manifest  inferiority  of  his 
position  inclined  him  to  take  up  her  quarrel, 
and  to  echo  her  complaints.  Because  of  the 
Ethiopian  woman  whom  he  had  married: 
for  he  had  married  an  Ethiopian  woman. 
Hebrew,  a  Cushite  woman.    The  descendants  | 

liUMB£BS. 


of  Cush  were  distributed  both  in  Africa  (the 
Ethiopians  proper)  andHn  Asia  (the  southern 
Arabians,  Babylonians,  Ninevites,  &c. ).  Sea 
Gen.  X.  Some  have  thought  that  this  Ethi- 
opian woman  was  none  other  than  the  Midian- 
ite  Zipporah,  who  might  have  been  called  a 
Cuahite  in  some  loose  sense  by  Miriam.  The 
historian,  however,  would  not  have  repeated 
in  his  own  name  a  statement  so  inaccurate  ; 
nor  is  it  at  all  likely  that  that  marriage 
would  have  become  a  matter  of  contention 
after  so  many  years.  The  natural  supposition 
undoubtedly  is  that  Moses  (whether  after  the 
death  of  Zipporah,  or  during  her  hfetime, 
we  cannot  tell)  had  taken  to  himself  a  second 
wife  of  Hamite  origin.  Where  he  found  her 
it  is  useless  to  conjecture  ;  she  may  possibly 
have  been  one  of  the  "mixed  multitude" 
that  went  up  out  of  Egypt.  It  is  equally 
useless  to  attribute  any  moral  or  religious 
character  to  this  marriage,  of  which  Holy 
Scripture  .takes  no  direct  notice,  and  which 
was  evidently  regarded  by  Moses  as  a  matter 
of  purely  private  concern  to  himself.  In 
general  we  may  say  that  the  rulers  of  Israel 
attached  neither  political,  social,  nor  religious 
significance  to  their  marriages ;  and  that 
neither  law  nor  custom  imposed  any  restraint 
upon  their  choice,  so  long  as  they  did  not 
aUy  themselves  with  the  daughters  of  Canaan 
(see Exod.  xxxiv.  16).  Itwould  be  nlto-n'l,  r 
beside  the  mark    to   sUj^Ji^ose    that    ili^ses 


130 


THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS. 


[ciE.zn 


deliberately  married  a  Cushite  woman  in  order 
to  set  forth  the  essential  fellowship  between 
Jew  and  Gentile.  It  is  true  that  such  mar- 
riages as  those  of  Joseph,  of  Salmon,  of 
Solomon,  and  others  undeniably  became  in- 
vested with  spiritual  importance  and  evan- 
gelical significance,  in  view  of  the  growing 
narrowness  of  Jewish  feeling,  and  of  the 
coming  in  of  a  wider  dispensarion ;  but  such 
significance  was  whoUy  latent  at  the  time. 
I  f,  however,  the  choice  of  Moses  is  inexplic- 
able, the  opposition  of  Miriam  is  intelligible 
enough.  She  was  a  prophetess  (Exod.  xv. 
20),  and  strongly  imbued  with  those  national 
and  patriotic  feelings  which  are  never  far 
removed  from  exclusiveness  and  pride  of  race. 
She  had — ^to  use  modern  words — led  the  Te 
Deum  of  the  nation  after  the  stupendous 
overthrow  of  the  Egyptians.  And  now  her 
brother,  who  stood  at  the  head  of  the  nation, 
had  brought  into  his  tent  a  Cushite  woman, 
one  of  the  dark-skinned  race  which  seemed 
even  lower  in  the  religious  scale  than  the 
Egyptians  themselves.  Such  an  alliance 
might  easily  seem  to  Miriam  nothing  better 
than  an  act  of  apostasy  which  would  justify 
any  possible  opposition. 

Yer.  2. — And  they  said,  Hath  the  lord 
indeed  spoken  only  by  Moses  t  hath  he  not 
spoken  also  by  usi  This  is  evidently  not 
the  "speaking  against  Moses"  mentioned  in 
the  previous  verse,  for  that  is  distinctly  said 
to  have  been  on  the  score  of  Moses'  marriage. 
This  is  their  justification  of  themselves  for 
daring  to  dispute  his  judgment  and  arraign 
his  proceedings ;  a  thing  which  clearly  re- 
quired justification.  Moses  himself,  or  more 
likely  others  for  him,  had  remonstrated  with 
them  on  the  language  they  were  using.  They 
retorted  that  Moses  had  no  monopoly  of 
Divine  communications ;  Aaron  also  received 
the  revelation  of  God  by  Urim  and  Thum- 
mim,  and  Miriam  was  a  prophetess.  They 
were  acknowledged  in  a  general  sense  as 
sharing  with  him  the  leadership  of  Israel 
(see  Micah  vi.  4)  ;  upon  this  they  meant  to 
found  a  claim  to  co-ordinate  authority.  They 
would  have  had  perhaps  aU  matters  settled 
in  a  family  council  in  which  they  should  have 
had  an  equal  voice.  It  was  hard  for  them 
both  to  forget  that  Moses  was  only  their 
younger  brother ;  for  Miriam  that  she  had 
saved  his  life  as  an  infant ;  for  Aaron  that  he 
had  been  as  prominent  as  Moses  in  the  original 
commission  from  God  to  the  people.  And 
the  lord  heard  it.  In  one  sense  he  hears 
everything ;  in  another  sense  there  are  many 
things  which  he  does  not  choose  to  hear,  be- 
cause he  does  not  wish  to  take  judicial  notice 
of  them.  Thus  he  had  not  "heard"  the 
passionate  complaints  of  Moses  himself  a 
short  time  before,  because  his  wUl  was  then 
to  pardon,  not  to  punish  (cf.  Ian.  ilii.  19 ; 
lUL  iii.  16). 


Ver.  3. — ^ITow  the  man  Moses  was  very 
meek,  above  all  the  men  which  were  upon 
the  face  of  the  earth.  For  the  Hebrew  l^y 
the  Septuagint  has  ■npavg  here;  the  Vul- 
gate, mitis.  The  Targum  Palestine  has 
"bowed  down  in  his  mind,"  i.  e.  overwhelmed 
("plagued,"  Luther).  The  ordinary  ver- 
sion is  undoubtedly  right;  the  object  of 
the  parenthesis  was  either  to  explain  that 
there  was  no  real  ground  for  the  hostility 
of  Miriam  and  Aaron,  or  to  show  that  the 
direct  interference  of  the  Lord  himself  wm 
necessary  for  the  protection  of  his  servant. 
The  verse  bears  a  difficulty  on  its  very  face, 
because  it  speaks  of  Moses  in  terms  which 
could  hardly  have  been  used  by  Moses  of 
himself.  Nor  is  this  difficulty  in  the  least 
degree  diminished  by  the  explanations  which 
are  offered  by  those  who  are  determined  to 
maintain  at  any  cost  the  Mosaic  authorship 
of  every  word  in  the  Pentateuch.  It  is  no 
doubt  true  to  some  extent  that  when  a  great 
and  good  man  is  writing  of  himself  (and 
especially  when  he  writes  under  the  influence 
of  the  Holy  Spirit),  he  can  speak  of  himself 
with  the  same  calm  and  simple  truthfulness 
with  which  he  would  speak  of  any  other.  It 
is  sufficient,  however,  to  refer  to  the  example 
of  St.  Paul  to  show  that  neither  any  height 
of  spiritual  privilege  and  authority,  nor  any 
intensity  of  Divine  inspiration,  obliterates  the 
natural  virtue  of  modesty,  or  allows  a  really 
humble  man  to  praise  himseU  without  pain 
and  shrinking.  It  is  also  to  be  observed  that 
while  St.  Paul  forces  himself  to  speak  of  his 
privileges,  distinctions,  and  suflerings,  all  of 
which  were  outward  to  himself,  Moses  would 
here  be  claiming  for  himself  the  possession  of 
an  inward  virtue  in  greater  measure  than 
any  other  living  souL  Surely  it  is  not  too 
much  to  say  that  if  he  did  possess  it  in  such 
measure,  he  could  not  possibly  have  been 
conscious  that  he  did ;  only  One  was  thus 
conscious  of  his  own  ineffable  superiority, 
and  this  very  consciousness  is  one  of  the 
strongest  arguments  for  believing  that  he  was 
infinitely  more  than  a  mere  man,  howsoever 
good  and  exalted.  There  is  but  one  theory 
that  will  make  it  morally  possible  for  Moses 
to  have  written  this  verse,  viz.,  that  in  writ- 
ing he  was  a  mere  instrument,  and  not 
morally  responsible  for  what  he  did  write. 
Such  a  theory  wUl  find  few  upholders.  But, 
further,  it  is  necessary  to  prove  not  only  that 
Moses  might  have  made  this  statement,  but 
also  that  he  might  have  made  it  in  this 
form.  Granted  that  it  was  necessary  to  the 
narrative  to  point  out  that  he  was  very 
meek ;  It  was  not  necessary  to  assert  that  he 
was  absolutely  the  meekest  man  living. 
And  if  it  was  unnecessary,  it  was  also  un- 
natural  No  good  man  would  go  out  of  hia 
way  to  compare  himself  to  his  own  advantag* 
with  all  men  upon  the  face  of  the  earth. 


OH.  XII.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS. 


ISl 


The  whole  form  of  the  sentence,  indeed,  as 
well  as  its  position,  proclaim  it  so  clearly  to 
be  an  addition  by  some  later  hand,  that  the 
question  may  be  left  to  the  common  sense 
and  knowledge  of  human  nature  of  eveiy 
reader ;  for  the  broad  outlines  of  human 
character,  morality,  and  virtue  are  the  same 
in  every  age,  and  are  not  displaced  by  any 
accident  of  position,  or  even  of  inspiration. 
A  slight  examination  of  passages  from  other 
sacred  writers,  which  are  sometimes  adduced 
as  analogous,  will  serve  to  show  how  profound 
is  the  difference  between  what  holy  men  could 
say  of  themselves  and  what  they  amid  not  (cf. 
Dan.  i  19,  20 ;  v.  11, 12  ;  it  23  ;  x.  11).  On 
the  question  of  the  inspiration  of  this  verse, 
supposing  it  to  be  an  interpolation,  and  as  to 
the  probable  author  of  it,  see  the  Preface.  As 
to  the  fact  of  Moses'  meekness,  we  hive  no 
reason  to  doubt  it,  but  we  may  legitimately 
look  upon  the  form  in  which  it  is  stated  as 
one  of  those  conventional  hyperboles  which 
are  not  uncommon  even  in  the  sacred  writ- 
ings (cf.  Gen.  vii.  19 ;  John  xxi.  25).  And 
we  cannot  avoid  perceiving  that  Moses'  meek- 
ness was  far  from  being  perfect,  and  was 
marred  by  sinful  impatience  and  passion  on 
more  than  one  recorded  occasion. 

Ver.  4. — The  Lord  spake  suddenly.  How 
he  spake  we  cannot  tell,  but  the  word  "sud- 
denly "  (Septuagint,  vapaxprjita)  points  to 
something  unexpected  and  unusual  The 
voice  seems  to  have  come  to  the  three  in  their 
tents  before  there  was  any  thought  in  their 
minds  of  such  an  intervention.  Come  out 
ye  three,  i.  e.  out  of  the  camp — probably  the 
camp  of  Moses  and  Aaron,  on  the  east  of  the 
tabernacle  court  (see  ch.  iii.  38). 

Ver.  5. — The  Lord  came  down  in  the  pillar 
of  the  cloud.  The  cloud  which  had  been  soar- 
ing above  the  tabernacle  descended  upon  it 
(see  ch.  xi.  25  and  xii.  10).  And  stood  in 
the  door  of  the  tabernacle.  It  would  seem 
most  natural  to  understand  by  these  words 
the  entrance  to  the  holy  place  itself,  and  this 
would  manifestly  accord  best  with  the  move- 
ments of  the  cloud,  as  here  described;  for 
the  cloud  seems  to  have  sunk  down  upon  the 
sacred  tent  in  token  that  the  Lord  was  in 
tome  special  sense  present  within  it.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  phrase  must,  certainly  be 
understood  to  mean  the  entrance  of  the  court, 
or  sacred  enclosure,  in  Levit.  viii.  3,  31,  33, 
and  probably  in  other  places.  As  it  is  hardly 
possible  that  the  phrase  can  have  had  both 
meanings,  the  latter  must  be  preferred.  And 
they  both  came  forth.  Kot  out  of  the  sanc- 
tuary, into  which  Miriam  could  not  have 
entered,  bui  out  of  the  enclosure.  The 
wrath  which  lay  upon  them  both,  and  the 
punishment  which  was  about  to  be  inflicted 
upon  one,  were  sufficient  reasons  for  calling 
them  out  of  the  holy  ground. 

Ver.  6. — If  there  be  a  prophet  among  you 


I  the  Lord  will  make  myself  known.  More 
probably  "the  Lord"  belongs  to  the  first 
clause  :  "If  there  be  to  you  a  prophet  of  the 
Lord,  I  will  make  myself  known."  So  the 
Septuagint,  (&v  yivtirai  irpo^ijrqc  v/tuiv  Kv- 
piif, .  .  .  yvwcfSnaofiat.  In  a  vision.  'Evopd- 
liuTi.  An  internal  vision,  in  which  the  eyes 
(even  if  open)  saw  nothing,  but  the  effects  of 
vision  were  produced  upon  the  sensorium  by 
other  and  supernatural  means  (see, «.  fli. ,  Amos 
vii.  7,  8 ;  Acts  x.  11).  Speak  unto  him  in  a 
dream.  Eather,  speak  "  in  him  " — M.  The 
voice  that  spake  to  the  prophet  was  an  in- 
ternal voice,  causing  no  vibration  of  the 
outer  air,  but  affecting  only  the  inner  and 
hidden  seat  of  consciousness.  It  is  not 
necessary  to  restrict  the  prophetic  dream  to 
the  time  of  sleep  ;  a  waking  state,  resembling 
what  we  call  day-dream,  in  which  the  ex- 
ternal senses  are  quiescent,  and  the  imagina- 
tion is  freed  from  its  usual  restraints,  was 
perhaps  the  more  usual  mental  condition  at 
the  time.  Indeed  the  Divine  communica- 
tions made  to  Joseph  (Matt.  i.  20 ;  ii.  13) 
and  to  the  Magi  {ibid.  ch.  ii  12)  are  almost 
the  only  ones  we  read  of  as  made  during 
actual  sleep,  unless  we  include  the  case  of 
Pilate's  wife  {ibid.  ch.  xxvii.  19) ;  and  none 
of  these  were  prophets  in  the  ordinary  sense. 
Compare,  however.  Acts  ii.  17  i. 

Ver.  7. — My  servant  Moses  is  not  so. 
No  words  could  more  clearly  and  sharply 
draw  the  distinction  between  Moses  and  the 
whole  laudabilia  numerus  of  the  prophets. 
It  is  strange  that,  in  the  face  of  a  statement 
so  general  and  so  emphatic,  it  should  have 
been  doubted  whether  it  applied  to  such 
prophets  as  Isaiah  or  Daniel.  It  was  ex- 
actly in  "visions"  and  in  "dreams,"  t.  e. 
under  the  peculiar  psychological  conditions 
so-called,  that  these  greatest  of  prophets 
received  their  revelations  from  heaven.  The 
exceeding  richness  and  wonder  of  some  of 
these  revelations  did  not  alter  the  mode  in 
which  they  were  received,  nor  raise  them  out 
of  the  ordinary  conditions  of  the  gradus 
propJieticus.  As  prophets  of  future  things 
they  were  much  greater  than  Moses,  and 
their  writings  may  be  to  us  far  more  precious ; 
but  that  does  not  concern  the  present  ques> 
tion,  which  turns  exclusively  upon  the  rela- 
tion between  the  Divine  Giver  and  the  human 
receiver  of  the  revelation.  If  words  mean 
anything,  the  assertion  here  is  that  Moses 
stood  on  an  altogether  different  footing  from 
the  "  prophet  of  the  Lord  "  in  respect  of  the 
communications  which  he  received  from  the 
Lord.  It  is  this  essential  superiority  of 
position  on  the  part  of  Moses  which  alone 
gives  force  and  meaning  to  the  important 
declarations  of  Deut.  xviii.  15  ;  John  i  21  6. ; 
vi.  14 ;  vii.  40,  &c.  Moses  had  no  successor 
in  his  relations  with  God  until  that  Son  of 
man  came,  who  was  "in  heaven"  dl  tke 
e2 


133 


THE  BOOK  01"  NUMBERS. 


[OB.  XII. 


time  lie  walked  and  spake  on  earth.  Who  is 
faithful  in  all  mine  house.  tDK;)with3means 
to  be  proTedj  or  attested,  and  so  established 
(c£  1  Sam.  iii.  20  ;  xzii.  14).  The  Septuagint 
gives  the  true  sense,  £i^!>X(^r^oTic^/iotf  7rtar6g) 
and  so  it  is  quoted  in  the  Epistle  to  the  He- 
brews_(ch.  iu.  2).  The  "house"of  God,  as  the 
adjective  "whole  "shows,  is  not  the  taber- 
nacle, but  the  house  of  Israel ;  the  word 
"house"  standing  for  household,  family, 
nation,  as  so  often  in  the  sacred  writings  (see 
Gen.  xlvi.  27 ;  Levit.  x.  6  ;  Heb.  iii.  6). 

Ver.  8. — UoTith  to  month.  Equivalent  to 
face  to  face  in  Exod.  xxxiiL  11 .  What  the 
.exact  facts  of  the  case  were  it  is  not  possible 
to  know,  scarcely  to  imagine  ;  but  the  words 
seem  to  imply  a  familiar  speaking  with  an 
audible  voice  on  the  part  of  God,  as  distin- 
guished from  the  internal  voice,  inaudible  to 
the  ear,  with  which  he  spake  "in"  the 
prophets.  To  assert  that  the  revelations 
accorded  to  Moses  were  only  subjective 
modifications  of  his  own  consciousness  is  to 
evacuate  these  strong  words  of  any  meaning 
whatever.  Apparently.  n^lD  (Septuagint 
iv  tilii)  is  an  accusative  in  apposition  to  what 
goes  before  by  way  (apparently)  of  further 
definition.  It  is  the  same  word  translated 
' '  vision  "  in  ver.  6 ;  but  its  meaning  here  must 
be  determined  by  the  expression  "in  riddles," 
which  stands  in  antithesis  to  it.  It  was  con- 
fessedly the  case  with  most  prophetic  utter- 
ances that  the  language  in  which  they  were 
couched  was  quite  as  much  intended  to  con- 
ceal as  to  express  their  full  meaning ;  but  to 
Moses  God  spake  without  any  such  conceal- 
ments. The  similitude  of  the  Lord  shall  he 
behold,  nin'.  n>lDJ^.  Not  the  essential  na- 
ture of  God,  which  no  man  can  see,  but  a 
form  (wholly  unknown  and  unimaginable  to 
us)  in  which  it  pleased  him  to  veil  his  glory. 
The  Septuagint  has  t-ijv  So^av  Kvptov  ildt, 
referring,  apparently,  to  the  vision  promised 
in  Exod.  xxxiii.  22  ;  and  the  Targum  Pales- 
tine speaks  here  of  the  vision  of  the  burning 
bush.  The  motive  for  this  alteration  is  no 
doubt  to  be  sought  iu  a  profound  jealousy  for 
the  great  truth  declared  in.  such  texts  as 
Deut.  iv.  15  ;  Isa.  xL  18,  and  afterwards  in 
John  i.  18 ;  1  Tim.  vi  16.  But  the  state- 
ment in  the  text  is  a  general  one,  and  can 
only  mean  that  Moses  habitually  in  his  inter- 
course with  God  had  before  his  eyes  some 
visible  manifestation  of  the  invisible  God, 
which  helped  to  make  that  intercourse  at 
once  more  awfully  real  and  more  intensely 
blessed.  Such  manifestation  to  the  sense  of 
sight  must  be  distinguished  both  from  the 
visionary  (or  subjective)  sight  of  God  in 
human  figure  accorded  to  Ezekiel  (oh.  i.  26), 
to  Isaiah  (ch.  vi  1),  to  St.  John  (Eev.  iv.  2, 
8),  and  perhaps  to  others,  and  also  from  such 
theophanies  in  angel  guise  as  are  recorded  in 


Gen  xxxii.  30 ;  Judges  xiii.  22,  and  elsewhere. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  seventy  elders  seem 
to  have  seen  the  "Temunah"  of  the  Lord 
upon  that  one  occasion  when  they  were 
called  up'into  Mount  Sinai  (Exod.  xxiv.  10, 
11).  Wherefore  then  were  ye  not  a&aid  to 
speak  against  my  servant  Moses?  No 
doubt  it  was  the  double  fact  of  their  relation- 
ship to  Moses  after  the  flesh,  and  of  their 
sharing  with  him  in  certain  spiritual  gifts 
and  prerogatives,  which  made  them  oblivious 
of  the  great  distinction  which  lifted  him 
above  their  rivalry,  and  should  have  lifted 
him  above  their  contradiction.  That  contra- 
diction, however,  served  to  bring  out  in  the 
clearest  way  the  singular  and  un  approached 
position  of  the  mediator  of  Israel ;  and  it  serves 
still  to  enable  us  to  estimate  aright  the  pecu- 
liar dignity  of  his  legislation  and  his  writ- 
ings. The  substance  of  prophetic  teaching 
may  be  of  deeper  interest  and  of  wider  im- 
port than  "the  law,"  but  this  latter  will 
still  rank  higher  in  the  scale  of  inspiratioo, 
as  having  been  more  directly  communicated 
from  on  high.  Thus  "the  kw"  (as  the 
Jews  rightly  taught)  remained  the  body  of 
Divine  revelation  until  "that  Prophet" 
came  who  was  "like  unto"  Moses  in  the 
fact  that  he  enjoyed  constant,  open,  and 
direct  communication  mth  the  Godhead. 

Ver.  9. — And  he  departed.  As  a  judge 
departs  from  his  judgment-seat  after  trying 
and  convicting  evil-doers. 

Ver.  10.— The  elond  departed  from  off  the 
tabernacle.  During  this  awful  interview 
the  cloud  of  the  Presence  had  rested  on  the 
tabernacle,  as  if  it  were  the  Divine  chariot 
waiting  for  the  King  of  Israel  while  he 
tarried  within  (of.  Ps.  civ.  3 ;  Isa.  xix.  1  ; 
Rev.  XL  12).  Now  that  his  work  is  done  he 
ascends  his  chariot  again,  and  soars  aloft 
above  the  host.  Miriam  became  leprous. 
The  Hebrews  had  become  familiar  with  this 
terrible  disease  in  Egypt  The  Levitical 
legislation  had  made  it  more  terrible  by 
affixing  to  it  the  penalty  of  religious  and 
social  excommunication,  and  the  stigma,  as 
it  were,  of  the  Divine  displeasure.  Before 
this  legislation  Moses  himself  had  been  ma<le 
partially  and  temporarily  leprous,  and  that 
solely  for  a  gign,  and  without  any  sense  of 
punishment  (Exod.  iv.  6).  In  Miriam's  case, 
however,  as  in  all  subsequent  cases,  the 
plague  of  leprosy  was  endued  with  moral  as 
weU  as  physical  horror  (cf.  2  Kings  v.  27). 
As  snow.  This  expression  points  to  the  per- 
fect development  of  the  disease,  as  contrasted 
with  its  earlier  and  less  conspicuous  stages. 
Aaron  looked  upon  Miriam.  If  we  ask 
why  Aaron  himself  was  not  punished,  the 
answer  appears  to  be  the  same  here  as  in  the 
case  of  the  golden  calf.  1.  He  was  not  tba 
leader  in  mischief,  but  only  led  into  it  through 
weakness.    2.  He  was,  like  many  weak  men. 


et.  xn.] 


f  HE  BOOK  OS*  NtTMBERS. 


131 


ofan  affectionate  disposition  (cfi  Levit.  x.  19), 
and  suffered  his  own  punishmeht  in  witness- 
ing that  of  others.  8.  He  was  God's  high 
priest,  and  the  office  would  have  shared  in 
the  disgrace  of  the  man. 

Yer.  11. — Aaron  said  unto  Uosei,  Alas, 
my  lord,  I  heseeoh  thee.  Septuagint,  lio/iai, 
Kvpic.  In  thus  addressing  his  brother 
Aaron  acknowledged  his  superior  position, 
and  tacitly  abandoned  all  pretension  to 
equality,  lay  not  the  sin  upon  us.  Aaron 
speaks  to  Moses  almost  as  if  he  were  praying 
to  God,  so  completely  does  he  recognise  in 
his  brother  the  representative  of  God  (in  a 
far  higher  sense  than  himself),  who  had 
power  to  bind  and  loose  in  the  name  and 
power  of  God.  What  Aaron  really  prays  for 
is  that  the  sin,  which  he  frankly  confesses, 
may  not  be  imputed  to  them.  The  Lovitical 
law  had  taught  them  to  look  upon  sin  as  a 
burden,  which  in  the  nature  of  things  the 
sinner  must  carry,  but  which  by  the  goodness 
of  God  might  be  got  rid  of,  or  transferred  to 
some  one  else  (cf.  Levit.  iv.  4;  ivl-21; 
John  i.  29). 

Ver.  12. — As  one  dead.  Rather,  "as  the 
dead  thing,"  i.  e.  the  still-born  child,  in  which 
death  and  decay  have  anticipated  life.  Such 
was  the  frightful  effect  of  lejirosy  in  its  last 


Ver.  13.  —  Hoses  cried  unto  the  Lord. 
A  much  harder  and  prouder  man  than  Moses 
was  must  needs  have  been  melted  into  pity  at 
the  sight  of  his  sister,  and  the  terrible  sug- 
gestion of  Aaron.  Heal  her  now,  0  God,  I 
beseech  thee.  The  "now"  has  no  place 
here,. unless  it  be  merely  to  add  force  to  the 
exclamation.  Moses,  although  directly  ap- 
pealed to  himself,  can  only  appeal  to  God. 

Ver.  14.  —  The  Lord  said  unto  Moses. 
Presumably  in  the  tabernacle,  whither  Moses 
would  have  returned  to  supplicate  God.  If 
her  father  had  but  spit  in  her  face.  The 
"but"  is  superfluous,  and  obscures  the 
sense ;  the  act  mentioned  is  referred  to  not 
as  something  trifling,  but  as  something  in  its 
way  very  serious.  The  Septuagint  renders 
it  correctly  li  6  jrarijp  .  . .  irTvuiv  iviTrrvatv. 
ITie  Targums  have,  "  if  her  father  had  cor- 
rected her."  Probably  they  used  this  eu- 
phemism from  a,  sense  of  a  certain  want  of 
dignity  and  propriety  in  the  orignal  expres- 


sion, considered  as  coming  from  the  month  ol 
God.  The  act  in  question  was,  however,  not 
uncommon  in  itself,  and  in  significance 
clearly  marked  (see  Deut.  xxt.  9).  It  was 
the  distinctive  note  of  public  disgrace  in- 
flicted by  one  who  had  a  right  to  inflict  it. 
In  the  case  of  a  father,  it  meant  that  he  was 
thoroughly  ashamed  of  his  child,  and  judged 
it  best  (which  would  be  only  in  extreme 
cases)  to  put  his  child  to  shame  before  aU  the 
world.  So  public  a  disgrace  would  certainly 
be  felt  in  patriarchal  times  as  a  most  severe 
calamity,  and  entailed  by  ordinary  custom 
(as  we  learn  here)  retirement  and  mourfling 
for  seven  days  at  least.  How  much  more, 
when  her  heavenly  Father  had  been  driven 
to  inflict  a  public  disgi-ace  upon  her  for  per- 
verse behaviour,  should  the  shame  and  the 
sorrow  not  be  lightly  put  away,  but  patiently 
endured  for  a  decent  period  I  (cf.  Heb.  xii.  9). 

Ver.  15. — Miriam  was  shut  out  from  the 
camp  seven  days.  It  does  not  say  that 
Miriam  was  healed  forthwith  of  her  leprosy, 
but  the  presumption  is  to  that  effect.  Not 
the  punishment  itself,  but  the  shame  of  it, 
was  to  last  according  to  the  answer  of  God. 
Her  case,  therefore,  would  not  fall  under  the 
law  of  ch.  V.  2,  or  of  Levit.  xiii.  46,  but 
would  be  analogous  to  that  treated  of  in 
Levit.  xiv.  No  doubt  she  had  to  submit  to 
all  the  rites  there  prescribed,  humiliating  as 
they  must  have  been  to  the  prophetess  and 
the  sister  of  the  law-giver ;  and  these  rites 
involved  exclusion  from  her  tent  for  a  period 
of  seven  days'  (Levit.  xiv.  8).  By  God's 
command  exclusion  from  her  tent  was  made 
exclusion  from  the  camp. 

Ver.  16. — In  the  wilderness  of  Paran.  It 
is  somewhat  strange  that  this  note  of  place 
should  be  used  a  second  time  without  explan- 
ation (see  ch.  x.  12,  33).  Probably  it  is 
intended  to  mark  the  fact  that  they  were 
still  within  the  limits  of  Paran,  although 
on  the  very  verge  of  their  promised  land.  In 
the  list  of  stations  given  in  ch,  xxxiii.  it  is 
said  (ver.  18),  "They  departed  from  Hazeroth, 
and  pitched  in  Eithmah."  This  is  with 
some  probability  identified  with  the  .Wady 
RedemSt,  which  opens  from  the  mountain 
mass  of  the  Azazim^t  into  the  singular  plain 
of  Kudes,  or  Kadesh,  the  scene  of  the  decisive 
events  which  followed. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ch.  111. — Th«  contradiction  of  sinners.  We  have  in  this  chapter,  spiritually,  the 
contradiction  of  the  Jews  against  their  brother  afteftSKtlie  fleah ;  morally,  the  sin 
and  punishment  of  jealousy  and  envy  in  high  places.     Consider,  therefore — 

I.  That  as  Moses  is  the  type  op  iiim  who  was  the  mediator  op  a  better 

COVENAMT,  WHO  WAS  MBEK  AND  LOWLY  IN  HEART;  SO  AARON  AND  MiRIAM,  WHEN 
ARRAYED  AGAINS.'"'  MOSES,  REPRESENT  THE  LBVITIOAL  PRIESTHOOD  AT  THE  TIME  0» 
OUR  LOBD,  AND  THE  JEWISH  SYNAQOGUE,  IN   THEIR  CARNAL  Pj^TDB  AND  EXCLUSIVENKS8, 


1S4  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  LC=-  ^^ 

Nor  1*8  this  typical  character  arbitrary  or  unreal,  for  we  may  clearly  8ee  in  them  th« 
same  tendencies  which  afterwards  ripened  into  utter  blasphemy  and  Deicide. 

II.  That  the  offence  of  Moses  in  the  eyes  of  Miriam  was  his  having  allied 
HIMSELF  with  A  Gentile  WIFE  OF  A  DESPISED  EACE.  Even  SO  the  Crime  of  our 
Lord,  in  the  sight  of  a  narrow  and  bigoted  Judaism,  was  that  he  went  about  to 
present  unto  himself  a  Gentile  Church,  of  the  dregs  of  the  nations,  to  be  his  spouse 
(cf.  Cant.  i.  4—6 ;  Luke  xv.  28 ;  Acts  xxii.  21,  22  ;  Eph.  v.  25—32). 

III.  That  Miriam  and  Aaron  justified  their  opposition  to  Mosbs  bt  dwelling 
UPON  THEIR  OWN  spiritual  AUTHORITY.  Eveu  SO  the  synagogue  and  priesthood  of 
the  Jews  magnified  themselves  against  the  Lord's  Christ  and  their  own  Messiah,  on 
the  ground  that  they  themselves  were  commissioned  of  God  (cf .  John  vii.  48;  viii. 
33  ;  ix.  28,  29). 

IV.  That  they  were  able  to  be  oblivious  of  his  true  greatness,  because  he 
WAS  their  brother,  and  their  younger  brother.  Even  so  Christ  was  despised 
by  the  Jews  because  he  was  (as  it  were)  one  of  themselves,  and  because  they  seemed 
to  be  familiar  with  his  antecedents  and  training  (cf.  Matt.  xiii.  55 — 57;  Luke  iv. 
22,  28 ;  John  vi.  42). 

V.  That  Moses  displayed  a  meekness  which  seemed  more  than  human.  Even  so 
our  Lord  endured  the  contradiction  of  sinners  with  a  meekness  which  was  more  than 
human  (of.  Isa.  xlii.  19 ;  liii.  7 ;  Matt.  xi.  29  ;  Heb.  xii.  3 ;  Jas.  v.  6 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  23). 

VI.  That  God  intervened  to  advance  his  faithful  servjvnt  to  be  above  all 
prophets,  and  to  be  much  nearer  to  himself  than  Miriam  and  Aaron.  Even  so 
did  God  vindicate  his  holy  servant  Jesus  against  all  the  blasphemy  of  the  Jews,  and 
give  him  a  name  which  is  above  every  name  (cf.  Acts  ii.  22 — 24,  32  ;  iv.  10,  27,  30 ; 
Eom.  i.  4 ;  Phil.  ii.  9 ;  Heb.  iii.  1—3). 

VII.  That  God  interfered  to  punish  Miriam  with  leprosy  for  her  pride  and 
rancour.  Even  so  the  synagogue  of  the  Jews  became  the  synagogue  of  Satan,  and 
they  themselves  are  in  exile,  political  and  religious,  until  they  shall  cry  for  mercy 
to  their  Brother,  the  one  Mediator  (Rom,  xi.  25 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  15, 16 ;  Rev.  ii.  9 ;  iii.  9). 

Consider  again — 

I.  That  the  secret  cause  of  all  this  disturbance  was  probably  Miriam's 
JEALOUSY  OF  her  BROTHER'S  WIFE.  It  is  likely  she  hoped  to  have  exercised  a  grow- 
ing influence  over  him  herself.  Even  so  history  and  experience  testify  that  personal 
jealousies  and  envies  are  at  the  root  of  very  many  of  the  disorders  in  churches  and 
congregations  (cf.  2  Cor.  xii.  20 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  1  b.). 

II.  That  a  coincident  cause  was  a  secret  dissatisfaction  on  the  part  of 
Aaron  at  the  inferiority  of  his  own  position  and  influence  as  compared  with 
his  brother's,.  Even  so  ambition  and  lust  of  power  have  betrayed  many  a  higjhly- 
gifted  and  perhaps  really  religious  soul  into  making  claims,  and  taking  up  a  position 
derogatory  to  Christ,  and  inconsistent  with  his  sole  pre-eminence  (cf.  Col.  ii.  19). 

III.  That  they  excused  their  sedition  under  the  plea  (which  was  true  in 
itself)  that  they  too  enjoyed  Divine  favours  and  privileges.  How  often  do 
men  speak  and  act  as  if  the  fact  of  being  spiritual  (Gal,  vi.  1),  or  of  being  called  to 
some  ministry,  authorised  them  to  ignore  all  distmctions,  refuse  all  control,  and 
give  the  rein  to  their  own  enmities  and  evil  feelings. 

IV.  That  Moses  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  their  invectives,  but  all  the  more 
God  turned  a  listening  ear.  Moses  would  not  take  up  his  own  quarrel,  there- 
fore God  took  it  up  for  him,  and  greatly  magnified  him.  Even  so  they  that  wiU 
avenge  themselves  must  be  content  with  the  results  of  their  own  efEorts,  and  they 
that  will  fight  their  own  battles  must  take  their  chance  of  victory ;  but  they  that 
will  not  avenge  themselves,  God  will  vindicate,  and  that  gloriously.  The  meek  shall 
inherit  the  earth,  because  at  the  present  they  are  dispossessed  of  the  earth  (cf.  Ps. 
Ixxvj   9;  Isa.  xi.  4;  MatSfv.  5;  Rom.  xii.  19;  Heb.  x.  30). 

V.  That  the  punishment  of  Miriam  was  the  most  terrible  of  diseases — a 
LIVING  DEATH.  A  jealous  spirit,  stirring  up  dissensions,  reckless  of  the  souls  foi 
which  Christ  died,  incurs  awful  guilt,  and  is  in  danger  of  hell-fire  (cf.  Matt,  xviii. 
7 — 9 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  4 ;  James  iv.  6). 

VI.  That  Aaron  cmED  humbly  to  the  brother  whom  he  had  spoken  against, 


OH.  XII.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  13» 

AND  THAT  BBOTHEK  INTERCEDED  FOB  THEM,  AND  THBS  AAKON'S  FAITH   SAVED  HIMSELF 

AND  HIS  SISTBK.  Even  so  the  Lord  Jesus  is  ever  ready  to  intercede  for  his  enemies ; 
ouch  more  for  those  whom  he  loves  as  brethren,  when  they  cry  to  him,  even  if  they 
have  treated  him  ill  (cf.  Luke  xxiii.  34 ;  Bora.  v.  8,  9 ;  Heb.  ii.  11, 12,  and  of  the 
synagogue  itself  (Rom.  xi.  26,  28  ;  2  Cor.  iii.  16). 

VII.  That  Miriam's  fault,  although  foeqiven,  was  not  to  be  lightly  fou- 

GOTTEN  BY  HERSELF  OR  THE  PEOPLE  ;   SHE  WAS  TO  BE  ASHAMED  FOE  SEVEN  DAYS.      EveH 

so  it  is  not  according  to  the  will  of  God,  nor  for  the  edification  of  the  Church,  nor 
for  the  good  of  the  sinner,  that  a  sin  which  is  also  a  scandal  should  be  straightway 
smoothed  over  and  forgotten,  because  it  is  acknowledged  and  forgiven.  Tliere  is  a 
natural  impatience  to  be  rid  of  the  disagreeable  consequences  of  sin  in  this  life, 
which  is  purely  selfish  on  the  part  of  every  one  concerned,  and  is  dishonouring  to 
God.  Shame  is  a  holy  discipline  for  those  who  have  done  wrong,  and  they  should 
not  be  hastily  removed  from  its  sanctifying  influences  (cf.  Ezek.  xxxix.  26 ;  2  Cor.  ii. 
6;  vii.  9— 11). 

VIII.  That  Miriam,  peophetess  as  she  was,  and  sistee  of  the  lawgiver,  had  to 

pass  through  the  OEDINAEY  CEEEMONIAL  fob  the  cleansing  of  lepers — A  CEREMONIAL 

DESIGNED  TO  SET  FORTH  THE  ATONEMENT  OP  Oheist.  Even  SO  there  is  One  only  way 
to  restoration  for  all  sinners,  however  highly  placed  or  gifted,  and  that  through  the 
sprinkling  of  the  precious  blood  (cf.  Levit.  xiv.  2 ;  Acts  iv.  12  ;  Bom.  iii.  22,  23). 

IX.  That  God  would  not  give  the  signal  for  departure  until  Miriam  was 
RESTOEED.  Even  so  God,  who  will  have  all  men  to  be  saved,  waiteth  long  and 
delayeth  the  entry  of  the  Church  into  her  rest,  lest  any  who  will  come  in  should  be 
shut  out  (cf.  Luke  xviii.  7  6. ;  2  Pet.  iii.  9,  15  ;  Rev.  vii.  3). 

Consider  also — That  the  opposition  of  his  own  only  led  to  the  supreme  and 

SOLITARY  greatness   OP  MoSES  BEING   MADE  FAB  MORE  CLEAR   THAN    EVER,  AND    BEING 

PLACED  BEYOND  CAVIL  OR  MISTAKE.  Even  SO  the  persecution  of  our  Lord  by  the  Jews 
only  led  to  his  being  declared  the  Son  of  God  with  power ;  and  still  more,  the  efEorts 
of  heretics  to  deny  or  to  explain  away  his  Divine  glory,  have  only  led  to  that  glory 
being  much  more  clearly  defined,  and  much  more  devoutly  believed  than  ever. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — The  sedition  of  Miriam  and  Aaron.  Here  is  another  sedition  in 
Israel.  What  is  worse,  the  sedition  does  not,  at  this  time,  originate  among  the  mixed 
multitude,  the  pariahs  of  the  camp.  The  authors  of  it  are  the  two  leading  person- 
ages in  the  congregation,  after  Moses  himself.  Nor  are  they  strangers  to  him,  such 
as  might  be  deemed  his  natural  rivals ;  they  are  his  own  kindred,  his  sister  and 
brother. 

I.  The  STORY  of  the  sedition  was,  in  brief,  this : — Moses  was  not  the  only  member 
of  the  family  of  Amram  whom  the  Lord  had  endowed  with  eminent  gifts.  Aaron, 
his  elder  brother,  was  a  leading  man  among  the  Israelites  before  Moses  received  his 
call  at  Horeb.  Miriam  also  was  a  woman  of  high  and  various  gifts,  both  natural  and 
gracious.  She  was  a  prophetess — the  earliest  recorded  example  of  a  woman  endowed 
with  the  gift  of  prophecy — and  she  excelled  also  in  song  (Exod.  xv.  20  ;  Micah  vi. 
4).  The  eminent  gifts  of  these  two  were  not  passed  over.  They  found  such  recog- 
nition and  scope,  that  next  to  Moses,  Aaron  and  Miriam  were  the  two  most  honoured 
and  influential  individuals  in  the  camp.  But  they  were  not  content  with  this.  Moses 
was  set  in  yet  higher  place,  and  this  roused  their  jealousy.  They  could  not  bear 
to  see  another,  one  brought  np  in  the  same  family,  a  younger  brother  too,  elevated 
above  them.  Mirianj  could  not  brook  the  thought  of  being  subject  to  the  younger 
brother  whose  infancy  she  had  tended,  and  whose  ark  of  bulrushes  she  had  been 
set  to  watch  when  their  mother  committed  him  to  the  unfeeling  bosom  of  the 
Nile.  "  Hath  the  Lord  indeed  spoken  only  by  Moses  ?  hath  he  not  spoken  also 
by  us  ?  "  Envy  is  a  root  tenacious  of  li^e  in  the  human  heart.  When  some 
one  whom  you  have  known  familiarly  as  your  junior  or  inferior  is  raised  above 
you  in  office  or  wealth,  in  gifts  or  grace,  watch  and  pray,  else  you  will  be  very  apt 
to  fall  into  Miriam's  sin.  I  say  ifiriam's  sin,  for  it  is  plain  that  the  sedition  origin- 
ated with  her.     Not  only  is  her  name  put  f  rst,  but  in  the  Hebrew  the  beginning  of 


13«  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  [<«• «» 

the  narrative  runs  thus :  "  Then  she  spake,  even  Miriam  and  Aaron,  against  Moses." 
When  there  is  envy  in  the  heart,  it  will  soon  find  occasion  to  break  out.  Very 
characteristically,  the  occasion  in  this  instance  was  some  misunderstanding  about 
Moses'  wife.  She  was  not  of  the  daughters  of  Israel.  Miriam  affected  to  despise  her 
as  an  unclean  person,  and  persuaded  Aaron  to  do  the  same.  It  was  an  instance  of  a 
thing  not  rare  in  history,  a  family  quarrel,  a  fit  of  ill-feeling  between  two  sisters-in- 
law,  stirring  up  envy  and  strife  between  persons  in  high  oflSce,  and  troubling  the 
community.  There  was  something  very  petty  in  the  conduct  of  Miriam  and  Aaron, 
but  it  was  not,  therefore,  a  trifling  offence.  When  they  were  giving  vent  to  their 
envy  "  the  Lord  heard." 

II.  The  punishment  of  the  sedition.  It  does  not  appear  that  Moses  made  any 
complaint ;  he  was  the  meekest  of  men,  humble  and  patient.  All  the  rather  does  the 
Highest  take  the  defence  of  his  servant  in  hand.  "  Suddenly,"  i.  e.  in  sharp  dis- 
pleasure, Miriam  and  the  two  brothers  were  commanded  to  present  themselves  before 
the  Lord,  at  the  entrance  of  the  tabernacle.  Whereupon, — 1.  The  Lord  pronounced 
a  warm  eulogy  upon  Moses.  Observe  the  terms  in  which  he  is  described,  for  there 
is  much  more  in  them  than  is  perceived  at  first.  "  My  servant  Moses," — "  servant  in 
all  mine  house," — "faithful  in  all  mine  house."  (1)  Moses  was  "  the  servant  of  the 
Lord,"  "the  man  of  God,"  in  a  sense  more  ample  than  any  other  individual  who  ever 
lived  excepting  only  Christ  himself ;  and  one  can  perceive  a  tone  of  singular  love  in 
the  way  in  which  the  title  is  here  used :  "  my  servant  Moses."  (2)  The  commission 
of  Moses  extended  to  every  part  of  the  Lord's  house,  and  in  every  department  of  his 
service  he  showed  fidelity.  As  a  prophet,  he  was  more  extensively  employed  and 
more  faithful  than  Miriam ;  as  a  priest,  he  was  more  honourable  and  faithful  than 
Aaron;  and  he  was,  moreover,  king  in  Jeshurun,  the  valiant  and  faithful  leader  and 
commander  of  the  people.  These  were  facts,  and  Moses  might  well  have  appealed 
to  them  in  vindication  of  himself  against  the  complainers.  But  he  did  better  to  leave 
the  matter  in  the  Lord's  own  hand  (Ps.  xxxvii.  5,  6).  2.  Besides  vindicating  Moses 
and  rebuking  his  detractors,  the  Lord  put  a  mark  of  his  displeasure  on  Miriam.  The 
ringleader  in  the  sedition,  she  bears  the  brunt  of  the  punishment.  She  has  affected 
to  abhor  her  sister-in-law  as  unclean  ;  she  is  herself  smitten  with  leprosy,  a  disease 
loathsome  in  itself,  and  which  entailed  ceremonial  defilement  in  the  highest  degree. 
This  done,  the  cloud  of  the  Divine  presence  rose  as  suddenly  as  it  had  come  down. 
Miriam  and  Aaron  stood  before  the  tabernacle  utterly  confounded,  till  Aaron  was  fain 
to  humble  himself  before  his  brother,  saying : — We  have  done  foolishly,  we  have 
sinned  ;  forgive  us,  and  do  not  let  the  sad  affair  go  further ;  have  pity  on  poor  Miriam 
especially  ;  see  how  pitiable  a  sight  she  is.  "  Like  the  dead  thing  of  which  the  flesh  is 
half  consumed  when  it  cometh  out  of  its  mother's  womb."  Moses  was  not  the  man  to 
resist  so  touching  an  appeal.  Miriam  was  healed  ;  but  she  was  shut  out  from  the  camp 
•s  an  unclean  person  for  the  space  of  a  week,  as  the  law  prescribed.  The  lesson  lies 
on  the  surface.  Do  not  give  harbour  to  envy  because  of  the  welfare  or  honour  of 
your  neighbour,  rather  "  rejoice  with  them  that  do  rejoice."  It  is  not  always  easy  to 
rejoice  when  some  one  yoimger,  or  of  humbler  birth  than  ourselves,  is  exalted  above 
us.  Nor  is  the  difSculty  lessened  when  the  person  exalted  is  of  our  own  kindred. 
Nevertheless  envy  must  be  cast  forth.  The  author  of  all  gifts  and  honours  is  God. 
To  envy  the  receivers  is  to  rebel  against  him  and  provoke  his  displeasure.  And 
God's  ordinary  method  in  punishing  envious  pride  is  to  inflict  some  peculiarly  igno- 
minious stroke.    When  Miriam  swells  with  pride  she  is  smitten  with  leprosy. — B. 

Vers.  6 — 8. — Hie  singtdar  honour  of  Moses.  The  best  commentary  on  these  verses 
is  supplied  by  the  comparison  instituted  between  Moses  and  our  blessed  Lord  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  (iii.  1 — 6).  The  Hebrews  are  reminded  that  of  all  the 
servants  whom  the  Lord  raised  up  to  minister  in  the  ancient  Church,  there  was  not  one 
who  approached  Moses,  in  respect  either  to  the  greatness  and  variety  of  the  services 
performed  by  him,  or  the  greatness  of  the  honours  bestowed  upon  him.  Moses  was 
set  over  all  God's  house,  and  in  this  eminent  station  he  was  conspicuously  faithful. 
In  these  respects  Moses  was  the  most  perfect  figure  of  Christ.  Christ's  priesthood 
was  foreshadowed  by  Melohisedec,  his  royalty  by  David  and  Solomon,  his  prophetical 
office  by  Samuel  and  the  goodly  company  of  prophets  who  followed  him.    But  in 


Oi.  ttu]  TfiE  SOOK  OF  NtJMBBSS.  IS? 

■  -  _  - 

Moses  all  the  three  offices  were  foreshadowed  at  once.  01  these  two  men,  Mosea  and 
Christ,  and  of  no  other  since  the  world  began,  could  it  be  affirmed  that  they  were 
"  faithful  in  all  the  Lord's  house."  No  doubt  there  was  disparity  as  well  as  a  resem- 
blance. Both  were  servants.  But  Moses  was  a  servant  in  a  house  which  belonged 
to  another,  in  a  household  of  which  he  was  only  a  member,  whereas  Christ  is  such  a 
servant  as  is  also  a  son,  and  serves  in  a  household  of  which  he  is  the  Maker  and  Heir. 
This  is  true.  Nevertheless  it  is  profitable  to  forget  occasionally  the  disparity  of  the 
two  great  mediators,  and  to  fix  attention  on  the  resemblance  between  them,  the 
points  in  which  the  honour  of  Christ  the  Great  Prophet  was  prefigured  by  the  singular 
honour  of  Moses.     Hence  the  interest  and  value  of  this  text  in  Numbers. 

I.  As    A    FOIL    TO    BBINO    OUT    THE    SINGULAR  HONOUR  OF    MoSES,  THE  LORD  PUTS 

ALONGSIDE  OF  IT  THE  HONOUR  BESTOWED  ON  OTHER  PROPHETS.  "  Consider  the  pro- 
phets that  have  been  or  yet  are  anjong  you.  How  has  my  will  been  made  known  to 
them?"  Two  ways  are  specified.  1.  " In  a  vision."  There  was  a  memorable 
example  of  this  in  the  case  of  Abraham  (Gen.  xv.).  Visions  continued  to  be  the 
vehicles  of  revelation  during  the  whole  course  of  the  Old  Testament  history.  Isaiah 
(vi.,  xiii.,  (fee),  Jeremiah  (i.,  &c.),  Bzekiel  and  Daniel  (everywhere).  Peter's  vision 
at  Joppa  is  a  familiar  example  of  the  same  kind  under  the  New  Testament.  2.  "  In 
a  dream."  This  was  a  lower  way  of  revelation.  The  stories  of  Pharaoh  and  Nebu- 
chadnezzar remind  us  that  the  dreams  (I  do  not  say  the  interpretations  of  them)  were 
not  seldom  vouchsafed  to  men  who  were  strangers  to  God.  We  shall  see  immedi- 
ately that  these  ways  of  making  himself  known  to  men  through  the  prophets,  were 
inferior  to  the  ways  in  which  the  Lord  was  wont  to  reveal  himself  through  Moses. 
But  let  us  not  so  fix  our  attention  on  the  points  of  diiference  as  to  lose  sight  of  or 
forget  the  bright  and  glorious  feature  which  they  have  in  common.  "  I,  the  Lord,  do 
make  myself  known  in  a  vision,  and  do  speak  in  a  dream."  For  reasons  we  can  only 
guess  at,  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  suflEer  the  nations  to  walk  in  their  own  ways.  But 
in  Israel  he  revealed  himself.  At  sundry  times  and  in  divers  manners  he" was  pleased 
to  speak  to  the  fathers  by  the  prophets.  The  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament  are 
oracular.  In  them  we  inherit  the  most  precious  part  of  the  patrimony  of  the  ancient 
Church.  For  this  was  the  chief  advantage  which  the  Jews  had  above  the  Gentiles, 
that  "unto  them  were  committed  the  oracles  of  God."  It  is  our  own  fault  if,  in 
reading  the  Old  Testament,  we  fail  to  hear  everywhere  the  voice  of  God, 

II.  Over  against  the  honour  vouchsafed  to  all  the  prophets,  the  Lord  bets 
FORTH  THE  SINGULAR  HONOUR  OF  MosES.  It  is  denoted  by  the  loving  title  by  which 
the  Lord  here  and  elsewhere  names  him :  "  My  servant  Moses."  "  Were  ye  not  afraid 
to  speak  against  my  servant  Moses  ?  "  (vers.  7, 8 ;  of.  Josh.  i.  2  ;  also  Deut.  xxxiv.  6). 
The  word  here  translated  "servant"  is  a  word  of  honourable  import ;  and  in  the  sin- 
gular and  emphatic  way  in  which  it  is  applied  by  the  Lord  to  Moses,  it  is  applied  by 
him  to  no  other  till  we  come  to  Christ  himself  (see  Isa.  lii.  13 ;  liii.  11,  &c.).  The  sin- 
gular honour  of  Moses  is  indicated,  moreover,  by  this,  that  he  was  called  and,  enabled 
to  do  faithful  service  "in  all  God's  house."  Aaron  served  as  a  priest,  Miriam  as  -a 
prophetess,  Joshua  as  a  commander,  each  being  intrusted  with  one  department  of 
iervice ;  Moses  was  employed  in  all.  More  particularly,  Moses  was  singularly  honoured 
in  regard  to  the  manner  of  the  Divine  communications  granted  to  him.  With  him 
the  Lord  spoke  "  mouth  to  mouth,"  even  apparently,  t. «.  visibly,  and  not  in  dark 
speeches,  and  he  beheld  the  similitude  of  the  Lord.  1.  When  prophets  received 
communications  in  dreams  and  visions  they  were  very  much  in  a  passive  state,  simply 
beholding  and  hearing,  often  unable  to  make  out  the  meaning  of  what  they  saw  and 
heard.  Moses,  on  the  contrary,  was  admitted  as  it  were  into  the  audience  chamber, 
and  the  Lord  spoke  to  him  as  a  man  speaks  with  his  friend  (cf.  ch.  vii.  89).     2.  A 

'few  of  the  prophets,  specially  honoured,  had  visions  of  the  Divine  glory  (Isa.  vi.,  &c.). 
But  in  this  respect  Moses  was  honoured  above  all  the  rest  (Exod.xxxiii.,  xxxiv.).  In 
these  respects  he  prefigured  the  great  Prophet,  the  only  begotten  Son,  who  is  in  the 
bosom  of  the  Father,  knows  the  Father  even  as  the  Father  knows  him,  and  has  fully 
declared  him.  It  has  seemed  to  some  learned  men  a  thing  unlikely,  a  thing  in- 
credible, that  the  vast  body  of  doctrine  and  law  and  divinely-inspired  history  con- 
tained in  the  last  four  books  of  the  Pentateuch  should  have  been  delivered  to  th« 
Church  within  one  age,  and  chiefly  by  one  man.    But  the  thing  will  not  seem  Strang* 


138  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oh.  xii. 

to  one  who  believes  and  duly  considers  the  singular  honour  of  Moses  as  described 
in  this  text,  especially  if  it  is  read  in  connection  with  the  similar  testimony  borne 
elsewhere  to  Christ.  Moses,  and  the  Prophet  like  unto  Moses,  stand  by  themselves 
in  the  history  of  Divine  revelation  in  this  respect,  that  each  served  "  in  all  Gcd's 
house;"  each  was  commissioned  to  introduce  the  Church  into  a  new  dispensation,  to 
deliver  to  the  Church  a  system  of  doctrine  and  institutions.  In  harmony  with  this 
is  the  patent  fact  that,  as  at  the  bringing  in  of  the  gospel  dispensation  the  stream  of 
Holy  Scripture  expands  into  the  four  gospels,  even  so  at  the  bringing  in  of  the  ancient 
dispensation  the  stream  of  Holy  Scripture  originated  in  the  Books  of  the  Law. — B. 

Vers.  1 — 16. — God  the  vindicator  of  his  calumniated  servants.  The  serpent's  trail 
was  found  in  Eden,  and  "  a  devil "  among  the  apostles.  No  wonder  then  at  this 
narrative  of  strife  in  a  godly  family.     We  notice — 

I.  An  unjust  insinuation.  Neither  Moses'  marriage  nor  his  conduct  to  his 
relatives  (ver.  3)  had  given  fair  cause  of  provocation.  If  his  wife  had  done  so,  the 
charge  Aaron  and  Miriam  brought  against  the  man  who  chose  her  was  utterly 
irrelevant  (ver.  2).  "The  wife  of  Moses  is  mentioned,  his  superiority  is  shot  at" 
(Bp.  Hall).  No  wonder  if  the  most  conscientious  and  cautious  are  calumniated  since 
false  charges  were  brought  against  Moses,  Job,  Jeremiah,  and  Jesus  Christ.  The 
assault  was  aggravated  because — 1.  It  came  from  his  nearest  kindred  (Ps.  Iv.  12 — 14  ; 
Jer.  xii.  6).  Miriam  apparently  began  it,  perhaps  through  a  misunderstanding 
between  the  sisters-in-law,  and  drew  Aaron  into  the  plot  (1  Tim.  ii.  14).  2.  Because 
it  was  in  the  form  of  an  unjust  insinuation  that  Moses  claimed  exclusive  prophetic 
gifts  (ver.  2  ;  cf.  Exod.  xv.  20  ;  Micah  vi.  4). 

IL  A  TRIUMPHANT  VINDICATION.  Moses  apparently  had  taken  no  notice  of  the 
charge ;  perhaps  acting  on  Agricola's  rule, "  omnia  scire,  non  omnia  exsequi  "  (cf .  Ps 
xxxviii.  12 — 15;  John  viii.  50).  But  the  Lord  heard  it  and  interposed.  1.  The 
three  are  summoned  before  an  impartial  judge,  but  with  what  different  feelings. 

2.  The  calumniated  servant  of  Uod  is  distinguished  by  special  honours  (vers.  6^ — 8). 

3.  The  murmurers  are  rebuked,  and  a  humiliating  punisliment  is  inflicted  on  the 
chief  ofEender.  The  punishment  of  Aaron,  the  accomplice,  only  less  severe  (through 
sympathy  with  his  sister)  than  that  of  Miriam  (Job  xii.  16).  4.  They  are  indebted 
for  deliverance  to  the  intercession  of  the  man  they  have  wronged,  -illustration, 
Jeroboam  (1  Kings  xiii.  6 ;  Job's  friends.  Job  xlii.  7 — 10).  Thus  God  will  vindicate 
all  his  calumniated  servants  (Ps.  xxxvii.  5,  6).  Protection  (Ps.  xxxi.  20) ;  peace 
(Prov.  xvi.  7)  ;  honour  (Isa.  Ix.  14 ;  Eev.  iii.  9)  ;  and  final  reward  (Ps.  xci.  14—16 ; 
and  Bom.  viii.  31).  Such  are  the  privileges  of  the  faithful  but  maligned  servants  of 
God,— P. 

Ver.  2. — The  Lord  listening.  "  And  the  Lord  heard  it."  Compare  with  this  the 
words,  "  And  the  Lord  hearkened  and  heard  "  (Mai.  iii.  16).  We  are  thus  reminded 
that  God  listens  not  only  to  take  note  of  our  sinful  words,  but  to  record  every  loving, 
faithful  word,  spoken  of  him  or  for  him.  What  a  proof  of  the  omnipotence  of  God  I 
Wonderful  that  he  should  attend  to  every  prayer  addressed  to  him.  Still  more  so 
that  he  should  listen  to  every  word  spoken  not  to  him  but  to  others.  But  at  the 
same  moment  he  can  hear  the  brooks  murmuring  over  their  rocky  beds,  the  trees 
clapping  their  hands,  the  floods  lifting  up  their  voice,  the  birds  singing  in  the 
branches,  the  young  lions  roaring  for  their  prey,  and  every  sound  of  joy  or  cry  of 
pain,  every  hymn  of  praise  or  word  of  falsehood  issuing  from  human  lips  (Ps.  cxxxix. 
3,  4,  6).  Without  speaking  of  direct  prayers  we  may  seek  illustrations  of  the"  truth 
that  God  listens  to  everything  we  say  to  one  another,  records  it,  passes  his  judgment 
on  it,  and  lays  it  up  in  store  as  one  of  the  materials  of  his  future  verdict  on  our  lives. 
We  may  regard  this  truth — 

I.  As  AN  ENCOURAGEMENT.  As  illustrations — 1.  Turn  to  the  scene  described  in 
Mai.  iii.  16.  A  few  godly  persons  are  trying  to  keej)  alive  the  flame  of  piety  in  a 
godless  age  (vers.  13 — 15).  Apply  to  social  means  of  grace  for  mutual  edification. 
2.  See  that  Christian  man  on  a  lonely  walk,  courteously  conversing  with  a  stranger, 
and  seeking  to  recommend  Christ  to  him.  The  stranger  may  go  away  to  pray  or  to 
■cofE,  but  that  is  not  all.    God  hears  and  records  the  words  as  one  of  the  good 


OH.  XII.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  l» 

deeds  done  in  the  body  (2  Cor.  v.  10).  3.  A  godly  mother  in  the  midst  of  daily 
duties,  not  onl}'  praying  but  soliloquising,  as  in  Ps.  Ixii.  1,  2,  5 — 7.  Whether  or  not 
she  may  say  Ps.  v.  1,  God  does  "give  ear,"  and  the  words  are  "acceptable"  (Ps. 
xix.  14).  4.  Sufferers  lamenting ;  e.  g.  Hagar  (Gen.  xvi.  11)  ;  Ishmael  (Gen.  xxi. 
17)  ;  Israel  in  Egypt  (Exod.  ii.  24)  ;  mourners  in  Zion  (Isa.  xxx.  19). 

II.  Ab  a  warning.  The  truth  has  its  shady  as  well  as  its  sunny  side.  We  may 
apply  to — 1.  The  swearer's  prayer,  not  intended  for  the  ear  of  God,  but  reaching  it. 
2.  Calumnies  and  backbitings,  e.  g.  against  Moses  (vers.  1,  2),  or  other  servants  of 
God  (cf.  Zeph.  ii.  8) ;  perhaps  disliked  because  their  lives  are  a  rebuke  to  others  (cf. 
Ps.  xciv.  4,  7,  8,  9 ;  John  xv.  18).  3.  Impure  words.  The  youth  would  be  ashamed 
all  day  if  his  mother  accidentally  heard.  But  God  heard.  4.  Solitary  words  of 
repining  or  rebellion.  Spoken  in  haste,  they  are  soon  regretted,  and  you  say,  "  Well, 
at  any  rate  nobody  heard  them."  Stop  and  think  again  (ch.  xi.  1 ;  Ps.  cxxxix.  7). 
The  ear  of  God,  like  his  eye,  is  in  every  place."  Therefore  Matt.  xii.  37.  This 
truth  leads -us  by  a  single  step  to  the  heart  of  the  gospel  (Acts  xx.  21).  And  if  we 
say  Ps.  xvii.  3,  God  will  hear  that  too,  and  give  us  strength  to  serve  him  with 
"  righteous  lips  "  and  "  joyful  lips  "  (Ps.  xix.  14). — P. 

Vers.  1,  2. — A  hideous  manifestation  of  pride.  Amid  much  obscurity  we  discern 
that  family  jealousies  were  the  occasion  of  this  outbreak.  Some  occasion  certainly 
would  have  arisen,  so  we  need  not  trouble  ourselves  whether  this  Cushite  wife  was 
Zipporah  or  a  wife  lately  taken.  There  is  room  for  much  conjecture,  and  real  need 
for  none.  Out  of  the  heart  cometh  pride.  Pride  was  in  Miriam's  heart ;  it  must 
come  out  sooner  or  later.  We  specify  Miriam,  as  she  was  evidently  the  principal 
ti  ansgressor.  Aaron  simply  and  easily  followed  where  she  led.  Let  us  fix  our 
attention  on  the  hideous  revelation  of  her  pride. 

I.  It  was  A  PEIDB  THAT  OVSaWHELMED  NATURAL  AFFECTION.  To  whom  in  all  Israel 
might  Moses  have  more  confidently  looked  for  sympathy  than  his  own  sister  ? 
Especially  if  it  were  she  who  stood  afar  off,  and  watched  the  ark  of  bulrushes 
(Exod.  ii.  4).  It  was  an  unworthy  thing  of  a  sister  to  hinder  one  on  whom  God  had 
laid  such  great  and  anxious  duties.  But  when  self-esteem  is  once  hurt,  the  wound 
soon  inflames  beyond  all  control ;  and  even  those  on  whom  we  are  most  dependent, 
•nd  to  whom  we  owe  the  most,  are  made  to  feel  the  grievous  irritation  of  our  spirits. 

II.  It    was    A   PRIDE   THAT   MADE    MiEIAM    FORBBT    THE    OBLIGATIONS    OF   HER    OWN 

HONOURABLE  OFFICE.  She  was  a  prophetess,  even  as  Moses  was  a  prophet.  She  does, 
indeed,  in  one  sense  recollect  her  ofiSce.  "  Hath  the  Lord  not  spoken  also  by  us  ?  " 
True ;  and  this  was  the  very  reason  why  she  should  have  been  specially  careful  of 
what  she  said,  even  when  the  Lord  was  not  speaking  by  her.  A  prophets  tongue 
should  be  doubly  guarded  at  all  times.  Those  who  speak  for  God  ought  never  to 
say  anything  out  of  their  own  thoughts  incongruous  with  the  Divine  message.  If 
Miriam  and  Aaron  had  ever  been  obliged  to  deal  with  Moses  as  once  Paul  had  to 
deal  with  Peter,  and  withstand  him  to  the  face  because  he  was  to  be  blamed,  then 
the  prophet  element  in  them  would  have  been  more  glorious  than  ever.  But  here 
Miriam  stoops  from  her  high  rank  to  give  effect  to  a  mean  personal  grudge. 

III.  It  was  FRIDE  THAT  PUT   ON  A  PRETENCE   OF   BEING   BADLT   TREATED.       It  is  Very 

easy  for  the  proud  to  persuade  themselves  that  they  have  been  badly  treated.  They 
are  so  much  in  their  own  thoughts  that  it  becomes  easy  for  them  to  believe  that  they 
are  much  in  the  thoughts  of  other  people ;  and  from  this  they  can  soon  advance  to 
the  suspicion  that  there  may  be  elaborate  designs  against  them.  Men  will  go  step 
by  step  to  great  villainies,  justifying  themselves  all  the  way.  The  scribes  who  sat 
in  Moses'  seat  no  doubt  made  their  conspiracy  against  Jesus  look  very  laudable  to 
their  own  eyes.  Miriam  does  not  speak  here  with  the  arrogance  of  a  straightforward, 
brutal,  "  I  wish  it,  and  it  must  be  bo."  The  iniquity  of  her  heart  sought  to  veil  itseH 
in  a  plausible  plea  for  justice. 

IV.  It  was  the  worst  of  all  pride,  spiritual  pride.  Pride  of  birth,  of  beauty, 
of  wealth,  of  learning,  all  these  are  bad,  often  ridiculous ;  but  spiritual  pride  is  such 
a  contradiction,  such  an  amazing  example  of  blindness,  that  we  may  well  give  it  a 
pre-eminence  among  the  evil  fruits  of  the  corrupt  heart.  It  is  the  chief  of  all  pride, 
moBt  dangerous  to  the  subject  of  it,  and  most  insulting  to  God.     Contrast  Mrism 


140  THE  BOOK  OF  KUMBBSS.  [ctt.  ta. 

with  Mary,  the  mother  of  Jesus :  the  one  all  chafed  and  swelling  within,  who  thinks 
the  people  should  attend  her  as  much  as  her  brother;  the  other  having  the  ornament 
of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit,  humbly  submissive  to  Gabriel's  word,  nothing  doubting, 
yet  prostrate  iri  amazement  that  she  should  have  been  chosen  as  the  mother  of 
Messiah,  sending  forth  her  Magnificat  like  a  lark  soaring  from  its  humble  bed, 
singing  its  song,  and  straightway  returning  to  the  earth  again.  Or  contrast  her  with 
Paul,  saying,  because  he  truly  felt,  that  he  was  less  than  the  least  of  all  saints,  an 
earthen  vessel,  the  chief  of  sinners.  Amid  our  greatest  privileges  we  are  still  in  the 
greatest  danger  if  without  a  sense,  habitually  cherished,  of  our  natural  unworthiness. 
The  more  God  sees  fit  to  make  of  us,  the  more  we  should  wonder  that  he  is  able  to 
make  so  much  out  of  so  little. — Y. 

Ver.  3. — A  distinguished  example  of  meekness.  This  quality  of  meekness,  for 
which  Moses  is  here  so  much  praised,  is  not  without  its  signs  earlier  in  the  narrative 
of  his  connection  with  the  Israelites ;  and  as  we  look  back  in  the  light  of  this  express 
declaration,  the  quality  is  very  easily  seen.  '  Such  a  declaration  was  evidently  needed 
here,  and  we  may  trace  its  insertion  by  some  hand  soon  after  as  much  to  the  control 
of  inspiration  as  we  trace  the  originnl  narrative.  The  meekness  of  Moses  is  not  only 
a  foil  to  the  pride  of  Miriam,  but  evidently  had  something  to  do  with  exciting  her 
pride.  She  would  not  have  gone  so  far  with  a  diiferent  sort  of  man.  She  knew 
intuitively  how  far  she  could  go  with  him,  and  that  it  was  a  very  long  way  indeed. 
Therefore,  to  bring  out  all  the  significance  of  the  occasion,  it  was  needful  to  make 
special  mention  of  the  meekness  of  Moses.  Notice  tJie  emphatic  way  in  which  it 
is  set  forth.  "  Meek  above  all  the  men  which  were  upon  the  face  of  the  earth."  We 
talk  of  Moses  as  the  meekest  of  men  and  Solomon  as  the  wisest  of  men  to  indicate 
that  the  one  was  very  meek  indeed  and  the  other  very  wise.  Let  us  look  then  in  the 
life  and  character  of  Moses  to  see  how  that  eminent  virtue  was  shown  which  ought 
also  to  be  in  all  of  us. 

I.  The  meekness  included  A  consciousness  of  natubal  unfitness  for  the  work 
TO  WHICH  God  had  called  him.  A  consciousness  we  may  well  believe  to  have  been 
profound,  abiding,  and  oftentimes  oppressive.  God  meant  it  to  be  so.  We  know 
not  what  Moses  was  physically.  He  was  a  goodly  child  (Exod.  ii.  2),  but  a 
mother's  partiality  may  have  had  something  to  do  with  this  judgment.  In  after 
years  that  may  have  been  true  of  Moses  which  Paul  pathetically  observes  was  the 
opinion  of  some  concerning  himself— that  in  bodily  presence  he  was  weak  and  in 
speech  contemptible.  It  may  have  been  a  wonder  to  many,  as  well  as  to  himself,  that 
God  had  chosen  him.    In  that  memorable  interview  with  God  at  Horeb  (Exod.  iii.), 

the  first  word  of  Moses  is,  "  Here  am  I ; "  but  the  second,  "  Who  am  I, that  I 

should  bring  forth  the  children  of  Israel  out  of  Egypt  ?  "  There  was  no  jumping  at 
eminence,  no  vainglorious  grasping  at  the  chance  of  fame.  He  had  to  be  constrained 
along  the  path  of  God's  appointment,  not  because  of  a  disobedient  spirit,  but  because 
of  a  low  estimate  of  himself.  He  abounded  in  patriotism  and  sympathy  for  his 
oppressed  brethren,  but  the  work  of  deliverance  seemed  one  for  stronger  hands  than 
his.  Perhaps  there  is  nothing  in  the  natural  man  more  precious  in  the  sight  of  God 
for  the  possibilities  that  come  out  of  it  than  this  consciousness  of  weakness.  The 
work  to  be  done  is  so  great,  and  the  man  who  is  called  to  do  it,  even  when  he  has 
stretched  himself  to  his  fullest  extent,  looks  so  small. 

II.  This  sense  op  weakness  would  appear  in  all  his  intkrcoubsb  with  men. 
He  was  exposed  continually  to  the  risk  of  insult  and  reproach.  The  people  vented 
their  spleen  and  carnal  irritation  upon  him,  yet  he  did  not  make  their  words  a  matter 
of  personal  insult,  as  some  leaders  would  undoubtedly  have  done.  He  felt  only  too 
keenly  his  own  insuflSeiency,  and  how  far  short  he  fell  of  the  high  requirements  of 
God.  Although  the  particular  hard  things  which  men  said  about  him  might  not  be 
just,  yet  he  felt  that  many  hard  things  might  justly  be  said,  and  so  there  was  no 
inclination  to  fume  and  fret  and  stand  upon  his  dignity  when  fault-finders  began  to 
speak.  Even  when  Miriam  joins  the  traducing  herd  he  seems  to  bear  it  in  silence. 
The  dying  Cffisar  said, "  Ei  tii,  Brute;  "  but  Moses,  in  this  hour  of  his  loneliness,  when 
even  his  kindred  forsake  him,  does  not  say,  "  And  thou,  Miriam."  Each  succeeding 
revelation  of  God  made  him  humbler  in  his  own  spirit,  and  seemed  to  incease  tii« 


m.  xi:.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBBBS.  141 

distance  between  his  created  and  corrupted  life  and  the  glory  of  the  great  I  AM.  If 
God  were  so  gracious,  forgiving,  and  bountiful  to  him  (ch.  xi.),  why  should  not  he 
be  long-sufEering  and  meekly  tolerant  with  Miriam  ?  (Matt,  zviii.  23 — 35).  We  shall 
not  blow  ourselves  out  and  strut  before  men  if  we  only  constantly  recollect  how 
defiled  we  are  in  the  sight  of  God. 

III.  This  meekness-  is  especially  to  be  noticed  because  of  ITS  connection  with 
OEBTAIN  OTHER  (jnAilTlES  WHICH  GoD  LOVES.  The  more  conscious  Moses  became  of 
his  natural  weakness,  the  more  God  esteemed  him.  If  meekness  springs  from  the 
sense  of  weakness,  yet  it  grows  and  becomes  useful  in  association  with  the  strength 
of  God.  Though  Moses  was  meek,  he  was  not  a  pliable  man.  Though  meek,  he 
none  the  less  went  right  onward  in  the  way  of  God's  appointment.  This  meekness 
of  his  went  along  with  obedience  to  God.  He  quietly  listened  to  all  his  enemies  said 
in  the  way  of  invective  and  slander,  and  still  went  on  his  way,  with  eye  and  ear  and 
heart  open  to  the  will  of  God.  He  was  like  a  tree,  which,  though  it  may  bend  and 
yield  a  little  to  the  howling  blast,  yet  keeps  its  hold  firm  on  the  soil.  There  was  also 
a  never-failing  sense  of  right.  Moses  was  one  of  those  men — would  that  there  wore 
more  of  them  in  the  world  I — who  had  a  deep  feeling  of  sympathy  with  the  weak  and 
the  oppressed.  Meek  as  he  was  by  nature,  he  slew  the  Egyptian  who  smote  his 
Hebrew  brother.  There  was  also  courage  along  with  the  meekness — courage  of  the 
highest  sort,  moral  courage,  daring  to  be  laughed  at,  and  to  stand  alone.  These  are 
the  brave  men  who  can  do  this,  planting  alone,  if  need  be,  the  standard  of  some  great 
cause ;  meek  and  humble,  but  dauntless  in  their  meekness,  confiding  in  him  whose 
righteousness  is  like  the  great  mountains.  Look  at  the  bravery  of  meek  women  for 
Christ.  Then  there  was  persistency.  Is  not  this  great  part  of  the  secret  of  the 
fulfilling  of  that  beatitude,  "  Blessed  are  the  meek,  for  they  shall  inherit  the  earth  ?  " 
The  violent,  the  unjust,  the  greedy,  may  grasp  the  earth  for  a  time,  but  it  is  the  meek, 
the  gentle,  never  irritating,  yet  never  withdrawing,  persistent,  generation  after 
generation,  in  the  practice  and  application  of  spiritual  truth,  it  is  they  who  in  the 
fulness  of  time  will  truly  inherit  the  earth. — ^Y. 

Vers.  4 — 16.— 7%*  humbling  of  the  proud  and  the  exaltation  of  the  meek.  The 
humbling  was  evidently  by  the  action  of  God  himself.  The  Lord  heard  Miriam  and 
Aaron  in  the  words  of  their  pride,  and  even  though  Moses  might  bear  these  words  in 
the  silent  composure  of  his  magnanimity  and  meekness,  it  nevertheless  became  God 
to  justify  his  servant,  as  God  alone  could  effectually  and  signally  justify.  God  notes 
all  unjust  and  slanderous  doings  with  respect  to  his  people.  He  hears,  even  though 
the  reviled  ones  themselves  be  ignorant.  God  then  proceeds  by  one  course  of  action 
to  produce  a  double  result — to  humble  Miriam  and  Aaron,  Miriam  in  particular,  and  to 
exalt  Moses.  In  what  he  did,  notice  that  with  all  his  anger  and  severity  he  yet 
mingled  much  consideration  for  the  transgressors.  We  need  not  suppose  that  their 
words  had  been  spoken  to  any  considerable  audience.  More  likely  they  were  confined 
to  the  limits  of  the  domestic  circle.  And  so  the  Lord  spake  suddenly  to  the  three 
persons  concerned.  Probably  none  but  themselves  knew  why  they  were  summoned. 
There  was  no  reason  for  exposing  a  family  quarrel  to  the  gossip  of  the  whole  camp. 
The  dn  of  Miriam  need  not  be  published  abroad,  though  it  was  necessary,  in  order 
to  teach  her  a  lesson,  that  it  should  be  condignly  punished.  So  they  were  called  to 
the  door  of  the  tabernacle,  and  there  God  addressed  them  from  the  pillar  of  cloud, 
with  all  its  solemn  associations.  This  word  suddenly  also  suggests  that  wlien  God 
does  not  visit  immediately  the  iniquity  of  the  transgressor  upon  him,  it  is  from  con- 
siderations of  what  we  may  call  Divine  expediency.  He  can  come  at  once  or  later, 
but,  at  whatever  time,  he  certainly  will  come.     Consider  now — 

I.  The  humbling  of  the  proud.  This  was  done  in  two  ways.  1.  By  the  plain 
distinction  which  Qod  made  between  them  and  Moses.  It  was  perfectly  true  that,  as 
they  claimed,  God  had  spoken  by  them,  but  he  calls  attention  to  the  fact  that  it  was 
his  custom  to  speak  to  prophets  by  vision  and  by  dream.  There  was  no  mouth  to 
mouth  conversation,  no  beholding  of  the  similitude  of  the  Lord.  God  can  use  all 
sorts  of  agencies  for  his  communications  to  men.  It  needs  not  even  a  Miriam ;  he 
can  speak  warning  from  the  inouth  of  an  ass.  But  Moses  was  more  than  a  prophet  ; 
prophet  was  only  the  part  of  which  steward  and  general,  visible  representative  of 


14S 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[CH8.  XIII.,  XIY. 


Grod,  was  the  whole.  What  a  humbling  hour  for  this  proud  woman  to  find  that 
Jehovah  himself  had  taken  up  the  cause  of  her  despised  brother  I  It  is  probable 
that  Moses  himself  had  mentioned  little  of  the  details  of  his  experiences  of  God ; 
tliey  were  not  things  to  talk  much  about ;  perhaps  he  could  not  have  found  the  fit 
audience,  even  though  few.  Upon  Miriam  it  would  come  like  a  thunderbolt  to  know 
how  God  esteemed  the  man  whom  she  had  allowed  herself  to  scorn.  So  God  will 
ever  abase  the  proud  by  glorifying  his  own  pious  children  whom  they  despise.  Satan 
despises  Job,  says  he  is  a  mere  lip  worshipper,  a  man  whose  professions  will  not  bear 
trial ;  he  gets  him  down  into  the  dust  of  bereavement,  poverty,  and  disease ;  but  in 
the  end  he  has  to  see  him  a  holier  man,  a  more  trustful  and  prosperous  one  than 
before.  Miriam  meant  the  downfall  of  Moses;  she  only  helped  to  establish  him 
more  firmly  on  the  rook.  2.  By  the  personal  visitation  on  Miriam.  She  became  a 
leper.  As  her  pride  was  hideous  in  the  manifestation  of  it,  so  her  punishment  was 
hideous — a  leprosy,  loathsome  and  frightful  beyond  the  common.  We  might  expect 
this.  A  malignant  outbreak  in  her  bodily  life  corresponded  with  the  malignity  of 
the  defilement  in  her  spirit.  As  to  Aaron,  we  ma}-  presume  that  his  sacred  office,  and 
to  some  extent  the  fact  that  he  was  a  tool,  secured  him  from  leprosy,  but  the  visitation 
on  his  sister  was  punishment  in  itself.  He  felt  the  wind  of  the  blow  which  struck 
her  down.  Proud  souls,  take  warning  by  Miriam  ;  you  will  at  last  become  abhorrent 
to  yourselves.     Remember  Herod  (Acts  xii.  21 — 23). 

II.  The  exaltation  of  the  meek.  This  is  a  more  inward  and  spiritual  thing, 
and  therefore  not  conspicuous  in  the  same  way  as  the  humbling.  It  is  something  to 
be  appreciated  by  spiritual  discernment  rather  than  natural.  Besides,  the  full  exalta- 
tion of  the  meek  is  not  yet  come.  The  resurrection  and  ascension  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
himself  were  arranged  very  quietly.  But  we  cannot  help  noticing  that  from  this 
sharp  and  trying  scene  Moses  emerges  with  his  character  shining  more  beautifully 
than  ever.  He  does  nothing  to  forfeit  the  reputation  with  which  he  was  credited,  and 
everything  to  increase  it.  He  acted  like  a  man  who  had  beheld  the  similitude  of  the 
Lord.  Notice  particularly  the  way  in  which  he  joins  in  with  Aaron,  interceding  for 
his  afflicted  sister.  This  is  the  true  exaltation :  to  be  better  and  better  in  oneself, 
shining  more  because  there  is  more  liglit  within  to  cast  its  mild  radiance,  as  God  would 
have  it  cast,  alike  upon  the  evil  and  the  good,  the  just  and  the  unjust  (Ps.  xxv.  9 ; 
lii.  12;  Prov.  xiii.  10;  xvi.  18;  xxix.  23 ;  Dan.  iv.  37;  Matt,  xxiii.  12;  Gal.  vi. 
1—5;  2  Tim.  iL  24-26;  1  Pet.  iii.  4;  v.  6).— Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTERS  XIII.,  XIV. 

The  rebellion  at  Eadesh  (chs.  xiii., 
xiv.).  Ver.  2. — Send  thou  men,  that  they 
may  search  the  land.  If  this  account  of  the 
mission  of  the  spies  be  compared  with  that 
given  in  Deut.  i.  20 — 25,  it  may  be  seen  in 
a  striking  instance  how  entirely  different  » 
colour  may  he  put  upon  the  same  circum- 
stances by  two  inspired  narratives.  No  one 
indeedwiUafBrm  that  the  tworecords  are  con- 
tradictory, or  even  inconsistent,  and  yet  they 
leave  an  entirely  different  impression  upon 
the  mind  ;  and  ho  doubt  were  intended  to. 
It  is  important  to  note  that  the  Divine  in- 
spiration did  not  in  the  least  prevent  two 
sacred  authors  (cf.  2  Sam.  xxiv.  1  with  1 
Chron.  xxi.  1),  or  even  the  same  author  at 
different  times,  from  placing  on  record  vei-y 
distinct  and  even  strongly  contrasted  aspects 
of  the  same  facts,  according  to  the  point  of 
view  from  which  he  was  led  to  regard  them. 
la  Deut.  L  Moses  reminds  the  people  that  on 


their  arrival  at  Eadesh  he  had  bidden  them 
go  up  and  take  possession  ;  that  they  liad 
then  proposed  to  send  men  before  them  to 
examine  tlie  land  ;  that  the  proposal  had 
pleased  him  so  well  that  he  had  adopted  it 
and  acted  upon  it.  It  is  unquestionably 
strange  that  facts  so  material  should  have 
been  omitted  in  the  historical  Book  of  Num- 
bers. It  is,  however,  to  be  considered—  1 . 
That  there  is  no  contradiction  between  the 
two  accounts.  "We  may  be  certain  from  many 
a  recorded  example  that  Moses  would  not 
have  acted  on  the  popular  suggestion  without 
referring  the  matter  to  the  Lord,  and  that  it 
would  be  the  Divine  command  (when  given) 
which  would  really  weigh  with  him.  2.  That 
the  recital  in  Deuteronomy  is  distinctly  ad 
populwm,  and  that  therefore  their  part  in  the 
whole  transaction  is  an  strongly  emphasised 
as  is  consistent  with  the  truth  of  the  facts. 
3.  That  the  narrative  of  Numbers  is  frag- 
mentary, and  does  not  profess  to  give  a  full 
account  of  matters,  especially  in  such  psi' 


0H8.  xni.,  XIT.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES. 


U5 


ticulars  u  do  not  directly  concern  the  Divine 
government  and  guidance  of  Israel.     It  is 
not,  therefore,  a  serious  difficulty  that  the 
record  only  begins  here  at  the  point  when 
God  adopted  as  his  own  what  had  been  the 
demand  of  the  people.    If  we  ask  why  he 
so  adopted  it,  the  probable  answer  is  that  he 
knew  what  secret  disafFectiou  prompted  it, 
and  to  what  open  rebellion  it  would  lead.   It 
was  better  that  such  disaffection  should  be 
allowed  to  ripen  into  rebellion  before  they 
entered  their  promised  land.      Miserable  as 
the  desert  wandering  might  be,  it  was  yet 
a  discipline  which  prepared  the  nation  for 
better  things ;  whereas  the  invasion  of  Canaan 
without  strong  faith,  courage,  and  self-re- 
straint (such  as  they  showed  under  Joshua) 
could  but  have  ended  in  national  disaster  and 
destruction.     Of  every  tribe  of  their  fathers 
shall  ye  send  a  man.     This  was  not  part  of 
the  original  proposition  (Dent.  i.  22),  but 
was  agreeable    to  the  general   practice  in 
matters  of  national  concern,   and  was  no 
doubt  commanded  in  order  that  the  whole 
people  might  share  in  the  interest  and  re- 
sponsibiliiy  of  this  survey.      Every  one  a 
ruler  among  them.      This  does  not  mean 
that  they  were  to  be  the  tribe  princes  (as  the 
names  show),  for  they  would  not  be  suitable 
in  respect  of  age,  nor  could  they  be  spared 
for  this  service.     They  were  "heads  of  the 
children  of  Israel "   (ver.   3),   i.  e.    men  of 
position  and  repute,  but  also  no  doubt  com- 
paratively young  and  active,  as  befitted  a 
toilsome  and  hazardous  excursion. 

Ver.  i. — These  were  their  names.  None 
of  these  names  occur  elsewhere,  except  those 
of  Caleb  and  Joshua.  The  order  of  the  tribes 
is  the  same  as  in  ch.  L ,  except  that  Zebulun 
is  separated  from  the  other  sons  of  Leah,  and 

J  laced  after  Benjamin,  while  the  two  sons  of 
oseph  are  separated  from  one  another.  In 
ver.  11  "the  tribe  of  Joseph"  is  explained 
to  be  "  the  tribe  of  Manasseh  ; "  elsewhere  it 
is  either  common  to  both,  or  confined  to 
Ephraim  (see  Kev.  vii.  8,  and  cf.  Ezek. 
sxxvii  16).  No  spy  was  sent  for  the  tribe 
of  Levi,  because  it  was  now  understood  to 
have  no  territorial  claims  upon  the  land  of 
promise,  and  to  stand  altogether  by  itself  in 
relation  to  the  national  hopes  and  duties. 

Yer.  6. — Caleb  the  son  of  Jephnnneh. 
In  ch.  xxxii.  12  he  is  called  "  the  Kenezite  " 
C^^iPO),  which  appears  in  Gen.  xv.  19  as  the 
name  of  one  of  theancient  races  inhabiting 
the  promised  land.  It  is  possible  that  Je- 
phunneh  may  have  been  connected  by  descent 
or  otherwise  with  this  race  ;  it  is  more  likely 
that  the  similarity  of  name  was  accidental. 
The  younger  son  of  Jephnnneh,  the  father 
of  Othniel,  was  a  Kenaz  (T3j5),  and  so  was 
Caleb's  grandson  (see  on  Josh.  xv.  17  ;  1 
Chron.  iv.  13,  15).  Kenaz  was  also  an 
Edomitish  name. 


Ver.  16. — Moses  called  Oshea  the  >on  of 
Nun  Jehoshua.     The  change  was  from  yg'hn 
(Hoshea,  help  or  salvation)  toJJK'iiT.  (Jehoshua 
— the  same  name  with  the  first  syllable  of  the 
sacred  name  prefixed,  and  one  of  the  vowel 
points  modified).  It  was  afterwards  contracted 
into  J?1ty»  (Jeshua;  cf.  Neb.  viii.   17),  and 
has  come  to  us  in  its  current  form  through 
the    Vulgate.      The    Septuagint    has   here 
iiruivoiiaae  .  ,  rbv  Avar)  .  .  'Irinovv,  and  so 
the  name  appears  in  the  New  Testament.  It  is 
an  obvious  difficulty  that  Joshua  has  already 
been  called  by  his  new  name  at  Exod.  xvii. 
9,  and  in  every  other  place  where  he  has 
been  mentioned.     In  fact  he  is  only  once 
elsewhere  called  Hoshea,  and  that  in  a  place 
(Deut.  xxxii.  44)  where  we  should  certainly 
not  have  expected  it.     There  are  two  ways 
of  explaining  the  difficulty,  such  as  it  is. 
We  may  suppose  that  the  change  of  name  was 
really  made  at  this  time,  as  the  narrative 
seems  (on  the  face  of  it)  to  assert ;  and  then 
the  previous  mentions  of  Joshua  by  his  sub- 
sequent and  more  familiar  name  will  be  cases 
of  that  anticipation  which  is  so  common  in 
Scripture  (cf.,  e.  g.,  Matt.  ix.  9  with  Mark  ii. 
14).     Or  we  may  suppose,  what  is  perhaps 
more  in  harmony  with  the  course  of  Joshua's 
life,  that  the  change  had  been  already  made 
at  the  time  of  the  victory  over  Amalek.     In 
that  case  the  Vav  consec.  in  Klp^J    (and 
.  .  called)  must  be  referred  to  the  order  of 
thought,  not  of  time,  and  a  sufficient  reason 
must  be  shown  for  the  interpolation  of  the 
statement  in  this  particular  place.     Such  a 
reason  may  fairly  be  found  in  the  probable 
fact  that  the  names  of  the  spies  were  copied 
out  of  the  tribal  registers,  and  that  Joshua 
still  appeared  under  his  original  name  in 
those  registers.     As  to  the  significance  of  the 
change,  it  is  not  easy  to  estimate  it  aright. 
On  the  one  hand,  the  sacred  syllable  entered 
into  so  many  of  the  Jewish  names   that  it 
could  not  have  seemed  a  very  marked  change ; 
on  the  other  hand,  the  fact  that  our  Saviour 
received  the  same  name  because  he  was  our 
Saviour  throws   a  halo  of  glory  about  it 
which  we  cannot  ignore.      In  the  Divine 
providence  Hoshea  became  Joshua  because 
he  was  destined  to  be  the  temporal  saviour 
of  his  people,  and  to  lead  them  into  their 
promised  rest. 

Ver.  17. — Get  you  up  this  way  south- 
ward. Rather,  "get  you  up  there  (ilT)  in 
the  Negeb."  The  Negeb,  meaning  literally 
"the  dryness,"  was  the  south-western  dis- 
trict of  Canaan,  which  bordered  upon  the 
desert,  and  partook  more  or  less  of  its 
character.  Except  where  springs  existed, 
and  irrigation  could,  be  carried  out,  it  was 
unfit  for  settled  habitation.  See  Josh.  xv. 
19 ;  Judges  i.  15,  where  the  same  word  is 
used.'    Go  up  into  the  mountain.    From  the 


144 


THK  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[OBS.  ZIU.,  ZIV. 


Negeb  they  were  to  make  their  way  into  the 
mountain  or  hill  country  which  formed  the 
back-bone  of  Southern  Palestine,  from  the 
Wady  Murreh  on  the  south  to  the  plain  of 
Esdraelon  on  the  north.  In  after  ages  it 
formed  the  permanent  centre  of  the  Jewish 
raoe  and  Jewish  power.  Cf.  Judges  i.  9 
wheie  the  three  natural  divisions  of  Southern 
Palestine  are  mentioned  together:  nnn  (ij 
ipuvii),  the  mountain ;  3J!in  (4  Noroe),  the 
steppe ;  n^SB'rt  (iJ  irtltvii),  the  maritime 
plain. 

Ver.  18. — Whether  they  be  strong  or 
weak,  few  or  many.  It  would  appear  that 
Moses  was  guilty  of  some  indiscretion  at 
least  in  giving  these  directions.  Whether  the 
people  were  strong  or  weak,  many  or  few, 
should  have  been  nothing  to  the  Israelites. 
It  was  God  that  gave  them  the  land  ;  they 
had  only  to  take  possession  boldly. 

Ver.  20. — And  what  the  land  is.  It  is 
impossible  to  suppose  that  Moses  needed 
himself  to  be  informed  on  such  particulars 
as  are  here  mentioned.  The  intercourse 
between  Egypt  and  Palestine  was  compara- 
tively easy  and  frequent  (see  on  Gen.  1.  7), 
and  no  educated  Hebrew  could  have  failed 
to  make  himself  acquainted  with  the  main 
features  of  his  fathers'  home.  We  may  see 
in  these  instructions  u  confirmation  of  the 
statement  in  Dent,  i.,  that  it  was  at  the 
desire  of  the  people,  and  for  their  satisfaction, 
that  the  spies  were  sent.  The  time  of  the 
flrst-ripo  grapes.  The  end  of  July  :  the 
regular  vintage  is  a  month  or  more  later. 

Ver.  21.  —  From  the  wilderness  of  Zin. 
The  extreme  southern  boundary  of  the  pro- 
mised land  (ch.  xxxiv.  3,  4  ;  Josh.  xv.  i.  3). 
There  seems  to  be  but  one  marked  natural 
feature  which  could  have  been  chosen  for 
that  purpose — the  broad  sandy  depression 
called  the  Wady  Murreh,  which  divides  the 
mountain  mass  of  the  Azazimeh  from  the 
Rakhniah  plateau,  the  southern  extremity  of 
the  highlands  of  Judah.  The  plain  of  Kudes 
communicates  with  it  at  its  upper  or  western 
end,  and  maybe  counted  a  part  of  it.  TTnto 
Behob,  as  men  come  to  Hamath.  Septuagint, 
^4ii£  Po6j3  tlffiropfvofiiviiiv  AJ/irtO.  Hamath, 
now  Ilamah,  was  in  Greek  times  Epiphaneia, 
on  the  Orontes,  outside  the  limits  of  Jewish 
rule.  The  southern  entrance  to  it  lay  be- 
tween the  ranges  of  Libanus  and  Anti- 
libanus  (see  note  on  oh.  xxxiv.  8).  The  Re- 
hob  here  mentioned  is  not  likely  to  have  been 
either  of  the  Rohobs  in  the  territory  of  Asher 
(Josh.  xix.  28—30),  but  the  Beth-rehob  fur- 
ther to  the  east,  and  near  to  where  Dan-Laish 
was  afterwards  built  (Judges  xviii.  28).  It 
lies  on  tlie  route  to  Hamath,  and  was  at  one 
time  a  place  of  some  importance  in  the 
possession  of  the  Syrians  (2  Sam.  x.  6). 

y«r,  22.  —And  came  unto  Hebron.    This 


and  the  following  details  of  their  journey  are 
appended  to  the  general  statement  of  ver.  21 
in  that  inartificial  style  of  narrative  still 
common  in  the  East,  On  the  name  Hebron, 
and  the  perplexities  which  it  causes,  see  on 
Gen.  xiii.  18  ;  xxiii.  2.  Where  Ahiman, 
Sheshai,  and  Talmai,  the  ohildren  of  Anak, 
were,  pjy.rj  n.'?*,  "Anak's  progeny." 
Septuagint,  •ytwof  'VvAx  (as  in  ver.  28 
and  Josh.  xv.  14  h.),  means  simply  "de- 
scendants of  Anak."  The  Beni-Anak  (Beni- 
Anakim  in  Deut.  i.  28  ;  Anakira  in  Deut.  ii. 
10,  &c.)  were  a  tribe  whose  remote  and  per- 
haps legendary  ancestor  was  Anak  son  of 
Alba  (see  on  Josh.  xiv.  15).  These  three 
chiefs  of  the  Beni-Anak  are  said  to  have  been 
expelled  from  Hebron  fifty  years  later  by 
Caleb  (Josh.  xv.  14  ;  Judges  i.  20).  The 
gigantic  size  which  the  Anakira  shared  with 
the  Emim  and  Rcphaim,  other  remnants  of 
the  aboriginal  inhabitants,  may  have  been 
accompanied  by  remarkable  longevity  ;  or 
they  may  have  been  quite  young  at  the 
time  of  this  visit ;  or,  finally,  they  may  not 
have  been  individuals  at  all,  but  families 
or  clans.  Now  Hebron  was  built  seven 
years  before  Zoan  in  £gypt.  Hebron  was 
in  existence  at  the  time  of  Abraham.  Zoan 
was  Tanis,  near  the  mouth  of  the  eastern 
bi'anch  of  the  Nile  (see  on  Ps.  IxxviiL  12, 
43).  If  it  be  true  that  the  Pharaoh  of  the 
exodus  had  his  royal  residence  at  Zoan, 
Moses  may  have  had  access  to  the  archives 
of  the  city,  or  he  may  have  learnt  the  date 
of  its  foundation  from  the  priests  who  gave 
him  his  Egyptian  education.  That  there 
was  any  real  connection  between  the  two 
places  is  extremely  problematical,  nor  is  it 
possible  to  give  any  reason  for  the  abmpt 
mserlion  here  of  a  fragment  of  history  so 
minute  and  in  itself  so  unimportant.  There 
is,  however,  no  one  but  Moses  to  whom  the 
statement  can  with  any  sort  of  likelihood  be 
traced ;  a  later  writer  could  have  had  no 
authority  for  making  the  statement,  and  no 
possible  reason  for  inventing  it. 

Ver.  23.— The  brook  of  Xshool.  Rather, 
"  the  valley  of  Eshcol,"  for  it  is  not  a  land 
of  brooks.  Probably  between  Hebron  and 
Jerusalem,  where  the  grapes  are  still  excep- 
tionally fine,  and  the  clusters  of  great  size. 
They  bare  it  between  two  on  a  staff.  Not 
on  account  of  its  weight,  but  simply  in  order 
not  to  spoil  it.  Common  sense  dictates  the 
like  precaution  still  in  like  cases. 

Ver.  24. — The  place  was  called  the  brook 
£shcol,  because  of  the  cluster.  It  ia  vei'y 
probable  that  it  was  already  known  as  the 
valley  of  Eshcol,  from  the  friend  of  Abra- 
ham, who  bore  that  name  and  lived  in  that 
neighbourhood  (Gen.  xiv.  13,  24).  If  so  it 
ia  an  admirable  instanue  of  the  loose  way 
in  which  etymologies  are  ueated  in  the  Ola 


OHB.  XIII.,  XIV.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


145 


Testament :  what  the  place  really  received 
was  not  a  new  name,  but  a  new  signification 
to  the  old  name  ;  but  this  appeared  all  one 
in  the  eyes  of  the  sacred  writer. 

Ver.  25.— They  returned  .  .  after  forty 
days.  This  is  a  period  of  time  which  con- 
stantly recurs  in  the  sacred  books  (see  on 
Exod.  zziv.  18).  It  points  to  the  fact  that 
their  work  was  completely  done,  and  the 
land  thoroughly  explored. 

Yer.  26. — To  Sadesh  (see  note  at  the  end 
of  ch.  liv.). 

^er.  27' — It  floweth  with  milk  and  honey. 
A.j';ording  to  the  proralss  of  God  in  his  first 
message  of  deliverance  to  the  people  (see  on 
Rxod.  iii.  8). 

Ver.  28.— Nevertheless.  >3  DQSt.  "Only 
nhat."  Septuagint,  d\X'  f/  8ri.  The  people 
be  strong.  Moses  himself  had  directed  their 
attention  to  this  point,  and  now  they  dwell 
on  it  to  the  exclusion  of  everything  else. 

Ver.  29.— The  Amalekites.  These  de- 
scendants of  Esau  (see  on  Qen.  zxxvi.  1!I) 
formed  wild  roving  bands,  which  (like  t1>e 
Bedouins  of  the  present  day)  infested  rather 
than  inhabited  the  whole  country  between 
Judaea  and  Egypt,  including  the  Kegeb. 
They  are  not  namoered  among  the  inhabit- 
ants of  Canaan  proper.  The  Oanaanites 
dwell  by  the  sea,  and  by  the  coast  of  Jor- 
dan. It  is  not  easy  to  say  in  what  sense 
the  word  "Oanaanites"  is  used  here.  At 
one  time  it  is  the  name  of  one  tribe  amongst 
many,  all  descended  from  Canaan,  the  son 
of  Ham,  which  dwelt  in  the  land  of  pro- 
mise ;  at  another  time  it  is  apparently 
synonymous  with  "Amorites,"  or  rather  in- 
cludes both  them  and  the  allied  tribes  (cf. 
e.  g.  Judges  i.  9).  It  is  possible,  though  far 
from  certain,  that  "  Oanaanites  "  in  this  place 
may  mean  "  PhoBnioians,"  since  Sidon  was 
the  first-bom  of  Canaan  (Gen.  z.  16),  and 
the  northern  portion  of  the  maritime  plain 
was  certainly  in  their  possession,  and  pro- 
bably the  upper  jiart  of  the  Ghor,  or  coast  of 
Jordjin.  It  would  appear  that  the  Pliilis- 
tines  had  not  at  this  time  made  themselves 
masters  of  the  plain,  although  they  dwelt  in 
some  parts  of  it  (see  on  Exod.  xiii.  17). 

Ver.  80.  Caleb  stilled  the  people.  That 
Caleb  alone  is  named  here,  whereas  Joshua 
is  elsewhere  joined  with  him  in  the  matter 
(as  in  ch.  xiv.  6,  30),  has  been  considered 
strange  ;  but  it  is  not  difficult  to  supply 
a  probable  explanation.  Joshua  was  the 
special  companion  and  minister  of  Moses, 
his  alter  ego  in  those  things  wherein  he  was 
employed  :  for  that  reason  he  may  very  well 
have  given  place  to  Caleb  as  a  more  im])ar- 
tial  witness,  and  one  more  likely  to  be  lis- 
tened to  in  the  present  temper  of  the  people  ; 
for  it  is  evident  from  Deut.  i.  that  that  tem- 
per had  already  declared  itself  for  evil  (see 
on  ch.  xiv.  24). 
KUUBBBS. 


Ver  81. — For  they  are  stronger  than  we. 
In  point  of  numbers  the  enormous  superior- 
ity of  the  Israelitbs  over  any  combination 
likely  to  oppose  them  must  have  been  evi- 
dent to  the  most  cowardly.  But  the  exist- 
ence of  numerous  walled  and  fortified  towns 
Was  (apart  from  Divine  aid)  an  almost  in- 
superable obstacle  to  a  people  wholly  ignor- 
ant of  artillery  or  of  siege  operations ;  and 
the  presence  of  giants  was  exceedingly  terri- 
fying in  an  age  when  battles  were  a  series  of 
personal  encounters  (of.  1  Sam.  xvii.  11,  24). 

Ver.  32. — ^A  land  that  eateth  up  the  in- 
habitants thereof.  This  cannot  mean  that 
the  people  died  of  starvation,  pestilence,  or 
other  natural  causes,  which  would  have  been 
contrary  to  facts  and  to  their  own  report. 
It  must  mean  that  the  population  was  con 
tinually  changing  through  internecine  wars, 
and  the  incursions  of  fresh  tribes  from  the 
surrounding  wastes.  The  history  of  Pales 
tine  from  first  to  last  testifies  to  the  constant 
presence  of  this  d  anger.  The  remarkable 
variation  in  the  lists  of  tribes  inhabitino 
Canaan  may  be  thus  accounted  for.  All. the 
people  .  .  are  men  of  great  stature,  nno 
'B'JS  ' '  men  of  measures. "  Septuagint,  avSpif, 
iiTrtp/iiiKeic.  The  "all"  is  an  exaggeration 
very  natural  to  men  who  had  to  justify  the 
counsels  of  cowardice. 

Ver.  33. — The  giants,  the  sons  of  Anak 
which  come  of  the  giants,  D'79?il~]P  pyj_ 
'55  D'P'-pJCI'n^.  The  NephiUm,  Beui- 
Anak,  of  the  Nephilim.  The  Septuagint  has 
only  roit  -/iyavras.  The  NephMta  are,  with- 
out doubt,  the  primeeval  tyrants  mentione<l 
under  that  name  in  Gen.  vi.  4.  The  renown 
of  these  sons  of  violence  had  come  down 
from  those  dim  ages,  and  the  exi^gerateil 
feais  of  the  spies  saw  them  revived  in  the 
gigantic  forms  of  the  Beni-Anak.  There  is 
no  certainty  that  the  Kephilim  had  been 
giants,  and  no  likelihood  whatever  that  the 
Beni-Anak  had  any  real  connection  with 
them.  As  grasshoppers.  We  have  no  means 
of  judging  of  the  actual  size  of  these  men, 
unless  the  height  assigned  to  Goliath  (six 
cubits  and  a  span)  be  allowed  to  them.  Pro- 
bably men  of  this  stature  were  quite  ex- 
ceptional even  among  the  Anakim.  The 
report  of  the  spies  was  thoroughly  false  is 
effect,  although  founded  on  isolated  facts. 

Ch.  xiv.  1. — ^And  the  people  wept  that 
night.  As  the  spies  repeated  their  dismal 
tidings,  each  to  the  leading  men  of  his  own 
tribe,  and  as  the  report  was  spread  swiftly 
through  the  tents  (cf.  Deut.  L  27)  with  ever- 
increasing  exaggerations,  the  lamentation 
became  universal. 

Ver.  2.— Uurmnred  againit  XToses  and 
against  Aaron ;  whom  they  probably  sus- 
pected and  accused  of  seeking  their  own 
L 


U6 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[CHS,  XIII.,  XIV. 


peiBonal  ends.  Here  we  may  see  the  true 
leason  why  Joshua  had  not  been  put  for- 
ward to  advocate  an  immediate  advance. 
The  Septuagint  has  SuySyyuZov  (c£  1  Cor, 
X.  10).  ■Would  God  we  had  died.  Op??"l7. 
Septuagint,  oipiXov  airiddvoiitv.  The  A.  V. 
is  unnecessarily  strong. 

Ver.  3. — Wherefore  hath  the  Lord  brought 
OS.  Kather,  "wherefore  doth  the  Lord 
bring  us."  N'3Q.  Septuagint,  eiirayei.  They 
were  not  actually  in  the  land  yet,  but  only 
on  the  threshold. 

Yer.  4. — let  ns  make  a  captain,  and  let 
us  return  into  Egypt.  Although  this  was 
only  proposed  in  the  wUdness  of  their  dis- 
tress, yet  it  was  a  height  of  rebellion  to  which 
they  had  never  risen  before.  They  had 
limented  that  they  had  not  died  in  Egypt, 
and  they  had  wished  themselves  back  in 
Egypt,  but  they  had  never  proposed  to  take 
any  overt  steps  towards  returning  thither. 
Nothing  less  than  an  entire  and  deliberate 
revolt  was  involved  in  the  wish  to  elect  a 
captain  for  themselves,  for  the  angel  of  the 
covenant  was  the  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host 
(Josh.  V.  14,  15).  The  proposal  to  depose 
him,  and  to  choose  another  in  his  place, 
marked  the  extremity  of  the  despair,  the  un- 
belief, and  the  ingratitude  of  the  people. 

Ver.  5. — Moses  and  Aaron  fell  on  their 
faces.  After  making  ineffectual  efforts  to 
reason  with  the  people,  or  rather  with  their 
leaders  (Deut.  i.  29—31).  It  was  not,  how- 
ever, in  this  case  an  attitude  of  intercession, 
but  the  instinctive  action  of  those  who  await 
in  silent  horror  a  catastrophe  which  they  see 
to  be  inevitable  ;  it  testified  to  aU  who  saw 
it  that  they  were  overwhelmed  with  shame 
and  sorrow  in  view  of  the  awful  sin  of  the 
people,  and  of  the  terrible  punishment  which 
must  follow. 

Yer.  6. — ^And  Joshua.  In  a  last  hopeless 
effort  to  bring  the  people  to  a  better  mind, 
or  at  least  to  deliver  their  own  souls,  there 
was  no  reason  why  Joshua  should  hold  back 
any  more.  Bent  their  clothes.  Another 
token  of  grief  and  horror  practised  from 
patriarchal  times  (cf.  Gen.  xxxvii.  29,  34 ; 
Job  i.  20). 

Ver.  8. — If  the  lord  delight  In  us.  An 
expression  used  by  Moses  himself  (Deut.  x. 
15).  It  did  indeed  place  the  whole  matter 
in  the  only  right  light ;  all  the  doubt  that 
could  possibly  exist  was  the  doubt  iinplied 
in  that  "if." 

Yer.  9. — They  are  bread  for  us.  "  They 
tt.re  our  food,"  i.  e..  we  shall  easily  devour  them 
(cf.  ch.  xxiv.  8  ;  Ps.  xiv.  4).  Perhaps  it  has 
the  further  significance  that  their  enemies 
would  be  an  absolute  advantage  to  them, 
because  they  would  (however  unwillingly) 
supply  them  with  the  necessaries  of  life.  So 
apparently  the  Septuagint :  /ii)  ^o^qdqrc  rhv 


"Ka'ov  t!js  yq{,  8ri  KaraPpuiiia  viilv  iariv. 
Their  defence  is  departed  from  them.  Liter- 
ally, "  their  shadow,"  that  which  shielded 
them  for  a  while  from  the  fierce  blast  oi 
Divine  wrath.  This  "shadow"  was  not 
positively  the  Divine  protection  (as  in  Ps. 
xci.  1,  and  elsewhere),  but  negatively  that 
Providence  which  left  them  a  space  wherein 
to  walk  in  their  own  ways  (cf.  ro  kutixov  of 
2  Thess.  iL  6). 

Yer.  10. — Bade  stone  them  with  stones. 
Angry  people  cannot  endure  the  counsels  of 
calm  reason,  and  perhaps  the  hostility  which 
they  felt  against  Moses  they  were  very  ready 
to  vent  upon  his  "  minister."  The  glory  of 
the  Lord  appeared  .  .  before  all  the  children 
of  Israel.  At  the  moment  when  they  were 
about  to  proceed  to  violence,  the  Divine 
glory  filled  the  tabernacle,  and  flashed  forth 
with  a  brilliancy  which  compelled  their  awe- 
struck attention. 

Yer.  11. — ^And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses, 
who  had,  as  we  may  suppose,  risen  and 
drawn  nigh  when  the  glory  of  the  Lord 


Yer.  12. — And  will  make  of  thee  a  greater 
nation  and  mightier  than  they.  By  electing 
Moses,  in  the  place  of  Jacob,  to  be  the 
founder  and  ancestor  of  the  chosen  race,  God 
would  still  have  made  good  his  promises  to 
Abraham,  and  would  only  have  vindicated 
for  himself  the  same  freedom  of  choice  which 
he  had  used  in  the  case  of  Ishmael  and  of 
Esau.  We  cannot,  however,  regard  this  offer 
as  embodying  a  deliberate  intention,  for  we 
know  that  God  did  not  really  mean  to  cast 
off  Israel ;  nor  can  we  regard  it  as  expressing 
the  anger  of  the  moment,  for  it  is  not  of  God 
to  be  hasty.  We  must  understand  it  dis- 
tinctly as  intended  to  try  the  loyalty  and 
charity  of  Moses,  and  to  give  him  an  oppor- 
tunity of  rising  to  the  loftiest  height  of  mag- 
nanimity, unselfishness,  and  courage.  Hoses 
would  unquestionably  have  been  less  noble 
than  he  was  if  he  had  listened  to  the  offer  ; 
it  is  therefore  certain  that  the  offer  was  only 
made  in  order  that  it  might  be  refused  (c£ 
Exod.  xxxiL  10). 

Yer.  13. — And  Moses  said  unto  the  Lord. 
The  words  which  follow  are  so  confused,  and 
the  construction  so  dislocated,  that  they  afford 
the  strongest  evidence  that  we  have  here  the 
ipsissima  verba  of  the  mediator,  disordered 
as  they  were  in  the  moment  of  utterance  by 
passionate  earnestness  and  an  agonising  fear. 
Had  Moses  been  ever  so  eloquent,  a  facility 
of  speech  at  such  a  moment  would  have  been 
alike  unnatural  and  unlovely.  What  we  can 
see  in  the  words  is  this  :  that  Moses  had  no 
thought  for  himself,  and  that  it  never  occurred 
to  him  to  entertain  the  tempting  offer  made 
to  him  by  God  ;  that  he  knew  God  too  well, 
and  (if  we  may  say  so)  cared  for  God  too 
much,  to  let  him  so  compromiw  hii  honoul 


CHS.  XIU.,  XIT.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS. 


147 


among  the  nations,  and  so  thwart  his  own 
purposes,  without  making  one  effort  (however 
audacious)  to  turn  his  wrath  aside.  We  can 
see  that  it  is  (as  in  Exod.  xxxii.  11,  12,  only 
much  more  boldly  and  abruptly)  the  thought 
of  what  the  heathen  would  say  which  he 
wishes  to  thrust  upon  the  Almighty  ;  but  we 
cannot  be  sure  of  the  right  translation  of  the 
words.  The  most  literal  rendering  would 
seem  to  be,  "  Both  the  Egyptians  have  heard 
(IJJDB'l)  that  thou  broughtest  out  this  people 
from  among  them  with  thy  might,  and  they 
have  told  it  (■nDK))  to  the  inhabitants  of 
this  land  ;  they  have  heard  (■lypK',  repeated) 
that  thou.  Lord,  art  amongst  this  people," 
&o.  The  Septuagint,  however,  translates  the 
first  verbbyafuture(Kai  dKovairai  Aiyujrrof), 
and,  as  this  gives  a  much  clearer  sense,  it  is 
fallowed  by  the  Targum  Palestine  and  most 
of  the  versions. 

Yer.  16.  —Because  the  Lord  was  not  able 
to  bring  this  people  into  the  land.  Moral 
or  religious  difficulties  could  not  be  compre- 
hended by  those  heathen  nations  as  standing 
in  the  way  of  God's  purposes.  Physical 
hindrances  were  the  only  ones  they  could 
understand  ;  and  they  would  certainly  infer 
that  if  he  slew  the  Israelites  in  the  wilder- 
ness, it  could  only  be  in  order  to  cover  his 
own  defeat  and  failure  before  the  rival  deities 
of  Palestine. 

Ver.  17. — And  now,  I  beseech  thee,  let 
the  power  of  my  Lord  be  great.  Here  the 
argument  of  Moses  rises  to  a  higher  level ; 
he  ventures  to  put  God  in  mind  of  what  he 
had  himself  declared  to  Moses  in  the  fullest 
revelation  which  he  had  ever  made  of  his 
own  unchangeable  character,  viz.,  that  of  all 
Divine  prerogatives,  the  most  Divine  was 
that  of  forgiving  sins  and  showing  mercy. 
According  as  thou  hast  spoken.  See  on  Exod. 
xxxiv.  6,  7.  The  words  are  not  quoted 
exactly  as  there  given,  but  are  substantially 
the  same. 

Ver.  19. — Prom  Egypt  until  now.  From 
the  first  passion  of  despair  in  Egypt  itself 
(Exod.  xiv.  11, 12),  through  the  murraurings 
in  the  wilderness  of  Sin,  and  the  apostasy  of 
Mount  Sinai,  to  the  last  rebellion  at  Kibroth- 
Hattaavah. 

Ver.  20. — I  have  pardoned.  Whatever 
necessary  exceptions  and  qualifications  might 
remain  to  be  afterwards  declared,  the  great 
fact  that  he  forgave  the  nation,  and  that  the 
nation  should  not  die,  is  announced  without 
delay  and  without  reservation  (cf.  2  Sam. 
xiL  13).  According  to  thy  word.  Such 
power  had  God  been  pleased  to  give  unto 
man,  that  at  the  intercession  of  the  mediator 
a  whole  nation  is  delivered  from  imminent 
death  and  destruction. 

Ver.  21. — As  truly  as  I  live,  all  the  earth 
iStaU  be  411«d  with  the  glory  of  the  I^ord. 


Eather,  "as  truly  as  I  live,  and  the  gloiy 
of  the  Lord  shall  fiU  all  the  earth. "  Both 
clauses  are  dependent  on  &/'1iit,  and  the 
second  is  but  the  necessary  correlative  of  the 
first. 

Ver.  22. — ^Because  all  those  men.  The 
particle  *3  is  not  to  be  rendered  "because  ; " 
it  simply  introduces  the  substance  of  the 
oath :  "  As  I  live, . .  all  those  men .  .  shall  not 
see."  So  the  Septuagint. ,  And  have  tempted 
me  now  these  ten  times.  It  is  not  in  the 
least  necessary  to  press  this  expression,  bor- 
rowed from  the  vague  usage  of  men,  liter- 
ally. It  is  the  language  of  indignayon, 
meaning  that  the  full  measure  of  provocation 
had  been  received  (of.  Gen.  xxxi.  7 ;  Job 
xix.  3).  The  recorded  instances  of  national 
"  temptations  "  cannot  be  made  to  reach  the 
number  ten. 

Ver.  23.— Surely  they  shallnot  see.  -IKI/'DK, 
"if  they  shall  see,"  according  to  the  usual 
Hebrew  idiom.  Cf.  Ps.  cvii.  11  (Septuagint), 
Heb.  iv.  3,  btg  uifiotra  .  .  ci  eifftXevfrovrai, 

Ver.  24. — My  servant  Caleb.  Caleb  alone 
is  mentioned  here,  as  if  he  were  the  only  ex- 
ception to  the  sentence  just  passed  upon  the 
generation  which  came  out  of  Egypt.  Taken 
in  connection  with  ch.  xiii.  30,  and  in  contrast 
with  eh.  xiv.  6,  30,  38,  it  has  been  supposed 
to  point  to  the  interweaving  here  of  two  nar- 
ratives, from  the  one  of  which  the  name  of 
Joshua  was  intentionally  omitted  (see  the 
Introduction).  The  fact,  however,  is  that 
Joshua  is  not  the  only,  nor  the  most  remark- 
able, exception  to  the  general  sentence  which 
is  not  specified  here.  Moses  and  Aaron  them- 
selves were  undoubtedly  not  included  in  that 
sentence  at  this  time,  although  they  after- 
wards came  under  the  severity  of  it  (see  on 
Dent.  i.  37).  Eleazar,  the  priest,  was  one  of 
those  who  entered  with  Joshua  (Josh.  xiv.  1), 
and  it  is  vain  to  argue  that  he  might  have 
been  under  twenty  at  the  time  of  the  num- 
bering (cf.  ch.  iv.  16).  There  is,  indeed, 
every  reason  to  believe  that  the  whole  tribe 
of  Levi  were  excepted  from  the  punishment, 
because  they  were  not  compromised  in  the 
guilt.  They  had  no  representative  among  the 
spies,  nor  were  they  called  upon  to  go  up 
and  fight ;  moreover,  they  had  been  steadily 
loyal  to  Moses  since  the  matter  of  the  golden 
calf.  But  if  the  exception  of  the  Levites 
was  taken  for  granted,  and  passed  without 
mention,  much  more  might  the  exception  of 
Joshua.  He  did  not  stand  by  any  means  in 
the  same  position  as  Caleb  and  the  other 
spies  ;  he  was  the  "minister"  and  lieutenant 
of  Moses,  whose  fortunes  were  obviously 
bound  up,  not  with  those  of  his  tribe,  but 
with  those  of  his  master.  If  Moses  had  ac- 
cepted the  Divine  offer  to  make  him  the  head 
of  a  new  chosen  race,  no  doubt  Joshua  would 
have  been  given  to  him.      His  subse^ue^t 


148 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERa 


[OHB.  ZIII.,  XI7. 


separation  as  leader,  not  of  Ejiliraira,  but  of 
Israel,  Was  already  anticipated  in  the  singu- 
larity, at  least,  of  his  position.  Caleb,  on 
the  other  hand,  Was  merely  a  chieftain  of  the 
tribe  of  Judah,  with  notmng  to  distinguish 
him  from  the  mass  of  the  people  but  his  own 
good  conduct.  There  is,  therefore,  nothing 
perplexing  in  the  fact  that  Caleb  alone  is 
mentioned  in  this  place,  and  nothing  to  war- 
rant the  assumption  of  a  double  narrative. 
Another  spirit.  The  spirit  which  possessed 
and  prompted  Caleb  was  no  doubt  the  Holy 
Spirit,  just  as  the  spirit  which  moved  the 
rebellion  was  an  evil  spirit  (Eph.  ii.  2) ;  but 
how  far  any  such  personality  is  here  attri- 
buted*to  the  "  spirit "  is  hard  to  determine. 
Hath  followed  me  fully.  Literally,  "ful- 
filled to  walk  behind  me."  Caleb  treasured 
up  this  testimony  with  natural  ptide  (cf. 
Josh,  ziv,  8).  And  his  seed  shall  possess 
it,  t. «.  a  portion  of  it  and  in  it.  No  men- 
tion is  made  here  of  any  special  heritage,  nor 
is  it  clear  from  Josh.  xiv.  6 — 13  that  Caleb 
received  any  definite  promise  of  Hebron.  He 
spoke  indeed  of  a  promise  made  him,  pro- 
bably at  this  time,  by  Moses  ;  but  that  pro- 
mise was  a  very  general  one.  He  asked  for 
"  this  motintain,  whereof  the  Lord  spake  in 
that  day;"  but  he  may  only  have  referred 
to  the  Divine  command  first  to  explore  and 
then  to  occupy  "the  mountain,"  as  the 
nearest  portion  of  the  promised  land. 

Yer.  26.— ITow  tli6  Amalekitfis  aad  the 
Canaanites  dwelt  in  the  valley.  Tliis  pa- 
renthesis bears  on  the  face  of  it  Several  diffl- 
culties,  both  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  State- 
ment and  as  to  its  position  in  the  text, 
1.  It  has  been  stated  just  before  (ch.  xiii.  29) 
that  the  "  Canaanites  "  dwelt  by  the  sea,  and 
in  the  Ghor,  and  it  has  been  proposed  by  some 
to  understand  under  this  name  the  Phoeni- 
cians, because  "Sidon"  was  the  first-born  of 
Canaan,  and  because  they  are  known  to  have 
occupied  the  coast.  But  if  "Catmnuite" 
means  "  Phoenician "  in  ch.  xiii.  29,  it  is 
diflicult  to  maintain  that  it  is  here  equiva- 
lent to  "Amorite."  Again,  if  "Canaanite" 
be  taken  ia  this  vaguer  sense,  yet  it  is  cleat 
that  the  Amorites  dwelt  in  "the  mountain" 
(cf.  t.  g,  vet.  45  wilh  Deut.  i.  44),  and  not 
in  the  lowlands.  This  has  been  got  over  by 
supposing  that  p^lj  may  mean  an  upland 

vale,  or  plateau,  such  as  that  to  which  the 
Israelites  presently  ascended.  It  is,  how- 
ever, a  straining  of  the  word  to  assign  such  a 
meaning  to  it.  It  is  rightly  translated  by 
the  Septuagint  iv  ry  toiXaSt.  And  even  u 
one  looking  down  from  above  might  call  an 
upland  plain  by  this  name,  yet  certainly 
one  looking  up  from  below  would  not.  If 
the  word  stands  rightly  in  this  place,  pOjn 
must  mean  "in  the  "Wady  Murreh,"  the 
bfosd    sand^   strut   whio£    bounded   tl^e 


"mountain  of  the  Amorite  "on  the  soath. 
If  so,  we  must  conclude  that  not  only  the 
roving  Amalekites,  but  also  the  Canaanites, 
or  Amorites,  had  established  themselves  in 
some  parts  of  the  Wady.  2.  It  is  scarcely 
oredible  that  an  observation  of  this  sort, 
which  would  seem  unusual  and  abrupt  in 
any  speech,  should  have  formed  t>  part  of 
Crod's  message  to  Moses.  It  has  no  apparent 
connection  with  the  context.  It  does  not  . 
(as  often  alleged)  afford  a  reason  for  the  com- 
mand which  follows ;  it  was  not  at  all  be- 
cause enemies  were  already  in  posaoasion 
before  them  that  the  Israelites  had  to  turn 
their  backs  Upon  the  promised  knd,  but 
because  God  had  withdrawn  fot  the  time  his 
promised  aid.  If  the  "valley"  be  the 
Eakhmah  plateau,  they  had  always  known 
that  hostile  tribes  held  it,  and  that  they 
Would  have  to  conquer  them.  That  the 
Words  are  an  interpolation,  as  the  A.  V. 
represents  them,  seems  as  certain  as  internal 
evidence  cati  make  it ;  but  by  whom  made, 
and  wilh  what  intent,  is  a  question  which 
Will  probably  never  be  answered.  It  may  be 
Worth  while  to  hazard  a  Conjecture  that  the 
interpolated  Words  are  really  connected  with 
what  goes  before,  viz,,  the  promise  of  in- 
heritance to  Caleb.  Now  that  promise  was 
fulfilled  in  the  gift  of  Hebron  to  Caleb  and 
his  Seed  (Josh,  xiv,  14).  But  we  have 
express  mention  in  Gen.  xxxvii.  14  Of  the 
''vale  of  Hebron,"  and  the  same  word,  pDJ?, 
is  Used  in  the  Hebrew.  Is  it  not  possible 
that  this  parenthesis  was  originally  the  gloss 
of  one  who  had  a  special  interest  in  the  herit- 
age of  Caleb,  and  wished  to  note  that  at  tlie 
time  it  was  given  to  him  "the  vale"  Was 
dc(!upled  by  two  hostile  peoples  ?  Into  the 
Wilderness,  i.  e.  the  SinaitiC  peninsula,  as 
distinguished  from  Palestine  on  the  one  hand, 
and  from  Egypt  on  the  other.  By  the  way 
Of  the  Bed  Sea,  t. ».  towards  the  Red  Sea ; 
here  apparently  the  !Elanitic  Gulf  (cf.  ch. 
li,  31). 

Ver,  26. — Aiid  the  lord  Spake  unto  Mdses 
and  unto  Aaron.  This  communication  is 
clearly  by  way  of  continuation  and  amplifica- 
tion of  the  sentence  briefly  pronounced  above. 
It  is  markedly  distinguished  from  the 
latter,  as  being  (1)  spoken  to  Aaron  as 
well  as  to  Moses ;  (2)  addressed  through 
them  tu  the  people  at  large.  The  one  Was 
the  Divine  answer  to  the  effectual  pleading 
of  the  mediator  ;  the  other  the  Divine  reply 
to  the  rebellious  cries  of  the  people.  Ihe 
two  are  blended  together  in  the  narrative  of 
Deut.  i. 

Yer.  27.— Hov  long  shall  I  bear  with  this 
evil  congregation,  whioh  murmur  against 
mel  Literally,  "How  long  this  evil  coU' 
gregation,  that  they  murmur  against  me." 
Septuagint)  i'u^  nVof  ri)v  ovvayuy^v  ri^ 


ctte.  tth.,  <tv.] 


Tfifi  SOOlf  01?  NUMSEftS. 


149 


iraftjptlo  rairtiv;  The  verb  is  supplied  from 
the  sense. 

Ver.  29.— All  that  were  numbered  of  you, 
. .  from  twenty  years  old  (of.  oh.  i.  18,  19, 
47).  All  that  had  been  enrolled  as  the 
soldiers  of  the  Lord,  to  fight  his  battles  and 
their  own,  but  had  refused,  and  had  incurred 
the  guilt  of  mutiny. 

Ver.  30.— Sware.  Literally,  "lifted  up 
my  hand"  (see  on  Gen.  xir.  22).  And 
Joshua  the  son  of  ITnn.  The  exception  in 
favour  of  his  "  minister,"  Joshua,  had  been 
taken  for  granted  in  the  brief  answer  of  God 
to  Moses ;  in  the  fuller  announcement  of  his 
purposes  to  the  congregation  it  was  natural 
that  he  too  should  be  mentioned  by  name. 

Ver.  33. — Tour  children  shall  wander- 
Literally,  "shall  pasture."  D»yi.  Septuagint, 
iaovTm  i'»/*c5/ifvo».  It  was  not  altogether  a 
threat,  for  it  implied  that  the  Lord  would  be 
their  Shepherd  and  would  provide  for  their 
wants  in  their  wanderings.  Forty  years. 
This  period  was  made  up  by  counting  in  the 
year  and  a  half  since  the  exodus.  It  was 
one  of  those  man  y  cases  in  which  the  word 
of  God  was  fulfilled  in  the  meaning  and  sub- 
stance of  it,  but  not  in  the  letter.  The  delay 
which  had  already  occurred  was  itself  practi- 
cally due  to  the  same  spirit  of  mutiny  which 
had  grown  to  a  head  at  Kadesh ;  it  was 
therefore  strictly  equitable  to  count  it  as 
part  of  the  punishment  inflicted  (see  on 
Dent.  ii.  14).  And  hear  your  whoredoms. 
"  Whoredom  "  had  been  already  used  (Exod. 
xxxiv.  16)  as  a  synonym  for  idolatry  in  its 
aspect  of  spiritual  unfaithfulness,  and  there 
is  no  reason  to  depart  from  that  well-marlied 
meaning  here.  That  the  Jews  were  guilty 
of  idolatry  in  the  wilderness  is  distinctly 
asserted  (cf.  Acts  vii.  42,  43) ;  and  these 
idolatrous  practices,  carried  on  no  doubt 
in  secret,  must  have  been  a  sore  trial  to 
the  generation  which  grew  up  amidst  them 
(cf.  Josh,  xxiv.  14,  23), 

Ver.  34. — After  the  number  of  the  days, 
.  .  each  day  for  a  year.  It  is  said,  and  truly, 
that  the  connection  between  the  two  periods 
was  arbitrary,  and  that  the  apparent  corre- 
spondence lay  only  upon  the  surface.  Exactly 
for  this  reason  it  was  the  better  fitted  to  fix 
itself  in  the  mind  of  a  nation  incapable  of 
following  a  deeper  and  more  spiritual  analogy 
of  guilt  and  punishment.  It  served  the 
purpose  which  God  had  in  view,  vis.,  to 
make  them  feel  that  the  q^uantity  as  well  as 
the  quality  of  their  punishment  was  entirely 
due  to  themselves ;  and  it  needed  no  other 

i'nstification.  If  God  assigns  reasons  at  all, 
le  assigns  such  as  can  be  understood  by  those 
to  whom  he  speaks.  Te  shall  know  my 
breach  of  promise.  'flXUPI.  The  noun 
only  occurs  elsewhere  in  Job  xxxiii.  10,  but 
the  verb  is  found  in  ch.  zxdi,  7  in  the  sense 


of  "  discouraging,"  or  "  turning  away " 
(Septuagint,  ivari  iiaarplipiTt).  Here  i< 
must  mean  "my  withdrawal,"  or  "my 
turning  aside,  from  you."  They  should 
know  by  sad  experience  that  "with  the 
froward  God  will  "show"  himself  "fro- 
ward  "  (Ps.  xviii.  26). 

Ver.  37. — Died  by  the  plague  before  the 
lord.  Septuagint,  tv  rj  ir'Kmy.  " Plague  " 
has  here  its  older  signification  of  "stroke," 
or  visitation  of  God.  We  are  not  told  what 
death  they  died,  but  it  was  sudden  and 
exceptional  enough  to  mark  it  as  the  direct 
consequence  of  their  sinful  conduct. 

Ver.  40. —Early  in  the  morning.  Wishing 
to  anticipate  the  retrograde  movement  com- 
manded by  God  (ver.  25).  Into  the  top  of 
the  mountain.  What  summit  is  here  spoken 
of  as  the  object  of  their  enterprise  is  quite 
uncertain.  Probably  it  was  some  ridge  not 
far  distant  which  seemed  to  them  from  below 
to  be  the  height  of  land,  but  was  itself  com- 
manded by  loftier  heights  beyond.  For  we 
have  sinned.  The  prospect  of  being  taken 
at  their  own  word,  and  being  excluded  from 
the  land  which  lay  so  near,  brought  home  to 
them  a  sense  of  their  folly  ;  but  their  repent- 
ance merely  consisted  in  a  frantic  effort  to 
avoid  the  punishment  which  their  sin  had 
incurred. 

Ver.  41. — And  Moses  said,  i.  e.  had  said, 
before  they  left  the  camp  (cf.  ver.  44,  and 
Deut.  i.  42). 

Ver.  44.— They  presumed  to  go  up.  This 
gives  the  sense  very  well :  they  were  deaf  to 
all  persuasion  or  command  to  stay.  Septu- 
agint, iiaPtaaifitvot,  avifSijaav.  Thus  they 
added  to  an  evil  distrust  in  the  power  of 
God  an  almost  more  evil  trust  in  their  own 
power.  It  does  not  seem  correct  to  say  that 
"unbelief"  was  the  real  cause  of  both  errors 
—unbelief,  firstly  in  God's  promises,  and  se- 
condly in  his  threats.  It  was  rather  one  of 
those  many  cases  in  which  men  seek  to  atone 
for  a  fault  on  one  side  by  rushing  into  as 
great  a  fault  on  the  other  side.  They  spoke 
brave  words  about  the  "place  which  the 
Lord  hath  promised,"  as  though  it. were  in- 
deed obedience  and  trust  which  spurred  them 
on,  instead  of  presumption  and  selfishness. 
The  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord,  and 
Moses,  departed  not  out  of  the  camp.  The 
plainest  possible  token  that  the  Lord  was 
not  with  them.  With  Moses  remained  no 
doubt  all  the  Levites,  and  the  silver  trum- 
pets, and  Joshua,  and  perhaps  the  bulk  of 
the  people, 

Ver.  45. — The  AmaleHtes  came  down,  and 
the  Canaanites.  See  on  Deut.  i.  44.  They 
came  down  from  the  summit  of  the  moun- 
tain country,  and  drove  tlie  Israelites  off  the 
saddle,  or  lower  level,  to  which  they  had 
ascended.  Discomfited  them.  Septuagint, 
Kariicoif/av  airovs,  "cut  them  up."    Vntf 


150 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[Ohb.  xin.-XtV 


Hormali.  This  mention  of  Hormah  is  ex- 
tremely perplexing,  especially  when  we  find 
from  Deut.  i.  44  that  it  was  "in  Seir" 
(TVB'3),  which  is  the  ordinary  name  for  the 
territory  of  the  Edomites.  The  name  Hor- 
mah meets  us  again  in  ch.  xxi.  3  (see  the 
notes  there),  as  having  been  bestowed  by  the 
Israelites  upon  the  place  where  they  de- 
stroyed the  people  of  King  Arad.  If  this  be 
the  same  Hormah,  it  must  be  so  named  here 
by  anticipation.  It  is,  however,  quite  pos- 
sible that  it  is  another  place  altogether. 
Again,  if  the  Seir  of  Deut.  i.  44  be  the 
country  usually  so  called,  we  must  suppose 
that  the  Edomites  had  at  this  time  occupied 
a  part  of  the  Azazimeh,  contiguous  to  the 
Wady  Murreh,  and  westwards  of  the  Arabah. 
We  should  then  represent  the  Israelites  to 
ourselves  as  being  driven  off  the  mountain, 
and  across  the  Wady  Murreh,  and  cut  down 


in  the  mountains  beyond,  as  far  as  a  place 
called  Hormah,  perhaps  from  this  very 
slaughter.  Others  have  found  Hormah  (oi 
Zephath,  Judges  i.  17)  and  Seir  among  the 
multitudinous  names  of  past  or  present  habit- 
ation in  the  south  of  Palestine  ;  the  perplex- 
ing resemblances  of  which,  coupled  with  the 
vagueness  of  the  sacred  narrative,  lead  to  the 
rise  of  as  many  different  theories  as  there  are 
commentators.  It  must,  however,  be  erro- 
neous to  represent  this  hasty  incursion  of  the 
Israelites,  without  their  leaders,  and  without 
their  daily  food  from  heaven,  as  a  campaign 
in  which  they  advanced  for  a  considerable 
distance,  and  were  only  partially  expelled  at 
last.  It  is  clear  from  this  passage,  and  still 
more  from  the  parallel  passage  in  Deut.  i., 
that  the  expedition  was  swiftly  and  igno- 
miniously  repelled  and  avenged.  Compare 
the  expression,  "  chased  you  as  bees  do. 


NOTE  TO  CHAPTERS  XIII.,  XIV.  ON  THE  POSITION  OF  KADESH  AND 
THE  ROUTE  TAKEN  BY  THE  ISRAELITES. 

The  old  name  of  Kadesh  was  En-mishpat  (Gen.  xiv.  7),  or  the  "  Well  of  Judg- 
ment." Its  later  and  more  familiar  name  was  equivalent  to  "the  sanctuary"  or 
"  holy  place  "  (compare  the  Arabic  name  for  Jerusalem,  "  El  Kuda  ").  It  is  possible 
that  it  received  this  name  from  the  long  sojourn  of  the  tabernacle  in  its  neighbour- 
hood (Deut.  i.  46) ;  but  it  is  more  likely  that  it  possessed  some  character  of  sanctity 
from  ancient  times,  a  character  which  would  very  well  harmonise  with  the  fact  that 
juati(»  was  administered  there.  It  is  evident  that  in  order  to  obtain  any  clear  and 
connected  idea  of  the  history  of  Israel  between  the  departure  from  Sinai  and  the 
encampment  upon  the  plains  of  Moab,  it  is  above  all  necessary  to  fix  approximately 
th«  position  of  this  place,  which  for  one  generation  was  the  most  important  place 
in  the  whole  world.  It  was  no  doubt  from  the  neighbourhood  of  Kadesh  that  the 
spies  were  sent,  and  it  was  certainly  to  Kadesh  that  they  returned  from  searching 
the  land  (ch.  xiii.  26).  Prom  Kadesh  the  first  disastrous  attempt  was  made  to  invade 
the  country,  and  from  thence  again  the  final  journey  began  which  led  the  nation 
round  the  coasts  of  Edom  to  the  plains  of  Moab.  Thus  Kadesh  was  of  all  places, 
next  to  Mount  Sinai,  the  one  associated  with  the  most  momentous  events  of  those 
momentous  years,  marking  at  once  the  terminus  of  their  first  journey  (which  should 
have  been  their  last),  the  beginning  of  their  tedious  wanderings,  and  the  starting 
point  of  their  final  march.  So  far,  however,  from  there  being  any  certainty  or 
agreement  as  to  the  site  of  Kadesh,  we  find  two  sites  proposed  widely  separated 
from  one  another,  each  maintained  and  each  assailed  by  powerful  arguments,  which 
divide  between  them  the  suffrages  of  geographers  and  commentators ;  and  besides 
these  there  are  others  less  powerfully  supported. 

The  view  adopted  in  the  notes  to  this  book  is  that  of  the  travellers  Rowland  and 
Williams,  and  of  the  great  majority  of  the  German  commentators :  it  is  fully  stated 
and  minutely  argued  in  Kurtz's  '  History  of  the  Old  Covenant '  (vol.  lii.  in  Clark's 
'  Foreign  Theol.  Lib.').  According  to  these  authorities  Kadesh  is  to  be  recognised  in 
the  plain  and  fountain  of  Kudes,  just  within  the  north-west  comer  of  the  mountaJM 


««B.  MM.,  tW.]  fm  fiOOK  OP  NtJMBERS.  1«1 

of  the  Azazimeh  (see  note  on  ch.  x.  12).  This  desert  plain,  some  ten  miles  by  six  in 
extent,  is  screened  from  ordinary  observation  by  the  outer  mountain  walls  of  the 
Azazimat,  which  shut  it  o£E  on  the  west  from  the  desert  road  from  Sinai  to  Hebron, 
on  the  north  from  the  Wady  Murreh.  At  the  north-east  of  the  plain  is  a  bold  and 
bare  rock,  a  promontory  of  the  northern  mountain  rampart,  from  theifoot  of  which 
issues  a  copious  spring,  which  begins  by  falling  in  cascades  into  the  bed  of  a  torrent, 
and  ends  by  losing  itself  in  the  sands.  Amongst  the  Wadys  which  open  into  the 
plain  is  one  which  bears  the  name  of  Bedemat  (see  note  on  ch.  xii.  16).  It  is  un- 
certain whether  there  is  any  easy  communication  between  this  plain  and  the  Wady 
Murreh,  but  there  are  several  passes  on  the  western  side  which  lead  by  a  slight 
circuit  to  the  southern  table-lands  of  Palestine. 

The  view  adopted  by  the  majority  of  English  commentators  is  that  of  the  traveller 
Robinson.  According  to  these  authorities  Kadesh  must  be  sought  in  the  Arabah, 
the  broad  depression  which  runs  northward  from  the  head  of  the  Blanitic  G-ulf  until 
it  meets  the  Ghor  below  the  Dead  Sea.  By  most  of  those  who  hold  this  view  the 
site  of  Kadesh  is  placed  at  Ain-el-Weibeh,  ten  miles  to  the  north  of  Mount  Hor,  and 
opposite  the  opening  (from  the  east)  of  the  Wady  el  Ghuweir,  which  affords  the 
only  easy  passage  through  Edom  to  the  north-west.  Others,  however,  prefer  Ain 
Hash,  a  few  miles  further  north.  The  local  peculiarities  of  either  place  are  such  as 
to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  narrative,  although  they  would  not  by  themselves 
have  recalled  the  scenes  with  which  Kadesh  is  associated. 

Of  other  theories  none  perhaps  need  to  be  considered  here,  because  none  can 
reasonably  enter  into  competition  with  the  two  already  mentioned ;  they  avoid  none 
of  the  difficulties  with  which  these  are  beset,  while  they  incur  others  of  their  own. 
If,  indeed,  Eabbinical  tradition  (followed  in  this  case  by  Jerome)  were  worth  any- 
thing, it  would  decide  the  question  in  favour  of  Petra,  the  Aramaic  name  of  which 
(Rekem)  uniformly  takes  the  place  of  Kadesh  in  the  Syriao  and  Chaldee,  and  in  the 
Talmud.  Kadesh-Bamea  in  the  Targums  is  Rekem-Geiah.  Petra  itself  (of  which 
the  ancient  name  apparently  was  Selah  (2  Kings  xiv.  7),  the  very  word  used  in  ch. 
XX.  10,  11)  stands  in  a  gorge  famous  for  its  giant  cliffs,  still  called  the  Wady  Musa, 
concerning  which  the  local  tradition  is  that  it  was  cleft  by  the  rod  of  Moses.  But 
apart  from  these  resemblances  of  name,  which  are  so  fallacious^  and  these  legends, 
which  are  so  worthless,  there  is  absolutely  nothing  to  connect  Kadesh  with  Petra ; 
on  the  contrary,  the  position  of  Petra,  far  away  from  Palestine,  on  the  skirts  of 
Mount  Hor,  and  in  the  heart  of  Edom,  distinguish  it  sharply  from  the  Kadesh  of  the 
Bible  story.  The  two  can  only  be  identified  on  the  supposition  that  the  sacred 
narrative,  as  it  stands,  is  mistaken  and  misleading. 

In  examining  briefly  the  arguments  by  which  the  western  and  eastern  sites  respect- 
ively are  maintained  and  assailed,  it  will  be  better  to  dismiss  the  evidence  (such  as 
it  is)  afforded  by  modem  nomenclature,  which  is  always  open  to  grave  suspicion,  and 
is  at  best  of  very  variable  value.  The  Wady  RetemSt,  e.  g.,  is  so  named  from  the 
broom  plant,  which  is  very  plentiful  in  the  peninsula,  and  may  have  lent  a  similar 
name  to  many  another  place. 

In  favour  of  the  western  site,  that  of  the  so-called  plain  of  Kudes,  we  have  the 
following  arguments  in  addition  to  the  marked  natural  features  which  suggested  tlie 
identification.  1.  Previous  mentions  of  Kadesh  would  certainly  dispose  us  (in  the 
absence  of  any  indication  that  there  was  more  than  one  place  of  that  name)  to  look 
for  it  to  the  south  of  Palestine,  and  rather  to  the  south-west  than  to  the  south- 
east. In  Gen.  xiv.  7  it  is  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  "  country  of  the  Amalft- 
kites,"  which  was  apparently  between  Canaan  and  Egypt.    In  the  same  region  we 


162  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBfiRS.  [cHS.  xni.,  xiv. 

may  place  with  more  confidence  the  well  of  Hagar  (Gen.  xvi.  14),  which  is  placed 
between  "  Kadesh  and  Bered."  It  is  di£Bcalt  to  think  that  this  Kadesh  could  possibly 
have  been  in  the  Arabah,  Gerar,  ogain,  which  was  certainly  near  to  Beersheba,  is 
placed  (Gen.  zx.  1)  "  between  Kadesh  and  Shur."  These  notices  are  indeed  inde- 
finite, but  they  certainly  point  to  the  western  rather  than  to  the  eastern  site. 
2.  Subsequent  mentions  of  Kadesh  point  in  the  same  direction.  In  ch.  xxxiv.  4,  5 
and  Josh.  zv.  3,  4  the  southern  frontier  of  Judah,  which  was  also  that  of  Canaan, 
is  traced  from  the  scorpion  cliffs  at  the  head  of  the  Ghor  to  the  Mediterranean  (see 
note  on  the  first  passage).  On  this  frontier  Kadesh  occurs  in  such  a  way  that  we 
should  look  for  it  not  at  one  extremity,  but  somewhere- about  the  middle  of  the  line. 
The  same  is  still  more  clearly  the  case  in  Ezek.  xlvii.  19,  where  only  three  points 
are  given  on  the  southern  frontier,  of  which  Kadesh  is  the  middle  one.  It  is,  again, 
very  difficult  to  imagine  that  this  Kadesh  could  have  been  in  the  Arabah.  3.  It  is 
a  weaker  argument,  but  still  of  some  moment,  that  Kadesh  is  pointedly  said  to  have 
been  in  the  "  wilderness  of  Paran  "  (ch.  xii.  16  j  xiii.  3),  and  also  to  have  been  in  or 
near  the  wilderness  of  Zin  (oh.  xiii.  21 ;  xx.  1).  But  the  eastern  site  of  Kadesh  far 
up  the  Arabah  does  not  seem  to  answer  to  this  double  description  nearly  as  well  as 
the  western.  The  plain  of  Kudes  is  strictly  within  the  limits  of  that  southern  desert 
now  called  et-Tih,  and  yet  it  is  quite  close  to  the  Wady  Murreh,  which  with  its 
Bandy  expansions  towards  the  east  may  well  have  been  the  wilderness  of  Zin  (see 
note  on  ch.  xiii.  21). 

In  favour  of  the  eastern  site,  the  only  argument  of  real  weight  is  founded  upon  the 
repeated  statement  that  Kadesh  was  close  upon  the  territory  of  Edoin.  In  ch.  xx, 
16,  e.gi.,it  is  spoken  of  to  the  king  of  Edom  as  "a  city  in  the  uttermost  of  thy 
borders."  But  the  only  position  in  which  the  children  of  Israel  would  be  at  once  on 
the  borders  of  Canaan  and  on  the  bordeis  of  Bdom  as  commonly  understood,  would 
be  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Ain  el-Weibeh,  with  the  pass  of  es-Saffih  on  their  left, 
and  the  Wady  Ghuweir  on  their  right,  aa  they  looked  northwards.  With  this  agrees 
the  statement  that  they  came  to  Kadesh  "  by  the  way  of  Mount  Seir"  (Dent.  i.  2), 
and  the  fact  that  there  is  no  station  mentioned  between  Kadesh  and  Mount  Hor 
(ch.  xxxiii.  37),  although  the  western  site  is  seventy  miles  from  that  mountain. 

The  necessity  indeed  of  placing  Kadesh  on  the  border  of  Edom  must  be  conclusive  in 
favour  of  the  eastern  site,  if  the  common  assumption  is  correct  that  the  name  and  terri- 
tory of  Edom  were  bounded  westwards  by  the  Arabah.  It  is,  however,  contended,  with 
some  show  of  reason,  that  the  kings  of  Bdom  had  extended  their  authority  at  this  time 
over  the  country  of  the  Azazimeh  as  far  as  the  plain  of  Kudes,  There  is,  at  any  rate, 
nothing  improbable  in  this,  because  this  great  mountain  fastness  is  almost  as  sharply 
severed  from  Canaan  as  from  Mount  Seir,  properly  so  called  ;  and  in  fact  it  never 
appears  to  have  been  in  possession  of  the  Canaanites.  When,  however,  the  southern 
boundary  line  is  traced  in  detail  (oh.  xxxiv.  3,  4 ;  Josh.  xv.  1,  2,  21),  it  is  said  to 
have  extended  ^"p"'??!  "  on  the  sides,"  or  b-Taa-bN,  "  to  the  borders,"  of  Edom,  and 
this  expression  can  hardly  be  satisfied  by  the  single  point  of  contact  at  the  south-east 
comer  of  Judah,  especially  when  we  consider  the  long  list  of  cities  which  were  on  or 
near  this  border  (Josh.  iv.  21 — 32).  Again,  when  the  extreme  southern  and  northern 
points  of  Joshua's  conquest  are  mentioned  (Josh.  xi.  17;-  xii.  7),  the  former  ia 
"  the  bald  mountain  which  goeth  up  Seir  " — a  natural  feature  which  we  look  for  in 
vain  (for  it  cannot  possibly  be  the  low  line  of  the  scorpion  cliffs),  unless  it  be  the 
northern  rampart  of  the  Azazimat.  We  have  seen  that  the  Hormah  to  which  the 
Israelites  were  repelled  on  their  first  invasion  is  placed  (Deut.  i.  44)  "  in  Seir,"  wbicb 


0H8.  XIU.,  XIV.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  168 

can  hardly  bewMount  Seir  in  its  ordinary  restricted  sense.  If  the  name  Seir  has  to  be 
sought  anywhere  outside  of  Edora  proper,  it  would  seem  more  natural  to  find  it  in  the 
northern  part  of  the  wilderness  of  Paran,  where  it  is  said  to  be  still  common,  than 
anywhere  else.  And  if  this  extension  of  Edom  can  be  established,  there  appears  to 
be  no  further  objection  of  any  moment  to  the  western  site.  Mount  Hor  would  still 
be  on  the  coast  or  edge  of  the  land  of  Edora,  because  it  would  be  the  meeting-point 
of  the  two  boundaries,  the  one  striking  westwards  across  the  Arabah,  the  other 
southwards  down  the  Arabah.  T!>e  absence  of  any  name  between  Kadesh  and  Hor 
is  not  conclusive,  because  the  people  certainly  made  journeys  of  several  days  without 
any  regular  halt  (see  note  on  ch.  x.  33). 

Upon  the  whole  the  question  may  fairly  be  stated  thus : — 

1.  The  general  tenor  of  the  narrative  would  lead  us  to  suppose  that  the  host  of 
Israel  had  marched  from  Sinai  through  the  midst  of  the  desert  of  Paran,  by  the  route 
which  led  most  directly  to  the  extreme  south  of  Palestine ;  and  if  they  did  this,  they 
must  have  passed  near  to  Rowland's  Kadesh. 

2.  The  natural  features  of  this  site,  its  position  with  regard  to  the  desert  of  et-Tih 
and  the  Wady  Murreh,  its  distance  from  Sinai  (Deut.  i.  2),  and  its  proximity  to  the 
Negeb  and  the  plateau  of  Bakhmah,  seem  to  harmonise  better  with  all  that  we  read 
about  Kadesh  than  the  corresponding  characteristics  of  the  rival  site. 

3.  The  general  eflfeot  of  the  various  mentions  of  Kadesh,  both  before  and  after,  is 
undeniably,  though  not  decidedly,  in  favour  of  the  western  site. 

4.  The  minor  arguments  which  are  urged  on  one  side  or  the  other  may  be  allowed 
to  balance  one  another,  for  it  is  certain  that  neither  is  free  from  dilHoulty. 

5.  The  difficulty  with  respect  to  Edom  is  a  very  serious  one,  and  with  many  will 
be  decisive  against  Rowland's  Kadesh. 

6.  What  must  turn  the  scale  one  way  or  the  other  is  the  independent  evidence  that 
the  border  of  Edora  extended  at  this  time  across  the  Arabah,  and  included  the  north- 
east portion  of  the  desert  of  Paran,  viz.,  the  mountain  mass  which  fronted  the  southern 
edge  of  Canaan.  There  is  some  evidence  that  this  was  the  case,  and  it  cannot  be  met 
by  the  simple  assertion  that  the  territory  of  Edom  consisted  only  of  Mount  Seir,  and 
that  Mount  Seir  lay  wholly  to  the  east  of  the  Arabah. 

It  is  to  be  expected  that  travel  and  research  in  these  regions  now  so  inaccessible, 
and,  alter  all  said  and  written,  so  little  known,  will  before  long  bring  fresh  and  more 
decisive  evidence  to  light.  In  the  mean  time  that  view  is  consistently  maintained  in 
these  notes  which,  if  it  had  apparently  the  greatest  difficulty  to  surmount,  yet  receives 
the  greatest  amount  of  positive  support  from  the  general  and  incidental  testimony  of 
the  Scripture  record. .  One  lesson  emerges  clearly  from  the  obscurity  involving  this 
question,  which  appears  to  us  so  important  to  the  understanding  of  Q-od's  holy  word : 
the  geography  of  the  Bible  must  be  of  very  small  importance  indeed  as  compared 
with  its  moral  and  religious  teachings.  These  are  not  affected  by  any  ignorance  of 
localities  and  routes.  The  rebellion  of  Kadesh  has  exactly  th^  same  moral  for  us 
(Heb.  iii.  19 ;  iv,  II)  whether  Kadesh  was  in  the  Azazimat  or  the  Arabah ;  and  the 
very  uncertainty  in  which  its  site  is  involved  may  be  designed  to  remind  us  that  it  is 
very  easy  to  exaggerate  the  value  of  these  outward  details  to  the  neglect  of  thoat 
inward  tMchinga  which  alone  are  in  the  highest  sense  important. 


184  TflE  BOOR  Of  NtJMBEM  [cas.  xtit.,  xtt 


HOMILETICS. 

Chs.  xiii.,  xiv. — The  revolt  of  Israel.  In  these  two  chapters  wo  have,  as  the 
writer  to  the  Hebrews  teaches  us,  a  Divinely-recorded  "  example  of  unbelief  "  (Heb. 
iv.  11) — of  that  iriiStia  which  we  cannot  satisfactorily  translate,  because  it  is  a 
disbelief  which  prompts  and  produces,  and  so  appears  in  practice  as,  disobedience; 
of  that  iirtidtia  which  is  to  the  Christian's  life  exactly  what  the  "  evil  heart  of 
unbelief  "  (^aniarlas)  is  to  the  Christian's  faith.  The  fall  of  Israel  is  "  written,"  and 
fully  written,  "  for  our  admonition,"  because  the  like  temper  and  the  like  behaviour 
leads  in  us  to  the  like  misery  and  loss.  Spiritually,  therefore,  we  see  the  Israel  of 
God — 1.  Brought  very  nigh  to  the  promised  rest,  almost  within  sight,  and  actually 
within  taste.  2.  Eefusing  to  enter  that  rest  through  disbelief.  3.  Sentenced  to  exile 
from  the  rest  they  would  not  enter.  4.  Attempting  (vainly)  to  enter  that  rest  in  their 
(mm  unbidden  and  unblessed  ways.  And  subordinately  to  this  great  and  striking 
lesson,  we  have  other  lessons  and  examples  both  of  good  and  evil. 

I.  Consider,  therefore,  in  respect  of  this  iiroSiiyita  iwciBnas — 

1.  That  the  place  where  Israel  now  lay  was  "  in  the  wilderness  of  Paran," 
"  that  great  and  terrible  wilderness ; "  but  it  was  also  " in  the  uiildemess  of  Zin" 
which  was  the  southern  frontier  of  Canaan  ;  and  therefore  {wherever  Xadesh  may 
have  been)  the  desert  journey  lay  behind  him,  and  his  rest  was  close  before  him:  only 
one  steep  climb  and  he  would  begin  to  enter  into  the  land  of  promise.  Even  so  are 
we  placed  to-day.  God  has  brought  us  with  a  mighty  hand  within  reach  of  home; 
has  led  us  by  a  way  we  knew  not  of  ;  has  given  ns  a  law  and  a  worship ;  has  fed  us 
with  heavenly  food  ;  has  separated  us  (outwardly  at  least)  from  a  perishing  world. 
Rest  lies  before  us :  rest  in  this  world  from  sin  and  self  (Heb.  iv.  10)  ;  in  the  next 
from  sorrow  and  sadness  too  (Rev.  xiv.  13).  It  is  not  far  away,  not  out  of  reach ;  it 
only  needs  a  little  patient  efEort  to  make  that  rest  our  own. 

2.  That  it  pleased  God  not  only  to  tell  the  people  about  the  land  of  promise,  but  to 
let  them  see  its  goodness,  as  it  were,  for  themselves  through  the  report  of  their  own 
brethren,  representative  men  whom  he  suffered  to  view  the  land.  Even  so  it  is  the 
good  pleasure  of  God  that,  concerning  the  happiness  of  a  holy  life,  we  should  have 
not  only  his  promise,  but  the  testimony  of  men  also,  even  of  our  brethren.  Yea, 
concerning  the  glories  of  the  world  to  come,  how  great  they  are,  we  have  the  report 
of  men  to  whom  it  hath  been  given  to  "  go  up  thither,"  to  see  what  "  eye  hath  not 
Been,"  to  hear  "  what  ear  hath  not  heard,"  even  "  unspeakable  things  "  which  could 
only  be  set  forth  to  us  in  types  and  figures  (2  Cor.  xii.  2, 3,  compared  with  Eom.  viii. 
18 ;  Rev.  iv.  1 ;  xxi.  10,  &c.). 

3.  That  the  people  at  Kadesh  not  only  heard  the  report  of  Canaan,  but  tasted  of 
the  fruits  of  it  which  the  spies  brought  back;  and  they  might  know  by  these  fruits  how 
much  pleasanter  a  land  it  was  than  Egypt  itself,  even  apart  from,  its  slavery.  Even 
so  it  is  given  to  us  in  Christ  not  only  to  hear  by  report,  but  to  taste  also  of  the  good 
things  of  the  world  to  come  (Heb.  vi.  4,  6).  It  is  a  fact  of  experience  that  we  may 
partake  to  some  extent,  here  and  now,  of  delights  which  no  more  spring  from  the 
conditions  of  unregenerate  human  nature  than  those  fruits  could  have  grown  in  the 
desert  of  Paran — delights  which  are  as  superior  to  the  luxuries  of  sin  as  the  grapes 
of  Eshcol  to  the  pungent  dainties  of  Egypt.  Nothing  can  rob  us  of  the  conscious- 
ness that  we  have  tasted  them,  and  it  is  this  which  makes  heaven  so  real  to  us,  as 
Canaan  to  them. 

4.  That  none  of  the  spies  concealed  from  them  the  fact  that  the  land  which  invited 
them  had  its  grave  difficulties,  as  well  as  its  great  attractions :  milk  and  honey  and 
fruit,  and  all  good  things,  but  many  strong  foes  to  be  conquered  first.  Even  so  it  is 
not  concealed  by  any  that  great  obstacles  and  sore  conflicts  stand  between  the  longing 
Boul  and  the  promised  rest.  If  any  represented  the  entry  into  the  inheritance  of  the 
saints  as  an  easy  thing  and  unopposed,  he  would  but  contradict  the  Master  himself 
(Mark  viii.  34,  35 ;  Luke  xiii.  24  ;  Rev.  ii.  26,  &c.)  and  his  inspired  servants  (1  Cor. 
ix  26,  27 ;  Heb.  iv.  1 ;  James  i.  3,  12  ;  2  Pet.  i.  10,  11 ;  2  John  8 ;  Jude  20,  21). 

6.  That  the  obstacles  which  confronted  Israel  in  the  gigantic  size  and  fortified  citiet 
qf  their  foes  were  truly  formidable,  and  to  the  military  science  of  that  day  insuper- 


cas.  xm.,  Xlv.1  THE  BOOK  OF  NtJMBEBS.  IBS 

able.  Even  so  the  powers  of  evil  which  har  our  upward  way  are  indeed  mighty,  and 
that  for  two  especial  reasons:  (1)  as  wielded  and  swayed  by  beings  of  superhuman 
origin  and  power  (Eph.  vi.  12)  ;  (2)  as  having  entrenched  themselves  in  the  ancient 
and  (as  it  were)  invincible  habits,  customs,  and  tendencies  of  the  human  race  (of. 
2  Cor.  X.  4,  5).  And  note  that  while  the  former  ground  of  hopelessness  becomes  less 
and  less  potent  as  faith  shrinks  within  her  deepest  channels,  so  the  second  becomes 
more  and  more  alarming.  Those  evil  principles  which  nineteen  centuries  of  Christi- 
anity have  failed  to  expel  from  Christian  society  are  indeed  formidable  hindrances. 

6.  l^hat^  the  faithless  among  the  spies  led  the  people  astray  in,  two  ways :  (1)  hy 
exaggerating  the  real  difficulties  which  existed,  and  (2)  by  ignoring  the  Divine  aid 
they  would  have  in  overcoming  them.  When  they  dKcJ  enter  they  found  no  Nephilim, 
nor  do  their  foes  seem  to  have  been  as  a  rule  superior  in  size  to  themselves.  And 
God  had  brought  them  through  far  greater  perils,  and  made  them  victors  over  far 
more  formidable  foes  (cf.  Exod.  xiv.  15  6.,  31).  Even  so  the  counsels  of  the  natural 
man  are  doubly  false :  (1)  as  exaggerating  the  real  difficulty  of  leading  a  life  of 
holiness  and  attaining  unto  rest,  raising  up  creatures  of  the  imagination,  and  mag- 
nifying existing  obstacles,  to  excuse  cowardice  and  sloth  ;  (2)  as  putting  out  of  sight 
the  fact  that  when  God  calls  us  to  a  certain  thing  he  pledges  himself  to  give  us  the 
strength  we  need  (Exod.  iii.  12 ;  Deut.  zxxiii.  25 ;  1  Cor.  x.  13).  The  natural  man 
would  ever  persuade  us  that  heaven  and  peace  are  not  attainable  in  the  way  which 
God  points  out  as  the  way ;  that  it  is  not  possible  in  this  or  that  position  to  lead  a 
holy  life,  br  to  give  up  this  or  that  sin,  or  to  attain  a  real  mastery  over  self — which 
is  mere  unbelief  (2  Cor.  xii.  9,  10;  Phil.  iv.  13  ;  cf.  2  Kings  vi.  16,  17). 

7.  That  the  faithful  among  the  spies  {in  whom  was  "  anoi/ier  spirit ")  gave  counsel, 
"Let  us  go  up  at  once  and  possess  it,  for  we  are  well  able  to  overcome  it."  And 
herein  were  three  points :  (1)  to  "  go  up,"  because  the  ascent,  whether  from  the 
Arabah  or  the  Wady  Murreh,  was  necessarily  steep  ;  (2)  to  go  up  "  at  once,"  be- 
cause delay  would,  strengthen  the  hands  of  their  enemies,  and  could  only  weaken 
theirs,  as  offending  the  Lord  ;  (3)  to  go  up  at  once,  because  the  victory  was  assured 
to  them  if  they  did,  with  the  help  of  God.  Even  so  is  the  voice  of  the  Spirit,  and 
of  all  who  are  led  by  the  Spirit,  however  full  an  acquaintance  they  may  have  with 
the  dangers  and  difficulties  of  the  spiritual  life — (1)  to  go  up,  because  it  is  an  ascent, 
and  must  involve  toil  and  fatigue  (Acts  xiv.  22)  ;  (2)  to  set  out  "  at  once,"  because 
any  delay  may  be  fatal  (Heb.  iii.  13  ;  James  iv.  13, 14),  and  must  add  to  the  difficulty ; 
(3)  to  proceed  with  holy  confidence,  because,  although  we  have  to  "  overcome,"  and 
that  by  dint  of  doing  and  suffering,  yet  it  is  God  who  fighteth  and  God  who  getteth 
the  victory  in  us  (Rom.  viii.  37 ;  Philip,  ii.  13 ;  Col.  i.  27). 

8.  That  the  crisis  of  Israel's  fate  was  come  when  they  had  to  choose  between  these 
persuasions.  God  had  brought  them  to  the  very  verge  of  Canaan,  but  they  could 
not  enter  unless  their  will  united  itself  to  his  will,  unless  they  chose  to  go  on  in  his 
name  and  strength.  Their  future  was  at  that  hour  in  their  own  hands,  and  they 
wrecked  it  because  they  did  not  trust  God,  because  their  faith  was  too  weak  to  pass 
into  obedience  in  the  face  of  serious  discouragement.  Even  so  are  our  eternal  for- 
tunes placed  (in  a  certain  true  sense)  in  our  own  hands.  Holiness  and  heaven  are  set 
before  us,  brought  within  our  reach  in  Christ ;  the  "  rest  which  remaineth  "  is  ours,  to 
be  entered  on  now,  to-day ;  and  God  calls  upon  us  to  enter,  and  encourages  us  by  the 
voice  and  experience  of  those  who  have  made  trial  of  it.  And  it  maybe  we  will  not 
go  on ;  it  is  too  hard — too  much  to  encounter ;  too  difficult — too  many  obstacles  in  the 
way.  It  may  be  we  find  the  prospect  so  much  less  easy  and  encouraging  than  we 
had  fancied.  We  will  not  make  the  effort,  or  undertake  the  risk,  looking  to  Divine 
grace  for  success  ;  ,and  therefore  we  too  cannot  enter  in  because  of  unbelief.  We 
must  bear  the  evil  consequences ;  we  have  mined  ourselves ;  we  have  shut  our- 
selves out  from  happiness  and  heaven.  And  note  that  as  this  crisis  (although  in 
some  sense  often  anticipated)  only  happened  once  to  Israel  in  the  wilderness,  so  does 
the  true  crisis  in  his  spiritual  fortunes  happen  only  once  (as  far  as  we  can  see)  in  the 
lives  of  many  men.  There  is  a  set  time  when  they  are  called,  in  some  unmistakable 
way,  to  make  a  bold  and  decisive  advance  in  the  spiritual  life,  which  will  leave  them 
really  masters  of  themselves,  and  so  at  rest.  If,  then,  they  shrink  from  taking  it 
because  it  ia  hard,  or  because  (as  they  say)  they  are  not  worthy  or  prepared  for  it, 


186  THE  fiOOR  Of  UtJMBfiRS.  [oas.  tm.,  XIV. 

tliey  forfeit  the  rest  prepared  for  them,  and  doom  themselvaB  to  a  fruitless  wandering 
in  dry  places. 

9.  That  the  first  fruit  of  that  refusal  to  advance  was  moummg,  the  second 
murmuring,  the  third  flat  rebellion.  Even  so  when  we,  being  called  .shrink  from 
going  on  unto  perfection,  the  first  consequence  is  that  unhappiness  which  is  both  a 
symptom  of  disaffection  to  God  and  a  part  of  it ;  the  second  is  a  oomplaining  spirit, 
as  though  we  had  been  ill-treated,  and  a  readiness  to  put  the  blame  on  others, 
perhaps  our  best  friends ;  the  third  is  a  desperate  intention  to  throw  o£E  the  yoke  of 
religion  altogether,  and  to  return  to  the  old  licence  of  sin  from  which  we  had 
escaped. 

10.  That  the  proposal  to  return  to  Egypt  was  as  infeanhle  as  it  was  wiehed.  Had 
it  been  possible  to  get  there,  it  is  certain  that  even  the  poor  luxuries  of  their  former 
slavery  would  never  have  been  given  baclc  to  them.  Even  so  the  faint-hearted  and 
faithless  Christian  can  yet  never  be  as  the  heathen,  or  even  as  the  ungodly,  again : 
for  one  thing,  he  knows  enough  of  true  happiness  and  freedom  to  find  the  yoke  of 
open  sin  intolerable  ;  for  another,  the  pleasures  of  sin  are  departed  for  him :  he  may 
sin,  and  recklessly,  but  it  will  not  have  the  zest  it  once  had,  when  it  was  in  a  manner 
natural  to  him.  The  ungodly  do  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  sin,  such  as  they  are ;  the 
half-converted  who  draw  back  are  of  all  men  most  miserable :  they  will  not  have 
Canaan,  and  they  cannot  have  Egypt,  and  there  is  nothing  for  them  but  the  wilderness 
(cf.  Heb.  X.  38,  39,  in  the  true  version). 

11.  That  the  punishment  which  God  ir{fficted  upon  the  rebels  was  perpetual  einle 
from  the  land  which  they  would-  not  enter.  Thus  he  simply  took  them  at  their  own 
word  (ch,  xiv.  28) ;  for  though  they  had  imagined  the  alternative  of  return  to  Egypt,  that 
was  impossible.  Even  so  the  sentence  which  Christ  passes  upon  them  that  will  not 
oome  to  him  is  simply,  "  Depart  from  me"  (Matt.  xxy.  41).  If  men  will  not  labour 
to  enter  into  rest  (Heb.  iv.  11),  there  is  no  alternative  before  them  but  perpetual 
unrest,  lasting  as  long  as  they  last ;  and  this  is  itself  "  the  fire  prepared  for  the  devil 
and  his  angels,"  for  this  is  the  natural  state  of  evil  spirits  apart  from  artificial  and 
temporary  disguises  (Matt.  xii.  43 ;  cf.  Isa.  Ivii.  20,  21). 

And  note  that  the  hvvtpoi  r6iroi  and  the  hv&vavaiQ  of  Matt.  zii.  43  exactly  correspond 
to  the  wilderness  of  Paran  on  the  one  hand,  and  to  Canaan  on  the  other  (cf.  Matt. 
xL  29). 

And  note  again,  with  regard  to  the  punishment  inflicted — .1.  That.all  who  were 
numbered  (and  none  other)  were  counted  worthy  of  punishment,  as  having  been 
enrolled  for  the  military  service  of  the  Lord,  but  having  mutinied.  So  will  our 
sentence  (if  we  incur  it)  be  one  passed  not  on  aliens,  or  enemies,  but  on  servants  who 
have  betrayed  their  trust,  on  soldiers  who  have  disobeyed  their  orders  and  turned 
their  backs  upon  their  Captain  (1  Cor.  vii.  22 ;  Col.  iii.  24  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  3,  4).  2.  That 
only  the  adult  generation,  who  were  strong  and  able,  were  excluded  ;  their  little  ones, 
whom  they  counted  so  helpless,  and  of  whom  they  said  they  would  be  a  prey, 
inherited  the  land.  Even  so  in  the  kingdom  of  his  grace  the  wise  and  prudent  are 
left  out,  and  the  proud  are  scattered  in  the  imagination  of  their  hearts,  whilst  unto 
babes  mysteries  are  revealed  (cf.  Matt,  xviii.  8 !  xix.  14 ;  1  Oor.  i.  26^28  ;  2  Cor. 
xii.  10).  3.  That  the  years  of  exile  were  reckoned  in  exaot  accordance  with  the  days 
of  searching.  So  must  there  be  a  perfect  correspondence  between  sin  and  its  punish- 
ment— a  correspondence  which  is  not  merely  on  the  surface  (as  in  their  case),  but 
lies  deep  down  in  the  nature  of  man,  so  that  sin  worka  out  its  own  revenges  both  in 
kind  and  in  measure  (of.  Luke  xii.  47). 

II.  CONBIDEB   AGAIN,  IH   BEBPEOT  07  THE   VAIW   ATTEMPT   TO   OOMQnER  OlNAAN   FOB 

THEMSELVES — 

1.  That  the  people  added  to  their  former  sin  an  opposite  tin — despairing  first,  and 
presuming  after.  Even  so  do  many  think  to  atone  for  the  unbelief  and  sloth  and 
disobedienoe  of  the  past  by  a  presumptuous  reliance  upon  their  own  strength  of 
character  and  of  will  for  the  future.  So  when  one  is  compelled  to  acknowledge  his 
irreligion  and  sin,  he  sets  up  to  mend  his  life  himself,  saying, "  I  will,"  and  "  /  have 
made  up  my  mind,"  and  "  /  am  determined,"  being  governed  as  much  by  self-will 
in  running  the  way  of  God's  commandments  as  before  in  refusing  to  run. 

2.  That  they  sought  to  justify  thHr  attempt  by  a  hasty  acknmvledgmtnt  of  th*W 


iBS.  XIII,,  XIV.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS-  167 

sin,  and  by  a  presumptuous  appropriation  of  GocTs  promises,  as  though  the  land 
was  theirs  whenever  and  however  they  chose  to  take  it.  Even  so  do  many  put  aside 
all  genuine  repentance  and  aelf-humiliation  for  their  grievous  sins,  when  those  sing 
are  brought  home  to  them;  speaking  and  acting  as  if  a  bare  acknowledgment  of  sin 
(which  cannot  be  avoided)  replaced  them  at  once  in  the  favour  of  God,  and  gave 
them  a  siire  title  to  all  the  blessings  of  the  covenant. 

3.  That  they  went  against  their  foes  witlmut  Moses,  and  without  the  arh,  as  if  they 
could  do  without  Divine  help  to-day  what  yesterday  they  had  despaired  of  doing 
with  that  help.  Even  sc  when  men  have  discovered  the  folly  of  their  sins  by  sharp 
experience,  they  will  set  to  work  to  lead  a  good  life  and  to  overcome  temptations 
without  the  means  of  grace,  without  the  presence  and  aid  of  Jesus,  without  any 
ground  of  confidence  that  he  is  with  them  in  their  strife. 

4.  That  the  result  was  speed}/  and  disastrous  defeat  at  the  hands  of  their  enemies. 
Even  so  have  all  men  fared  who  have  tried  to  achieve  holiness  and  heaven  without 
the  Divine  aid  carefully  sought  and  constantly  had  (Heb.  iv.  16 ;  xli.  28). 

III.  Consider  again,  with  respect  to  the  spies  and  the  land  of  promise — 
li  That  tie  propotal  to  nearch  the  land  did  not  at  frrst  proceed  from,  God,  hul 
fyrohahly  fru-in  a  secret  disaffection  on  the  part  of  the  people  ;  nevertheless,  lie  made  it 
his  own.  Even  so  there  ate  many  things  m  the  Church  of  God  whicl]  have  their  firsi 
origin  in  human  defection  from  the  obedience  of  faith,  which  yet,  as  not  beinj: 
wrong  in  themselves,  God  has  adopted  and  made  a  part  of  that  order  of  things 
which  is  our  practical  probation.  A  great  part  of  Christian  civilisation,  e.  g.,  had  its 
real  origin  in  pride,  ambition,  or  covetousness ;  nevertheless,  it  is  certain  that  God 
has  adopted  it,  and  we  could  not  go  back  from  it  without  flying  in  the  face  o 
providence. 

2.  Tliat  the  change  whereby  Hoshea  {help)  became  Jehoshua  (God's  help)  was 
either  made  or  declared  at  this  time.  Even  so  when  it  is  any  question  of  findinj; 
the  way  to  heaven,  or  making  any  report  concerning  it,  no  "liefp"  is  of  any  avai 
Nvhich  is  not  clearly  and  avowedly  "  God's  help  "  (Acts  xxvi.  ■.  2). 

3.  That  the  instructions  given  by  Moses  seem  to  ha/ve  erred  by  directing  attentioii 
i'lO  much  to  possible  difficulties.  Even  so  it  is  a  frequent  error,  and  a  natural  onr 
in  rulers  of  the  Church  that  they  direct  attention  too  much  to  matters  of  worldl- 
policy  and  to  outward  difBoulties,  and  thereby  encourage  a  spirit  of  cowardice  anci 
discouragement  which  they  do  not  themselves  share. 

4.  Tikat  Hebron,  was  older  than  ^oan.  Most  likely  they  thought  that  Zoan,  tht 
residence  of  Pharaoh,  was  the  oldest  place  in  the  world,  but,  as  a  fact,  Hebron  wa^ 
seven  years  (a  perfect  number)  older  still.  Even  so  we  thiidc  and  speak  naturally 
of  the  present  order  of  things  as  though  it  always  had  been,  as  though  all  the 
prestige  of  antiquity  at  any  rate  were  on  its  side.  In  truth  the  country  to  which  we 
go  is  infinitely  older,  having  been  prepared  for  us  "  before  the  foundation  of  the 
world."  .       .    '      . 

6.  That  the  vdllep  of  Eshcol  had  a  new  meaning  given  to  its  name  because  of  the 
famous  clutter  which  they  bare  thence.  Even  so  many  an  old  name  in  the  Bible 
becomes  instinct  with  new  meaning  through  its  association  with  the  joys  of  the 
world  to  come  (cf.  Paradise,  Zion,  &o. );  and  so  many  a  scene  in  our  individual 
lives,  being  connected  with  some  spiritual  happiness. 

6.  That  the  spies  e<Mftrmed  all  that  God  had  said  of  the  land.  Even  so  those 
who  have  had  visions  of  heaven,  and  those  too  among  ourselves  who  have  tasted 
of  its  sweetness  and  its  gifts  in  a  heavenly  life  on  earth,  must  needs  testify  that  all 
which  God  hath  said  of  its  blessedness  is  most  true,  and  not  exaggerated. 

7.  That  Caleb  differed  from  the  rest  of  the  spies,  and  was  the  only  reliable 
eounsdlor,  in  that  he  had  another  epirit,  and  "jfu^lled  to  walk  after'''  the  Lord. 
Even  80  the  faithful  Christian,  whom  it  is  safe  to  follow,  is  known  among  the  many 
faithless— (1)  as  being  led  by  another  spirit  from  that  which  sways  the  disafiected 
and  disobedient  (Bom.  viii.  15 ;  Eph.  ii.  2)  ;  (2)  as  having  not  merely  promised,  or 
began,  or  set  out,  but  "  fulfilled  "  to  follow  Christ  in  the  way  he  went  (1  Cor.  xi.  1 ; 
Eph.  V.  1 ;  1  These,  i.  6). 

8.  That  the  other  spies  died  by  the  hand  of  God,  as  having  turned  their  brethren 
away  from  Canaan-     Even  so  it  is  a  fearful  sin,  ajid  one  that  will  be  fearfully 


168  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [chb.  xiii.,  xiv. 

avenged,  to  discourage  the  wavering,  and  to  provide  those  that  are  disaffected  with 
arguments  and  reasons  against  a  religious  life. 

9.  That  Joshua  and  Caleb  lived  on,  sharing  tlie  present  punishment,  but  not 
destroyed  by  it,  because  cheered  with  certain  hope.  Even  so  in  an  evil  age,  amidst 
an  unspiritual  people,  the  faitliful  few  must  live  sadly,  but  they  live.  The  Lord 
knoweth  them  that  are  his,  and  they  shall  stand  in  their  lot  at  the  end  of  days 
( Jer.  xlv.  5  ;  Dan.  xii.  13 ;  Mai.  iii.  16, 17  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  19).  And  note,  that  the  spies 
were  specially  directed  to  see  "  whether  there  be  wood  "  in  the  holy  land,  or  not ;  i.  e. 
trees  (Septuagint,  iivSpa),  which  did  not  grow  in  the  wilderness.  It  is  especially 
told  us  that  in  the  holy  city  there  grows  the  tree  of  life  (Eev.  ii.  7) — yea,  many 
trees  of  life,  such  as  we  vainly  seek  here  (Ezek.  xlvii.  12 ;  Rev.  xxii.  2).  And 
note  again,  that  in  the  bunch  of  grapes  borne  upon  a  staff  the  ancient  com- 
mentators saw  an  image  of  Christ  crucified.  "  Christus  est  botrus  qui  pependit  in 
ligno"  ('  St.  Aug.  o.  Faust.,'  xii.  42).  The  two  that  bear  are  the  two  peoples',  Jew 
and  Gentile  ;  they  who  go  before  see  not  what  they  carry  ;  they  who  come  after 
carry  the  same,  and  see  what  they  carry. 

IV.  Consider  again,  in  eespbct  to  the  last  fruitless  appeal  of  Joshua  and 
Caleb  (ch.  xiv.  6 — 9),  that  they  urged  very  truly — 

1.  That  the  land  was  exceeding  good.  Even  so  is  the  land  set  before  us, 
whether  it  be  the  life  of  holiness  and  devotion  here,  or  the  life  of  perfection  beyond  ; 
it  floweth  with  milk  and  honey,  because  all  that  is  most  wholesome  and  pleasant  is 
to  be  had  freely  without  money  and  without  price. 

2.  That  the  Lord  would  bring  them  in,  if  he  delighted  in  them — and  there 
could  be  no  doubt  of  that,  after  what  he  had  done.  Even  so,  if  the  Lord  delight  in 
us,  as  he  has  said  and  proved  abundantly,  he  can  surely  give  us  victory  and  give 
us  possessions,  for  his  Spirit  is  able  to  sustain  our  weakness,  and  all  things  are  his 
(Rom.  viii.  26,  31,  37  ;  1  Cor.  iii.  21,  22). 

3.  That  the  one  thing  which  could  harm  them  was  rebellion.  Even  so  the  only 
thing  which  a  Christian  has  to  fear,  the  only  thing  which  can  keep  him  far  from 
rest,  out  of  heaven,  is  disaffection  towards  God.  If  he  does  not  believe  God's  word  ; 
if  he  shrinks  from  really  putting  it  to  the  test ;  if  he  will  not  in  an  actual  case  go 
forth  in  faith  of  his  promised  aid  to  overcome  a  temptation,  to  live  down  an  evil 
habit,  to  practise  a  recognised  virtue,  then  he  sins  through  unbelief,  and  forfeits 
grace  (Luke  xii.  5  ;  Heb.  iv.  2 ;  x.  23—26,  35,  36 ;  Rev.  ii.  5,  16  ;  iii.  16). 

4.  That  their  foes  were  not  in  fact  formidable,  but  rather  an  advantage,  as  pro- 
viding them  with  sustenance.  Even  so  there  is  nothing  in  temptation  or  in  trial, 
apart  from  unfaithfulness  in  us,  which  need  seriously  stand  in  our  way.  Our 
enemies,  natural  or  supernatural,  are  powerless  against  him  in  us.  And  when  met 
as  they  should  be,  they  are  our  greatest  helps  to  holiness  and  heaven,  for  neither  can 
be  attained  except  by  "  overcoming."  No  one  does  so  much  for  us  as  he  who  per- 
secutes us,  for  he  makes  ours  the  eighth  and  highest  beatitude,  which  we  cannot 
have  otherwise.  No  one  helps  us  so  fast  to  heaven  as  the  devil  himself,  resisted, 
withstood,  trampled  down  (Matt.  v.  11,  12;  Rom.  viii.  28;  1  Pet.  i.  7;  iv.  13; 
James  i.  2—4,  12). 

6.  That  fear  was  unreasonable,  since  the  Lord  was  with  them,  viz.,  in  his  ark  and 
cloudy  pillar.  Even  so  our  watchword  is  "  Emmanuel,"  the  Lord  with  us  in  the 
incarnation  of  the  eternal  Son.  and  in  his  perpetual  presence  with  all  and  each  of  us, 
and  in  his  assurance  of  our  Father's  love,  and  in  his  entire  adoption  of  our  interests 
as  his  own  (Matt,  xxviii.  20,  b. ;  Luke  xii.  32 ;  John  xiv.  1,2;  Heb.  xiii.  6 ;  Eev.  vi.  2). 

V.  Consider  again,  with  respect  to  the  intercession  of  Moses  and  the 
ANSWER  OF  God — 

1.  That  the  sin  of  the  people  and  the  wrath  they  incurred  brought  out  the  noblest 
trait  in  Mose^  character.  In  his  perfect  unselfishness,  and  in  his  ardour  of  interces- 
sion, he  reached  the  true  ideal  of  a  mediator.  Even  so  the  fall  and  condemnation  of 
the  human  race  were  the  conditions  (and  necessary  conditions,  as  far  as  we  can  see) 
of  the  manifestation  of  redeeming  love  and  power  in  Christ.  And  as  Israel  is  (in 
the  long  run)  more  ennobled  by  the  heroism  of  Moses  than  it  is  disgraced  by  the 
cowardice  of  the  people,  so  did  humanity  rise  more  in  the  righteousness  of  Christ 
than  it  fell  in  thp  vileness  of  Adam  and  the  rest  (Rom.  v.  15,  17,  20), 


OHS.  XIII.,  XIV.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  159 

2.  That  God  did  not  desire  the  sin  of  the  people,  hut  he  so  dealt  leith  their  sin  at 
to  bring  out  the  singular  goodness  of  his  servant.  Even  so  it  was  not  of  God  that 
man  should  fall  into  condemnation,  but  it  was  overruled  by  him  for  unspeakable 
good  in  the  self-sacrifice  of  his  dear  Son  (Rom.  v.  8 ;  Gal.  ii.  20  6. ;  1  John  iv.  9,  10). 

3.  That  the  offer  made  to  Moses  hy  God  was  intended  to  he  refused,  for  it  was  a 
temptation  to  advance  himself  at  the  expense  of  the  people.  Even  so  our  Lord  was 
"driven"  into  the  wilderness  by  the  Spirit  to  be  tempted  with  the  ofEer  of  all  the 
kingdoms  of  the  world  (Matt.  iv.  9  ;  Mark  i.  12,  13)  ;  and  the  temptation  was  often 
repeated  (John  vi.  15). 

4.  That  one  element  in  the  nohleness  of  Moses'  character  was  his  unconsciousness 
of  his  own  unselfishness.     He  did  not  even  decline  the  tempting  proposal,  he  only 

•  ignored  it,  as  though  it  had  never  been  made.  And  on  subsequent  occasions,  while 
he  often  referred  to  his  fault  and  punishment,  he  never  alluded  to  his  self-sacrifice 
(cf.  Deut.  i.  37,  38).  Even  so  the  true  beauty  of  a  Christian  character  is  its  sim- 
plicity, candour,  and  absence  of  self-conceit,  such  aa  we  admire  (and  our  Lord  too) 
in  children  (Matt,  xviii.  1 — 4;  1  Cor.  xiii.  4  6.). 

5.  That  the  effectual  intercession  of  Moses  was  based  on  two  arguments  :  that  God 
would  not  destroy  his  own  worh  begun;  that  God  would  not  belie  his  own  character 
revealed.  Even  so  is  all-prevailing  Christian  prayer  based  upon  the  same  founda- 
tions: we  plead  with  God  his  own  work  begun  in  us  or  others  (Phil.  i.  6,  20;  cf. 
Job  z.  3 ;  Ps.  cxxxviii.  8)  ;  we  plead  with  him  his  eternal  love  and  mercy  declared  in 
Christ,  and  extended  to  sinners  in  days  past.  And  note  that  the  work  which  God 
hath  wrought  for  us  is  on  an  infinitely  greater  scale,  and  of  infinitely  greater  moment 
and  renown,  than  the  exodus  of  Israel.  The  character  also  and  mercy  of  God,  which 
was  revealed  to  Moses  in  a  n/ime,  is  manifested  to  us  in  the  person  of  his  Son. 

6.  Thai  God  was  very  ready  to  pardon  at  the  intercession  of  Moses,  although  hit 
wrath  was  hot ;  and  this  partly  because  Moses  showed  a  courage,  a  love,  and  an 
indifference  to  self  which  pleased  God,  but  chiefly  because  as  mediator  he  repre- 
sented the  Mediator  who  was  to  come  (Ps.  cvi.  23).  Even  so  our  Lord  himself  was 
heard  for  his  devoutness  (Heb.  v.  7),  his  holiness  (ibid.  vii.  26),  and  his  absolute 
self-sacrifice  (ibid.  ix.  14)  ;  and  by  virtue  alike  of  what  he  was,  and  what  he  did,  is 
the  only  Mediator  between  God  and  man  (1  Tim.  ii.  5  ;  Heb.  ix.  16). 

7.  That  God  alone  "pardoned,"  yet  he  pardoned  "  according  to  the  word  "  of  his 
servant  Moses.  Even  so  in  the  highest  sense  "  who  can  forgive  sins  bat  God  only  ?  " 
(Mark  ii.  7)?  Nevertheless,  "  God  had  given  such  power  (i.  e.  authority)  unto  men," 
that  the  Divine  pardon  was  bestowed  on  penitent  sinners  "  according  to  the  word  "  of 
Jesus  (Matt.  ix.  2,  6),  and  through  him  of  his  apostles  (Matt,  xviii.  18 ;  John  xi. 
21^—23  ;  2  Cor.  ii.  10 ;  cf.  2  Sam.  xii.  13).  Again,  forgiveness  of  sin  is  no  arbitrary 
thing,  but  bestowed  only  upon  repentance  and  faith  ;  and  yet  it  is  bestowed  "  accord- 
ingto  the  word  "  of  the  humblest  Christian  (1  John  v.  16 ;  James  v.  16  6.). 

8.  That  God's  pWrdon  did  not  cancel  the  temporal  consequences  of  sin.  Israel,  aa 
Israel,  was  spared  for  a  glorious  future;  but  the  rebels  as  individuals  were  self- 
doomed  to  exile  and  destruction.  Even  so  the  pardoning  love  of  God,  although  it 
saves  the  sinner,  yet  it  does  not  abolish  the  natural  consequence  of  his  sin.  Just  as 
God's  pardon  to  Israel  allowed  the  young  and  innocent  to  grow  up,  while  the  old 
and  stubborn  died  off,  so  in  the  renewed  man  the  grace  of  God  ao  quickens  and 
strengthens  the  good  that  it  gathers  strength  and  courage  while  the  evil  dies  slowly 
out  Nevertheless,  the  consequences  of  sin  remain  in  body  and  mind,  and  even  in 
Boul.  David  never  recovered  his  fall,  either  in  outward  fortunes  (2  Sam.  xii.  10)  or 
in  character  (cf .'  1  Kings  i.  2 ;  ii.  6,  9,  &c. ),  or  probably  in  peace  of  mind._  Many 
Christians  sin  lightly,  trusting  always  to  repent  and  be  forgiven,  not  knowing  that 
every  sin  leaves  some  evil  behind  it. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

CSi.  xiii. — The  spies.  The  tribes  have  at  length  reached  the  border  of  the 
promised  land.  Leaving  the  wilderness  of  Sinai,  they  have  travelled  northwards  till 
they  have  reached  Kadesh-barnea,.  a  place  situated  in  the  Arabah,  the  long  valley 
reaching  from  the  Dead  Sea  to  the  Gulf  of  Akabah,  and  which  may  be  said  to  be 


im  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES.  [chb.  xiii.,  xiv 

a  prolongation  Af  the  Jordan  valley  southwards  to  the  Bed  Sea.  From  Kadesh  th« 
people  can  see,  lising  before  them  toward?  the  north-west,  the  steep  ascent  which  leads 
into  the  hill  country,  the  destined  inheritance  of  the  tribe  of  Judah.  The  march  from 
Egypt,  including  the  twelve  months'  sojourn  in  Horeb,  has  occupied  only  sixteen 
months ;  yet  the  tribes  already  stand  on  the  threshold  of  the  promised  rest,  and 
Moses  is  in  high  hopes  that  within  a  few  weeks  they  will  have  taken  possession  of 
the  long-expected  inheritance.  In  this  chapter  we  see  the  first  appearance  of  the 
cloud  which  soon  shrouded  in  darkness  the  fair  prospect.  Instead  of  going  resolutely 
forward  with  the  shining  pillar  of  the  Divine  presence  for  their  guide,  the  people 
desired  to  have  the  land  "  reported  upon  "  by  chosen  men  of  their  own  company. 
These  spies  brought  back  a  report  which  put  the  congregation  in  fear,  and  they 
refused  to  enter  in.     Observe — ■ 

I.  Whebb  this  proposal  to  send  foewabd  spies  originated.  Thirty-eight  years 
later,  Moses  laid  the  blame  of  it  on  the  people  (Deut.  i.  22).  He  adds,  however,  that 
"  the  saying  pleased  him  well,"  and  that  it  was  agreed  to  without  difficulty,  so  that 
the  statement  in  the  text  which  represents  the  Lord  as  directing  the  spies  to  be  sent 
is  quite  consistent  with  the  one  in  Deuteronomy.  There  was  nothing  in  itself  sinful 
in  the  people's  proposal,  and  it  received  the  Divine  approval.  Nevertheless,  it  was 
in  the  circumstances  a  doubtful  project.  It  betrayed  a  lurking  distrust  of  the  Lord's 
promise  and  leadership.  They  wanted  to  See  for  themselves  before  committing 
themselves  further.  Prudence  is  without  doubt  a  virtue.  Before  beginning  to  build 
our  tower  we  are  to  count  the  cost  (Luke  xiv.  28).  There  are  times  when  this  needs 
to  be  earnestly  preached.  Men  are  apt  to  make  great  ventures  for  the  world,  rushing 
forward  blindly  enough.  But  let  these  same"  men  be  asked  to  venture  much  for  God, 
they  will  be  snfficiently  cautious.  They  will  sit  down  and  count  the  cost ;  they  will 
have  the  land  diligently  searched  before  invading  it.  Men  do  well  to  be  prudent,  pro-' 
vided  only  that  they  do  not  leave  God's  promise  out  of  their  calculations.  Where  God's 
command  and  promise  are  clearly  given,  the  greatest  boldness  is  the  truest  wisdom. 
When  Paul  received  the  command  to  pass  over  to  Macedonia,  and  plant  the  Church 
of  Christ  in  Europe,  he  did  not  send  over  Timothy  and  Luke  to  search  out  the  land 
and  see  whether  they  and  Silas  and  he  were  equal  to  the  work.  Had  he  done  that,  he 
never  would  have  taken  ship  for  Europe.  Where  God's  command  is  clear,  oar 
wisdom  is  to  venture  upon  great  things  for  God,  and  to  expect  great  things  from  God. 

II.  How  THE  proposal  WAS  CARRIED  OUT.  Twelve  men  were  chosen,  one  for 
every  tribe.  These  men,  climbing  the  steep  ascent  from  Kadesh,  travelleJH  through 
the  thirsty  south  country  (the  Negeb)  as  far  as  to  Hebron.  From  Hebron  they  went 
up  by  the  brook  Eshcol  into  the  hill  country,  "  the  mountain  of  the  Amorites,"  the 
long  ridge  midway  between  Jordan  and  the  sea,  which  extends  from  the  south 
country  till  it  is  lost  among  the  roots  of  Lebanon.  Every  step  in  the  journey  opened 
up  scenes  tf  beauty  and  varied  fruitfulness  which  must  have  delighted  eyes  accus- 
tomed only  to  the  monotony  of  the  Nile  valley.  It  was  a  land  flowing  with  milk 
and  honey.  The  proof  of  its  fertility  they  brought  back  with  them.  The  cluster 
from  Bsliool  declared  that  the  land  was  one  worth  fighting  for.  A  trait  this  which 
has  fixed  itself  for  ever  in  the  imagination  of  the  Church.  For  are  not  these  Eshcol 
grapes  a  figure  of  those  foretastes  of  the  Better  Country  which  the  Lord  grants  his 
people  here  in  the  wilderness  ?  No  doubt  there  was  much  to  be  said  that  was  less 
promising.  The  country  was  exceedingly  populous.  The  inhabitants  belonged  to 
many  races,  and  everywhere  there  appeared  tokens  of  highly-advanced  civilisation. 
There  had  been  great  progress  since  Jacob  went  down  to  Egypt.  There  was  much, 
therefore,  to  impress  the  spies  with  a  sense  of  extreme  difficulty  in^the  task  lying 
before  the  congregation.  But  the  spies  saw  something  which  ought  to  have  armed 
them  against  fear.  They  saw  Hebron  and  that  cave  hard  by  which  contained  the 
bones  of  Abraham  and  Sarah,  of  Isaac  and  Behekah,  of  Jacob  and  Leah  ;  the  cave 
where  the  progenitors  of  Israel  were  buried,  in  the  sure  and  steadfast  hope  that  the 
land  would  yet  be  the  inheritance  of  their  seed.  They  being  dead  were  still  speak- 
ing, and  their  testimony  might  well  have  put  unbelief  to  shame. 

III.  The  tenor  and  effect  of  thb  spies'  report.  On  one  point  the  spies 
were  unanimous.  The  land  was  good.  Beyond  that  there  was  disagreement.  1« 
Tb«  majority  kept  harping  on  the  difficulties  they  had  discovered — the  walled  cities, 


OBS.  xin.,  ziv.]  THB  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBa  161 

the  grants,  the  multitudes  of  people.  They  added,  moreover,  this.  That  the  land  ate 
up  the  inhabitants — a  statement  which  probably  refers  to  the  circumstance  (a 
remarkable  one  it  is)  that  Palestine  had  been  the  meeting-place  and  battle-ground  of 
many  nations,  where  one  nation  had  exterminated  another.  2.  The  minority  did  not 
call  in  question  the  facts  on  which  their  brethren  harped.  But  they  set  them  in 
another  light.  Bead  oh.  ziv.  7 — 9,  And  this  suggests  thb  Lesson  the  story  of  the 
spies  is  fitted  to  teach.  When  God  makes  the  way  of  duty  plain,  we  must  beware 
how  we  suffer  our  minds  to  dwell  on  the  diflSculties  to  be  encountered.  To  do  so  will 
be  apt  simply  to  weaken  our  hands.  "  The  fearful  and  unbelieving  "  have  no  portion 
in  the  heavenly  city,  but  are  shut  out.  Faith  laughs  at  impossibilities,  for  it  knows 
that  in  the  Lord's  strength  it  can  do  all  things. — B. 

Vers.  1—20. — The  mission  of  the  spies.  I.  Thb  origin  of  the  mission.  We 
know  from  Deut.  i.  22  that  this  commandment  of  Ood  followed  on  a  resolution  of 
the  people.  It  was  their  wish  that  spies  should  go  forth  and  tell  them  something 
of  the  way  beforehand.  And  even  Moses  fell  in  with  them.  It  would  seem  an 
easier  thing  to  be  meek  than  to  take  no  thought  for  the  morrow.  Even  Moses  the 
servant  of  God  must  be  taking  up  to-morrow's  burdens  before  the  time.  How  much 
better  it  would  have  been  patiently  and  trustfully  to  wait  upon  the  cloud  and  the 
trumpets  I  (ch.  ix.  15 — 23 ;  x.  1 — 10).  But  since  the  people's  hearts  are  so,  God  sends 
the  spies.  The  unfitness  of  Israel  for  immediate  entrance  into  the  promised  land 
was  showing  itself  more  and  more,  and  God  sent  tnese  searchers,  that  in  their 
searching  both  they  and  the  people  they  represented  might  also  be  searched.  May 
we  not  as  it  were  detect  a  tone  of  rebuke  and  remonstrance  in  the  words,  "  which  I 
will  give  unto  the  children  of  Israel "  ?  The  Israelites  by  demanding  this  mission 
were  trying  to  guard  themselves  on  a  side  that  really  needed  no  defence,  while 
leaving  themselves  more  and  more  exposed  to  all  the  perils  of  an  unbelieving 
mind. 

II.  The  men  who  webe  bent.  Whether  by  choice  of  Moses  or  the  people  we  are 
not  told,  but  probably  there  was  much  careful  consultation  on  the  matter,  according 
to  human  wisdom.  Doubtless  they  seemed  the  best  men  for  the  purpose ;  chosen  for 
physical  endurance,  quickness  of  eye,  tact  in  emergencies,  and  good  judgment  of  the 
land  and  people.  Yet  some  very  important  requisites  were  evidently  not  considered. 
Out  of  the  twelve,  only  two  were  men  of  faith  in  God  and  deep  convictions  as  to  the 
destiny  of  Israel.  A  great  deal  depends  on  the  sort  of  men  we  send  in  any  enter- 
prise for  God.  Believing  and  devout  spirits  can  see  prospects  others  cannot  see, 
because  they  have  resources  which  others  have  not.  Perhaps  in  the  whole  nation 
there  were  not  twelve  men  to  be  found  of  the  right  stamp  in  every  particular,  and 
even  if  they  had  been  found,  they  might  have  failed  in  commanding  popular  con- 
fidence. We  can  easily  imagine  that  Caleb  and  Joshua  had  not  a  very  comfortable 
time  with  their  colleagues,  and  that  it  was  not  a  very  easy  matter  to  agree  upon  a 
report.  But  such  as  they  were,  they  went  forth.  The  people  had  come  to  depend 
on  twelve  limited  minds  like  their  own,  each  with  its  own  way  of  looking  at  things, 
instead  of  on  him  who  had  already  done  such  great  things — the  unchangeable  One, 
the  ample  Providence,  the  sure  Defence. 

III.  The  iNEOEMATioN  REQUIRED.  Moses  givcB  them  their  instructions  (vers.  17 — 
20),  and  they  come  from  a  man  who  is  acting  rather  in  accordance  with  the  wishes 
of  the  people  than  in  strict  harmony  with  previous  revelations  from  God.  Had  not 
God  said  to  Moses,  or  ever  the  chains  of  Egypt  were  loosed,  that  he  would  bring  his 
people  into  the  land  of  the  Canaanites,  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  a  land 
promised  in  solemn  covenant  to  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  when  as  yet  they  were 
strangers  in  it  ?  (Bxod.  iiL  17 ;  vi.  3,  4).  It  was  the  people  who,  in  their  unbelief 
and  carnal  anxiety,  wanted  something  in  the  way  of  human  testimony.  Let  them, 
therefore,  indicate  such  details  of  inquiry  as  in  their  opinion  were  necessary. 
They  were  like  a  suspicious  buyer,  who,  not  content  with  the  word  of  the  person 
from  whom  he  makes  his  purcliase,  though  he  be  a  man  of  tried  integrity,  hunts 
round  for  all  sorts  of  independent  testimony,  even  from  those  who  may  have  very 
doubtful  capacity  as  witnesses.  "A  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  is  it?  See 
then  if  it  be  such  •  good  land.    See  if  the  people  appreciate  its  fertility  by  their 

irUIIBBBI.  K 


162  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  [chs.  xin.,  xit. 

onltivation  of  it.  Observe  the  climate  and  the  people  themselves,  if  they  be  a  strong, 
stalwart  race,  and  numerous.  Do  they  live  peacefully  among  themselves,  or  in 
strongholds?"  There  was  not  a  sentence  in  these  instructions  but  threw  some 
doubt  on  the  wisdom,  power,  and  faithfulness  of  Jehovah.  When  God  sends  out 
people  to  do  such  work  as  delights  his  heart,  it  is  in  a  very  different  spirit ;  as  he 
sent  out  the  single  stripling,  unaccustomed  to  war,  against  the  giant ;  as  Jesus  sent 
out  the  twelve  on  their  gospel  mission,  encumbered  with  as  few  material  resources  as 

Eossible.  The  land  to  be  searched  was  the  land  in  which  their  honoured  progenitors 
ad  lived ;  but  there  is  no  word  to  say,  "  Tell  us  of  Bethel,  and  of  the  plain  of 
Mamre,  and  the  cave  of  Machpelah  in  Hebron."  And  to  crown  all,  the  result  shows 
that  they  took  all  this  trouble  and  waited  these  forty  days  for  useless  information. 
The  fear  of  God  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom. — Y. 

Vers.  21 — 29. — The  search  and  the  report.  L  Thb  search.  The  land  passed 
over  is  indicated  in  a  somewhat  indefinite  way.  Contrast  it  with  the  definiteness  of 
the  tribal  boundaries  in  Joshua  (chs.  xiii. — xix.).  These  were  forty  days  of  specu- 
lative and  dangerous  wandering,  with  no  guiding  cloud,  though  doubtless  God  pro- 
tected them  even  when  they  felt  not  the  protection  ;  if  for  nothing  else,  for  the  sake 
of  the  faithful  two  who  would  yet  serve  his  purposes  and  confirm  his  word.  Forty 
days  too  of  waiting  in  the  wilderness  of  Paran — days,  one  may  imagine,  of  much  con- 
jecture, full  of  apprehension  to  some,  while  by  others  many  airy  castles  would  be 
built,  how  soon  to  tremble  at  the  first  breath  of  Qod's  approaching  anger  I  Forty 
days  was  not  much  time  to  see  even  so  small  a  land,  geographically  speaking,  as 
Canaan.  We  know  by  our  own  land  the  ludicrous  mistakes  of  travellers  passing 
through  it,  and  their  sometimes  serious  mistakes ;  how  they  exalt  exceptions  into 
rules,  and  the  eccentricities  of  the  individual  into  the  character  and  habits  of  the 
race.  Live  in  a  land,  and  then  you  shall  report  on  it  with  the  authority  of  experi- 
ence. We  have  heard  the  story  of  the  traveller  who  visited  a  Carthusian  monastery 
in  Italy.  He  admired  the  situation,  and  said  to  one  of  the  monks,  "  What  a  fine 
residence  1"  "  Transeuntihus"  was  the  sad,  satiric  reply.  If  we  wish  to  know  the 
fatness,  the  beauty,  and  the  safety  of  the  land  in  which  God's  penple  dwell,  we  must 
have  something  more  than  forty  days  of  superficial  rambling.  It  is  not  Saul,  with 
eyesight  lost,  and  waiting  at  Damascus,  crushed  in  spirit,  for  Ananias,  who  shall 
tell  us  how  Jesus  is  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life ;  but  rather  such  a  one  as  Paul 
the  aged,  thirty  years  later,  sounding  from  the  fulness  of  his  experience,  "  I  know 
whom  I  have  believed  "  (2  Tim.  i.  12). 

II.  The  beport.  After  forty  days  they  came  back,  bearing  on  a  stafE  between 
two  of  them  the  cluster  of  grapes — bearing  it  thus,  as  some  think,  because  of  its 
weight;  as  others,  that  the  fruit  might  keep  its  shapeliness  and  bloom.  And, 
indeed,  along  with  the  pomegranates  and  figs,  which  were  doubtless  choice  samples, 
this  fruit  was  God's  own  beautiful  testimony.  Human  messengers  might  differ  and 
deceive,  but  these  sweet  silent  messengers  seemed  to  intimate  that  God  had  been 
making  ready  the  land  for  his  own  people.  So  much  for  what  the  spies  brought  in 
their  hands.  But  as  to  the  verbal  report,  what  a  meagre  thing  it  is  I  As  to  the 
quality  of  the  land,  they  content  themselves  with  saying,  "  Surely  it  floweth  with 
milk  and  honey."  Yes.  God  had  said  this  very  thing  to  Moses  long  before :  it  was 
the  highest  poetry  of  promise  to  speak  thus ;  it  was  meant  to  excite  large  antici- 
pations of  something  fertile  and  beautiful ;  but  men  who  had  been  over  the  land  for 
a  personal  inspection  might  have  said  something  more  prosaic  and  exact.  Then  as 
to  the  strong  people,  the  walled  towns,  and  the  giants,  God  had  indicated  these  very 
things  as  being  in  the  future  of  his  people,  when  he  caused  the  fighting  men  to  be 
numbered  not  long  before.  The  report  was  meagre,  we  may  well  believe,  because 
not  otherwise  could  it  have  been  unanimous.  As  long  as  they  kept  to  certain  bare 
facts,  and  did  not  proceed  to  advise,  the  spies  could  agree,  and  yet  it  very  speedily 
appeared  how  hollow  their  agreement  was.  Caleb  and  Joshua  had  to  strike  out  the« 
own  path,  no  longer  wasting  time  in  trying  to  sustain  vain  compromises. — ^Y. 

Vers.  30 — 33. — Conflicting  counsels.  The  report  has  been  received,  such  as  it  is, 
•ad  the  next  question  comes :   What  shall  be  done  ?    "  Caleb  stilled  the  peopls 


0H8.  xiu.,  iiv.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  169 

before  Moses."  This  intimates  the  excitement  and  turbulence  of  their  feeling.  The 
chances  are  that  a  good  deal  of  disparagement  of  Canaan  had  come  to  their  ears, 
losing  nothing  as  it  passed  from  one  tongue  to  another.  Notice  the  temporary 
effacement,  as  it  were,  of  Moses.  It  is  Caleb  who  here  takes  the  lead.  Moses  is 
nothing  sav*  as  the  mouth-piece  of  God,  and  the  time  is  not  quite  ripe  for  God  to 
speak.  But  Caleb,  who,  here  as  afterwards,  shows  himself  a  courageous  man,  prompt 
and  ready,  has  formed  his  opinion,  and  at  once  expresses  it  j  to  be  immediately 
followed  by  opinions  just  as  decided  in  the  opposite  direction.  We  need  not  here 
so  much  to  consider  who  was  right  and  who  wrong ;  God  himself  brings  all  out 
presently  into  the  clearest  of  light.  The  great  matter  to  be  noticed  is  that  the 
people  were  now  exposed  to  conflicting  counsels. 

I.  These  conflicting  counsels  webe  the  consequence  of  baokslidinq  from  God. 
The  people  had  turned  away  from  their  true  Guide,  and  the  consequence  of  being  in 
a  wrong  path  very  soon  appears.  God  is  one,  apd  in  his  infinite  wisdom  and  power 
can  make  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  him,  and  are  called 
according  to  his  purpose.  But  men  are  many  and  diverse,  and  if  those  who  are 
called  according  to  his  purpose  fall  from  the  obedience  which  shows  their  love,  how 
shall  fhey  make  things  work  together  for  good  ?  To  God  the  scheme  of  human 
affairs  is  as  a  machine,  complicated  and  intricate  indeed,  but  well  under  control,  and 
producing  large  results.  To  men  it  is,  more  or  less,  a  maze  of  motions.  They 
understand  it  a  little  in  parts,  but  are  hopelessly  divided  as  to  the  meaning  and 
service  of  the  whole. 

II.  The  preponderance  in  these  conflicting  counsels  was  against  the  course 
which  God  had  already  laid  out.  God  had  promised  the  land,  kept  it  before  the 
people,  and  brought  them  to  the  very  verge ;  yet  ten  out  of  twelve  men— responsible 
men  in  the  tribes,  men  who  had  journeyed  through  the  land  for  forty  days — declared 
that  it  was  beyond  the  strength  of  Israel  to  obtain.  What  a  satire  on  vox  populi 
vox  Dei  I  What  a  humbling  revelation  of  the  motives  that  work  most  powerfully  in 
unregenerate  human  nature  I  How  easy  it  is  to  exaggerate  difScuIties  when  one's 
heart  is  not  in  a  work  ;  to  see,  not  everything  that  is  to  be  seen,  but  only  what  the 
eye  wants  to  see,  and  to  see  in  a  particular  way !  It  is  a  part  of  spiritual  prudence 
to  reckon  that,  whatever  strength  there  may  be  in  mere  numbers,  in  brute  force  and 
material  appliances,  they  cannot  be  counted  on  in  advancing  the  kingdom  of  God. 
With  all  these  resources  heaped  up  around  them,  craven  spirits  will  still  cry  out 
that  there  is  a  lion  in  the  way. 

III.  It  is  everything  to  recollect  that  there  were  conflicting  counsels. 
Cowardice,  carnality,  and  backsliding  did  not  altogether  get  their  own  way.  Things 
were  bad  enough,  but  after  all  Caleb  and  Joshua  counted  for  a  great  deal  on  the 
other  side.  We  must  not  only  count  men,  but  weigh  them.  There  are  times  when 
it  is  no  credit  to  men,  when  it  says  but  little  for  their  piety  or  their  humanity,  that 
they  are  found  among  majorities.  It  is  the  glory  of  God's  cause  on  earth  that  it 
never  loses  its  hold  on  at  least  a  few.  There  is  always  a  Caleb  to  fling  to  the  wind 
considerations  of  base  expediency. — ^Y. 

Ch.  xiv. — They  could  not  enter  in  because  of  unhelief.  Less  than  two  years 
have  passed  since  the  congregation  marched  out  of  Egypt,  yet  already  they  stand  at 
the  threshold  of  the  land  of  promise.  Turning  their  gaze  northward  and  westward 
from  K.idesh,  they  see  the  hills  which  form  the  outworks  of  the  famous  and  goodly 
mountain  which  is  to  be  their  inheritance.  A  crowd  of  joyous  thoughts  fill  the  hearts 
of  Moses  and  the  faithful  at  the  sight.  "  Those  hills  belong  to  the  land  for  which 
Abraham  left  his  native  country,  and  was  content  to  be  a  sojourner  all  his  days. 
They  enclose  the  sepnlchre  in  which  the  bones  of  the  patriarchs  were  laid,  in 
the  sure  hope  that  the  land  should  yet  be  the  inheritance  of  their  seed.  The  promise 
has  tarried  long ;  it  is  now  at  the  door.  Ere  the  clusters  of  Eshcol  shall  have  again 
ripened  under  the  southern  lun,  the  Canaanites  will  have  been  dispossessed,  ana  we 
shall  have  been  settled  in  their  place."  So  Moses  and  the  godly  in  Israel  fondly 
thought.  But  they  were  doomed  to  disappointment.  For  thirty-eight  years  more 
the  Canaanites  were  to  dwell  undisturbed.  Moses  and  all  the  grown-up  people  were 
to  die  in  the  wilderness.    How  this  came  about  the  present  chapter  relates.    The 

1L% 


164  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [ohb.  xm.,  xiv. 

people  refused  to  enter  the  land.  The  Lord  took  them  at  their  word,  and  declared 
that  they  should  not  enter. 

I.  We  Bee  in  this  A  signal  instance  of  a  bort  of  faildbk  that  is  hot  Dll- 

COMMON. 

"  There  is  a  tide  in  the  affairs  of  men 
Which,  taken  at  the  flood,  leads  on  to  fortnn* 
Omitted,  all  the  voyage  of  their  life 
Is  bound  in  shallows  and  in  miseries. " 

This  is  a  principle  of  God's  government.  He  will  open  to  men — to  communities  or 
individuals — a  door  leading  straight  to  success.  If  they  fail  to  discern  their  oppor- 
tunity, or  to  take  prompt  advantage  of  it,  the  door  is  closed,  and  they  are  either  shut 
out  altogether,  or  enter  after  long  delay  and  heavy  toils.  We  must  take  the  current 
when  it  serves.  The  Apostle  Paul,  himself  an  eminent  example  of  the  resolute 
promptitude  he  enjoins,  used  to  say,  "  Redeem  the  time  "  (Eph.  v.  16 ;  Col.  iv.  6), 
».  e.  seize  the  occasion  while  it  serves ;  lay  hold  on  the  opportunity.  To  know  when 
to  go  forward  is  no  small  part  of  Christian  wisdom  ;  to  go  forward  resolutely  when 
the  hour  has  come  is  no  small  part  of  Christian  virtue. 

II.  More  particularly,  there  is  here  A  signal  example  of  unbelief  and  its  woeful 
FBUIT.  In  this  instance  the  failure  was  not  due  merely  to  blindness  or  slackness; 
it  sprang  from  disbelief  of  God's  promise.  "They  could  not  enter  in  because  of 
unbelief  "  (Heb.  iii.  19).  This  is  the  Lord's  account  of  the  matter  at  the  time. 
"  How  long  will  it  be  ere  this  people  believe  m&,  for  all  the  signs  which  I  have  showed 
among  them  ?  "  (ver.  11).  Q.d.,  "  Not  only  did  I  promise  the  land  to  tlieir  fathers, 
but  to  themselves  I  have  showed  great  signs  in  Egypt,  at  the  Eed  Sea,  at  Horeb, 
on  the  long  march.  After  all  this  they  might  have  believed  my  word ;  they  might 
have  trusted  in  me  that,  after  having  brought  them  so  far,  I  would  not  now  forsake 
them  or  fail  to  subdue  the  Canaanites  before  them.  They  do  not  believe  my  word ; 
they  do  not  trust  me ;  hence  their  refusal  to  go  forward."  It  is  remarkable  how  exactly 
this  fatal  example  of  unbelief  at  the  begin]  ling  of  the  Old  Testament  dispensation 
was  repeated  at  its  close.  Bead  Heb.  iii.  7 — iv.  3.  Among  the  many  parallels  with 
which  history  abounds,  it  would  not  be  easy  to  find  a  parallel  so  close  or  instructive. 
When  Christ  came  and  the  Spirit  was  given,  the  first  offer  of  inheritance  in  the 
gospel  Church  was  made  to  the  Jews,  'rhe  gospel  was  preached,  "  beginning  at 
Jerusalem."  The  ofEerwas  not  altogether  fruitless.  Thousands  of  Jews  believed  and 
thereupon  entered  into  God's  rest  within  the  bosom  of  the  Christian  society.  But,  like 
Joshua  and  Caleb,  they  were  in  the  minority.  The  great  body  of  the  people  rejected 
Christ,  and  could  not  enter  in  because  of  unbelief.  What  was  the  consequence  ?  ^  They 
were  taken  at  their  <vord.  The  doom  was  spoken :  "  They  shall  not  enter  into  my  rest." 
We  believe,  indeed,  that  the  doom  is  not  final.  As  the  children  of  the  unbelieving 
generation  which  fell  in  the  wilderness  entered  Canaan  under  Joshua,  so  the  Jews  are 
one  day  to  be  saved.  Still  the  doom  has  been  a  terrible  one.  For  more  than  1800 
years  the  Jews  have  been  pining  in  the  wilderness.  There  is  another  view  of  the 
matter  which  comes  home  to  every  one  to  whom  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  has 
been  preached.  Here  is  the  lesson  deduced  in  Ps.  xov.  from  the  chapter  in  hand. 
"  To-day,  if  you  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  heart."  I  can  imagine  that  there 
may  be  amongst  us  some  to  whose  hearts  God  has  been  speaking.  He  has  taken  you 
by  the  hand,  has  taught  you  something  of  the  burden  and  foulness  of  sin,  has  made 
yon  sensible  that  worldly  prosperity  cannot  give  rest  and  satisfaction  to  the  soul,  has 
stirred  in  you  desires  after  a  worthier  portion,  has  set  before  you  Christ  and  his  salva- 
tion. If  this  be  so,  do  not  let  the  matter  remain  undecided.  Delays  are  dangerous. 
They  provoke  God's  spirit.  God  has  set  before  you  an  open  door.  It  will  not  remain 
open  for  ever  ;  it  may  not  remain  open  long.  When  men  will  not  hear  Christ's  invita- 
tion, "  Come  unto  me,  and  I  will  give  you  rest,"  he  does  not  go  on  repeating  it  for 
ever.     He  closes  the  door  and  says,  "  They  shall  not  enter  into  my  rest," — B. 

Vers.  1 — 20. — Moses  standing  in  the  breach,  or  the  power  of  intercessory  prayer. 
The  PKAYEBS  of  the  Bible  open  up  a  field  of  singularly  interesting  and  instructive 
study.  One  thing  particularly  remarkable  in  them  is  that  such  a  large  proportion 
are  intercessory.     The  earliest  prayer  of  any  length  recorded  in  Scripture  is  that  <A 


cm.  xili.,  XI7.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  IM 

Abraham  in  Gen.  xviii.  It  is  an  intercession  for  Sodom.  It  would  seem  that,  whil« 
prayer  of  every  kind  is  made  welcome  in  heaven,  a  pecnliarly  gracious  welcome  is 
prepared  for  the  prayers  in  which  the  petitioner  forgets  himself  for  the  time,  in  the 
ardour  of  his  desire  for  the  good  of  others.  It  is  in  connection  with  the  command  to 
"  pray  one  for  another  "  that  the  assurance  is  given,  "  the  effectual  fervent  prayer  of 
a  righteous  man  availeth  much  "  (James  v.  16).  And  one  can  perceive  that  the 
intercessory  prayers  of  the  Bible  saints  have  been  recorded  in  Scripture  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  with  a  peculiarly  afEectionate  care.  In  this  highest  kind  of  prayer  Moses  ex- 
celled. During  his  long  leadership  of  the  people,  dangers  from  without  and 
murmarings  from  amongst  the  people  themselves  gave  frequent  occasion  for  depre- 
cating God's  wrath  and  invoking  his  help  ;  and  Moses  never  failed  to  rise  to  such 
occasions.     His  intercessions  are  amongst  the  most  instructive  of  any  on  record. 

I.  The  occasion  of  the  present  prateh.  The  people  have  at  length  reached  the 
threshold  of  the  promised  land  ;  but  beyond  the  threshold  they  will  not  advance. 
Disbelieving  the  promise,  they  first  insisted  on  sending  spies  ;  and  then,  when  the 
spies  returned,  they  would  hear  only  the  bad  report.  They  even  proposed  to  stone 
Moses,  choose  a  new  leader,  and  go  back  to  Egypt  They  would  not  listen  to  Joshua 
and  Caleb,  and  were  only  restrained  by  a  threatening  appearance  of  the  Lord  in  the 
cloud  above  the  tabernacle.  So  greatly  was  the  wrath  of  God  kindled,  that  he 
threatened  to  consume  the  congregation  utterly,  and  raise  up  a  more  faithful  people 
in  their  stead.  "  I  will  smite  them ;  I  will  disinherit  them  ;  I  will  make  of  thee  a 
greater  nation  and  mightier  than  they."  Moses  may  have  been — I  believe  he  was — 
unprepared  for  the  incredible  perversity  of  the  present  outbreak  of  rebellion ;  but  he 
was  not  unprepared  for  the  threatening  which  it  provoked.  A  similar  outbreak  had 
been  followed  with  the  same  threatening  at  Sinai.  And  Moses  did  not  fail  to  remember 
how,  on  that  occasion,  the  threatened  destruction  had  been  averted  by  his  intercession 
(Exod.  xxxii.  7 — 14).  So,  now  also,  he  with  reverent  boldness  "  stood  before  the  Lord 
in  the  breach,  to  turn  away  his  wrath,  lest  he  should  destroy  them  "  (Ps.  ovi.  23). 

II.  The  PBAYBE.  It  is  summed  up  in  one  word,  "  Parcfon  /  "  (ver.  19).  "Pardon, 
I  beseech  thee,  the  iniquity  of  this  people."  Forgive,  yet  this  once,  their  perverse 
disobedience ;  revoke  the  sentence  pronounced  against  them ;  fuliil  thy  promise  by 

granting  them  the  land. 1  need  not  say  more  about  this  petition.    The  remarkable 

thing  in  the  praj'er  is  not  what  Moses  asks,  but  the  argument  with  which  he  enforces 
HIS  BEQUEST.  First,  he  pleads  that  the  honour  of  God's  great  name  is  at  stake. 
The  Lord  had  been  pleased  to  put  his  name  on  the  children  of  Israel.  He  had 
chosen  them  to  be  his  special  possession,  making  them  the  depositaries  of  his  oracles 
and  ordinances,  and  the  witnesses  for  his  truth.  All  this  was  now  become  matter  of 
notoriety.  In  the  mind  of  the  nations  round  about  the  name  of  the  Lord  was 
identified  with  the  seed  of  Abraham.  Vers.  13 — 16,  a.  d.,  "  If  the  tribes  perish  here, 
the  Egyptians  will  hear  of  is,  and  what  will  they  think  ?  The  signs  wrought  in  their 
sight,  both  in  Egypt  and  at  the  Red  Sea,  have  taught  them  that  thou,  the  God  of 
Jacob,  art  the  Most  High,  and  that  thou  hast  chosen  Israel  for  thy  people ;  and  the 
report  of  thy  doings  in  Horeb,  and  by  the  way,  have  deepened  the  impression 
made  by  the  Egyptian  signs.  Let  not  this  salutary  impression  be  effaced  by  dis- 
comfiture now.  Let  not  Egypt  from  behind,  and  the  Canaanites  in  front,  shout  in 
derision  of  thy  great  name.  — I  much  fear  that  this  argument  does  not  usually 
find  the  place  of  prominence  in  our  prayers  that  it  finds  here  in  Moses'  prayer.  The 
interest  of  God's  name — his  truth  and  cause — in  the  earth  does  not  lie  so  near  our 
hearts.  Yet  it  certainly  ought.  "Hallowed  be  thy  name"  should  get  the  place  of 
honour  in  our  prayers.  More  particularly,  we  ought  to  guard  against  everything 
which  would  bring  reproach  on  true  religion  in  the  view  of  the  outside  world. 
Christians  are  to  "  walk  in  wisdom  toward  them  that  are  without."  There  are  still 
Egyptians  and  Canaanites  watching  to  hear,  and  eager  to  spread,  any  report  regard- 
ing the  professed  people  of  Christ  which  they  think  can  be  made  use  of  to  the 
disparagement  of  Divine  truth  and  the  Christian  cause.  Secondly,  Moses  pleads 
the  LorcFs  promise.  Along  with  vers.  17,  18  read  Exod.  xxxiv.  5—7.  The  refer- 
ence cannot  be  mistaken.  Q.  d.,  "  Didst  not  thou  show  mo  thy  glory  in  Horeb,  and 
was  not  thy  glory  this,  viz.,  that  thou  hast  mercy?  Didst  not  thou  declare  to  me 
that  thy  name  is  the  Lord,  the  Lord  God,  merciful  and  gracious,  forgiving  iniquity 


166  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oBfl.  *m.,  Mr. 

and  transgression  ?  Into  this  name  I  will  now  run.  In  this  name  I  take  refuge. 
Remember  thy  word  on  which  thou  hast  caused  me  to  hope.    Let  thy  name  be  now 

manifested  in  forgiving  this  people." There  is  no  encouragement  in  prayer  to  be 

compared  with  that  which  is  got  from  the  study  of  God's  promises.  "  He  hath  said 
— therefore  we  may  boldly  any  "  (Heb.  xiii.  6,  6).  What  God  has  promised  to  give, 
we  may  ask  without  wavering.  Thirdly,  Moses  pleads  former  mercies  (yet.  19).  Next 
to  the  promise  of  God,  the  remembrance  of  former  instances  of  kindness  received  in 
answer  to  prayer  ministers  encouragement  to  pray  still,  and  not  faint. — Such  then  was 
the  prayer  of  Moses  at  Eadesh-bamea — the  prayer  which  turned  away  the  fatal  sword 
of  God  s  wrath  from  Israel.  I  am  much  inchned  to  think  that  instances  of  like  success 
in  prayer  are  not  so  rare  as  many  suppose  ;  that,  on  the  contrary,  if  an  inspired  his- 
torian were  to  write  the  annals  of  our  families,  churches,  communities,  it  would  be 
found  that  not  seldom  public  judgments  have  been  turned  aside  by  the  intervention  of 
the  Lord's  hidden  ones — his  Noahs  and  Daniels  and  Jobs.  When  all  secret  things  are 
brought  to  light,  these  intercessors  will  not  fail  to  obtain  recognition  and  reward.— B. 

Vers.  3,  4. — The  sin  and  shame  of  apostasy.  The  sin  of  the  Israelites  at  this  time 
is  almost  incredible.  Their  rash  words  (ver.  3)  prompt  to  reckless  resolutions  {ver. 
4),  which,  if  not  actually  carried  out,  are  laid  to  their  charge  (Neh.  ix.  17).  Their 
crime  includes  the  following  sins : — 1 .  Criminal  forgetfvlness,  as  though  the  bondage 
of  Egypt  were  better  than  warfare  under  "  Jehovah  Nissi "  (Exod.  xvii.  15).  2. 
Gross  ingratitv^e.  They  imply  that  God  has  spared  them  and  cared  for  them  thus 
far  in  order  to  destroy  them  at  last.  3.  Shameful  distrust,  notwithstanding  all  the 
promises  God  has  given,  and  the  "signs"  of  his  faithfulness  he  has  shown  (ver. 
11).  4.  Obstinate  disobedience — *  stubborn  disregard  of  the  word  and  will  of 
their  God.  6.  Utter  madness.  In  returning  to  Egypt  they  must  part  company 
with  Moses  their  leader  and  Aaron  their  priest.  They  must  abandon  the  ark  and  the 
altar.  They  could  not  expect  the  manna  to  feed  them  or  the  cloud  to  guide  them. 
And  if  they  ever  reached  Egypt,  what  a  reception  would  meet  them  there  I  All 
these  sins  are  seen  in  a  still  more  glaring  form  in  the  shameful  crime  of  apostasy 
from  Christ.  Such  a  "  drawing  "  back  to  perdition  implies  a  previous  coming  near 
to  Christ,  and  an  enjoyment  of  blessings  analogous  to  the  covenanted  blessings  of 
ancient  Israel  (Exod.  xix.  3 — 6 ;  xxiv.  4 — 8).  In  apostasy  we  see — 1.  Criminal  for- 
getfulness  of  the  bondage  of  evil  habits,  the  burden  of  an  uneasy  conscience,  the 
yearnings  of  unsatisfied  desire,  and  all  the  other  evils  from  which  we  looked  to  Christ 
to  deliver  us.  How  can  it  be  "  better  to  return  "  to  these  ?  2.  Gross  ingratitude  to 
God  for  all  the  blessings  enjoyed  during  the  Christian  pilgrimage  so  far ;  as  though 
such  a  God  could  fail  or  forsake  us,  and  not  "  perfect  that  which  concemetb  us,"  as 
all  his  previous  blessings  are  a  pledge  that  he  will  do  (Ps.  cxzxviii.  8  ;  Rom.  viii. 
32).  3.  Shameful  distrust.  "  An  evil  heart  of  unbelief  "  is  generally  the  primary 
cause  of  departing  from  God  (Heb.  iii.  12).  Distrust  makes  us  weak  against  tempt- 
ations even  of  the  grossest  kind.  We  may  lose  courage  amid  foes  or  temptations 
which,  but  for  shameful  want  of  confidence  in  God,  would  have  little  power  to  alarm 
and  divert  ub  from  the  path  of  duty  (of.  Ps.  xxvii.  1—3  j  cxviii.  6—12,  and,  in 
contrast,  1  Sam.  xxvii.  1).  4.  Obstinate  disobedience.  For  we  are  "  under  law  to 
Christ ; "  and  "  his  will  is  our  sanctificatjon,"  our  perseverance,  our  conflict  and 
victory  till  we  reach  the  heavenly  Canaan  (1  Thess.  iv.  3 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  11 — 14 ;  Heb. 
iii.  14  ;  vi.  12).  6.  Utter  madness;  for  to  "draw  back  "is  to  forfeit  the  fellowship 
of  Christ's  Church,  the  tokens  of  his  favour,  his  promises,  his  consolations,  and  the 
good-will  of  God.    To  succeed  is  perdition  (Heb.  x.  26—39). — P. 

Vers.  8,  9.— With  God  on  our  side  tee  are  in  the  majority .  Caleb  and  Joshua  here 
describe— 

I.  The  conditions  on  which  wb  hat  bxpkct  God  to  bb  with  us.  1.  The  un- 
merited good  pleasure  of  God.  "If  the  Lord  delight  in  us."  This  is  repeatedly 
mentioned  as  the  origin  of  God's  favour  to  the  Israelites  (Deut.  iv.  37  ;  vii.  7,8,&c.) 
and  to  Christians  (Eph.  i.  3—6 ;  2  Tim.  i.  9,  &c.).  Only  provided  that  this  good 
pleasure  is  not  forfeited  by  obstinate  disobedience  or  distrust.  So  that  the  second 
condition  is— 2.  Obedience.     "  Only  rebel  not,"  &c.    That  generation  sinned  away 


CHS.  xin.,  «v.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  167 

the  favour  of  God,  though  it  could  not  annul  his  faithfulness.  3.  Confidence  in  God. 
"Neither  fear  ye  the  people."  To  fear  them  was  to  distrust  God  (Isa.  viii.  13,  14; 
Heh.  xiii.  ^&o.). 

11.  The  certain  success  of  those,  who  enjot  the  help  op  God.  Caleb  and 
Joshua  express  their  confidence  in  various  ways ;  e.  g.  in  ch.  xiii.  30  ("  veni,  vidi, 
vid"')  ;  ver.  8,  "he  will  bring  us  in  ;"  ver.  9,  "  bread  for  us,"  &c.  The  Canaanite« 
dwelt  in  fortresses,  but  God,  their  strength,  was  departed  from  them.  Israel  dwelt  in 
tents,  but  Prov.  xviii.  10.  Such  confidence  we  may  have,  when  opposed  by  foes, 
human  or  diabolical,  however  numerous  or  powerful.  With  God  on  our  side  we  are 
in  the  majority  (lllus.  Exod.  xiv.  13;  2  Kings  vi.  16:  2  Chron.  xiv.  11 ;  xx.  12  ; 
zxxii.  7,  8 ;  Ps.  xlvi.  11 ;  Rom.  viii  31,  &o.).  A  good  illustration  may  be  found  in 
a  letter  of  the  Prince  of  Orange  after  the  fall  of  Haarlem,  in  which  he  says,  "  Before 
ever  I  took  up  the  cause  of  the  oppressed  Christians  in  these  provinces  I  had  entered 
into  a  close  alliance  with  the  King  of  kings,"  &c,  (Motley's  '  Rise  of  the  Dutch 
Republic,'  Pt.  III.  ch.  ix.).— P. 

Vers.  11 — 19. — SMlful  intercession-  The  crowning  act  of  unbelief  on  the  part  of 
the  Israelites  at  Kadesh  brings  God  into  their  midst  in  righteous  anger.  He  remon- 
strates (ver.  11)  and  threatens  (ver.  12).  God's  foreknowledge  of  Moses'  prayer  did 
not  prevent  this  apparently  absolute  threat.  This  need  be  no  difficulty  to  us,  unless  we 
hold  opinions  about  God  which  would  make  the  government  of  free,  moral  beings  by 
promises  and  threats  impossible.  For  illustrations  of  Divine  words  or  acts  contingent 
on  human  actions  see  2  Kings  xx.  1 — 11 ;  Luke  xxiv.  28,  29 ;  Acts  xxvii.  22 — 24, 31. 
Moses  stands  in  the  breach,  and  skilfully  urges  two  motives,  suggested  by — I.  His 

ZEAL   for  the   honour  OF   GOD.      II.    HiS   FAITH  IN  THE   MERCY   OF  GoD. 

I.  (vers.  13 — 16).  The  Egyptians  would  soon  "make  comedies  out  of  the 
Church's  tragedies."  Our  best  pleas  are  founded  on  the  prayer,  "  Hallowed  be  thy 
name."  H.  g.  1.  In  pleading  for  a  highly-favoured  but  guilty  nation.  After  all 
God  has  done  for  Britain  and  by  it,  may  we  not  feel  as  though  it  would  be  a  dis- 
honour on  the  Christian  name  and  a  reflection  on  the  Christian's  God  if  we  were 
altogether  cast  off.  Our  plea  is  Jer.  x.  24,  and  our  hope  is  Jer.  xxx.  11.  2.  In 
pleading  for  a  fallen  Christian.  3.  Or  for  ourselves  (Ps.  Ixxix.  9  ;  Jer.  xiv.  7,  &c.). 
God  feels  the  power  of  this  motive  (Deut.  xxxii.  27 ;  Bzek.  xx.  9, 14).  God  is  not, 
like  some  men,  indifferent  to  his  own  reputation  (Isa.  xlviii.  11). 

II.  Note  how  skilfully  Moses  uses  God's  own  declaration  of  his  name  in  Exod. 
xxxiv.  He  appeals  (1)  to  the  pure  mercy  of  God  ;  (2)  to  the  past  mercies  of  God 
(Ps.  XXV.  6,  7 ;  li.  1 ;  Isa.  Iv.  7,  8).— P. 

Vers.  22,  23. — A  priceless  privilege  offered,  refused,  lost.  The  lessons  from  the 
narrative  of  chs.  ziu.  and  xiv.  may  be  summed  up  as  follows.  We  see  here  a  price- 
less privilege — 

I.  Offered.  It  is  Canaan,  "  the  glory  of  all  lands,"  the  gift  of  the  God  of  their 
fathers,  who  redeemed  them  from  Egypt  that  he  might  bring  them  to  a  land  of 
liberty  and  rest.  The  first  report  of  the  spies  (ch.  xiii.  27 — 29)  is  true  in  itself,  but 
its  style  suggests  faithless  fears  which  infect  the  congregation  (ch.  xiii.  30).  The 
exagsjerated  or  false  reports  that  are  now  given  (ch.  xiii,  31 — 33)  increase  the  panic, 
but  God's  offer  is  still  before  them  (2  Tim.  ii.  12). 

II.  Refused.  The  shades  of  evening  were  gathering  when  the  report  of  the  spies 
was  delivered.  (Sketch  the  spread  of  the  panic  during  the  night,  ch.  xiv.  1.)  In  the 
morning  the  murmurings  take  a  definite  form  (vers.  2 — 4).  The  cogent  reasonings 
of  Caleb  and  Joshua  are  in  vain  (vers.  6 — 9).  They  threaten  to  depose  Moses,  and 
to  stone  the  faithful  witnesses,  and  they  deliberately  reject  the  offer  of  God.  Thus 
are  sinners  wont  to  believe  lies  and  distrust  true  witnesses ;  to  assent  to  fallacies  and 
resist  the  soundest  arguments ;  to  neglect  or  persecute  their  best  friends,  and  distrust 
and  rebel  against  their  Redeemer,  God. 

III.  Lost.  God  interposes  to  protect  his  servants  and  sentence  the  rebels.  Moses' 
intercession  saves  them  from  immediate  destruction,  but  not  from  irremediable  loss. 
There  are  limits  to  the  power  of  intercessory  prayer  (Jer.  xv.  1 ;  1  John  v.  16).  A 
new  panic,  •nother  night  of  weeping  (ver.  39).     On  the  morrow  a  reaction,  a  revnl" 


168  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oBa.  xm.,  XIV 

gion  of  feeling,  but  not  a  repentance  of  heart  (of.  1  Sam.  xv.  30).  What  was  im- 
possible yesterday  is  practicable  to-day  (ver.  40).  But  they  go  without  the  prayer 
of  Moses  (ch.  x.  35)  or  the  presence  of  God  (ver.  44).  The  mountain  pass  is  impreg- 
nable. It  is  too  late.  The  offer  is  lost  to  that  generation.  Their  opportunity  has 
been  sinned  away.  Defeat  and  death  await  them  (Isa.  xlii.  24,  26).  These  truths 
applicable — 1.  To  the  offer  of  spiritual  conquests  to  the  Church.  The  Church  of 
Christ  often  on  the  borders  of  a  land  promised  to  our  conquests.  Unbelief  suggests 
fears,  our  enemies'  strength,  our  own  weakness,  &c.  Gradually  faith  in  our  own 
power  may  depart,  because  faith  in  God  is  lost.  While  others  are  useful  we  may  be 
ciphers  in  the  Church.  Special  excitement,  or  the  pricks  of  conscience,  may  incite 
us  to  make  spasmodic  efforts ;  but  the  faculty  for  Christian  service  may  be  well- 
nigh  extirpated  by  disuse  (Matt.  xxv.  29).  2.  To  the  offer  of  a  present  salvation  to, 
the  sinner.  Christian  Calebs  bring  a  good  report  of  God's  promised  land  o£  rest ; 
but  indecision  or  unbelief  may  forfeit  it  (Heb.  iiL  19). — P. 

Ver.  28. — Fatal  answers  to  faithless  prayen.  The  faithless  prayer  was  heard  bj' 
God  when  the  people  munnured  (verl  2).  Now  the  answer  comes  to  their  own 
destruction.  Apply  to — 1.  Reckless  transgressors,  who  brave  the  consequences  of 
their  sins.  Illustration — Jews  (Matt,  xxvii.  25),  who,  however,  soon,  dreaded  the 
answer  (Acts  v.  28;  of.  Prov.  i.  31).  2.  The  discontented.  E.g.  Bachel  (Gen. 
XXX.  1 ;  XXXV.  19) ;  Hebrews  lusting  for  flesh  (ch,  xi,  18 — 20),  or  desiring  a  king 
(1  Sam.  viii.  6 — 22 ;  Hosea  xiii.  11 ;  c£  Prov.  xii.  13).  3.  Profane  swearers  impre- 
cating damnation  and  receiving  it  (Ps.  lix.  12 ;  Ixiv.  8 ;  Matt.  xii.  36).  4.  Distrust- 
ful servants  of  God,  who,  in  haste,  may  proffer  requests  which,  if  granted,  would 
leave  a  stain  on  their  memories,  if  not  actually  fatal  to  their  reputation.  H.  g.  Moses 
(ch.  xi.  15)  ;  Elijah  (1  Kings  xix.  4)  ;  Jonah  (iv.  3).  What  thanks  are  due  to  God 
that  in  his  mercy  he  does  not  always  answer  our  prayers,  implied  or  expressed  I  And 
how  much  we  need  the  teaching  and  the  spirit  of  Christ,  that  we  may  pray  thought- 
fully and  trustfully,  and  that  he  may  not  have  to  say  to  lu,  "  Ye  know  not  what  ye 
ask"  (Mark  x.  35— 40).— P. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — A  repentance  to  he  repented  of.  I.  As  wb  consider  how  it  was 
CADSBD.  1.  By  the  fears  of  an  all-devouring  selfishness.  Selfishness  swallowed  up 
every  other  consideration.  Their  vexation  was  caused  not  by  the  stirrings  of  a 
guilty  conscience,  but  by  suffering  and  fleshly  loss.  All  they  wanted  was  the  suffer- 
ing taken  away.  There  was  not  the  slightest  sign  of  shame  and  penitence  and  return 
to  God  with  fruits  meet  for  repentance.  Self-will  was  as  strong  in  this  night  of 
weeping  as  it  had  been  in  the  day  when  they  proposed  to  send  the  spies  (Deut.  i.  • 
22).  2.  By  a  false  report.  How  many  are  terrified  by  representations  of  religion 
as  far  from  the  truth  as  what  the  spies  said  of  Canaan  1  Even  where  there  is  nothing 
malevolent  or  base  in  purpose,  the  difficulties  of  religion  may  he  set  forth  as  if  it  were 
all  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  from  end  to  end,  and  heaven  a  mere  perad- 
venture  at  the  last.  These  Israelites  were  given  over  to  strong  delusion  that  they 
should  believe  a  lie.  Selfishness  was  the  source  of  all  their  weeping,  and  a  false 
report  brought  it  forth.  Such  views  of  religion,  got  upon  such  representations,  will 
have  to  be  changed,  or  there  can  be  no  real  return  to  God,  no  real  achievement  of 
the  rest  of  his  people. 

II.  As  WB  coNsiDBB  HOW  IT  WAS  EXPBBssBD.  1.  In  unjust  complaint*  of  their 
leaders.  Moses  and  Aaron  were  neither  of  them  faultless,  far  from  it,  but  their 
faults  were  such  as  God  marked,  and  not  rebellious  men.  These  faults  the  people 
had  no  notion  of,  nor  would  it  have  mattered  if  they  had.  A  Moses  less  faithful  to . 
God,  more  indulgent  to  their  whims  and  caprices,  would  have  suited  them  better. 
They  blamed  Moses  when  they  should  have  praised  him,  and  it  was  his  highest  glory 
that  there  was  nothing  about  him  they  could  praise.  2.  Infremitd  r^erences  to 
themselves.  They  speak  as  men  with  all  judgment,  self-control,  and  self-respect  clean 
gone  out  of  them.  They  were  not  in  a  state  of  mind  to  form  a  right  estimate  of 
anything  whatever.  "  The  mind  must  retain  its  full  strength  when  engaged  on  such 
a  work  as  repentance."  8.  Their  rash  rmroaches  against  God.  There  was  but  one 
tiling  they  said  of  him  that  was  true.    Ele  had  indeed  brought  them  into  this  land. 


OBB.  xin.,  xit.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  16i 

Certain  it  ia  that  they  conld  never  have  found  their  way  so  far  themselves.  But 
their  present  strait .  was  none  of  his  bringing.  It  had  come  through  unbelief, 
cowardice,  and  lying.  Men  have  low,  miserable  views  of  what  is  good  for  them- 
selves, and  the  end  is  blasphemous  language  with  respect  to  the  all-loving,  all-wise- 
God  above.  He  knew  far  better  than  they  how  to  protect  their  wives  and  children. 
III.  Ab  wb  considbe  how  the  follt  op  it  was  exposed.  Everything  went 
contrary  to  their  anticipations.  The  men  who  brought  up  the  evil  report  died  by  the 
plague  before  the  Lord.  This  was  in  itself  a  clear  intimation  of  their  wickedness 
in  misleading  the  people.  Caleb  and  Joshua  stood  out,  vindicated  both  as  wise  coun- 
sellors and  speakers  of  the  truth.  Canaan  was  all  they  had  represented  it  to  be,  but 
this  thankless,  rebellious  generation  should  have  no  personal  experience  of  it.  They 
were  indeed  to  die  in  the  wilderness,  gradually  dropping  off  for  forty  years,  and  the 
children  whose  impending  fate  they  deplored,  themselves  entered  the  land  of  which 
their  fathers  had  shown  themselves  unworthy.  Forty  years  I  Who  can  tell  how  many 
during  that  time  may  have  sought  carefully,  with  tears,  and  in  due  time  found,  a 
place  of  true  repentance  and  godly  sorrow  ?  Not  able  to  enter  the  earthly  Canaan, 
any  more  than  Moses,  Aaron,  or  Miriam,  they  may  still  have  found  their  part  in 
the  heavenly  one. — Y. 

Ver.  4. — A  vain  proposition.  Very  briefly  and  comprehensively  put,  with  an 
appearance  of  decision  and  unanimity,  but  nevertheless  utterly  vain  with  respect  to 
both  matters  mentioned  in  it. 

I.  The  making  op  a  captain.  They  could  call  a  man  a  captain,  but  that  would 
not  make  him  one.  The  power  of  election  may  be  a  great  privilege,  but  it  is  greater 
negatively  than  positively.  No  election  can  make  a  fool  into  a  wise  man,  or  a 
coward  into  a  hero,  any  more  than  it  can  make  the  moon  give  the  light  of  the  sun, 
or  thorns  to  produce  grapes.  Election  may  give  a  man  opportunity  only  to  show 
decisively  that  he  is  not  able  to  use  it.  On  the  other  hand,  no  election  can  give  the 
most  capable  of  men  the  power  to  do  impossibilities.  Captains  are  not  made  in  this 
way  at  all.  The  true  captain  is  he  who,  having  been  faithful  in  that  which  is  least, 
finds  his  way  on  by  natural  attraction  to  that  which  is  greater.  He  is  not  so  much 
elected  as  recognised.  There  is  much  significance  from  this  point  of  view  in  Christ's 
words:  "Ye  have  not  chosen  me,  but  I  have  chosen  you."  The  Israelites  had 
rejected  the  word  of  the  Lord  and  the  leader  he  had  chosen,  and  what  wisdom  was 
there  in  them  to  find  a  better  leader  for  themselves  ?  Even  as  God,  for  his  own  pur- 
poses, chooses  men  after  his  own  heart,  such  as  his  penetrating,  unerring  eye  sees  can 
be  trained  and  fashioned  in  the  right  way,  so  men  make  choice  after  their  hearts 
only  to  show  their  folly  and  ignorance,  and  that  oftentimes  right  speedily.  The  true 
election  is  to  elect  ourselves  to  follow  the  good,  the  true,  the  noble,  and  the  wise,  and 
only  them  so  far  as  they  are  plainly  following  Christ  (Heb.  xii.  1—4). 

n.  The  betubn  to  Egypt.  The  land  they  had  been  through  and  knew  was  even 
less  accessible  than  the  unvisited  land  of  which  they  had  such  exaggerated  fears. 
Where  should  they  get  provision  without  God  to  give  them  manna  ?  and  _  would  not 
Egypt  be  even  more  hostile  than  Canaan  ?  By  this  time  the  name  Israel  had  become 
coi  aected  in  the  Egyptian  mind  with  disaster  of  every  sort.  What  sort  of  men  then 
we  e  these  to  talk  of  the  welfare  of  wife  and  children  when  they  proposed  a  step 
which  would  bring  them  into  the  direst  destitution  ?  Even  while  they  spoke  God 
was  sustaining  them  and  their  families  with  bread  from  heaven.  It  was  even  from 
his  manna  that  these  rebels  were  made  strong  against  him.  Proud-hearted,  vain, 
conceited  man  will  propose  the  most  silly  ventures  rather  than  submit  to  God.  He 
is  the  last  refuge,  in  more  senses  than  one,  of  the  perplexed.  Anywhere,  into  any 
absurdity  and  refuge  of  lies,  rather  than  give  up  the  darling  lusts  of  the  heart,  and 
face  the  necessities  of  true  repentance.  Every  man  is  trying  to  return  to  Egypt  who, 
having  been  disappointed  in  one  earth-born  hope,  straightway  proceeds  to  indulge 
another.  It  is  poor  work,  when  we  find  ourselves  checked  by  difficulties  in  living 
a  better  life,  to  give  up  in  despair.  To  make  the  future  as  the  past  is  impossible ;  it 
must  either  be  better  or  worse.  God  helps  the  man  who  st«adily  and  strenuously 
keeps  his  face  towards  Canaan. — Y. 


170  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [chs.  xiii.,  xiv. 

Ver.  5.— A  mute  appeal.  I.  There  coMEa  a  time  when  all  expostulation  with 
MEN  IS  vain,  at  all  events  the  expostulation  o£  certain  people.  Moses  felt  no  word 
he  could  say  would  be  of  the  slightest  use.  In  vain  you  throw  the  pearls  of  truth 
and  soberness  before  the  swinish  multitude,  and  it  is  the  humbling  testimony  of 
history  that  only  too  often  men  get  so  embruted  in  their  prejudices  and  passions  as 
to  be  for  all  purposes  of  rational  action  little  better  than  swine.  Caleb  and  Joshua 
spoke,  only  to  be  threatened  with  stones.  Moses  and  Aaron  make  no  attempt  to 
speak,  but  fall  on  their  faces  before  all  the  assembly.  What  the  seventy  elders  were 
about  all  this  time  we  know  not.  When  even  Moses  has  to  be  silent  it  is  little 
wonder  their  presence  should  count  for  nothing.  We  need  to  recollect  this  madness 
and  perversity  of  men,  this  ease  and  rapidity  with  which  human  passion  mounts  to 
the  violence  of  a  hurricane.  The  reasonableness  of  human  nature  is  far  too  fre- 
quently glorified.  There  was  a  time  when  Paul's  converts  in  Galatia  would  have 
plucked  out  their  eyes,  and  given  them  to  him ;  yet  as  years  pass  on,  and  they  listen 
to  another  gospel,  which  is  not  another,  he  has  to  mourn  that  he  seems  to  have 
become  their  enemy  because  he  tells  them  the  truth  (Gal.  iv.  15,  16). 

II.  But  when  we  can  do  nothing  for  men  directly,  we  must  not,  therefore,  wait 
IN  complete  inaction.  Moses  was  obliged  to  be  silent  in  words ;  not  even  to  God 
does  he  seem  to  have  spoken  ;  but  he  fell  to  the  ground  in  mute  and  humble  appeal. 
There,  prostrate  before  the  tabernacle,  were  Moses  and  Aaron,  the  leader  and  the 
priest,  brethren  according  to  the  flesh,  united  now  by  deep  afiBiction,  if  a  little  while  ago 
they  were  separated  by  envy.  Nor  was  the  lowly  attitude  simply  an  appeal  to  God ; 
it  might  have  effect  on  some  of  the  better  sort  among  the  multitude,  finding  a  way  to 
the  heart  by  the  eye,  which  for  the  time  was  not  open  by  the  ear.  Neither  was  the 
appeal  simply  /or  the  sake  of  Moses  and  Aaron.  The  people  had  treated  them 
badly,  but  this  was  a  small  matter  compared  with  their  treatment  of  God.  How 
often  we  fume  over  injustice  to  ourselves,  utterly  forgetting  the  great  world's  huge 
and  light-hearted  negligence  of  him  who  made  and  redeemed  it.  Consider  Martha, 
complaining  so  bitterly  of  Mary,  while  she  herself  was  refusing  the  true  hospitality 
to  Jesus.  A  man  with  the  mind  of  Christ  Jesus  in  him  will  be  always  more  affected 
by  slights  upon  the  Saviour  than  upon  himself. 

III.  There  is  always  then  this  one  thing  we  can  do  in  the  turmoil  of  human 
affairs:  we  can  recognise  with  deep  humility  the  awful  presence  of  God. 
As  we  are  driven  into  a  sense  of  utter  helplessness,  let  us  think  of  him  from  whom, 
and  by  whom,  and  to  whom  are  all  things.  It  is  only  when  we  are  humbled  before 
him,  and  recollect  his  love  and  power  in  Christ,  that  we  can  be  calm  in  the  presence 
of  the  awful  problems  of  human  existence.  How  much  better  off  was  Moses  in  his 
extremitjr  than  the  Israelites  in  theirs  1  They  rejected  Moses  and  the  tabernacle  to 
speak  vain  words  about  returning  to  Egypt ;  he,  shut  out  as  it  were  from  service  to 
them,  found  his  sure  refuge  in  prostration  before  God  (Ps.  xlvi.  1 — 3). — ^Y. 

Vers.  6 — 10. — Speaking  out :  a  last  appeal.  Moaes  is  silent  from  necessity,  his 
power  with  men  in  abeyance,  and  he  waiting  humbly  upon  God.  Joshua  and  Caleb, 
who  were  not  only  men  of  a  different  spirit,  but  also  very  imperfectly  acquainted 
with  Moses'  peculiar  burdenL  spoke  out.  As  it  was  well  for  Moses  and  Aaron  to  be 
silent,  it  was  also  well  for  Caleb  and  Joshua  to  speak  out.  Moses  and  Aaron  were 
for  the  time  separated,  forsaken,  and  as  it  were  condemned ;  but  Caleb  and  Joshua 
are  still  in  the  multitude— Caleb  indeed  partly  declared,  and  only  waiting  further 
opportunity  to  speak  his  mind  fully  on  the  subject.  Now  Joshua  and  he  take  their 
stand  without  any  hesitation  or  chance  of  being  mistaken.  They  had  something  to 
say  which  Moses  could  not  say,  for  they  had  been  through  the  land.  Thus,  when 
God's  servant  is  compelled  to  be  silent,  friends  arise  to  say  what  is  right  and  just. 
Consider — 

I.  The  manner  of  the  speakers.  "  They  rent  their  clothes."  This  was  the 
symbol  of  hearts  rent  with  grief  and  astonishment  because  of  impending  disaster. 
To  the  Israelites  their  only  hope  appeared  in  retracing  their  steps.  To  Caleb  and 
Joshua  this  was  the  summary  and  utter  extinction  of  a  great  opportunity.  The 
mnltitude  looked  on  Canaan  as  worse  than  the  grave,  a  scene  of  vain  struggles  and 
harassing  privations.    Caleb  and  Joshua  looked  on  the  multitude  as  threatening  tht 


CBS.  xiiL,  xtv.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBEBS.  Ifl 

unutterable  folly  of  drawing  back  from  certain  and  inestimable  blessings  when  they 
lay  within  their  reach.  Therefore  they  accompanied  their  speech  with  an  action  that 
Indicated  the  distress  and  laceration  of  their  hearts.  Truth  may  do  such  things 
naturally  in  the  very  vehemence  and  consistency  of  its  onset.  We  do  not  read  that 
the  spies  who  brought  up  a  slander  on  the  land  rent  their  clothes  while  they  were 
telling  their  story.  Hypocrisy  must  always  be  careful  in  its  histrionics  not  to  overdo 
the  thing. 

II.  The  matter  of  their  speech.  They  give  the  testimony  of  experience.  They 
had  passed  through  the  land  to  search  it.  Although  they  were  only  two  against  ten 
who  told  a  different  story,  yet,  strong  in  the  consciousness  of  sincerity  and  com- 
petency, they  declared  what  they  had  seen  with  their  eyes,  looked  upon,  and  handled. 
Though  their  testimony  would  not  have  been  enough  for  some  purposes,  yet  it  was 
quite  enough  to  throw  as  a  check  in  the  way  of  revolted  Israel.  They  emphatically 
assert  the  goodness  of  the  land.  It  was  a  land  to  be  desired,  corresponding  to  all  the 
promises  made  and  the  hopes  cherished,  worth  all  the  struggling  and  self-denial  that 
might  be  needed  in  order  to  attain  it.  They  show  a  devout  recognition  of  Jehovah. 
This  alone  might  make  their  word,  though  only  two,  outweigh  the  exaggerations  of 
the  other  ten.  The  recognition  shows  itself  in  two  ways.  1.  They  avow  the  neces- 
sity of  his  favour.  "  If  the  Lord-delight  in  us ;  "  that  means,  surely,  "  If  we  believe 
in  the  Lord."  That  which  delights  the  Lord  is  to  see  men  walking  by  faith,  and  not 
by  sight,  stepping  forward  into  the  darkness  upon  his  clear  command.  Caleb  and 
Joshua  felt  sure,  from  what  they  had  seen  of  the  fatness  and  beauty  of  Canaan,  that 
God  wished  to  delight  in  his  people,  if  only  they  would  allow  it.  2.  They  avow  the 
necessity  of  submission  to  God.  Unbelief  is  not  only  separation,  it  is  rebellion.  This 
was  the  real  danger  of  Israel — rebellion  against  God's  appointments  and  restrictions. 
By  their  present  conduct  they  were  strengthening  the  nations  of  Canaan  with  more 
than  all  their  walled  cities,  giants,  and  strong  men  could  give  them.  They  show  that 
the  Canaanites  are  really  very  weak.  There  is  nothing  more  fallacious  than  outside 
show  and  casual  inspection.  The  spies  had  brought  some  fruit,  and  doubtless  tasted 
much  more ;  but  how  could  they  report  adequately  on  defences  which  they  could  not 
examine  in  any  accurate  way  ?  They  did  not  know  how  all  these  people  were  imder- 
mined  and  enervated  by  their  wickedness.  The  very  wealth  of  the  land  became  a 
curse  and  corrupting  influence  to  the  idolaters  who  dwelt  in  it  Wicked  nations  in  the 
midst  of  all  their  boasting  and  revelry  are  preparing  their  own  destruction. 

III.  The  BESDLTS  OP  THEIR  SPEECH.  1.  The  exosperotion  of  the  people  reaches  its 
highest  pilch.  "  All  the  congregation  bade  stone  them  with  stones."  This  was  the 
punishment  which  God  had  appointed  for  serious  transgressions  (Levit.  xx.  2,  27 ; 
xxiv.  14 ;  Numb.  xv.  35 ;  Deut.  xiii.  10,  &c.).  And  now  the  people  adopt  it, 
numbering  Caleb  and  Joshua  with  transgressors  against  their  sovereign  will.  If  we 
speak  the  truth,  all  of  it,  and  at  the  time  when  it  should  be  spoken,  we  must  be  ready 
for  the  consequences.  The  two  faithful  witnesses  would  certainly  have  been  stoned, 
as  Zechariah  long  after  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  21),  but-^2.  God  himself  interfered.  "  The 
glory  of  the  Lord  appeared,"  <fcc.  In  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  the 
rebels  were  reduced  to  impotence.  One  can  imagine  the  uplifted  stone  dropped,  as 
if  it  had  turned  to  a  blazing  coal.  Israel  may  still  be  sullen  and  rebellious  in  heart, 
but  its  hand  is  in  the  power  of  God.  He  can  rescue  his  servants  from  the  power  of 
their  enemies,  if  that  be  most  expedient.  Caleb  and  Joshua  still  had  much  work  to 
do.  Or,  as  happened  to  Stephen,  he  can  turn  the  unchecked  fury  of  men  into  the 
agent  of  a  quick  and  glorious  dismission  from  the  toils  and  perils  of  earthly  service. 
In  God's  house  the  more  manifest  the  faithfulness  of  the  servant,  the  more  manifest 
also  the  faithfulness  of  the  Master. — ^Y. 

Vers.  11,  12. — The  Lord  breaks  silence.  It  was  time  now  for  the  people  to  be 
silent.  They  had  talked  and  acted  enough  of  folly.  The  Lord  asks  certain  ques- 
tions, and  follows  them  with  certain  propositions.  We  can  hardly  call  them  deter- 
minations, but  rather  suggestions  of  action,  such  as  may  be  further  mrdified,  if 
modifying  considerations  can  be  introduced. 

Ver.  11. — God  implies  that  it  is  useless  to  wait  any  longer.  It  is  not  a  qnestion 
of  whether  he  is  long-suffering,  but  whether  the  long-suffering  wiU  answer  any  good 


172  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBBE8.  [ohb.  xin.,  Tctf. 

end.  He  had  been  engaged,  as  it  were,  in  a  solemn  experiment  with  the  libonted 
Israelites,  and  the  experiment  was  now  complete.  No  further  knowledge  could  be 
gained,  and  no  change  in  the  direction  of  trust  and  obedience  could  be  hoped  for, 
from  longer  waiting.  To  wait,  therefore,  was  only  to  waste  time  and  simulate  long- 
BufEering.  It  must  be  plain  to  every  one  who  will  consider  carefully,  that  the 
Israelites  had  shown  by  their  conduct  the  great  distance  that  the  calamity  of  human 
nature's  fall  has  placed  between  men  and  God.  God  knows  the  distance  ;  it  is  we 
who  deny  it  or  trifle  with  it.  This  experiment  with  one  generation  was  not  for  the 
information  of  God  himself,  but  to  instruct  and  impress  all  generations.  Israel, 
unconsciously,  was  helping  to  lay  a  foundation  in  history  for  the  great  doctrine  of 
regeneration.  "  Except  a  man  be  bom  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God  " 
(John  iii.  3).  Here  is  a  generation,  not  bom  again,  but  taken  in  the  ordinary  course 
of  nature.  Nothing  is  done  to  alter  them,  but  a  complete  change  is  made  in  their 
circumstances.  Liberated  from  the  thraldom  of  oppressors,  they  are  brought  under 
authority  of  the  law  of  God,  holy  and  just  and  good.  That  law  follows  them  into 
every  hour  of  life.  And  the  result  of  all  proves  that  a  man  cannot  by  such  strength 
and  disposition  as  nature  gives  him  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God.  This  generation 
was  not  fit  even  for  the  earthly  Canaan.  That  land  was  no  place  for  carnal  minds 
to  indulge  their  own  inclinations.  The  people  were  not  fit,  and  the  unfitness  is  now 
perfectly  clear.  As  they  lift  up  the  stones  against  Caleb  and  Joshua  the  experiment 
is  complete.  Hence  we  see  the  language  of  God  here  is  in  perfect  consistency  with 
all  the  Scripture  that  emphasises  the  fact  of  his  long-sufferiTig.  It  still  remains  a 
duty  of  man,  as  it  is  an  undoubted  and  gracious  disposition  of  God,  to  forgive  imto 
seventy  times  seven.  Recollect,  further,  that  God  was  dealing  xjoiih  these  Israelites 
as  a  whole.  What  his  relation  was  to  each  as  a  man,  and  not  simply  as  an  Israelite, 
is  hardly  to  be  considered  here.  The  great  lesson  of  Jehovah's  questionings  in  this 
verse  may  be  stated  in  the  words  of  Jesus :  "  That  which  is  bom  of  the  flesh  is  flesh, 
and  that  which  is  bom  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit." 

Ver.  12. — God  makes  three  propositions.  1.  As  to  the  fate  of  the  unbelieving 
nation.  "  I  will  smite  them  with  the  pestilence."  If  Israel  is  to  perish,  it  shall  not 
be  at  the  hands  of  some  other  nation,  which  may  thus  glorify  and  exalt  itself.  The 
occasion  is  one  on  which,  if  a  blow  is  to  be  struck,  it  must  be  a  manifestly  super- 
natural one,  even  as  in  the  Deluge  or  the  destruction  of  Sodom.  The  destruction, 
too,  shall  be  sudden.  The  people  shall  not  be  left  to  wander  and  droop  and  die  in 
the  wilderness.  The  disease  which  comes  from  sin  and  works  out  death  shall  have 
its  energy  concentrated  in  one  swift  tremendous  blow.  2.  As  to  the  aspect  in  which 
this  visitation  is  to  be  regarded-  "  I  will  disinherit  them."  God  looked  on  Israel  as 
the  legitimate  and  responsible  heir  to  Canaan.  It  was  considered  as  Abraham's  land, 
by  a  solemn  covenant,  even  when  he  was  a  stranger  in  it  (Gen.  lii.  7 ;  xiii.  14 — 17 ;  iv. 
7,  18 — 21 ;  xvii.  8).  The  aspect  of  Canaan  as  an  inheritance  was  still  further  con- 
firmed in  Isaac  as  the  child  of  promise,  and  Jacob  as  acquirer  of  the  birthright.  But 
in  spite  of  all  this,  Israel  obstinately  refused  to  make  ready  for  the  great  inheiitance. 
The  heirs  to  high  rank  and  great  possessions  in  this  world  are  watched  with  great 
solicitude.  Hereafter  they  will  not  only  have  great  means  for  indulgence,  but  great 
ojjportunities  for  good  and  eviL  And  sometimes  a  parent,  with  deep  pain  of  heart, 
will  feel  compelled  to  disinherit  an  unworthy  son.  This  word  "disinlierit,"  rightly 
considered,  puts  a  tone  of  inexpressible  sadness  into  this  verse.  Recollect  that  tone 
as  well  as  words,  manner  as  well  as  matter,  has  to  be  considered  in  listening  to  any 
judicial  sentence  of  God.  A  sceptic  talWng  with  Dr.  Channing  reproached  Jesus 
Christ  for  what  he  called  his  angry  denunciations  in  Matt.  xi.  20 — 24.  In  answer, 
Channing  opened  the  New  Testament,  and  read  the  passages  referred  to  aloud.  As 
soon  as  he  had  finished,  his  hearer  said,  "  Oh,  if  that  was  the  tone  in  which  he  spoke, 
it  alters  the  case."  3.  As  to  the  future  of  Moses.  "  I  will  make  of  thee  a  greater 
nation,  and  mightier  than  they."  Here  is  the  suggestion  of  another  experiment. 
Abraham  was  an  eminent  believer.  Against  all  his  shortcomings  and  infirmities  in 
other  respects,  and  they  are  very  plain,  his  faith  stands  out  in  relief,  conspicuous, 
almost  colossal,  one  may  say,  in  its  manifestations.  Nevertheless,  his  descendants 
turned  out  utter  unbelievers.  Take  away  from  them  for  a  single  moment  the  light 
of  tilings  seen  and  temporal,  and  they  become  frantic  and  rebelUoua  M  *  child  left 


0H8.  xiu.,  XIV.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  178 

alone  in  the  dark.  And  now  God  seems  to  suggest  that  possibly  the  seed  of  Most* 
may  prove  of  a  better  sort.  Thus  we  have  in  the  propositions  of  this  verse  what  we 
may  call  alternative  snggestions.  They  show  what  things  might,  conceivably,  «nd 
not  unjustly,  have  happened  at  this  critical  turning-point. — Y. 

Vers.  13 — 19. — Moses'  view  of  the  position.  God  has  presented  some  of  the  con- 
Biderations  which  needed  to  be  presented ;  Moses  now  presents  others ;  and  all  taken 
together  produce  the  decision  actually  arrived  at.  What  God  had  said  it  was  not 
for  Moses  to  say,  and  so  what  Moses  said  it  was  not  for  God  to  say ;  nevertheless,  all 
needed  to  be  said. 

I.  Note  the  chakactbb  in  which  Moses  chiefly  appears.  His  first  words 
indicate  a  concern  for  the  reputation  of  Jehovah  among  the  nations,  and  it  would  be 
wrong  to  suppose  that  this  was  not  a  matter  of  real  concern,  but  it  is  evident  the 
chief  thought  in  his  mind  was  how  to  secure  mercy  for  rebellious  Israel.  He  is 
the  intercessor.  All  considerations  he  can  appropriately  urge  are  urged  with  the 
ingenuity  of  one  who  feels  the  calamity  of  others  as  his  own.  He  is  consistent  here 
with  past  appearances  on  similar  occasions. 

II.  Note  the  consideeations  which  he  uhqbs.  1.  He  Ttidkes  no  attempt  to  ex- 
tenuate tlie  wickedness  of  the  people.  He  can  say  nothing  by  way  of  excuse.  He  does 
not  plead  as  Abraham  concerning  Sodom,  on  the  chance  of  a  righteous  remnant  being 
found  in  the  multitude.  He  does  not  distinctly  plead  for  another  trial,  like  the 
dresser  in  the-vineyard  (Luke  xiii.  8,  9).  The  sin  was  fresh,  patent,  monstrous, 
coming  as  the  climax  of  so  much  that  had  gone  before.  He  does  not  attempt  to 
make  the  sin  of  the  people  look  less  than  the  sin  of  the  spies,  but  leaves  all  in  its 
enormity.  So  we  may  say  it  is  better  for  us  not  to  go  excusing  self,  when  too  often 
excuse  but  adds  to  existing  sin.  Our  danger  is  to  under-estimate  our  sin,  to  think 
of  our  sorrows  and  trials  rather  than  our  disobedience  and  ingratitude.  God  knows 
what  may  be  said  for  us.  At  all  times,  and  in  all  our  transgressions,  he  remem- 
bers that  we  are  dust.  Let  us  rather  aim  to  get  a  due  sense  of  how  much,  how  venr 
much,  needs  to  be  done  in  us  to  make  us  holy  and  perfect  2.  He  makes  Gowi 
reputation  among  surrounding  nations  a  matter  of  great  concern.  In  God's 
government  of  the  world,  the  consideration  of  his  reed  glory  is  ever  to  be  kept  in 
view,  and  this  of  course  is  not  dependent  on  what  any  man  may  think.  Neverthe- 
less, what  men  may  think  and  say  is  by  no  means  to  be  neglected.  Whatever  is 
done,  some  will  criticise  and  jeer.  Strange  things  have  been  said,  and  are  said  still, 
concerning  the  God  revealed  in  the  history  of  Israel.  A  monster  of  hideous  attri- 
butes is  conjured  up  and  represented  as  the  Deity  of  the  Hebrews.  Now  as  among 
men  it  is  a  consideration  that  their  good  should  not  be  evil  spoken  of,  if  they  can 
possibly  arrange  it  otherwise,  so,  reverently  be  it  said,  a  similar  consideration  may 
be  present  to  God  when  he  reveals  himself  in  human  affairs.  What  he  said  here 
asserted  that  there  was  no  need  for  further  probation  of  these  Israelites.  What 
Moses  now  suggests  is  that  there  was  no  need  to  crit  them  down  at  once,  and  good 
reason  to  do  otherwise,  so  as  to  stop  the  mouth  of  Egypt  and  the  nations  of  Canaan. 
3.  One  Tnore  cut  of  mercy  would  be  consistent  vdth  God!a  character.  God  had  said, 
upon  the  making  of  the  two  tables  to  replace  the  former  two  (Bxod.  xxxiv,),  that 
though  he  could  not  treat  iniquity  as  a  trifle,  and  must  ever  stamp  on  it  signs  of  the 
serious  way  in  which  he  regarded  it,  yet  he  was  a  God  merciful  and  gracious,  and 
disposed  to  pardon.  Moses  now  humbly  reminds  God  of  these  words,  and  pleads  an 
application  of  them  to  the  present  transgression.  He  does  not  seem  to  have  meant 
much  by  the  word  pardon;  it  was  simply  that  God  might  turn  away  the  pestilence. 
Indeed,  for  anything  more  it  was  not  in  the  power  of  Moses  to  ask.  A  full  pardon,  a 
full  reconciliation  to  God,  these  demand,  as  a  pre-requisite,  full  repentance.  And  so 
far  Israel  had  made  no  sign.  Perhaps  the  people  were  dumb  and  stupefied  with 
terror.  Other  people  may  ask  pardon  for  us  in  a  certain  sense,  but  such  pardon  as 
will  be  complete  can  only  come  from  the  cry  of  awakened,  enlightened,  and  truly 
penitent  souls. — Y. 

Vers.  20 — 23. — The  ultimate  decision.  L  The  extent  ot  the  boon  which  God 
Bbanted.    "I  have  pardoned  according  to  thy  word."    God  gave  all  that  Mose* 


174  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBBBS.  [chs.  xiii.,  xiv. 

asked,  and  all  that  in  the  light  of  his  former  words  (vers.  11,  12),  he  could  give. 
But  what  did  it  come  to  ?  Nominally,  it  might  be  called  a  pardon ;  in  reality  it  came 
to  no  more  than  a  reprieve.  It  did  not  put  Israel  where  it  was  before.  It  wae  a  boon, 
so  far  as  it  is  a  boon  to  a  man  condemned  to  die  when  he  is  told  that  his  sentence  is 
commuted  to  penal  servitude  for  life.  To  him  trembling  under  the  shadow  of  the 
scaSold  it  may  seem  an  inestimable  mercy.  So  here  Israel  may  have  counted  it  the 
same  to  have  been  delivered  from  the  pestilence.  So  a  man  will  esteem  recovery 
from  a  critical  illness  or  the  near  chance  of  sudden  death.  Yet  what  has  such  a  boon 
come  to  ?  Death  and  the  demands  of  eternity  are  only  put  off  a  little  into  the 
future.  We  have  not  escaped  them  ;  we  are  pressed  on  towards  them ;  every  day 
of  life  narrows  the  distance,  and  at  any  moment  the  distance  may  be  swept  altogether 
away. 

II.  God  secures  that  he  shall  be  globified  in  the  bestowing  of  the  boon. 
"All  the  earth  shall  bo  filled  with  the  glory  of  the  Lord."  As  much  as  to  assure 
Moses  that  he  need  not  be  in  the  least  apprehensive.  The  nations  of  Canaan  should 
have  no  cause  for  exultation,  nothing  to  enable  them  to  glorify  their  gods  against 
Jehovah.  They  should  have  one  pretext  the  less,  if  only  one.  There  would  be  no 
chance  to  sneer  at  the  swift  destruction  of  Israel,  as  if  it  had  come  from  one  of  the 
passionate  and  revengeful  deities  of  Paganism.  Still,  if  there  was  one  pretext  the 
less,  there  was  only  one.  The  removal  of  one  pretext  only  opens  up  to  the  prejudiced 
and  carnal  mind  the  vision  of  another.  The  world  will  always  have  something  to 
say  against  God,  whithersoever  the  ways  of  his  providence  or  his  grace  may  tend. 
And  so  it  is  good  for  us  to  take  the  assurance  he  gave  to  Moses.  All  the  earth,  in  a 
wider  sense  than  Moses  understood,  shall  be  filled  with  the  glory  of  God  ;  for  not 
only  the  kingdom  and  the  power  are  his,  but  also  and  emphatically  the  glory.  There 
will  come  a  day  when  the  most  ingenious  and  admired  criticism  of  men  on  the  ways 
of  God  will  be  shrivelled  into  everlasting  oblivion  before  the  full  blaze  of  that  glory. 

III.  He  BECUBE3  IN  PARTICULAB  THAT  HE  SHALL  BE  GLOBIFIED  IN  ISEAEL.      What 

Israel  might  think  of  him  now  it  was  spared  was  a  matter  of  more  immediate  im- 
portance than  what  the  nations  might  think.  There  was  to  be  no  opportunity  for 
them  to  say,  "  This  is  a  God  who  threatens,  and  yet  when  the  pinch  comes,  the 
terrible  blow  is  withdrawn."  The  people  were  to  behold  both  his  goodness  and  his 
severity.  He  magnifies  their  sin  before  the  eyes  of  Moses,  and  there  was  the  more 
need  to  do  so  when  he  was  sparing  the  transgressors.  The  mere  lapse  of  time 
neither  diminishes  the  impression  made  by  sin  on  God  himself,  nor  the  destructive 
power  of  it  on  the  transgressor.  Repented  and  forsaken  sins  are  blotted  out,  but  a 
recurrence  of  them,  and  that  in  a  more  flagrant  way,  brings  them  back,  and  illus- 
trates what  an  inveterate  and  ingrained  thing  sin  has  become.  When  Whately  was 
principal  of  St.  Alban's  Hall,  he  would  sometimes  say  after  some  escapade  of  an  un- 
dergraduate, "  I  pardon  this  as  a  first  offence,  and  I  do  not  wish  to  remember  it.  I 
will  not  unless  you  force  me  to  do  so.  But  recollect  that  if  you  commit  a  second,  I 
must  remember  the  first."  So  God  had  to  call  up  everything  from  the  beginning  of 
his  wonders  in  Egypt :  on  the  one  hand,  all  his  glory  and  miracles,  and  impressive 
commands  and  promises ;  on  the  other  hand,  their  persistent  indiffierence,disobedience, 
and  unbelief.  Let  them  therefore  understand,  that  even  though  they  be  spared,  they 
cannot  see  Canaan.  This  is  all  the  Lord  says  at  present,  but  it  is  enough  to  secure 
that  he  shall  be  glorified  in  Israel. 

IV.  The  great  practical  lesson  to  us  is,  that  we  shoitld  be  vebt  observant  of 
THE  SIGNS  OF  God's  presence  with  vb,  and  pbomptlt  obedient  to  THE  God  who  is 
REVEALED  IN  THEM.  Of  how  many  it  may  truly  be  said,  that  they  travel  through 
life  unobservant  of  God's  wonderful  works  to  them,  and  tempting  him  many  times ! 
What  a  terrible  thought,  that  as  the  fate  of  this  generation  was  fixed,  though  some  of 
them  lived  well-nigh  forty  years  after,  so  the  fate  of  many  may  be  fixed  even  before 
they  die — probation  ended,  though  earthly  existence  may  continue ;  dead  even  while 
they  live  1  While_  still  in  vigorous  health  of  body,  and  active  in  all  worldly  con- 
cerns, the  last  faint  trace  of  spiritual  sensibility  may  have  passed  away.  Doing 
perhaps  what  they  reckon  to  be  good,  and  what  is  good  in  a  certain  way,  they 
nevertheless  miss  the  great  end  of  life,  because  faith  in  the  Son  and  in  the  Father 
wno  Bent  him  has  never  been  allowed  to  enter  their  minds  (Rom.  ii.,  xi.  20—22). — Y. 


OHS.  XIII.,  XIV.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS.  176 

Ver.  24. — The  promise  to  Caleb.    God  grants  the  prayer  of  Moses  for  the  people, 
and  makes  clear  now  small  a  boon  it  is  by  notifying  at  the  same  time  their  necessary 
exclusion  from  Canaan.    The  smallness  of  the  boon  compared  with  the  greatness  of 
the  loss  is  still  further  shown  when  he  goes  on  to  make  the  promise  to  Caleb 
Consider — 

I.  How  CLEAB  SUCH  A  PB0MI8E  HAKES  THB  BEASOM  WHY  God's  FBOMIBES  SEEM  80 

OFTEN  UNFULFILLED.  Men  do  not  supply  the  cflnditions  requisite  for  their  fulfilment. 
The  same  elaims,  promises,  and  warnings  were  laid  before  others  as  before  Caleb ,' 
but  when  they  were  rebellious  he  was  obedient,  and  the  end  of  it  is  indicated  here. 
The  law  of  sowing  and  reaping,  of  cause  and  effect,  is  at  work.  Let  Christians  con- 
sider how  many  promises  given  for  the  guidance  and  comfort  of  present  life  are  yet 
unfulfilled  in  their  experience.  The  power  and  disposition  of  God  are  toward  us,  as 
toward  the  Israelites,  but  the  rebellious  hearts  are  many  and  the  Calebs  few  (Eph. 
i.  19). 

II.  A  BEAUTIFUL  iLLUSTBATioN  OF  SPECIAL  PBOViDENCB.  As  WO  read  OH  and  learn 
that  Caleb  was  to  spend  forty  years  in  the  wilderness  before  the  fulfilment  of 
the  promise,  then  we  discern  how  constantly  he  must  have  been  under  the  eye  of 
God,  how  surely  provided  for  and  protected.  He  had  known  much  of  danger 
already :  something  as  a  spy  and  something  as  a  faithful  witness,  and  the  lifting  of 
stones  against  him  was  perhaps  but  an  earnest  of  further  perils  from  his  own  coun- 
trymen. And  yet,  although  his  wanderings  were  to  be  long  and  dangerous,  God, 
speaking  with  that  assurance  which  becomes  God  only,  promises  Caleb  an  entrance 
into  the  land  at  last.  Who  can  tell  what  hearts  this  very  promise  made  more  hostile, 
and  what  special  interpositions  may  have  been  required  to  protect  him  ? 

III.  The  reasons  fob  God's  gracious  tbbatment  of  Caleb.  "  He  was  a  man  of 
another  spirit."  Of  another  spirit  as  to  his  recollections  of  the  past.  The  others 
thought  much  of  the  past,  but  it  was  in  a  selfish  and  grovelling  spirit  They 
hankered  after  the  creature  comforts  and  delicacies  of  Egypt,  and  continually  be- 
moaned the  simpler  life  of  the  wilderness.  The  ten  misleading  spies  very  likely 
took  thoughts  of  Egypt  into  their  inspection  of  Canaan,  comparing  it  not  with  God's 
promises,  but  with  what  they  recollected  of  the  land  they  had  left.  On  the  other 
hand,  Caleb's  thoughts  would  run  much  on  the  bondage  and  oppression  in  Egypt. 
Humbly  and  devoutly  observant  of  each  wonderful  work  of  God  as  it  was  being  per- 
formed, he  would  have  it  more  deeply  impressed  on  his  mind  ;  and  every  time  the 
thought  returned  there  would  be  something  of  the  power  of  a  first  impression.  There 
would  be  the  recollection  also  of  God's  forbearance  and  long-sufEering  with  him  in  his 
own  imperfect  services.  Of  another  spirit,  consequently,  as  to  his  conduct  in  the 
present.  To  one  who  had  learned  to  look  on  the  past  as  he  did,  the  present  would 
appear  in  all  its  glory  immeasurably  better  than  the  past.  Hence,  what  made  others 
mourn  made  him  rejoice ;  while  others  were  rebelling  and  hatching  conspiracies,  he 
was  doing  all  he  could  to  sustain  Moses.  May  we  not  conjecture  that  he  went  on  the 
search  expedition  not  so  much  because  he  deemed  it  needful,  as  in  order  that  one  at 
least  might  bring  back  a  faithful  testimony  ?  So  let  it  be  said  of  us  that  wherever 
the  spirit  of  the  world  is  manifested  in  greed,  passion,  false  representation,  or  any 
other  evil  thing,  we  by  our  conduct  in  present  circumstances,  as  they  rise  fresh  and 
often  unexpected  day  by  day,  show  indeed  another  spirit.  It  is  only  by  having  the 
right  spirit  alive  and  strong  within  us  that  we  shall  be  equal  to  the  claims  ever 
coming  on  Christ's  servants.  Of  another  spirit  as  to  his  expectations  in  the  future. 
Every  man  who  lives  so  that  his  present  is  better  than  his  past  has  a  growing 
assurance  that  the  future  will  be  better  than  the  present.  He  who  lives  in  the  con- 
stant appreciation  and  enjoyment  of  fulfilled  promises  will  consider  the  future  as 
having  in  it  the  promises  yet  to  be  fulfilled.  It  would  doubtless  be  a  keen  personal 
disappointment  to  Caleb  when  he  found  the  people  determined  to  retreat.  He  had 
known  something  of  the  future  in  the  present  when  he  visited  the  promised  land, 
and  joy  would  fill  his  thoughts  at  the  prospect  of  speedy  possession.  A  man  of 
such  a  spirit  as  Caleb  gives  God  the  opportunity  of  accomplishing  all  his  word. 
"He  hath  followed  me  fully."  As  fully,  that  is,  as  was  possible  for  a  sinful  man 
in  earthly  conditions.  God  does  not  expect  the  service  of  glorified  spirits  during  the 
life  we  live  in  the  flesh.    But  wherever  he  finds  diligence,  caution,  the  spirit  that 


176  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBEBa  [ohs.  xin.,  Xir. 

Bajrg,  "  This  one  thing  I  do ; "  wherever  he  finds  the  loving  heart,  the  giving  hand, 
the  bridled  tongue,  he  is  not  slow  to  give  approval.  When  the  -heart  is  fully  set 
towards  him,  without  division  and  without  compulsion,  he  recognises  such  a  state  in 
the  most  emphatic  language.  Hence,  in  spite  of  great  blots  faithfully  recorded, 
Abraham  is  called  the  friend  of  God  (James  ii.  23),  and  David  the  man  after  his  own 
heart  (1  Sam.  xiii.  14).  So  Caleb  is  described  as  having  followed  God  fully ;  not 
that  he  was  a  faultless  man,  but  there  was  that  in  him  which  in  due  time  would  make 
all  the  outward  the  full  and  beautiful  expression  of  the  inward.  God  sees  the  fruit 
within  the  seed,  and  speaks  accordingly.  Compare  Caleb  with  the  unbelieving 
multitude,  and  the  words  will  not  appear  one  whit  too  strong.  Note  in  conclusion 
that  Caleb  was  now  required  to  exerdse  the  hiqh  quality  of  pcUience.  He  himself 
deserved  immediate  entrance,  but  he  must  wait  while  the  unbelieving  generation 
died  away,  and  those  who  at  present  were  only  striplings  and  infants  rose  to  take 
tlieir  place.  He  had  to  be  patient,  but  his  patience  was  the  patience  of  hope.  "  It 
is  good  that  a  man  should  both  hope  and  quietly  wait  for  the  salvation  of  the 
Lord  "  (Lam.  iil  26).  Caleb  had  a  spirit  within  him  which  could  find  the  best  things 
of  Canaan  even  in  the  waste  wilderness  ('  Paradise  Begained,'  i.  7). — Y. 

Vers.  26 — 35. — God^s  decision  repealed  at  a  mestage.  What  God  has  already  said 
to  Moses  by  way  of  answer  to  his  intercession  is  now  amplified  in  a  solemn  message 
to  the  people.  The  punitive  aspect  of  the  decision  is  made  to  appear  still  more  dis- 
tinctly. Cf.  vers.  11  and  27.  In  the  first  he  asks  how  long  the  people  mean  to  pursue 
their  unbelieving  conduct ;  in  the  second,  how  long  shall  he  bear  with  them.  The 
time  has  come  for  God  himself  to  decide,  and  make  his  decision  known  in  the 
clearest  manner. 

I.  This  gbnbration  was  not  ailowbd  to  ao  its  owh  way.  It  was  not  to  die 
at  once,  neither  was  it  to  enter  the  land;  and  perhaps  some  may  then  have  antici- 
pated dismissal  altogether,  like  a  disbanded  army,  that  each  might  be  free  to  take  his 
own  path.  In  reality,  all  was  to  go  on  as  before,  save  that  the  promise  was  taken 
a  way.  They  were  to  continue  in  the  wilderness,  and  die  there.  No  relaxation  is 
intimated  as  to  the  service  of  the  tabernacle  and  the  duties  of  the  camp.  We  do  aot 
escape  God's  constraints  because  our  hearts  have  rejected  him.  He  spared  Israel,  but 
Le  did  not  let  it  go  back  to  Egypt.  Men  may  congratulate  themselves  on  being  free 
from  the  restrictions  of  a  godly  life,  and  talk  wildly  of  those  who  shut  themselves 
up  in  the  service  of  Christ,  yet  they  know  very  well  that  they  are  themselves  under 
restraint.  Anything  like  license  and  recklessness  brings  suffering  on  them  very 
quickly.  God  takes  care  even  now  that  if  men  will  not  serve  him,  neither  shall  they 
please  themselves.  The  fruits  of  evil-doing  sometimes  ripen  with  wonderful 
rapidity. 

II.  It  was  not  left  to  its  own  resoubceb.  It  is  not  expressly  said  that  the  manna 
would  be  continued,  but  doubtless  all  was  continued  that  was  not  formally  revoked. 
This  doomed  generation,  which  could  neither  go  its  own  way,  nor  entirely  in  God's 
way,  nevertheless  had  something  to  do  for  God  which  could  be  done  by  the  ordinary 
provisions  of  nature.  A  generation  mostly  bom  in  the  wilderness  had  to  be  brought 
up  to  manhood.  The  lot  was,  therefore,  to  some  extent  mitigated  by  the  continu- 
ance of  family  life,  with  all  its  affections,  occupations,  "and  enjoyments.  In  the 
course  of  time,  as  the  first  bitterness  of  their  doom  passed  away,  parents  might  even 
find  a  certain  pleasure  in  the  thought  that  their  children  would  enjoy  the  land  from 
which  by  their  own  folly  they  had  been  excluded. 

III.  No  ROOM  WAS  left  FOB  A  MOKB  HOPEFUL  PROSPECT  WITH  BISFBOT  TO  THEM- 
SELVES. They  had  said  in  their  haste,  "  Would  God  we  had  died  in  this  wilderness ! " 
(ver.  2).  And  now  through  their  own  folly  what  they  hastily  wished  has  become  a 
necessity.  All  who  had  been  numbered  (ch.  i.)  are  to  die,  as  not  being  fit  to  fight 
the  Lord's  battles.  No  less  than  four  times  does  the  Lord  refer  to  this  doom,  with 
variety  of  expression,  which  only  makes  more  certain  the  identity  of  meaning.  Are 
any  of  them  saying  that  this  very  doom  is  a  change  of  purpose,  and  therefore  they 
may  hope  that  in  a  short  time  God  will  gladden  their  ears  with  the  words,  "  Arise, 
enter,  and  possess  "  ?  He  closes  the  door  against  such  a  hope  by  giving  the  long 
term  of  forty  years  to  exhaust  the  doomed  generation.    This  itratch  of  tune  would 


CHS.  XIII.,  XIV.]  THE  BOOK  OF.NUMBEBS.  Itl 

bring  even  the  youngest  of  them  to  be  a  man  of  sixty,  and  thus,  though  the  wear- 
mg  away  might  be  very  gradual,  yet  it  would  be  none  the  less  certain.  The  rule  ia 
made  more  express  and  rigorous  by  the  very  exceptions  in  Caleb  and  Joshua. 

IV.  Though  thet  themselves  webb  doomed,  cleab  indication  is  given  la  them 
THAT  God's  purposes  would  bb  accomplished.  Forty  years,  and  they  would  be 
gone  I  and  what  then  ?  Why  they  themselves  would  be  the  instruments,  and  that 
to  a  large  extent  unconsciously,  of  fulfilling  the  very  purpose  which  once  they  seemed 
to  have  imperilled.  Their  little  ones  God  would  bring  into  the  land.  "  Your  little 
ones,  which  ye  said  should  be  a  prey."  Men  are  fearful  when  they  ought  to  be  bold, 
and  bold  when  they  ought  to  be  fearful.  Israel  was  alarmed  for  its  tender  ofEspring, 
but  not  afraid  to  rebel  against  God,  and  treat  his  servants  with  contempt.  And  now 
God  says  that  in  the  exercise  of  his  providence  and  the  carrying  out  of  his  extensive 
plans,  these  very  children,  these  infants,  helpless  on  the  mother's  breast,  shall  enter 
and  conquer  where  their  fathers  were  a&aid  to  go.  Another  generation  would  arise, 
not  knowing  Egypt  except  at  second  hand,  and  which  could  not  very  well  lust  after 
things  it  had  never  tasted.  The  delay  in  accomplishing  God's  purposes  was  more 
apparent  than  real.  The  loss  was  chiefly  a  loss  to  the  disobedient  themselves.  God 
can  take  the  most  adverse  things,  the  most  determined  outbreaks  of  the  wicked,  and 
work  them  in  with  his  own  purposes. 

V.  An   ILLUSTRATION  IS  FURNISHED  OF  THE  TRUTH  THAT  CHILDREN  HAVE  TO  BEAR 

THE  SINS  OF  THE  PARENTS  (ver.  33).  A  dreadful  name,  and  only  too  frequent  in 
his  after-dealings  with  Israel,  does  the  Lord  give  to  these  sins — "  whoredoms  "  he 
calls  them.  The  generations  of  men  are  so  interwoven  that  the  blow  which  falls 
on  the  parent  cannot  be  entirely  averted  from  the  child.  Not  only  was  the  punished 
generation  unfit  for  entrance,  but  its  children  had  to  wait  in  consequence.  The 
children  born  on  this  very  day  of  sentence  would  be  well  on  in  manhood  when  they 
entered  the  land.  Sinners  should  well  consider  how  their  sin  includes  others  in  its 
consequences.  The  Israelites  thought  they  were  doing  a  good  thing  for  their  little 
ones  when  they  rebelled ;  but  the  real  result  was  the  detention  of  them  forty  years 
in  the  wilderness.  If  the  fathers  had  been  believing,  tljey  could  have  entered  at 
once,  and  brought  up  their  children  in  the  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey. 
As  it  was,  they  had  to  nourish  them  in  the  wilderness,  and  on  the  manna  they  so 
much  despised. 

VI.  There  is  something  through  all  these  forit  years  to  remind  them  or 
THEIE  SIN  and  ITS  PUNISHMENT.  As  the  unbelievers  died  off  one  by  one,  and  as 
3ach  succeeding  year  began,  and  whenever  Caleb  and  Joshua  appeared,  there  was 
something  to  remind  of  God's  chastising  hand. — ^Y. 

Vers.  39 — 46. — A  confession  contradicted  in  action.  The  way  of  Israel  seems 
now  closed  up.  The  way  to  Egypt  is  closed,  and  also  the  way  to  the  promised 
land,  where  of  late  was  fixed  up  the  clear  intimation, "  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it." 
There  is  now  but  one  way  open — to  wander  in  this  wilderness  for  forty  years  till  all 
the  rebels  have  passed  away.  The  full  measure  of  their  doom  is  now  before  them, 
and  as  it  appears  in  all  its  naked  severity,  it  fills  them  with  grief  and  consternation. 
Evervthing  corroborates  the  word  of  Moses.  The  ten  spies  who  brought  up  the 
slancferous  report  are  lying  plague-stricken  corpses,  while  Caleb  and  Joshua  stand 
among  the  living  confessed  by  God  himself  as  faithful  and  true  witnesses.  Never- 
theless, in  the  midst  of  this  utter  collapse  the  people  were  not  unprovided  for  as 
to  their  course  of  action  (ver.  25).  God  had  told  Moses  the  direction  into  which  to 
take  them.  But  they  cannot  learn  even  so  much  obedience  as  this  without  being 
taught  it  in  a  terrible  lesson. 

I.   We  have  a  CONFESSION  CONTRADICTED  EVEN  WHILB  IT  WAB  BEING  MADK.      The 

confession  is,  "  We  have  sinned,"  It  is  very  easy  to  say  this,  and  to  say  it  meaning 
something  by  it,  but  in  a  great  multitude  of  cases  it  is  said  with  very  little  under- 
standing of  what  sin  really  is.  Pharaoh  said  at  last,  when  he  had  been  visited  with 
seven  plagues.  "  I  have  sinned  this  time :  the  Lord  is  righteous,  and  I  and  my 
people  are  wicked  "  (Exod.  ix.  27) ;  but  as  soon  as  the  rain,  hail,  and  thunders  ceased 
at  the  intercession  of  Moses,  he  sinned  yet  more  and  hardened  his  heart.  So  with 
Hhe  Israelites  here ;  it  was  not  ^in  they  felt,  bift  suffering.  If  they  had  truly  felt  si^i 
HUijcsisa.  '  s 


178  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [chs.  xiii.,  xiv. 

they  would  have  suhmitted  at  once  to  the  decision  of  God  and  his  direction  for  their 
present  need  (ver.  26).  A  mind  filled  with  the  sense  of  sin  is  filled  also  with  the 
sense  of  God's  authority.  It  is  so  impressed  with  its  own  sin  and  God's  righteous- 
ness, that  its  first  thought  is  how  to  end  the  dreadful  alienation  from  God  by  reason 
of  wicked  works.  It  will  at  once  attempt  to  bring  disobedience  to  an  end  by 
prompt  obedience  in  the  nearest  duties.  But  here  the  confession  of  sin  is  not  ever 
put  first.  They  are  occupied  with  self,  its  aims  and  disappointments,  even  while 
professing  themselves  humbled  before  God.  What  a  proof  that  God  judged  them 
truly  when  he  said  that  any  further  trial  of  their  obedience  was  useless  I  They  had 
forgotten  that  wisdom  has  to  do  with  times  and  seasons.  What  was  obedience 
yesterday  may  be  disobedience  to-day.  They  tried  to  open  a  door  closed  by  him 
who  shuts  so  that  none  can  open.  They  said  "  We  have  sinned "  in  the  same 
breath  with  the  most  audacious  purpose  of  sin  they  could  form.  Learn  from  them 
how  hard  it  is  to  have,  not  simply  an  adequate  sense  of  sin,  but  a  sense  of  sin  at  all. 
It  is  a  dreadful  thing  to  sin,  and  yet  persistently  deny  it  through  failing  to  feel  it 
(1  John  i.  8,  10)  ;  it  is  also  a  dreadful  thing  to  confess  sin  while  the  felt  trouble  is 
not  sin,  but  mere  fleshly  vexation  and  pain.  Eead  carefully  Dan.  ix.  for  a  becoming 
confession  of  sin  really  felt. 

II.  A  CONFESSION  STILL  FURTHER  CONTRADICTED  IN  ACTION,  EVEN  AFTER  THE  CON- 
TRADICTION HAS  BEEN  POINTED  OUT.  We  have  seen  how  the  resolution  to  advance 
into  Canaan  made  the  confession  of  sin  worthless.  How  worthless  it  was  is  made 
more  evident  by  the  action  of  the  people.  Notice  that  Moses  takes  not  the  slightest 
heed  of  their  confession  of  sin,  but  aims  direct  at  their  wild  resolution.  What  can 
be  more  urgent  and  more  strongly  fortified  with  reasons  than  his  dissuasive  words  ? 
He  puts  in  the  front,  as  the  most  proper  thing  to  be  put,  that  they  are  about  to  trans- 
gress the  commandment  of  the  Lord.  Fresh  from  one  transgression,  and  with  its 
penalty  pronounced,  they  yet  rushed  headlong  into  another.  They  are  foolish 
enough  to  suppose  that  by  an  energetic  efEort  they  can  release  themselves  from  the 
penalty.  Such  a  rebellious  purpose  must  assuredly  be  frustrated.  By  so  much  as 
the  presence  of  God  would  have  been  felt  if  they  had  gone  onward  at  the  right  time, 
by  ]ust  as  much  would  his  absence  be  felt  now.  As  formerly  they  would  have  had  a 
force  far  above  nature  against  their  enemies,  now  they  have  a  force  far  below.  But 
all  that  Moses  can  say  is  in  vain.  All  their  notion  of  sin  was  that  they  had  not 
advanced  into  Canaan.  They  had  such  poor  thoughts  of  God  as  to  think  that  they 
could  wipe  the  sin  out  by  advancing  with  all  energy  now,  forgetting  that  the  sin  lay 
in  unbelief  and  disobedience.  If  by  any  chance  they  had  got  into  Canaan,  they 
would  not  have  found  it  a  promised  land.  God  could  and  would  have  made  it  just 
as  hard  and  unattractive  as  the  wilderness  they  had  left. 

III.  The  conteadiction  is  still  further  aggravated  by  breaking  away  from 
Moses  and  the  ark.  One  can  imagine  that  in  their  impetuosity  all  tribal  order  and 
discipline  was  lost.  Possibly  they  had  some  commander  ;  there  may  have  been  just 
enough  cohesion  to  agree  so  far.  But  though  a  crowd  may  choose  a  commander,  a 
commander  cannot  at  will  make  a  crowd  into  an  army.  The  peculiarity  of  Israel 
was  that  its  army  was  fixed  and  disciplined  by  Jehovah  himself,  and  to  break  away 
from  the  ark,  where  his  honour  dwelt,  was  openly  to  despise  it,  as  if  it  were  nothing 
but  common  furniture.  There  was  not  only  a  rebellion  of  the  people  against  its 
governor,  but  a  mutiny  of  the  army  against  its  commander.  Does  it  not  almost  seem 
as  if  a  host  of  demons  had  gone  into  these  men,  carrying  them  headlong  to  destruc- 
tion, even  as  they  carried  the  swine  down  the  steep  place  ?  Only  a  little  while  before, 
no  argument,  no  appeal  would  have  dragged  them  an  inch  against  the  Amalekites 
and  the  Canaanites,  and  now  there  is  nothing  can  keep  them  back.  Surely  this 
crowns  the  illustrations  of  Israel's  perversity,  and  makes  it  very  wonderful  that  out 
of  them,  as  concerning  the  flesh,  the  Christ  should  have  sprung. 

ly.  Theib  discomfiture  came  as  a  certain  consequence.  The  enemy,  we  may 
conjecture,  had  been  preparing  for  some  time.  Probably,  as  the  Israelites  sent  spies 
into  Canaan,  so  the  Canaanites  may  have  had  spies  in  the  wilderness.  And  so  as 
Israel  in  this  battle  was  at  its  very  weakest,  Canaan  may  have  been  at  its  strongest. 
Yet  Israel  would  appear  strong,  advancing  with  furious  onset,  and  bent  on  cancelling 
IliMe  dreadful  forty  years.    Heuce  the  enemy  would  exult  in  a  great  victory  gaiiMa 


OH.  XV.  1—31.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  179 

by  their  own  powers,  being  ignorant  that  they  owed  it  rather  to  the  disobedience  of 
Israel.  The  world  is  not  strong  in  itself,  as  against  those  who  truly  confide  in  God, 
but  its  strength  is  enough  and  to  spare  when  God's  people  fight  against  it  with 
fleshly  weapons.  The  best  allies  of  God's  enemies  are  oftentimes  found  among  hii 
professed  friends. — Y. 


PBBLIMINARY  NOTE  TO  CHAPTERS  XV.— XIX. 

A  great  break  in  the  story  of  Israel  occurs  here.  Perhaps  in  the  whole  history  of 
the  theocracy,  from  Abraham  downwards,  there  is  no  such  entire  submergence  of  the 
chosen  people  to  he  noted.  After  the  rebellion  at  Kadesh  they  disappear  from  view, 
and  they  only  reappear  at  Eadesh  again  after  an  interval  of  thirty-eight  years.  Only 
one  occurrence  of  any  historical  moment  can  be  assigned  to  this  period  (ch.  xvi.), 
and  that  is  recorded  without  note  of  time  or  place,  because  its  ecclesiastical  interest 
gave  it  an  abiding  value  for  all  time.  The  sacred  history  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness 
may  be  compared  to  one  of  the  streams  of  that  wilderness.  From  its  source  it  runs, 
if  circumstances  be  favourable,  full  and  free  for  a  certain  distance,  and  even  spreads 
itself  abroad  upon  the  more  level  ground ;  here,  however,  it  meets  a  thirstier  soil 
and  more  scorching  heat ;  it  loses  itself  suddenly  and  entirely.  If  its  course  bo 
followed  with  doubt  and  difSculty,  a  few  small  water-holes  may  be  discovered,  and 
perhaps  in  some  exceptionally  shaded  and  sheltered  spot  a  permanent  pool ;  only  at 
the  furthest  end  of  the  dried-up  wady,  near  the  great  sea,  the  stream  re-forms  itself 
and  flows  on  without  interruption  to  its  goal.  The  void  in  the  record  which  thus 
divides  in  two  the  story  of  the  exodus  is  explained  readily  and  satisfactorily  by  the 
one  fact  that  during  all  these  years  the  history  of  Israel  was  actually  in  abeyance. 
For  that  history  is  the  history  of  a  theocracy,  and  in  the  higher  sense  it  is  the  history 
of  God's  dealings  with  his  own  people,  as  he  leads  them  on  "  from  strength  to 
strength,"  until  "  every  one  of  them  in  Zion  appeareth  before  God."  Thus  all  the 
Old  Testament  from  Gen.  xii.  (in  which  the  history  properly  so  called  commences) 
to  the  end  of  Joshua  has  for  its  goal  the  entry  into  and  conquest  of  the  promised 
land  ;  and  thence  again  to  1  Kings  z.  and  2  Chron.  ix.  it  leads  up  to  the  firm  and 
full  establishment  of  the  temple  and  of  the  Lord's  anointed  in  the  place  which  he 
had  chosen.  But  during  the  thirty-eight  years  this  advance  was  absolutely  sus- 
pended ;  the  generation  that  excommunicated  itself  at  Kadesh  had  thenceforth  no 
part  and  no  heritage  in  Israel ;  their  lives  were  spared  indeed  at  the  time,  but  they 
had  to  die  out  and  another  generation  had  to  take  their  place  before  the  history  of 
the  theocracy  could  be  resumed.  Instead,  therefore,  of  the  blank  causing  perplexity 
01  suspicion,  it  most  strikingly  corresponds  with  and  confirms  the  whole  tenor  and 
puiport  of  the  Pentateuch,  and  the  Old  Testament  in  general.  It  was  at  Kadesh 
that  the  onward  march  of  Israel,  as  Israel,  was  summarily  suspended ;  it  was  from 
Kadesh  that  that  march  began  once  more  after  thirty-eight  years ;  and  the  sacred 
narrative  conforms  itself  with  the  utmost  simplicity  and  naturalness  to  this  fact. 

The  condition  of  the  nation  during  this  period  of  submergence  is  a  matter  of 
considerable  interest,  ii  In  endeavouring  to  picture  it  to  ourselves,  we  are  left  to  a 
few  scattered  statements,  to  some  probable  conclusions,  and  for  the  rest  to  mere 
conjecture.    The  most  important  of  these  statements  are  as  follows  :— 

1.  Deut.  viii.  2 — 6 ;  xxix.  6,  6.  God  did  not  wholly  abandon  them  to  them- 
■elves.    He  supplied  them  every  day  with  manna,  and  also  (no  doubt)  with  water 

n2 


180  THE  BOOK  OF  NDMBEBS.  [ch.  xv.  1—31. 

when  there  was  no  natural  supply  (see  on  1  Cor.  x.  4).  He  provided  them  also 
with  raiment  and  shoes,  bo  that  they  had  the  "  food  and  clothing  "  which  are  the  actual 
necessaries  of  life. 

2.  Josh.  V.  4 — 8.  It  may  seem  strange  that  no  children  were  circumcised 
between  Egypt  and  Canaan,  considering  the  extreme  importance  assigned  to  the  rite 
(see  on  Exod.  iv.  24 — 26).  If  any  children  were  bom  before  the  first  arriral  at 
Eadesh  (see  note  on  ch.  x.  28),  it  is  probable  that  their  circumcision  was  postponed 
in  view  of  a  speedy  settlement  in  the  land  of  promise.  After  that  time  the  general 
neglect  of  religious  ordinances  and  the  extreme  uncertainty  of  their  movements  (ch. 
ix.  22)  would  sufficiently  account  for  the  general  disuse  of  the  rite.  It  is  only 
reasonable  to  conclude  that  the  passover  also  was  omitted  during  all  this  period. 
Even  if  the  material  elements  for  its  celebration  could  have  been  provided,  it  is 
hardly  possible  that  the  men  who  came  out  of  Egypt  only  to  die  in  that  wilderness 
could  have  brought  themselves  to  renew  the  memory,  so  bitter  to  them,  of  that  great 
but  fruitless  deliverance.  And  with  the  passover  we  may  probably  conclude  that 
the  whole  sacrificial  system  fell  into  abeyance,  save  so  far  as  it  might  be  maintained 
by  the  zeal  of  the  Levites  alone  (see  below  on  ch.  xix.). 

3.  Ezek.  XX.  10 — 26.  This  is  a  strong  indictment  against  Israel  in  the  wilderness, 
and  all  the  more  because  the  children  are  reproached  in  the  same  strain  as  the  fathers. 
It  is  apparently  to  the  former  that  the  difficult  verses  25  and  26  refer  exclusively. 
If  so,  we  have  two  facts  of  grave  moment  made  known  to  us  through  the  prophet. 
1.  That  the  Lord,  by  way  of  punishment,  gave  them  statutes  and  judgment  which 
were  not  good.  2.  That  they  systematically  offered  their  first-born  to  Moloch.  It 
is  only  necessary  here  to  point  out  that  these  statements  occur  in  the  course  of  an 
impassioned  invective^  and  must  therefore  be  taken  as  the  extreme  expression  of  one 
side  only  of  a  state  of  things  which  may  have  had  other  aspects. 

4.  Amos  v.  26,  26 ;  Acts  vii.  42,  43.  This  again  is  a  strong  indictment.  It  is 
indeed  contended  that  Amos  v.  26  should  be  read  in  the  present  tense,  and  that  St. 
Stephen  was  misled  by  an  error  of  the  Septuagint.  This,  however,  introduces  a  much 
greater  difficulty ;  and  even  apart  from  the  quotation  in  the  Acts,  the  ordinary 
reading  is  the  more  natural  and  probable  (see  note  on  ch.  xiv.  33). 

While,  therefore,  the  general  impression  left  upon  us  by  these  passages  is  dark 
indeed,  it  is  hopeless  1o  look  for  anything  definite  or  precise  as  to  the  moral  and 
religious  condition  of  the  people  at  this  time.  A  similar  obscurity  hangs  over  their 
movements  and  proceedings.  We  have  nothing  to  guide  us  except  the  probabilities 
of  the  case,  and  a  list  of  stations  which  really  tells  us  nothing.  It  is  only  reasonable 
to  suppose  that  the  marching  orders  issued  at  Sinai  fell  ipso  facto  into  abeyance 
when  the  short,  swift,  decisive  march  for  which  they  were  designed  came  to  an  abrupt 
conclusion.  We  have  no  authority  for  supposing  that  the  host  held  together  during 
these  years  of  wandering  which  had  no  aim  but  waste  of  time,  and  no  end  but  death. 
The  presumption  is  that  they  scattered  themselves  far  and  wide  over  the  wilderness 
(itself  of  no  great  extent),  just  as  present  convenience  dictated.  Disease,  and  death, 
and  all  those  other  incidents  revived  in  full  force  which  make  the  simultaneous 
march  in  close  array  of  two  million  people  an  impossibility.  No  doubt  the  head- 
quarters of  the  host  and  nation,  Moses  and  Aaron,  and  the  Levites  generally,  remained 
with  the  ark,  and  formed,  wherever  they  might  be,  the  visible  and  representative 
centre  of  the  national  life  and  worship.  It  is  of  the  movements  of  this  permanent 
centre,  which  contained  in  itself  all  that  was  really  distinctive  and  abiding  in 
Israel,  that  Moses  speaks  in  ch.  xxxiii. ,  and  elsewhere ;  and  no  doubt  these  move- 
Dtfnts  were  made  in  implicit  obedience  to  the  signals  of  God,  given  by  the  cloudy 


ca.  XV.  1—31.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBBB8. 


m 


pillar  (ch.  ix.  21, 22).  It  is  quite  possible  that  while  the  ark  removed  from  time  to 
time,  some  portion  of  the  people  remained  stationary  at  Kadesh,  imtil  the  "  whole 
congregation"  (see  on  ch.  ix.  1)  was  reassembled  there  once  more.  If  this  were 
the  case,  the  peculiar  phraseology  of  Dent.  L  46  aa  compared  with  the  following 
verse  may  be  satisfactorily  explained. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XV. 


Vakiotts  tAws  OF  SACRIFICE  (vers.  1 — 31). 
Ver.  1. — The  Lord  spake  unto  Mosea.  It 
must  have  been  during  the  years  of  wander- 
ing, but  within  those  limits  it  is  impossible 
even  to  conjecture  the  probable  date.  There 
is  no  external  evidence,  and  the  internal 
evidence  is  wholly  indecisive.  Neither  can 
it  be  reasonably  maintained  that  these  regu- 
lations were  designed  to  revive  the  hope  and 
sustain  the  faith  of  the  rising  generation. 
Incidentally  they  may  have  had  some  effect 
in  that  way,  but  it  is  evident  that  the  pri- 
mary object  of  their  promulgation  was  simply 
to  supply  certain  defects  and  omissions  in  the 
Levitical  legislation.  Why  that  legislation 
should  have  had  the  fragmentaiy  and  unfin- 
ished character  which  it  so  evidently  bekrs, 
requiring  to  be  supplemented,  here  by  an 
isolated  commandment,  and  there  by  oral 
tradition,  is  an  interesting  and  difiicult  ques- 
tion ;  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  the 
feet,  and  it  is  superfluous  to  look  any  further 
for  the  reason  of  the  enactments  here  following. 

Ver.  2. — When  ye  be  come  into  the  land. 
The  same  formula  is  used  in  Levit.  xziii.  10 
concerning  the  wave-sheaf.  It  is  only  re- 
markable here  because  it  tacitly  assumes — (1) 
that  the  burnt  offerings  and  sacrifices  men- 
tioned would  not  be  offered  any  more  in  the 
wilderness ;  (2)  that  the  nation  to  which  it 
was  spoken  would  surely  enter  into  Canaan 
at  last, 

Ver.  3. — h  burnt  offering,  or  a  sacrifice, 
1.  e.  a  whole  burnt  offering,  or  a  slain  offer- 
ing. There  should  be  a  comma  after  the 
word  "sacrifice."  In  performing  a  vow,  or  in 
a  free-will  offering,  or  in  yonr  solemn  feasts. 
The  burnt  offering,  or  slain  offering,  might  be 
offered  in  either  of  these  three  ways,  in  addi- 
tion to  the  more  ordinary  sacrifices  which  do 
not  come  into  question  here. 

Ver.  4. — ^A  meat  offering.  See  on  Levit. 
U.  The  command  to  add  the  meat  offering 
in  eveiTsuch  case  had  not  been  given  before, 
but  it  had  apparently  been  the  practice  (see 
Levit.  xxiii.  18)  in  accordance  with  the  law 
of  the  daily  sacrifice  given  in  Exod.  xzix. 
40,  41. 

Ver.  6. — A,  drink  offering.  This  is  no- 
where separately  treated  of  in  Leviticus,  but 
it  is  mentioned  along  with  the  meat  offering 
in  the  passagea  just  lefenad  ta    libations 


are  amongst  the  simplest  and  most  universal 
of  offerings  to  the  unseen  powers.  Tor  one 
lamb.    b^S,  lamb  or  kid. 

Ver.  6.— -Or  for  a  ram.  The  meat  and 
drink  offerings  were  to  be  proportionate  in 
amount  to  the  size  of  the  victim. 

Ver.  8. — Peace  offerings.  The  sacrifices 
made  of  free-will,  or  made  on  solemn  feast- 
days,  would  commonly  be  peace  offerings  (see 
on  Levit.  vii). 

Ver.  9.— Then  shall  he  bring.  The  rapid 
interchange  of  the  second  and  third  persons 
in  these  verses  is  awkward  and  perplexing. 
No  doubt  it  is  due  to  some  sufficiently  simple 
cause  in  the  inditing  of  the  original  record, 
but  we  are  not  in  a  position  even  to  guess  at 
its  nature.  Meanwhile  the  broken  construc- 
tion remains  as  a  witness  to  the  faithfulness 
with  which  the  record  has  been  handed  down. 

Ver.  12. — According  to  the  number.  The 
strict  proportion  of  the  meat  and  drink  offer- 
ings was  to  be  carried  out  with  respect  to  the 
numbers,  as  well  as  the  individnu  value,  of 
the  sacrifices. 

Ver.  13. — All  that  are  bom  of  the  country. 
n"1t.l§n"?3,  all  the  native  bom.  Septuagint, 
jraf  6  oirrox^wv.  The  phrase  is  used  no 
doubt  from  the  point  of  view  of  a  resident  in 
Canaan ;  but  it  was  only  to  such  residents 
that  these  ordinances  applied.  These  things. 
The  regulations  just  mentioned. 

Ver.  14. — A  stranger.    Septuagint,  irpo 
irfiXvTos. 

Ver.  16. — One  ordinance  shall  be  both  for 
you  of  the  congregation,  &e.  Rather,  "As  for 
the  congregation  pnjjn,  construed  abso- 
lutely), one  law  for  you,  and  for  the  stranger 
that  sojoumeth,  an  eternal  ordinance  for 
your  generations ;  as  with  you  so  shall  it  be 
with  the  stranger  before  the  Lord." 

Ver.  17. — And  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses. 
Whether  on  the  same  or  on  some  other  occa- 
sion we  cannot  tell.  The  two  enactments 
have  the  same  supplemental  and  (humanly 
speaking)  trivial  character. 

Ver.  19. — When  ye  eat  of  the  bread  of 
the  land.  A  thing  which  the  younger  Is- 
raelites, few  of  whom  had  ever  tasted  bread, 
must  have  eagerly  looked  forward  to  (see  on 
Josh.  V.  11, 12).  An  heave  offering.  See 
on  Exod.  xxix.  27 ;  Levit.  vii  14.  Thj» 
dedication  of  first-fruits  had  been  ordered  i« 
general  terms  in  Exod.  xxiL  89 ;  xxiii.  19. 


\ 


m 


THE  BOOK  OP  NtJMBBfiS. 


f  V.  1—91, 


Ver.  20..— A  cake  of  the  first  of  your 
dough.  riblJ/,  only  used  here  and  in  the 
two  passages  which  refer  to  this  enactment 
(Neh.  X.  37 ;  Ezek.  xliv.  30).  It  probably 
means  whole  meal  coarsely  ground,  the  first 
preparation  of  the  new  com  ayailable  for 
baking  and  eating.  Septuagint  has  ivapxv 
dtipiSfiaroc,  an  expression  used  by  St.  Paul  in 
Rom.  xi.  16.  As  .  .  the  heave  offering'^  of 
the  threshing  floor,  so  shall  ye  heave  it,  t.  e. 
the  offering  of  bread  from  the  home  was  to 
be  made  in  addition  to  the  offering  of  ears  or 
grains  from  the  threshing-floor,  and  in  the 
same  manner.  No  doubt  this  latter  offering 
was  a  very  ancient  (Gen.  iv.  3)  and  general 
one,  but  it  is  not  clearly  described  in  the 
Law  (see,  howerer,  Levit.  iL  14 ;  zziii.  10). 
All  these  heave  offerings  were  the  peiquisite 
of  the  priest. 

Ver.  22. — ^And  if  ye  have  erred.  The  ab- 
sence of  the  usual  formula,  "and  the  Lord 
spake  unto  Moses,"  is  singular,  because  what 
follows  has  reference  not  to  the  enactment  just 
made,  but  to  the  whole  Law.  Perhaps  it  is  a 
part  of  the  thoroughly  unscientific  and  inar- 
tificial character  of  the  Mosaic  legislation 
that  a  principle  of  extreme  importance  and 
wide  application  is  appended  to  an  insignifi- 
cant matter  of  ceremonial.  Provision  is  here 
made  for  the  forgiveness  of  sins  due  to  ignor- 
ance and  oversight — a  provision  which  was 
sorely  needed,  considering  the  great  com- 

Elexity  of  the  Law,  and  the  bad  trainingthey 
ad  for  the  accurate  observance  of  it  (Deut. 
lii.  8).  A  similar  provision  had  been  made 
in  Levit.  iv.  The  two,  however,  differ,  inas- 
much as  that  contemplates  sins  of  commis- 
sion, while  this  contemplates  sins  of  omission. 
Ver.  23. — From  the  day  that  the'  Lord 
commanded,  .  ,  and  henceforward  among 
your  generations.  Or,  "thenceforward  ac- 
cording to  your  generations."  These  words 
are  obscure,  because  they  point  apparently 
to  a  much  larger  lapse  of  time  since  the  first 

fiving  of  the  Law  than  had  really  occurred, 
t  may  be  that  they  include  the  possibility 
of  fresh  revelations  of  the  Divine  will  in  the 
time  to  come. 

Yer.  24. — If  ought  be  committed.  Rather, 
"if  it  be  committed,"  t. e.  the  non-observ- 
ance of  "  all  these  commandments."  It 
cannot,  however,  be  necessary  to  suppose 
that  a  falling  away  from  the  whole  body  of 
the  Mosaic  legislation  is  here  intended ;  such 
an  apostasy  could  not  happen  by  oversight, 
and  if  it  did,  the  remedy  provided  would 
seem  much  too  slight  for  the  occasion.  The 
■uialogy  of  the  provision  which  follows  (ver. 


27),  and  of  the  parallel  provisions  in  Levit. 
iv.  2,  13,  points  clearly  to  the  neglect  of  any 
one  of  the  Divine  commandments.  One 
yoimg  bnllook  ft>r  a  burnt  offering.  In  the 
case  of  a  sin  of  commission  done  ignorantly, 
the  bullock  was  treated  as  a  sin  offering 
(Levit.  iv.  14,  20),  for  in  that  case  the  expia- 
tion of  guilt  incurred  is  the  prominent  point 
in  the  atonement ;  in  this  case  it  is  the 
necessity  of  a  fresh  self-dedication  to  ,the 
Lord.  According  to  the  manner.  t3^(^&3, 
according  to  the  ordinance  given  above.  One 
kid  of  the  goats  for  a  sin  offering.  This 
was  no  doubt  offered  fiist,  because  expiation 
must  precede  self-oblation,  but  the  buUock  is 
mentioned  first  as  forming  the  principal  part 
of  the  sacrifice.  The  kid  was  probably  treated 
according  to  the  regulations  of  Levit.  iv.  14,  sq. 
Yer.  26. — Seeing  all  the  people  were  in 
ignorance.  Literally,  "  because  (se,  it  hap- 
pened) to  the  whole  nation  in  ignorance." 
As  the  stranger  was  counted  as  of  the  nation 
for  religious  purposes,  he  shared  both  in  its 
sin  and  in  its  forgiveness.  There  is  no  record 
of  this  atonement  ever  having  been  made, 
although  there  was  abundant  occasion  for  it ; 
it  may  well  be  that  it  was  intended  only  to 
stand  on  record  against  the  Jews,  and  to 
point  them  to  the  one  true  expiation  for 
their  national  as  well  as  for  their  particular 
transgressions. 

Yer.  27.— And  If  any  soxil  sin  through 
ignorance.  No  doubt  by  way  of  omission, 
as  in  the  preceding  case,  and  thus  this  regu- 
lation will  be  distinguished  from  that  in 
Levit.  iv.  27.  In  either  case  the  ritual  is 
apparently  intended  to  be  the  same,  although 
not  so  ftdly  described  here.  In  ver.  29  the 
benefit  of  the  ordinance  is  extended  to 
strangers ;  this  was  natural  in  a  law  which 
directly  contemplates  the  residence  of  Israel 
in  their  permanent  home. 

Yer.  30.— The  soul  that  doeth  •  .  pre- 
■nmptnonsly.  Literally,  "with  a  high  hand," 
i.  e.  defiantly.  A  similar  phrase  is  used 
of  God  himself  (Exod.  xiiL  9).  The  same 
reproacheththe  Lord.  F|530,revileth.  Septu- 
agint, irapoivvtt.  In  Ezek.  ix.  27  it  is  trans- 
lated "  blasphemeth."  Perhaps  "  affronteth  " 
would  be  better.  He  that  deliberately  broke 
the  commandment  of  the  Lord  avowed  him- 
self his  open  enemy,  and,  as  it  were,  challenged 
him  to  single  combat.  Cut  off.  See  Gen. 
xvii.  14. 

Yer.  .81. — His  iniquity  .  .  upon  him. 
It!}  njl}?,  "its  crime  upon  it,"  t. «.  the  sin 
of  that  soul  must  come  upon  it  in  punish' 
ment. 


OB.  XT.  1—81.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  188 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers!  1 — 31. — Ordinances  of  sacrifice.  The  laws  given  in  this  section  were  to  be 
"  an  ordinance  for  ever,"  but  they  have  long  ago  come  to  an  end  as  far  as  the  literal 
observance  of  them  is  concerned  ;  it  is  certain,  therefore,  that  they  have  an  abiding 
spiritual  fulfilment  in  the  law  of  Christ.     Consider,  therefore — 

I.  That  the  two  first  of  those  laws  were  designed  for  the  Israelites  when 
THET  CAME  INTO  THE  LAND  OF  THEIR  HABITATION  ;  they  do  not  contemplate  the 
period  of  wandering  in  the  desert  which  was  then  going  on.  Even  so  a  great  part 
of  the  law  of  Christ  is  designed  for  that  state  of  holy  "joy  and  peace  in  believing," 
for  that  "rest "  which  is  intended  to  be  our  habitation  even  now,  and  into  which  we 
do  enter  (Heb.  iv.  3  a.),  albeit  imperfectly  and  uncertainly.  Many  of  the  counsels 
of  our  Lord  and  his  apostles  are  manifestly  out  of  all  harmony  with  the  ordinary 
lives  of  ordinary  Christians,  because  they  pertain  to  a  state  of  detachment  and  self- 
conquest  which  we,  through  perversity  or  half-heartedness,  have  not  attained  (Matt. 
V.  29,  39,  40,  48  ;  vi.  34 ;  xvi.  25  ;  xvii.  20 ;  xix.  12,  21 ;  xx.  26,  27 ;  Luke  vi.  35  ; 
xii.  33  ;  Rom.  xiv.  21 ;  1  Cor.  v.  11 ;  vi.  4,  7 ;  vii.  29—31 ;  Philip,  ii.  6 ;  1  Tim.  vi. 

8,  &c.).  These  are  indeed  addressed  to  all  Christians  ("  speak  unto  the  children  of 
Israel "),  not  to  a  select  few ;  but  they  are  addressed  to  them  on  the  assumption  that 
they  have  striven  after  and  attained  the  higher  life  of  the  Spirit  ("  when  ye  be 
come,"  &c.).  And  this  is  the  real  answer  to  the  mocking  or  uneasy  spirit  which 
reproaches  the  gospel  of  Christ  with  being  visionary,  and  with  having  failed  to 
realise  itself  in  the  actual  life  of  Christendom.  It  is  quite  true  that,  as  far  as  the 
present  is  concerned,  the  mind  of  Christ  is  not  fulfilled  in  the  great  majority  even  of 
decent-living  Christians,  because  they  have  not  attained  to  rest,  but  are  wandering 
still  in  the  deserts  of  a  divided  allegiance,  one  half  to  God,  the  other  to  the  world 
and  self  (1  Cor.  ii.  14 ;  iii.,3  ;  Heb.  xii.  5). 

II.  That  the  vert  giving  of  these  laws  involved  the  assurance  that  those 

WHO  WERE  TO  KEEP  THEM    SHOTILD  ENTER  THE    HOLY  LAND   ("which  I  give  yoU "). 

Even  80  the  very  fact  that  so  much  of  the  mind  of  Christ  as  yet  unfulfilled  in  us 
has  been  plainly  revealed  in  the  gospel  is  a  pledge  to  us  that  God  has  yet  much 
to  do  for  us  and  in  us,  and  that  he  will  do  it  (2  Cor.  xiii.  9  ;  Philip,  i.  6,  9,  10).  •  If 
it  be  true  that  the  majority  even  of  earnest  Christian  people  never  attain  a  thorough 
mastery  over  self,  or  an  entire  conformity?  to  the  will  of  God  in  this  life,  then  it  is 
certain  that  this  will  be  wrought  in  them  in  the  world  of  spirits  beyond  our  ken  ; 
for  only  this  conformity  willingly  pursued  and  embraced  is  our  rest  (cf.  Matt.  xi.  28, 
29  ;  Heb.  iv.  10). 

III.  That  it  was  ordained  that  a  meat  and  drink  offering  snocLD  always 

ACCOMPANY  THE  VOLUNTARY  PRESENTATION  OF  BURNT  OR  SLAIN  OFFERINGS.      Now  the 

burnt  and  slain  ofEerihgs  represented  Christ  in  his  atonement  (1)  as  having  in  our 
name  and  stead  ofEered  himself  in  entire  self-oblation  to  the  Father  (Heb.  ix.  14 ;  x. 

9,  10),  (2)  as  being  the  means  of  access  to  and  communion  with  God  to  them  that 
are  justified  (John  vi.  57 ;  Eph.  ii.  14  a.,  18)  ;  moreover,  the  voluntary  presentation 
of  these  sacrifices  out  of  the  ordinary  routine  signified  a  more  personal  and  earnest 
pleading  of  that  one  Sacrifice  by  the  faithful,  as  distinguished  from  that  which 
18  more  formal  and,  as  it  were,  obligatory.  Again,  the  meat  and  drink  offering 
represented  the  oblation  of  human  labour  and  care  co-operating  with  Divine  grace, 
for  the  flour  and  the  oil  and  the  wine  were  all  prepared  from  the  gifts  of  nature  with 
more  or  less  of  industry  and  skill.  Even  so,  therefore,  is  it  a  part  of  the  higher  law 
of  Christ,  which  many  do  not  seem  to  attain  unto,  that  the  earnest  pleading  of,  and 
reliance  upon,  and  joy  in  the  atonement  of  Christ  shall  be  always  accompanied  with 
the  offering  of  personal  service,  of  good  work  done  for  Christ.  This  cannot  truly 
take  the  place  of  the  other,  any  more  than  the  meat  offering  could  supersede  or 
precede  the  sacrifice ;  but  yet  the  other  is  for  ever  incomplete  without  it.  The  most 
lively  faith  and  devout  worship  is  not  acceptable  when  unaccompanied  by  the  willing 
tribute  of  good  works  (Titus  iii.  8,  14 ;  James  ii  17,  26  ;  2  Pet.  i.  8). 

IV.  That  this  meat  and  drink  offering  was  always  and  in  every  way  to 

M  FBOfOBTIONATI  TO  THI  BUBNT  AND  SLAIN    OFVICBINQa    FBESENTED.      Even  BO  tke 


184  tfiE  BOOK  OS"  NtJMBEftS.  t<m.  xv.  1-41. 

tribute  of  our  industry  and  zeal  dedicated  to  God  should  bear  a  full  proportion  to  our 
faith  and  joy  in  the  atonement  of  Christ,  and  should  still  increase  with  the  increase 
of  these.  Nothing  is  more  painful  than  the  entire  disproportion  often  visible  between 
a  man's  earnest  and  lively  desire  to  appropriate  by  faith  and  devotion  the  merits  of 
Christ's  sacrifice,  and  the  grudging  reluctance  with  which  he  ofiEers  to  God  of  his  own 
time,  means,  and  labour  (Matt.  vii.  21 ;  xxv.  44,  45,  compared  with  James  ii.  16 ;  2 
Cor.  'ix.  6 ;  Heb.  xiii.  16). 

V.  That  in  this  respect  there  was  to  be  one  r0le  fob  all,  whether  native 
BORN  OB  stbanqeb.  Even  so  in  the  Church  of  Christ  there  is  but  one  law  of  faith 
and  works.  There  is  indeed  no  "stranger"  where  all  are  brethren,  but  this  very 
fact  means  among  other  things  that  there  is  no  one  having  part  and  lot  in  the  atone- 
ment of  Christ  who  is  relieved  by  any  personal  circumstances  from  the  duty  of  help- 
ing together  with  the  rest  in  the  tribute  of  good  works  (Rev.  xx.  12). 

VI.  That  the  first-fbuits  of  bread  were  to  be  offered,  as  well  as  of 
CORN,  i.  e.  of  food  as  prepared  by  human  labour,  as  of  food  in  its  natural  state  (fruits 
of  the  earth).  Even  so  everything  which  belongs  to  our  life  is  to  be  sanctified  by- 
dedication  to  God,  however  much  human  art  and  labour  have  conspired  to  make  it 
what  it  is.  It  is  not  only  that  which  seems  to  come  direct  from  the  bountiful  lap  of 
nature  which  is  to  be  thus  acknowledged,  but  that  also  which  through  any  process 
of  industry  has  been  adapted  to  our  actual  wants.  The  art  and  ingenuity  and  con- 
trivance of  man  have  gone  wildly  astray,  and  led  to  fearful  abuses,  just  because  they 
have  not  been  dedicated  to  God  and  to  pious  uses  (cf.  Luke  xi.  41 ;  Bom.  jri.  16; 
Eev.  xxi.  24  6.). 

VII.  That  proper  sacrifices  were  appointed,  with  promise  of  forgiveness, 

FOR   THE   BREACH   OF   ANY   OF   THE  COMMANDMENTS   BY  WAY  OF  OMISSION,  SUch  Omission 

not  being  presumptuous.  Even  so  it  is  certain  under  the  gospel — 1.  That  sins  of 
omission  are  still  sins,  albeit  done  through  neglect,  or  carelessness,  or  in  ignorance. 
In  nothing  is  Christian  morality  more  lax  than  on  this  point.  The  double  law  of 
Christian  charity  requires  an  instructed  and  attentive  mind,  if  it  is  to  be  fulfilled ; 
the  carelessness,  therefore,  of  Christians  as  to  how  they  discharge  their  positive 
duties  towards  God  and  man  is  distinctly  sinful.  2.  That  such  sins  will  find  for- 
giveness. The  far-reaching  nature  of  our  obligations  as  laid  down  in  the  New 
Testament,  and  the  unending  consequences  of  our  most  heedless  acts  and  words, 
might  well  terrify  us  if  it  were  not  bo  (Matt.  xii.  37 ;  xviii.  6 ;  xxv.  27,  45  ;  James 
iii.  2 ;  Kev.  iii.  2). 

VIII.  That  the  whole  Divmje  legislation  was  included  in  the  most  com- 
prehensive LANGUAGE.  Even  so  there  is  nothing  discretionary,  nothing  permissive, 
about  the  laws  of  Christian  norality.  None  may  be  overlooked  or  ignored  from  first 
to  last  without  incurring  guilt  (Matt.  v.  18,  19 ;  James  ii.  10 ;  Rom.  ii.  22  6.). 

IX.  That  the  sacrifice  foe  sins  of  omission  was  a  sin  offering,  but  also, 
and  more  especially,  a  burnt  offering.  Even  so  sins  of  neglect  of  duty,  of 
Bupineness  and  indifference,  demand  indeed  to  be  expiated  by  the  one  offering  made 
for  sin,  but  also  to  be  repaired  by  a  fresh  and  entire  self -dedication  to  the  will  and 
service  of  God.  To  acknowledge  our  past  neglects  without  an  earnest  effort  to  ful- 
fil our  duty  in  future  is  a  feeble  and  imperfect  thing  (Heb.  xii.  12,  13 ;  1  Pet  i.  13 ; 
Eev.  ii.  5).  Note,  that  the  law  recognised  the  distinction  between  the  guilt  of  the 
nation  and  the  guilt  of  the  individual,  and  both  had  their  expiations.  It  is  difBcult 
to  say  whether  there  is  now  any  "  national "  guilt,  for  Christianity  does  not  recognise 
nations  as  such ;  modern  nations  correspond  to  the  tribes  of  Israel,  if  to  anything. 
But  there  is  of  course  "  collective  "  guilt,  of  which  each  must  discharge  himself  by 
an  individual  repentance.  The  atonement  for  an  individual  sin  of  omission  was  the 
same  as  for  one  of  commission. 

X.  That  no  provision  was  made  under  the  law  for  the  pardon  of  a  wilful 
BIN  against  God — a  sin  of  defiance.  Thus  the  law  brought  no  satisfaction  to  the 
tender  conscience,  but  rather  conviction  of  sin,  and  longing  for  a  better  covenant. 
Herein  is  at  once  contrast  and  likeness :  contrast,  in  that  the  gospel  hath  forgive- 
ness for  all  sin  and  wickedness  (Mark  iii.  28 ;  Acts  xiii.  39  ;  Rom.  viii  1 ;  1  John  il 
1)  ;  likeness,  in  that  a  marked  distinction  is  made  between  sins  against  the  light  and 
other  sins  (Mark  iii.  29  ;  Luke  xziii.  34  ;  John  zix,  11 ;  1  Tim.  i.  13 ;  Heb.  vi.  4; 


et.  IT.  I-AI.3  tat!  BOOK  OF  iJUMBEftS.  188 

X.  26  ;  1  John  v,  16  b.).  It  is  certain  that  (e.  g.)  one  deliberate  lie  spoken  deliber- 
ately,  and  of  malice  aforethought,  may  do  more  lasting  injury  to  a  soul,  as  far  as  we 
can  judge,  than  a  whole  life  of  reckless,  thoughtless,  heedless  vice.  Compare  the 
case  of  the  Pharisees  <(Mark  iii.  30)  with  that  of  the  harlots  (Luke  vii.  37)  and 
publicans  {ibid.  six.  2),  and  that  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira  with  that  of  the  sinful 
Corinthian. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  22 — 31. — Presumptuous  sins  and  sins  of  ignorance.  Some  sins  are  more 
heinous  in  the  sight  of  God  than  others  ;  more  heinous  in  their  own  nature,  or  by 
reason  of  aggravating  circumstances.  The  distinction  is  familiar  to  all.  Murder  is 
a  sin  more  heinous  in  the  sight  of  God  and  man  than  petty  theft.  Armed  rebellion 
against  just  authority  is  a  greater  sin  than  heedless  omission  to  pay  due  honour  and 
courtesy  to  a  superior  in  office.  Yet  old  and  familiar  as  the  distinction  is,  it  is  one 
in  connexion  with  which  men  have  often  fallen  into  mischievous  error.  Hence  the 
value  of  texts  like  this  in  Numbers,  which  throw  light  upon  it. 

I.  Observe  HOW  THB  distinction  between  gbbateb  and  lesser  sins  is  hbbb 
BTATBD.  1.  Some  sins  are  described  as  sins  0/ ignorance.  The  reference  is  to  faults 
that  are  due  to  error  or  inadvertence.  We  all  know,  to  our  cost,  how  liable  we  are 
to  these.  Never  a  day  passes  but  we  omit  duty  and  commit  faults,  either  because 
we  knew  no  better,  or  because  we  were  "  o£E  our  guard  "  and  stumbled  before  we 
were  aware.  These  are  sins  of  infirmity,  such  as  cleave  to  the  best  of  men  in  the 
present  life.  2.  Other  sins  are  done  presumptuously.  (Literally,  "  with  a  high 
hand.")  The  matter  is  one  about  which  there  is  no  dubiety ;  the  person  knows 
well  what  is  right  and  what  is  wrong ;  knowing  this,  he  deliberately  and  purposely 
does  the  wrong.  He  offends  against  light,  conviction,  conscience.  This  is  pre- 
sumptuous sin.  I  have  said  that  the  distinction  between  greater  and  lesser  sins  is 
old  and  familiar.  Turning  to  any  Roman  Catholic  book  of  devotion,  you  will  find 
tables  in  which  are  enumerated  respectively  the  "mortal  sins"  and  the  "venial 
sins."  That  is  one  way  of  describing  the  two  classes.  I  very  much  prefer  the  terms 
employed  here  in  God's  word.  And  the  superior  wisdom  of  God  is  to  be  seen  not 
only  in  the  fitter  terms  employed,  but  also  in  the  absence  of  any  attempt,  here  or 
elsewhere  in  the  Bible,  to  give  a  tabular  enumeration  of  the  sins  belonging  to  either 
class.  For  one  thing,  a  correct  distribution  is  impossible.  The  same  act  which,  in 
ordinary  circumstances,  one  might  deem  trivial,  may  in  other  circumstances  be  a  most 
heinous  crime ;  whereas  what  seems  a  heinous  crime  may  be  found  to  have  been 
committed  in  circumstances  so  extenuating,  that  you  hesitate  to  pronounce  it  a  crime 
at  all.  Besides,  the  distribution,  if  it  were  possible  to  be  made,  could  only  do  mischief. 
It  is  not  good  for  men  to  be  trying  to  find  out  how  near  they  may  go  to  the  line 
which  separates  sins  of  infirmity  from  presumptuous  sins,  without  actually  passing 
over.  The  Bible  refuses  to  give  help  in  that  sort  of  study.  It  indicates  the  quality 
which  aggravates  offences,  so  that  we  may  learn  to  fear  it  and  keep  as  far  ofE  from 
it  as  we  can. 

II.  Observe  thb  LAW  which  is  LAID  DOWN  with  reference  to  the  two  kinds  or 
BIN.  1.  When  the  party — whether  it  be  the  congregation  or  an  individual  Israelite — 
who  has  sinned  inadvertently  becomes  aware  of  the  sin,  a  sin-offeri/ng  is  to  be  pre- 
sented viith  the  aceustomed  rites,  and  the  sin  will  be  forgiven,  (vers.  24,  25,  27, 
28).  The  point  to  be  noted  here  is,  that  however  much  the  sin  may  have  been  due  to 
mere  ignorance  or  inadvertence,  the  law  demanded  satisfaction ;  that  is  to  say. 
Transgression  of  God's  law  is  transgression  still,  though  done  through  mere  heed- 
lessness or  error.  Ignorance  and  heedlessness  may  extenuate,  but  they  do  not  justify ; 
nor  do  they  exempt  from  suffering  the  consequences  of  evil  doing.  Nor  ought  this 
to  be  deemed  strange  or  harsh.  The  same  principle  prevails  in  human  governments. 
A  transgressor  does  not  escape  the  penalties  annexed  to  his  acts  because  he  did  not 
know  they  were  forbidden,  or  because  he  acted  recklessly.  It  is  a  mischievous 
abuse  of  the  distinction  between  sins,  if  occasion  is  taken  from  it  to  make  light  of 
any  sin.  Remember  that  all  sin  is,  in  its  own  nature,  mortal.  Paul  persecuted 
"  ignorantly  and  in  unbelief ;  "  yet,  for  having  persecuted,  he  reckoned  himself  the 
(hief  of  sinners.    2.  As  for  the  presumptuous  transgressor,  the  lav  holde  out  to  him 


m  THB  BOOK  OF  NUMBBBS.  [en.  XT.  1-41. 

no  hope  (vers.  30, 31).  The  reference,  no  doubt,  is,  in  the  first  instance,  to  deliberate 
violations  of  the  Mosaic  constitution — the  refusal  to  accept  circumcision,  or  celebrate 
the  Passover,  or  observe  the  Sabbatic  rest.  For  such  offences  no  Baorifioe  was  pro- 
vided. The  person  forfeited  his  place  in  the  covenant  society.  But  this  part  of  the 
law,  like  the  former  part,  hag  an  ultimate  reference  to  offences  considered  as  strictly 
moral.  It  suggests  lessons  regarding  all  deliberate  and  presumptuous  sins.  It  is  a 
most  striking  and  significant  fact,  that  for  such  sins  the  law  of  Moses  provided  no 
sacrifice.  What  are  we  to  make  of  this  ?  (1)  It  may  remind  us  that  there  is  such 
a  thing  as  "  a  sin  unto  death,"  and  for  which  "  there  remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  " 
(Heb.  X.  26,  27 ;  1  John  v.  16).  We  believe,  indeed,  that  no  penitent,  however 
heinous  his  sin,  will  be  turned  away  from  God's  door  uiiforgiven ;  but  there  are  dark 
admonitory  texts  of  Scripture,  of  which  this  in  Numbers  is  one,  which  distinctly 
warn  us  that  God's  mercy  will  not  be  trifled  with  ;  that  there  is  a  point  to  which,  if 
men  go,  in  resisting  the  testimony  of  God's  word  and  Spirit  in  their  consciences,  the 
Spirit  will  withdraw  and  give  them  over  to  hardness  and  impenitence.  (2)  But 
there  is  a  brighter  side  of  the  matter.  "  By  Christ  all  that  believe  are  justified  from 
all  things,  from  which  they  could  not  be  justified  by  the  law  of  Moses  "  (Acts  xiii. 
39).  David's  great  crime  was  a  "presumptuous  sin."  The  law  prescribed  no 
sacrifice  for  it.  The  law  could  suggest  to  him  no  hope.  Whatthen?  Heremembered 
the  name  of  the  Lord  which  was  enshrined  in  the  Pentateuch  side  by  side  with  the 
law  (Ezod.  xxxiv.  6).  He  confessed  and  was  forgiven. — In  Ps.  zix.  there  occur 
a  remarkable  succession  of  meditations  and  prayers  which,  to  all  appearance,  were 
suggested  originally  by  this  law  in  Numbers,  and  which  mry  be  taken  as  expressing 
the  thoughts  and  exercises  to  which  the  study  of  it  gave  birth  in  the  soul  of  David. 
At  all  events,  they  so  perfectly  indicate  the  practical  use  to  be  made  of  the  law  that 
they  cannot  be  too  earnestly  commended  to  your  consideration.  "  Who  can  under- 
stand his  errors  1  (Who  can  make  sure  that  he  has  noted,  or  can  remember  and 
confess  his  sins  in  this  kind  ?)  Cleanse  thou  me  from  secret  faults."  "  Keep  bach  thy 
servant  also  from  presumptuous  sins;  let  them  not  have  dominion  over  me;  tlien 
shall  I  he  upright,  and  I  shall  he  innocent  from  the  great  transgression." — B. 

Vers.  15, 16. — The  impartiality  of  God.  The  treatment  of  foreigners  among  the 
Jews  one  sign  of  the  impartiality  of  God.  For — 1.  They  were  all  "  of  one  blood  " 
(Acts  xvii.  26).  2.  The  Israelites  were  •'  strangers  and  sojourners  with  God  "  in  his 
own  land  (Levit.  xxv.  23),  as  we  all  are  upon  earth  (1  Chron.  xxix.  15 ;  1  Pet.  ii. 
11).  3.  All  are  involved  in. sin.  The  guilt  of  the  favoured  Israelites  was  greater 
than  that  of  heathen  strangers  (Eom.  ii.  6 — 12).  4.  All  are  included  in  the  one 
salvation  (Rom.  iii.  21 — 30).    For  further  illustrations  see  outline  on  ch.  ix.  14. — P. 

Vers.  30,  31. — PresumptiMus  sins.  I.  The  guilt  of  PEEstrMPTnons  sins.  The 
transgressor  sinneth  "  with  a  high  hand  "  (Heb.).  It  is  not  easy  exactly  to  define 
sins  of  presumption  or  deliberate  disobedience,  for  which  there  was  no  expiation  by 
sacrifice.  Some  crimes  involved  capital  punishment  (Levit.  xx.  1, 2, 10  ;  Bxod.  xxi. 
14 ;  Deut.  xvii.  12),  or  were  followed  by  fatal  judgments  by  God  (Levit.  xvii.  10  ;  xx. 
4—6).  The  impossibillity  of  drawing  up  a  complete  schedule  of  wilful,  presumptuous 
sins  suggests  a  caution.  For  their  heinous  guilt  is  described  by  the  term  "  reproach- 
eth  the  Lord,"  i.e.  blasphemes  God  in  word  or  act.  A  presumptuous  sinner 
reproaches  God  in  four  ways.  He  acts  as  though  (1)  his  commands  were  harsh  ; 
(2)  his  authority  was  of  no  account ;  (3)  his  favour  was  to  be  little  prized ;  (4) 
his  threats  were  to  be  still  less  feared  (Deut.  xxix.  19,  20).  Such  guilt  is  aggra- 
vated under  thelaw  of  the  gospel,  inasmuch  as  God's  commands,  authority,  favour, 
and  threats  are  invested  with  greater  weight  and  sanctity  through  the  revelation  of 
his  will  and  his  love  in  Jesus  Christ  (Heb.  ii.  1 — -3). 

II.  The  danger  of  PRESUiiPTUons  sins.  1.  Under  the  law  there  was  no  sacrifice 
to  expiate  for  such  sins,  but  fatal  punishment  at  the  hand  of  manor  of  God  himself. 
2.  Under  the  gospel  a  sacrifice  even  for  wilful  sin  is  provided.  But  as  "the  con- 
demnation "  is  for  unbelief,  the  neglect  of  the  Saviour  and  his  sacrifice  is  the  most 
terrible,  though  a  most  common  presumptuous  sin,  for  which  "  there  remaineth  no 
more  sacrifica"  (Heb.  x.  26—29).    There  is  a  sin  "  unto  death,"  which  "  shall  not 


ea.  sir.  l-Sl.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NtMBEM  18? 


be  forgiven,"  &o.  (Matt.  xii.  32 ;  1  John  v.  16).  3.  The  difficulty  of  exactly 
deciding,  either  under  the  law  or  the  gospel,  what  sins  are  beyond  the  power  of 
expiation,  and  expose  ns  to  be  "  cut  off,"  adds  to  their  danger.  All  sins  are  like 
poisons,  fatal  if  remedies  are  not  applied.  But  IE  some  are  certainly  fatal,  and  we 
know  not  which,  what  need  for  faith  in  the  Physician,  and  prayer  that  we  may  be 
kept  from  all  sins  so  as  to  be  guarded  from  presumptuous  sins  among  them  (Ps.  xix. 
12— 14).— P. 

Vers.  1 — 16. — God  giving  laws  for  the  distant  future.  I.  He  treats  the  future 
AS  THE  PRESENT.  The  people  had  been  very  near  to  a  land  of  habitations,  and  to  a 
time  when  the  requirements  of  this  passage  would  have  been  close  upon  them.  That 
time  is  now  moved  int )  a  distant  future ;  but  it  is  oi^ually  certain  to  come,  and  the 
requirements  are  equally  practical.  The  land  of  ^r.mise  was  Israel's  inheritance, 
and  to  become  its  possession,  even  though  Amalekite  and  Canaanite  had  just  been 
victorious.  God  can  speak  of  things  that  are  not  as  if  they  were.  And  after  so 
much  gloom  as  the  previous  chapter  presents,  such  a  rebellious,  unmanageable  spirit 
and  ominous  outlook,  there  was  need  of  something  bright,  such  as  we  find  in  the 
state  of  things  which  these  ordinances  of  offering  imply. 

II.  He  POINTS  TO  A  FUTURE  FULL   OF   SATISFACTION  TO  THE  PEOPLE.       It  will    be 

approved  by  them  as  according  with  his  prediction  to  Moses :  "  a  good  land  and  a 
large,  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey."  They  shall  have  cause  for  all  manner  of 
voluntary  offerings  over  and  above  the  necessary  offerings  for  sin.  Fulfilled  desires 
would  lead  to  the  fulfilment  of  vows.  The  very  mention  of  these  sacrifices  as 
possible  indicated  that  Israel  would  be  rich  in  flocks  and  herds,  in  com  and  wine  and 
oil.  There,  would  be  reason  for  much  gratitude  in  the  heart,  and  consequent  gifts  of 
thanksgiving.  And  thus,  in  spite  of  all  that  may  be  a  cause  of  despondency  in  the 
Christian's  present  outlook,  there  will  yet  be  cause  of  thanksgiving  to  him.  We 
must  not  judge  the  future  from  our  present  humiliation  and  almost  vanished  hopes, 
but  from  the  greatness  of  God's  power  and  purposes.  He  sees  the  rich,  bright  future 
of  his  people  even  when  they  do  not. 

III.  He  counts  on  the  existence  of  a  thankful  spirit.  There  would  be 
abundant  cause  for  such  a  spirit,  and  so  it  was  right  to  provide  for  any  effects  that 
might  appear.  In  spite  of  all  present  murmuring  and  ingratitude,  in  spite  of  all 
sullen  compliance  with  the  compulsion  to  turn  back  into  the  wilderness,  there  would 
surely  some  day  be  a  thankful  spirit,  a  devout  recognition  of  God  in  the  midst  of 
prosperity.  Thus  we  may  take  it  that  there  is  something  of  prophecy,  something  of 
reasonable  expectation,  as  well  as  of  appointed  duty  in  the  commands  here  given. 
Just  as  the  regulations  for  the  Nazarite  (ch.  vi.)  indicated  an  expectation  that  there 
would  be  much  of  the  feeling  leading  men  to  the  Nazarite  vow,  so  here  there  is  an 
expectation  of  much  in  the  way  of  free-will  offerings. 

IV.  These  free-will  offerings  must  be  joined  with  offerings  from  the  com,  the  oil, 
and  the  wine  to  make  all  into  one  complete  and  acceptable  sacrifice.  The 
desire  to  do  something  acceptable  to  God  needs  to  be  directed  by  a  knowledge  of 
what  is  acceptable.  The  thankful  soul  will  ever  be  glad  to  learn  his  will.  No  offer- 
ing to  him  is  worth  anj^hing  unless  it  be  a  cheerful  one;  but  the  most  cheerful  gifts 
may  be  nullified  for  the  want  of  other  needed  qualities.  Hence  there  should  ever  be 
a  careful  pondering  of  God's  will  in  all  our  offerings  to  him,  so  that  they  may  be 
good  and  perfect  according  to  the  measure  of  human  ability.  When  most  of  all  we 
are  free  agents,  then  most  of  all  should  we  look  to  be  directed  by  necessary  com- 
mandments from  on  high. 

V.  The  PROVISION  for  strangers.  The  land  of  promise  was  to  be  attractive  and 
beneficent  to  them  as  well  as  to  Israel.  They  also  would  share  in  its  advantages, 
and  be  stirred  to  a  corresponding  acknowledgment.  Thus  ever  and  anon  does  God 
raise  his  warning  against  all  disposition  to  exclusiveness.  He  had  the  case  of  the 
stranger  and  proselyte  ever  before  him.  A  word  of  hope  this  for  Hobab,  whose 
heart  may  have  been  cast  down  within  him,  when  he  saw  how  contemptuously  Moses 
had  been  treated  of  late. — Y. 

Vers.  17 — 21. — An  offering  from  the  dough:  domestic  religion.  I.  A  daily  offbr- 
JNQ,  or  if  not  daily,  so  frequent  as  to  be  practically  daily.    God  has  spoken  so  far  of 


led  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  [««.  xv.  1—81. 

free-will  offerings,  but  here  is  one  connected  with  such  a  frequent  and  necessary  act 
as  the  eating  of  bread.  There  are  occasions  for  free-will  offerings  when  evident 
mercies  anH  peculiar  gains  prompt  to  something  special  in  the  way  of  acknowledg- 
ment ;  but  men  are  only  too  prone  to  forget  the  common  and  daily  mercies  which  in 
reality  are  greatest  of  all.  Where  we  abound  in  forgetting,  God  most  abounds  in 
reminding.  The  time  of  eating  bread  was  an  appointed  opportunity  for  acknowledg- 
ing his  daily  goodness.  The  manna  was  so  evidently  miraculous,  that  very  little  was 
needed  to  remind  Israel  how  entirely  it  was  produced  without  their  intervention. 
It  was  not  the  sort  of  food  they  would  have  cultivated.  They  took  it,  not  that  they 
liked  it,  but  it  was  the  only  thing  to  be  got.  But  bread  is  a  thing  on  which  man 
spends  much  care.  It  goes  through  so  many  processes  before  it  reaches  his  mouth 
that  he  easily  exaggerates  his  share  in  the  production  of  it.  Sowing  and  reaping, 
grinding  and  baking,  help  to  hide  the  good  hand  of  God  behind  them.  Hence  the 
giving  of  the  first  from  every  piece  of  dough  was  a  deliberate  and  frequent  recog- 
nition of  dependence  on  God  for  the  bre.ad  in  Canaan,  as  much  as  for  the  manna  in 
the  wilderness. 

II.  A  DOMESTIC  OFFERING.  Thus  religion  was  brought  into  the  house  to  sanctify  a 
common  homely  duty.  There  was  something  to  excite  the  curiosity  of  children.  It 
was  an  opportunity  of  explaining  to  them,  from  whose  loving-kindness  came  their 
daily  bread  ;  teaching  them  lessons  of  dependence  and  gratitude  in  the  seed-time  and 
the  harvest,  by  the  mill  and  the  oven.  Contrast  with  this  the  melancholy  picture  by 
Jeremiah  of  the  children  gathering  the  wood,  the  fathers  kindling  the  fire,  and  the 
women  kneading  dough  to  make  cakes  to  the  queen  of  heaven  (Deut.  zxviii.  6; 
Neh.  X.  37  ;  Ps.  civ.  14, 15  ;  Jer.  vii.  18;  Bzek.  iliT.  30  j  Haggai  i.  9),— Y. 

Vers.  22 — 29. — God  shows  himself  strict  and  yet  considerate.  I.  The  seriodsness 
OF  God's  expectations.  God  gave  to  Israel  many  and  elaborate  commandments,  in 
the  mode  of  obeying  which  he  left  nothing  to  personal  discretion.  Hence  the  work 
of  obedience  was  often  a  difficult  and  always  a  careful  one,  and  sometimes  the  people 
might  be  tempted  to  say,  "  Surely  this  minute  and  unvarying  compliance  in  outward 
things  cannot  be  seriously  intended."  But  everything  God  commands  has  a  reason, 
even  though  we  see  it  not.  God  hides  reasons  in  order  that  the  obedience  of  faith 
may  be  complete.  An  Israelite  quite  conceivably  might  say,  "Surely  I  am  not 
expected  to  remember  all  these  commandments  in  all  their  details."  The  answer  is, 
that  though  the  commandments  might  not  all  be  remembered,  yet  every  one  of  them 
was  important.  And  so  we  find  that  God  made  it  a  dangerous,  even  a  deadly  thing, 
knowingly  f.nd  wilfully  to  disobey  them.  He  has  high  aims  with  respect  to  his 
people,  far  higher  than  they  can  at  present  appreciate,  and  this  is  the  surest  way  of 
getting  great  results.  He  may  seem  to  be  imposing  intolerable  burdens,  but  he  is 
really  leading  us  onward  in  strength  and  capacity  until  we  shall  be  able  to  bear  the 
burdens.  Hence  the  large  demands  which  Christ  also  makes  on  his  disciples.  He 
came  to  fulfil  the  law.  His  people  are  not  only  to  do  more  than  others,  but  much 
more,  and  in  many  ways.  Whatever  be  provided  for  in  the  way  of  pardon  and  expi- 
ation, the  standard  must  not  be  lowered  in  the  least.  God  has  constituted  man  to 
reach  great  attainments,  and  he  will  enable  him  to  reach  them,  if  only  the  proper 
means  be  taken. 

II.  His  remembrance  of  human  infibmity.  It  is  no  real  contradiction,  to  them 
who  will  consider,  that  God  meant  his  commandments  to  be  kept,  yet  knew  they 
would  be  oftentimes  broken.  As  he  was  serious  in  giving  the  commandments,  he 
wished  the  people  to  be  serious  in  trying  to  keep  them,  and  serious  also  in  asking 
why  they  were  not  able  to  keep  them.  He  provided  for  the  commandments  being 
broken.  While  serious  in  expectations,  he  was  also  considerate  and  encouraging. 
He  who  knows  what  his  people  will  one  day  be  able  to  do,  knows  full  well  how  little 
they  can  do  at  present.  He  is  really  more  considerate  of  feeble  men  than  they  are  of 
each  other.  The  parable  of  the  servant  forgiven  of  his  master,  yet  refusing  to  for- 
mve  hJ8  fellow-servant,  finds  its  application  only  too  often  in  the  difference  between 
God's  tender  treatment  of  man,  and  man's  harsh  treatment  of  his  fellow-man.  God 
•nakes  allowance  for  the  difiioulty  of  turning  away  from  inveterate  habits.  H« 
makes  allowance  for  what  we  know  by  daily  experience  is  a  great  infirmity  of  men, 


OH.  XT.  32— «6.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  189 

sheer  forgetfulness.  He  considers  how  many  suSer  from  defective  instracticn, 
bad  example,  and  early  orphanhood.  He  can  say  far  more  for  us  than  with  our 
utmost  skill  wts  can  plead  for  ourselves.  He  knows  all  the  difficulties  we  have  in 
getting  at  ihe  knowledge  and  practice  of  his  truth.  What  comfort  could  we  possibly 
have  in  the  midst  of  all  our  differing  sects,  confessions,  and  ceremonies,  did  we  not 
think  of  God  looking  kindly  and  patiently  on  the  sins  of  ignorance,  and  remembering 
that  we  know  only  in  part  ?  It  was  Paul's  great  comfort  to  feel  that  the  cruelties  of 
Ills  persecuting  days  had  been  committed  ignorantly  and  in  unbelief. 

III.  His  strict  requieement  of  expiation.  They  were  not  allowed  to  say, 
"  We  knew  it  not;  therefore  it  will  not  be  required  from  us."  Evil  done  in  ignorance 
does  not  cease  to  be  evil  because  done  in  ignorance.  Whatever  is  commanded  ought 
to  be  done,  and  if  omitted  there  is  loss  somewhere  in  God's  universe  because  of  the 
omission.  We  must  not  plead  ignorance  of  the  commandment,  for  the  reason  of 
that  ignorance  lies  with  man,  and  not  with  God.  It  may  not  lie  with  the  particular 
transgressor,  but  still  it  lies  with  man,  and  therefore  the  transgression  must  be  con- 
fessed and  atoned  for ;  and  when  we  humble  ourselves  in  confession  of  sin  committed 
and  service  omitted,  there  is  need  that  we  sliould  dwell  with  much  self-examination 
and  seeking  for  light  on  the  things  that  have  been  left  undone  through  ignorance. 
What  we  have  done  that  we  ought  not  to  have  done  is  much  more  discoverable  than 
what  ought  to  have  been  done,  yet  has  been  left  undone.  Many  conscientious, 
earnest,  and  enlightened  Christians  have  been  transgressors  through  ignorance. 
Prayer  for  the  doing  of  God's  will  on  earth  as  it  is  done  in  heaven  must  be  accom- 
panied by  an  incessant  seeking  for  the  knowledge  of  his  will.  Assuredly  we  suffer 
by  our  ignorance  in  this  matter,  even  though,  in  a  certain  sense  and  to  a  certain 
extent,  this  ignorance  cannot  be  helped.  This  provision  here  made  for  atonement, 
this  prophecy,  as  it  were,  that  many  transgressions  unconsciously  committed  would 
be  discovered  in  due  time,  is  a  reminder  to  us  how  much  we  may  still  have  to  dis- 
cover of  God's  will  concerning  us.  Much  as  we  may  know,  and  much  as  we  may  do, 
there  may  be  large  fields  of  obedience  where  we  have  not  taken  a  single  step.  The 
great  essentials,  of  course,  if  we  be  Christians  at  all,  we  cannot  be  ignorant  of,  but  it 
is  quite  possible  to  know  them,  yet  be  ignorant  of  other  things  God  would  also  have 
us  know.  We  are  not  to  look  for  the  laws  of  life  in  Scripture  only ;  God  has  put 
there  such  things  as  are  not  to  be  found  in  nature  and  the  dealings  of  his  common 
providence.  We  must  look  for  his  will  in  every  place  where  intimations  of  it  are  to 
be  found,  and  be  quick  in  discovering  what  has  been  revealed  to  others.  Mark 
these  words  of  Joseph  Sturge: — "  It  seems  to  be  the  will  of  him  who  is  infinite  in 
wisdom  that  light  upon  great  subjects  should  first  arise,  and  be  gradually  spread 
through  the  faithfulness  of  individuals  in  acting  up  to  their  own  convictions." — Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


The    8ABBATH-BBEAKEB    (veTB.    32 — 36). 

Ver.  32.  —  And  while  the  children  of 
Israel  were  in  tEe  wilderness.  It  is  main- 
tained by  some  that  these  words  were  intended 
to  mark  the  contrast  between  the  previous 
laws,  which  were  only  to  be  observed  when 
l^e  people  came  into  their  own  land,  and 
the  law  of  the  sabbath,  which  was  strictly 
enforced  during  the  period  of  wandering. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  such  a  distinction 
existed  in  fact,  but  there  is  no  reason  to  find 
the  intentional  assertion  of  it  in  this  ex- 
pression. "The  simpler  and  more  natural, 
and  therefore  more  probable,  explanation  is, 
that  the  incident  was  recorded  after  the 
people  had  left  the  wilderness.  At  the  same 
time,  there  is  nothing  unreasonable  in  ascrib- 
mg  the  narratiye  to  Jloses  himself  if  we 


suppose  him  to  have  written  it  at  the  end  ot 
his  life,  when  the  people  were  encamped  in 
the  steppes  of  Moab,  It  seems  probable  that 
the  record  of  the  incident  was  inserted  here 
as  an  example  of  a  "  presumptuous  "  sin,  and 
of  its  punishment.  A  man  that  gathered 
sticks  upon  the  sabbath  day.  'This  was 
clearly  presumptuous,  because  the  prohibition 
to  do  any  work  for  oneself  on  the  sabbath 
had  been  made  so  clear,  and  was  so  constantly 
forced,  upon  their  attention  by  the  failure  of 
the  manna  on  that  day,  that  ignorance  could 
not  possibly  be  pleaded  here. 

Ver.  33. — TTnto  all  the  congregation,  i.  e. 
unto  the  council  of  elders,  who  were  tho 
congregation  by  representation  (soe  on  Exod. 
xviii.  25,  26). 

Ver.  34.  —  They  put  him  in  wwd  (of. 


190 


THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS. 


[oh.  XT.  82— Sft 


Levit.  xnv.  12),  becanse  it  was  not  declared 
what  Bhonld  be  done  to  him.  This  is  per- 
plexing, because  the  punishment  of  death 
had  been  decreed  in  Exod.  xzzi.  14,  16,  and 
zxzT.  2.  It  seems  an  evasion  to  say  that 
although  death  had  been  decreed,  the  mode 
of  death  had  not  been  fixed ;  for  (1)  it  was 
clearly  part  of  the  Divine  answer  that  the 
offence  was  really  capital  (see  ver.  85  a.), 
and  (2)  it  was  understood  that  in  such  cases 
death  was  to  be  inflicted  by  stoning  (see 
Levit.  zx.  2 ;  zxiv.  14 ;  Josn.  vii  26 ;  in 
the  last  case  the  command  was  to  bum  the 
delinquents  with  fire,  yet  it  was  rightly 
taken  for  granted  that  they  were  to  be  stoned 
to  death  mst).  There  are  only  two  explana- 
tions which  are  satisfactory  because  they  are 
honest.  1.  The  incident  may  possibly  have 
occurred  between  the  first  institution  of  the 
sabbath  (Exod.  xvi.  23,  29)  and  the  decree 
of  death  to  those  that  broke  it.  There  is 
nothing  in  the  record  as  it  stands  here  to 
contradict  such  an  assumption.  2.  It  is  more 
likely  that  it  occurred  after^  the  departure 
from  Sinai,  and  that  the  hesitation  in  deal- 
ing with  the  criminal  was  due  not  to  any  real 
uncertainty  as  to  the  law,  but  to  unwilling- 
ness to  inflict  so  extreme  and  so  (apparently) 


disproportioned  a  punishment  for  aocli  an 
offence  without  a  farther  appeal  If  it  be 
said  that  such  unwillingness  to  carry  out  a 
plain  command  would  have  been  sinful,  it  is 
sufBcient  to  answer  that  Moses  and  Aaron 
and  the  &lders  were  human  beings,  and  must 
have  shrunk  from  visiting  with  a  cruel  death 
the  trivial  breach  of  a  purely  arbitrary  com- 
mandment. 

Ver.  86.— "Without  the  camp.  That  it 
might  not  be  defiled  (c£  Acts  viL  68,  and 
Heb.  xiii.  12). 

Yer.  86. — And  he  died.  He  was  killed 
not  for  what  he  did,  but  for  doing  it  pre- 
sumptuously, in  deliberate  defiance  of  'tniat 
he  knew  to  be  the  will  of  God.  If  the 
covenant  relation  was  to  be  maintained  be- 
tween God  and  Israel,  the  observance  of  the 
sabbath,  which  was  an  integral  part  of  that 
covenant,  must  be  enforced,  and  he  who 
wilfully  violated  it  must  be  cut  off;  and  this 
consideration  was  of  exceptional  force  in  this 
case,  as  the  first  which  had  occurred,  and  as 
the  one,  therefore,  which  would  govern  all  the 
rest  (of.  Acts  v.  5,  10).  On  the  punishment 
of  stoning  see  Levit.  zx.  2 ;  xxiv.  14 ;  Acta 
vii.  68. 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vers.  32  —  36.  —  2%e  Habhaih  of  God.  We  have  hero  •  record  which  is 
both  valuable  in  itself  as  revealing  the  mind  of  God,  and  also  valuable  indirectly 
as  revealing  the  mind  of  man.  The  perversity  of  human  nature,  and  the  extreme 
subtleness  of  superstition,  are  remarkably  exemplified  in  the  popular  treatment  of 
this  record.  It  has  indeed  made  a  deep  impression  upon  men,  but  that  impression 
has  been  almost  wholly  false,  and  has  simply  led  to  superstition.  The  story  of 
the  man  who  picked  up  sticks  on  the  Sabbath  appears  in  every  Christian  age,  and 
every  Christian  land ;  but  in  all  cases  it  is  the  act  itself  which  is  regarded  as 
being  so  awful  and  so  fearfully  avenged.  Yet  even  under  the  law  the  act  itself  was 
lawful  in  the  priests,  as  our  Lord  points  out  (Matt.  xii.  6),  for  the  temple  fire  was 
supplied  with  wood  ;  and  under  the  gospel  the  law  of  the  Sabbath,  so  far  as  it  was 
outward  and  arbitrary,  was  totally  repealed :  it  passed  away  like  a  shadow,  leaving 
us  face  to  face  with  the  substance,  the  reality  which  it  had  obscured — viz.,  the 
eternal  rest  from  sin  and  self  which  belongs  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven  (Rom.  liv.  6 ; 
Gal.  iv.  10 ;  Col.  ii.  16 ;  Heb.  iv.  9,  10).  We  keep  indeed  the  Lord's  day  because 
as  a  fact  it  has  been  kept  from  the  first,  and  no  one  has  a  right  to  ignore  the  universal 
custom  of  Christians ;  but  our  Sabbath  is  a  spiritual  one,  for  it  is  that  ceasing  from 
our  own  works  by  virtue  of  unselfishness  and  self-devotion  which,  as  it  is  the  secret 
of  "  rest "  in  this  life,  so  it  will  be  the  essence  of  "  rest "  in  the  life  to  come.  It 
follows  that  the  popular  use  of  this  story  to  enforce  the  outward  observance,  of  a 
legal  Sabbath  is  simply  and  purely  superstitious,  and  directly  antagonistic  to  its  true 
teaching.    Consider  therefore — 

I.  That  while  almost  all  other  obdinances,  even  cieoumcision  and  the  fasb- 

OVEB,  FELL   INTO  DISUSE,  THE   SabBATH  BEMAINED   FIXED,  INVIOLABLE,  AND    ETEBNAL 

Even  BO  while  all  outward  things  may  change,  while  even  sacraments  themselves 
might  fail,  the  true  Sabbath  of  the  soul  can  never  alter,  never  cease  to  be  observed  and 
sought.  To  cease  from  our  own  works  by  a  true  unselfishness ;  to  live  for  others 
by  an  active  love ;  to  find  our  rest  in  contemplating  good  and  rejoicing  in  it ;  that 
is  to  rest  from  our  labours  <ts  God  did  from  his,  and  that  is  the  law  of  the  holy  Sab- 
bath which  can  never  be  altered.    As  long  asGoj  ia  Go4,  and  man  is  man,  God  cap 


OH.  XT.  82—86.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBBE8.  191 

only  set  to  ns,  and  we  can  only  set  to  ourselves,  this  law  aa  the  law  of  all  laws  to 
be  observed  for  ever. 

II.  That  thb  violation  of  the  Sabbath-law  was  not  pakdonablb.  The  sentence 
of  death  was  confirmed,  on  special  appeal,  by  God  himself.  Even  so  whatever  directly 
violates  the  law  of  rest,  and  so  destroys  that  rest,  is  fatal  and  deadly  to  the  soul. 
For  as  this  rest  is  the  end  of  all  religion,  and  is  to  be  heaven  itself,  that  which 
directly  militates  against  it  (and  that  is  in  the  deepest  sense  selfishness)  has  never 
forgiveness,  can  never  be  overlooked  or  suffered  to  continue. 

III.  That  the  essence  of  the  man's  crime  was  not  that  he  gatheebd  sticks  on 
THE  Sabbath,  but  that  he  gathered  them  fob  himself.  For  the  priests  were 
guiltless,  cleaving  wood  for  the  altar  on  the  Sabbath ;  and  though  the  Jews  to  this 
day  will  not  make  a  fire  on  the  Sabbath  even  to  save  a  man's  life,  yet  it  is  certain 
that  our  Lord  would  have  commended  it,  and  that  from  an  Old  Testament  point  of 
view  (Mark  ii.  26,  27 ;  iii.  4).  Even  so  the  essence  of  all  sin,  and  the  cause  of  all 
wrath,  is  selfishness.  Selfishness  is  the  real  and  only  Sabbath-breaker,  because  it 
alone  disturbs  that  Divine  rest  which  stands  in  conformity  to  the  will  of  God  (see 
on  Gal.  ii.  20  ;  Col.  iii.  3  ;  1  John  iii.  21,  22,  &o.). 

IV.  That  the  doom  of  the  Sabbath-bbeaker  was  stoning — ^a  punishment  inflicted 
by  all,  and  expressive  of  universal  condemnation.  Even  so  the  true  punishment 
of  sin  is  that  it  arrays  against  us  both  God  and  all  good  and  holy  beings.  A  selfish 
person  would  find  neither  sympathy  nor  allowance  in  heaven :  his  soul  would  fall, 
crushed  beneath  the  weight  of  silent  disapproval  and  unintended  reproach.  And  so 
the  only  way  to  war  against  a  sin  of  selfishness  upon  earth  is  to  enlist  the  sympa- 
thies of  all  good  people  against  it. 

V.  That  the  end  of  the  Sabbath-breaker  was  death,  although  it  was  not  im- 
mediately EXECUTED.  Even  so  spiritual  death  is  the  certain  end  of  selfishness. 
Amidst  the  uncertainties  of  time  indeed  that  death  appears  to  be  postponed ;  selfish- 
nesG  is  quite  consistent  with  some  amount  of  religion.  But  the  sentence  of  deatli 
against  it  is  plain  and  irrevocable,  and  it  will  surely  be  carried  out  (Matt.  x.  38,  39  ; 
xvi,  26  •  Luke  xii.  21 ;  Rom.  viii.  6 ;  Phil.  ii.  4,  5, 21). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vert.  30 — SS.— The  doom  of  the  presumptuous  tUwtrated  by  that  of  the  Sahhath- 
breaker.  Disobedience  to  the  commands  of  God  is  ranged  under  two  classes.  First, 
that  which  has  just  been  considered,  disobedience  through  ignorance;  secondly, 
disobedience  from  presumption,  a  bold,  conscious,  recklesb  defiance  of  God  and 
following  out  of  the  promptings  of  self.  God  indicates  that  such  conduct  must 
be  met  in  a  corresponding  way.  "That  soul  shall  be  cut  oS  from  among  his 
people,  ....  utterly  cut  ofE."  Notice  that  while  God  supposed  the  case  of 
the  whole  people  sinning  ignorantly,  he  does  not  make  a  similar  supposition  with 
regard  to  presumptuous  sin.  Unanimity  in  an  open  and  deliberate  defiance  of  God 
jeems  to  be  impossible.  It  is  only  too  possible,  however,  that  single  men  should 
be  guilty  in  this  matter,  and  an  illustration  of  presumptuous  sin,  from  actual  life, 
immediately  follows.  The  people  were  to  be  left  without  excuse  for  saying  that 
they  were  in  any  doubt  as  to  this  dangerous  sin.  Where  death  was  the  punish- 
ment, the  oSence  could  not  be  too  clearly  indicated.  Let  us  consider  then  the  doom 
of  the  presumptuous  sinner,  as  illustrated  by  that  of  the  Sabbath- breaker. 

I.  The  commandment  with  respect  to  the  Sabbath  had  been  put  in  peculiar 
prominence.  It  stands  among  those  ten  solemn  announcements  of  God's  will,  with 
respect  to  which  we  may  say  that  all  other  commandments  existed  for  them.  Surely 
to  sin  against  any  of  these  was  to  sin  presumptuously.  It  is  reckoned  the  business 
of  all  men  to  know  all  the  laws  under  which  they  live — ignorance  is  not  allowed  for 
a  plea, — but  with  respect  to  the  ten  commandments,  special  means  had  been  taken 
to  impress  them  on  the  minds  and  memories  of  the  people.  Even  before  the  fourth 
commandment  had  been  formally  announced,  the  double  provision  of  manna  on  the 
sixth  day  had  helped  to  give  a  peculiar  significance  to  the  seventh.  So  it  may  be 
said,  if  we  are  disobedient  in  respect  of  those  requirements  mentioned  repeatedly 
and  held  out  prominently  by  Christ  and  his  apostles,  we  are  Binning  presumptuously. 


192  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBBBa  [oh.  xv.  82—86 

- 

Who  can  deny  that  continued  unbelief  in  the  face  of  pressing  requirements  for 
faith  is  a  presumptuous  sin  ?  Who  can  deny  that  where  love  and  unselfish  service 
are  kept  back  from  God  and  men  there  is  presumptuous  sin?  Such  sins  persisted 
in,  against  all  light,  instruction,  warning,  and  appeal,  will  end  in  a  cutting  o£E  from 
the  people,  a  terrible  exclusion  from  all  those  gracious  rewards  which  come  to  the 
faithful  and  obedient.  Presumptuous  sins  strike  at  the  very  foundation  of  the  throne 
of  God. 

II.  ThEBB  WAB  EVEBYTHINO  to  OALl.  THE  ATTENTION  0»  THIS  TBANSGBE8S0B  IN  THE 

FACT  THAT  OTHERS  WEBB  KEEPiNQ  THE  Sabbath.  None  could  come  into  the  Israel- 
ite camp  and  mistake  the  Sabbath  for  some  other  day,  just  as  none  could  enter  an 
English  town  on  the  day  of  rest  and  mistake  it  for  a  working  day.  When  the 
man  went  out  gathering  sticks,  there  was  something  fresh  at  every  step  he  took  to 
remind  him  that  he  was  transgressing  a  commandment  of  God  ;  a  dozen  steps  from 
his  own  door  was  enough  for  this.  He  went  into  sin  with  bis  eyes  open  and  his 
selfish  will  determined  to  disobey  God.  Thus  also  there  is  presumptuous  sin  in 
despising  those  requirements  of  Christ  which  are  not  only  plainly  and  repeatedly 
stated  by  him  and  his  apostles,  but  carried  out,  from  a  sincere  heart,  in  the  daily 
practice  of  many  who  rejoice  to  call  themselves  his  servants.  Every  Christian  who 
by  his  life  and  the  results  of  it  shows  that  in  his  judgment  certain  requirements  of 
Christ  are  all  important,  becomes  thereby  a  witness  to  convict  others  of  presumptuous 
sin.  To  act  on  tiie  principle  that  faith  in  Christ  is  not  absolutely  necessary  to  salva- 
tion, righteousness,  and  eternal  life,  is  to  run  counter  to  the  life  and  emphatic  con- 
fession of  many  in  all  generations  of  the  Christian  era.  Every  life  in  which  Christ 
is  manifested  ruling  and  guiding  is  a  fresh  repetition  of  his  great  requirements,  a  fresh 
evidence  of  presumptuous  sin  on  the  part  of  those  who  neglect  these  requirements. 

III.  The  bin  afpeabs  all  the  geeateb  rBoii  the  act  itself-  being  so  trifling. 
The  first  thought  of  many  on  reading  the  narrative  may  be,  "  What  severity  for  such 
a  little  offence  I "  But  the  more  it  is  looked  at  the  greater  the  offence  appears. 
There  would  have  been  more  to  say  for  the  man  if  the  temptation  had  come  from 
some  great  thing.  If  a  fortune  or  a  kingdom  bad  been  in  question,  then  there  would 
have  been  some  plausibly  sufScient  motive  for  a  great  transgression ;  but  to  break 
such  a  commandment,  to  run  counter  to  the  conduct  of  the  whole  camp  for  a  hand- 
ful of  sticks,  does  it  not  show  how  proud-hearted  the  man  was,  how  utterly  careless 
of  all  and  any  of  God's  regulations?  Such  a  man  would  have  turned  to  idolatry  and 
profanity  on  the  one  hand,  or  to  theft  and  even  murder  on  the  other,  at  very  slight 
provocation.  It  was  a  little  thing  for  Esau  to  crave  a  mess  of  pottage,  but  it 
deservedly  lost  him  his  birthright  when  he  valued  it  so  little.  Thus  have  men  sinned 
against  their  Saviour  for  the  paltriest  trifles.  Peter  moves  our  sympathy  when  he 
denies  Jesus,  for  life  is  dear  when  closely  threatened,  and  we  consider  ourselves  lest 
we  also  be  tempted  ;  but  when  Judas  sells  his  master,  and  such  a  master,  for  thirty 
pieces  of  silver,  how  abominable  the  act  appears  I  Yet  men  are  constantly  turning 
from  Jesus  on  considerations  as  paltry  and  sordid.  They  will  not  be  religious,  because 
such  continual  carefulness  is  required  in  little  things.  This  man  sinned  a  great  and 
daring  sin  against  God  ;  he  was  dragged  in  shame  before  the  whole  congregation, 
and  then  stoned  outsid*  the  camp.  And  what  had  he  by  way  of  set-off  ?  A  few 
stK'Vs.  If  it  was  a  little  thing  to  do,  it  was  just  as  little  a  thing  to  be  left  vmdone. 
Smai)  as  it  was,  it  showed  the  state  of  the  man's  heart,  that  corroding  and  hopeless 
leprosy  within,  which  left  no  other  course  but  to  cut  him  off  from  the  people. 

IV.  Thus  we  arbive  at  the  full  measure  ok  the  man's  insult  to  the  majesty 
OF  God.  We  see  in  what  way  he  reproaches  the  Lord  and  despises  his  word.  If 
this  man  had  gone  before  Moses,  when  with  the  tables  in  his  hands  he  came  fresh 
from  Sii.ai,  and  if  he  had  heaped  contumely  on  the  messenger,  and  spat  upon  the 
tables,  he  could  not  have  done  more  then  to  show  contempt  than  he  did  by  the 
gathering  of  those  few  sticks  on  the  day  which  God  had  claimed  for  his  own. 
Human  governments,  with  all  their  impeif  ections,  look  upon  deliberate  defiance  of 
their  authority  as  a  thing  to  be  punished  severely ;  what,  then,  must  be  done  where 
there  is  a  deliberate  defiance  of  the  authority  of  God  ?  A  terrible  doom  awaits  those 
who  despise  and  ridicule  God's  ordinances  of  right  and  wrsng.  Though  it  may  not 
bi  swift  and  sudden,  it  wi}l  assuredlj'  be  ceTtaifl  ani|  complete-    Tbow  who  moi)ni 


OH.  XV.  32—86.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  IW 

their  inability  to  keep  the  law  of  God  are  separated  in  hia  sight  from  those  who  eon- 
temn  that  law,  far  as  the  east  is  from  the  west.  Be  it  ours  to  feel  with  David, 
"  rivers  of  waters  run  down  my  eyes,  because  they  keep  not  thy  law  "  (Ps.  czix.  136), 
and  not  as  the  fool  who  says  in  his  heart.  There  is  no  Qod  (Fs.  liii  1 :  six. 
12— 14).— Y. 

Vers.  32 — 36. — The  law  of  the  Sahbatk :  a  solemn  vindication.    I.  This  doom  or 

DEATH   SHOWS  THE   IMPOBTANCE  OF  THE   SABBATH  IN  THE   SIGHT  OF    GOD.       1.    There 

teas  nted  of  something  special  to  call  attention  to  this  point.  Those  commandments 
which  concerned  himself  directly  he  had  to  fence  in  a  special  way.  Commandments 
against  filial  impiety,  murder,  adultery,  theft,  false  witness,  covetousness,  these  con- 
cerned man  directly,  and  through  him  they  concerned  Qod ;  man,  therefore,  might 
be  trusted  to  help  in  vindicating  these  commands.  But  those  against  polytheism, 
idolatry,  profanity,  and  Sabbath-breaking  concerned  God  directly  and  man  only 
indirectly.  Man,  therefore,  might  not  perceive  the  hurt,  even  though  it  was  real  and 
most  serious.  Thus  it  became  needful  for  God  to  deal  in  a  specially  stern  and  im- 
pressive way  with  the  Sabbath-breaker.  His  people  must  be  made  to  perceive  and 
bear  in  mind  that  he  meant  the  seventh  day  to  be  a  holy  day.  It  was  as  much 
sacrilege  to  spend  it  in  common  occupations  as  it  was  to  defile  the  ark  in  the  holy 
place._  2.  There  was  need  to  arrest  the  attention  of  such  as  kept  the  Sabbath  in  a 
negative  rather  than  a  positive  way.  God  gave  the  Sabbath,  not  for  idleness,  but 
for  that  most  valuable  of  all  rest  which  is  gained  in  quiet,  undisturbed  communion 
with  God,  and  meditation  on  all  his  wonderful  works.  Those  who  employed  the 
Sabbath  in  solemn  and  devout  approaches  to  the  God  of  the  covenant  were  delivered 
from  temptation  to  break  the  Sabbath.  Filled  with  the  fulness  of  God,  there  would 
be  no  room  for  base,  transgressing  thoughts.  But  no  commandment  could  bring  the 
unwilling  heart  to  God.  It  might  do  something  to  keep  the  work  of  the  common 
day  away  from  the  hands ;  it  could  do  nothing  to  keep  the  thoughts  of  the  common 
day  out  of  the  heart.  The  heart  was  to  be  sought ;  it  could  not  be  forced,  being  in 
its  nature  beyond  force.  Many,  therefore,  would  keep  the  day  negatively,  in  utter 
idleness,  and  this  idleness  itself  tended  to  disobedience.  The  doing  of  little  things 
would  seem  practically  the  same  as  doing  nothing.  So  men  had  to  be  taught,  by 
terrible  examples,  not  to  trifle  with  holy  things.  If  a  man  thoughtlessly  touches 
things  dangerous  to  physical  life,  his  thoughtlessness  will  not  deliver  him  from  fatal 
consequences.  If  a  man  sports  with  poisons,  or  moves  carelessly  among  machinery, 
he  is  very  likely  to  lose  his  life;  so  men  who  trifled  with  the  Sabbath  were  in  great 
peril.  Safety,  progress,  approval,  blessedness,  were  for  those  who  obeyed  from  the 
heart.  But  those  who  through  heedlessness  of  the  heart  disobeyed  with  the  hand 
had  no  right  to  complain  when  death  outside  the  camp  awaited  them. 

II.  This  solemn  vindication  has  an  important  bearing  on  the  Christian 
DAT  of  rest.  This  is  not  the  place  to  take  up  even  a  fragment  of  the  interminable 
discussion  on  the  obligation  of  the  Sabbath.  But  is  not  the  very  fact  of  such  a  dis- 
cussion evidence  that  the  lapse  of  the  obligation  is  by  no  means  a  thing  clearly  and 
easily  to  be  seen  ?_  1.  This  solemn  vindication  hints  to  us  that  it  is  a  prudent  thing 
to  be  on  the  safe  side.  Thus  we  may  both  escape  great  dangers  ana  secure  great 
blessings.  To  spend  the  day  of  rest  just  as  we  please  is  a  claim,  not  of  conscience, 
hut  of  self-will.  It  cannot  be  pretended  that  ceasing  from  work  one  daj  in  seven 
is  a  hurt  to  one's  self  or  to  the  world.  Practically,  all  Christians  confess  the  need  of  a 
day  of  rest.  If  God  so  blessed  one  day  in  seven  to  those  who  knew  him  as  he  might 
be  known  in  the  obscurities  and  distances  of  the  Jewish  economy,  is^it  not  reasonable 
to  expect  that  in  the  fuller  light  and  nearer  approach  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  a 
seventh  day  of  rest,  rightly  used,  may  be  the  means  of  the  greatest  blessing.  We 
are  now  under  the  perfect  law  of  liberty ;  and  because  it  is  a  law  of  liberty  it  is  all 
the  more  a  law  to  the  liberated  soul.  We  use  not  our  liberty  for  an  occasio  to  the 
flesh ;  we  ought  to  use  it  for  an  occasion  to  th6  Spirit.  God  blessed  and  hallo  ed  the 
seventh  day,  because  in  it  he  rested  from  his  work  of  creation.  What  a  pro- 
priety then  in  .keeping  the  first  day  of  the  week,  as  that  in  which  the  OhrisbanV 
Master  rested  from  temptation,  toil,  and  his  victorious  struggle  with  death  anrt 
Hades  I    2.  This  solemn  vindication  should  make  us  considerate  of  all  who  are  called 

NUMBBBS.  0 


194 


THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBEES. 


[oh.  XV.  37—41, 


ty  the  ugly  name  of  Sabbatarian.  No  doubt  with  regard  to  the  Sabbath  there  hai 
been  much  of  bigotry,  ignorance,  and  of  melancholy  misinterpretations  of  the  Scrip- 
ture ;  but  the  weak  brother  wh  o  reads  this  narrative  of  the  Sabbath-breaker's  doom  may 
well  be  excused  if  to  stronger  minds  he  seems  ridiculously  precise.  Christ  will  deal 
with  us  as  severely  as  his  Father  dealt  with  the  Sabbath-breaker  if  we  make  one  of  his 
little  ones  to  oiEend.  It  is  necessary  above  all  things  to  be  safe.  We  must  not  confound 
the  scrupulosity  of  the  weak  with  the  scrupulosity  of  the  Pharisee.  That,  indeed,  is 
always  abominable — attending  to  little  external  things,  and  neglecting  the  weightier 
matter*  of  the  law.  God's  service,  after  all,  whether  on  week  day  or  Sunday,  con- 
sists in  the  things  we  do  rather  than  in  those  we  refrain  from  doing.  God,  we  may 
be  sure,  will  take  care  that  the  day  of  rest  is  not  narrowed  out  of  harmony  with  the 
liberty  of  the  gospel.  As  there  were  matters  of  necessity  provided  for  under  the 
law,  so  there  is  like  provision  under  the  gospel.  A  man  of  right  spirit  will  not  mis- 
interpret the  necessities.  Jeremiah  Horrocks,  the  young  clergyman  who  first  observed 
the  transit  of  Venus,  is  said  to  have  made  his  discovery  on  the  Lord's  Day,  without 
allowing  it  in  the  least  to  interfere  with  his  duties  in  the  church.  One  of  the 
most  important  principles  of  his  steam-engine  flashed  into  the  mind  of  Watt  as  he 
was  walking  along  Glasgow  Green  one  Sunday  morning.  And  it  was  one  Simday 
morning  that  Carey,  entering  his  pulpit  in  India,  received  the  new  regulation  pro- 
hibiting suttee.  He  at  once  sent  for  his  pundit,  and  completed  the  translation  into 
Bengalee  before  night. — Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


Thu  law  of  tassem  (vers.  37  —  41). 
Ver.  38. — Bid  them  that  they  make  them 
fringes.  nS'V.  probably  tassels.  It  seems 
to  signify  something  ilower-like  and  bright, 
like  the  blooms  on  a  shrub  ;  the  word  f'V  is 
applied  to  the  shining  plate  of  gold  upon 
Aaron's  head-baud  (Exod.  zxviii.  36).  In 
Jer.  xlviii.  9  it  seems  to  mean  a  wing,  and 
in  Ezek.  viii.  3  TlVy  is  a  lock  of  hair.  The 
exact  meaning  must  be  gathered  from  the 
context,  and  on  the  whole  that  suggests  a 

tassel  father  than  a  fringe.  The  word  D*?^)!, 
used  Id  the  parallel  passage  Deut.  ^xii.  12, 
seems  to  have  this  meaning.  The  Septuagint 
renders  it  by  kpaairiSa,  which  is  adopted  in 
the  Gospels  (see  on  Matt,  xxiii.  5).  In  the 
borders  of  their  garments.  Literally,  "  on 
the  wings,"  tjri  rd  jrrepuyia.  The  outer 
garment  (1^3  here,  .1-103  in  Deut.  ixii.  12) 
was  worn  like  a  plaid,  so  folded  that  the  four 
corners  were  dependent,  and  on  each  of  these 
corners  was  to  be  hung  a  tassel.  It  was  also 
used  as  a  coverlet  by  the  poor  (Exod.  xxii. 
27).  That  they  put  upon  the  fringe  of  the 
borders  a  ribband  of  blue.  Rather,  "that 
they  put  a  string  (or  thread)  of  hyaointh-blue 
upon  the  tassel  of  the  wing."  Septuagint, 
fXaaixa  iaxiv^ivov.  This  may  have  been  a 
blue  string  with  which  to  fasten  the  tassel  to 
the  corner  of  the  garment,  as  if  it  were  the 
■talk  on  which  this  flower  grew ;  or  it  may 
have  been  a  prominent  blue  thread  in  the 
tassel  itself.  The  later  Jews  seem  to  have 
understood  it  in  this  sense,  and  concerned 
themselves  greatly  with  the  symbolical  ar- 
rangements of  the  blus  and  other  threads, 


and  the  method  in  which  they  were  knotted 
together,  so  as  to  set  forth  the  whole  law  with 
all  its  several  commandments.  The  later 
Jews,  however,  have  always  contrived,  with 
all  their  minute  observance,  to  break  the  plain 
letter  of  the  law  :  thus  the  modem  tdll(h  is 
an  under,  and  not  an  upper,  garment. 

Ver.  39. — That  ye  may  look  upon  it,  and 
remember  all  the  commandments.  It  was 
indeed  a  minute  and  apparently  trivial  dis- 
tinction, and  yet  such  an  one  as  would  most 
surely  strike  the  eye,  and  through  the  eye 
the  mind.  It  was  like  the  facings  on  a 
uniform  which  recall  the  fame  and  exploits 
of  a  famous  regiment.  The  tasseled  Hebrew 
was  a  marked  man  in  other  eyes,  and  in  his 
own ;  he  could  not  pass  himself  off  as  one  of 
the  heathen ;  he  was  perpetually  reminded 
of  the  special  relation  m  which  he  stood  to 
the  Lord,  whose  lively  (so  to  speak) — or,  to 
USB  another  simile,  whose  colours — b^  wore. 
No  doubt  the  sky-blue  string  or  thread 
which  was  so  prominent  was  meant  to  re- 
mind him  of  heaven,  and  of  the  God  of 
heaven.  And  that  ye  seek  not  after  your  own 
heart  and  your  own  eyes,  after  which  ye 
use  to  go  a  whoring.  The  office  of  the 
tassels  was  to  promote  a  recollected  spirit. 
As  it  was,  their  fickle  minds  were  always 
ready  to  stray  away  towards  any  heathen 
foUiea  which  their  restless  eyes  might  Ught 
upon.  The  trivial  but  striking  peculiarity 
of  their  dress  should  recall  them  to  the 
thought  that  they  were  a  peculiar  people, 
holy  to  the  Lord. 

Ver.  41. — I  am  the  Lord  your  God.    This 
intensely  solemn  formula,  here  twice  repeated. 


CH.  XT.  S7— 41.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


196 


may  lerre  to  show  how  intimately  the  smallest 
observances  of  the  Law  were  connected  with 
the  profoimdest  and  most  comforting  of 
spiritual  truths,  if  only  observed  in  faith 
and  true  obedience.  The  whole  of  religion, 
theoretical  and  practical,  lay  in  those  words, 
and  that  whole  was  hung  upon  a  tassel.    It 


is  further  to  be  noted  that  this  precept  wm 
given  during  the  years  of  exile,  and  probably 
given  as  one  which  they  could  keep,  and 
which  would  be  helpful  to  them,  at  a  time 
when  almost  all  other  distinctive  observancea 
were  suspended. 


HOMILBTICS. 

Vers.  37 — 41. — A  distinguishing  mark  of  the  faithful.    In  the  ordinance  of  the 

tassels  we  have  at  once  the  height  and  depth  of  the  old  dispensation — the  most  trivial 
of  outward  observances  married  to  the  deepest  truths  and  greatest  blessings  of  true 
religion.  Spiritually  we  are  to  see  here  the  distinctive  marks  of  the  faithful  Christian 
which  separate  between  him  and  the  children  of  this  world.    Consider  therefore — 

I.  That  the  tassels  were  designed  to  be  unmistakeable  mares  of  distinction 
AND  SBPABATION  BETWEEN  ISRAEL  AND  ALL  OTHER  PEOPLES ;  and  that  at  a  time  when 
many  other  distinctions  had  fallen  into  abeyance.  Even  so  it  is  exceeding  necessary 
that  the  faithful  disciple  (who  is  the  true  Israelite)  should  not  only  be  different,  but 
be  obviously  different,  from  others ;  and  this  especially  in  an  age  when  the  old  dis- 
tinctions between  the  Church  and  the  world  are  so  greatly  broken  down.  Nothing 
can  be  more  abhorrent  to  God  than  a  crypto-Christianity,  which  is  ashamed  of  itself 
and  endeavours  to  efface  all  visible  distinctions  between  itself  and  the  irreligion  of 
the  world.  Christians  were  to  be  emphatically  "a  peculiar  people,"  and  if  they 
seem  "  peculiar"  to  those  who  are  not  governed  by  Christian  motives  and  principles, 
so  much  the  better.  It  does  not  follow  that  they  are  right  because  they  are  unlike 
others,  but  at  any  rate  they  would  not  be  right  if  they  were  like  them  (Rom.  lii.  2  ; 
2  Cor.  vi.  14—18 ;  Titus  ii.  14 ;  Heb.  vii.  26  ;  James  iv.  4  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  9). 

II.  That  the  distinction  here  commanded  was  trivial  in  itself,  and  in  after 
AGES  TURNED  TO  SUPERSTITION  AND  ARROGANCE  (Matt,  xxiii.  5).  Even  SO  all  external 
distinctions,  however  harmless  and  even  venerable  by  association,  have  an  unalterable 
tendency  to  substitute  themselves  for  the  inward  differences  whicTi  they  symbolize. 
Consider  the  reproach  which  has  overtaken  the  very  name  of  "  Christian '  — a  name  so 
full  of  significance,  warning,  and^  encouragement — among  heathens  and  Mahometans. 
And  how  little  effect  the  high-sounding  names  of  Christian  bodies  have  had  upon 
their  lives,  save  indeed  in  fostering  arrogance  and  self-righteousness.  No  external 
distinction  is  of  any  value  unless  it  has  a  real  correspondence  to  something  inward 
and  spiritual  (Rom.  ii.  29  ;  xiv.  17;  1  Cor.  viii.  8;  Q-al.  vi.  15). 

III.  That  the  tassels  were  intended  to  produce  and  to  poster  a  habit  of  be- 
COLLECTEDNESS,  ESPECIALLY  AMONG  STRANGERS.  The  tasseled  Hebrew  was  perpetually 
reminded  that  he  shared  in  privileges,  responsibilities,  and  dangers  which  the 
nations  knew  nothing  of.  Even  so  the  faithful  Christian  has  no  greater  or  more 
necessary  safeguard  than  a  habit  of  recollectedness,  and  he  is  bound  to  cultivate  it 
carefully  by  prayer  and  self-discipline.  In  the  midst  of  innumerable  entanglements, 
confusions,  and  perplexities,  he  has  continually  to  call  to  mind  whose  he  is  and 
whom  he  serves.  Mixing,  conversing,  dealing  in  every  way  with  those  whose  aims, 
motives,  and  principles  are  avowedly  worldly  and  selfish,  he  has  to  check  himself 
at  every  turn  by  this  recollection ;  and  only  thus  can  he  escape  from  sin  (Philip,  ii. 
15,  16 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  1,  2  ;  Titus  ii.  8). 

IV.  That  the  hyacinthine  blue  of  the  string,  or  thread,  was  meant  to  remind 
THE  Israelite  op  heaven,  and  the  God  op  heaven  (cf.  the  "  jacinth  "  of  Rev.  ix.  17). 
Even  so  there  must  be  in  the  faithful  soul  a  perpetual  remembrance  of  heaven  as  at 
once  his  home  and  goal ;  for  it  is  this  remembrance  only  mingling  with  all  other 
thoughts  which  will  keep  him  from  the  subtle  greed  and  from  the  base  attractions 
of  earth  (Philip,  iii.  20 ;  Heb.  xii.  1,  2  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  11 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  12, 13).  And  note 
that  this  spirit  -of  recollectedness  in  these  two  particulars,  viz.,  whose  we  are,  and 
whither  we  are  bound,  is  the  true  and  destinctive  adornment  of  all  faithful  Christians, 
no  matter  in  what  diversity  of,  outward  circumstance  they  may  be  arrayed.  And 
thia,  without  tlie  least  ostentation  or  ■elf-cousciousness,  will  at  once  make  them 

o2 


IW  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  [ch.  xv.  87— 4t 

known  to  one  another  (cf.  Mai.  iii.  16),  and  mark  them  out  for  an  instinctive  wonder 
and  admiration  in  the  eyes  of  all  who  are  seeking  after  God. 

V.  That  the  one  great  and  blessed  tboth  which  gave  bealitt  and  hbanikg  to 
THIS  distinction  was,  "  I  AM  THE  LoBD  TOUB  GoD."  Even  80  whatever  may  dis- 
tinguish the  faithful  Christian  from  others  has  no  other  foundation  than  this,  that 
God  is  his  God — his  in  Christ,  his  in  a  sense  which  is  beyond  words  or  thought.  It 
is  not  the  fact  that  he  is  more  righteous  than  others  which  any  distinctive  conduct  or 
observance  is  meant  to  proclaim  ;  but  simply  that  God  has  been  more  merciful  to 
him,  and  has  drawn  him  closer  to  himself  in  Christ  (1  Cor.  iii.  21 — 23 ;  1  John  i.  3  : 
2  Pet.  14). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Vers.  37 — 41. — The  use  and  abuse  of  memorials.  This  law  is  one  of  the  many 
illustrations  of  the  minute  particulars  prescribed  by  the  laws  of  Moses.  We  find 
other  illustrations  in  precepts  respecting  ploughing  (Deut.  xxii.  10),  sowing  (Deut. 
xxii.  9),  reaping  (Levit.  xxiii.  22),  threshing  ^Deut.  xxv.  41  killing  (Levit.  xvii.  13), 
cooking  (Exod.  xxiii.  19),  clothing  (Deut,  xxii.  11),  &c.  All  these  laws  had  certain 
moral  or  spiritual  significations.     The  precept  respecting  the  fringes  teaches  us — 

I.  The  value  of  uemobuls.  1.  To  remind  us  of  spiritual  truths.  The 
peculiarity  of  the  Jew's  dress  was  a  witness  to  him  that  he  belonged  to  "  a  peculiar 
people "  (Deut.  xiv.  2)  separated  unto  God.  Possibly  the  blue  colour  (c£  Exod. 
xxviii.  31)  was  intended  to  remind  him  that  he  belonged  to  a  kingdom  of  priests. 
2.  Such  memorials  are  needed  because  of  our  treacherous  memories,  which,  like 
sieves,  may  let  pure  water  run  away,  but  retain  the  sediment  and  rubbish.  3.  And 
they  are  valuable  for  the  sake  of  others.  The  Jews  taught  that  even  a  blind  man 
must  wear  the  fringe,  because  others  could  see  it.  Strangers  may  be  impressed  by 
our  memorial  services,  even  if  we  are  blind  to  their  significance.  Our  children  and 
their  descendants  may  learn  by  them.  Illustrations — Passover  (Exod.  xii.  24 — 27) ; 
altar  and  stones  on  Ebal  and  Gerizim  (Deut.  xxvii.  1 — 8  ;  Josh.  viii.  30 — 35).  The 
Lord's  Supper,  by  which  we  "  show  Christ's  death  till  he  come." 

II.  The  dangeb  or  theib  abuse.  1.  Because  of  our  inveterate  tendency  to 
exaggerate  the  importance  of  what  is  external.  Hence  fringes  were  "enlarged" 
(Matt,  xxiii.  5)  and  phylacteries  were  invented  (Deut.  vi.  6 — 9).  The  simple  supper 
of  the  Lord  has  been  developed  into  the  pompous  ceremonies  of  the  mass.  2.  And 
thus  to  stop  at  the  symbol  and  thereby  prevent  it.  Illustrations — The  serpent  of 
brass  idolised  (2  Kings  xviii.  4)  ;  the  ark  treated  as  a  charm  (1  Sam.  iv.  3).  3.  And 
by  so  doing  to  "  come  short"  of  the  promise  of  salvation  which  is  "  in  Christ  Jesus," 
who  is  "  the  way,  and  the  truth,  and  the  life."  Nevertheless,  God  does  not  take 
away  symbolic  memorials  from  us,  but  throws  on  us  the  responsibility  of  using  "  as 
not  abusing  "  them. — P. 

Vers.  37 — 40. — The  fringes:  ever-present  reminders.  I.  A  need  to  be  phovidbd 
FOB.  These  numerous  and  all-important  commandments  must,  if  such  a  thing  is 
possible,  be  kept  continually  before  the  minds  of  the  people.  God  has  already 
provided  for  the  need,  in  fact,  by  appointing  an  atonement  for  sins  of  ignorance. 
These  would  be  very  largely  sms  of  forgetf  ulness,  ,and  so,  as  prevention  is  better 
than  cure,  it  was  desirable  to  guard  against  forgetf ulness.  Sins  of  ignorance,  when 
committed,  may  be  atoned  for,  but  it  is  better,  if  such  a  thing  can  be,  not  to  commit 
them  at  all.  Hence  God,  knowing  the  natural  forgetfulness  of  the  human  heart, 
and  bow  many  cares,  pleasures,  novelties,  and  objects  of  interest  there  are  to  draw  it 
away  from  the  consideration  of  his  will,  recognises  a  need  to  be  provided  for  in  a 
special  way.  The  will  of  God,  moreover,  needed  to  be  constantly/  remembered.  It 
bears  on  all  our  conscious  life,  and  through  that  in  many  unknown  ways  on  the 
unconscious  life  beneath.  There  was  no  action  of  an  Israelite's  life  but  could  be 
done  in  God's  way  or  in  his  own.  A  moment's  incaution,  and  he  might  step  into 
some  great  transgression.  The  law  through  Moses  was  a  thing  of  details,  and  to 
neglect  the  least  detail  was  to  impair  the  whole.  Evidently  this  need  has  still  to  be 
pnmded/or.    The  law  t>>rough  CSuist  for  oar  life  is  also  one  needing  to  be  constantly 


OH.  XT.  87—41.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  W 

remembered.  There  is  no  moment  when  it  does  not  stand  before  ns  in  all  its  spiritu- 
ality, and  its  searching  for  inward  conformity.  Nor  can  we  pretend  that  our  hearts 
are  any  better,  any  more  in  sympathy  with  God,  than  those  in  Israel  of  old.  The 
human  heart  under  Christ  needs  to  be  provided  for  just  as  much  as  under  Moses. 
Thus  we  may  be  sure  that  if  God  saw  the  need  then,  he  sees  it  equally  now. 

II.  God's  provision  fob  the  nebd.  He  provided  something  that  should  always 
be  before  the.  eye.  Fringes  or  tassels  on  the  garments  were  ever-present  remem- 
brancers. Many  times  a  day  the  wearer  could  not  but  cast  his  eye  on  this  addition 
to  his  garment,  and  he  was  at  once  to  recollect  that  it  was  something  not  added  by 
his  own  fancy,  but  that  he  might  ask  himself  the  question,  "  Am  I  at  this  moment 
doing  the  wiU  of  God  ?  "  Nor  on  his  own  garment  only  was  the  fringe  of  use ;  every 
time  his  eye  rested  on  the  garments  of  others,  similarly  adorned,  he  was  reminded  to 
treat  them  in  a  just,  godly,  and  brotherly  fashion,  as  being  also  Israelites,  holy  and 
privileged  as  himself  (Gal.  vi.  10).  And  may  we  not  say  that  we  have  reminders,  so 
various,  numerous,  and  increasing,  as  to  the  claims  of  God  upon  us,  that  they  amount 
to  something  like  a  fringe  on  our  garments  ?  There  may  be  nothing  of  distinct 
Divine  appointment  in  many  of  these  reminders,  but  if  they  are  such  as  naturally  turn 
our  attention  to  holy  things,  then  the  presence  of  them  adds  very  much  to  our 
responsibility.  Every  Bible  that  we  see ;  every  passage  of  Scripture  set  in  other 
writing ;  every  church  spire  rising  to  the  sky,  or  even  the  humblest  building  given  to 
religious  uses ;  every  known  minister  of  religion,  or  indeed  any  one  known  to  be  a 
Christian ;  every  grave-yard  and  burial  procession — these  and  many  such  have  all  in 
them  something  of  the  fringes.  We  cannot  afford  to  despise  any  helps  towards 
knowledge  and  obedience.  He  provided  the  same  memorial  for  all.  He  did  not 
count  it  sufficient  there  should  be  any  memorial  the  individual  might  choose.  There 
was  to  be  no  room  for  individual  caprice.  The  memorial  wag  a  fringe,  and  it  was 
always  blue.  Thus,  while  there  are  many  things  which  m/iy  be  used  to  remind  us  of 
God's  will,  there  are  some  especially  designed  for  this  end.  Those  who  accept  the 
permanent  obligation  of  the  Lord's  Supper  are  brought,  on  every  observance  of  it, 
face  to  face  with  him  whom  only  too  easily  we  forget.  "  Do  this  in  remembrance  of 
me."  But  since  all  do  not  accept  this  obligation,  and  those  who  do  meet  in  different 
ways  and  with  varying  frequency,  we  can  hardly  find  here  that  which  is  to  correspond 
in  the  gospel  with  the  fringes  in  the  law.  Is  there  any  one  settled  and  definite  thing 
which  Christ  gives  us  now  the  same  for  us  all  ?  May  we,  not  answer  from  John  xvi. 
13 :  "  When  he,  the  Spirit  of  truth,  is  come,  he  will  guide  you  into  all  (the)  truth  "  ? 
Where  Moses  gave  commandments,  Christ  gave  promises,  which  are  only  command- 
ments in  another  form.  We  have  now  to  do  not  with  a  body  of  positive  precepts,  to 
be  understood  and  obeyed  in  our  natural  strength,  but  with  a  living  and  life-giving 
Spirit,  and  the  more  we  have  the  life  of  that  Spirit  in  us,  the  more  we  shall  bo 
preserved  from  errors  in  doctrine,  and  from  omissions,  exaggerations,  and  defects  in 
duty.  We  are  not  now  called  to  manufacture  lifeless  and  merely  typical  ojiservances 
according  to  a  pattern.  Obedience  now  is  to  be  a  growth ;  and  if  there  is  heavenly, 
pure,  and  energetic  life  in  us,  then  wo  shall  not  be  lacking  in  strength,  beauty,  and 
fruit£ulness.  What  signification,  if  any,  may  there  be  in  the  colour  t  Perhaps  it  is 
not  fanciful  to  suppose  that  it  may  have  been  chosen  as  having  correspondence  with 
the  tint  of  the  sky — something  to  help  in  turning  the  thoughts  of  the  people  away 
from  earth  to  him  who  dwells  on  high.  Tennyson  reminds  us  ('  In  Memoriam,' 
11)  of 

"  The  sinless  years 
That  breathed  beneath  the  Syrian  blue." 

III.  The  uuited  use  of  God's  fbovision.  It  was  as  good  a  monitor  as  could 
be  given  in  the  circumstances,  always  moving  about  with  the  person  who  had  to 
remember.  But  remembrance,  even  .supposing  it  exact  and  opportune,  would  only 
reveal  more  and  more  the  inevitable  weakness  in  action.  What  could  the  fringes 
help  in  the  doing  ?  Could  they  turn  men  from  seeking  after  their  own  hearts  and 
their  own  eyes  ?  By  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin  (Rom.  iii.  20).  Hence  the 
better  their  knowledge  of  the  law  in  its  requirements,  and  the  more  exact  their 
tamembrance,  the  more  painful  and  depressing  would  be  the  consciousness  of  their  owb 


IM  HE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [Ofi.xv.  37-41. 

iin.  The  holier  they  became  in  outward  compliances,  the  more  would  they  feel 
their  pollution  and  their  separation  of  heart  from  God.  If  any  one  ever  knew  th« 
value  of  the  fringes,  we  should  judge  it  to  have  been  David,  yet  read  Ps.  cxix.,  and 
notice  how  he  there  gathers  up  his  earnest  longings  for  conformity  with  God's  law, 
and  not  unfrequently  seems  to  tread  the  verge  of  despair.  We  must  have  more  than 
mere  admonitions,  however  frequent  and  earnest,  if  we  are  to  do  God's  will  and  be 
in  truth  holy  before  him.  Hence  we  come  back  to  that  work  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ, 
putting  within  us  new  life,  and  that  love  which  is  the  best  of  all  monitors.  The 
fringe  above  all  fringes,  the  riband  made  of  heaven's  own  blue,  is  to  have  love  in  the 
heart.  Love  never  forgets.  It  has  its  object  ever  in  its  thoughts — first  in  the  morn- 
ing, last  at  night,  and  flitting  even  through  dreams.  Fringes  may  recall  words  and 
outward  ceremonies,  but  love  discovers  fresh  applications  and  larger  meanings. 
Love  does  with  the  mere  words  of  commandment  as  the  chemist  does  with  material 
things,  ever  discovering  in  them  new  combinations,  properties,  and  powers  (John 
xiv.  23— 26).— Y. 

Ver.  41. — God  recalls  a  great  deed  and  the  purpose  of  it.     I.  God  recalls  k 
GREAT  DEED.     "  I  brought  you  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt."     1.  It  was  deliverance 
from  a  bitter  bondage.    The  Israelites  had  been  making  light  of  it  of  late,  but  in 
Egypt  it  was  grievous  indeed  (Exod.  i.  13,  14 ;  ii.  23 ;  iii.  7 ;  vi.  9).     So  God,  by 
the  work  of  his  incarnate  Son,  delivered  the  world  from  a  bitter  bondage.     "  Behold 
the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  whole  world."     The  act  of 
Divine  power  by  which  Jesus  rose  from  the  grave  did  not  sweep  away  all  difficulties 
and  make  life  henceforth  a  path  of  roses.     But  it  is  a  great  deal  to  stand  on  this 
side,  historically,  of  the  sepulchre  from  which  the  stone  was  rolled  away     The 
generations  before  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  were,  as  we  may  say,  in  Egypt,  waiting 
deliverance.     The  world  since  that  event  stands,  as  it  were,  delivered.     He  who 
brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  destroyed  him  that  had  the  power  of  death,  that 
is,  the  devil,  and  delivered  them  who  through  fear  of  death  were  all  the''-  lifetime 
subject  to  bondage  (Heb.  ii.  14, 15).    2.  It  was  a  deliverance  worked  out  entirely 
by  God.     "I  brought  you  out,  &o."    There  was  no  struggle  against  Pharaoh  on  the 
part  of  the  people.     We  do  not  see  the  prisoner  within  conspiring  with  the  deliverer 
oulside.     The  bondage  was  so  bitter,  the  subjection  so  complete,  that  the  people 
were  not  moved  to  conspiracy  and  insurrection.     We  read  constantly  in  history  of 
servile  and  subject  races  winning  their  way  to  freedom  through  the  bloody  struggles 
of  many  generations,  but  these  Israelites  before  Pharaoh  were  like  oxen  broken  to 
the  plough.    They  groaned,  but  they  submitted.    And  in  this  Egyptian  sort  of  bond- 
age the  world  was  fast  before  Christ  came  to  deliver.     Men  groaned  under  tha 
burdens  of  life ;  they  were  filled  with  the  fruits  of  sin ;  they  yielded  at  last  to  the 
grasp  of  death.    All  was  accepted  as  a  mysterious  necessity ;  men  did  not  protest 
•nd  struggle  against  calamity  and  death.     The  deliverance  is  from  Jesus,  and  in  it 
we  have  no  hand.     "  When  we  were  yet  without  strength,  in  due  time  Christ  died 
for  the  ungodly  "  (Rom.  v.  6).     A  delivered  world  was  even  incredulous  as  to  its 
deliverance.    It  could  not  believe  that  as  by  one  man  came  sin  and  death,  so  by  one 
also  had  come  conquest  over  sin,  death,  and  the  devil.     Thomas,  the  very  disciple, 
doubts,  and  before  long  Paul  has  to  write  1  Cor.  xv.     Jesus  may  say  to  the  world  for 
which  he  died  and  rose  again,  "  /  brought  you  out  of  spiritual  Egypt."    3.   While  t/te 
deliverance  was  being  worked  out,  the  Israelites  were  scarcely  conscious  of  what  was 
being  done.    They  saw  the  plagues,  but  only  as  wonders,  stupendous  physical  calami- 
ties.    They  felt  the  grasp  of  Pharaoh  alternately  tightening  and  relaxing,  but  little 
did  they  comprehend  of  that  great,  significant  struggle  going  on  between  Jehovah 
and  Pharaoh.    They  waited,  as  the  prize  of  victory  waits  on  the  athletes  while  they 
contend ;  it  knows  nothing  of  the  energy  and  endurance  it  has  evoked.     And  so  it 
was  and  is  in  Christ's  redeeming  work.     It  is  wonderful  to  notice  how  unconsciona 
the  world  was  of  that  great  work  which  was  transacted  between  Bethlehem  and  Jeru- 
•alem,  between  the  cradle  of  Jesus  and  his  opened  grave.     The  world  looked  upon 
him,  and  to  a  large  extent  it  still  looks,  in  any  light  but  the  right  one.    Let  us  know 
him  first  then,  and  fully  in  all  that  the  work  means,  aa  Deliverer  from  spiritual 
Egypt 


cti.  XVt  1—40.] 


TflE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERa 


IH 


II.  The  purpose  of  this  great  deed.  "  I  brought  you  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt 
to  be  your  God."  It  is  one  thing  for  Israel  to  be  brought  out  of  Egypt;  quite 
another  for  it  to  understand  why  it  has  been  brought  out.  And  so  we  find  the  peopla 
complaining  of  the  wilderness  quite  as  much  as  they  had  done  of  Egypt.  Their 
expectations  pointed  in  a  direction  opposite  to  God's  purpose,  and  never  could  the 
wilderness  become  a  better  place  than  Egypt  until  they  did  appreciate  God's  purpose 
and  make  it  their  own.  God  did  not  bring  them  out  as  one  might  bring  a  man  out 
of  prison,  and  then  say,  "  Go  where  you  like."  They  were  brought  out  of  a  bitter 
bondage  to  enter  upon  a  reasonable  service,  otherwise  the  wilderness  would  prove 
only  an  exchange  of  suffering,  not  a  release  from  it.  In  like  manner  we  need  to 
ask  -how  the  world  may  be  made  better  by  the  redeeming  work  of  Christ.  The 
difference  between  the  state  of  the  world  before  the  death  of  Christ  and  since 
does  not  look  as  great  from  certain  points  of  view  as  one  might  expect,  A  count- 
less host  of  those  for  whom  he  died  and  rose  again  nevertheless  goes  about  in  a 
bewilderment  and  unbelief  equal  to  that  of  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness.  Christ 
died  for  us  and  rose  again,  that  we,  rising  with  him,  might  live  not  to  ourselves,  but 
to  him  (Eom.  vi.  4,  10 — 13,  indeed  the  whole  chapter;  xii.  1 ;  xiv.  7 — 9 ;  1  Cor.  iii. 
22,  23 ;  X.  31 ;  2  Cor.  v.  15—18 ;  x.  5 ;  Eph.  ii.  10 ;  Philip,  i.  20,  21 ;  Col.  iii.  1—3), 
Deliverance  from  Egypt  is  not  equivalent  to  entrance  into  the  promised  land.  The 
wilderness  is  a  critical  place  for  us,  and  all  depends  on  what  heed  we  take  to  this 
purpose  of  God.  We  must  receive  the  gospel  in  its  integrity/.  If  the  full  purpose 
of  God  becomes  our  full  purpose,  then  all  will  be  right.  Christ  died  for  usinot  that 
we  might  just  escape  the  penalty  and  power  of  sin,  as  something  painful  to  ourselves, 
and  know  the  luxury  of  a  washed  conscience  ;  not  that  we  might  just  pass  into  a 
perfect  blessedness  beyond  the  tomb ;  but  that,  becoming  pure  and  blessed,  we  might 
engage  in  the  service  of  God  and  set  forth  his  glory.  We  must  be  pleased  with 
what  pleases  him.  The  work  of  Christ  brings  us  that  highest  of  all  joy,  to  serve  God 
with  a  perfect  heart  and  a  willing  mind. — Y, 


Vindication  of  the  Aaeonic  Priesthood  (chs  xvi.,xvn.). 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


The  gainsaying  of  Korah  (vers.  1 — iO]. 
Ver.  1. — Now  Eorah  .  .  took  men.  Hip 
ni?;i.  The  word  "  took  "  stands  alone  at  the 
head  of  the  sentence  in  the  singular  nrnnher. 
This  does  not  by  itself  confine  its  reference 
to  Korah,  because  it  may  be  taken  as  repeated 
after  each  of  the  other  names  ;  at  the  same 
time,  the  construction  suggests  that  in  its 
original  form  Korah  alone  was  mentioned, 
and  that  the  other  names  were  afterwards 
added  in  order  to  include  them  in  the  same 
statement.  The  ellipsis  after  "  took  "  (if  it 
be  one)  maybe  filled  up  by  "men,"  as  in 
the  A.  V.  and  in  most  versions,  or  by 
"counsel,"  as  in  the  Jerusalem  Targum. 
The  Septuagint  has  in  place  of  Hj?)  iXaXriae, 
representing  apparently  a  different  reading. 
Some  commentators  regard  it  as  an  anacolu- 
thon  for  "  took  two  hundred  and  fifty  men, .  . 
•nd  rose  up  with  them  ; "  others,  again,  treat 
the  "  took  "  as  a  pleonasm,  as  in  2  Sam.xviii. 
18  and  elsewhere  ;  but  the  change  of  number 
from  ni??!  to  -la-lpjl  makes  it  difficult.  It 
seems  best  to  say  that  the  construction  ia 
broken  and  cannot  be  satisfactorily  explained. 
Indeed  there  can  be  no  question  that  the 


whole  narrative,  like  the  construction  of  the 
opening  verses,  is  vei-y  confused,  and  leaves 
on  the  mind  the  impression  that  it  has  been 
altered,  not  very  skilfully,  from  its  original 
form.  The  two  parts  of  the  tragedy,  that 
concerning,  the  company  of  Korah,  and  that 
concerning  the  Eeubenites,  although  mingled 
in  the  narrative,  do  not  adjust  themselves  in 
the  mind,  and  the  general  effect  is  obscure. 
It  is  sufficient  to  point  out  here  that  no  one 
can  certainly  tell  what  became  of  the  ring- 
leader himself,  who  was  obviously  the  head 
and  front  of  the  whole  business.  Some  are 
strenuously  of  opinion  that  he  was  swallowed 
up  alive,  others  as  strenuously  that  he  was 
consumed  with  fire  ;  but  the  simple  fact  is 
that  his  death  is  not  recorded  in  this  chapter 
at  all,  although  he  is  assumed  to  have  perished. 
The  obscurity  which  hangs  over  this  passage 
cannot  be  traced  to  any  certain  cause  ;  the 
discrepancies  and  contradictions  which  have 
been  discovered  in  it  are  due  to  mistake  or 
misrepresentation  ;  nor  can  any  evil  motive 
be  plausibly  assigned  for  the  interpolation 
(if  it  be  such)  of  that  part  of  the  story  which 
concerns  the  Reubenites.  If,  for  some  reason 
unknown  to  us,  an  original  narrative  of 
Korah's  rebellion  was  enlarged  so  as  to  in- 
clude the  simultaneous  mutiny  of  the  Reuben- 


200 


THJS  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[CH.  XVI.    1 — 40. 


itea  and  their  fate ;  and  if,  farther,  that  en- 
largement was  so  unskilfully  made  as  to 
leave  considerable  confusion  in  the  narrative, 
wherein  does  that  affect  either  its  truth  or 
its  inspiration !  The  supernatural  influence 
which  watched  over  the  production  of  the 
■acred  narrative  certainly  did  not  interfere 
with  any  of  those  natural  causes  which 
affected  its  composition,  its  style,  its  clear- 
ness or  obscurity.  Eorah,  the  son  of  Izhar, 
the  eon  of  Eohath,  the  son  of  Levi.  On 
the  genealogy  of  the  Levites  see  Exod.  vL 
16 — 22,  and  above  on  ch.  iii.  17 — 19.  It  is 
generally  supposed  that  some  generations  are 
passed  over  in  these  genealogies.  Korah  be- 
longed to  the  same  Kohathite  sub-tribe  as 
Moses  and  Aaron,  and  was  related  to  them 
by  some  sort  of  cousinship ;  his  father  (or 
ancestor)  Izhar  was  the  younger  brother  of 
Amram  and  the  elder  brother  of  Uzziel, 
whose  descendant  Elizaphan  had  been  made 
chief  of  the  Kohathites.  Bathan  and 
Abiram,  the  sons  of  Eliah.  Eliab  himself 
was  apparently  the  only  son  of  Pallu,  the 
second  son  of  Reuben  (ch.  xxvi  6,  8).  If 
the  word  "  son"  is  to  be  literally  understood 
in  all  these  cases,  then  Korah,  Dathan,  and 
Abiram  would  all  be  great-great-grandsons 
of  Jacob  himself.  On,  the  son  of  Feleth. 
It  is  one  of  the  strange  obscurities  of  thia 
narrative  that  On,  who  appears  here  as  a  ring- 
leader, is  never  mentioned  again  either  in 
this  chapter  or  elsewhere.  Sons  of  Beuben. 
Reubenites.  The  encampment  of  their  tribe 
was  on  the  south  side  of  the  tabernacle  in 
the  outer  line  (ch.  ii.  10),  while  that  of  the 
Kohathites  was  on  the  same  side  in  the 
inner  line.  Thus  they  were  to  some  extent 
neighbours  ;  but  see  below  on  ver.  24. 

Ver.  2. — And  they  rose  up  before  Moses. 
It  is  suggested  that  the  Reubenites  were 


aggrieved  because  their  father  had  been 
deprived  of  his  birthright  in  favour  of 
Judah,  and  that  Korah  was  aggrieved  be- 
cause the  Uzzielites  had  been  preferred  in 
the  person  of  Elizaphan  to  the  Izharites  (ch. 
iii.  30).  These  accusations  have  nothing 
whatever  in  the  narrative  to  support  them, 
and  are  suspicious  because  they  are  so  easy 
and  so  sure  to  be  made  in  such  cases.  In  all 
ecclesiastical  history  the  true  reformer,  as 
well  as  the  heretic  and  the  demagogue,  has 
always  been  charged  with  being  actuated  by 
motives  of  disappointed  ambition.  Without 
these  gratuitous  suppositions  there  was  quite 
enough  to  excite  the  anger  and  opposition  of 
Buoh  discontented  and  insubordinate  minds 
as  are  to  be  found  in  every  community.  With 
eertain  of  the  children  of  Israel.  These 
were  gathered  from  the  tribes  at  large,  as 
implied  in  the  statement  that  Zelophehad  a 
Manassite  was  not  amongst  them  (ch.  xxvii. 
8),  Tamous  in  the  congregation.  Literally, 
'called  men  of  the  congregation."    Septua- 


gint,  iTi/yKXTjroi  jSovXijg,  representatires  of 
the  host  in  the  gi'eat  council  (cf.  ch.  i.  16 ; 
xxvi.  9). 

Ver.  3. — They  gathered  themselves  to- 
gether against  Uoses  and  against  Aaron. 
They  had  risen  up  before  Moses,  i.  e.  made  a 
tumult  in  his  presence,  because  they  regarded 
him  (and  rightly)  as  the  actual  ruler  of  Israel 
in  religions  as  well  as  in  secular  matters.  At 
the  same  time,  the  attack  of  Korah  and  his 
company  (with  whom  alone  the  narrative  is 
really  concerned  here)  was  directed  especially 
against  the  ecclesiastical  rule  which  Moses 
exercised  through  his  brother  Aaron.     Ye 

take  too  much  npon  yon.    D^^'^l,  "  much 
for  yon,"  probably  in  the  sense  of  "enough 
for  yon  "  (cf.  the  use  of  31  in  Gen.  xlv.  28), 
t.  e.  you  have  enjoyed  power  long  enough ; 
so  the  Targum  Palestine.     It  may,  however, 
be  taken  with  the  following  *3  as  meaning, 
"  let  it  suffice  you  that  all  the  congregation," 
&c. ;  and  so  the  Septuagint,  Ixiria  vjiiv  on, 
K.  T.  \.     The  Targum  of  Onkelos  renders 
it  in  the  same  sense  as  the  A.  Y.     All  the 
congregation  are  holy,  every  one  of  them. 
This  was  perfectly  true,  in  a  sense.     There 
was  a  sanctity  which  pertained  to  Israel  as  a 
nation,  in  which  all  its  members  shared  as 
distinguished  from  the  nations  around  (Exod. 
XIX.  6  ;  Levit.  xx.  26) ;  there  was  a  priest- 
hood which  was  inherent  in  all  the  sons  of 
Israel,  older  and  more  indelible  than  that 
which  was   conferred   on  Aaron's  line  —  a 
priesthood  which,  apart  from  special  restric- 
tions, or  in  exceptional  circumstances,  might 
and  did  assert  itself  in  priestly  acts  (Exod. 
iiiv.  5,  and  compare  the  cases  of  Samuel, 
Elijah,  and  others  who  offered  sacrifice  during 
the  failure  of  the  appointed  priesthood).     Il 
Moses  had  taken  the  power  to  himself,  or  ii 
he  had  (as  they  doubtless  supposed)  restricted 
active  priestly  functions  to  Aaron  because 
he  was  his  brother,  and  wholly  under  his 
influence,  their  contention  would  have  been 
quite  right.     They  erred,  as  most  violent 
men  do,  not  because  they  asserted  what  was 
false,  but  because  they  took  for  granted  that 
the  truth  which  they  asserted  was  really  in- 
consistent with  the  claims  which  they  as- 
sailed.    The  congregation  were  all  holy  ;  the 
sons  of  Israel  were  all  priests ;  that  was  true- 
but  it  was  also  true  that  by  Divine  command 
Israel  could  only  exercise  his  corporate  priest- 
hood outwardly  through  the  one  family  which 
God  had  set  apart  for  that  purpose.     The 
same  God  who  has  lodged  in  the  body  certain 
faculties  and  powers  for  the  benefit  of  the 
body,  has  decreed  that  those  faculties  and 
powers  can  only  be  exercised  through  certain 
determinate  organs,  the  very  specialisation  oi 
which  is  both  condition  and  result  of  a  high 
organisation.   The  congregation  of  the  Lord. 
There  are  two  words  for  congregation  in  tU* 


OH.  XVI.  1 — 40.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


201 


Terse:  bng  hero,  and  ITJU  before.  The 
former  seems  to  bs  nsed  in  the  more  solemn 
sense,  but  they  are  for  the  most  part  india- 
tinguishable,  and  certainly  cannot  br  assigned 
to  different  authors. 

Yer.  6. — He  spake  unto  Eorah.  That 
Eorah  was  the  mainspring  of  the  conspiracy 
ia  evident  (cf.  ver.  22 ;  ch.  xxvii.  3 ;  Jude 
11  i.).  It  may  well  be  that  his  position  as 
a  prominent  Levite  and  a  relation  of  Moses 
gave  him  great  influence  with  men  of  other 
tribes,  and  earned  him  a,  great  name  for  dis- 
interestedness and  liberality  in  advocating 
the  rights  of  all  Israel,  and  in  denouncing 
the  exclusive  claims  and  privileges  by  which 
he  himself  (as  a  Levite)  was  benefited.  It 
is  often  assumed  that  Korah  was  secretly 
aiming  at  the  high-priesthood,  but  of  this, 
again,  there  is  not  a  shadow  of  proof;  his 
error  was  great  enough,  and  his  punishment 
sore  enough,  without  casting  upon  him  these 
unfounded  accusations.  It  would  be  more  in 
accordance  with  human  nature  if  we  supposed 
that  Eorah  was  in  his  way  sincere  ;  that  he 
had  really  convinced  himself,  by  dint  of  tiy- 
ing  to  convince  others,  that  Moses  and  Aaron 
were  usurpers ;  that  he  began  his  agitation 
without  thought  of  advantage  of  himself; 
that,  having  gained  a  considerable  following 
and  much  popular  applause,  the  pride  of 
leadership  and  the  excitement  of  conflict 
led  him  on  to  the  last  extremity.  The  Lord 
will  show  who  are  his.  O'IB'KTIS,  the 
meaning  of  which  is  defined  by  the  following 
words,  whom  he  hath  chosen."  Moses  re- 
fers the  matter  to  the  direct  deciaion  of  the 
Lord ;  as  that  decision  had  originated  the 
separate  position  of  Aaron,  that  should  also 
vindicate  it. 

Ver.  6. — Take  yon  censers.  rtflO^- 
Septuagint,  Trvptta.  Translated  "fire-pans" 
in  Exod.  xxvii.  3.  From  the  number  re- 
quired, they  must  have  been  either  household 
utensils  used  for  carrying  fire,  or  else  they 
must  have  been  made  in  some  simple  fashion 
for  the  occasion.  The  offering  of  incense 
was  proposed  by  Moses  as  a  test  because  it 
was  a  typically  priestly  function,  to  which 
the  gravest  importance  was  attached  (Levit. 
X.  1 ;  xvi.  12,  13),  and  because  it  was  so 
very  simply  executed. 

Ver.  7.— Ye  take  too  much  upon  yon,  ye 
song  of  Levi.  D3^~31,  aa  in  ver.  3.  The 
exact  meaning  of  this  tu  guoque  is  not 
apparent.  Perhaps  he  would  say  that  if  he 
and  Aaron  were  usurpers,  the  whole  tribe  of 
Levi  were  usurpers  too. 

Ver.  8.— Hear,  I  pray  yon,  ye  sons  of  Levi. 
No  son  of  Levi  is  mentioned  in  the  narrative 
except  Eorah,  and  this  address  itself  passes 
into  the  second  person  singular  (vers.  10, 11), 
u   though    Korah   alone   were    personally 


guilty.  It  is  possible  enough  that  behind 
him  was  a  considerable  body  of  pubUo 
opinion  among  the  Lovites  more  or  less 
decidedly  supporting  him;  but  there  is  no 
need  to  impute  any  general  disloyalty  to 
them. 

Ver.  9. — Seemeth  it  a  small  thing  to  yon. 
Bather,   "ia  it  too  little  for  you."    DSD 

Ver.  11. — Tor  which  cause  both  thou  and 
all  thy  company  are  gathered  together.  It 
does  not  follow  that  Korah  was  seeking  an 
exclusive  dignity  for  himself,  or  for  his  toibe. 
His  "company"  apparently  included  repre- 
sentative men  from  all  the  tribes,  or  at  least 
from  many  (see  on  ver.  2).  They  were  seek- 
ing the  priesthood  because  they  aflirmed  it 
to  be  the  common  possession  of  all  Israelites, 
Against  the  Lord.  It  was  in  his  name  that 
they  appeared,  and  to  some  extent  no  doubt 
sincerely ;  but  since  they  appeared  to  dispute 
an  ordinance  actually  and  historically  made 
by  God  himself,  it  was  indeed  against  him 
that  they  were  gathered.  And  what  is  Aaron, 
that  ye  murmur  against  himT  The  con- 
struction is  broken,  as  so  often  when  we 
have  the  ipsissima  verba  of  Moses,  whose 
meekness  did  not  enable  him  to  speak  calmly 
under  provocation.  The  sentence  runs,  "  For 
which  cause  thou  and  all  thy  company  who 
are  gathered  against  the  Lord, — and  Aaron, 
who  is  he,  that  ye  murmur  against  him  ? " 
It  was  easy  to  represent  the  position  of  Aaron 
in  an  invidious  light,  as  though  they  were 
assailing  some  personal  sacerdotal  preten- 
sions ;  but  in  truth  he  was  only  a  poor 
servant  of  God  doing  what  he  was  bid. 

Ver.  12. — And  Moses  sent  to  call  Dathan 
and  Abiram.  The  part  really  taken  by  these 
men  in  the  agitation  is  very  obscure.  They 
were  not  of  the  two  hundred  and  fifty,  nor 
were  they  with  them  when  they  gathered 
together  against  Moses  and  Aaron — perhaps 
because  they  took  no  interest  in  ecclesiastical 
matters,  and  only  resented  the  secular 
domination  of  Moses.  Neither  can  we  tell 
why  Moses  sent  for  them  at  this  juncture, 
unless  he  suspected  them  of  being  in  league 
with  Korah  (see  below  on  ver.  24).  We  will 
not  come  np,  i.  e.  to  the  tabernacle,  as  being 
spiritually  the  culminating  point  of  the 
camp. 

Ver.  13. — Is  it  a  small  thing.  Rather, 
"is  it  too  little,"  as  in  ver.  9.  A  land  that 
floweth  with  milk  and  honey.  A  description 
applying  by  right  to  the  land  of  promiae 
(Exod.  iii.  8  ;  ch.  xiii.  27),  wliich  they  in 
their  studied  insolence  applied  to  Egypt. 
Except  thou  make  thyself  altogether  a 
prince  over  ns.  Literally,  "  that  C?)  thou 
altogether  lord  it  over  us."  The  expressior 
is  strengthened  in  the  original  by  the  re 


S02 


THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS. 


[cfi.  xrt.  1—40. 


duplication  of  the  verb  in  the  inf.  abs., 

Ver.  14. — Moreover  thou  hast  not  brought 
us.  According  to  the  promises  (they  meant 
to  say)  by  which  he  had  induced  them,  to 
leave  their  comfortable  homes  in  Egypt 
(Exod.  iv.  30,  31).  Wilt  thon  put  out  the 
eyes  of  these  meni  i.  e.  wUt  thou  blind 
them  to  the  utter  failure  of  thy  plans  and 
promises  ?  wilt  thou  throw  dust  in  their  eyes  ? 

Ver.  16. — And  Moses  was  very  wroth. 
The  bitter  taunts  of  the  Eeubenites  had  just 
enough  semblance  of  truth  in  them  to  malce 
them  very  hard  to  bear,  and  especially  the 
imputation  of  low  personal  ambition ;  but  it 
is  impossible  to  say  that  Moses  did  not  err 
through  anger.  Bespect  not  thou  their 
offering.  Cf.  Gen.  iv.  4.  It  is  not  quite 
clear  what  offering  Moses  meant,  since  they 
do  not  seem  to  have  wished  to  offer  incense. 
Probably  it  was  equivalent  to  saying,  Do  not 
thou  accept  them  when  they  approach  thee ; 
for  such  appn'Hch  was  always  by  sacrifice 
(cf.  Ps.  cix.  7).  '^  have  not  taken  one  ass 
from  them.  Cf  1  Sam.  xii.  3.  The  ass  was 
the  least  valuable  of  the  ordinary  live  stock 
of  those  days  (of  Exod.  xx.  17).  The  Septua- 
gint  has  here  ovk  iiri^vfiijfia  oi/SivdQ  avTwv 
eiXti^a,  which  is  apparently  an  intentional 
paraphrase  with  a  reference  to  the  tenth 
commandment  (owk  eiriSu/jijirtic,  ic.  t.  X.). 
Neither  have  I  hurt  one  of  them.  As  abso- 
lute ruler  he  might  have  made  himself  very 
burdensome  to  all,  and  very  terrible  to  his 
personal  enemies.  Compare  Samuel's  de- 
scription of  the  Eastern  autocrat  (1  Sam. 
viiL  11—17). 

Yer.  16. — And  Moses  said  nnto  Eorah. 
After  the  interchange  of  messages  with  the 
Eeubenites,  Moses  repeats  his  injunctions  to 
Korah  to  be  ready  on  the  morrow  to  put  his 
claims  to  the  test,  adding  that  Aaron  too 
should  be  there,  that  the  Lord  might  judge 
between  them. 

Ver.  18. — Stood  in  the  door  of  the  taber- 
nacle, i.  e.  at  the  door  of  the  court,  so  that 
they  were  visible  from  the  space  outside. 

Yer.  19. — And  Eorah  gathered  all  the 
congregation  against  them.  It  does  not 
follow  that  the  whole  congregation  was  act- 
ively or  deliberately  on  Korah's  side.  But 
a  movement  ostensibly  in  behalf  of  the  many 
as  against  the  few  is  sure  to  enlist  a  general, 
if  not  a  deep,  sympathy ;  nor  is  it  to  be  sup- 
posed that  Moses  and  Aaron  could  escape  a 
large  amount  of  unpopularity  under  the 
grievous  circumstances  of  the  time.  The 
thoughtless  multitude  would  have  hailed 
their  downfall  with  real  though  short-lived 
satisfaction.  The  glory  of  the  Lord  ap- 
peared. Ai  b«.fore  ^h.  xiv.  10),  filling  the 
tabernacle  probably,  and  flashing  out  before 
the  eyes  of  aU. 


Ver.  21. — That  I  may  consume  them  in  a 
moment.  Literally,  "and  I  will  consume 
them."  The  same  thing  must  be  said  of 
ihis  as  of  ch.  xiv.  11,  12. 

Ver.  22.— 0  God,  the  God  of  the  spirits  of 
all  flesh.  "lB'3"^?^  nh-n.-^  ■>rf?1A.  h^.  The 
ruach  is  the  spirit  of  life  which  the  Cre- 
ator bas  imparted  unto  perishable  flesh,  and 
made  it  live.  In  some  sense  it  belongs  to 
beasts  as  well  as  to  men  (Eccles.  iii.  19, 
21) ;  but  in  the  common  use  of  the  word 
men  only  are  thought  of,  as  having  received 
it  by  a  special  communication  of  a  higher 
order  (Gen.  ii.  7  j  1  Cor.  xv.  46).  Moses, 
therefore,  really  appeals  to  God,  as  the  Author 
and  Giver  of  that  imperishable  life-principle 
which  is  lodged  in  the'  mortal  flesh  of  all 
men,  not  to  destroy  the  works  of  his  own 
hands,  the  creatures  made  in  his  own  image. 
Here  we  have  in  its  germ  that  idea  of  the 
universal  fatherhood  of  God  which  remained 
undeveloped  in  Jewish  thought  until  Judaism 
itself  expanded  into  Christianity  (cf  Isa.  bdii 
16  ;  Ixiv.  8,  9  ;  Acts  xvii.  26,  29).  Shall 
one  man  sin.  Eather,  "  the  one  man  (C^^KPI) 
hath  sinned,"  t.  e.  Eorah,  who  had  misled 
all  the  rest. 

Yer.  23. — The  lord  spake  nnto  Moses.  No 
direct  answer  was  apparently  vouchsafed  to 
the  remonstrance  of  Moaes  and  Aaron,  but 
it  was  tacitly  allowed. 

Ver.  24. — Get  you  up  from  about  the  taber- 
nacle of  Eorah,  Sathan,  and  Abiram.  The 
word  "  tabernacle  "  (tiiishcan)  is  the  same  word 
which  is  so  translated  in  ver.  9,  but  not  the 
same  which  is  used  in  vers.  18,19;  it  properly 
signifies  "dwelling-place."  It  is  certainly 
the  natural  conclusion,  from  the  use  of  this 
expression  here  and  in  ver.  27,  that  this 
mishcan  was  something  difierent  from  the 
"tents"  ('5n?!)  mentioned  in  vers.  26,  27, 
and  was  some  habitation  common  to  the 
three  rebels  (see  below  on  ver.  31).  The 
Septuagint,  in  order  to  avoid  the  difficulty, 
omits  the  names  of  Dathan  and  Abiram,  and 
has  only  aitb  rqs  avvayuiyris  KopE. 

Ver.  26. — Touch  nothing  of  theirs.  Be- 
cause they,  and  all  that  belonged  to  them, 
were  aTiatheriia,  devoted  to  destruction. 
Compare  the  case  of  Achan  (Josh.  vii.  1). 

Yer.  27.— And  Sathan  and  Abiram  .  . 
stood  in  the  door  of  their  tents.  To  see 
what  Moses  would  do.  Kothing  is  said  of 
Koah. 

Yer.  28. — Tor  1  have  not  done  them  of  mini 
own  mind.  Literally,  "  that  not  of  my  heart.'' 

'3^P  nV*3.     Septuagint,  8ri  oit  in  i/iav- 

TOV, 

Yer.  29.— If  they  be  visited  after  the 
visitation  of  all  men.  IgS  is  of  somewhat 
doubtful  meaning ;  it  seems  to  answer  to  the 


OH.  xn.  1—40.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS. 


JiriiTKfi^ie  and  iTciirtowfl  of  the  Septuagint, 
and  to  our  "oversight,"  or  "visitation" 
(German,  heiinsuchimg.  Thus  it  may  mean 
practically  the  providence  of  God  for  good, 
t.  e.  in  the  way  of  protection,  or  for  evil,  i.  e. 
in  the  way  of  judgment.  In  either  sense 
providence  showed  itself  in  no  ordinary  form 
towards  these  men. 

Ver.  30. — Make  a  new  thing.  "  Create  a 
creation."  N^ft  "Kn?.  Into  the  pit. 
Rather,  "into  Sheol."  TOVS^.  Septuagint, 
tig  ^Sov.  Sheol  is  not  "  the  pit,"  but  Hades, 
the  j)lace  of  departed  spirits  (Gen.  xxxvii. 
35 ;  xlii.  88),  which  is  regarded,  according 
to  the  general  instinct  of  mankind,  as  being 
"under  the  earth"  (cf.  Philip. ii.  10  i.;  Rev. 
V.  13).  They  were  to  go  down  "quick"  into 
Sheol,  because  they  were  still  alive  at  the 
moment  that  they  were  lost  to  sight  for 
ever. 

Ver.  SI. — The  gronnd  clave  asunder  that 
was  under  them.  As  it  sometimes  does 
during  an  earthquake.  In  this  case,  how- 
ever, the  event  was  predicted,  and  whoUy 
supematuraL  The  sequence  of  the  narrative 
wouM  '"wl  'VI  to  suppose  that  the  earth 
opened  heneat>.  the  tents  of  Dathan  and 
Abiram  in  the  camp  of  Reuben.  It  is  diffi- 
cult to  think  of  the  gulf  as  extending  so  far 
as  to  involve  the  tent  of  Korah  in  the  Ko- 
hathite  lines  in  the  same  destruction,  while 
there  is  nothing  to  suggest  the  idea  that  the 
earth  oj^aned  in  more  than  one  place.  It  is 
true  that  the  camps  of  the  Reubeuites  and 
of  the  Kohathites  were  more  or  less  con- 
tiguous ;  but  when  it  is  remembered  that 
there.were  46,500  adult  males  in  the  former, 
and  8600  males  in  the  latter,  and  that  a 
broad  space  must  have  been  left  between  the 
two  lines  of  encampment,  it  is  obviously  im- 
probable that  Korah's  tent  was  in  a  practical 
sense  "near"  to  those  of  Dathan  and  Abi- 
ram, unless  indeed  he  had  purposely  re- 
moved it  in  order  to  be  under  the  protection 
of  his  Reubenite  partisans.  It  is  very  ob- 
servable that  not  a  word  is  said  here  as  to 
the  fate  of  Korah  himself.  It  is  implied  in 
ver.  40  that  ha  had  perished,  and  it  is  ap- 
parently asserted  in  ch.  xxvi.  10  that  he 
was  swallowed  up  with  Dathan  and  Abiram 
(see  the  note  there).  On  the  other  hand, 
Deut.  XL  6 ;  Ps.  cvi.  17  speak  of  the  en- 
gulfing of  the  other  two  without  any  men- 
tion of  Korah  himself  sharing  their  fate ; 
and  while  "all  the  men  that  appertained 
unto  Korah  "  perished,  his  own  sons  did  not 
(oh.  xxvi  11).  On  these  grounds  it  is  held 
by  most  commentators  that  Korah  died  by 
fire  among  those  who  offered  incense  (ver. 
35).  This,  however,  is  untenable,  because 
"the  two  hundred  and  fifty  men  who  offered 
incense  "  are  distinctly  mentioned  as  having 
been  his  partisans  (ver.  2),  and  are  always 


counted  exclnsive  of  Korah  himself.  On  th« 
whole,  while  it  is  certain  that  the  narrativt 
is  very  obscure,  and  the  question  very  doubt- 
ful, it  seems  most  agreeable  to  all  the  testi- 
monies of  Holy  Scripture  to  conclude  —  1. 
That  Korah  had  left  his  own  place,  and  had 
some  sort  of  dwelling  (mishcwn)  either  in 
common  with  Dathan  and  Abiram,  pr  hard 
by  their  tents.  2.  That  the  earth  opened  and 
swallowed  up  the  mishown  of  Korah,  and 
the  tents  of  Dathan  and  Abiram.  3.  That 
Korah's  men  (see  next  verse)  and  their  pro 
perty  were  swallowed  up  with  his  mishcwn, 
and  (as  far  as  we  can  tell)  Korah  himsell 
also.  If  this  be  correct,  then  the  much  dis- 
puted heading  of  the  chapter  in  the  A.  V. 
will  be  right  after  alL 

Ver.  82. — And  their  houses,  i.  e.  their 
families,  as  in  ch.  xviii.  13.  And  all  the 
men  that  appertained  unto  Korah.  Liter- 
ally, "  all  the  men  who  to  Korah. "  Whether 
it  means  his  dependants,  or  his  special  parti- 
sans, is  uncertain.  Perhaps  some  had  clung 
to  his  fortunes  in  blind  confidence  when  the 
rest  gat  up  from  his  mishcan. 

Ver.  34.— At  the  cry  of  them.  D7p7.,  "  at 
the  noise  of  them;"  at  the  mingled  sound 
of  their  shrieks  and  of  the  natural  convul- 
sion amidst  which  they  disappeared. 

Ver.  35. — There  came  out  a  fire  from  the 
Iiord.  The  fire  probably  flashed  out  from 
the  sanctuary  with  the  destructive  force  of 
lightning.  The  two  hundred  and  fifty  men. 
These  had  remained  swinging  their  censers 
before  the  gate  of  the  tabernacle  while  Moses 
and  (presumably)  Korah  himself  had  gone  to 
the  camp  of  Reuben. 

Ver.  37. — Speak  unto  Eleazar.  This  is 
the  first  time  that  any  special  duty  is  assigned 
to  Eleazar,  who  was  destined  to  succeed  to 
the  high-priesthood.  We  may  suppose  that 
he  was  sent  instead  of  his  father  because  the 
duty  of  gathering  up  the  censers  could  hardly 
have  been  carried  out  without  incurring  legal 
defilement  by  contact  with  the  dead.  Out  of 
the  burning.  Or,  "out  of  the  burnt." 
Septuagint,  eic  fikffov  tSiv  KaraKiKavfikvuiv. 
From  amongst  the  charred  and  smouldering 
corpses.  Scatter  thou  the  fire  yonder ;  for 
they  are  hallowed.  The  censers  had  been 
made  holy  even  by  that  sacrilegious  dedica- 
tion, and  must  never  revert  to  any  common 
uses  ;  for  the  same  reason  the  live  coals 
which  stiU  remained  in  them  were  to  be 
emptied  out  in  »  separate  place. 

Ver.  38. — These  sinners  against  their  own 
souls.  DriB'Sia,  "  against  their  own  lives." 
The  thought  is  not  that  they  had  ruined 
their  souls,  but  that  they  had  forfeited  their 
lives.  The  Pentateuch  does  not  contemplate 
any  consequences  of  sia  beyond  physical' 
death.  The  same  phrase  occurs  in  Prov.  xx. 
2.    For  a  covering  of  the  altar.    The  altal 


2M 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[oh,  XTl.  1—40. 


of  burnt  incense.  The  censers  were  no  doubt 
brazen  pans,  and  when  beaten  out  would 
form  plates  which  could  be  afSxed  to  the 
boards  of  which  the  frame  of  the  altar  was 
composed. 


Ver.  40.— That  he  he  not  as  Eorah.   ro\>'2 
r^^rjY^h].     That  he  do  not  meet  with  the 


same  fate  as  Eorah. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 40. — The  true  tmd  only  Priesthood.  It  is  quite  clear  that  the  homiletic 
application  of  this  passage  turns  upon  a  question  which  is  strongly  controverted — a 
question  which  it  is  alike  impossible  (save  at  the  cost  of  honesty  and  truth)  to  shirk, 
or  to  take  for  granted  one  way  or  the  other.  _  That  the  rebellion  of  Korah  was  directed 
under  specious  pretences  against  a  divinely-ordained  priesthood  vested  in  one  man 
and  his  successors  is  of  course  undenied,  but  is  of  little  interest  or  value  apart  from 
its  application  to  our  own  times  and  circumstances.  The  practical  question  which 
immediately  arises,  and  arises  only  to  be  disputed,  is  this,  What  priesthood  now 
corresponds  to  that  assailed  in  Aaron  ?  It  may  no  doubt  be  said  that  there  is  nothing 
which  now  answers  to  it,  nothing  of  which  that  was  a  shadow  and  a  type ;  that  Judaism 
was  a  sacerdotal  religion,  but  that  Christianity  is  not.  If  that  were  true  then  Korah 
was  after  all  right ;  his  only  error  was  that  he  held  opinions  in  advance  of  his  age. 
But  apart  from  that,  such  a  position  simply  robs  both  the  incident  and  record  of  any 
value  for  ourselves,  and  is  point-blank  opposed  to  the  Apostolic  teaching  in  such 
places  as  1  Cor.  x.  11,  and  Jude  11.  In  the  latter  the  "gainsaying  of  Korah"  is 
specified  as  one  of  those  typical  acts  of  wickedness  in  which  a  virulent  form  of  moral 
evil  active  in  the' days  of  the  apostle  had  been  anticipated  both  as  to  sin  and  punish- 
ment ;  the  bad  men  of  whom  he  speaks  (vers.  4,  8,  10)  had  already  met  their  doom 
in  a  figure  when  Korah  and  his  company  perished.  It  is  clear  that  Holy  Scripture 
recognises,  both  generally  and  specifically,  a  teaching  value  for  Christian  times  in 
this  record.  The  most  useful  and  honest  plan  will  therefore  be  to  set  forth  the 
elements  of  the  question  impartially,  and  to  leave  them  to  the  consideration  of^  the 
reader.  Some  points  will  come  out  with  sufBcient  clearness  to  command  general  (if 
not  universal)  assent ;  and  others  will  at  least  be  cleared  of  misleading  arguments 
and  false  associations. 

I.  The  first  position  which  we  can  take  up  with  authority  and  certainty  is  the 
positive  position  that  the  priesthood  of  Aaeon  and  his  sons  was  the  Old  Tebtajient 

TYPE    AND    SHADOW   OF    THE    PBIESTHOOD    OF   ChBIST    CONFERRED    UPON    HIM    IN     HIS 

HUMAN  NATDEB  AS  THE  SoN  OF  MAN.  This  is  argued  and  proved  with  many  illus- 
trations by  the  author  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  (see  especially  ch.  v.  4,  6 ;  vii. 
11 — 28;  viii.  1 — 4;  x.  11 — 14,  21).  The  elaborate  comparison  of  the  two  priest- 
hoods, the  old  and  the  new,  which  was  also  infinitely  older, — and  especially  the 
assertion  that  the  Levitical  priests  were  many  only  because  death  deposed  them  from 
ofiBce  (ch.  vii  23),  whilst  Christ  abideth  for  ever, — forbid  us  to  regard  any  other 
priesthood  than  that  of  our  Lord  as  the  Christian  analogue  of  the  Jewish  priesthood. 
As  far  as  the  typ«  went  Aaron  lived  on  in  all  his  priestly  race,  just  as  he  had  lived 
before  in  his  chosen  ancestor  Abraham  (Heb.  vii.  10) :  there  was  but  one  Jewish 
high-priest,  and  unto  him  corresponds  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  Jesus  and  Jesus 
alone.  Herein  all  will  be  substantially  agreed  who  loyally  accept  the  testimony  of 
Scripture,  and  herein  (if  it  be  clearly  and  devoutly  held)  is  the  real  heart  of  the 
matter,  and  the  sufficient  safeguard  against  superstition. 

II.  The  second  position  which  we  can  take  up  on  purely  Scriptural  grounds,  and 
which  is  not  fairly  assailable,  is  the  negative  position  that  no  argument  against 

MINISTERIAL  OB  SACERDOTAL  ASSUMPTIONS  OB  CLAIMS  IS  VALID  WHICH  IS  BASED  UPON 
THE  HOLINESS  AND  PBIESTLT  CHABACTEK  OF  ALL  THE  FAITHFUL.     It  is  perfectly  clear 

that  Korah  and  his  company  had  both  Scripture  and  fact  on  their  side  when  they 
said  that  all  the  congregation  wee  holy  and  all  were  priests.  They  erred  in  taking 
for  granted  that  the  priesthood  of  all  Israelites  was  really  inconsistent  with  the 
special  priesthood  of  Aaron.  As  things  were,  it  is  certain  that  the  universal  priest- 
hood of  Israel  could  best  express  it  self,  best  translate  itself  into  worship,  through 
the  ministerial  acts  of  Aaron  and  his  sons.    A  spiritually-miuded  Jew,  who  recognised 


OH.  XTi.  1—40.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEB8.  SOI 

most  deeply  hia  own  priestly  calling  in  Israel,  would  most  devoutly  give  thanks  tot 
the  separation  of  the  tribe  of  Levi  and  family  of  Aaron,  because  he  would  feel  that 
no  one  benefited  so  much  by  that  separation  as  biaiself ;  far  from  standing  between 
him  and  the  God  of  Israel,  it  enabled  him  to  draw  nigh  to  God  in  a  multitude  of 
ways  otherwise  impossible.  He  would  indeed  be  able  to  argue  from  the  histories  of 
Gideon,  of  Samuel,  of  Elijah,  and  of  others  of  the  chosen  race,  that  the  priesthood 
of  the  ordinary  Israelite,  although  usually  dormant  as  to  outward  sacerdotal  functions, 
was  always  capable  of  being  called  into  play  by  Divine  permission  under  stress  of 
:;ircum8tances,  and  he  would  he  prepared  to  understand  the  significance  of  such  a 
passage  as  Rev.  vii.  6 — 8,  in  which  Levi  takes  his  place  again  (and  not  at  all  a  fore- 
most place)  among  the  tribes,  the  Holy  Ghost  thus  signifying  that  in  the  world  to 
come  all  such  distinctions  will  be  merged  for  ever  in  the  common  priesthood  of  the 
saved.  But  in  the  mean  time  there  was  nothing  antagonistic,  either  in  doctrine  or  in 
practice,  betweenthe  truth  which  Eorah  asserted  and  that  other  truth  which  Eorah 
assailed :  the  priesthood  of  the  many  was  helped,  not  hindered,  by  the  special 
priesthood  of  thefew.  It  is  therefore  impossible  honestly  to  use  such  texts  as 
1  Pet.  ii.  9  ;  Rev.  i  6,  against  the  doctrine  of  a  special  Christian  priesthood,  because 
they  only  assert  of  Christians  what  the  texts  relied  upon  by  Eorah  asserted  of  the 
Jews. 

III.  Abandoning  the  false  line  of  argument  just  mentioned,  we  may  yet  so  far 
develop  the  first  position  taken  up  as  to  maintain  with  confidence,  that  no  pbibst- 

HOOD  CAN    HAVE    ANT  EXISTENCE    IN    THE   ChDECH  OP  ChRIBT  OTHER  THAN  THAT  OF 

OUR  Lord  himself.  This  is  made  evident,  not  only  by  the  exclusive  way  in  which 
his  priesthood  is  dwelt  upon  in  the  New  Testament,  but  (what  concerns  us  more  in 
this  place)  by  the  whole  analogy  of  the  Old.  Aaron  alone  had  the  priesthood,  and 
the  extreme  malediction  of  God  lighted  upon  all,  even  of  the  separated  tribe,  who 
dared  to  meddle  with  it ;  but  Aaron  was  certainly  the  type  of  Christ  Himself.  Any 
priesthood  which  should  claim  to  have  any  independent  existence,  even  if  it  professed 
to  draw  its  authority  from  Divine  appointment,  would  be  ipso  facto  in  direct  antago- 
nism to  the  solitary  prerogative  of  Jesus  Christ.  Hence  it  follows  that  the  upholders, 
not  the  impugners,  of  such  a  priesthood  would  be  "  in  the  gainsaying  of  Korah."  It 
follows  also  that  there  can  be  no  direct  analogy  drawn  between  those  who  rose  up 
against  Moses  and  Aaron,  and  those  who  rise  up  against  any  earthly  ministry  ;  it 
will  be  shown  that  a  true  resemblance  may  be  traced  under  certain  conditions. 

IV.  Admitting  these  principles,  which  ought  not  to  be  controverted,  we  may  bring 
the  questicii  to  a  practical  issue  as  follows: — While  there  cannot  be  set  over  us  any 
other  priesthood  than  the  only,  immutable,  and  incommunicable  priesthood  of  the 
Messiah,  yet  there  is  nothing  in  Holy  Scripture  to  negative  d,  priori  the  idea  that 
OUB  Lord  (being  withdrawn  from  sight  and  sense)  may  choose  to  perform  priestly 

FDNCTIONS  nPON  EARTH  VISIBLY  AND  AUDIBLY  BY  THE  HAND  AND  MOUTH  OF  CHOSEN 
MEN ;  nor  is  there  anything  to  negative  a  priori  the  further  contention  that  those 
men  were  and  are  set  apart  in  some  special  and  exclusive  way.  Whether  this  be  so 
is  a  matter  of  fact  which  must  be  decided  upon  the  testimony,  fairly  and  conscienti- 
ously weighed,  of  Scripture  and  of  history.  It  depends  upon  the  two  historical 
questions.  1.  Whether  our  Lord  constituted  the  apostles  his  representatives  for  any 
priestly  functions.  2.  Whether  the  apostles  transmitted  such  representation  to  others 
after  them.  In  any  case  our  Lord  is  the  only  priest,  or  rather  has  the  only  priesthood, 
although  upon  one  view  of  the  case  he  will  execute  some  ofSces  of  his  priesthood  by 
means  of  visible  human  agents,  in  whom  and  through  whom  he  himself  speaks  and 
acts.  Without,  therefore,  entering  upon  any  argument,  we  can  safely  conclude  as  to 
the  Christian  application  of  this  passage.  1.  That  it  must  be  directly  referred  to 
the  everlasting  priesthood  of  Christ,  and  to  assaults  upon  it,  or  infringements  of  it. 
2.  That  it  may  be  in  a  secondary  sense  referred  to  a  visible  Christian  priesthood,  and 
to  assaults  upon  it,  on  the  supposition  that  such  priesthood  is  in  fact  and  in  truth 
only  the  priesthood  of  Christ  ministered  in  time  and  space  by  his  appointment. 

In  point  of  fact  there  are  many  obvious  and  many  subtle  resemblances  between  the 
gainsaying  of  Eorah  and  the  popular  contention  against  a  Christian  priesthood,  or 
•ven  against  any  Christian  ministry,  which  no  thoughtful  student  of  Scripture 
can  overlook.    In  ths  homiletics,  however,  which  follow  these  are  left  to  speak 


KM  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS.  oh.  xvl  1—40. 

for  themselves,  and  the  deeper  line  of   application  will  be  followed.     Consider, 
therefore — 
I.  That  Egbah  on  one  bidk,  Dathan  and  Abibau  on  the  otheb,  had  hardly  ant. 

THING  IN  COMMON  EXCEPT  DISLIKE  TO  THE  RULE  OF  MOSES,  THE  MEDIATOR  OF  ISHAEL  AND 

EiNO  IN  Jeshubdn  (Deut.  xxxiii.  5).  His  dislike  was  ecclesiastical,  theirs  was  poli- 
tical ;  but  this  commoD  dislike  made  them  allies,  and  gave  them  a  "  tabernacle  "  in 
common  (ver.  27).  Even  so  amongst  the  many  who  say,  "We  will  not  have 
this  man  to  reign  over  us  "  (Luke  xix.  14),  there  are  to  be  found  the  most  various 
dispositions,  and  the  most  distinct  causes  of  complaint.  As  in  the  days  of  his  earthly 
ministry  (Mark  iii.  6 ;  xiv.  64,  "  all "),  so  now  the  opposition  to  him  and  to  his  sole 
governance  is  made  up  of  the  most  heterogeneous,  and  at  other  times  dissociate, 
elements. 

IL  That  Koeah  was  himself  a  Levitb  or  some  distinction,  and  was  the  soul  of 
THE  CONSFIRACT.  Even  so  it  is  hardly  possible  to  find  in  history  any  grave  assault 
upon  the  work  or  doctrine  of  Christ  which  has  not  been  inspired  by  some  one  whose 
ecclesiastical  position  has  given  him  both  aptness  and  influence  for  this  evil. 

III.  That  Koeah  represented  Moses  and  Aaron  in  an  invidious  light,  as  men 

WHO  KEPT  THE  PEOPLE  IN  SPIRITUAL  SUBJECTION,  AND  DENIED  TO  THEM  THEIR  COMMON 

RIGHTS  AS  CHILDREN  OF  ISRAEL.  Even  SO  the  constant  clamour  of  unbelief  is  that 
Cliristianity  is  a  system  devised  in  the  interests  of  tyranny  and  obscurantism  in  order 
to  keep  men  in  moral  slavery,  and  to  rob  them  of  their  freedom  of  thought,  and  to 
fetter  their  freedom  of  action. 

IV.  That  Eorah  asserted  true  facts  and  appealed  to  tbue  principles  in  op- 
position TO  WHAT  HAD  BEEN  DiVINELT  APPOINTED,  AND  WAS  TO  BE  DiVINELT  VINDI- 
CATED. Even  so  do  men  continually  bring  against  the  Truth  himself  facts  which  are 
undeniable,  and  principles  which  must  be  admitted.  Herein  is  the  real  danger  when 
war  upon  the  Truth  is  waged  with  half-truths  plausibly  paraded  as  whole,  with 
truths  on  one  side  confidently  assumed  to  be  fatal  to  the  complemental  truths  on  the 
other  side.  The  liberty,  e.  g.,  of  private  judgment  is  arrayed  against  the  authority  of 
inspiration ;  the  universal  fatherhood  of  God  against  any  distinction  of  the  children 
of  God,  or  necessity  for  the  mediation  of  Christ ;  the  fact  that  we  are  all  members 
of  one  body  against  any  mutual  subordination  or  distribution  of  functions  amongst 
those  members. 

V.  That  Eorah  wab  probably  sincere  in  so  fab  as  he  had  persuaded  himself 
THAT  HE  WAS  RIGHT,  otherwise  he  would  hardly  have  ventured  upon  the  fatal  test. 
Even  so  the  leaders  of  opposition  to  Christ  are  commonly  sincere  ;  only  vulgar  in- 
tolerance' brands  them  ofE-hand  with  hypocrisy  or  self-seeking.  And  this  is  their 
power,  for  men  are  led  by  personal  regard  and  trust  much  more  than  by  any  ability 
to  judge  between  rival  systems.  The  only  way  to  meet  the  sincerity  and  zeal  of 
error  is  by  showing  a  more  transparent  sincerity  and  a  more  ardent  zeal  on  the  side 
of  truth  (2  Cor,  vi.  3—10 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  12—16  ;  Titus  ii.  10). 

VI.  ThA;-  WHEN  MOSES  HEARD  THE  INDICTMENT  AGAINST   HIMSELF  AND  AABON  HE 

COULD  BUT  RE^EB  IT  TO  THE  DECISION  OF  THE  LoRD.  The  people  wero  either  actively 
or  passively  on  the  side  of  Korah,  and  argument  had  been  unavailing.  Even  so  when 
Christianity  at  large,  or  any  system  which  we  believe  to  be  an  integral  part  of 
Christianity,  is  assailed  with  popular  and  plausible  arguments,  there  is  really  nothing 
to  be  done  but  to  refer  it  to  the  arbitrament  of  God  himself.  Arguments  convince 
only  those  that  are  convinced  ;  clamours  only  intensify  prejudice ;  mutual  accusa- 
tions only  repel — Moses  himself  efEected  nothing  by  the  angry  words  into  which  he 
was  betrayed.  And  the  arbitrament  of  God  is  unequivocally  declared  by  our  Lord 
to  be  the  practical  outcome  of  our  religion  in  our  lives  (Matt.  vii.  16,  20;  John  xiii. 
35).  That  the  test  is  not  capable  of  easy  or  of  immediate  application,  that  it  has  to 
be  applied  broadly,  and  with  many  allowances  for  disturbing  causes,  is  true  ;  but  yet 
it  is  the  test,  and  the  only  test,  to  which  our  Lord  calls  us.  It  is  the  test  out  of  which 
Aaron,  with  all  the  weight  of  popular  opinion  against  him,  will  ultimately  come 
triumphant ;  in  which  Eorah,  with  all  his  sincerity  and  plausibility,  will  come  to 
nothing.  And  note  that  while  religious  questions  must  be  referred  to  the  arbitrament 
of  God,  and  that  arbitrament  is  not  always  distinct  or  immediate  in  this  world,  there 
ia  a  further  decision  which  will  be  absolutely  certain  and  conclusive.     "  £v«n  to- 


OH.  XTL 1—40.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  207 

morrow  the  Lord  will  show  who  are  his,"  "  for  the  day  shall  declare  it "  (1  Cor.  ilL 
13),  and  "  it  shall  be  revealed  by  fire,"  as  it  was  with  Korah's  company.  Woe  unto 
them  who  cannot  abide,  whether  personally  or  as  to  their  work,  the  test  of  fire. 
Our  God  ia  Btill,  as  then,  a  consuming  fire  (Heb.  zii.  29),  and  that  fire  burns  and 
will  bum  against  all  falsity  of  teaching,  as  well  as  all  unholiness  of  living  (1  Cor. 
iii.  15 ;  Heb.  xii.  14).  And  note  again  that  "  even  him  whom  he  hath  chosen  will 
he  cause  to  come  near  unto  him  j  "  for  although  the  election  be  not  arbitrary,  yet  it 
w  the  election  of  grace,  and  not  the  personal  worth  or  aptitude  or  desire,  that  does 
place  any,  or  will  place  any  hereafter,  near  unto  Qod  (cf.  Mark  iii.  13  ;  z.  40 ;  John 
XV.  16  ;  Bom.  viii.  28). 

VII.  That  the  ambition  of  Eobah  was  the  mobe  to  be  blamed  because  he  was 

HIMSELF  A  LeVITB,  AND  INTRUSTED  WITH  A  SPECIAL  MINISTRY  IN  HOLY  THINGS.      Even 

BO  is  ambition  or  envy  especially  evil  in  a  Christian  man,  forasmuch  as  he  has  an 
'_'  unction  "  and  an  office  in  the  body  of  Christ  to  which  he  cannot  with  all  his  zeal  do 

J'ustice,  and  which  if  faithfully  used  will  bring  him  the  highest  possible  reward  (cf. 
juke  xxii.  26 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  16,  22 ;  1  Pet  ii.  6 ;  1  John  ii.  20,  27 ;  Rev.  iii.  21 ;  viL 
14,  sq.). 

VIII.  That  the  fabtiuulab  offence  op  Eobah  and  his  company  was  their 
DARiNa  to  offer  incense,  which  Aaron  alone  might  do.  The  incense  seems  to 
have  signified  not  simply  "  prayer,"  but  rather  the  intercessory  and  prevailing  prayer 
of  the  great  High  Priest  and  Mediator.  Thus  the  "much  incense"  in  Rev.  viii. 3,4, 
which  is  undoubtedly  the  intercession  of  Christ,  is  added  to  and  rises  toith  the  prayers 
of  all  saints.  Thus  then  the  special  sin  reprobated  in  Eorah  is  any  interference 
with  the  mediatorial  office  of  Christ,  whether  by  endeavouring  to  draw  near  to 
God  through  other  mediators,  or  without  any  mediator  at  all  (cf.  John  ziv.  6 ;  Oal. 
i.  8 ;  1  John  ii.  1). 

IX.  That  the  company  of  Eorah  (whatever  became  of  himself)  died  by  fire, 
the  element  in  which  they  sinned.  Even  so  he  that  presumptuously  meddles 
with  holy  things,  not  being  holy  himself,  shall  perish  by  that  very  nearness  which 
he  rashly  courted.  The  hand  that  is  really  and  entirely  wet  can  be  plunged  into 
molten  metal  without  injury,  and  so  he  who  is  covered  with  the  robe  of  righteousness 
may  be  a  ministering  servant  of  the  consuming  Fire,  and  live  j  but  how  great  is  the 
risk  if  the  call  be  not  clear  (cf.  Mark  ix.  49  a.). 

X.  That  these  men  were  "  sinners  against  their  own  lives  "  in  truth,  al- 
though they  only  seemed  to  be  vindicating  their  just  bights  against  usurpers. 
Even  so  is  every  one  that  seeks  his  supposed  rights  not  in  the  spirit  of  meekness  and 
of  personal  self-abnegation,  but  in  a  spirit  of  pride,  contradiction,  and  vain-glory. 
To  contend  for  oneself — albeit  sometimes  necessary — is  of  all  things  most  dangerous, 
lest  even  in  gaining  our  cause  we  lose  our  souls  (cf .  Matt  xxiii.  12 ;  1  Cor.  xiii.  5 ; 
Philip,  ii.  5—7). 

XI.  That  theib  cbnsebs  webe  hallowed  even  by  an  unlawful  religious  ub«. 
Even  so  there  is  a  kind  of  sanctity  which  attaches  to  every  religious  effort,  however 
much  it  may  be  stained  with  pride  or  vitiated  by  error,  and  whatever  ill  results  it 
may  lead  to,  if  it  be  made  with  sincerity.  No  such  efEort  can  be  ignored  as  though 
it  had  not  been  made,  nor  cast  out  as  wholly  evil  because  not  rightly  made.  Nothing 
which  is  done  in  the  sacred  name  of  religion  (saving  sheer  hypociisy)  ought  to  be 
despised  or  neglected. 

XII.  That  the  rescued  censebs  became  an  additional  strength  and  obnambnt 
TO  the  altab,  and  a  wabning  to  all  oenebations.  Even  so  all  assaults  upon 
the  faith  and  discipline  of  Christ  are  over-ruled  for  good,  at  the  same  time  adding 
strength  to  some  weak  or  neglected  side  of  religion,  and  furnishing  a  warning 
against  the  mistakes  and  faults  which  misled  their  authors  (c£  1  Cor.  xi.  19). 

Consider  again,  with  respect  to  the  Reubenitea — 

I.  That  they  were  angry  with  Moses  foe  what  was  dub  to  their  own  fault 
and  the  fault  of  the  congregation.  If  they  had  not  disobeyed  they  would  have 
been  in  their  own  land  by  this  time.  Even  so  men  are  angry  and  impatient  with 
the  rule  of  Christ  because  it  has  not  brought  them  peace  or  happiness,  whereas  this 
a  wholly  due  to  their  own  unfaithfulness.    And  so  again  men  assail  Christianity  for 


208  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [cH.  XTI.  1— 4a 



not  having  reformed  the  world  and  abolished  all  evils,  whereas  they  themselves  will 
not  submit  to  the  easy  yoke  and  light  burden  of  Christ, 

II.  That  thby  falsely  and  wickedly  spake  or  Egypt  in  terms  only  applioablb 
TO  Canaan.  Even  so  do  the  enemies  of  Christ  speak  of  a  state  of  nature,  and  of 
the  life  of  the  natural  man,  nnvexed  by  fear  of  hell  or  hope  of  heaven,  as  if  that 
had  been  true  happiness  and  peace,  whereas  they  know  that  it  is  sheer  misery  and 
slavery  (Bom.  i.  28—32 ;  vi.  20,  21 ;  Eph.  ii.  2,  3). 

III.  That  they  charged  Moses  with  ambition  and  belf-sbeking,  and  with 
THROWING  dust  IN  THE  EYES  OF  THE  PEOPLE.  Even  SO  is  Christianity  commonly 
accounted  (or  at  least  described)  by  its  open  and  more  vulgar  enemies  as  mere 
obscurantism  intended  to  keep  the  people  in  darkness,  and  to  make  them  an  easy 
prey  to  designing  men  for  power  and  profit  (cf.  2  Cor.  xi.  12,  20 ;  xii.  16,  &c.). 

IV.  That  Dathan  and  Abibam,  being  obddbatb,  were  swallowed  up  by  thb 
EARTH,  because  it  was  with  their  earthly  lot  that  they  were  angry,  and  with  their 
earthly  ruler  that  they  contended.  Even  so  they  that  are  of  the  earth  earthy  shall 
perish  with  the  perishing  world ;  it  is  their  punishment  that  they  are  "swallowed 
op  "  in  gross  material  cares  or  pleasures,  and  have  no  lot  nor  part  in  the  upper  air 
of  spiritual  life  (1  Cor.  xv.  48 ;  Phil.  iii.  19,  and  compare  the  use  of  *  the  earth  "  in 
the  Apoc.,  as  in  ch.  vii.  1  j  viii.  13). 

Consider  again,  with  respect  to  the  congregation  at  large — 

I.  That  they  were  implicated  in  the  sin,  and  might  have  been  included  in 
the  punishment,  of  these  men.  Even  so  the  pride  and  discontent  which  is  active 
in  a  few  is  latent  in  the  many,  and  brings  danger  and  damage  to  the  whole  Church 
of  Christ.  The  conventional  restraints  of  Christianity  prevent  for  the  most  part 
any  open  outbreak ;  nevertheless,  it  may  be  said  almost  of  the  mass  of  nominally 
Christian  people  that  they  have  "  a  revolting  and  a  rebellious  heart "  (cf .  1  Cor.  v. 
6 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  17 ;  Heb.  xii.  15). 

II.  That  they  were  saved  because  they  gat  up  fbom  the  tabernacle  of 
these  men  on  every  side,  and  touched  nothing  that  belonged  to  them.  Even 
so  our  safety  is  to  separate  ourselves  wholly  from  the  fellowship  or  influence  (in 
religious  things)  of  such  as  oppose  themselves  to  the  paramount  and  absolute  claims 
of  Christ  as  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King  (Bom.  xvi.  17  j  1  Cor.  x.  22  ■  2  Cor.  vi.  14—17  ; 
Jude  22,  23). 

HOMILIES  BY  VABI0U8  AUTHOBS. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Korah's  rebellion.  1.  The  ringleader  and  his  policy.  Of  all  the 
seditious  movements  which  embittered  the  heart  of  Moses  and  wrought  trouble  in 
Israel  during  the  forty  years'  wanderings,  the  rebellion  of  Korah  was  by  far  the  most 
formidable.  The  anxious  tone  of  the  narrative  betrays  a  consciousness  of  this,  and 
it  is  confirmed  by  the  facts  narrated.  The  other  seditions  were  either  confined  to  a 
few  individuals,  like  the  sedition  of  Miriam  and  Aaron,  or,  like  the  disturbances  at 
Marah,  and  Kibroth-hataavah,  and  Kadesh,  they  were  the  confused  movements  of  a 
crowd  without  definite  aims,  without  leaders,  without  organisation.  In  this  sedition 
of  Korah  there  is  not  only  a  general  ferment  of  rebellious  feeling,  but  there  is  an 
organised  conspiracy,  with  a  resolute  and  able  man  at  its  head — a  man  who  knows 
exactly  what  he  would  be  at,  and  is  consummately  skilful  in  turning  to  account  all 
the  floating  elements  of  discontent  that  exist  in  the  congregation. 

I.  Let  us  begin  by  taking  careful  note  of  the  ringleader.  Korah  was,  like  Moses 
and  Aaron,  of  the  tribe  of  Levi  and  family  of  Kohatb.  He  was  therefore  a  far-ofE 
cousin  of  the  men  against  whom  he  rebelled.  That  Korah  was  the  soul  of  the  sedition 
is  too  plain  to  need  proof.  (Compare  "  the  company  of  Korah,"  vers.  6, 16, 32  ;  xxvi. 
9,  &c.  ;  "  the  gainsaying  of  Koran,"  Jude  11).  His  design  is  not  difficult  to  fathom. 
He  is  a  man  of  honourable  rank.  But  being  an  ambitious  man,  he  cannot  rest  so  long 
as  there  is  in  the  camp  any  one  greater  than  himself.  He  looks  with  envious  eye  on 
his  cousins  Mosea  and  Aaron.  Moses,  under  God,  is  supreme  in  peace  and  war.  As 
for  Aaron,  not  only  has  he  been  invested  with  the  exclusive  right  to  offer  sacrifice  and 
bum  incense  before  the  Lord,  but  his  family  have  been  set  apart  to  form  a  priestly 


OH.  XVI.  1—40.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBBES.  209 

caste  in  Israel.  These  hononrs  did  not  come  to  the  brothers  by  birthright,  but  by 
the  special  gift  and  appointment  of  the  Lord.  It  would  seem  that  Korah  was  of  the 
elder  branch  of  the  family.     He  resolves  to  cast  down  both  brothers  from  their  high 

Elace.    Thus  far  his  intention  is  open  and  avowed.    We  need  not  hesitate  to  add  that 
e  means  to  vault  into  their  place ;  but  about  this  part  of  his  intention  he  holds  his 
peace  for  the  present.    So  much  for  the  man. 

II.  His  policy.  1.  He  begins  by  announcing  a  doctrine  or  principle.  As  much 
aa  anything  else  in  the  sedition,  tnis  enables  us  to  take  the  measure  of  Eorah's 
genius  for  leadership.  Movements  which  repose  merely  on  brute  force  rarely  achieve 
abiding  results.  Blood  and  iron  are  not  all-sufBcient.  A  true  loader  of  men  spares 
no  pains  to  get  hold  of  men's  minds.  He  likes  to  give  his  followers  a  good  watchword 
or  rallying  cry.  When  a  nation  gets  thoroughly  possessed  with  a  great  and  sound 
principle,  when  some  high  and  far-reaching  doctrine  seizes  its  heart,  it  is  almost 
invincible.  It  is  characteristic  of  Korah  that  he  so  far  appreciates  the  importance  of 
a  great  doctrine  to  rally  round,  that  he  casts  about  for  some  truth  which  may  be  made 
a  handle  of  for  his  purpose.  In  the  great  oracle  which  was  the  first  to  be  uttered  at 
Sinai  he  thinks  he  sees  what  will  serve  admirably.  "  Ye  shall  be  to  me  a  kingdom 
of  priests,  and  an  holy  nation "  (Exod.  six.  6).  Accordingly,  he  raises  the  cry  of 
Equality  and  Fraternity  I  Moses  and  Aaron  have  engrossed  to  themselves  privileges 
which  are  the  inalienable  right  of  every  Israelite.  They  have  taken  too  much  upon 
them,  and  must  be  stripped  of  their  usurped  honours.  A  cry  of  this  sort  has  often 
been  raised,  in  all  sincerity,  by  men  of  excitable  temperament.  But  Korah  was  no 
enthusiast.  The  principle  that  all  Israelites  are  kings  and  priests,  if  it  had  been 
really  inconsistent  (as  he  pretended  to  think)  with  the  rule  of  Moses  and  the  priest- 
hood of  Aaron,  would  have  been  equally  inconsistent  with  the  rule  which  he  coveted 
for  himself.  Still  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  cry  Korah  raised  would  gain 
him  many  supporters.  2.  He  organises  a  band  of  conspirators.  By  one  means  or 
another  he  succeeds  in  gathering  around  him  no  fewer  than  250  accomplices.  Nor 
were  these  obscure  men.  They  all  belonged  to  the  ruling  class.  They  are  entitled 
(1)  "  princes  of  the  assembly,"  i.  e.  chiefs  of  the  congregation,  natural  leaders  in 
their  several  tribes ;  (2)  "  famous  in  the  congregation,"  more  correctly,  "  men  sum- 
moned in  the  assembly,' '  i.  e.  members  of  the  national  council ;  (3)  "  men  of  renown," 
i.  ft  not  nameless  persons,  but  men  of  note  among  the  people.  'Their  names  are  not 
given,  nor  the  tribes  to  which  they  belonged.  Korah  would  take  care  to  have  all  the 
tribes  represented ;  but  probably  the  Levites  and  Eeubenites  would  be  most  numerous. 
It  was  a  formidable  conspiracy.  3.  He  diligently  enlists  into  his  company  all  the 
malcontents  of  the  congregation.  An  example  is  seen  in  the  Eeubenites.  They  had 
a  grievance.  Eeuben  was  the  first-bom,  and  as  such  had  certain  rights  of  priority, 
according  to  immemorial  custom.  These  rights  have  been  ignored,  or  transferred  to 
Judah  and  Ephraim.  The  Eeubenites  are  Korah's  neighbours  in  the  camp.  He  has 
inflamrd  their  discontents,  and  held  out  flattering  hopes.  So  Dathan,  Abinim,  and 
their  people  join  him  in  open  revolt  (vers.  12 — 14).  4.  Korah  does  not  confine  his 
attentions  to  the  two  hundred  and  fifty  leaders  and  their  pronounced  followers. 
ITie  whole  camp  is  pervaded  with  his  emissaries.  Things  are  in  such  a  train  that 
when  the  two  hundred  and  fifty  confront  Moses  and  Aaron  at  the  door  of  the  taber- 
nacle, Korah  is  able  to  "  gather  all  the  congregation  "  at  the  same  time.  He  hope's 
to  overawe  Moses  by  this  demonstration  of  popular  sympathy. 

We  see  here: — 1.  An  example  of  fine  abilities  abused.  What  an  admirable 
helper  in  the  kingdom  of  God  Korah  might  have  been  I  He  might  have  been  a 
second  Joshua.  Instead  of  that,  he  leads  the  wretched  life  of  a  conspirator, 
comes  to  a  bad  end,  and  leaves  behind  him  an  infamous  name.  The  lust  of 
power — the  determination  to  be  the  greatest,  has  been  the  ruin  of  many  a  richly-gifted 
man.  2.  An  admonition  to  leaders  in  Church  and  State.  There  are  leaders,  not  a 
few,  who  are  such  not  of  their  own  choice,  but  by  the  call  of  their  brethren  and  by 
the  clear  appointment  of  Divine  providence.  It  is  natural  and  reasonable  for  them 
to  expect  the  loyal  support  of  the  people.  Certainly  they  are  entitled  to  expect 
that  they  shall  not  be  reviled  and  resisted,  as  if  they  had  been  ambitious  and  selfish 
nsurpers.  The  example  of  Moses  admonishes  them  not  to.  be  surprised  if  such 
reasonable  expectations  should  be  disappointed.    A  good  conscience  is  an  excellent 


5810  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  Loh-  xtl  1—40 

companion  under  bitter  reproach  and  opposition,  but  it  will  not  always  ward  them 
oS.  Never  was  leader  less  ambitious,  less  selfish,  than  Moses ;  yet  he  could  hardly 
have  been  treated  worse  if  he  had  been  another  Korah. — B. 

Vers.  4 — 35. — Korah' s  rebellion.  2.  How  the  rebellion  was  encountered  and  put 
doton.  Moses  was  the  meekest  of  men.  There  were  circumstances  of  aggravation 
in  the  rebellion  of  Korah  which  would  have  exhausted  the  meekness  of  most  men, 
but  they  failed  to  break  down  that  of  Moses.  The  much-enduring  patience  of  the 
servant  of  the  Lord  never  shone  out  more  brightly  than  in  the  way  in  which  he 
encountered  the  sedition,  of  his  bold,  unscrupulous  kinsman. 

I.  He  carried  the  cause  by  appeal  to  the  Most  High.  A  proposal  to  this  effect 
vras  made — 1.  To  Korah  and  the  two  hundred  and  fifty  chiefs  of  the  conspiracy;  vers. 
5 — 7 :  q.  d.  "  You  challenge  the  legitimacy  of  my  government  and  of  Aaron's 
priesthood.  You  insinuate  that  we  climbed  so  high  by  treading  on  the  rights  of 
our  brethren.  I  might  plead  in  reply  that  Aaron  and  I  did  not  grasp  at  our  pre- 
sent honours  ;  they  were  thrust  on  us  by  the  Lord.  But  let  us  refer  the  matter  to 
the  Lord's  decision.  Let  him  show  who  are  his,  who  are  holy,  whom  he  hath  chosen 
to  draw  near  to  him  in  his  sanctuary.  Take  censers  and  present  yourselves  before 
the  Lord  to-morrow ;  I  and  Aaron  will  come  likewise.  Let  the  Lord  answer  by 
fire."  Such  is  the  proposal.  To  Moses  the  result  is  not  doubtful.  Yet  his  heart 
yearns  over  the  misguided  men.  This  comes  out — (1)  In  his  putting  off  the  trial  till 
next  day.  After  a  night's  reflection  they  may  perhaps  repent;  (2)  In  his  remon- 
strance with  thoso  of  the  two  hundred  and  fifty  who  were  Levites  (vers.  8 — 10). 
Their  participation  in  the  rebellion  was  peculiarly  inexcusable,  2.  To  the  Eeubenites. 
Moses  sent  for  them  also  ;  but  they  were  not  so  bold  as  the  two  hundred  and  fifty, 
and  refused  to  come.  They  sent  back,  instead,  an  insolent  and  reproachful  reply 
(vers.  13,  14).  Nevertheless,  in  their  case  also  Moses  refers  the  decision  to  the 
Lord  (ver.  16) :  q,  d.  "  They  accuse  me  of  playing  the  prince  and  tyrant  over  them, 
whereas  I  have  never  exacted  from  them  an  ordinary  governor's  dues.  So  far  from 
defrauding  them,  I  have  not  taken  from  them  so  much  as  an  ass.  The  Lord  judge 
between  them  and  me,  and  respect  not  their  offering." 

II.  The  appeal  was  heard  and  judgment  was  pronounced.  1.  We  are  not  told 
how  the  two  hundred  and  -fifty  passed  the  night.  Some  of  them  must  have  had  mis- 
givings. They  could  not  fail  to  remember  the  tragic  death  of  Nadab  and  Abihuwhen 
they  drew  near  to  the  Lord  with  strange  fire.  But  Korah  suffered  no  flinching.  He 
mustered  them  on  the  morrow.  His  emissaries  too  had  been  busy  in  the  camp,  for 
when  the  two  hundred  and  fifty  took  their  places  they  were  surrounded  with  a  vast  con- 
gregation of  eager  and  sympathizing  spectators.  "This  gathering  it  was  hoped  would 
at  once  confirm  the  resolution  of  the  conspirators  and  overawe  Moses  and  Aaron. 
Moses,  on  his  part,  having  referred  the  matter  to  the  Lord,  left  it  in  his  hand  ; 
with  what  result  need  hardly  be  told.  First  the  pillar  of  fire  appeared  in  a  way  that 
struck  dismay ;  and  then,  after  a  while,  fire  came  forth  and  consumed  Korah 
and  his  two  hundred  and  fifty — "  those  sinners  against  their  own  souls."  2.  The 
fate  of  the  Eeubenites  presented  features  of  a  still  more  tragic  interest  (vers. 
23 — 34).  It  was  resolved  that  they  should  be  made  a  signal  example  of  Divine 
vengeance.  But,  in  the  first  place,  the  congregation  were  charged  to  separate  them- 
selves from  them  (cf.  Rev.  xviii.  4).  This  might  well  have  awakened  fear,  and 
led  to  repentance.  But  they  were  infatuated  in  their  error.  Instead  of  repenting 
and  craving  mercy,  "  they  came  out  and  stood  in  the  door  of  their  tents,  and  their 
wives,  and  their  sons,  and  their  little  children."  Oh  these  last  words  !  What  a 
harrowing  scene  they  bring  before  the  mind  1  Was  it  not  enough  that  Dathan  and 
Abiram  and  their  sons  should  perish?  Why  should  the  women  and  unconscious 
children  die  ?  The  sight  is  a  harrowing  one,  but  it  is  one  that  meets  us  every  day. 
When  a  blaspheming  wretch  passes  us  on  the  road  with  his  like-minded  wife,  and  % 
String  of  little  children  at  their  heels,  is  not  that  Abiram  over  again,  with  his  wife 
and  little  children  ?  A  sight  not  to  be  contemplated  without  fear  and  pity. — Read 
the  terms  in  which  Moses  referred  the  decision  in  this  case  to  the  Lord,  and  the 
•wful  judgment  that  ensued,  vers.  28 — 34.  .  .  .  One  can  hardly  help  commiserating 
the  Eeubenites  more  than  the  Levites^  for  the  Levites,  one  would  think,  must  have 


OH.  x\i.  1—40.]  THE  BOOK  0¥  NUMBERS.  211 

Binned  against  the  clearer  light.  Yet  the  facts  seem  to  show  that  the  Reubenitei 
were  the  more  aggravated  sinners,  or  at  least  that  their  families  took  part  more 
entirely  in  their  sin.  This  at  least  is  certain,  that  while  the  families  of  the  Keubenite 
rebels  perished  with  them,  the  family  of  Korah  survived.  Centuries  after  this,  the 
sons  of  Korah  flourished  in  Judah,  and  did  honourable  service  as  psalmists  (titles  of 
Psalms  xlii. — xlix.,  and  Ixxxiv. — Ixxxviii.) 

The  story  of  Korah  is  an  admonition  to  nations,  and  especially  to  'churches,  to 
"  look  diligently  lest  any  root  of  bitterness  springing  up  trouble  them,  and  thereby 
many  be  defiled''  (Heb.  xii.  15).  When  a  society  provokes  God's  displeasure,  he 
does  not  need  to  send  against  it  some  external  foe ;  there  are  other  and  more 
humiliating  forms  of  chastisement  at  his  disposal.  He  may  sufEer  some  root  of 
bitterness  to  spring  up  from  within ;  he  may  sufEer  some  one  of  its  own  children  to 
be  its  scourge.  A  Korah  will  work  more  mischief  in  Israel  than  the  Egyptians  and 
the  Amalekites  put  together  can  efEect. — B. 

Vers.  19 — 22,  41 — 50. — Korah's  rebellion.  3.  How  the  congregation  abetted  the 
rebels,  and  were  only  saved  through  the  intercession  of  Moses  and  Aaron.  Bold  and 
crafty  as  Korah  was,  he  could  not  have  done  so  much  mischief  if  elements  of  mischief 
had  not  been  everywhere  rife  in  the  camp.  Many  things  conspire  to  show  that  his 
policy  was  to  inflame  and  turn  to  bad  account  discontents  previously  existing  among 
the  people.'  The  existence  of  these  discontents  is  not  inexplicable.  A  crowd  of 
bondmen  are  not  to  be  transferred  into  a  nation  of  reasonable  free  men  all  at  once. 
Moreover,  the  circumstances  of  the  congregation  at  Kadesh  Bamea  were  not  fitted  to 
make  the  task  of  Moses  an  easy  one.  After  having  reached  the  threshold  of  Canaan, 
the  people  had  been  turned  back  and  condemned  to  pass  the  rest  of  their  days  in 
the  wilderness.  To  be  sure  they  had  no  one  but  themselves  to  blame ;  but  this  did 
not  mend  the  matter.  The  consciousness  that  the  ditch  into  which  a  man  has  fallen 
is  a  ditch  of  his  own  digging  does  not  always  move  a  man  to  take  his  fall  meekly. 
Penitent  hearts  may  be  silent  under  God's  chastisement ;  but  impenitent  hearts 
blaspheme  him  the  more  for  what  they  suffer.  We  need  not  marvel,  therefore,  that 
there  were  many  in  the  congregation,  besides  his  active  coadjutors,  who  were  ready 
to  lend  their  countenance  to  Korah  in  his  rebellion. 

I.  The  sympathy  of  the  people  with  Korah  showed  itself  in  various  ways. 
1.  They  did  not  rise  and  vindicate  the  government  of  Moses,  as  they  ought  to  have 
done.  2.  In  the  crisis  of  the  rebellion  they  gathered  together  in  front  of  the  taber- 
nacle to  encourage  Korah  and  his  two  hundred  and  fifty  with  their  countenance. 
Probably  enough  they  did  this  with  light  hearts.  Individuals  moving  with  a  crowd 
are  apt  to  lose  the  sense  of  personal  responsibility.  But  we  shall  have  to  answer  to 
God  for  what  we  do,  none  the  less  because  many  others  are  doing  it  along  with  us. 
In  the  case  in  hand  the  general  countenance  given  to  the  rebels  was  so  deeply 
resented  by  God  that  it  had  almost  proved  fatal  to  the  whole  nation.  To  swell  with 
our  voice  the  shouts  of  a  popular  assembly  may  seem  a  trifle ;  but  if  the  shouts  are 
directed  against  the  maintainers  of  truth  and  righteousness,  we  cannot  take  part 
without  sin  and  danger.  3.  When  the  rebels  died  for  their  sin,  the  people  charged 
Moses  and  Aaron  with  their  blood  (ver.  41).  A  fresh  example  of  perversity  which 
again  had  almost  proved  fatal  to  the  whole  nation. 

II.  It  is  a  relief  to  turn  from  the  perverse  ungodliness  of  the  people  tc  THB  meek- 
ness AND  UNSELFISH  ZEAL  OF  MosES  AND  Aabon.  When  the  Reubenite  rebels  and  the 
250  conspirators  perished,  Moses  did  not  utter  a  word  in  deprecation  of  their  terrible 
doom.  A  signal  example  had  become  necessary.  But  when  the  whole  people  was 
threatened,  he  fell  on  his  face  and  pleaded  for  it.  This  he  did  twice,  he  and  Aaron. 
1.  When  the  people  abetted  Korah  and  his  company  before  the  tabernacle  (ver.  22). 
Twice  before  Moses  had  been  tempted  to  desert  his  ofSce  of  intercessor,  and  to 
separate  his  fortunes  from  those  of  his  brethren  (cf .  Ezod.  xxxii.  10 — 13 ;  Numb.  xiv. 
12).  On  this  third  occasion,  as  on  the  two  former,  he  refuses  to  do  so.  On  the  con- 
trary, he  intercedes  with  the  energy  of  a  man  pleading  for  his  own  life.  Whea 
sin  abounds  and  judgments  threaten,  may  the  Lord  always  raise  up  among  ua  inter- 
cessors like  Moses  and  Aaron  I  2.  When  the  people  charged  him  ^vith  the  death  of 
the  rebeb  (ver.  41).    This  time  his  intercession  took  a  new  form.    While  the  peopI« 

r2 


212  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oh.  xvi.  1—40. 

were  murmuring  the  plague  was  breaking  out  in  the  camp.  How  shall  it  be  stayed  7 
Let  Aaron  show  himself  a  true  priest  by  making  atonement  for  the  people.  There  is 
no  time  for  presenting  a  sin  offering.  Let  him  instead  fill  his  censer  with  coals  from 
the  altar  of  sacrifice,  and  run  in  between  the  living  and  the  dead,  burning  incense.  It 
was  a  palpable  token  and  demonstration  of  the  Divine  authority  of  the  priesthood  which 
the  rebels  had  affected  to  condemn,  that  whereas  the  two  hundred  and  fifty  had  by 
their  incense-burning  brought  on  themselves  death,  Aaron  by  his  incense-burning 
warded  off  death,  and  that  not  only  from  himself  but  from  the  whole  congregation. 
General  lessons : — 1.  The  greatest  storm  of  trial  will  not  overthrow  the  man  who 
makes  God  his  strength.  Moses  begins,  carries  on,  finishes  his  conflict  against 
Korah  with  prayer  (vers.  4,  22,  45).  Hence  his  unfailing  meekness.  2.-  General 
demonstrations  of  sympathy  with  men  who  are  the  champions  of  error  and  unright- 
eousness bring  guilt  on  the  community,  are  displeasing  to  God,  and  may  be  expected 
to  bring  down  his  chastisements.  3.  Moses,  in  his  meek  endurance  of  obloquy  and 
his  successful  intercession  for  those  who  assailed  him  with  it,  is  the  figure  of  our 
blessed  Lord.  He  endured  the  contradiction  of  sinners  against  himself.  He  prayed, 
"  Father,  forgive  them."  And  thousands  of  them  were  forgiven.  Christ's  priesthood 
which  men  despise,  how  often  is  it  glorified  in  their  salvation  I  4.  The  best  answer 
that  a  Church  or  a  ministry  can  give  to  men  by  whom  their  legitimacy  is  challenged 
01  derided,  is  to  bestir  themselves  like  Aaron,  standing  between  the  dead  and  the 
living,  and  turning  back  the  tide  of  destruction. — B. 

Vers.  1 — 35. — Unvy  and  its  hitter  fruita.  L  A  conspieact  of  blanderous  rebels. 
1.  They  begin  by  blowing  up  the  flame  of  envy  in  one  another's  hearts.  The  vicinity 
of  the  Eeubenites  to  the  Kohathites  in  the  camp  gave  opportunities  for  this.  "  Woe 
to  the  wicked  man,  and  woe  to  his  neighbour,"  is  a  Jewish  saying  perhaps  derived 
from  this  incident.  2.  Their  sin  the  more  serious  because  they  were  "men  of  re- 
nown." Influential  sinners  particularly  dangerous.  3.  Eorah's  sin  especially  grievous 
(1)  because  of  his  kinship  to  Moses,  but  chiefly  (2)  because  of  the  honour  already 
bestowed  on  him  and  his  brethren  (vers.  9,  10).  Note  the  insatiableness  of  sin. 
4.  Their  conduct  condemns  their  motives  also  as  bad.  They  envied  the  power  or 
privileges,  perhaps  even  the  provision,  made  for  the  priests,  as  being  somewhat  better 
than  that  of  the  Levites.  "Seekest  thou  great  things  for  thyself?  Seek  them 
not. "  5.  They  bring  a  false  charge  against  Moses  (ver.  3),  which  recoils  on  them- 
selves (ver.  7).   God  had  "  lifted  up  "  Moses ;  they  were  seeking  to  lift  up  themselves. 

6.  They  will  not  avail  themselves  of  "  space  for  repentance  "  till  the  morrow,  when 
God  will  decide.    They  will  not  "  sleep  over  it"  with  any  advantage  to  themselves. 

7.  They  are  unmoved  by  the  reminder  that  their  murmuring  is  really  against  God 
(ver.  11).  8.  They  meet  the  friendly  interposition  of  Moses  by  a  fresh  conspiracy 
of  grievous  falsehoods:  of  ambition  (ver.  13),  deception  (ver.  14:  "Wilt  thou  put 
out  the  eyes  of  these  men?  "),  and  responsibility  for  the  evils  they  had  brought  on 
them  by  their  own  sins  (vers.  13, 14 :  "to  kill  us ;  "  "  thou  hast  not  brought  us,"  &c.). 
9.  They  persist  in  the  most  audacious  defiance  of  God  till  the  very  last.  Sketch 
Korah  and  his  company  with  their  censers  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle,  while 
Dathan,  Abiram,  and  their  kindred  are  recklessly  waiting  the  issue  at  the  doors  of 
their  tents,  in  spite  of  the  warning  of  ver.  26.  This  last  act  of  sin  one  element  also 
of  their  punishment. 

II.  A  FEARFUL  RETRIBUTION  FROM  AN  ANGRY  GoD.  1.  The  infatuation  of  the 
rebels  one  part  of  the  judgment.  The  madness  of  hardened  sinners  their  own  guilt, 
but  God's  punishment  (of.  Ezod.  iv.  21 ;  1  Kings  xxii.  19—23 ;  Acts  xxviii.  23 — 
27),  2.  New,  strange  sins  call  for  a  new,  "  strange  work"  of  judgment  (vers.  31 — 
33 ;  Prov.  xxix.  1).  3.  Those  who  unbidden  handled  sacred  fire  in  their  censer* 
perished  by  the  fire  of  God.  Learn  hence  the  guilt  and  peril  of  murmuring  against 
the  appointments  of  God  in  regard  to  the  methods  of  his  government,  or  the  means 
of  acceptable  approach  to  him  through  our  Divine  High  Priest.  Teachers  and  rulers 
in  God's  Church  are  to  be  honoured  and  followed  (1  Thess.  v.  12,  13 ;  Heb.  xiii.  17), 
and  Christ  is  to  be  recognised  as  "the  head  of  all  principality  and  power"  (Col.  ii. 
10),  and  the  one  and  only  medium  of  acceptance  with  Qod  (Fs.  ii  12 ;  John  t.  22, 
23;»v.  6).— P. 


OH.  XVI.  1—40.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEB8,  21i 

Ver.  22. — "  The  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh.''  This  name  o£  God  reminds  ns 
of  Bome  of  the  relations  in  which  God  stands  to  us  his  creatures,  who  are  immortal 
spirits  in  mortal  flesh.    We  select  three,  and  speak  of  him — 

I.  As  Fbofbietob.  "  He  formeth  the  spirit  of  man  within  him  "  (Zech.  zii.  IX 
The  verb  used  is  applied  to  a  potter  or  a  smitn,  and  reminds  us  that  God  has  modelled 
the  human  spirit,  with  its  varied  powers,  according  to  his  own  ideal  (Ps.  zzziii.  15). 
Since  he  formed  man  in  his  own  image,  he  is  "the  Father  of  spirits "  in  a  sense  in 
which  he  is  not  the  Father  of  animals.  I'hus  he  is  our  Proprietor,  who  can  say.  "  All 
souls  are  mine,"  who  feels  a  deep  interest  in  "  the  work  of  his  own  hands  (Ps. 
cxxsviii.  8),  and  who  will  use,  according  to  his  judgment,  the  spirits  he  has  formed 
and  variously  endowed.    See  Moses'  use  of  this  truth  in  Numb,  xxvii.  15 — 17. 

II.  As  Heabt-Sbarcher.  Sin  has  broken  into  the  natural  relation  of  God  to  his 
creatures.  He  has  to  deal  with  them  as  sinners  with  various  degrees  of  criminality. 
Hence  need  of  discrimination  which  only  the  Creator  and  Searcher  of  hearts  possesses. 
This  truth  used  by  Abraham  (Gen.  xviii.  23 — 33)  and  by  Moses  and  Aaron  (ver.  22). 
It  is  only  the  Heart-Searcher  who  can  righteously  adjust  (1)  the  direct  punisliment  of 
sin,  which  falls  only  on  the  guilty  (Ezek.  xviii.  1 — ^32),  and  (2)  the  indirect  conse- 
quences, which  may  fall  on  the  innocent  (Exod.  xxxiv.  7),  as  on  Dathan's  children 
(vers.  27,  32).  In  this  narrative  we  see  (1)  conditional  preservation  (ver.  24),  (2) 
diverse  judgments  (vers.  32,  35,  49),  (3)  bereavements  and  dishonour  to  the  sur- 
vivors (ch.  xxvii.  3).  Faith  in  '*God,  the  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh,"  may 
keep  us  calm  in  the  midst  of  judgments  (Isa.  Ivii.  16). 

III.  As  THE  Saviodb.  If  God  were  not  a  Saviour  there  would  soon  be  no  "  spirits 
of  flesh  "  to  be  the  God  of  (Mai.  iii.  6).  But  God's  salvation  is  for  all  flesh  (2  Cor. 
V.  19 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  6 ;  1  John  iL  2).  If  God  is  our  Saviour,  then  we  may  delight  in 
his  proprietorship  of  us  (Ps.  oxix.  94 ;  cxvi.  12  ;  Isa.  xliii.  1).  And  we  can  cheer- 
fully accept  any  discipline  which  our  Heart-Searcher  sends  (Heb.  xii.  6 — 10)  j  for 
"  the  God  of  my  life  "  is  also  "  the  God  of  my  salvation." — P. 

Vers.  31 — 33. — The  deatructiveness  of  sin.  Some  things  are  very  much  dreaded 
because  so  destructive.  H.  g.  locusts,  war,  pestilence.  But  there  is  nothing  so 
destructive  as  sin.  As  "no  man  liveth,"  so  no  man  sinneth,  "to  himself."  Of 
Korah,  as  of  Achan  or  of  other  transgressors,  it  may  be  said,  "That  man  perished 
not  alone  in  his  iniquity "  (Josh.  xxii.  20).  The  destructive  effects  of  sin  are 
twofold— I.  Personal,  II.  Social. 

I.  Personal  :  on  the  sinner  himself,  as  in  the  case  of  Korah  the  Kohathite,  honoured 
as  one  of  the  ministers  of  God's  ark.  Illustration — Infection,  taken  unawares,  may 
not  be  suspected  by  friends,  hardly  by  the  victim ;  but  its  effects  (fever,  eruption, 
&c.)  will  be  seen  by  and  by.  Sin  cannot  always  be  kept  secret  (Isa.  lix.  12 ;  James 
i.  15).  "  Uvil  shall  slay  the  wicked."  If  the  consequences  are  not  as  fatal  as  in 
Korah's  case,  moral  destruction  is  going  on.  As  Alpine  granite  may  be  reduced  by 
frost  and  damp  to  a  kind  of  mould,  so  sin — some  sins  especially — seems  to  break  up 
the  moral  nature  and  reduce  it  to  ruins.  From  the  personal  consequences  of  sin 
the  destroyer  we  can  only  be  delivered  bj'  Christ  the  Saviour  (Titus  ii.  14). 

II.  Social  :  on  others.  In  the  case  of  Korah  and  his  conspirators,  sin  was  fatal  to 
their  families.  So  perhaps  in  the  case  of  Achan  (Josh.  vii.  24 — 26 ;  xxii.  20) ;  if 
not,  how  terrible  for  them  to  see  the  husband,  the  father,  killed,  and  to  know  that  he 
had  caused  the  loss  of  thirty-six  men  at  Ai  I  "  Curses,  like  chickens,  always  come 
home  to  roost."  We  cannot  sin  with  impunity  to  our  family  any  more  than  Adam 
did.  Sin  propagate8_  sin.  It  involves  others,  directly  or  indirectly,  in  its  fatal  con- 
sequences. Illustration — King  Saul,  and  the  catastrophe  to  both  family  and  nation  at 
Gilboa.  Unrighteous  statesmen.  Men  of  high  social  position  who  are  immoral  or 
infidel.  Each  sinnej  a  centre  of  contagion  (Bocles.  ix.  18).  The  fate  of  the  children 
of  Korah's  company  a  warning  to  sinful  parents.  The  children  of  the  godless 
may  be  expected  to  become  the  parents  of  godless  children,  and  thus  the  evil  may  be 
perpetuated  from  generation  to  generation.  Mournful  epitaph  for  a  sinner's  grave : 
"That  man  perished  not  alone  in  his  iniquity."  " But  where  sin  abounded,  grac< 
did  much  more  abound  "  (Bom.  v.  20,  21 ;  viii.  2,  3). — P. 


tU.  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  fofi.  XVI.  1—40. 

Vein.  1 — 3. — The  rebellion  of  Korah.  The  conspirators  and  their  pretext.  Here 
is  now  the  sin  of  Miriam  and  Aaron  (ch.  xii.)  on  a  larger  scale.  Aaron,  who  had 
been  inveigled  into  troubling  Moses,  is  now  joined  with  Moses  in  sufiEering  from  the 
pride  and  envy  of  others. 

I.  The  conspirators.  They  were  men  of  positi  and  influence.  We  come  upon 
a  different  kind  of  grievance  from  that  of  the  ignorant  multitude.  Korah  and  his 
band  may  have  been  comparatively  free  from  lusting  after  the  delicacies  of  Egypt. 
DifEerent  men,  different  temptations.  Korah  was  a  Kohathite,  joined  therefore  in 
the  honourable  oiEce  of  bearing  the  ark  and  the  sanctuary  furniture  (Numb.  iv. 
1 — 20).  The  others  belonged  to  the  tribe  of  Eeuben,  the  eldest  eon  of  Jacob,  and 
with  them  were  250  of  the  leaders  in  the  nation.  A  conspiracy  of  men  of  this  sort 
was  not  so  easily  dealt  with  as  an  outbreak  of  the  whole  people.  Korah  was 
probably  a  man  of  deep,  deliberate  designs,  able  to  bide  his  time,  and  watching 
as  he  had  opportunity,  to  draw  first  one  and  then  another  into  his  schemes.  Here 
was  a  set  of  men  seeking  great  things  for  themselves"  (Jer.  xlv.  6).  They  had  got 
as  far  as  they  could  get  in  the  orderly  and  appointed  way,  but  they  wanted  to  be 
higher,  and  somehow  or  other  Moses  and  Aaron  blocked  the  way.  These  two  men 
were  a  long  way  above  the  rest,  and  seemingly  in  an  altogether  different  order  of 
service,  and  thus  the  rebellious,  envious  spirit  of  Korah  was  excited.  He  was  a  man 
of  the  sort  whp  would  rather  reign  in  hell  than  serve  in  heaven. 

II.  The  pretext  ci''  attack.  Conspirators  against  rightful  authority  like  to  have 
a  pretext  of  something  fair  and  just.  Thus  Miriam:  "Hath  the  Lord  not  spoken 
also  by  us  ?  "  And  thus  Korah :  "  All  the  congregation  are  holy,  every  one  of  them." 
There  was  something  in  Korah's  ofBce  to  furnish  temptation  to  an  envious  mind. 
As  he  was  engaged  in  the  service  of  the  tabernacle  he  saw  Aaron  going  where  he 
dare  not  go,  touching  things  which  he  dare  not  touch.  He  heard  Moses  coming 
forward  with  a'message  professedly  from  God,  but  it  was  a  message  from  the  invisible. 
No  one  saw  this  God  with  whom  Moses  professed  to  hold  intercourse,  and  doubtless 
Korah  concluded  that  the  messages  were  presumptuous  inventions  of  Moses  himself. 
He  considered  the  honours  and  privileges  only  of  the  leader  and  priest;  he  made  no 
allowance  for  the  burdens.  Being  a  self-seeking,  self-aggrandising  man,  he  could 
see  no  higher  feeling  in  others.  He  wanted  to  be  at  the  top  of  the  tree  himself,  and 
seeing  Moses  and  Aaron  there,  he  made  sure  they  had  got  there  by  audacity  and 
determination,  and  not  by  any  appointment  from  God  at  all.  "  All  the  congregation 
are  holy."  This  was  a  true  statement,  but  an  insufficient  reason  for  attack.  Thus 
the  plea  of  nil  men  being  equal  is  put  forth  against  those  who  hold  high  rank  and 
great  power.  The  outward  eminence  only  is  seen  ;  the  burdens  of  state,  the  cease- 
less care,  are  all  unknown.  "Uneasy  lies  the  head  that  wears  a  crown."  Thus 
jealously  Paul  and  Timothj  were  dealt  with  in  the  Church  at  Corinth,  when  they 
wished,  not  to  have  dominion  over  the  faith  of  their  brethren,  but  to  be  helpers  of 
their  joy  (2  Cor.  i.  24).  Little  did  the  schismatics  dream  of  the  Apostle's  trials, 
crowned  with  the  thorniest  of  all,  the  care  (itipi/iva)  of  all  the  Churches  (2  Cor.  xi. 
23 — 28).  Moses  would  have  rejoiced  to  take  Korah's  place,  or  even  the  lowest  place 
in  the  camp,  if  God  had  not  put  him  where  he  was.  But  of  all  this  inner  life  of 
Moses,  Korah  knew  and  cared  nothing.  In  his  eyes  Moses  was  a  self-exalted  man, 
to  be  immediately  and  irretrievably  abased.  "  Do  we  not  all  wear  the  fringes,  and 
look  each  of  us  on  his  own  riband  of  blue?  Did  you  not  tell  us  yourself  that  these 
were  to  remind  us  of  our  holiness  towards  God.  Why  then  should  you  have  an 
access  to  God  and  consequent  honour  which  are  denied  to  us  ?  "  Thus  these  leaders 
of  the  people  had  yet  to  learn,  as  only  bitter  lessons  would  teach  them,  that  they 
were  under  a  theocracy.  There  was  no  room  for  a  democracy,  either  real  or  pretended, 
in  Israel,  Nor  is  the  Church  of  Christ  now  a  democracy,  though  it  is  the  fashion 
sometimes  to  speak  of  the  democratic  spirit  in  it.  It  does  indeed  make  light  of 
human  distinctions,  traditions,  fashions,  and  prejudices,  but  only  to  put  in  place  of 
them  the  authority  of  Christ.  He  has  appointed  his  Church  humbly  and  faithfully 
to  execute  his  will.  Professing  Christians  may  indeed  choose  Church  ofScials,  but 
the  real  call  and  choice  and  guidance  are  of  the  Master  himself. — Y. 

Vers.  4 — 11.— The  re^ly  of  Moset  to  Korah.  I.  Korah's  qoesxion  is  one  fob 
OOD  TO  ANSWER.    It  bringB  an  accusation  to  which  Mos«s  had  no  answer  in  an} 


Cfi.  XVI,  i— to.]  TtiE  BOO^  Ot  NUMBEES.  2i6 

language  or  conduct  of  his  own.  He  was  in  a  humbler  way  like  Jesus  before  his 
enemies.  When  Jesus  spoke  of  hia  relation  to  the  Father,  his  complete  dependence 
on  the  Father's  will,  and  obedience  to  it,  and  of  himself  as  the  sole  revealer  of  the 
Father,  these  enemies  sneered  and  threatened ;  and  no  reply  was  effectual  except 
that  in  which  the  Father  glorified  the  Son  by  raising  him  from  the  dead.  And  even 
this  was  denied  by  those  so  enamoured  of  lies  that  it  was  impossible  for  them  to 
receive  the  truth.  Moses  here  could  but  wait  an  answer  in  some  effectual  and  crush- 
ing way  out  of  the  great  Invisible.  Thus  we  have  the  impressive  sight  of  a  man 
who  knows  he  is  falsely  accused  and  can  wait  serenely  for  the  justifying  word.  If 
he  had  been  guilty  of  self-seeking,  as  Korah  was,  and  with  the  stain  of  it  on  his 
conscience,  he  could  never  have  appealed  in  this  way.  It  was  not  an  empty  call 
upon  God,  a  mere  rhetorical  device.  The  challenge  to  Korah  and  his  band  is  definite, 
and  expresses  a  sure  confidence  in  God  as  vindicator  of  his  servants.  "  An  honest 
cause  fears  not  a  trial,  fears  not  a  second  trial,  fears  not  a  speedy  trial."  An  innocent 
person  needs  do  nothing  in  rashness,  nor  will  he  seek  causes  of  evasion  and  delay. 
Let  there  be  time  for  decent  preparation,  and  on  the  morrow  a  decisive  answer  shall 
be  given. 

XL  The  question  shall  be  addressed  to  G?od  in  the  most  explicit  way.  By 
a  solemn  act  he  shall  be  questioned,  and  by  a  solemn  act  he  shall  answer.  Let  the 
people  be  effectually  tested  as  to  this  holiness  of  which  Korah  makes  so  much.  If 
even  he  and  his  band  are  holy  before  God  as  Aaron  is,  then  let  them  attempt  a  part 
of  Aaron's  ofiice  (Exod.  xxx.  1 — 9).  If  God  accepts  the  service  from  them  as  from 
Aaron,  then  all  that  Korah  says  may  be  taken  as  true,  and  Aaron  may  retreat  into 
obscurity  and  shame  as  a  detected  impostor.  Moses  was  ready  for  the  one  test  that 
should  be  complete.  It  is  always  open  to  us,  if  we  do  not  believe  statements  made 
on  authority,  to  try  them  for  ourselves.  If  we  do  not  believe  that  arsenic  is  poisonous, 
it  is  quite  open  to  us  to  make  the  experiment  on  our  own  life.  It  may  be  a  foolish 
experiment,  but  it  is  certainly  a  possible  one.  There  was  no  fortified  wall  round  the 
sanctuary.  God  did  not  put  a  guard  of  soldiers  to  keep  defilers  back.  He  himself 
was  guard  of  his  sanctuary.  His  own  Divine  energy  resided  in  the  holy  things  to 
avenge  them  against  any  polluted  touch.  Thus  when  men  repudiate  gospel  truth 
and  say,  "  Who  is  Christ,  or  who  Paul,  that  we  should  be  tied  to  square  our  future 
and  control  our  hopes  by  their  requirements  ?  "  God  takes  in  hand  the  clearing  of 
his  Son  and  servants  from  all  reproaches.  There  is  nothing  to  prevent  a  man  trying 
to  please  God  apart  from  him  who  is  appointed  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life,  and 
to  whom  all  power  is  given  in  heaven  and  on  earth ;  but  God  in  his  own  due  time  will 
make  the  trial  manifest  as  ending  in  disastrous,  ignominious  failure.  The  more 
distinct  and  emphatic  the  challenge,  the  more  distinct  and  emphatic  shall  the 
answer  be. 

III.  Moses  suggests  certain  considerations  which  mat  lead  to  a  timely 
RETREAT.  Moses  doubtlcss  had  a  prophet's  premonitions  of  the  terrible  doom  into 
which  this  proud  band  was  advancing;  therefore  he  mentions  things  which  Korah 
had  neglected  sufficiently  to  consider,  and  which  would  show  hira  that  God  had  been 
honouring  him  as  well  as  Moses  and  Aaron.  Korah  belonged  to  a  tribe  specially 
separated  to  the  service  of  God.  If  we  complain  of  those  who  stand  in  a  higher 
rank  than  ourselves,  then  those  who  are  lower  may  complain  of  us  in  turn.  All  had 
been  by  God's  appointment.  The  tribe  of  Levi  had  no  more  right  to  complain  against 
Moses  and  Aaron  than  any  other  tribe  had  to  complain  against  Levi.  The  God  who 
arranged  one  body  and  many  members  arranged  the  whole  body  of  Israel,  so  that 
every  part  should  contribute  in  harmony  to  the  whole,  and  receive  good  in  return. 
The  service  of  Korah  was  just  as  needful  in  its  way  as  that  of  Moses  and  Aaron. 
Korah  was  clamouring  for  the  priesthood :  who  then  was  to  do  Korah's  work  if  he 
stepped  into  Aaron's  shoes  ?  Thus  Moses  made  an  appeal  to  whatever  generous  and 
public  spirit  was  in  him  to  think  mora  seriously  on  the  good  of  the  whole.  God 
could  not  allow  any  one  to  imperil  the  integrity  of  Israel.  They  were  in  a  dangerous 
position,  this  band  of  rebels,  yet  they  knew  it  not.  It  was  the  Lord  they  were  gathered 
against,  and  not  Moses  and  Aaron,  and  just  in  proportion  to  the  greatness  of  their 
ignorance  was  the  greatness  of  their  peril.  They  had  talked  indeed  as  if  it  was  the 
ttovA'B  cause  they  were  thinking  of,  but  their  real  object,  which  seemed  ea»ily  in 


S16  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oh.  xvi.  1—40, 

their  grsgp,  was  to  trample  down  Moses  and  Aaron  and  take  their  place.  "  What  is 
Aaron,  that  ye  murmur  against  him  ?  "  An  earthen  vessel  is  a  very  common,  cheap, 
fragile  thing.  If  it  is  nothing  more  than  an  earthen  vessel,  then  you  may  in  a 
moment,  unhindered,  dash  it  to  pieces.  But  if  God,  to  show  the  excellency  of  his 
power,  has  put  his  treasure  in  an  earthen  vessel,  then  it  were  safer  for  you  to  con- 
spire against  the  best  founded  of  human  governments  than  to  touch  that  earthen 
vessel  with  so  much  as  your  little  finger. — Y. 

"^'ars.  12 — 15. — Dathan,  Abiram,  and  Moses.  Dathan  and  Abir^ra  seem  to  have 
Ixwn  absent  from  the  interview,  as  if  to  show  their  particular  and  utter  contempt  for 
Moses.  It  was  a  sort  of  crime  against  the  new  authority  to  have  any  dealings  with 
him,  to  treat  him  with  any  civility.  But  Moses  does  not  treat  them  as  they  treat 
him.  It  is  good  to  stoop  to  rebels  even,  and  show  them  a  way  of  being  reconciled — 
a  way  all  in  vain,  however,  so  far  as  these  two  were  concerned.  What  contempt  they 
had  silently  shown  by  their  absence  is  now  made  clear  in  unmistakable  words.  A 
free  vent  is  found  for  all  the  rage  and  scorn  pent  up  in  their  hearts,  and  one  can  see 
a  sort  of  sidelong  rebuke  to  Korah  for  condescending  to  make  any  terms  with  such  a 
deceiver. 

L  Their  charge  against  Moses.  Notice  how  all  their  complaints  end  with  him- 
There  is  no  word  concerning  Jehovah.  Korah,  at  any  rate,  made  a  pretence  of 
thinking  of  God's  glory,  as  if  Moses  were  not  merely  injuring  the  people,  but  robbing 
God  of  their  service.  Dathan  and  Abiram  talk  like  utter  atheists,  as  if  the  promises 
were  of  Moses,  and  not  of  God,  and  as  if  the  non-fulfilment  came  from  the  inability 
or  malice  of  Moses,  and  not  from  the  righteous  indignation  of  God.  God  had  said 
that  he  brought  them  out  of  Egypt  to  be  their  God.  Bathan  and  Abiram  leave  God 
altogether  out  of  the  question.  It  is  Moses  who  has  brought  them  out  of  a  land  that 
might  be  counted  one  of  milk  and  honey,  as  compared  with  the  wilderness.  That 
assertion  of  Jehovah's  appointment,  favour,  and  protection  which  Moses  so  rejoicingly 
made  was  to  them  nothing  but  the  lying  of  tyrannous  statecraft.  Men  who  are 
themselves  without  perceptions  of  the  Eternal,  whose  thoughts  are  wholly  within  the 
sphere  of  time  and  sense,  are  fond  of  speaking  concerning  such  as  walk  in  the  light  of 
the  Eternal  as  if  they  must  be  either  fools  or  knaves.  It  is  possible  that  Dathan  and 
Abiram  had  been  so  blinded  by  the  god  of  this  world  as  to  have  persuaded  them- 
selves they  were  the  champions  of  a  righteous  cause.  The  savage  and  heartless  aim* 
which  they  attribute  to  him-  How  easy  it  is  when  one's  heart  is  so  inclined,  to  distort 
into  hideousness  the  lineaments  of  the  most  noble  characters  1  Vindictive  minds  are 
like  those  spherical  mirrors  which  alter  the  shape  of  everything  presented  to  them. 
Thus  did  Dathan  and  Abiram  make  it  out  that  Moses  had  drawn  them  from  com- 
parative comfort  and  security,  to  trifle  with  them  and  knock  them  about  hither  and 
thither  at  his  own  caprice.  How  differently  the  same  things  look  aj:cording  to  the 
point  from  which  we  view  them  1  How  we  should  be  on  our  guard  against  the  re- 
presentations of  wicked,  self-seeking  men  I  how  slow  to  credit  or  even  to  consider 
any  slander  upon  God's  servants  I  They  charge  him,  moreover,  with  drawing  them 
into  the  wilderness  by  specious  promises,  made  only  to  be  broken,  as  if,  finding  he 
could  not  keep  these  promises,  he  had  cunningly  thrown  the  fault  on  a  pretended 
deity  behind.  Men  will  look  anywhere  for  the  reasons  of  disappointment  save  in 
their  own  headstrong  and  self-regarding  lives.  The  infallible  discernment  which 
they  claim  fw  themselves.  "  Do  you  think  people  have  only  eyes  for  what  you  would 
have  them  see  ?  "  What  is  harder  than  to  get  the  Dathans  and  Abirams  of  the  world 
out  of  the  supercilious  egotism  in  which  they  are  entrenched  ?  It  is  bad  enough  to 
have  eyes  and  yet  see  not,  to  fail  in  discerning  the  great  realities  of  the  unseen  and 
eternal,  but  it  is  even  worse  to  see  all  sorts  of  horrors  and  iniquities  that  have  no 
existence.  There  is  a  sort  of  people  in  the  world  who  suspect  everybody,  and  the 
better  any  one  seems,  the  more  for  that  very  reason  are  they  doubtful.  Thus  Jesus 
is  held  for  a  gluttonous  man  and  a  wine-bibber,  one  casting  out  demons  by  the  prince 
of  the  demons;  Paul  is  a  pattern  of  duplicity;  there  is  no  real  integrity  among  men, 
no  real  purity  among  women.  The  defiled  minds  of  such  pull  down  every  other 
person,  without  hesitation,  to  their  own  level.  There  is  no  arguing  with  the  man 
who  believes  that  every  face  is  nothing  but  a  mask. 


OH.  XTL 1—40,]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  '  211 

II.  Moses'  indignant  peotest.  He  does  not  address  the  slanderers,  for  where 
would  have  been  the  use  ?  He  makes  a  direct  appeal  to  God;  "  Respect  not  their 
offering."  Probably  they  were  going  to  set  up  some  sort  of  altar  in  their  own  tents, 
since  they  refused  to  come  to  the  ttibemacle  ;  only  to  find  out,  as  Cain  did  before, 
and  many  have  done  since,  that  will-worship  (Col.  ii.  23)  has  no  acceptance  with 
God.  Even  if  their  offering  had  been  made  by  the  strictest  ceremonial  rules,  what 
would  have  been  its  chance  of  acceptance  with  him  to  whom  lying  lips  are  an 
abomination?  "Lord,  who  shall  abide  in  thy  tabernacle?"  (Ps.  xv.).  There  is  a  claim 
here  not  only  for  the  vindication  of  Aaron  as  the  appointed  priest,  but  of  Moses  also  as 
the  appointed  leader,  the  faithful  messenger,  the  pure  channel  of  the  pure  command- 
ments and  promises  of  God.  The  man  who  would  teach  the  people  righteousness 
must  be  clear  of  the  faintest  suspicion  that  robbery  or  oppression  clings  to  his  own 
garments.  He  must  be  far  different  from  those  rulers  of  after  days  whom  Isaiah 
denounces  (Isa.L  10 — 15,  23),  "  Moses  got  more  in  his  estate  when  he  kept  Jethro's 
flock  than  since  he  came  to  be  king  in  Jeshurun." — Y. 

Vers.  16 — 35, — The  destruction  of  Korah  and  his  company.  I.  The  appuoation 
OF  THE  TEST.  1.  Moses  and  Aaron  put  themsdves  on  a  perfect  outward  equality 
with  the  rest.  They  humbled  themselves  that  they  might  be  exalted.  Aaron,  already 
chosen  of  the  Lord,  stands  with  his  censer  and  incense  in  the  midst  of  the  company 
of  rebels,  as  if  he  were  but  a  candidate  waiting  for  approval.  Such  is  not  the  way 
of  the  dignitaries  of  the  world.  Their  pomp  and  honour  is  mostly  a  mere  conven- 
tion ;  strip  them  of  their  titles  and  gauds,  and  you  would  scarcely  notice  them  in  the 
street.  But  Aaron  was  the  priest  of  God  wherever  he  went,  and  howsoever  he  was 
surrounded.  Therefore,  without  fear  or  shame,  he  could  take  the  lowest  place,  sure 
that  he  would  presently  be  addressed,  •'  Come  up  hither."  So  Jesus  was  numbered 
with  the  transgressors,  reduced  to  the  level  of  criminals,  crucified  instead  of  Barabbas. 
Cliristians  have  often  had  to  stand  among  the  ranks  of  evil-doers,  but  in  due  time 
they  have  gone  out  from  them,  because  they  were  not  of  them  (1  Pet.  ii.  19 — 23). 
2.  Korah  shows  unquailing  audacity  to  the  last,  i.  e.  up  to  the  appearing  of  the  glory. 
Tlie  more  the  servants  of  God  humbled  themselves,  the  higher  and  more  confident 
were  his  enemies  in  their  pride.  Eorah  was  at  his  very  highest  before  he  fell. 
Aaron,  whom  he  had  so  often  seen  going  where  he  was  forbidden,  stands  now  on  a 
level  with  the  ordinary  Levite  ;  nay,  more,  he  is  as  low  as  the  other  tribes.  The  con- 
gregation too  has  gathered  round  Korah  in  sympathy  and  expectation,  for  doubtless  he 
has  promised  them  such  things  as  they  love.  And  even  as  God  had  allowed  rebellious 
Israel  to  go  on  even  to  the  lifting  of  stones  against  Caleb  and  Joshua  (ch.  xiv.  10), 
so  here  he  allows  the  pride  of  Korah  to  swell  to  its  fullest  extent.  And  hence  God's 
people  should  ever  gain  confidence  in  the  times  when  he  seems  to  be  inactive.  We 
are  not  to  be  discouraged  because  the  wicked  go  on  from  strength  to  strength. 
The  Jews  rejected  Christ ;  they  consulted  to  slay  him  ;  they  seized  him  ;  they  put 
him  through  an  examination  in  their  own  court ;  they  handed  him  to  Pilate ;  he  was 
mocked,  scourged,  crucified ;  yet  God  did  not  intervene.  And  who  now  does  not 
see  that  all  this  time  he  was  in  process  of  answering  the  prayer,  "Glorify  thy  Son. 
tliat  thy  Son  also  may  glorify  thee  "  ?  (Johnxvii.  1).  Korah,  rising,  was  lifting  Moses 
and  Aaron  with  him.  He  fell ;  thoy  remained.  3.  The  first  expression  of  Divine 
wrath.  A  general  destruction  is  threatened,  without  mitigation  or  delay.  And  if  we 
only  consider,  we  shall  see  how  fitting  it  was  that  the  first  word  should  be  a  menace 
of  complete  and  terrible  destruction.  The  holiness  of  God  is  a  great  reality,  keenly 
sensitiv*  to  any  sin.  How  much  then  was  it  outraged  by  such  a  daring  attempt  as 
that  of  Korah  and  his  company  I  And  the  whole  congregation  had  shown  a  sad 
alacrity  in  their  support.  Why,  even  we  ourselves,  when  we  hear  of  some  g^eat 
crime  in  which  many  are  engaged,  do  not  stop  to  make  distinctions  between  princi- 
pals and  accomplices.  We  feel  that  our  first  word  must  be  one  of  utter  abhorrence 
and  condemnation  vrith  respect  to  all  who  had  part  in  such  great  wickedness.  It  is 
only  because  we  are  so  little  sensitive  to  the  evil  of  sin,  that  we  find  difBoulty  in 
nnderstandiiig  the  menace  of  ver.  21.  4.  Moses  and  Aaron  promptly  intercede. 
God  has  already  shown  what  a  distance  separates  them  from  the  rest  of  the  people, 
Now  they  proceed  to  shew  it  themselves.    It  was  the  hour  of  exaltation  snd  trivmph 


tie  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  [cB-  x^i.  1—40. 

but,  like  truly  humble  and  holy  men,  they  were  occupied  with  intense  pity  for  the 
great  multitude  suddenly  exposed  to  the  full  wrath  of  God.  Was  there  any  in  that 
great  multitude  who  would  thus  have  thought  of  them  1  Their  position  towards  God 
and  men  comes  out  in  something  like  its  completeness.  If  Moses  had  much  on  be- 
half of  God  to  say  to  men,  so  he  had  much  on  behalf  of  men  to  say  to  God.  And 
Jesus  is  put  before  us  as  the  great  High  Priest.  If  the  sinful  Aaron  could  be  touched 
with  a  feeling  of  the  infirmities  of  his  brethren,  not  less  is  the  same  true  of  the  sin- 
less Jesus.  Amid  the  threatening  penalties  of  sin,  and  with  the  growing  con- 
sciousness of  our  own  helplessness,  we  can  look  to  him  for  intercessory  services, 
even  those  which  he  came  to  earth  specially  to  render.  His  Father,  who  is  God  of 
the  spirits  of  all  flesh,  sent  him  not  to  destroy  men's  lives,  but  to  save  them  (Luke 
ix.  56). 

II.  The  awful  pkactical  consequence.  1.  Korah,  Dathan,  and  Ahiram  are 
devoted  to  destruction.  The  intercession  of  Moses  and  Aaron,  earnest  and  prevail- 
ing as  it  is,  has  a  limit  in  tlie  request  and  the  result.  "  If  any  man  see  his  brother 
sin  a  sin  which  is  not  unto  death,  he  shall  ask,  and  he  shall  give  him  life  for  them 
that  sin  not  unto  death.  There  is  a  sin  unto  death:  I  do  not  say  that  he  shall 
pray  for  ii^'  (1  John  v.  16).  The  people  are  first  of  all  included  in  menace  with 
the  three  chief  rebels  that  presently  they  may  be  separated  from  them.  Leaders 
and  followers  are  both  guilty,  but  there  are  degrees  in  wickedness  as  in  holiness. 
It  is  perhaps  of  great  significance,  if  only  we  will  consider  that  God  in  this  mani- 
festation of  his  wrath  came  not  only  with  three  separate  punishments,  but  three 
different  modes  of  punishment.  He  seems  to  shadow  forth  something  of  degrees 
of  punishment  in  the  eternal  world.  If  the  blind  lead  the  blind,  hoth  shall  fall 
into  the  pit;  but  surely  the  woe  of  a  deeper  fall  is  to  those  presumptuous  blind 
who  drag  others  with  them.  Here  were  those  who  would  not  admit  that  Moses 
and  Aaron  had  been  Divinely  separated  for  a  peculiar  service,  and  now  in  their 
towering  pride  they  are  separated  for  a  peculiar  doom.  If  they  had  not  climbed 
so  high  they  would  not  have  fallen  so  far.  2.  As  we  see  the  people  falling  away 
from  Korah,  we  notice  what  a  feeble  bond  unites  the  vricked.  Only  a  few  minutes 
ago  the  people  were  pressing  admiringly  on  him  as  he  bearded  Moses  in  the  very 
door  of  the  tabernacle ;  now  they  flee  from  him  and  the  other  two  as  if  they 
infected  the  air  with  death.  The  bond  that  looks  so  firm  is  but  a  rope  of 
sand.  It  will  not  hold  when  anything  appears  that  looks  like  a  peril  to  individual 
selfishness.  We  may  be  reminded  indeed  of  "honour  among  thieves,"  but  this  at 
the  most  can  only  mean  that  wicked  men  may  act  together  till  the  last,  not  that 
they  may  be  trusted  to  do  it.  There  is  no  such  coherency  possible  amongst  the 
wicked  as  amongst  the  good.  They  have  no  entirely  common  purpose ;  each  has 
his  own  advantage  to  seek,  and  so  one  may  easily  thwart  all  the  rest.  The  Jews  in 
the  hour  of  their  triumph  over  Jesus  are  chagrined  by  the  inscription  which  obstinate 
Pilate  puts  on  the  cross.  3.  Notice  the  reference  to  the  elders  in  ver.  25.  They  had 
been  appointed,  seventy  of  them,  to  help  Moses  in  the  burden  which  had  become  so 
grievous  (ch.  xi.).  Where  then  had  they  been  all  this  time  ?  Men  with  the  Spirit  of 
God  upon  them  should  surely  have  sided  boldly  with  Moses,  even  before  the  glory 
appeared.  Perhaps  indeed  they  were  on  his  side  ;  and  we  must  not  infer  too  much 
from  silence,  else  Caleb  and  Joshua  would  appear  in  a  dubious  light.  But  this  much 
at  all  events  may  be  said,  that  even  though  they  were  select  and  judicious  men,  and 
God  took  of  the  spirit  that  was  upon  Moses  and  put  it  upon  them,  all  this  was  in- 
sufBcient  to  help  Moses  in  his  extremest  needs.  We  may  take  their  appo  ntment 
rather  as  an  expression  of  regard  and  sympathy,  something  fitted  to  te  ch  the 
elders  themselves  to  be  full  of  consideration  and  attention  towards  Moses  The 
great  crowning  needs  of  life  cannot  be  met  by  human  help,  even  when  sanctified  ; 
we  must  still,  like  Moses,  fall  on  our  faces  before  God.  Not  until  God  has  appeared, 
vindicated  his  servant,  and  scattered  the  unfriendly  crowd,  do  we  hear  that  the  elders 
of  Israel  followed  him.  4.  The  carrying  out  of  the  judgment  on  Korah,  Dathan, 
and  Abiram.  Moses  announces  that  the  mode  of  their  death  was  to  have  great 
evidential  value  with  respect  to  himself.  Those  who  had  been  foremost  as  accusers 
and  slanderers  shall  now  be  chief  witnesses  on  his  side,  speaking  more  loudlv  for 
him  in  their  death  than  ever  they  had  spoken  against  him  in  their  life.    It  had  been 


c&.  XVI  41—50.] 


THte  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS. 


tiff 


their  charge  against  Moses  that  he  had  assumed  undue  authority ;  therefore,  to  show 
how  much  he  was  in  the  secrets  of  the  Divine  government,  he  announces,  not  only 
that  God  himself  would  take  in  hand  the  execution  of  a  righteous  sentence,  but 
would  execute  it  in  a  way  hitherto  unheard  of.  And  this  very  way  Moses  proceeds 
to  indicate.  What  a  point  of  faith  he  here  reaches  !  what  a  perfect  community  of 
thought  with  God  I  for  scarcely  has  he  spoken  when  that  happens  which  he  said  would 
happen,  and  in  exactly  the  same  way.  Death  and  burial  are  included  in  the  same 
set.    No  one  was  made  unclean  by  these  three  men  or  any  of  their  belongings. — Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


The  plague  begun  and  averted  (vers. 
41—50).  Ver.  41.— Ye  have  killed  the 
people  of  the  Lord.  They  had  in  truth 
forfeited  their  own  lives,  and  Moses  and 
Aaron  had  no  more  part  in  their  death  than 
St.  Peter  had  in  the  death  of  Ananias  and 
Sapphira.  But  it  was  easy  to  represent  the 
matter  as  a  personal  conflict  between  two 
parties,  in  which  the  one  had  triumphed  by 
destroying  the  other.  In  speaking  of  Koran 
and  his  company  as  the  "  people  of  the  Lord," 
tbey  meant  to  say  that  their  lives  were  as 
sacred  as  the  lives  of  Moses  and  Aaron,  and 
the  crime  of  taking  them  as  great ;  they  did 
not  know,  or  did  not  heed,  that  their  own 
immunity  was  due  to  the  intercession  of 
those  whom  they  thus  charged  with  sacrile- 
gious murder. 

Ver.  42. — The  clond  covered  it.  Not 
soaring  above  it,  as  usual,  but  lying  close 
down  upon  it,  to  signify  that  the  presence  of 
the  Lord  had  passed  in  some  special  sense 
into  the  tabernacle  (see  on  ch.  xii.  5,  10). 

Ver.  45. — Get  yon  up.  -IDin,  from  DD^. 
The  command  is  substantially  the  same  as 
that  in  ver.  21.  Since  it  was  not  obeyed,  we 
must  conclude  (as  before)  that  it  was  not  in- 
tended to  be  obeyed.  They  fell  on  their 
faces.  In  horror  and  dismay.  No  doubt 
they  would  have  interceded  (as  in  ver.  22), 
but  that  Moses  perceived  through  some 
Divine  intimation  that  wrath  had  gone 
forth,  and  that  some  more  prevailing  form 
of  mediation  than  mere  words  must  be 
sought. 

Ver.  46. — ^Take  a  censer.  Eather,  "the 
censer,"  i.  e.  the  proper  censer  of  the  high 
priest,  which  he  used  upon  the  great  day  of 
atonement  (Levit.  xvi.  12),  and  which  is 
said  in  Heb.  ix.  4  to  have  been  of  gold,  and 
to  have  been  kept  in  the  most  holy  place. 
It  is  not,  however,  mentioned  amongst  the 
sacred  furniture  in  the  Levitical  books.    And 

go  quickly.  iVlH.  Rather,  "take  it  quickly.'' 
And  make  an  atonement  for  them.  There 
was  no  precedent  for  making  an  incense 
offering  after  this  fashion,  but  it  was  on  the 
analogy  of  the  rite  performed  within  th« 


tabernacle  on  the  day  of  atonement  (Levit. 
xvi.).  Whether  Moses  received  any  intimation 
that  the  wrath  might  be  thus  averted,  or 
whether  it  was  the  daring  thought  of  a 
devoted  heart  when  all  else  failed,  it  is  im- 
possible to  say.  As,  it  had  no  precedent,  so 
it  never  seems  to  have  been  repeated ;  nor  is 
the  name  or  idea  of  atonement  anywhere 
else  connected  with  the  offering  of  mcensa 
apart  from  the  shedding  of  blood. 

Ver.  48.— And  he  stood  between  the  dead 
and  the  living.  If  this  is  to  be  understood 
literally,  as  seems  most  consistent  with  the 
character  of  the  narrative,  then  the  plague 
must  have  been  strictly  local  in  its  character, 
striking  down  its  victims  in  one  quarter 
before  passing  on  to  another ;  only  thus 
could  it  be  arrested  by  the  actual  inter- 
position of  Aaron  with  the  smoking  censer. 
And  the  plague  was  stayed.  Thus  was 
given  to  the  people  the  most  striking  and 
public  proof  of  the  saving  efficacy  of  that 
mediatorial  and  intercessory  office  which  they 
had  been  ready  to  invade  and  to  reject. 
Thus  also  was  it  shown  that  what  in  profane 
hands  was  a  savour  of  death  unto  death, 
became  when  rightly  and  lawfully  used  a 
savour  of  life  unto  life. 

Ver.  49. — Fourteen  thonsand  and  seven 
hundred.  A  very  large  number  to  have  died 
in  the  course  of  a  few  minutes,  as  the  narra- 
tive seems  to  imply.  The  plague  was  un- 
doubtedly of  a  supernatural  character,  and 
cannot  bo  considered  as  a  pestilence  or  other 
natural  visitation.  Beside  them  that  died 
abont  the  matter  of  Eorah.  These  were  (1) 
the  two  hundred  and  fifty  men  who  offered 
incense,  (2)  Dathan  and  Abiram,  and  their 
families,  (3)  probably  Korah  himself,  (4) 
possibly  some  other  partisans  of  Korah  (see 
on  ver.  32),  making  m  all  about  300  souls. 
Thus  we  get  the  round  number  of  15,000  as 
the  total  of  those  that  perished  on  this 
occasion. 

Ver.  50. — And  the  plagne  was  stayed. 
Not  only  temporarily,  while  Aaron  stood 
between  the  dead  and  the  living,  but  finally 
and  effectually. 


S20  THE  BOOK  OF  NDMBEKS.  [ch.  xvi.  41—60. 


HOMILBTICS. 

Vers.  41 — 60. — The  priestly  atonement.  We  see  in  this  section  the  priesthood  of  the 
anointed  at  once  exercised  and  vindicated  in  the  fullest  and  highest  sense  by  shielding 
from  wrath  and  death  those  who  were  appointed  to  die  on  account  of  sin.  The  epiritusl 
meaning  so  far  and  so  plainly  eclipses  the  literal  that  we  might  well  suppose  th» 
passage  to  have  been  written  in  the  light  of  the  finished  work  of  Christ ;  as  it  ia, 
we  cannot  possibly  refuse  to  read  the  "  mind  of  the  Spirit "  testifying  before  of  the 
atonement  and  intercession  of  our  High  Priest.     Consider,  therefore — 

I.  That  wrath  had  gone  fobth  against  all  Israel  because  or  their  active 

OB  PASSIVE  participation  IN  REBELLION  AGAINST  THE  WILL  AND  ORDINANCE  OF  GoD. 

Even  so  had  wrath  gone  forth  against  all  mankind,  for  that  all  were  compromised 
(albeit  not  all  to  the  same  degree,  or  by  the  same  deliberate  choice)  in  sin  and 
rebellion  (Rom.  v.  12,  14 ;  xL  32 ;  Eph.  ii.  3). 

II.  That  Moses  did  not  even  attempt  to  pkay  at  this  time  for  Israel,  be- 
cause THE  sentence  WAS  GONE  FORTH,  AND  EVEN  HIS  PRAYER  HAD  BEEN  UNAVAILING. 

Even  SO,  however  much  the  intercessions  of  righteous  men  may  have  been  heard  in 
other  and  lesser  matters  (James  v,  16  6.),  yet  could  not  any  human  means  avail  to  turn 
aside  from  us  the  sentence  of  death  which  follows  upon  sin  (Gen.  ii.  17 ;  Ps.  xlix.  7, 8 ; 
Rom.  vi.  23 ;  vii.  24).  And  note  that  as  far  as  we  can  see  even  the  incarnate  Son 
had  not  saved  us  as  Lawgiver  and  Ruler  except  his  intercessions  had  been  based  upon 
his  meritorious  cross  and  passion.     Moses  must  give  place  to  Aaron  here. 

III.  That  the  plague  advanced  all  the  while  with  frightful  celerity. 
Even  so  sin  and  death  made  havoc  of  an  evil  world  ere  Christ  came  forth  to  stay  the 
plague  (Rom.  i. ;  iii. ;  v.).  And  still,  where  it  is  not  stayed,  its  progress  is  as  rapid  and 
as  irresistible  as  ever.     Thousands  are  daily  swept  away  to  destruction. 

IV.  That  the  febvbnt,  self-sacbifioinq  love  of  Moses  fob  his  people  (who 
HAD  opposed  and  bejected  him)  devised  this  new  remedy,  unknown  before. 
Even  so  it  was  the  infinite,  self-abasing  love  of  the  eternal  Son  which  devised  the 
means  of  our  salvation,  albeit  we  had  rebelled  against  him  and  cast  off  his  dominion 
(Ps.  ii.  2,  3,  12;  Luke  xix.  14;  John  iii.  16;  Acts  iii.  26;  Rom.  v.  8;  1  John 
iv.  10). 

V.  That  this  remedy  was  found  in  an  incense  offering  (1)  made  by  Aaron, 
(2)  m  THB  censer,  (3)  among  the  dying  people.  Even  so  the  one  Divine  deliver- 
ance from  eternal  death  is  (1)  in  the  high  priestly  intercession  of  Christ,  (2)  offered 
in  the  golden  censer  of  his  infinite  merits,  (3)  offered  "  in  the  midst  of  the  congre- 
gation," i.  e.  in  our  nature,  wherein  he  lived  and  died,  and  in  which  he  ever  livetli  to 
make  intercession  (Luke  xxiii.  34 ;  John  xvii.  19,  20 ;  Rom.  v.  9, 10 ;  Heb.  ii.  12 — 17 ; 
vii.  24,  25 ;  Rev.  viii.  3,  4t). 

VI.  That  the  incense  was  to  be  lighted  with  fire  from  off  the  altar  of 
burnt  offering,  otherwise  it  had  been  as  ineffectual  for  good  as  the  offering  of 
Nadab  and  Abihu  (Levit.  x.  1).  Even  so  the  intercessions  of  Christ  whereby  we  live 
are  not  only  offered  as  of  his  infinite  merits,  but  as  based  upon  his  one  perfect  and 
sufScient  sacrifice.  It  is  fire  from  the  altar  of  the  cross  which  kindles  and  makes  to 
ascend  in  fragrance  his  "  much  incense  "  before  the  throne.  From  another  point  of 
view  it  is  the  burning  love  which  prompted  and  inspired  his  death  which  inspires 
and  kindles  his  unceasing  intercession  for  us. 

VII.  That  Aaron  ran  into  the  camp  to  make  an  atonement  for  the  people, 
KBGARDLESS  OF  ANY  DANGER  TO  HIMSELF.  Even  SO  Our  Lord  hasted  in  his  great  zeal 
to  expose  himself  to  all  danger  in  our  midst  in  order  to  work  out  our  salvation 
(Ps.  xl.  10;  Mark  x.  32;  Luke  xii.  50). 

VIII.  That  Aaron  stood  between  the  dead  and  the  living — all  on  one  side 
of  him  (as  it  should  seem)  dead,  all  on  the  other  side  alive,  through  his  intervention. 
Even  so  our  High  Priest  stands,  and  stands  alone,  between  us  and  death.  Nothing 
separates  us  from  the  eternally  lost  but  the  saving  efficacy  of  his  intercession ;  had 
he  not  appeared  upon  the  scene  we  too  had  perished.  Moreover,  he  stands  between 
the  living  and  the  dead  in  this  sense,  that  all  souls  are  divided  by  him  and  his  crosi 
into  two  lots,  the  living  who  accept,  the  dead  who  reject  him.    Thus  he  hung  between 


OH.  XVL  41—60.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS.  221 


the  penitent  and  impenitent  robbers,  and  thuB  he  will  place  the  goats  and  the  sheep 

on  the  one  side  of  him  and  on  the  other, 

IX.  That  the  plaque  was  stayed  by  Aaron's  iNTEBPosmoM  of  himself  between 
IT  AND  ITS  VICTIMS.  Even  so  Christ  has  averted  death  from  us,  and  taken  away  its 
sting,  by  placing  himself  between  it  and  us,  by  interposing  between  the  wrath  of 
Heaven  and  our  souls  (Eom.  vii.  25 ;  viiL  1).  And  so  long  as  we  are  sheltered  behind 
his  atonement  and  intercession  we  are  absolutely  safe. 

X.  That  Aaron,  after  making  an  atonement,  betitbnbd  to  thk  most  holt 
ILACB  WITH  HIS  CENSER  (cf.  Heb.  ix.  4).  Even  so  our  Lord,  after  making  atonement 
for  us  upon  the  cross,  and  breaking  the  empire  of  sin  and  death,  returned  to  that 
heaven  from  which  he  came,  leaving  us  free  from  the  power  of  death. 

XI.  That  this  was  the  qloriods  vindication  of  Aaron's  priestly  office,  in 

THAT  it  brought  LIFE  AND  DELIVERANCE  TO  THE  VERY  MEN  WHO  ILiD  DESPISED  AND 

SLANDERED  IT.  How  much  better  and  more  effectual  than  if  a  thousand  Eorahs 
had_  been  slain  by  reason  of  it  I  Even  so  the  true  vindication  of  the  priesthood  of 
Christ,  in  whatsoever  sense  or  bjr  whomsoever  assailed,  is  its  marvellous  and  ever- 
living  efficacy  for  the  healing  of  sinners,  and  for  their  salvation  from  spiritual  death. 
Those  that  are  ready  to  strive  against  it  to  the  uttermost  to-day  will  know  themselves 
beholden  to  it  for  life  and  liberty  to-morrow.  Whatever  belongs  to  the  priesthood 
of  Christ  must  here,  and  here  only,  find  its  defence  and  confirmation,  not  m  smiting 
down  them  that  oppose  themselves  (which  is  of  the  law  only),  but  in  saving  them 
from  the  fatal  consequences  of  their  own  sin  and  blindness  (which  is  of  the  gospel 
alone).  Cf.  Luke  ix.  66,  66  ;  John  xii.  47 ;  2  Cor.  x.  8 ;  xiii.  10 ;  GaL  L  23 ;  1  Tim. 
ii.  4. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  41—50. — The  priesthood  still  further  honoured  and  established.  I.  The 
PEOPLE  REMAIN  UNCHANGED  IN  HEART.  They  had  been  terrified  for  the  moment,  and 
fied  to  what  they  thought  a  safe  distance,  but  by  the  morrow  all  their  audacity  has 
returned.  It  would  seem  as  if  men  soon  become  accustomed  to  even  the  most  terrible 
visitations  of  God  ;  and  the  more  they  see  of  his  doings,  the  less  able  they  are  to 
understand  them.  There  was  a  time  when  such  destruction  as  they  had  gazed  on 
would  have  taught  them  caution  for  more  than  a  day,  but  now  a  day  is  quite  sufficient 
to  make  them  bolder  than  ever.  The  evidential  value  which  Moses  had  pointed  out 
in  vers.  28 — 30  is  quite  lost  upon  them.  Perverse  minds  disregard  the  clearest 
evidence.  It  may  be  a  good  thing  for  some  purposes  to  multiply  evidences  of 
Christianity,  but  if  the  whole  earth  were  filled  with  books  written  on  the  subject, 
many  would  remain  unconvinced.  The  conduct  of  these  people,  so  quickly  murmur- 
ing again,  may  seem  scarcely  credible  as  we  read  it,  yet  are  they  in  reality  worse 
than  unbelievers  now  ?  If  we  also  read  of  these  things  that  happened  to  Israel  of 
old,  and  are  not  in  the  least  impressed  by  them,  then  what  are  we  different  in  our 
folly  and  audacity  ?  The  lapse  of  more  than  three  thousand  years  has  not  made  God 
less  jealous  of  his  ordinances,  less  able  and  determined  to  punish  those  who  slight 
them.  Fearful  things  are  spoken  of  those  who  crucify  the  Son  of  God  afresh  and 
put  him  to  an  open  shame.  Instead  of  marvelling  at  Israel,  we  shall  do  well  to  see 
in  it,  as  in  a  mirror,  the  perversity,  blindness,  and  frivolity  of  the  natural  man  every- 
where. As  Israel  was,  so  are  we,  until  and  unless  God  puts  within  as  a  new  and 
different  life. 

XL  A  STILL  FURTHER  RECOGNITION  OF  THE  PRIESTLY  OFFICK.     One  18  not  astonished 

to  read  that  simultaneously  with  the  gathering  of  the  murmuring  people,  the  glory 
of  the  Lord  appeared  again.  Hitherto  there  has  been  some  little  interval,  some  time 
as  it  were  for  repentance,  but  now  along  with  this  high  pitch  of  audacity,  it  is  fitting 
that  the  revelation  of  the  glory  should  be  prompt,  and  prompt  also  the  vindication 
of  what  God  had  but  lately  done.  Once  again  he  warns  Moses  and  Aaron  out  of  the 
way  of  death.  And  now  what  can  Moses  do,  for  his  pleas  are  exhausted  ?  The 
people  have  gone  on  sinning,  nntil  at  last  the  ingenuity  of  his  pitying  heart  has 
nothing  left  to  say.  In  this  extremity  he  turns  where  all  must  turn  at  last,  namely, 
to  the  atonement  for  sin  which  God  has  solemnly  appointed.  Probably  in  the  first 
institution  of  the  priestly  office  be  did  net  comprehend  all  the  power  and  blessing  it 


2i2 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[oh.  XVII.  1—13. 


could  confer.  He  was  now  to  know,  and  Israel  with  him,  that  atonement  for  sin, 
made  through  the  appointed  o£Bcer,  had  a  most  certain  effect  in  destroying  some,  at 
least,  of  the  consequences  of  sin.  The  atonement  made  under  the  law  sets  forth  that 
more  efficacious  and  searching  atonement  lying  at  the  foundation  of  the  gospel,  but 
it  was  not,  therefore,  a  mere  form.  It  could  not  indeed  cleanse  the  conscience  or 
change  the  life,  but  it  was  effectual  to  keep  back  the  plague  that  brought  physical 
death.  In  the  light  of  the  honour  which  Gqd  here  puts  upon  his  priest,  and  the  real 
effect  produced  by  this  offering  for  sin,  how  clearly  we  see  the  real  effect  that  must 
come  from  the  work  of  Jesus !  If  Aaron,  the  feeble,  sinful  type,  could  do  so  much, 
how  much  more  we  are  bound  to  expect  from  Jesus,  the  sinless,  perfect  antitype  f 

in.  The  significance  of  Aaron  s  position.  He  stood  between  the  dead  tad 
the  living.  What  a  quickly  destntctive  power  sin  Acu  I  The  language  indicates  that 
Moses  and  Aaron  were  full  of  alacrity.  Not  a  moment  was  lost  in  interposing  the 
atoning  service,  but  even  so  more  than  fourteen  thousand  of  the  people  had  already 
perished.  The  connection  between  sin  and  death  is  very  close,  and  in  such  a  visita- 
tion as  this  the  closeness  is  made  very  clear.  It  may  seem  constantly  contradicted, 
that  in  the  day  men  eat  of  the  forbidden  fruit  they  shall  surely  die,  but  the  con- 
tradiction is  in  appearance  only.  In  the  sinful  act  death  is  begun,  and  if  God  so 
chooses,  its  full  power  may  be  very  quickly  manifested.  Thus  when  Aaron  went  in 
he  found  death  had  been  before  him,  and  he  had  to  stand  between  the  dead  and  the 
living.  It  was  from  the  dead  that  the  plague  passed  greedily  on  to  the  living,  like 
the  licking  fire  from  the  black  ruins  where  it  has  done  its  work  to  the  things  still 
unconsumed.  But  the  moment  Aaron  enters,  the  atonement  begins  to  work.  The 
very  fact  that  so  many  had  perished,  and  so  rapidly,  glorifies  the  eflScacy  of  his 
intervention.  Sin  is  then  at  once  in  check.  It  was  a  noble  position  for  the  priest 
to  occupy,  and  we  should  think  of  it  as  occupied  by  Jesus.  He  indeed  stands  between 
the  dead  and  the  living.  As  we  gaze  upon  those  wrecked  and  ruined  ones,  fast 
settled  in  despair,  and  beyond  any  succour  that  we  can  discern,  Christ  stands  be- 
tween us  and  them  to  give  assurance  that  vnth  him  there  ia  power  to  deliver  us  from 
such  a  fate.  It  is  his  great  and  glorious  power  to  deliver  us  from  death  by  giving 
to  us  a  new  and  higher  life,  and  giving  it  more  abundantly,  that  mortality  may  be 
tuxdlowed  up  of  life  (2  Cor.  v.  4). — Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEE  XVII. 


Aabon's  hod  that  budded  (vers.  1 — 13). 
Ver.  1. — And  the  Lord  spake.  Presumably 
upon  the  same  day,  since  the  design  was  to 
prevent  any  recurrence  of  the  sin  and  pun- 
ishment described  above. 

Ver.  2. — Take  of  every  one  of  them  a  rod. 
Literally,  "  take  of  them  a  rod,  a  rod,"  i.  e.  a 
rod  apiece,  in  the  way  immediately  particular- 
ised. HGD  (Septuagint,  pa^Sov)  is  used  for 
the  staff  of  Judah  (Gen.  xxxviii.  18)  and  for 
the  rod  of  Moses  (Exod.  iv.  2).  It  is  also  used 
in  the  sense  of  "  tribe  "  (ch.  i  4,  16).  Each 
tribe  was  but  a  branch,  or  rod,  out  of  the  stock 
of  Israel,  and,  therefore,  was  moat  naturally 
represented  by  the  rod  cut  from  the  tree.  The 
words  used  for  sceptre  in  Gen.  xlix.  10,  and  in 
Pa.  xlv.  7,  and  for  rod  in  Isa.  xi.  1,  and  else- 
where are  different,  but  the  same  imagery 
underlies  the  use  of  all  of  them.  Of  all  their 
princes  .  .  .  twelve  rods.  These  princes 
must  he  those  named  in  oh.  ii.  and  vii.  Since 
among  these  are  to  be  found  the  tribe  princes 
of  Ej^-aim  and  Mauasseh,  standing  upon  a 


perfect  equality  with  the  rest,  it  Is  evident 
that  the  twelve  rods  were  exclusive  of  that 
of  Aaron.  The  joining  together  of  Ephraim 
and  Manasseh  in  Deut.  zxvii  12  was  a  very 
different  thing,  because  it  could  not  raise 
any  question  as  between  the  two. 

Ver.  3. — Thou  shalt  write  Aaron's  name 
upon  the  rod  of  LevL  There  was  no  tribe 
prince  of  Levi,  audit  is  not  probable  thateithei 
of  the  three  chiefs  of  the  sub-tribes  (ch.  iii.  24, 
SO,  35)  was  called  upon  to  bring  a  rod.  Thif 
rod  was,  therefore,  provided  by  Moses  him- 
self, and  inscribed  by  him  with  the  name  of 
Aaron,  who  stood  by  Divine  appointment 
(so  recently  and  fearndly  attested)  above  all 
his  brethren.  For  the  significance  of  the 
act  cf.  Ezek.  xxxvii.  16 — 28.  For  one  rod 
.  .  for  the  head  of  the  house  of  their  fathers. 
For  Levi,  therefore,  there  must  be,  not  three 
rods  inscribed  with  the  names  of  the  chiefs, 
but  one  only  bearing  the  name  of  Aaron,  aa 
their  common  superior. 

Yer.  4.— The  tabernacle  of  the  congrega- 
tion. "The  tent  of  meeting."  See  on 
Exod.  XXX.  26.    Before  the  testimony,  i.  • 


OH.  XVII.  1 — 13.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES. 


223 


in  firont  of  the  ark  containing  the  two  tables 
of  the  law  (Exod.  xxv.  21). 

Yer.  6. — Whom  I  shall  choose.  For  the 
special  duty  and  service  of  the  priesthood 
(cf.  ch.  xvi.  5).  I  will  make  to  cease.  *?!^D 
'pbB'n.  I  will  cause  to  sink  so  that  they 
shall  not  rise  again. 

Yer.  6. — ^And  the  rod  of  Aaron  was  among 
the  rods.  As  there  was  no  prince  from  whom 
this  rod  could  have  come,  and  as  there  were 
twelve  rods  without  it,  this  must  mean  that 
Moses  did  not  keep  Aaron's  rod  separate 
(which  might  have  caused  suspicion),  but  let 
it  be  seen  amongst  the  others. 

Yer.  7. — ^Before  the  Lord,  i.  e.  in  front  of 
the  ark.  In  the  tabernacle  of  witness.  "In 
the  tent  of  the  testimony."    Tiiyn  ?r|i?3. 

Yer.  8.  —  Was  budded:  or  "sprouted." 
ni^.  And  yielded  almonds.  Eather,  "ma- 
tured almonds."  This  particular  rod  had 
been  cut  from  an  almond  tree,  and  it  would 
seem  probable  that  it  had  on  it  shoots  and 
flowers  and  fruit  at  once,  so  that  the  vari- 
ous stages  of  its  natural  growth  were  all 
exemplified  together.  The  almond  has  its 
Hebrew  name  Hp.B',  "awake,"  from  the  well- 
known  fact  of  its  being  the  first  of  all  trees 
to  awake  from  the  winter  sleep  of  nature, 
and  to  herald  the  vernal  resurrection  with 
its  conspicuous  show  of  snow-white  blossoms, 
which  even  anticipate  the  leaves  (cf.  Eccles. 
xii,  5).  Thus  the  "rod  of  an  almond- tree" 
(IpB'  7pO)  was  shown  to  the  prophet  Jere- 
miah (Jer.  i  11)  as  the  evident  symbol  of 
the  vigilant  haste  with  which  the  purposes 
of  God  were  to  be  developed  and  matured. 
It  is  possible  that  all  the  tribe  princes  had 
official  " rods"  of  the  almond-tree  to  denote 
their  watchful  alacrity  in  duty,  and  that 
these  were  the  rods  which  they  brought  to 
Moses.  In  any  case  the  flowering  and  fruit- 
ing of  Aaron's  rod,  while  it  was  an  imques- 
tionable  miracle  (for  if  not  a  miracle,  it  could 
only  have  been  a  disgraceful  imposture),  was 
a  ariiiitov  in  the  true  sense,  i.  e.  a  miracle 
which  was  also  a  parable.  Aaron's  rod  could 
no  more  blossom  and  fruit  by  nature  than 
any  of  the  others,  since  it  also  had  been 
severed  from  the  living  tree  ;  and  so  in  Aaron 
himself  was  no  more  power  or  goodness  than 
in  the  rest  of  IsraeL    But  ss  the  rod  germin- 


ated and  matured  its  fruit  by  the  power  of 
God,  supematuraUy  starting  and  accelerating 
the  natural  forces  of  vegetable  life,  even  so 
in  Aaron  the  grace  of  God  was  quick  and 
fruitful  to  put  forth,  not  the  signs  only  and 
promise  of  spiritual  gifts  and  energies,  but 
the  ripened  fruits  as  weU. 

Yer.  9. — And  took  every  man  his  rod.  So 
that  they  saw  for  themselves  that  their  rods 
remained  dry  and  barren  as  they  were  by 
nature,  while  Aaron's  had  been  made  to  live. 

Yer.  10.  —  Before  the  testimony.  By 
comparison  with  ver.  7  this  should  mean 
before  the  ark  in  which  the  "  testimony"  lay. 
In  Heb.  ix,  4,  however,  the  rod  is  said  to 
have  been  in  the  ark,  although  before  Solo- 
mon's time  it  had  disappeared  (1  Kings  viii. 
9).  We  may  suppose  that  after  it  had  been 
inspected  by  the  princes  it  was  deposited  for 
safer  preservation  and  easier  conveyance  in- 
side the  sacred  chest.  To  be  kept  for  a  token 
against  the  rebels.  Bather,  "against  the 
rebellious,"  literally,  "  children  of  rebellion  " 
(cf.  Eph.  ii.  2,  3).  It  could  only  serve  as  a 
token  as  long  as  it  retained  the  evidences  of 
having  sprouted  and  fruited,  either  miracu- 
lously in  a  fresh  state,  or  naturally  in  a 
withered  state.  As  a  fact,  however,  it  does 
not  appear  that  the  lesson  ever  needed  to  be 
learnt  again,  and  therefore  we  may  suppose 
that  the  rod  was  left  first  to  shrivel  with  age, 
and  then  to  be  lost  through  some  accident. 

Yer.  12. — ^And  the  children  of  Israel  spake 
unto  Hoses.  It  is  a  mistake  to  unite  these 
verses  specially  with  the  following  chapter, 
for  they  clearly  belong  to  the  story  of  Ko- 
lah's  rebellion,  although  not  particularly 
connected  with  the  miracle  of  the  rod.  These 
are  the  last  wailings  of  the  great  storm  which 
had  raged  against  Moses  and  Aaron,  which 
had  roared  so  loudly  and  angrily  at  its  height, 
which  was  now  sobbing  itself  out  in  the  petu- 
lant despair  of  defeated  and  disheartened 
men,  cowed  indeed,  but  not  convinced,  fear- 
ful to  offend,  yet  not  loving  to  obey. 

Ver.  13.  —  Shall  we  be  consumed  with 
dying  t  It  was  a  natural  question,  consider- 
ing all  that  had  happened ;  and  indeed  it 
could  only  be  answered  in  the  aflBrmative, 
for  their  sentence  was,  "  In  this  wilderness 
they  shall  be  consumed"  (oh.  xiv.  35).  But 
it  was  not  in  human  nature  that  they  should 
calmly  accept  theii  fate. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vera.  1 — 13.— The  sign  o/the  true  Priesthood.  In  this  chapter  we  have  the  testimony 

of  God  to  the  priesthood  of  his  Anointed  in  a  atiitiiov,  a  teaching  miracle,  setting  forth 
the  inner  and  hidden  troths  upon  which  the  exclusive  claims  of  that  priesthood  rest 
The  application,  according  to  what  has  been  set  forth  above,  is  governed  by  die  saying 
"  Aaronis  virga  rejloruit  im  Ghristo^    Consider,  therefore —  ' 

I,  That  the  "bod"  was  the  natural  symbol  of  bach  unit  in  th«  booi 


224  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBa  [oh.  xvn.  1—13. 

COBFORATX  or  IsBAEL,  and  was  therefore  synonymous  with  "  tribe ; "  for  each  tribe 
collectively,  as  represented  by  its  prince,  was  one  of  the  twelve  branches  which 
gprew  out  of  the  one  parent  stem  of  Israel.  Even  so  our  Lord  has  said,  "  1  am  the 
Vine,  ye  are  the  branches ; "  and  this  holds  good  whether  we  regard  the  individnsl 
Christian  as  a  unit  in  that  collective  whole  which  is  Christ  (1  Cor.  zii.  12),  or  the 
particular  Church  as  a  unit  in  that  same  whole  which  is  the  body  of  Christ  (1  Cor. 
xii.  27 ;  Eph.  i.  22,  23). 

II.  That  the  aluond  bod  had  a  bfeoiai.  sionificanob  fob  Aabon,  inasmuch  as 
it«  name  and  character  spake  of  vigilance  and  the  attribute  of  preventing  others 
both  in  promise  and  in  peif ormance.  Even  so  it  is  the  fitting  emblem  of  the  Bod  out 
of  the  stem  of  Jesse,  and  the  Branch  which  grew  out  of  his  roots ;  for  that  Branch 
was  "  beautiful  and  glorious  "  (Isa.  iv.  2)  when  all  the  other  trees  in  the  garden  of 
God  (Ezek.  xzxi.  9)  stood  dry  and  leafless,  and  there  was  no  sign  of  any  life  stirring 
nor  promise  of  any  fruit  coming.  Then  was  he  "awake,"  and  showed  the  pure 
beauty  of  a  perfect  life  before  the  eyes  of  men  (Luke  ii.  52 ;  iii.  22).  Even  ftiore  in 
his  resurrection  was  the  almond  rod  his  natural  symbol ;  for  then  indeed  he  had 
been  cut  ofE  from  the  stock  of  Israel,  from  the  natural  stem  out  of  which  he  grew, 
and  had  been  laid  in  the  dust  of  death,  and  had  seemed  to  be  withered  and  lifeless ; 
but  on  the  third  day  he  "  awoke  "  early  (Ps.  cviii.  2),  and  became  the  first-fruits  of 
them  that  slept,  anticipating  all  expectation,  and  pntting  forth  the  glorious  blossom 
of  life  and  immortality  (Cant.  ii.  10 — 13). 

III.  That  the  visible  confibmation  op  Aaron's  pbibsthood  in  the  type  was 
THE  BLOSSOMING  AND  FRUITING  OF  HIS  BOD.  Even  SO  our  Lord-ig  commended  unto 
us  beyond  all  cavil  as  the  High  Priest  of  our  profession  in  that  his  priesthood  is  ever 
adorned  with  the  buds  of  hope,  the  blossoms  of  beauty,  the  ripened  fruits  of  holy 
deeds,  such  as  always  and  everywhere  grow  out  of  that  priesthood  as  ministered 
among  us,  and  testify  to  its  enduring  vitality  and  energy,  whereas  no  such  resulfs 
follow  any  other  guide  and  redeemer  of  souls.  And  note  that  what  is  true  of  the 
priesthood  of  Christ  must  be  true,  in  a  secondary  sense,  of  all  ministries  of  grace 
claiming  rightly  to  be  such.  "  By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them,"  or  by  their 
absence  of  fruit.  If  they  really  live  and  blossom  into  purity  and  beauty,  and  ripen 
the  fruits  of  holy  and  devoted  deeds,  then  are  they  attested  by  God  to  be  ministries 
of  grace  indeed,  standing  in  vital  relation  to  the  only  priesthood  of  Christ.  Moreover, 
since  only  Aaron's  rod  can  blossom,  it  is  certain  that  every  true  grace  and  beauty  not 
of  earth  which  is  found  in  Christian  souls  and  lives  must  be  due  to  the  fruitful 
energy  of  "  Christ  in  us  "  through  the  Spirit. 

IV.  That  the  continued  vitality  and  fbuitfcinebs  of  the  bod  was  not  natubal, 
BUT  WAS  simply  due  TO  God's  POWER  FOLLOWING  HIS  ELECTION.  Even  SO  whatever 
energy  for  good  is  found  in  any  Christian  ministry,  whatever  grace  in  any  means  of 
grace,  is  assuredly  not  of  nature,  for  there  is  no  inherent  power  in  any  man  or  in 
any  outward  thing  to  communicate  spiritual  life  or  blessing.  It  is  only  the  Divine 
grace,  following  the  Divine  choice  of  the  agents  and  instruments  of  redeeming  love, 
which  can  make  them  or  their  ministry  of  any  real  efEect ;  it  is  not  they  who  can 
produce  any  change  for  the  better,  but  only  the  mighty  power  of  God  working  in 
them  and  through  them. 

V.  That  the  buds,  the  blossoms,  and  the  fruit  would  seem  to  havi  been  on 
THE  bod  all  at  once.  Even  so  in  the  history  and  course  of  Christianity  there  was 
no  slow  progression  towards  the  perfection  of  Christian  character  and  action.  The 
ripened  fruits  of  holy  living  were  put  forth  at  once  side  by  side  with  the  promise  of 
better  things  in  some,  and  with  the  beauty  of  early  piety  in  others.  And  so  it  is, 
•vherever  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come  are  at  work,  there  may  always  be  dis- 
cerned, apparently  from  the  first,  the  three  stages  of  growth  in  Christ.  What  the 
energy  of  the  Spirit  seems  to  ripen  at  once  in  some  happy  souls  seems  to  take  him 
many  years  to  bring  to  maturity  in  others,  even  if  maturity  be  ever  reached  in  this 
world.  Nevertheless,  the  bud  and  the  blossom  are  as  impossible  to  mere  nature  as 
the  fruit  itself. 

VI.  That  the  bod  which  budded  was  laid  dp  for  a  token  against  thb  BBBiLLiona 
Even  80  if  men  oppose  themselves  we  have  no  other  sign  but  this.  Pilate  asked  our 
Lord,  "  Wh»t  hast  thou  done  ?  "  and  i£  he  had  but  sought  the  answer  which  so  many 


OH.  xvn.  1—13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  226 

could  have  given  him,  he  had  not  condemned  the  Lord  of  glory.  "  By  their  fruits 
ye  shall  know  them,"  for  therehy  shall  they  he  judged  at  the  last  day.  Our  good 
works  then  are  the  credentials  of  our  creed  and  of  our  priesthood.  The  "  doctrine  " 
is  (and  must  he)  but  a  dry  rod  which  savours  only  of  rule  and  domination  in  the 
eyes  of  a  natural  man  unless  it  be  "  adorned "  with  these  fair  blossoms,  this 
substantial  fruit. 

VII.  That  the  Object  of  the  miraolb  was  ebpecialltto  convinobthe  people  fob 

THEIR  GOOD,  LEST  THEY  SHOULD  RUSH  AGAIN  UPON  DESTRUCTION  (ver.  10  6).      Even  SO 

it  is  the  will  of  God  that  the  witness  of  good  works  and  piety  come  abroad,  and  not 
that  men  "  keep  their  religion  to  themselves"  and  within  their  own  doors,  in  order 
that  prejudice  may  be  dispelled  and  souls  attracted  to  their  own  salvation  (Matt.  v. 
16;  IPet.  ii.  12). 

VIII.  That  the  sinful  people  charged  upon  the  law  of  God  the  fatal  con- 

aEQDBNCES  OF  THEIR  OWN   SIN,  AND  DESPAIRED  WHEN  THET  COULD  NO  LONGER   REBEL. 

Even  BO  do  men  complain  bitterly  of  their  misfortunes  when  they  reap  the  fruits  of 
their  own  wiUal  sin,  and  are  filled  with  an  amazed  despair  when  they  find  that  a 
man  must  really  reap  as  he  has  sown, 

IX.  That  tsb  tabernacle  and  priesthood,  which  should  have  been  a  safett 

AND  delight,  did  IN  TRUTH  BECOME  A  DANGER  AND  A  FEAR,  BECAUSE  THE  PEOPLE  WERE 

carnal.  Even  so  the  very  nearness  of  God  to  us  in  Christ  and  in  his  Church,  which 
is  the  glory  of  the  gospel  (2  Cor.  vi.  16),  is  fraught  with  fearful  dangers  to  them  that 
walk  unworthy  of  the  heavenly  calling  (Matt.  sod.  44  ;  2  Cor.  ii.  16, 16). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  8.^— The  budding  of  Aarmii  rod.  The  budding,  blossoming,  and  frnit> 
bearing  of  the  dry  stafE  of  ofSce  laid  by  Aaron  in  the  tabernacle,  signiiioant — 

I.  As  A  MIRACLE.  It  was  an  unmistakable  sign  of  God's  interposition  (such  a 
natural  impossibility  the  occasion  of  an  oath  among  the  heathen :  Homer's  'Iliad,' 
i.  233,  and  Virgil's  '  .fflneid,'  Xv.  206),  as  every  miracle  is, — on  behalf  of  his  serv- 
ant Aaron,  "  disallowed  indeed  of  men,  but  chosen  of  God," — and  in  condemna^ 
tion  of  "the  rebels."  Even  if  regarded  as  an  arbitrary  sign,  it  was  none  the  less 
sufScient.  God  required  that  the  niiracles  of  Moses /ler  ««  should  be  accepted  both 
by  the  sympathetic  Israelites  and  the  reluctant  Pharaoh  (Ezod.  iv.  1 — 8).  So  too 
did  our  Lord  (John  xiv.  11 ;  zv.  24).  This  miracle  permanent  so  long  as  the  rod 
existed.  And  all  miracles,  though  transitory,  of  permanent  value  as  proofs  of  the 
interposition  of  God  (Ezod.  iii.  14). 

II.  As  A  symbol.  1.  "The  almond  tree,  as  that  which  most  quickly  brings  forth 
blossoms  and  beautiful  fruit,  is  an  emblem  of  the  mighty  power  of  the  word  of  God, 
which  is  ever  fresh  and  unfailing  in  its  fulfilment"  (Jer.  i.  11, 12).  2.  A  sign  of 
the  permanent  vitality  of  God's  appointed  priesthood  as  "  an  everlasting  priesthood 
throughout  their  generations  "  (Ezod.  zl.  15).  3.  A  type  of  the  miraculous  attesta- 
tion of  the  unchangeable  priesthood  of  Christ.  God,  who  "  fulfils  himself  in  many 
ways,"  about,  hereafter,  to  replace  the  priesthood  of  Aaron  by  a  Priest  chosen  by  him- 
self, after  the  order  of  Melchizedee.  This  priesthood  attested  by  a  resurrection  (Acta 
xiii.  33 ;  Heb.  v.  9,  10),  of  which  the  resurrection  of  this  dead  tree  was  a  type.  And 
now  that  the  risen  Christ  is  in  the  holiest  place,  in  the  presence  of  God,  his  resur- 
rection and  reign  in  glory  are  signs  to  all  murmurers  of  his  appointment  as  the  one 
High  Priest  and  King,  who  "  shall  send  forth  the  rod  of  his  strength,"  and  reign  till  all 
enemies  are  placed  beneath  his  feet.-^F. 

Ver.  10. — The  two  brethren  amd  their  rods.  L  The  rod  of  Moses,  a  shepherd's 
staff,  a  commonplace  instrument,  changed  by  God's  power  into  "the  rod  Of  God" 
(Exod.  iv.  17),  "the  rod  of  his  strength."  (1)  For  the  conviction  of  Moses  himself 
(ibid.  iv.  1 — 6) ;  (2)  for  the  punishment  of  the  rebellious  (ibid.  vii.  20,  &c.) ;  (3) 
lor  the  deliverance  of  God's  servants  from  imminent  danger  (ibid.  ziv.  16,  26) ; 
(4)  for  the  supply  of  theit  most  urgent  wants  (ibid.  xvli.  6,  6) ;  (6)  for  the  con- 
quest of  f'leir  toes  {ibid.  Xvii.  9^'12).    Thus  God  makes  the  weakest  commonest 

HUUBERS.  % 


aS6  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  [ch.  xvn.  1—18. 

things  of  the  world  "mighty  through  God"  (1  Cor.  L  27 ;  2  Cor.  x.  4).    The  rod 
of  the  lowly  Jesus  is  "  a  rod  of  strength,"  or  "  of  iron"  (Pa,  ii  9  ;  ex.  2 ;  Isa.  xi.  4). 

II.  The  rod  of  Aaron,  a  tribal  sceptre,  a  symbol  of  power,  as  the  shepherd's  stafl 
was  not.  This  symbol  of  authority  used  for  remedial  and  spiritual  purposes.  (11 
For  the  confutation  of  presumptuous  upstarts ;  (2)  for  the  preservation  of  the  tempted 
from  further  sin  and  consequent  destruction  (ver.  10)  ;  (3)  for  a  type  of  the  &uit- 
fulness  of  every  institution  ordained  and  sustained  by  God.  See  further  under  ver. 
8.  Thus  God  makes  his  mightiest  power  the  means  of  attaining  spiritual  ends  for 
the  welfare  even  of  sinners.  "Christ  the  power  of  God"  is  "the  power  of  God 
unto  salvation."    The  "  Prince  "  is  also  the  "  Saviour  "  (Acts  v.  81).— P. 

Ters.  1 — ^9. — Aaron's  rod  thai  btidded.  The  priesthood  of  Aaron,  as  a  solemn 
reality,  and  no  mere  arrogant  pretence,  had  already  been  amply  shown.  It  had  been 
shown,  however,  in  a  way  which  left  behind  terrible  associations.  Those  who  im- 
pugned it  had  died  by  a  sudden  and  fearful  death.  And  though  the  priesthood 
appears  differently  when  it  becomes  the  means  of  staying  death  from  the  living, 
yet  even  this  was  not  sufficient  to  glorify  it  before  the  eyes  of  the  people.  These 
illustrations  of  its  validity  had  arisen  from  the  urgent  pressure  of  circumstances.  If 
the  people  had  not  sinned  against  God  by  despising  his  ordinance,  that  ordinance 
would  not  have  been  manifested  in  such  awful  power.  It  becomes  God  now  to 
glorify  the  priesthood  by  a  new  and  independent  testimony,  the  way  of  which  had 
been  prepared  by  the  judgments  they  had  lately  seen  and  suffered. 

I.  Aabon  IB  EQUALISED  WITH  THE  BEST.  He  had  been  equalised  before  in  voluntary 
humility  (ch.  xvi.  16,  17).  Now  the  thing  is  specially  commanded.  Aaron  is  taken 
•8  a  simple  member  of  the  tribe  of  Levi,  and  Levi  itself  is  considered  as  but  one  ot 
the  tribes  of  Israel.  Thus  to  any  one  disposed  to  complain  of  Aaron  exalting  him- 
■elf,  God,  as  it  were,  gave  for  answer:  "Aaron  does  not  exalt  himself;  he  is 
nothing  more  than  any  of  you.  Let  there  be  a  rod  for  each  of  the  tribes,  and  nothing 
to  make  his  better  than  the  rest  It  shall  then  be  made  manifest  that  whatever  his 
power,  his  holiness,  his  honour,  they  do  not  come  from  anything  inherent  in  himself 
•8  a  simple  Israelite."  And  so  in  a  certain  sense  Jesus  was  equalised  with  men 
(Philip,  ii.  6 — 8).  He  grew  to  manhood  among  the  poor  and  lowly.  He  had  been  so 
like  the  rest  of  the  simple  Nazarenes  in  outward  form,  so  unpretending,  so  little  fitted 
to  excite  attention  and  wonderment,  that  his  brethren  did  not  believe  in  him.  There 
was  everything  in  him  but  sin  to  show  his  community  with  men.  He  became  in  all 
things  like  his  brethren ;  and  one  of  the  results  of  this  full,  demonstrative  humanity 
is  to  make  clear  how  highly  God  exalted  him  (Philip,  ii.  9 — 11) 

IL  The  objects  taken  to  represent  the  tribes  once  had  life  in  them.  They  were 
not  stones  of  the  wilderness  which  God  was  about  to  turn  into  living,  fruitful  branches. 
The  work  was  one  of  restoration,  not  of  creation  altogether  fresh  and  original.'  But 
for  sin,  all  these  Israelites,  Aaron  included,  would  have  been  like  branches,  full  of 
beautiful  and  fruitful  life  rejoicing  in  God's  presence,  instead  of  being,  as  they  were, 
dead  to  him,  alive  to  sin.  These  rods,  were  significant /or  their  past  as  well  as  their 
future.  The  Israelites ,  used  these  rods  doubtless  for  some  purpose  to  which  dead 
wood  could  be  put,  and  thinking  nothing  of  the  life  that  had  once  been  in  them. 
Dead  wood  is  useful,  but  the  state  and  service  are  low  as  compared  with  those  of  the 
living  tree.  So  Israel  was  now  in  an  utterly  humiliated  state,  quite  ignorant  and 
careless  as  to  the  glory  and  joy  of  man's  first  unfallen  days.  These  tribes  were  now 
as  dead  rods,  but  if  all  had  gone  according  to  the  original  purpose,  they  would  have 
been  as  living,  fruitful  branches.  It  is  part  of  the  priestly  office  of  Christ  to  bring 
back  that  which  is  lost,  and  to  swallow  up  in  a  new  and  glorious  creation  the  ruin 
that  has  befallen  the  old  one. 

III.  Hence  the  capacity  of  restoeation  is  indicated  to  the  people.  Ask  an 
Israelite  if  a  rod,  a  dead,  sapless,  long-separated  branch,  shall  live  again,  he  will  reply, 
"  No."  In  one  sense  he  is  right,  for  such  a  thing  is  outside  of  his  experience ;  in 
another  sense  he  is  wrong,  as  not  knowing  the  power  of  God.  Aaron's  rod  alons 
lived,  but  it  is  plain  that  the  same  power  which  revived  it  could  have  acted  on  the 
rest  with  a  like  result.  When  Jesus  was  raised  from  the  dead,  this  was  an  indication 
that  all  dead  ones  might  come  back  to  life.     "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also  " 


OH.  xm.  1— IS.]  THB  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  8fl 

(John  xiv.  19).  The  veiy  descent  of  Aaron  to  an  equality  with  the  rest  implied  a 
poBsihility  that  they  might  ascend  to  an  equality  with  him.  The  risen  Saviour  in 
the  glory  of  his  heavenly  life  is  the  first-born  among  many  brethren.  Aaron  became 
different  from  the  rest  in  order  that  by  his  difference  he  might  draw  the  rest  nearer 
to  G-od.    The  rod  budded  for  the  benefit  of  the  rods  that  remained  dead. 

IV.,  Theke  is  an  anticipation  of  the  slower  pbocesses  of  nattjrb.  Not  only 
is  dead  wood  restored  to  life,  but  the  life  rushes  forward  into  fruit.  In  the  Lord's 
hand  the  work  of  all  seasons  can  be  done  in  a  night.  Buds,  blossoms,  and  fruit  at 
the  same  time  I  What  a  fulness  of  life  this  indicates  I  By  thus  combining  in  one 
example  three  stages  of  plant  life,  God  shows  the  power  of  the  priest's  office.  There 
was  not  only  promise,  but  performance.  It  would  have  been  a  work  of  God  to  show 
just  peeping  buds ;  but  the  work  of  God  here  is  to  show  life  in  its  fulness.  It  was 
the  clamour  of  the  people  that  nothing  more  than  empty  promise  had  been  got  out 
of  Moses.  They  had  lately  learned  that  Aaron's  office  was  full  of  worth  by  his  pro- 
tecting atonement  as  against  the  plague.  Now  in  this  budding,  blossoming,  fruit- 
bearing  rod  they  see  both  promise  and  performance.  He  who  makes  the  rod  bud  ia 
thereby  promising;  he  who  makes  it  blossom  is  drawing  onward  in  increased  hope; 
but  he  who  also  makes  it  yield  fruit  shows  that  he  can  perform  as  well  as  promise. 
So  may  we  think  of  Jesus.  Consider  the  multitudes  for  whom  and  in  whom  his 
priestly  work  is  being  done.  They  are  in  different  stages.  With  some  the  bud,  with 
some  the  blossom,  with  some  the  ripened,  fragrant  fruit.  It  needed  that  all  stages 
should  be  shown  in  the  life  of  the  typifying  rod. 

V.  The  usual  aids  of  nature,  the  aids  commonly  counted  necessary,  abb 
DISPENSED  WITH.  There  is  no  planting  of  the  rods  in  the  soil,  no  exposure  to  the 
sunshine  and  the  rain.  God,  who  usually  works  through  many  combined  ministries, 
and  shows  man  the  blessed  fellow-worker  with  himself,  finds  it  fitting  here,  for  his 
glory,  and  for  the  full  manifestation  of  the  truth,  to  set  all  customary  ministries  on 
one  side.  If  usually  there  are  all  these  aids,  it  is  because  of*  what  is  fitting,  not  of 
what  is  indispensably  needed.  Nothing  is  needed  but  to  lay  the  rods  in  the  tabernacle, 
before  the  testimony.  Thus  we  see  how  far  from  any  human  choice,  contrivance,  or 
control  was  the  budding  of  this  rod.  The  result  was  from  God's  secret  power,  and 
that  alone.  Thereby  he  invested  Aaron  and  the  ark  and  every  priestly  function  with 
fresh  importance.  Henceforth  we  look  upon  Aaron  not  only  as  one  who  keeps  back 
death  from  the  living,  but  who  has  to  do  with  the  giving  back  of  life  to  the  dead. 
When  this  rod  was  formerly  on  the  tree  it  did  not  live  after  this  glorious  fashion. 
There  was  life,  but  not  in  such  exaltation  and  abundance.  This  rod  was  known 
henceforth  not  after  its  first  life,  but  its  second.  So  now  we  know  Christ  not  after 
the  flesh,  but  after  the  spirit ;  not  according  to  those  first  works,  in  curing  the  sick, 
assuaging  temporal  sorrows,  or  even  bringing  back  Lazarus  to  continue  awhile  longer 
his  mortal  life,  but  according  to  those  second  works  by  which  he,  the  chosen  and 
only  mediatorial  channel  of  them,  saves,  sanctifies,  and  perfects  those  who  come  to 
God  through  him.  If  this  marvellous  rod  so  glorified  Aaron,  and  stopped  the  mur- 
murings  of  the  people,  should  it  not  have  some  effect,  rightly  and  repeatedly  con- 
sidered, in  glorifying  Jesus,  and  bringing  us  closer  to  him  in  humble  acceptance  and 
faith.  The  murmuring  of  the  Israelites  was  a  great  evil,  but  our  neglect  of  that 
gracious  Intercessor  whom  God  has  appointed  is  not  one  whit  better. — Y. 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XVin. 

Status  and  revenues  of  priests  and 
Lbvitbs  (vers.  1 — 32).  Ver.  1. — The  lord 
■pake  unto  Aaron.  This  clear  and  compre- 
hensive instruction  as  to  the  position  and 
support  of  the  sons  of  Aaron  on  the  one  hand, 
and  of  the  Levites  on  the  other,  may  very 
naturally  have  been  given  in  connection  with 
tht  eranta  jnat  namted.    There  is,  however. 


no  direct  reference  to  those  events,  and  it  is 
quite  possible  that  the  only  connection  was 
one  of  subject-matter  in  the  mind  of  the 
writer.  That  the  regulations  which  fbllow 
were  addressed  to  Aaron  directly  is  a  thing 
unusual,  and  indeed  unexampled.  Tlie  ever- 
recurring  statement  elsewhere  is,  "  the  Lord 
spake  unto  Moses,"  varied  occasionally  by 
"the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  and  nnta 
Aaron  "  (as  in  eh.  iL  1 ;  iv.  1 ;  ziz.  1) ;  but 


(28 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[cH.  xvin.  1— S2. 


eTen  where   the  sammniiication  refers   to 
things   wholly  and   peculiarly  within   the 
province  of  Aaron,  it  is  usually  made  to 
Moses,  and  only  through  him  to  his  brother 
(see  «.  g.  ch.  viii.  1 — 3).    This  change  in  the 
form  of  the  message  may  point  to  a  later 
date,  i.  e.  to  a  time  subsequent  to  the  gain- 
saying of  Eorah,  when  the  separate  position 
of  Aaron  as  the  head  of  a  priestly  caste  was 
more  fully  recognised  than  before,  and  he 
himself  somewhat  less  under  the  shadow  of 
his  greater  brother.     Thou  and  thy  sons  and 
thy  father's  house  with  thee  shall  bear  the 
iniquity  of  the  sanctuary.     Aaron's  father's 
house,  according  to  the  analogy  of  ch.  ivii. 
2,  8,  6,  was  the  sub-tribe  of  the  Kohathites, 
and  these  had  charge  (to  the  exclusion  of  the 
other  Levites)  of  the  sanctuary,  or  rather 
ncred    things  (^'^i?^n,  as  in  ch.   z.   21. 
Septuagint,  r&v  ayiuiv).     See  on  ch.  iv.  16. 
This  mention  of  the  Kohathites  in  connection 
with  the  sanctuary  is  an  incidental  proof 
that  these  instructions  were  given  in  view  of 
the  wanderings  in  the  wilderness,  for  after 
the  settlement  in  Canaan  no  Levites  (as  such) 
came  into  contact  with  the  sacred  furniture. 
It  is  not  easy  to  define  exactly  the  meaning 
of  "shall  bear  the  iniquity  (^HJ■n^5  -IN^n) 
of  the  sanctuary."    The  general  sense  of  the 
phrase  is,  "  to  be  responsible  for  the  iniquity," 
».  e.  for  anything  which  caused  displeasure  in 
the  eyes  of  God,   "  in  connection  with  the 
sacred  things  and  the  service  of  them ; " 
hence  it  meant  either  to  be  responsible  for 
such  iniquity,  as  being  held  accountable  for 
it,  and  having  to  endure  the  penalty,  or  as 
being  permitted  and  enabled  to  take  such 
accountability  on  oneself,  and  so  discharge 
it  from  others.     This  double  sense  is  exactly 
reflected  in  the  Greek  word  a'puv,  as  applied 
to  our  Lord  (John  i.  29).     I'he  priests,  there- 
fore (and  the  Kohathites,  so  far  as  they  had 
aiiylhing  to  do  with  the  sanctuary),  were 
responsible  for  all  the  nnholiness  attaching 
or  accruing  to  it,  not  only  by  reason  of  all 
offences  committed  by  themselves,  but  by 
reason  of  that  imperfection  which  clung  to 
them  at  the  best,  and  made  them  unworthy 
to  handle  the  things  of  God.     In  a  further 
and  deeper  sense  they  might  be  said  to  be 
vicariously  responsible  for  all  the  iniquity  of 
all  Israel,  so  far  as  the  taint  of  it  aflFeoted  the 
very  sanctuary  (see  on  Exod.   xxviii.   38 ; 
Levit.  xvi.  16).    The  iniquity  of  your  priest- 
hood.    The  responsibility  not  only  for  all 
sinful  acts  of  omission  and  commission  in 
Divine  service    (such  as   those   of   Nadab 
and  Abihu,  and  of  Korah),  but  for  all  the 
inevitable  failure  of  personal  holiness  on  the 
part  of  those  who  mmistered  unto  the  Lord. 
This  responsibility  was  emphatically  recog- 
aised  and  provided  for  in  tha  rites  of  the 
great  day  of  Atonement. 


Ver.  2. — Thy  brethren  also  of  the  tribo 
of  Levi  The  Levites  generally,  as  dis- 
tinguished from  the  Kohathites  in  particulir 
(see  on  ch.  iii.).    That  they  may  be  joined 

unto  thee.  ■1^^'')>  a  play  npon  the  name 
Levi  (see  on  Gen.  xxix.  31).  But  thou  and 
thy  sons  with  thee  shall  minister  before 
the  tabernacle  of  witness.  The  Hebrew  has 
only  IJJp^  I'P^'I  flJJf?!)  which  may  be  ren- 
dered, "And  thou  and  thy  sons  with  thee 
(shall  be),"  &c.,  or  more  naturally  read  with 
what  goes  before,  "that  they  may  minister 
unto  thee ;  both  thee  and  thy  sons  with 
thee,"  &c.  The  Septuagintand  theTargnms 
appear  to  favour  the  former  rendering,  but 
it  is  not  evident  what  distinction  could  be 
drawn  between  priests  and  Levites  as  to  the 
mere  fact  of  being  before  the  tabernacle. 

Ver.  3. — They  shall  keep  thy  charge,  &c. 
See  on  ch.  iii.  7,  8.  That  neither  they,  nor 
ye  also,  die.  "This  warning  does  not  seem 
to  refer  to  the  danger  of  the  Kohathites 
seeing  the  sacred  things  (ch.  iv.  15),  but  of 
the  other  Levites  coming  near  them ;  the 
further  warning,  "nor  ye  also,"  is  added 
because  if  the  carelessness  or  profanity  ot 
the  priest  led  to  sacrilege  and  death  in  the 
case  of  the  Levite,  it  would  be  laid  to  his 
charge  (cf.  ch.  iv.  18). 

Ver.  4. — A  stranger.    1J»<.e.  one  not  a 

Levite,  as  in  ch.  i.  51. 

Ver.  5. — That  there  be  no  wrath  any  more 
upon  the  children  of  Israel.  As  there  had 
been  in  the  case  of  Korah  and  his  company, 
and  of  the  many  thousands  who  had  fallen  in 
consequence. 

Ver.  6. — I  have  taken  your  brethren  the 
Levites.    See  on  ch.  iii.  9  ;  viii.  19. 

Ver.  7. — Shall  keep  your  priests'  oflSco 
for  everything  of  the  altar,  and  within  the 
vail.  That  the  Levites  were  made  over  to 
Aaron  and  his  sons  to  relieve  them  of  a  great 
part  of  the  mere  routine  and  drudgery  of 
their  service  was  to  be  with  them  an  ad- 
ditional and  powerful  motive  for  doing  their 
priestly  work  so  reverently  and  watchfully 
as  to  leave  no  excuse  for  sacrilegious  intru- 
sion. The  altar  (of  burnt  offering)  and 
"that  within  the  vail  '  (cf.  Heb.  vi.  19) 
were  the  two  points  between  which  the 
exclusive  duties  of  the  priesthood  lay,  in- 
cluding the  service  of  the  holy  place.  A 
service  of  gift  A  service  which  was  not  to 
be  regarded  as  a  burden,  or  a  misfortune,  or 
as  a  natural  heritage  and  accident  of  birth, 
but  to  be  received  and  cherished  as  a  favour 
accorded  to  them  by  the  goodness  of  God. 

Ver.  8. — And  the  lord  spake  unto  Aaron. 
The  charge  and  responsibility  of  the  priesti 
having  been  declared,  the  provision  for  their 
maintenance  is  now  to  be  set  forth.  The 
charge,    ri'il^^,  ■■  in  ,T«r.  S,  4o. ;  but 


CH.  XVIII.  1—32.] 


THE  BOOK  or  NUMBEB& 


here  it  means  "the  keeping"  for  their  own 
use  (cf.  £xod.  ziL  6).  Uine  heave  offering!, 
^Qu4^J[l.  The  possessive  pronoun  marks  the 
fact  that  these  did  not  belong  to  the  priest 
in  the  first  instance,  although  they  naturally 
came  to  be  looked  on  as  hu  perquisites  (c£ 
1  Sam.  ii.  16),  but  were  a  gift  to  him  from 
the  Lord  out  of  whatthe  people  had  dedicated. 
The  word  terumoth  must  here  be  under- 
stood in  its  widest  sense,  as  including  every- 
thing which  the  Israelites  dedicated  or 
"lifted"  of  all  their  possessions,  so  far  as 
these  were  not  destroyed  in  the  act  of  offer- 
ing. Of  all  the  hallowed  things.  The 
genitive  of  identity:  "consisting  of  all  the 
hallowed  things."  By  reason  of  the  anoint- 
ing. Rather,  "for  a  portion,"  nrilfD^  (see 
on  Levit.  vii.  36).  The  Septuagint  has  Wf 
yipas,  "as  an  honour,'  OTpeeulium. 

Ver.  9.— Reserved  firom  fire,  i.e.  from  the 
sacrificial  altar.  Every  oblation  of  theirs. 
As  specified  in  the  following  clauses.  The 
burnt  offering  is  not  mentioned  because  it 
was  wholly  consumed,  and  only  the  skin  fell 
to  the  priest.  The  sin  offerings  for  the  priest 
or  for  the  congregation  were  also  vuoUy 
consumed  (Levit.  iv.  12,  21),  but  the  sin 
offerings  of  private  individuals,  although  in 
no  case  partaken  of  by  the  offerers,  were 
available  for  the  priests  (Levit,  vi.  26),  and 
this  was  the  ordinary  case. 

Ver.  10. — In  the  most  holy  place  thou 
■halt  eat  it.  D''B'j?'3r!  i^^p^.  Septuagint, 
If  T^  iy^V  ^i^^  ayiuv.  This  expression  ia 
somewhat  perplexing,  because  it  stands  com- 
monly for  the  holy  of  holies  (Exod.  xxvi 
83).  As  it  cannot  possibly  have  that  mean- 
ing hero,  two  interpretations  have  been  pro- 
posed. 1.  That  it  means  the  court  of  the 
tabernacle,  called  "  the  holy  place  "  in  Levit. 
vi.  16,  26  ;  vii.  6,  and  there  specified  as  the 
only  place  in  which  the  meat  offerings,  the 
^in  offerings,  and  trespass  offerings  might 
be  eaten.  There  is  no  reason  why  this  court 
should  not  be  called  "most  holy,"  as  well 
as  "holy,"  if  it  was  "holy  "with  respect 
to  the  camp,  or  the  holy  city,  it  was  "  most 
holy  "  with  respect  to  all  without  the  camp, 
or  without  the  gate.  2.  That  the  expression 
does  not  mean  "  in  the  most  holy  place," 
but  "amongst  the  most  holy  things,"  aa  it 
does  in  ch.  iv.  4,  and  above  in  ver.  9.  A 
distinction  is  clearly  intended  between  the 
"  most  holy  things,"  which  only  the  priests 
and  their  sons  might  eat,  and  the  "holy 
things,"  of  which  the  rest  of  their  families 
might  partake  also.  It  is  difficult  to  decide 
between  these  renderings,  although  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  "most  holy" 
things  we're  actually  to  be  consumed  within 
the  tabernacle  precincts. 

Ver.  11. — And  this  is  thine.  Here  be- 
gins a  second  list  of  holy  gifts  which  might 


be_  eaten  at  home  by  all  members  of  tke 
priestly  families  who  were  clean;  they  in- 
cluded (1)  all  wave  offerings,  especially  the 
wave  breast  and  heave  shoulder  of  the  peace 
offerings ;  (2)  all  first-fruits  of  every  kind ; 
(8)  all  that  was  devoted ;  (4)  all  the  first- 
bom,  or  their  substitutes.  The  first  and 
third  must  have  been  very  variable  in  amount, 
but  the  second  and  fourth,  if  honestly  ren- 
dered, must  have  brought  in  a  vast  amount 
both  of  produce  and  of  revenue.  With  all 
the  wave  offerings.  Eather,  "in  all  the 
wave  offerings,"  as  in  ver.  8. 

Ver.  12.— All  the  beet  Literally,  "all 
the  fat "  (cf.  Gen.  xlv.  18), 

Ver.  14.— Everything  devoted.  ff^D'?- 
Septuagint,  irav  avaredf/iarw/iEvoi',  all  deo- 
dands,  or  things  vowed  (see  on  Levit. 
xxvii.  28). 

Ver.  16. — ^From  a  month  old.  Literally, 
"from  the  monthly  child,"  as  soon  as  they 
reach  the  age  of  one  month.  According  to 
thine  estimation.  See  on  Levit.  v.  16 ; 
xxvii.  2 — 7.  It  would  seem  that  the  priest  was 
to  make  the  valuation  for  the  people,  since 
each  first-bom  or  firstling  was  separately 
claimed  by  God,  and  had  to  be  separately  re- 
deemed; but  at  the  same  time,  to  prevent  ex- 
tortion, the  sum  which  the  priest  might  assess 
was  fixed  by  God.  For  the  money  of  five 
shekels.  About  seventeen  shillings  of  our 
money  (see  ch.  iiL  47).  It  is  extremely  diffi- 
cult to  estimate  the  number  of  first-bom, 
but  it  ia  evident  that  in  any  case  a  large 
income  must  have  accrued  to  the  priests  in 
this  way,  'No  value  is  here  set  upon  the 
firstlings  of  unclean  beasts;  in  the  most 
usual  case,  that  of  the  ass,  the  rule  had  been 
laid  down  in  Exod.  xiii  18 ;  and  in  other 
cases  it  was  apparently  left  to  the  discretion 
of  the  priests,  subject  to  the  right  of  the 
owner,  if  he  saw  fit,  to  destroy  the  animal 
rather  than  pay  for  it  (see  Levit.  xxvii  27). 

Ver.  17. — But  the  firstling  of  a  eov,  &c. 
Only  those  things  which  were  not  available 
for  sacrifice  could  be  redeemed ;  the  rest  must 
be  offered  to  him  that  claimed  them.  The 
first-born  of  men  belonged  partially  to  both 
classes :  on  the  one  hand,  they  could  not  be 
sacrificed,  and  therefore  were  redeemed  with 
money;  on  the  other  hand,  they  could  be 
dedicated  (being  clean),  and  therefore  had 
been  exchanged  for  the  Levites. 

Ver,  18.— The  flesh  of  them  shall  be 
thine,  as  the  wave  breast  and  as  the  right 
shoulder  are  thine.  This  is  on  the  face  of 
it  inconsistent  with  the  direction  given  in 
Deut.  XV.  19,  20,  that  the  flesh  of  the  first- 
lings should  be  eaten  by  the  offerers  in  the 
holy  place  (cf.  also  Deut.  xii.  17,  18).  Two 
explanations  have  been  proposed.  1.  That 
the  firstlings  were  given  to  the  priest  in  the 
same  sense  as  the  peace  offerings,  i,e.  only 
as  regarded  the  breast  and  shoulder,  while 


290 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS. 


[CB.  XTin.  1—82. 


the  rest  went  to  the  offerer.  This,  however, 
does  obvious  violence  to  the  language,  and 
is  not  supported  by  the  Septuagint  2.  That 
as  the  priest  was  bound  to  consume  the  first- 
lings with  his  family,  and  could  not  sell 
them,  he  would  be  certainly  disposed  to  in- 
vite the  offerer  to  join  hiirn  in  the  sacred 
meal.  This  may  have  been  usually  the  case, 
but  it  was  entirely  within  the  option  of  the 
the  priest,  and  could  scarcely  be  made  the 
basis  of  a  direct  command,  like  that  of  Deut. 
XV.  19,  stiU  less  of  an  indirect  assumption, 
like  that  of  Deut.  xii.  17,  18,  that  the  first- 
lings stood  upon  the  same  footing  as  free-will 
offerings  and  heave  offerings.  It  is  easier  to 
suppose  that  the  law  was  actually  modified 
in  this,  as  in  some  other  particulars. 

Ver.  19.— All  the  heave  offerings  of  th« 
holy  things.  Those,  viz.,  enumerated  from 
ver.  9.  It  is  a  covenant  of  salt  for  ever. 
Septuagint,  SiaBtixti  riXdj  aiwviov{c{.  2  Chron. 
ziii.  6).  Salt  was  the  natural  emblem  of 
that  which  is  incorruptible;  wherefore  a 
binding  alliance  was  (and  still  is)  made  by 
eating  bread  and  salt  together,  and  salt  was 
always  added  to  the  sacrifices  of  the  Lord 
(Levit.  ii.  13  ;  Mark  ix.  49). 

Ver.  20. — Thou  shalthave  no  inheritance 
in  their  land.  The  priests  had  of  necessity 
homes  wherein  to  live  when  not  on  duty, 
but  they  had  no  territory  of  their  own  in  the 
same  sense  as  Jews  of  other  tribes.  I  am 
thy  part  and  thine  inheritance.  Septuagint, 
syo)  fiipie  aov  xnl  KXtipovo/tia  aov.  This  is 
not  to  be  explained  away,  as  if  it  meant  only 
that  they  were  to  live  "  of  the  altar."  Just 
as  the  priests  (and  in  a  lesser  sense  all  the 
Levites)  were  the  special  possession  of  the 
Lord,  so  the  Lord  was  the  special  possession 
of  the  priests ;  and  inasmuch  as  all  the  whole 
earth  belonged  to  him,  the  portion  of  the 
priests  was,  potentially  in  all  cases,  actually 
for  those  who  were  capable  of  realising  it, 
infinitely  more  desirable  than  any  other  por- 
tion. The  spiritual  meaning  of  the  promise 
was  so  clearly  felt  that  it  was  constantly 
claimed  by  the  devout  in  Israel,  irrespective 
of  their  ecclesiastical  status  (cf.  Ps.  xvl  6 ; 
Lam.  iii.  24,  &c.). 

Ver.  21.— All  the  tenth.  The  tithe  of 
all  fruits  and  flocks  had  been  already  claimed 
absolutely  by  the  Lord  (Levit.  xxvii.  30,  32). 
It  is  probable  indeed  that  the  giving  of 
tithes  had  been  more  or  less  a  matter  of  obli- 
gation from  time  immemorial.  Abraham 
had  paid  them  on  one  memorable  occasion 
(Gen.  xiv.  20),  and  Jacob  had  vowed  them 
en  another  (Gen.  xxviii.  22).  From  this 
time  forth,  however,  the  tithes  were  formally 
assigned  to  the  maintenance  of  the  Levites, 
in  return  for  their  service. 
Ver.  22. — lest  they  hear  sin,  and  die. 

rMD^  ^W  na^.  Septuagint,  Xajiiiv  d/iap- 


Ttav  daviirq^i$poi>.  In  the  sense  of  incnrring 
Bin,  and  the  consequent  wrath  and  death. 

Ver.  23.— And  they  shall  bear  (Wt^'J)  theif 
iniquity.  The  Levites  were  to  take  the  re- 
sponsibility of  the  general  iniquity  so  far  as 
approach  to  the  tabernacle  was  concerned. 
They  have  no  inheritance.  Like  the  priests, 
they  had  homes  and  cities,  and  they  had 
pasturages  attached  to  these  cities,  but  no 
separate  territory. 

Ver.  24. — As  an  heave  offering'.  This 
means  nothing  more  than  an  "offering" 
apparently.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that 
any  rituu  was  observed  in  the  giving  of 
tithes. 

Ver.  25.  — And  the  Lord  spake  nnto  Hoses. 
This  part  of  the  instruction  alone  is  addressed 
to  Moses,  probably  because  it  determined  a 
question  as  between  priests  and  Levites  to 
me  advantage  of  the  former,  and  therefore 
would  not  have  come  well  from  Aaron. 

Ver.  26. — Ye  shall  offer  up  an  heave 
offering  of  it  for  the  lord,  even  a  tenth  part 
of  the  tithe.  Thus  the  principle  of  giving  a 
tenth  part  of  all  to  God  was  carried  out 
consistently  throughout  the  whole  of  his 
people. 

Ver.  28.— Te  shall  give  thereof  the  lord's 
heave  offering  to  Aaron  the'  priest.  The 
Levites  tithed  the  people,  the  priests  tithed 
the  Levites.  At  this  time  the  other  Israel- 
ites were  nearly  fifty  times  as  numerous  as 
the  Levites,  and  therefore  they  would  have 
been  exceptionally  well  provided  for.  It 
must  be  remembered,  however,  that  the 
Levites  would  naturally  increase  faster  than 
the  rest,  not  being  exposed  to  the  same 
dangers  ;  and  still  more  that  tithes  are  never 
paid  at  all  fully  or  generally,  even  when  of 
strict  legal  obligation.  A  glance  along  the 
history  of  Israel  after  the  conquest  will 
satisfy  us  that  at  no  time  could  the  people 
at  largo  be  trusted  to  pay  their  tithes,  unless 
it  were  during  the  ascendancy  of  the  Macca- 
bees, and  afterwards  under  the  influence  of 
the  Pharisees  (cf.  MaL  iii.  9,  10).  The 
Levites,  indeed,  appear  in  the  history  of 
Israel  as  the  reverse  of  an  opulent  or  influ- 
ential class.  It  was  no  doubt  much  easier 
forthe  sons  of  Aaron  to  obtain  their  tithes  from 
the  Levites ;  and  as  these  were  very  numerous 
in  proportion,  and  the  tithes  themselves  were 
only  a  part  of  their  revenues,  the  priests 
should  have  been,  and  in  later  times  cer- 
tainly were,  sufiiciently  rich.  If  they  were 
devout  they  no  doubt  spent  much  on  the 
service  of  the  altar  and  of  the  sanctuary. 

Ver.  30. — ^Thou  shalt  say  unto  them,  i.  e. 
to  the  Levites.  When  they  had  dedicated 
their  tithe' of  the  best-part,  the  rest  was  theirs 
exactly  as  if  they  had  grown  it  and  gathered 
it  themselves. 

Ver.  32.— Ye  shaU  bear  no  lis.     V}lj 


«.  XTtn.  1— S2.] 


THE  BOOS  OF  NUMBERS. 


m 


4KK>i;i'K^.  They  wonld  not  incnr  any  gnilty 
responsibility  by  enjoying  it  as  and  where 
they  pleased.  Neither  shall  ye  pollute  the 
holy  things  of  the  children  of  Israel,  lest 
ye  die.    Tlaa  seems  to  be  the  true  transla- 


tion, and  it  conveyed  a  final  warning.  Se« 
Levit.  TYii  2  for  one  very  obvious  way  in 
which  the  Levites  might  pollute  "holy 
things." 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 32. — Eesponstbilities  amd  privileges  of  God^s  servants.  We  have  in  this 
chapter,  spiritually,  the  status  of  those  who  are  itpelc  rif  &eif  and  ^oSXoi  'IijuoB  Xpurrov, 
as  being  the  inheritance  of  the  Lord,  and  (in  this  world)  "  having  nothing,  and  yet 
possessing  all  things."  Much  that  has  been  considered  under  the  head  of  chs.  iii.,  iv., 
and  viii.  is  applicable  here.     Consider,  therefore — 

I.  That  a  heavy  responsibility  weighed  upon  priest  and  Levite  in  respect 

OF  THE  SANOTUABY,  OF  WHICH  THEY  HAD  THE  CHARGE  AND  THE  HANDLING.  What- 
ever pollution  came  upon  it  was  chargeable  upon  them  in  the  double  sense,  (1)  that 
if  due  to  them,  they  should  suffer  for  it ;  (2)  that  whether  due  to  them  or  not,  they 
should  be  bound  to  purge  it  by  atonement.  Even  so  all  the  faithful  in  Christ  Jesus 
are  deeply  responsible  for  all  the  shame,  reproach,  and  disparagement  which  cornea 
upon  that  temple  which  is  themselves  (Bph.  ii.  22  ;  1  Tim.  iii.  15 ;  Heb.  iii.  6),  and 
that  in  the  following  senses: — 1.  So  far  as  such  evils  may  be  due  to  their  own  sin  or 
carelessness  (Matt,  xviii.  6,  7 ;  Rom.  xiv.  15, 16 ;  1  Cor.  x.  32 ;  2  Cor.  vi,  3  ;  1  Thess. 
V.  22).  2.  So  far  as  the  evil  can  be  undone  or  counteracted  by  their  own  piety  and 
zeal  (Matt.  v.  16 ;  Philip,  ii  16,  16 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  12).  3.  If  this  cannot  be,  then  at 
least  to  this  extent,  that  they  bear  it  on  their  heart  in  sorrow  and  in  prayer  (Ezek.  ix. 
4 ;  Dan.  ix.  20  ;  1  Cor.  xii.  25,  26  ;  2  Cor.  xi.  29).  Nothing  is  worse  than  the  com- 
placency with  which  Christians  regard  the  scandals  of  religion,  although  such  are 
often  due  in  part  to  themselves,  or  might  in  part  be  cured  by  their  own  efEorts,  or 
should  at  least  be  a  cause  of  inward  grief  and  humiliation  to  them  as  members  of 
Christ. 

II.  That  a  similar  responsibility  attached  to  the  priesthood  in  respect  to 

ALL  faults  and  IMPERFECTIONS  ATTENDING  ITS   EXERCISE.      Even  80  it  is   no   light 

or  trivial  thing  to  have  received  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,  making  us,  in 
any  sense  of  the  words,  priests  unto  God.  There  are  no  vain  titles  in  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  to  gratify  man's  love"  of  distinction ;  whatever  we  have  is  a  dispensation 
committed  unto  us  (1  Cor.  ix.  17) ;  any  ministry  ill  discharged,  made  a  scandal  or 
offence,  is  ruin  to  the  soul  (1  Cor.  iv.  2;  Col.  iv.  17;  1  Tim.  iv.  16;  Bev.  iii. 
2,  15,  16). 

III.  That  they  were  under  special  responsibility  to  watch  their  watch 

AND  OBSERVE  THE  DUTIES  OF  THEIR  OFFICE  ABOUT   THE   SANCTUARY  AND  THE  ALTAR, 

lest  wrath  should  come  upon  the  people.  Even  so  the  custodians  of  Divine  truth 
are  under  special  obligation  to  guard  most  carefully  and  reverently  the  two  doctrines 
of  Jesus  in  heaven  ("that  within  the  vail,"  Eeb.  vi.  19,  20)  and  of  Jesus  upon  the 
cross  {ibid.  ix.  14),  lest,  either  being  tampered  with,  damage  should  accrue  to  the>  souls 
of  men. 

IV.  That  the  office  of  the  priests  was  "a  service  of  gift."  Even  so  every 
office  in  the  Church  of  God  is  a  service,  for  there  is  no  such  thing  aa  a  sinecure  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven ;  and  it  is  a  service  of  gift,  because  it  is  not  a  matter  of  earthly 
honour,  or  of  pay,  or  of  human  choice,  or  even  of  personal  aptness,  but  of  free  grace 
and  gift  on  the  part  of  God — a  trust  conferred,  a  bounty  bestowed. 

V.  That  the  priests  "  were  partakers  with  the  altar."  Even  so  hath  the 
Lord  ordained,  &o.  (1  Cor.  ix.  13, 14). 

Consider  again,  with  respect  to  ilie  Levites — 

I.  That  they  were  given  to  Aaron  to  "watch  his  watch"  and  "thb 
WATCH  OF  all  THE  TABERNACLE."  Even  80  are  all  the  kindred  of  Christ  given  imto 
him  to  be  his  soldiers  and  servants  to  keep  his  watches,  and  to  be  the  guardians  of 
his  spiritual  house  until  he  come  again  (Mark  xiii.  35 — 37 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  13  ;  Eph.  v. 
15 ;  Bev.  xtL  15). 


m  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  {cb.  ivnt  1— Si 

n.  That  while  ever  watchfui.  and  on  thk  alert,  they  must  not  intbtjdi 
UPON  the  backed  things  of  the  bancthart,  OB  the  altar,  on  pain  of  death. 
Even  80  it  is  fatal  presumption  and  loss  of  spiritual  life  when  men  leave  their 
practical  duties  to  "  intrude  "  by  vain  speculation  into  "  those  things  which  they 
have  not  seen "  in  the  heavenly  state ;  or  when  they  pry  curiously  into  the  unre- 
vealed  mysteries  of  the  cross,  "  which  things  the  angels  desire  to  look  into,"  yet 
forbear,  because  it  is  not  given  them  to  understand  (Col.  ii.  18 ;  1  Pet.  i  12). 

Oonsider  again,  with  respect  to  Aaron  and  the  people  at  large — 
1,  That  bvbbt  oblation  or  offering  of  theirs  was  given  to  Aaron.     Even 
■0  everything  which  the  piety  or  gratitude  of  man  freely  offers  to  God  has  been  mnde 
over  to  Christ,  as  the  High  Priest  of  our  profession,  by  an  indefeasible  title  (Matt.  xi. 
27  a. ;  ixviii.  18  6. ;  1  Cor.  iii.  23). 

it  That  the  first  and  best  (the  fat)  of  everything  was  to  be  given  to 
God  and  to  Aaron.  Even  so  ought  every  faithful  person  to  dedicate  the  first  and 
best  of  all  he  has  (or  is)  to  the  Lord  and  his  Christ.  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  put  hiin 
off  with  the  odds  and  ends  of  our  time,  the  gleanings  of  our  mind  and  thought,  the 
stray  coins  of  our  wealth. 

III.  That  everything  under  a  ban — a  vow,  or  curse — was  given  to  Aaron. 
Even  so  does  every  soul  devoted  to  destruction,  every  soul  und«r  the  curse,  belong 
to  Christ,  because  he  was  made  a  curse  for  ns,  and  devoted  himself  to  death  and 
wrath  for  our  redemption ;  wherefore  all  souls  are  his,  being  given  unto  him  of  the 
Father  for  his  portion. 

IV.  That  all  the  people  were  to  pay  tithes  to  the  Levites,  and  the  Levites 
themselves  to  Aaron,  and  thus  the  principle  was  doubly  maintained  that  a  tenth 
part  of  all  was  due  to  God  for  the  support  of  religion.  Aaron  did  not  pay  tithes, 
because  he  was  the  figure  of  Christ  himself.  Even  so  all  good  Christian  people  are 
boimd,  not  of  necessity  to  giv^  an  exact  and  literal  tenth,  but  certainly  no  lees  than 
that,  unless  they  think  that  their  obligation  to  God  is  less  than  that  of  the  Jews. 
This  may  be  enforced  by  the  following  considerations : — 1.  We  are  as  much  beholden 
for  all  we  have  to  the  mere  bounty  of  Providence  as  the  Jews.  2.  We  are  in  at  least 
as  much  danger  of  covetousness  as  they.  3.  We  are  much  more  in  the  practice  of 
luxury  and  superfluity  than  they.  4.  We  are  more  distinctly  called  to  a  voluntary 
choice  of  (comparative)  poverty  than  they  (Matt.  xiii.  22 ;  xix.  23 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  6 — 10). 
6.  There  is  more  need  of  abundant  offerings  now  than  then,  because  we  have  all  the 
world  to  evangelise,  instead  of  a  single  temple  with  its  services  to  maintain.  6.  Our 
giving  should  be  more  ample,  just  because  it  is  left  to  the  holy  impulse  of  faith  and 
love.  God  has  refrained  from  demanding  a  tenth  in  order  that  we  might  freely  give 
— more  (Mai.  iii.  10  ;  Matt.  xxvi.  13 ;  Acts  ii.  46  ;  xx.  35  ;  Philem.  19,  &c.). 

v.  That  the  Levites,  having  "  heaved  from  the  best  "  of  all  they  re- 
ceived, WERE  THEN  TO  ENJOY  THE  REMAINDER  WITH  A  CLEAR  CONSCIENCE.  Even  SO 
the  servants  of  Christ,  when  they  have  dedicated  (and  only  when)  the  best  of  all 
they  have — time,  money,  talents,  opportunities,  influence — to  the  direct  service  of 
Christ,  may  enjoy  the  good  things  which  fall  to  them  with  singleness  and  gladness 
of  heart  (Luke  xi.  41 ;  Acts  ii.  46 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  18  ;  and  of.  1  Kings  xvii.  13  tq.). 

Consider  again,  loith  respect  to  priests  aiid  Levites — 

That  they  had  no  inheritance  amongst  the  tribes,  bdt  the  Lord  was 
THEIR  portion  AND  THEIR  INHERITANCE.  Bveu  SO  hath  the  Lord  given  unto  us  no 
inheritance  in  this  world,  because  he  himself  is  ours,  as  we  are  his.  We  do  indeed 
have  (most  of  us)  many  things  richly  to  enjoy,  but  these  are  not  our  own,  as  the 
world  counts  its  good  things  its  own,  but  are  only  lent  for  an  uncertain  season  (Luke 
xvi.  11,  12 — what  we  have  here  is  "another  man's,"  as  distinguished  from  "our 
own  ");  and  that  we  have  anything  at  all  is  only  of  indulgence,  not  of  right,  nor  of 
promise  (Matt.  xix.  21 ;  Luke  xii.  33  ;  John  xvi.  33 ;  Acts  xiv.  22  6. ;  James  ii.  6)  ; 
and,  further,  whatever  we  have  we  hold  o.ily  on  condition  of  giving  it  up  at  once, 
without  complaint  or  astonishment,  if  cal'«d  thereunto  (Luke  xiv.  26 ;  Heb.  x.  34 ; 
James  i.  10;  Eev.  iii.  17;  xii.  11).  Nevertheless,  we  are  not  poor,  though  having 
nothing ;  but  rich  beyond  compare,  having  the  Pearl  of  great  pnce,  and  the  Treasuiw 


OH.  inn.  1—92.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  ttS 


Star(2Pet.  L 
Bev.  iiL  20; 


(albeit  "  hid  "  for  the  present,  Col.  ii.  3),  and  the  bright  and  morning 
19  6.),  and  in  him  all  things  "ndeed  (1  Cor.  iii,  21,  22;  2  Cor.  iv.  18; 
ol  Gen.  XT.  1  6. ;  Pe.  xvi.  6 ;  ixiii.  26,  &c.). 

Consider  again,  with  respect  to  sacrifice — 

That  ckrtain  things  most  holt  might  bb  consuhed  onlt  ■within  the  sacbbd 
precincts  by  the  priests  themselves  ;  others  holy,  but  not  so  holt,  at  home 
BY  ALL  MEMBERS  OF  THE  FAMILY.  Even  80  there  are  things  pertaining  to  the  one 
sacrifice  for  sin  with  which  none  may  intermeddle  but  the  priest  himself  of  the 
Bacrifioe;  others  which  may  be  shared  in  common  amongst  all  members  of  the  family 
of  Christ.  Or,  in  another  sense,  there  are  aspects  of  the  atonement  which  can  only 
be  made  our  own  in  a  religious  solitude  and  retirement,  and  which  are  profaned  by 
being  brought  abroad ;  others,  again,  which  befit  the  common  and  social  life  of 
Christian  people,  always  providing  that  no  "  unoleanness,"  ».  c  no  unrepented  sin, 
hinder  them  from  having  part  or  lot  therein. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Vers.  1 — 7. — The  responsibility  of  authority/.  Recent  assaults  on  the  priesthood 
give  occasion  for  a  reafBrmation  of  its  prerogatives.  Lest  this  should  tend  unduly 
to  elate  the  family  of  Aaron,  the  same  Divine  oracle  which  confirms  to  them  their 
distinguished  privileges  insists  on  their  grave  responsibilities. 

I.  The  distinguished  privileges  of  thb  priests.  1.  The  priest's  office  is  de- 
scribed BS  "  a  service  of  gift,"  conferred  by  God  himself  (Heb.  v.  4).  2.  It  was 
confined  to  the  family  of  Aaron  (ver.  2).  3.  It  had  special  duties  into  which  not 
even  the  priests'  kindred,  the  Levites,  might  intrude  (ver.  3 ;  ch.  iv.  4 — 16).  4.  The 
priests  had  authority  over  the  Levites  as  their  ministers  (ver.  2),  and  over  the  people 
in  a  variety  of  ways:  teachers  (Levit.  x.  11)  ;  mediators  of  blessing  (ch.  vi.  22 — 26 ; 
Deut.  xzi.  6) ;  judges  (Deut.  xvii.  8 — 13) ;  sanitary  officers  (Levit.  xiii.,  xiv.).  6. 
Provision  was  made  for  their  daily  wants,  that  they  might  "  attend  upon  the  Lord  " 
without  distraction  (vers.  8 — 15).  6.  They  were  thus,  as  mediators,  the  means  of 
averting  wrath  from  the  nation  (ver.  5) 

II.  Their  grave  responsibilities.  Lest  Aaron's  "  pride  "  should  "  bud  "  (Ezek. 
vii.  10),  even  as  his  rod  had,  and  the  priests  should  be  exalted  above  measure  through 
the  abundance  of  their  privileges,  they  are  reminded  of  some  of  their  responsibihties. 
1.  The  priests  and  their  father's  house  (the  Levites  or  Kohathites)  had  to  "  hear  the 
iniquity  of  the  sanctuary"  (of.  Exod.  xxviii.  38).  Some  errors  might  be  atoned  for, 
but  they  were  responsible  for  any  profanation  of  the  tabeniacle,  2.  The  priests 
alone  had  to  "  bear  the  iniquity  of  their  priesthocid."  An  annual  atonement  provided 
(Levit.  xvi.  6),  but  not  for  such  wilful  transgressions  as  Nadab's,  or  for  gross  neg- 
lect (e.  g.  Levit.  xxii.  9).  3.  They  had  a  responsibility  in  regard  to  the  Levites,  not 
to  allow  them  to  intrude  into  the  priest's  office,  ''  that  neither  they  nor  ye  also  die  " 
(ver.  3).  4.  The  neglect  of  these  duties  might  be  fatal  to  others  as  well  as  to  themselves 
(vers.  3,  6) 

These  two  truths  admit  o£  various  applications.  1.  To  Christian  rulers,  to  states- 
men called  to  the  duty  of  governing  a  country  on  Christian  principles,  but  incurring 
tremendous  responsibility  thereby.  Illustrate  from  the  history  of  Jeroboam  (cf.  Jer. 
xlv.  5 ;  Luke  xii.  48).  2.  To  Christian  teachers  (1  Tim.  iii.  1,  yet  James  Hi.  1).  The 
burden  of  responsibility  quite  enough  to  account  for  the  "  If^olo  Jipiscopari."  Yet 
where  God  calls  to  the  honour  he  will  give  strength  and  grace  for  the  burden. — P. 

Ver.  20. — God,  the  best  inheritance.  The  tribe  of  Levi  was  left  out  in  the  division 
of  the  land.  Some  of  its  members  might  have  wished  to  be  landowners  rather  than 
Levites.  Yet  their  loss  was  a  special  privilege,  for  they  were  selected  that  they 
might  "come  nigh  to  God,"  and  serve  in  his  tabernacle.  God  who  called  them  did 
not  forget  them.  They  received  houses,  gardens,  pasture  lands  (ch.  xxiv,  1 — 8), 
and  tithes  (ver.  21),  and  were  commended  to  the  care  and  sympathy  of  the  nation 
(Deut.  xii.  12,  14,  27 — 29).  Just  so,  under  the  gospel,  those  called  to  give  up  their 
fives  to  the  service  of  God,  though  they  may  not  have  even  manses  or  glebes,  ars 


IM  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  L™-  ^^m*  l-^^ 

proyided  for  by  Ood  through  the  law  of  Christ  (1  Cor,  ix.  13, 14),  and  are  commended 
to  the  care  of  his  people  (Gal.  vi.  6 ;  1  Thess.  v.  12,  13).  Let  no  young  Christians 
who  hear  God's  call  to  be  pastors,  evangelists,  or  missionaries  hesitate  to  obey  it. 
They  may  have  many  trials  and  heart-aches,  but  they  know  God's  word :  "  Them  that 
honour  me  I  will  honour."  Their  experience  may  be  that  of  the  Apostle's  (Luke 
zxii.  35),  for  their  Master's  promise  stands  good  (Matt.  zix.  29).  But  the  privilege 
of  the  Levites  may  be  enjoyed  by  all  God's  servants  who  can  say  with  David,  "  The 
Lord  is  the  portion  of  my  inheritance." 

I.  The  Chbistian's  inheritance.  Wisdom  is  needed  in  choosing  an  earthly 
inheritance  or  investing  our  "  portion  "  of  this  world's  goods.  It  may  be  invested 
in  a  freehold,  embarked  in  a  business  venture,  spent  on  one's  own  education,  or 
squandered  in  riotous  living.  Much  more  is  wisdom  needed  in  regard  to  the  soul's 
inheritance.  Other  portions  allure  some :  modern  idolatries,  worldly  wealth  or  ease 
(Ps.  xvii.  14 ;  Isa.  Ivii.  6).  But  the  Christian,  like  a  loyal  Levite,  prefers  God  without 
the  land  to  the  land  without  God,  He  has  committed  his  soul  entirely  to  God.  He 
has  no  second  spiritual  portion  to  fall  back  upon  if  this  should  fail  him.  Of  thia  he 
has  no  fear.  He  has  accepted  God's  ofier  to  be  his  God  and  his  portion,  and  he  can 
say  2  Tim.  i.  12. 

II.  The  besponsibilities  and  pkivileges  op  having  such  an  inhebitanoe.  The 
grave  responsibilities  of  the  Levites  have  their  parallel  in  the  entire  consecration 
needed  from  every  Christian  (Ps.  cxix.  57 ;  Titus  ii.  14).  But  we  need  not  shrink 
from  our  responsibilities  when  we  remember  our  privileges.  The  two  things  most 
needed  in  our  inheritance  are  safety  and  sufficiency.  1.  Safety.  If  God  is  our 
portion,  he  himself  is  our  security  (Deut.  xxxiii.  27).  When  he  invited  us  to  take 
him  as  our  portion,  it  was  because  he  took  us  as  his  inheritance  (Deut.  xxxiL  9 ;  Isa. 
xliii  1 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  23). 

"  Be  thou  my  God,  and  the  whole  world  ia  mino. 
Whilst  thou  art  Sovereign,  I'm  secure  ; 
I  shall  be  rich  till  thou  art  poor ; 
For  all  I  hope  and  all  I  fear,  heaven,  earth,  and  hell,  are  thine." 

2.  Sufficiency.  So  was  it  with  the  Levites  (ver.  21,  &o.),  David  (Ps.  xvi.  6),  Jacob 
(of.  Gen.  xxviii.  21  ;  xlviii.  15, 16),  and  so  is  it  with  all  Christians.  In  God  they  have 
sufficiency  for  both  spiritual  wants  (John  i.  16 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  21,  22 ;  James  iv.  6)  and 
temporal  also  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  11,  12 ;  Matt.  vi.  33  ;  Phil.  iv.  19). 

We  can  thus  recommend  God  as  the  best  portion  for  all.  1.  A  good  portion  for 
the  young,  who,  like  those  bom  heirs  to  an  estate,  are  entitled  to  this  inheritance  if 
they  will  claim  it.  2.  A  good  marriage  portion.  Illustration — Ruth,  who  brought 
Boaz  an  excellent  portion  (Ruth  i.  16,  17;  ii.  11,  12).  3.  A  good  inheritance  in 
troublous  times  when  banks  and  companies  are  failing.  None  of  these  vicissitudes 
in  our  inheritance  (Deut.  xxxii.  31).  4.  A  good  inheritance  in  reserve  (Lam.  iii.  24). 
That  hope  cannot  be  disappointed ;  the  heirs  of  God  know  that  "  still  there's  more 
to  follow  "  (Ps.  xxxi.  19).  5.  A  good  inheritance  on  a  dying  bed.  Then  all  earthly 
inheritance  daily  drop  in  value  to  the  proprietor,  and  at  last  "flesh  and  heart  fail." 
But  the  Christian  can  say  Ps.  Ixxiii.  26.  Because  God  has  been  the  "  portion  of  his 
inheritance  "  he  can  add  Ps.  xvi.  8,  9,  11. — P. 

Ver.  1. — The  iniquity  of  the  sanctuary  and  priesthood.  It  is  full  of  significance 
that  this  provision  for  the  iniquity  of  the  sanctuary  and  priesthood  stands  first  among 
the  regulations  of  this  chapter.  Though  God  had  separated  Aaron,  and  in  recent 
transactions  exalted  and  glorified  him,  be  had  not  thereby  made  it  an  easy  or  certain 
thing  to  serve  in  this  office  of  priest  as  in  all  respects  one  was  required  to  serve. 
God  had  called  Israel  to  be  his  own  people,  and  honoured  them,  but  they  were  very 

Eerverse  in  all  their  ways.  It  is  therefore  far  from  wonderful  that  Aaron  and  the 
evites,  being  of  the  same  flesh  and  blood  as  rebellious  Israel,  should  have  fallen 
short  in  the  holy  service  to  which  they  were  appointed.  That  rebellious  spirit 
Korah,  who  was  a  Kohathite,  shows  how  much  iniquity  could  attach  to  the  sano 
tuary ;  and  the  iniquity  of  the  priesthood  is  amply  shown  in  Aaron's  conduct  when 
he  made  the  golden  calf,  and  joined  Miriam  in  her  envious  outbreak  against  Mosea, 


em.  xvni.  1-32.]  THE  BOOK  OF  KUMBEBS.  Sll 

Bat  even  apart  from  such  capital  instancea  of  transgression,  we  may  be  snre  there 
was  continual  iniquity  both  in  sanctuary  and  priesthood — things  done  too  often  in  a 
formal,  listless  way,  priest  and  Levite  alike  conscious  that  the  heart  was  not  always 
in  the  work.  It  was  necessary  to  provide  also  for  imperfections  in  the  offerings. 
The  animals  without  blemish  were  only  relatively  so,  not  blemished  so  far  as  the 
contributors  knew,  the  very  pick,  doubtless,  of  the  flocks  and  herds.  There  was 
sincerity  of  purpose,  but  there  could  not  be  completeness  of  knowledge.  Henee  we 
are  led  to  consider — 

I.  Thb  inbvitablb  bhortcomings  is  ohb  holiest  bbrvices.  Considering  how 
much  we  fall  short  even  in  our  relations  to  men,  how  deficient  in  equity,  benevolence, 
and  gratitude,  we  may  well  feel  that  the  iniquity  of  our  religion  must  be  a  very  large 
and  serious  matter  indeed.  In  relation  to  God,  how  ignorant  is  the  understanding, 
how  dull  the  conscience,  how  languid  are  the  afEections  I  What  formality  and  pre- 
occupation in  the  worship  I  how  apt  we  are  to  turn  it  as  far  as  we  can  into  mere 
selfish  pleasiue,  from  music  or  eloquence  I  And  when  in  the  mercy  of  God  we 
become  more  sensitive  to  his  claims,  more  spiritually-minded,  better  able  to  estimate 
rightly  this  present  evil  world,  then  also  we  shall  see  our  shortcomings  in  a  clearer 
light.  Faults  that  are  not  noticeable  in  the  dim  light  of  this  world's  ethics  become 
not  only  manifest,  but  hideous  and  humiliating,  when  the  light  that  lighteth  every 
man  coming  into  the  world  shines  upon  them.  The  holier  we  become,  the  humbler 
we  become ;  the  nearer  we  draw  to  God,  the  more  conscious  we  are  of  the  difference 
between  him  and  us.  We  neither  repent  nor  believe  as  we  ought.  Praise,  prayer, 
meditation,  good  works,  gospel  efforts,  all  are  seen  to  be  not  only  imperfect,  but 
lamentably  so. 

II.  Thb  peculiar  dangers  which  beset  those  ENOAaBD  in  special  sebvicb.  The 
Levites,  however  reverently  they  might  at  first  bear  the  ark  and  the  holy  vessels, 
would  gradually  and  insensibly  contract  a  sort  of  indifference.  The  burdens  would 
become  like  other  burdens,  thoughtlessly  and  mechanically  home.  It  is  no  easy 
matter  for  such  as  have  to  exhibit  God's  truth  to  an  indifferent  world  to  keep  above 
indifiference  themselves.  All  the  more  reason,  therefore,  that  they  should  be  on  their 
guard.  There  must  needs  be  iniquity  both  in  priesthood  and  sanctuary,  but  woe 
either  to  Aaron  or  his  sons,  or  any  Kohathite  who  presumed  on  this  as  an  excuse  for 
relaxing  from  the  strictest  attention.  Though  we  cannot  attain  entire  perfection,  we 
are  bound  to  labour  on,  getting  more  and  more  out  of  mediocrity  and  formality. 
Bemember  the  humility,  caution,  and  self-distrust  with  which  Paul  invariably  speaks 
of  his  own  attainments,  ever  magnifying  the  grace  of  God,  ever  confessing  his  need 
of  Divine  support,  and  the  instant  failure  and  danger  which  come  from  its  with- 
drawal. Formality  in  any  special  work  which  God  may  require  from  his  people,  say, 
the  exposition  and  enforcement  of  his  truth,  is  ruinous.  Christian  work  can  never 
come  to  appear  impossible,  but  it  must  never  cease  to  appear  difficult.  It  must 
always  require  attention,  concentration,  self-denial,  and  patience.  It  was  a  saying 
of  J.  J,  Gumey,  "  The  ministry  of  the  gospel  is  the  only  thing  I  know  which  practice 
never  makes  easy," 

.  III.  Thb  diffusive,  penetrative  power  of  sin.  It  is  not  so  much  as  assumed 
that  iniquity  of  the  sanctuary  and  priesthood  could  be  guarded  against.  However 
much  wag  done  in  this  direction,  something  would  be  left  undone,  needing  to  be  pro- 
vided for  in  the  way  of  atonement.  Sin  is  working  in  us  and  against  us  even  when 
•  we  are  not  conscious  of  it.  It  is  a  vain  thing  to  make  out  that  there  is  not  much 
after  all  of  sin  in  us,  that  it  is  a  stage  of  weakness,  ignorance,  and  imperfection  out 
of  which  we  shall  naturally  grow. — Y. 

Vers.  2 — 7. — Aaron  and  his  Tielpers.  I.  Aaron  had  many  helpers.  No  less 
than  a  whole  tribe  of  Israel,  22,000  in  number  (ch.  iii.  39).  And  if  it  be  said, 
•'  What  work  could  be  found  about  the  tabernacle  for  so  many  ?  "  the  answer  is 
g^iven  in  the  portioning  o\it  of  the  work  among  the  three  great  divisions  of  the  tribe. 
The  Levites  were  not  around  Aaron  like  the  embellishments  of  a  court,  merely  to 
impress  the  vulgar  mind.  They  were  there  for  work — real,  necessary,  honourable, 
beneficial  work.  A  great  deal  of  it  might  seem  humble,  but  it  could  not  be  done 
withoat    So  notice  how  Jesus  gathered  helpers  around  himself.    It  was  one  of  the 


tS6  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBBEa  [oh.  xviil  1—31 

earliest  things  he  did.  He  gave  them  also  great  power,  snch  as  to  heal  diseases, 
raise  dead  Dersons,  and  cast  out  demons;  that  thus  they  might  authenticate  the 
gracious  ana  momentous  message  with  which  he  had  intrusted  them.  And  in  the 
course  of  ages  how  the  helpers  have  increased  in  numbers  and  in  variety  of  service  I 
Doubtless  when  Israel  settled  in  Canaan,  and  the  Levites  became  distributed  over 
the  land,  it  was  found  that  they  were  not  at  all  too  numerous  for  the  religious 
requirements  of  the  people.  Christ  is  the  centre  and  the  guide  of  an  immense 
amount  of  spiritual  industry ;  nevertheless,  the  cry  goes  out  that  many  more  hearts 
and  hands  might  be  engaged  helping  the  Divine  Saviour  of  men  (John  iv.  35 — 38). 
It  will  be  a  long  time  before  the  Church  has  occasion  to  complain,  with  respect  to 
labourers  together  with  God,  that  the  supply  exceeds  the  demand.  The  house- 
holder had  work  to  he  done  in  his  vineyard  even  at  the  eleventh  hour. 

II.  These  helpers  must  bb  duly  qualified.  They  must  all  be  of  the  tribe  of 
Levi.  Levi  was  taken  in  place  of  the  first-bom  of  Israel,  and  when  the  first-bom 
were  numbered  it  was  found  that  they  somewhat  exceeded  the  number  of  qualified 
persons  among  the  Levites.  But  God  did  not  make  up  the  deficiency  by  taking  from 
other  tribes ;  he  kept  the  tabernacle  service  within  the  limits  of  Levi,  and  provided 
for  a  ransom  instead  (ch.  iii.  39 — 61).  The  service  was  thus  to  be  a  matter  of  inherit- 
ance, Aaron  and  his  sons  had  their  portion — Kohathite,  Gershonite,  Merarite,  each 
had  his  own  field  of  work,  and  was  not  to  transgress  it.  Strangers  were  cautioned 
against  putting  unauthorised  hands  on  the  tabernacle.  It  was  as  real  a  violation  of 
the  sanctuary  for  a  common  Israelite  to  touch  even  a  peg  of  the  tabernacle  as  to 
intrude  within  the  veil  itself.  So  we  should  ever  look  with  great  jealousy  and  care- 
fulness on  the  qualifications  for  serving  Jesus.  There  have  been  great  hindrances, 
occasions  for  blasphemy,  because  unclean  hands  have  not  only  meddled  with  holy 
things,  but  kept  them  long  in  charge.  The  service  of  Jesus  should  go  down  by 
spiritual  inheritance.  We  take  care  in  affairs  of  this  world  that  there  shall  be  due 
tpprenticeship  and  preparation,  ascertained  fitness,  the  tools  intrusted  to  those  who 
can  handle  them,  and  surely  there  is  equal  if  not  greater  need  in  the  supremely 
important  affairs  of  Christ's  kingdom.  Spiritual  things  should  ever  be  in  charge  of 
those  who  have  spiritual  discernment. 

III.  Those'  qualified  were  thereby  placed  under  obligation  to  bbrvb.  As 
the  service  was  confined  to  Levi,  so  every  Levite,  not  otherwise  disqualified,  had  to 
take  part  in  it.  There  was  nothing  else  for  a  Levite  to  do  than  serve  God  in  con- 
nection with  the  sanctuary.  He  had  no  land ;  he  was  a  substitute  for  others  in  holy 
service,  and  therefore  they  had  to  provide  him  with  the  necessaries  of  life.  Thus 
his  way  in  life  was  made  clear ;  there  was  no  need  to  consult  personal  inclination,  and 
no  room  for  reasonable  doubt.  And  so,  generally  speaking,  what  service  God  expects 
from  us  we  may  be  sure  he  will  signify  in  the  clearest  manner.  If  we  allow  per- 
sonal inclination  to  be  the  great  prompter  and  decider,  there  is  very  little  we  shall  do. 
Many  there  are  whose  personal  inclinations  lead  them  into  some  sort  of  connection 
with  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  keep  them  there,  yet  they  never  enter  into  anything 
like  real  service.  They  have  a  name  to  serve,  yet  are  only  idly  busy.  Personal 
inclination  is  a  very  small  factor  in  Christian  service,  at  least  at  the  beginning,  else 
Christ  would  not  have  been  so  urgent  in  his  demands  for  self-denial.  Not  much,  of 
course,  can  be  done  without  love ;  but  duty,  the  sense  of  what  we  ought  to  do,  is  to 
be  the  great  power  at  the  beginning.  Those  who  have  had  the  five  talents  from 
God  may  have  to  appear  in  his  presence  to  be  judged,  conscious  that  not  only  have  the 
talents  been  lost  to  him,  but  used  so  selfishly  as  rather  to  have  gained  five  talents 
besides  in  worldly  possessions,  influence,  and  reputation.  It  is  a  monstrous  sin  to 
use  God's  property  for  the  low,  injurious  aims  of  self.  "  Power,"  said  John  Foster, 
"  to  its  very  last  particle,  is  duty.' 

IV.  Though  they  were  helpers  of  Aaron,  they  could  not  be  his  suBSTrruTES 
When  the  priest  dies,  it  is  not  some  experienced  and  sagacious  Levite  who  can  take 
his  place  ;  the  priesthood  is  to  be  kept  in  the  priest's  own  family.  The  hand  cannot 
supply  the  place  of  the  head.  Take  away  the  priest,  and  the  head  is  gone.  Aaron, 
if  it  had  been  necessary,  could  have  stooped  to  do  the  humblest  Levitical  service,  but 
not  even  the  highest  or  the  Kohathites  could  enter  within  the  veil.  And  thus  must 
the  helpers  of  Christ  ever  look  on  him  as  separated  by  his  nature  and  person  to  a 


CH.  xviii.  1—32.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS.  ©7 

work  which  no  other  human  being  can  do.  He  did  indeed  himself  take  up  the  work 
of  the  Baptist  at  one  time,  preaching  repentance  (Matt.  iv.  17),  and  he  also  at  timei 
became  his  own  apostle  in  proclaiming  the  gospel ;  but  to  his  own  peculiar  work 
neither  Baptist  nor  apostle  could  rise.  Whatever  responsibility  be  laid  on  us,  we 
are  only  helpers  at  best.  Let  no  admiration  we  feel  for  the  achievements  of  the 
men  famous  in  Church  history  allow  us  to  forget  that  their  work  has  been  really 
Christian  and  beneficial  just  in  proportion  as  they  made  themselves  secondary  and 
subordinate  to  Christ.  We  do  not  sufficiently  appreciate  the  service  of  any  Christian, 
unless  as  we  trace  in  it  the  sustaining  and  guiding  power  of  Christ  himself.  In  the 
Church  one  generation  goeth  and  another  cometh,  but  Christ  abideth  for  ever. — Y. 

Vers.  8 — 20. — The  provision  for  ike  priests.  Already,  upon  different  occasions, 
something  has  been  said  as  to  parts  of  certain  offerings  being  reserved  for  Aaron  and 
his  sons  (Exod.  xxix.  28,  31—33 ;  Levit.  ii.  3,  10 ;  vi.  16—18,  26,  29,  &c.),  and  now 
in  this  passage  the  whole  question  of  how  the  priests  were  to  be  provided  for  is  taken 
up  and  answered.  It  was  a  fitting  occasion,  seeing  that  priestly  duties  had  just  been 
laid  down,  so  exacting  and  exclusive  in  their  demands.  When  a  man  is  called  away 
from  the  ordinary  business  of  life,  where  he  is  as  it  were  naturally  provided  for  by 
the  fruits  of  his  industry,  it  must  always  be  an  anxious  question  as  to  how  he 
shall  be  supported.  If  the  priests,  along  with  the  holding  of  their  priestly  office,  had 
been  able  to  farm  or  trade  there  would  have  been  no  need  to  point  out  a  special 
means  of  support.  But  since  the  priest  was  to  be  wholly  given  to  tabernacle  service, 
it  was  right  not  only  to  assure  him  beforehand  of  the  necessaries  of  life,  but  to 
point  out  to  him  something  of  the  way  in  which  they  were  to  be  provided. 

L  The  sdppobt  of  the  priests  was  closely  connected  with  the  faithful 
DISCHARGE  OF  THElB  OFFICE.  They  were  provided  for  in  the  very  act  of  carrying 
out  their  priestly  duties.  Forsaking  the  appointed  service  of  God  at  his  altar,  they 
found  themseHes  forsaken  of  his  providence.  He  might  have  continued  for  them 
some  miraculous  provision  by  manna  or  otherwise,  if  such  a  course  had  seemed 
fitting;  but  he  rather  arranged  it  that  in  faithful  waiting  upon  the  altar  their  sup- 
port should  come  from  day  to  day.  Faithfulness  was  required  of  them,  first  of  all, 
in  keeping  the  people  instructed  and  reminded  as  to  all  the  offerings  required.  An 
omitted  offering  might  mean  an  impoverished  priest.  Faithfulness  also  was  required 
in  being  continually  at  the  altar.  It  was  the  appointed  place  for  the  people  to  give 
and  for  the  priest  to  receive.  There  was  no  call  for  him  to  go  on  mendicant  expe- 
ditions round  the  land,  or  lean  upon  the  suggestions  of  his  own  prudence  in  order  to 
make  sure  of  daily  bread.  When  he  went  to  the  altar  it  was  as  to  a  table  provideJ 
by  the  Lord  himself.  So  when  God  manifestly  calls  any  of  us  to  special  service,  our 
very  faithfulness  in  the  service  will  bring  a  sufiicient  supply  for  all  our  need.  If 
we  leave  the  path  of  duty  we  leave  the  path  of  Providence. 

II.  This  mode  of  pbovision  tended  to  bind  priests  and  people  closer  to- 
gbtheb.  The  priest,  while  in  some  respects  separated  from  the  people  by  an  impase  ■ 
able  barrier,  was  in  others  united  by  an  indissoluble  bund .  Standing  before  them  as 
an  anointed  one,  with  awful  and  peculiar  powers,  treading  unharmed  where  the  firsl 
footstep  of  a  common  Israelite  would  have  wrought  instant  death,  he  nevertheless 
appeared  at  the  same  time  dependent  for  his  bodily  sustenance  on  the  regular  offer- 
ings of  the  people.  Thus  the  priest  was  manifested  as  one  of  themselves.  There  was 
everything  in  this  remarkable  mingling  of  relations  to  keep  the  people  from  pre- 
sumption and  the  priest  from  pride.  Their  dependence  on  him  was^not  more  manifest 
than  his  dependence  on  them.  Thus,  also,  we  observe  in  many  and  touching  ways 
how  dependent  our  Saviour  was  on  those  whom  he  came  to  save.  He  threw  him- 
self, as  no  one  ever  before  or  since,  on  the  hospitality  of  the  world,  manifesting 
that  there  were  real  needs  of  his  humanity  which  he  looked  even  to  sinful  men  to 
supply.  And  may  we  not  well  suppose  that  even  in  his  glory  Jesus  is  not  only  a 
giver  to  men,  but  a  receiver  from  them  ?  May  it  not  be  that  by  our  fidelity  and 
diligence  in  respect  of  the  living  sacrifice  we  are  ministering  a  very  real  satisfaction 
to  the  glorified  Jesus  ? 

III.  Aa  this  provision  required  faithfulness  in  the  discharge  of  duty,  so  also  it 
required  faith  m  God.     If  he  had  said  he  would  nrovide  manna  or  some  direct 


«38  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  [ch.  xvm,  1—32, 

miraculous  gift,  such  an  intimation  would  have  been  easier  to  receive  than  the  one 
actually  made.  That  which  has  to  come  to  us  indirectly,  gives  occasion  for  a  greater 
trial  of  faith  than  what  has  to  come  directly.  The  food  of  these  priests  was  to  flow 
through  a  circuitous  and,  to  judge  by  late  experience,  not  very  promising  channel. 
Had  not  these  very  people,  whose  offerings  were  to  support  the  priests,  only  lately 
shown  their  contempt  for  Aaron  and  unbelief  as  to  the  reality  of  his  office  ?  How 
then  should  they  he  the  channels  of  God's  providence  ?  Thus  the  opportunity  for 
faith  comes  in.  Looking  towards  man,  all  is  unlikely ;  looking  through  man  to  God, 
all  appears  certain  and  regular.  God  will  make  his  own  channels,  in  places  we 
think  unlikely,  for  those  who  put  their  trust  in  him.  He  knew  that,  stubborn  and 
unsympathetic  as  the  people  now  were,  yet  the  day  would  come  when  their  offerings 
might  be  looked  for  with  a  reasonable  confidence.  We  are  very  poor  judges  by  our- 
selves of  what  is  likely  or  unlikely.  The  Divine  arrangements,  perplexing  as  they 
may  appear  on  the  surface,  have  in  all  cases  a  basis  of  knowledge  and  power  which 
it  is  onr  wisdom  humbly  and  gratefully  to  accept. 

IV.  This  provision  evidently  guarded  against  anything  like  extortion.  The 
people  themselves  knew  exactly  how  the  priests  were  to  be  provided  for.  And  this 
was  no  small  matter,  seeing  that  in  course  of  time  the  holy  priesthood  became  in 
the  hands  of  arrogant  and  grasping  men  an  occasion  for  priestcraft.  Priests  learned 
only  too  soon  the  power  of  an  ipse  dixit  over  superstitious  and  timid  minds.  But  God 
does  not  allow  the  authority  of  an  ipse  dixit  to  any  but  himself.  The  priest  was 
bound  by  a  written  and  definite  commandment  which  lay  open  to  the  perception  of 
every  one  who  had  to  do  with  him.  All  these  offerings,  of  which  he  had  a  certain 
part,  were  to  be  presented  in  any  case.  They  were  not  presented  in  order  that  he 
might  be  provided  for,  but,  being  presented,  they  gave  occasion  sufiBoiently  to  pro- 
vide for  him.  Th«  people  were  to  feel  that  he  was  being  supported  by  a  reasonable 
service. 

V.  Thebb  was  a  great  oppobtunity  fob  people  to  give  in  a  bight  spirit. 
If  any  one  had  a  grudging  and  fault-finding  disposition  there  was  certainly  oppor- 
tunity for  him  to  exercise  it.  He  could  say,  not  without  plausibility  in  the  ears  of 
like-minded  men,  that  the  priests  were  managing  things  very  cleverly,  so  as  to  be 
provided  for  at  the  public  expense.  Misrepresentation  is  not  a  very  difficult  thing  to 
achieve  if  certain  considerations,  and  these  alone,  are  brought  into  view.  God's 
appointments  for  the  support  of  the  priesthood  were  a  standing  trial  of  the  people's 
views  with  respect  to  it.  Misrepresentations  cannot  be  escaped,  but  woe  to  those  who, 
without  troubling  fully  and  honestly  to  understand  the  thing  of  which  they  speak, 
are  the  authors  of  misrepresentations.  The  priesthood  itself  was  a  Divine,  a  neces- 
sary, and  a  beneficial  institution,  and  every  devout  Israelite  would  count  it  a  joy  to 
support  it,  even  though  particular  holders  of  the  office  might  be  very  unworthy  men. 
We  must  honour  and  support  every  Divine  appointment,  and  that  all  the  more  if  the 
persons  appointed  show  themselves  insensible  to  the  duties  laid  upon  them. — T. 

Ver.  19. — A  covenant  of  salt.  God  has  defined  the  provisions  for  the  priesthood, 
and  indicated  in  what  certainty  and  sufficiency  they  would  come.  He  also  indicates 
the  permanency  of  the  supply.  The  things  given  would  be  given  to  Aaron  and  to 
his  sons  and  daughters  with  him  by  a  statute  for  ever.  Everything  was  done  to 
make  and  keep  the  priesthood  separate,  and  prevent  those  who  had  it  from  being 
tempted  into  the  ordinary  business  of  life,  by  fear  lest  they  should  lack  sufficient 
suppdrt.  And  still  further  to  emphasise  the  solemnity  of  the  pledge,  God  adds  this 
peculiar  and  suggestive  expression :  "  It  is  a  covenant  of  salt  for  ever."  Dr.  Thom- 
son, in  '  The  Land  and  the  Book,'  tells  us  that  it  is  a  habit  still  common  among  the 
Bedawtn,  and  probably  coming  from  the  remotest  times,  for  host  and  guest  to  eat 
together.  This  is  said  to  be  bread  and  salt  between  them,  and  constitutes  a  pledge 
of  protection,  support,  and  fidelity  even  to  death.  Thus  we  may  understand  God 
saymg  to  Aaron,  and  through  him  to  the  long  succession  of  priests,  "  There  is  bread 
and  salt  between  us."  But  we  must  also  go  back  and  consider  Levit.  ii.  13.  All  the 
meat  offerings  presented  to  God  were  to  be  seasoned  with  salt.  When  presented,  s 
part  was  burnt, — as  it  were,  eaten  by  God  himself, — and  the  remainder  he  returns  to 
the  priest  for  his  own  use.     Thus  there  are  mutual  pledges  of  fidelity.     God  is  the 


OH.  XTIIL  1— 3S.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


gaest  of  the  priesi^  and  the  priest  in  turn  the  gaeat  of  God.  In  this  way  Ood  lifted 
a  social  custom  to  a  holy  use.  We  cannot  but  notice  in  the  second  chapter  of 
Leviticus  that  while  some  things  are  mentioned  as  constituents  of  the  meat  ofEering, 
viz.,  oil  and  frankincense,  and  others  as  excluded,  viz.,  leaven  and  honey,  a  special 
emphasis  is  laid  on  the  presence  of  salt.  A  special  significance  was  to  be  indicated 
by  that  presence,  and  it  agrees  with  this  that  when  Ezra  was  going  up  from  Babylon, 
furnished  by  Artaxerxes  with  all  he  might  require  for  sacrifice,  the  salt  is  given 
without  prescribing  how  much  (ch.  vii.  ^2).  We  must,  however,  look  further  back 
than  social  customs  even,  to  find  the  reason  why  salt  was  present  in  this  covenant. 
Social  customs,  could  they  be  traced  back,  rise,  some  of  them  at  least,  out  of  religious 
ordinances.  Why  was  salt  chosen  as  the  symbol  ?  It  is  something  to  notice  that 
salt  gives  flavour  to  that  which  is  insipid.  God's  gifts  may  easily  pall  and  become 
worthless  if  his  presence  is  not  associated  with  them ;  with  the  sense  of  that 
presence  they  cannot  but  be  grateful.  But  the  chief  service  of  salt  is  to  preserve 
that  which  is  dead  from  decay.  Salt  will  not  bring  back  life,  but  it  will  hinder 
putrefaction.  Under  the  old  covenant  God  did  not  give  life,  though  he  was  pre- 
paring to  give  it ;  but  at  the  same  time  he  did  much  to  preserve  the  world,  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins,  from  corpse  decay,  while  he  made  ready  in  the  fulness  of  time 
to  bring  back  the  dead  to  life.  Thus  the  covenant  with  men  through  types  and 
shadows  was  emphatically  a  covenant  of  salt.  And  the  same  may  he  said  of  the 
new  covenant  through  the  great  reality  in  Christ  Jesus.  There  is  an  element  of  salt 
in  this  covenant  also.  "Ye  are  the  sal'  of  the  earth," said  Christ  to  his  disciples  in 
the  great  and  honourable  burden  of  service  which  he  laid  on  them.  Indeed,  what 
we  call  the  old  and  the  new  covenant  are  really  but  shapes  of  that  great  covenant 
between  God  and  man  made  in  the  very  constitution  of  things.  God,  creating  man 
in  his  own  image,  and  planting  within  him  certain  powers  and  aspirations,  is  thereby 
recording  the  Divine  articles  m  the  covenant ;  and  man  also,  by  the  manifestations 
of  his  nature,  by  his  recognition  of  conscience,  even  by  his  idolatries  and  super- 
stitions, and  gropings  after  God,  testifies  to  his  part  in  the  covenant.  And  in  this 
covenant  all  true  disciples  are  as  the  salt,  the  solemn,  continuous  pledge  from  God 
to  the  world  that  he  does  not  look  on  it  as  beyond  recovery.  Be  it  the  part  of  all 
disciples  then  to  keep  the  savour  of  the  salt  that  is  in  them.  "  Walk  in  wisdom 
towards  them  that  are  without,  redeeming  the  time.  Let  your  speech  be  alway 
with  grace,  seasoned  with  salt"  (Col.  iv.  5,  6).  It  rests  with  us  to  honour  God's 
M  Tenant  of  salt  and  make  it  more  and  more  efficacious. — ^Y. 


EXPOSITION, 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


Tea    ABHBS    OF    AN  HEIFBB  SFSDrKLINO 

THB  UNOLBAjf  (vers.  1 — 22).  Ver.  1. — ^And 
the  Lord  spake  nnto  Mobcs  and  onto  Aaron. 
On  the  addition  of  the  second  name  see  on  ch. 
zviii.  1.  There  is  no  note  of  time  in  connec- 
tion with  this  chapter,  but  internal  evidence 
points  strongly  to  the  supposition  that  it  be- 
longs to  the  early  days  of  wandering  after  the 
ban.  It  belongs  to  a  period  when  death  had 
resnmed  his  normal,  and  more  than  his  nor- 
mal, power  over  the  children  of  Israel;  when, 
having  been  for  a  short  time  expelled  (except 
in  a  hmited  number  of  cases — see  above  on 
ch.  X.  28),  he  had  come  back  with  frightful 
rigour  to  reign  over  a  doomed  generation. 
It  belongs  also,  as  it  would  seem,  to  a  time 
when  the  daily,  monthly,  and  even  annual 
routine  of  sacrifice  and  purgation  was  sus- 
pended through  poverty,  distress,  and  dis- 
Divonr  witii  QtoA.    It  tws  of  the  mercy  and 


condescension  which  did  not  leave  oven  the 
rebellious  and  excommunicate  without  some 
simple  remedy,  some  easily-obtainable  solace, 
for  the  one  religions  distress  which  must  of 
necessity  press  upon  them  daily  and  hourly, 
not  only  as  Israelites,  but  .as  children  of  the 
East,  sharing  the  ordinary  superstitions  of 
the  age.  Through  the  vaUey  of  the  shadow 
of  death  they  were  doomed  at  Kadesh  to 
walk,  while  their  fellows  fell  beside  them  one 
by  one,  until  the  reek  and  taint  of  death 
passed  upon  the  whole  congregation.  Almost 
all  nations  have  had,  as  is  well  known,  an 
instinctive  horror  of  death,  which  has  every- 
where demanded  separation  and  purification 
on  the  part  of  those  who  have  come  in  con- 
tact with  it  (Bahr,  'SymboUk,'  ii.  p.  468  iq.). 
And  this  religious  horror  had  not  been  com- 
bated, but,  on  the  contrary,  fostered  and  deep- 
ened by  the  Mosaic  legislation.  The  law 
everywhere  encouraged  the  idea  that  sin  and 
death  were  essentially  connected,  and  that 


240 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[cH.  SIX.  1—22. 


disease  and  death  spread  their  infection  in 
the  spiritual  as  well  as  in  the  natural  order  of 
things.  Life  and  death  were  the  two  oppo- 
site poles  under  the  law,  as  under  the  gospel ; 
but  the  eye  of  faith  was  fixed  upon  natural 
life  and  natural  death,  and  was  not  trained 
to  look  beyond.  It  could  never  have  oc- 
curred to  a  Jew  to  say,  "Duke  et  decorum  est 
pro  patrid  mori."  To  die,  however  nobly, 
was  not  only  to  be  cut  off  from  God  oneself, 
but  to  become  a  curse  and  a  danger  and  a 
cause  of  religious  defilement  to  those  around. 
There  is,  therefore,  a  beautiful  consistency 
between  this  ooactment  and  the  circum- 
stances of  the  time  on  the  one  hand,  between 
this  enactment  and  the  revealed  character  of 
God  on  the  other  hand.  Although  they 
were  his  covenant  people  no  more,  since  they 
were  under  sentence  of  death,  yet,  like  others, 
and  more  than  others,  they  had  religious 
horrors  and  religious  fears — not  very  spiritual, 
perhaps,  but  very  real  to  them  ;  these  hoirors 
and  fears  cried  to  him  piteously  for  relief, 
and  that  relief  he  was  careful  to  give.  They 
must  die,  but  they  need  not  suffer  daily  tor- 
ment of  death ;  they  must  not  worship  him 
in  the  splendid  and  perfect  order  of  his 
appointed  ritual,  but  they  should  at  least 
have  the  rites  which  should  make  life  toler- 
able to  them.  It  appears  to  be  a  mistake 
to  connect  this  ordinance  especially  with  the 
plague  which  occurred  after  the  rebellion  of 
Korah.  It  was  not  an  exceptional  calamity, 
the  effects  of  which  might  indeed  be  wide- 
spread, but  would  be  soon  over,  which  the 

leople  had  to  dread  exceedingly ;  it  was  the 
^aUy  mortality  always  going  on  in  every 
camp  under  all  circumstances.  If  only  the 
elder  generation  died  off  in  the  vrildemess, 
this  alone  would  yield  nearly  100  victims 
every  day,  and  by  each  of  these  a  consider- 
able number  of  the  survivors  must  have  been 
defiled.  Thus,  in  the  absence  of  special  pro- 
vision, one  of  two  things  must  have  hap- 
pened: either  the  unhappy  people  would 
have  grown  callous  and  indifferent  to  the 
awful  presence  of  death  ;  or,  more  probably, 
a  dark  cloud  of  religious  horror  and  depres- 
sion would  have  permanently  enveloped 
them, 
Yer.  2. — ^Thii  ii  the  ordinance  of  the  law. 

iTJ^Fli]  ngn.  Law-statute :  an  unusual  com- 
bination only  found  elsewhere  in  ch.  xxzi. 
21,  which  also  concerns  legal  purifications. 
A  red  heifer.  This  offering  was  obviously 
intended,  apart  from  its  symbolic  signifi- 
cance, to  be  studiedly  simple  and  cheap.  In 
contradiction  to  the  many  and  costly  and 
ever-repeated  sacrifices  of  the  Sinaitic  legis- 
lation, this  wae  a  single  individual,  a  female, 

and  of  the  most  common  description  :  red  is 

the  most  ordinary  colour  of  cattle,  and  a 

Cig  heifer  is  of  less  value  than  any  other 
t  of  its  kliiu.     The  iiigc;;uity  indeed 


s; 


of  the  Jews  heaped  around  the  choice  of  tliii 
animal  a  multitude  of  precise  requirements, 
and  supplemented  the  prescribed  ritual  with 
many  ceremonies,  some  of  which  are  incoi 
porated  by  the  I'argums  with  the  sacretl 
text ;  but  even  so  they  could  not  destroy  the 
remarkable  contrast  between  the  simplicity 
of  this  offering  and  the  elaborate  complexity 
of  those  ordained  at  Sinai.  Only  six  red 
heifers  are  said  to  have  been  needed  during 
the  whole  of  Jewish  history,  so  far-reaching 
and  so  long-enduring  were  the  uses  and 
advantages  of  a  single  immolation.  It  is 
evident  that  this  ordinance  had  for  its  dis- 
tinguishing character  oneness  as  opposed  to 
multiplicity,  simplicity  contrasted  with 
elaborateness.  Without  spot,  wherein  is  no 
blemish.  See  on  Levit.  iv.  3.  However 
little,  comparatively  speaking,  the  victim 
might  cost  them,  it  must  yet  be  perfect  of 
its  kind.  The  later  Jews  held  that  three 
white  hairs  together  on  any  part  of  the  body 
made  it  unfit  for  the  purpose.  On  the  sex 
and  colour  of  the  offering  see  below.  TTpon 
which  never  came  yoke.  Of.  Deut.  xxi.  3 ; 
1  Sam.  vi  7.  The  imposition  of  the  yoke, 
according  to  the  common  sentiment  of  all 
nations,  was  a  species  of  degiadation,  and 
therefore  inconsistent  with  the  ideal  of  what 
was  fit  to  be  offered  in  this  case.  Tliat  the 
matter  was  wholly  one  of  sentiment  is  nothing 
to  the  point :  God  doth  not  care  for  oxen  of 
any  kind,  but  he  doth  care  that  man  should 
give  him  what  is,  whether  in  fact  or  in 
Eincy,  the  best  of  its  sort. 

Ver.  8. — TTnto  Eleazar  the  priest.  Pos- 
sibly in  order  that  Aaron  himself  might  not 
be  associated  with  death,  even  in  this  indi- 
rect way  (see  ver.  6).  In  after  times,  how- 
ever, it  was  usually  the  high  priest  who  of- 
ficiated on  this  occasion,  and  therefore  it  ia 
quite  as  likely  that  Eleazar  was  designs  ted 
because  he  was  already  beginning  to  take  the 
place  of  his  father  in  his  especial  duties. 
Without  the  camp.  The  bodies  of  those 
animals  which  were  offered  for  the  sin  of  the 
congregation  were  always  burnt  outside  the 
camp,  the  law  thus  testifying  that  sin  and 
death  had  no  proper  place  witliin  the  city  of 
God.  In  this  case,  however,  the  whole  sacn- 
fice  was  performed  outside  the  camp,  and  was 
only  brought  into  relation  with  the  national 
sanctuary  by  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  in 
that  direction,  various  symbolic  reasons 
have  been  assigned  to  this  fact,  but  none  are 
satisfactory  except  the  following; — 1.  It 
served  to  intensify  the  conviction,  which  the 
whole  of  this  ordinance  was  intended  to  brin  p; 
home  to  the  minds  of  men,  that  death  wm 
an  awful  thing,  and  that  everything  coti- 
nected  with  it  was  wholly  foreign  to  the 
presence  and  habitation  of  the  living  Coil. 
2.  It  served  to  mark  with  more  emph:isi 
the  contrast  between  this  one  offering,  wbicb 


CH.  zee  1—22.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


241 


was  perhaps  almost  the  only  one  they  had  in 
the  wilderness,  and  those  which  ought  to 
hare  been  offered  continually  according  to 
the  Levitical  ordinances.  The  red  heifer 
stood  quite  outside  the  number  of  ordinary 
victims  as  demanded  by  the  law,  and  there- 
fore it  was  not  slain  at  any  hallowed  altar, 
nor,  necessarily,  by  any  hallowed  hand.  8. 
It  served  to  prefigure  in  a  wonderful  and 
indeed  startling  way  the  sacrifice  of  Christ 
outside  the  gate.  In  later  days  the  heifer  was 
conducted  upon  a  double  tier  of  arches  over 
the  ravine  of  Eedron  to  the  opposite  slope  of 
Olivet.  That  he  may  bring  her  forth, .  . 
and  one  shall  slay  her.  The  nominative  to 
both  these  verbs  is  alike  unexpressed.  Sep- 
tuagint,  Kai  imovaiv  .  .  xai  aipaiovmv.  In 
the  practice  of  later  ages  the  high  priest  led 
her  out,  and  another  priest  killed  her  in  his 
presence,  but  it  was  not  so  commanded. 
Yer.  4.— And  Eleazar .  .  shall , .  sprinkle 

of  h«r  blood  directly  before  (^^P  ns!)'?^) 
the  tabernacle.  By  this  act  the  death  of 
the  heifer  became  a  sacrificial  offering.  The 
sprinkling  in  the  direction  of  the  sanctuary 
intimated  that  the  offering  was  made  to  him 
that  dwelt  therejn,  and  the  "  seven  times " 
was  the  ordinary  number  of  perfect  perform- 
ance (Levit.  iv.  17,  &c.). 

Ver.  5. — One  shall  burn  the  heifer.  See 
on  Exod.  zzix.  14.  And  her  blood.  In  all 
other  cases  the  blood  was  poured  away  beside 
the  altar,  because  in  the  blood  was  the  life, 
and  the  life  was  given  to  God  in  exchange 
for  the  life  of  the  offerer.  This  great  truth, 
which  underlay  all  animal  sacrifices,  was 
represented  in  this  case  by  the  sprinkling 
towards  the  sanctuary.  The  rest  of  the 
blood  was  burnt  with  the  carcase,  either 
because  outside  the  holy  precincts  there  was 
no  consecrated  earth  to  receive  the  blood,  or 
in  order  that  the  virtue  of  the  blood  might 
in  a  figure  pass  into  the  ashes  and  add  to 
their  efficacy. 

Yer.  6. — Cedar  wood,  and  scarlet,  and 
hyssop.  See  on  Levit.  xiv.  4 — 6  for  the 
significance  of  these  things.  The  antiseptic 
and  medicinal  qualities  of  the  cedar  {Juni- 
perus  oxycedrus)  and  hyssop  (probably  Cap- 
varis  spinosa)  make  their  use  readily  intel- 
ligible ;  the  symbolism  of  the  "scarlet"  la 
much  more  obscure. 

Ver.  7. — The  priest  shall  be  unclean  until 
the  even,  i.  e.  the  priest  who  superintended 
the  sacrifice,  and  dipped  his  finger  in  the 
blood.  Every  one  of  these  details  was  de- 
vised in  order  to  express  the  intensely  infec- 
tious character  of  death  in  its  moral  aspect. 
Th&  very  ashes,  which  wer6  so  widely  potent 
for  cleansing  (ver.  10),  and  the  cleansing 
water  itself  (ver.  19),  made  every  one  that 
touched  them,  even  for  the  purifying  of 
another,  himself  unclean.  At  the  same  time 
NUMBERS. 


the  ashes,  while,  as  it  were,  so  redolent  of 
death  that  they  must  be  kept  outside  tht 
camp,  were  most  holy,  and  were  to  be  laid 
up  by  a  clean  man  in  a  clean  place  (ver.  9). 
These  contradictions  find  their  true  explana- 
tion only  when  we  consider  them  as  fore- 
shadowing the  mysteries  of  the  atonement. 

Ver.  9.— For  a  water  of  separation,  i.  e.  a 
water  which  should  remedy  the  state  of  legal 
separation  due  to  the  defilement  of  death, 
just  as  in  ch.  viii.  the  water  of  purification 
from  sin  is  called  the  water  of  sin. 

Yer.  10.— It  shall  be  nnto  the  children 
of  Israel  .  .  a  statute  for  ever.  This  may 
refer  only  to  the  former  part  of  the  verse, 
according  to  the  analogy  of  ver.  21,  or  it 
may  refer  to  the  whole  ordinance  of  the  red 
heifer. 

Ver.  11. — Shall  be  unclean  seven  days. 
The  fact  of  defilement  by  contact  with  the 
dead  had  been  mentioned  before  (Levit.  xxi. 
1 ;  Numb.  v.  2 ;  vi.  6 ;  ix.  6),  and  had  no  doubt 
been  recognised  as  a  religious  pollution  from 
ancient  times  ;  but  the  exact  period  of  con- 
sequent uncleanness  is  here  definitely  fixed. 

Ver.  12. — ^With  it.  13.  /.  e.,  as  the  sense 
clearly  demands,  with  the  water  of  separa- 
tion. 

Ver.  13.— Defileth  the  tdbemacle  of  the 
Lord.  On  the  bearing  of  this  remarkable 
announcement  see  Levit.  xv.  31.  The  un- 
cleanness of  death  was  not  simply  a  per8on»l 
matter,  it  involved,  if  not  duly  purged,  the 
whole  congregation,  and  reached  even  to 
God  himself,  for  its  defilement  spread  to  the 
sanctuary.  Cut  off  firom  Israel,  i, «,  ex- 
communicate on  earth,  and  liable  to  the 
direct   visitation  of  Heaven  (cf.  Gen.  ivii. 

14). 
Ver.  14.— This  is  the  law.     nnWH.     By 

this  law  the  extent  of  the  infection  is  rigidly 
defined,  as  its  duration  by  the  last.  In  a 
tent.  This  fixes  the  date  of  the  law  as  given 
in  the  wilderness,  but  it  leaves  in  some  un- 
certainty the  rule  as  to  settled  habitations. 
The  Septuagint,  however,  has  here  ev  oUi^, 
and  therefore  it  would  appear  that  the  law 
was  transferred  without  modification  from 
the  tent  to  the  house.  In  the  case  of  large 
houses  with  many  inhabilnnts,  eome  relaxa- 
tion of  the  strictness  must  have  been  found 


Ver.  IS. — Which  hath  no  covering  bound 
upon  it.  So  the  Septuagint  (Sua  oix'  Sfl^of 
KaraSiSfTai  sir'  airii),  and'  this  is  the  sense. 

In  the  Hebrew  7''JpS,  a  string,  stands  in 
apposition  to  l^DS,  a.  covering.  If  the 
vessel  was  open,  its  contents  were  polluted 
by  the  odour  of  death. 

Yer.  16. — One  that  is  slain  with  a  sword. 
This  would  apply  especially,  it  would  seem, 
to  the  field  of  battle;   but  the  Uw  must 


248 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[CH.  XIX.  1—22. 


eertainly  have  been  relaxed  in  the  case  of 
loldiers.  Or  a  bone  of  a  man,  or  a  grave. 
Thus  the  defilement  was  extended  to  the 
monldering  remains  of  humanity,  and  eren 
to  the  tombs  (fivq/iara.  Cf.  Luke  zi.  44) 
which  held  them. 

Ver.  17. — Kunning  water.  Septuaglnt, 
vluip  ZSiv  (cf.  Levit.  ziv.  6  ;  John  iv,  10). 

Ver.  18. — Shall  take  hyssop.  See  Ezod. 
xii  22,  and  cf.  Ps.  li.  7. 

Yer.  19.— On  the  third  day,  and  on  the 
seventh  day.  The  twice-repeated  amplica- 
tion of  holy  water  marked  the  clinging 
nature  of  the  pollution  to  be  removed ;  so 
also  the  repetition  of  the  threat  in  the  fol- 
lowing verse  marked  the  heinonsness.  of  the 
ne^ect  to  seek  its  removal. 

Yer.  21. — It  shall  be  a  perpetual  statute. 


This  formnla  nsnally  emphasises  something 
of  solemn  importance.  In  this  case,  as  ap- 
parently above  in  ver.  10,  the  regulations 
thus  enforced  might  seem  of  trifling  moment. 
But  the  whole  design  of  this  ordinance,  down 
to  its  minutest  detail,  was  to  stamp  npon 
physical  death  a  far-reaching  power  of  defil- 
ing and  separating  irom  God,  which  extended 
even  to  the  very  means  Divinely  appointed 
as  a  remedy.  The  Jew,  whose  religious  feel- 
ings were  modelled  upon  this  law,  must  have 
felt  himself  entangled  in  the  meshes  of  a  net 
so  widely  cast  about  him  that  he  could 
hardly  quite  escape  it  by  extreme  caution 
and  multiplied  observances  ;  he  might  indeed 
exclaim,  unless  habit  hardened  him  to  it, 
"  Who  shall  deliver  me  iiom  the  body  of  this 
death  ?  " 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vers.  1  —  22.  —  The  remedy  of  death.     We   have  In  this  chapter,  Bpiritoally, 

death,  and  the  remedy  for  death.  Death  is  treated  of  not  as  the  mere  physical 
change  which  is  the  end  of  life,  nor  as  the  social  and  domestic  loss  which  breaks  so 
many  hearts  and  causes  so  many  tears  to  flow,  but  as  the  inseparable  companion  and, 
as  it  were,  alter  ego  of  sin,  whose  dark  shadow  does  not  merely  blight,  but  pollutes, 
which  shuts  out  not  so  much  the  light  of  life  as  the  light  of  God.  -  It  is  death,  not 
as  he  is  to  the  dead,  but  as  he  is  to  the  living,  and  to  them  in  their  religious  life. 
It  is  true  that  according  to  the  letter  it  is  physical  death  only  which  is  spoken  of, 
and  the  ceremonial  uncleanness  which  ensued  upon  contact  with  it.  It  is  true  also 
that  this  uncleanness,  so  minutely  regulated,  and  so  held  in  abhorrence,  was  a  matter 
of  superstition.  The  last  relics  of  religious  feeling  (or,  upon  another  view,  its  first 
dawnings)  in  the  lowest  savages  take  the  form  of  a  superstitious  dread  of  the  lifeless 
remains  of  the  departed  and  of  their  resting-place.  There  is  in  truth  nothing  in  the 
touch  of  the  dead  which  can  infect  or  contaminate  the  living,  or  afEect  in  the  least 
their  moral  and  spiritual  condition.  Nevertheless,  most  of  the  nations  (and  especially 
the  Egyptians)  elaborated  the  primitive  superstition  of  their  forefathers  into  a  code 
of  religious  sentiment  and  observance  which  took  a  firm  hold  of  the  popular  mind 
It  pleased  God  to  adopt  this  primitive  and  widespread  superstition  (as  in  so  many 
other  cases)  into  his  own  Divine  legislation,  and  to  make  it  a  vehicle  of  deep  and 
important  spiritual  truths,  and  an  instrument  for  preparing  the  national  mind  and 
conscience  for  the  glorious  revelation  of  life  and  incorruption  through  Christ.  Only 
in  the  light  of  the  gospel  can  the  treatment  of  death  in  this  chapter  be  edifying  or 
indeed  intelligible,  for  otherwise  it  were  only  the  imposition  of  a  ceremonial  yoke, 
extremely  burdensome  in  itself,  and  grounded  upon  a  painful  superstition.  But  it  is 
BufBcient  to  point  out  that  death  is  only  treated  of  in  connection  with  its  remedy, 
even  as  eternal  death  is  only  clearly  revealed  in  that  gospel  which  tells  us  of  ever- 
lasting life.  In  this  remedy  for  death  we  have  one  of  the  most  remarkable  types  of 
the  atonement,  and  of  its  application  to  the  cleansing  of  individual  souls,  to  be  found 
in  the  Old  Testament,  The  very  exceptional  character  of  the  ordinance,  and  its 
isolation  from  the  body  of  the  Mosaic  legislation ;  the  singular  and  apparently  con- 
tradictory character  of  its  details,  as  well  as  the  great  importance  assigned  to  it  both 
in  the  ordinance  itself  and  in  the  practice  of  the  Jews ;  would  have  led  us  to  look  for 
some  eminent  and  distinctive  foreshadowings  of  the  one  Sacrifice  once  offered.  The 
New  Testament  confirms  this  natural  expectation,  not  indeed  dwelling  upon  details, 
but  ranking  "the  ashes  of  an  heifer  sprinkling  the  unclean"  side  by  side  with  "the 
blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats,"  as  typifying  the  more  prevailing  ez{  iation  made  by 
Christ.  We  have,  therefore,  in  this  ordinance  Christ  himself  in  the  oneness  of  hia 
election  and  sacrifice ;  Christ  in  the  perfectness,  freedom,  and  gentleness  of  his 
nntaiuted  life ;  Christ  in  many  circumstances  of  his  rejection  and  death ;  Christ  in 


CH.  xk:  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  2« 

the  enduring  effects  of  his  expiation  to  do  away  the  contagion  and  terror  of  spiritual 
death ;  in  a  word,  we  have  him  who  by  dying  overcame  death,  and  delivered  them  who 
through  fear  of  death  were  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage.  In  drawing  out 
this  great  type  we  may  consider — 1.  The  circumstances  under  which  the  ordinance 
was  given.  2.  The  choice  of  the  victim.  3.  The  manner  of  sacrifice.  4.  The 
application  of  its  cleansing  virtue. 

I.  As  TO  THE  ciBCUMSTANCEs  OF  TIME  AND  FLAOB.  Consider — 1.  That  the  ordin- 
ance of  the  red  heifer  was  given  not  at  Sinai,  but  in  the  wilderness  of  Paran,  the 
region  of  exile,  of  wandering ;  the  land  of  the  shadow  of  death,  which  was  but  the 
ante-chamber  of  the  tomb  and  of  eternal  darkness  to  that  generation.  The  whole 
Levitical  system  had  been  given  in  the  wilderness,  but  in  the  wilderness  as  a  land  of 
liberty  to  serve  God,  and  as  the  threshold  of  the  promised  land  of  life  flowing  with 
milk  and  honey.  Even  bo  Christ  was  given  to  us  when  we  lay  in  darkness  and  the 
shadow  of  death,  living  in  a  world  whose  prince  was  Satan,  wherein  was  no  rest, 
and  wherefrom  was  no  escape,  save  into  the  gloomier  land  beyond  the  grave.  2. 
That  it  was  given  at  a  time  when  Israel  lay  under  condemnation  for  rebellion,  and 
under  sentence  of  death;  when  death,  who  had  been  restrained  for.a  season,  was  let 
looge  upon  them  with  multiplied  terrors  to  prey  upon  them  until  they  were  consumed, 
filling  the  minds  of  them  that  lived  with  horror  and  despair.  Even  so  Christ  was 
given  unto  a  dying  raee,  Ijdng  under  the  wrath  of  God  for  sin,  and  in  perpetual 
bondage  through  certain  fear  of  coming  death.  Death  was  the  universal  tyrant 
whose  terror  sickened  the  boldest  heart  and  saddened  the  uneasy  mirth  of  the  gayest. 
3.  That  it  vkis  given  at  a  time  when  the  routine  of  sacrifices  and  holy  rites  was 
abandoned,  partly  as  out  of  their  power  to  maintam,  partly  as  useless  for  such  as 
were  alienated  from  God  and  appointed  to  die.  How  should  men  eat  the  passover 
who  had  but  escaped  from  Egypt  to  perish  miserably  in  a  howling  wilderness  ?  Even 
so  Christ  was  given  to  a  race  which  had  little  belief  and  less  comfort  in  its  religious 
rites,  Jewish  or  Gentile ;  which  knew  itself  alienated  from  God,  excluded  from  heaven  ; 
which  had  tried  all  outward  and  formal  rites,  and  found  that  they  could  not  deliver 
from  the  fear  of  death.  Even  the  Divinely-given,  religious  system  of  Moses  had  not 
a  word  to  say  about  the  life  to  come,  could  not  whisper  one  syllable  of  comfort  to 
the  dying  soul. 

II.  As  TO  THE  CHOICE  OF  VICTIM.  Consider — 1.  That  the  victim  was  (so  far  as 
could  possibly  be)  one,  and  one  only ;  in  striking  contrast  to  the  multiplicity  and 
constant  repetition  (with  its  consequent  difiBoulty  and  expense)  of  the  ordinary 
sacrifices  of  the  law.  One  red  heifer  availed  for  centuries.  Only  six  are  said  to 
have  been  required  during  the  whole  of  Jewish  history ;  for  the  smallest  quantity  of 
the  ashes  availed  to  impart  the  cleansing  virtue  to  the  holy  water.  Had  it  indeed 
been  possible  to  preserve  the  ashes  from  unavoidable  waste,  no  second  red  heifer 
would  ever  have  needed  to  be  offered.  Even  so  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  is  one,  and 
only  one,  as  opposed  to  all  the  offerings  of  the  law ;  and  this  because  the  availing 
power  of  it  and  the  cleansing  virtue  of  his  atonement  endure  for  ever,  without  the 
slightest  loss  of  efScacy  or  possibility  of  being  exhausted.  2.  That  the  victim  was 
a  heifer,  not  a  male  animal,  ow  in  almost  all  other  cases.  Even  so  we  may  believe 
with  reverence  that  there  was  a  distinctly  feminine  side  to  the  character  of  Christ,  a 
tenderness  and  gentleness  which  might  have  been  counted  weakness  had  it  not  been 
united  with  so  much  masculine  force  of  command  and  energy  of  will.  And  this  was 
necessary  to  the  perfect  Man ;  for  whereas  Eve  was  taken  from  out  of  Adam  after 
his  creation,  this  points  to  the  subtraction  from  the  ideal  man  of  some  elements  of 
his  nature,  so  that  man  and  woman  only  represent  between  them  a  complete  humanity. 
As,  therefore,  we  ever  find  in  the  greatest  men  some  strongly-marked  feminine  traits 
of  character,  bo  we  may  believe  that  in  Christ,  who  was  the  second  Adam,  and  (in  a 
special  sense)  the  seed  of  the  woman,  this  feminine  side  of  the  perfect  ideal  was 
fully  restored.  3.  That  the  victim  was  red.  Even  so  our  Lord,  as  touching  bis 
bodily  nature,  was  of  that  common  earth,  which  is  red,  from  which  Adam  took  his 
name.  Moreover,  he  was  red  in  the  blood  of  his  passion,  as  the  prophet  testifies 
(Isa.  Ixiii.  1,  2 ;  Bev.  zix.  13),  4,  Tfiat  it  was  without  blemish.  A  matter  about 
which  the  Jews  took  incredible  pains,  three  hairs  together  of  any  but  the  one  colour 
being  held  fatal  to  the  choice.    Bvep  tc  our  Lord,  even  by  the  testimony  of  Jew* 

b2 


SS44  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [<jh.  xix.  1—22. 

and  heathens,  was  without  fault  and  irreproachable  (John  vii.  46 ;  xviii.  23 ;  xix.  4 ; 
1  Pet.  ii.  22).  6.  That  no  yoke  had  ever  come  upon  it.  The  innocent  freedom  of 
its  young  life  had  never  been  harshly  bent  to  the  purposes  and  plans  of  others.  Even 
so  our  Lord  was  never  under  any  yoke  of  constraint,  nor  was  any  other  will  ever 
imposed  upon  him.  It  is  true  that  he  made  himself  obedient  to  his  Father  in  all 
tilings,  to  his  earthly  parents  within  their  proper  sphere,  and  to  his  enemies  in  his 
appointed  sufferings ;  but  all  this  was  purely  voluntary,  and  it  was  of  the  essence  of 
his  perfect  sacrifice  that  no  constraint  of  any  sort  was  ever  put  upon  him.  It  was 
his  own  will  which  accepted  the  will  of  others,  as  shaping  for  him  his  life  and 
destiny. 

III.  As  TO  THB  MANNER  OF  SAOBiriCB.  Consider — 1.  That  the  red  heifer  was  led, 
outside  the  camp  (or  city)  of  God  to  die  in  an  wnhaMowed  place — a  thing  absolutely 
singular,  even  among  sacrifices  for  sin.  Even  so  our  Lord,  by  whose  death  we  are 
restored  to  life,  suffered  without  the  gate  (Heb.  xiii.  12) ;  partly  because  he  was 
despised  and  rejected,  but  partly  because  he  was  an  anathema,  made  a  curse  for 
us,  concentrating  upon  himself  all  our  sin  and  death  ;  partly  also  because  he  died 
not  for  that  natipn  only  (whose  home  and  heritage  was  the  holy  city),  but  for  the 
whole  wide  world  beyond.  2.  Thai  the  heifer  was  delivered  to  the  chief  priest,  and 
by  him  led  forth  to  die,  but  slain  by  other  hands  before  Ms  face.  Even  so  our  Lord 
was  delivered  unto  Caiaphas  and  the  Jewish  priesthood,  and  by  them  was  he  brought 
unto  his  death ;  but  he  was  crucified  by  alien  hands,  not  theirs, — God  so  over-ruling 
it  (John  xviii.  31), — yet  in  their  presence,  and  with  their  sanction  and  desire.  3. 
That  the  death  of  the  heifer  was  not  in  appearance  saerifidal,  hut  became  so  when  its 
blood  was  sprinkled  towards  the  sanctuary  by  the  finger  of  the  priest.  Even  so  the 
death  of  Christ  upon  the  cross  was  not  made  an  atoning  sacrifice  by  its  outward 
incidents,  or  even  by  its  extreme  injustice,  or  by  the  hatred  of  the  Truth  which 
prompted  it ;  for  then  it  had  been  only  a  murder,  or  a  martyrdom,  and  not  equal  to 
many  others  in  the  cruelty  shown  or  the  suffering  patiently  endured ;  but  it  became 
a  true  propitiatory  sacrifice  by  virtue  of  the  deliberate  will  and  purpose  of  Christ, 
whereby  he  (being  Priest  as  well  as  Victim)  offered  his  sufferings  and  death  in  holy 
submission  and  with  devout  gladness  to  the  Father.  As  the  priest  sprinkled  of  the 
blood  with  his  own  finger  towards  the  sanctuary,  and  made  it  a  sacrifice,  so  Christ, 
by  his  will  to  suffer  for  us  and  to  be  our  atonement  with  God,  imparted  an  intention 
or  direction  to  his  death  which  made  it  in  the  deepest  sense  a  sacrifice  (Luke  xii.  50 ; 
John  xvii.  19 ;  Heb.  ix,  14 ;  x.  8 — 10).  4.  That  the  heifer  was  wholly  consumed 
withf/re,  as  was  the  case  with  all  sin  offerings  for  the  sins  of  many,  as  a  thing  wholly 
due  unto  God.  Even  so  Christ  was  wholly  given  up  by  himself  unto  that  God  who 
is  a  consuming  fire,  a  fire  of  wrath  against  sin,  a  fire  of  love  towards  the  sinner.  In 
this  flame  of  Divine  zeal  against  sin,  of  Divine  zeal  for  soul^,  was  Christ  wholly  con- 
sumed, nothing  in  him  remaining  indifferent,  nothing  escaping  the  agony  and  the 
cross  (cf .  John  ii.  17).  6.  That,  contrary  to  the  universal  rule,  the  blood  of  the  heifer 
was  not  poured  away,  but  was  burnt  with  the  carcase,  and  so  was  represented  in  the 
ashes.  Even  so  "  the  precious  blood  "  of  Christ  which  he  shed  for  our  redemption 
did  not  pass  away ;  the  cleansing  virtue  of  it  and  the  abiding  strength  of  it  remain 
for  ever  in  the  means  and  ministries  of  grace  which  we  owe  to  his  atoning  deatli. 
6.  That  cedar,^  hyssop,  and  sea/rlet  were  mingled  in  the  burning.  Even  so  there 
are  for  ever  mingled  in  the  passion  of  Christ,  never  to  be  lost  sight  of  if  we  would 
view  it  aright,  these  three  elements :  fragrance  and  incorruption,  cleansing  efficacy, 
martial  and  royal  grandeur.  If  we  omit  any  of  these  we  do  wrong  to  the  full  glory 
of  the  cross  ;  for  these  three  belong  to  him,  as  the  Prophet,  the  fragrance  of  whose 
holy  teachings  has  filled  the  world  j  as  the  Priest,  who  only  can  purge  us  with  hyssop 
that  we  may  be  clean ;  as  the  King,  who  never  reigned  more  gloriously  than  on  the 
tree  (see  Cant.  iii.  11 ;  Matt,  ixvii.  28 ;  Col.  ii.  15).  7.  That  the  priest  himself  and 
the  man  that  slew  the  heifer  became  unclean,  contrary  to  the  usual  rule.  Even  so 
the  Jewish  priesthood  and  the  heathen  soldiery  who  slew  our  Lord,  albeit  he  died 
for  them  as  well  as  for  others,  yet  incurred  a  fearful  guilt  thereby  (Acts  ii.  28), 

IV.  As  TO  THE  APPUCATION  OF  THE  EXPIATION.  Consider — 1.  That  the  ashes  were, 
to  far  as  could  be  presented  to  the  senses,  the  indestructible  reMue  of  the  entire  victim. 
inclading  its  blood,  after  the  sacrifice  was  completed.     Even  so  the  whole  merits  oi 


CH,  XIX.  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES.  «4« 

I— ^— — i— ^-— ^—  M^i^M^^^^^^— ^— — 11  I  I  I         III     ■I...II..  I..I  ■  ■       I         .——Mil -■!■ 

Ohriat — the  entire  value  and  efficacy  of  his  self-sacriflcd,  of  his  life  given  for  na,  of 
all  that  he  was,  and  did,  and  suffered — remain  ever,  and  ahide  with  ua,  and  are  avail« 
able  for  our  cleansing.  2.  That  the  ashes  of  the  heifer  were  laid  up,  hut  notbf/  the 
priest,  or  hy  any  one  concerned  in  its  death,  without  the  camp  in  a  clean  pkuse. 
Even  BO  the  ments  of  Christ  and  the  efficacy  of  his  sacrifice  are  preserved  for  ever ; 
yet  not  in  the  Jerusalem  below,  nor  by  any  agency  of  them  that  slew  him ;  but  he 
himself  (see  4.)  hath  laid  them  up  for  the  use  of  all  nations  in  the  Church  which  is 
"  clean,"  as  governed  and  sanctified  by  his  Holy  Spirit.  3.  That  the  ashes  of  the 
heifer  when  mixed  with  "  living  water  were  made  a  pwrificationfor  sin  imto  Israel 
to  deliver  them  from  the  bondage  of  death.  Even  so  the  merits  of  Christ  and  the 
virtue  of  his  atonement  are  available  for  all,  through  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
(John  iv.  10 ;  vii.  38),  to  purify  from  all  sin,  and  to  set  free  from  the  power  of 
death.  4.  That  when  any  undean  person  was  to  hepv/rged,  it  must  be  done  by  "  a 
clean  person,"  not  by  any  one  having  need  of  cleansing  himself.  Even  so  the  cleans- 
ing efficacy  of  Christ's  atonement  must  be  applied  to  the  sinful  soul  only  by  one 
that  is  clean,  and  not  by  any  one  under  like  condemnation  with  himself.  And  this 
"clean  person"  can  only  be  Christ  himself,  who  only  is  holy,  harmless,  and  un- 
defiled  (Job  xiv.  4 ;  xv.  14  ;  Rom.  iii.  23 ;  Gal.  iii  22)  ;  wherefore  the  sprinkling  of 
purification  from  sin  and  death  can  only  be  effected  by  Christ  himself.  6.  That  the 
clean  person  did  not  apply  the  water  for  purification  with  his  finger,  as  when  the 
priest  mrimkled  the  blood,  but  by  means  ^hyssop,  a  lowly  herb  used  as  an  aspergil- 
lum  (cf.  Exod.  xii.  22 ;  1  Kings  iv.  33 ;  Ps.  n.  7).  Even  so  it  hath  pleased  the  Lord 
to  apply  the  cleansing  virtue  of  his  blood  and  passion  to  souls  unclean  not  directly 
and  personally,  as  he  offered  his  sacrifice  of  himself  to  the  Fatlier,  but  through  lowly 
means  and  ministries  of  grace,  by  means  of  which  he  himself  is  pleased  to  work 
(cf.  John  iv.  1,  2  ;  xiii.  20;  xx.  21—23 ;  1  Cor. x.  16  ;  2  Cor.  ii.  10  ;  iv.  7  ;  Gal.  iii. 
27).  6.  That  the  unclean  person  was  to  be  sprinkled  on  the  third  day  and  on  the 
seventh  day  ere  he  was  wholly  cleansed  from  the  savour  of  death.  Even  so  must 
the  cleansing  virtue  of  the  atonement  come  unto  us  in  the  twofold  power,  (1)  of 
tlie  resurrection,  wherein  we  rise  from  the  death  of  sin  unto  the  active  life  of  right- 
eousness ;  (2)  of  the  holy  sabbath,  wherein  we  rfest  from  our  own  works  by  renounc- 
ing self  and  living  for  God  and  for  our  neighbour.  The  cleansing  which  has  not 
this  double  moral  aspect  is  not  perfect — ^the  savour  of  death  is  not  taken  away.  Nor 
is  the  order  inverted  because  the  third  day  (of  resurrection)  comes  before  the  seventh 
(of  rest)  ;  for  as  a  fact  the  activities  of  the  new  life  in  Christ  do  precede  in  the  soul 
the  cessation  of  the  old  life,  which  ia  the  spiritual  sabbath. 

Consider,  further,  with  respect  to  the  infection  op  death  —  1.  That  the 
.Tews  were  taught  most  emphatically  and  most  mirmtely  to  regard  death  as  a  foul 
and  horrible  thing,  the  slightest  contact  with  which  alienated  from  God  and  banished 
from  his  worship.  Even  so  are  we  taught  that  death  is  the  shadow  of  sin  (Rom.  v. 
12)  and  the  wages  of  mn{ibid.  vi.  23),  and  the  active  enemy  of  Christ  (1  Cor.  xv,  26 ; 
Rev.  vi.  8 ;  xx.  14),  and  that  the  death  of  Christ  was  an  awful  mystery  connected 
with  his  being  made  "sin"  and  "a  curse"  for  us  (Matt,  xxvii,  46,  and  the  Passion 
Psalms  passim).  Yet  in  the  law  the  horror  is  concentrated  upon  physical  death, 
whereas  in  the  gospel  it  is  removed  from  this  and  attached  to  the  second  death,  of 
tlie  soul  (Matt.  X.  28 ;  Mark  v.  39,  41  ;  1  Thess.  iv.  14 ;  Rev.  ii.  11 ;  xx.  6).  2.  That 
whoso  came  into  contact,  even  indirectly,  with  the  dead,  or  even  entered  a  tent  where 
any  corpse  lay,  was  undean  a  whole  seven  days.  Far  from  being  able  to  give  any 
of  his  own  life  to  the  deceased,  he  himself  was  infected  with  his  death.  Even  so 
are  we  powerless  of  ourselves  to  do  good  to  the  spiritually  dead  beside  us,  but 
rather  are  certain  to  catch  from  them  the  contagion  of  their  death.  None  can  live 
(naturally)  among  those  that  are  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  without  to  some  extent 
becoming  like  them.  3.  That  this  rule  applied  as  much  to  the  Zevitical priests  as  to 
any  other ;  nay,  the  very  high  priest  who  superintended  the  sacrifice,  and  the  man 
who  applied  the  holy  water,  became  themselves  unclean.  Even  so  there  is  none  of 
ua,  whatever  his  office  may  be,  or  howsoever  ho  may  be  occupied  about  religious 
things,  that  does  not  contract  defilement  from  the  dead  world  and  the  dead  works 
which  are  around  him.  Our  Lord  alone  could  utterly  disregard  the  infection  of  death, 
because  in  his  inherent  holiness  he  was  p.  oof  against  its  infection.    4.  2%a<  thert 


us  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEfia  [ck.  ta.  1—22. 

was  no  cleansing  for  those  dtfiLtd  with,  death  hut  hy  means  of  the  sprinMing  of  the 
ashes.  Even  so  mere  is  no  deliverance  from  the  sentence  and  savour  of  death  -wliich 
hath  passed  upon  us  hut  through  the  sprinkling  of  the  bipod  of  Christ.  6.  That  if 
any  was  not  purified  in  the  appointed  way,  he  did  not  simply  forego  a  great  benefit 
to  himsdf,  he  incurred  the  wrath  of  God  as  one  that  wantonly  defiled  his  sanctuary. 
Even  so  that  Christian  who  will  not  seek  cleansing  for  his  uncleanness  and  the 
hallowing  of  the  precious  blood  does  not  only  sin  against  his  own  soul,  remaining 
in  alienation  from  his  God ;  he  grieves  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  provokes  him  to  anger, 
as  one  that  despises  his  goodness,  and  mars  by  his  state  and  example  the  sanctity  of 
God's  living  temple,  which  is  the  Church  (Matt.  xxii.  11 — 13  ;  John  xiii.  8,  10, 11 ; 
'1  Cor.  iii.  16,  17 ;  Eph.  ii.  20—22 ;  Heb.  x.  29). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 10,  17 — 19.— Purge  me  with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  be  clean.  This  law 
respecting  the  purification  of  one  who  has  contracted  uncleanness  by  contact  with 
the  dead  must  have  been  familiar  to  every  Israelite.  Death  with  impartial  foot 
visits  every  house.  No  one  can  long  remain  a  stranger  to  it  There  is  evidence, 
moreover,  that  this  law  did  not  fail  to  impress  devout  hearts,  deepening  in  them  the 
feeling  of  impurity  before  God  and  unfitness  for  his  presence,  and  at  the  same  time 
awakening  the  hope  that  there  is  in  the  grace  of  God  a  remedy  for  uncleanness. 
Hence  David's  prayer, "  Purge  me  with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  be  clean."  The  law  gives 
direction  regarding — 

I.  The  pdeifyinq  elkmknt.  1.  It  was  water,  pare  spring  water  (ver.  17^.  A 
most  natural  symbol,  much  used  in  the  Levitical  lustrations,  and  which  is  still  m  use 
in  the  Christian  Church.'  At  the  door  of  the  sanctuary  there  is  still  a  laver.  In  the 
sacrament  of  baptism  Christ  says  to  every  candidate  for  admission  into  his  house, 
"  If  I  wash  thee  not,  thou  hast  no  part  with  me."  2.  In  the  present  instance 
the  ashes  of  a  sin  offering  were  mingled  toith  the  wafer.  A  heifer  was  procured  at 
the  expense  of  the  congregation, — red,  unblemished,  on  which  never  yoke  had  come, — 
and  it  was  slain  as  a  sacrifice.  The  red  heifer  was  a  true  sin  ofEering.  It  is  so  named 
in  vers.  9,  17  (Hebrew).  But  in  several  respects  it  dilEered  remarkably  from  aU  the 
other  sin  ofEerings.  Although  the  priest  was  to  see  it  slain,  and  with  his  own  finger 
sprinkled  its  blood  toward  the  holy  place,  he  was  forbidden  to  slay  it  himself ;  it 
was  slain  not  at  the  altar,  but  outside  the  camp,  and  the  carcase  was  wholly  consumed 
without  being  either  flayed,  or  cleaned,  or  divided,  or  laid  out  in  order.  Besides, 
every  one  who  took  part  in  the  sacrificial  act  was  thereby  rendered  unclean ;  for 
which  reason  Eleazar,  not  Aaron,  was  to  do  the  priest's  part — the  high  priest  might 
not  defile  himself  for  any  cause.  The  ashes  of  this  singular  ofEering  were  carefiuly 
preserved  to  be  used  to  commimicate  purifying  virtue  to  the  water  rpquired  for 
lustration  from  time  to  time.  None  of  these  details  is  without  meaning,  if  we  , 
could  only  get  at  it.  The  points  of  chief  importance  are  these : — (1)  The  sin  ofEer- 
ing prefigured  Christ  in  his  offering  himself  without  spot  to  God  (Heb.  ix.  14).  The 
singular  rule  which  forbade  the  slaying  of  the  red  heifer  witlxin  the'  precinct  of  the 
camp,  who  does  not  see  in  it  a  prophecy  of  the  fact  that  the  Just  One  suffered  the 
leproaohful  death  of  a  malefactor  without  the  gate  of  Jerusalem?  (Heb.  xiii.  12, 13). 
(2)  Without  prior  expiation  there  could  be  no  purification,  and,  conversely,  expiation 
being  made,  the  way  was  open  for  purification.  So  when  Christ  had  once  offered 
himself  without  spot  to  God,  provision  was  thereby  made  for  purging  our  consciences. 
There  is  a  cleansing  virtue 'in  the  blood  of  Christ.  The  man  who  believes  in  Christ 
is  not  only  pardoned,  but  is  so  purified  in  his  conscience  that  he  no  longer  ihrinks  in 
shame  from  the  eye  of  God,  but  draws  near  with  holy  confidence. 

n.  The  purifying  rite  (vers.  17 — 19).  Nothing  could  be  more  simple.  A  few 
particles  of  the  ashes  of  the  sin  offering  were  put  into  a  vessel  of  spring  water ;  this 
was  sprinkled  with  a  bunch  of  hyssop  on  the  unclean  person  on  the  third  day  and 
again  on  the  seventh,  an  act  which  any  clean  person  could  perform  in  any  town ;  by 
this  act  the  uncleanness  was  removed.  A  simple  rite,  but  not,  therefore,  optional. 
Wilful  neglect  was  a  presumptuous  sin. 

QeneiraJL  lesson* : — 1.  There  is  something  in  sin  which  unfits  for  the  society  o£  God, 


(A.  xiz.  1-22.]  TBE  BOOS:  OF  NUMBEBS.  847 

One  of  the  chief  lessons  of  the  ceremonial  law.  When  the  grace  of  God  touches  tha 
heart,  one  of  its  first  effects  is  to  open  the  heart  to  feel  this.  "  Lord,  I  am  vile."  As 
liabits  of  personal  cleanliness  make  a  man  loathe  himself  when  he  has  been  touched 
with  filth,  so  the  grace  of  God  makes  a  man  loathe  himself  for  sin.  2.  There  is 
provision  in  Christ  for  making  men  clean.  His  blood  purges  the  conscience  from 
dead  works  to  serve  the  living  Ood.  3.  Of  this  provision  we  must  not  omit  to 
avail  ourselves.    Wilful  neglect  of  the  blood  of  sprinkling  is  presumptuous  sin. — B. 

Ver.  11. — Defilement  hy  contact  with  the  dead.  The  law  of  Mosea  was  a  yoke 
which  neither  the  fathers  of  the  nation  nor  their  descendants  were  able  to  bear.  It 
would  be  difficult  to  name  any  part  of  the  law  in  regard  to  which  Peter's  saying  was 
more  applicable  than  it  is  to  the  regulations  here  laid  down  regarding  defilement  by 
the  dead.  They  must  have  been  not  only  irksome  in  a  high  degree,  but  trying  to 
some  of  the  purest  and  most  tender  of  the  natural  affections. 

I.  For  WHAT  ARE  THE  PEOViBiOHfl  OF  THE  LAW?  1.  Contact  with  a  dead  body 
rendered  the  person  unclean,  and  so  disabled  him  from  enjoying  the  privileges  of  the 
sanctuary.  Many  an  Israelite  would,  like  Jacob,  desire  that  a  beloved  son  should  be 
with  him  when  he  died,  to  hear  his  last  words  and  put  his  hand  upon  his  eyes.  Many 
a  Joseph  would  covet  the  honour  of  paying  this  last  tribute  of  fiUal  affection.  Yet 
the  son  who  closed  his  father's  eyes  found  himself  branded  by  the  law  as  unclean, 
BO  that  if  it  happened  to  be  the  passover  time,  he  could  not  keep  the  feast.  Tha 
same  unwelcome  disability  befell  any  one  who,  walking  in  the  field,  came  upon  a 
dead  body  and  did  his  duty  by  it  as  a  good  citizen.  When  a  company  of  neighbours 
assembled  to  comfort  some  Martha  or  Mary  whose  brother  had  died,  and  to  bear  the 
mortal  remains  to  the  burial-place,  this  act  of  neighbourly  kindness  rendered  every 
one  of  them  unclean.  Our  Lord,  when  he  entered  the  chamber  of  death  in  Jainis' 
house,  and  when  he  touched  the  bier  at  the  gate  of  Nain,  thereby  took  upon  himself 
legal  defilement  and  its  consequences.  Not  only  so ;  if  a  man  happened  to  touch 
a  grave  or  a  human  bone,  he  contracted  defilement,  and  would  have  been  chargeable 
with  presumptuous  sin,  as  a  defiler  of  the  sanctuary,  if  he  had  ventured  thereafter  to 
set  foot  within  the  house  of  the  Lord.  2.  The  defilement  consequent  on  contact  with 
the  dead  was  defilement  of  the  graver  sort  Many  forms  of  defilement  only  disabled 
till  sunset,  and  were  removed  by  simply  washing  the  person  with  water.'  Defilement 
by  the  dead  lasted  a  whole  week,  aiid  could  be  removed  only  by  the  sprinkling  of 
the  water  of  purification  on  the  third  and  the  seventh  days :  an  irksome  rule.  3. 
Hence  all  specially  devoted  persons  in  Israel  were  forbidden  to  pay  the  last  offices 
of  kindness  to  deceased  friends.  A  priest  might  not  defile  himself  for  any  except 
his  nearest  blood  relations :  his  father,  or  mother,  or  brother,  or  unmarried  sister. 
As  for  the  high  priest,  he  was  forbidden  to  defile  himself  even  for  these.  And  the 
same  stringent  prohibition  applied  to  the  Nazarite  also. 

II.  What  was  the  beason  of  this  eemabkable  law?  and  what  does  it 
TEACH  DS  ?  1.  According  to  some  it  was  simply  a  sanitary  regulation.  The  sugges- 
tion is  not  to  be  wholly  set  aside.  So  long  as  this  law  was  in  force  extramural 
interment  must  have  been  the  rule.  No  city  in  Israel  contained  a  crowded  burial- 
ground,  diffusing  pestilence  within  its  walls,  nor  was  any  synagogue  made  a  place  of 
interment.  Much  less  did  the  Israelites  ever  revert  to  the  Egyptian  custom  of  giving 
a  place  within  their  houses  to  the  embalmed  bodies  of  deceased  friends.  In  theso 
respects  the  provisions  of  the  Mosaic  law  anticipated  by  8000  years  the  teaching  of 
our  modem  sanitary  science.  However,  this  intention  of  the  law  was  certainly  not  the 
principal  one.  2.  Another  view  of  it  is  suggested  by  Heb.  ix.  14 :  "  The  blood  of 
Christ  shall  purge  your  conscience  from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God."  Dead 
works  are  works  which  have  in  them  no  breath  of  spiritual  life.  Transgressions  of 
God's  law  are  dead  works ;  so  also  are  "  duties  "  not  animated  with  a  loving  regard 
for  the  glory  of  God.  Such  works  are  dead,  and,  being  dead,  defile  the  conscience, 
BO  that  it  needs  to  be  purified  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  3.  But  the  chief  reason  of  tha 
law  is,  without  doubt,  to  be  sought  in  the  principle  that  death  is  the  wages  of  sin. 
This  principle,  taught  so  plainly  in  Rom.  v.  and  1  Cor.  xv.,  was  not  unknown  to  tha 
Old  Testament  Church.  It  is  taught  in  the  story  of  the  Fall,  and  is  implied  in  Ps. 
xo.,  "  the  pr»y«r  of  Mosei."    The  habit  of  making  light  of  death — as  if  it  were  na 


248  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oh.  xix.  1—22. 

evil  at  all,  but  rather  the  welcome  riddance  of  the  soul  from  a  burdensome  and  unfit 
companion — was  not  learned  from  the  word  of  God.  The  Bible  teaches  us  to  regard 
the  body  as  the  fitting  dwelling-place  of  the  soul,  and  necessary  to  the  completeness 
of  our  nature.  That  separation  of  body  and  soul  which  takes  place  in  death,  it 
teaches  us  to  regard  as  penal.  Death,  accordingly,  is  the  awful  effect  and  memorial 
of  sin,  and  contact  with  the  dead  causes  defilement.  Blessed  be  God,  the  gospel 
invites  us  to  look  on  a  brighter  scene.  If  the  law  admonished  men  that  the  wages 
of  sin  is  death,  the  gospel  bears  witness  that  God  in  Christ  offers  to  us  a  gift  of 
eternal  life.  To  say  this  is  not  to  disparage  the  law.  Bright  objects  show  best  on  a 
dark  ground.  The  gospel  is  appreciated  rightly  by  those  only  who  huve  laid  to 
heart  the  teachings  of  the  law.  Still  it  is  not  the  dark  ground  that  we  are  invited  to 
gaze  upon  so  much  as  the  bright  object  to  whose  beauty  it  serves  for  a  foil  The 
relation  between  the  law  we  have  been  considering  and  the  grace  of  Christ  is 
strikingly  seen  in  the  story  of  the  raising  of  Jairus's  daughter,  and  of  the  widow's 
eon  at  Nain.  In  both  instances  Christ  was  careful  to  touch  the  dead  body ;  and  in 
both  instances  the  effect  immediately  wrought  proclaimed  the  intention  of  the 
act.  From  the  dead  there  went  out  no  real  defiling  influence  on  the  Lord.  On  the 
contrary,  from  him  there  went  forth  power  to  raise  the  dead.  In  Christ  grace  reigns 
through  righteousness  unto  life ;  he  is  the  Conqueror  of  death. — B. 

Vers.  1 — 22. — The  water  of  purification,  and  its  lessons-  The  extreme  diflSculty 
of  applying  the  details  of  this  chapter  to  the  spiritual  truths  of  which  they  were  a 
shadoiv  forbids  us  attempting  more  than  a  general  application  of  the  narrative. 

I.  GBBAT  OARB   WA3  NEEDED   IN   PBOVIDINQ   THIS   SIN   OVFERINQ  (for   SO   it  is  Called 

in  vers.  9, 17).  Therb  were  precepts  as  to  the  victim's  sex,  age,  colour,  freedom  from 
blemish,  and  from  compulsory  labour.  There  were  further  minute  requirements  as 
to  the  method  of  killing  and  burning.  The  animal,  first  killed  as  a  sacrifice,  was 
to  be  utterly  consumed.  No  ordinary  pure  water,  but  water  impregnated  with  ashes, 
might  serve  as  a  medium  of  purification.  These  typical  facts  are  applicable  to  the 
means  of  purification  provided  in  the  gospel.  Christ  was  no  ordinary  sacrifice,  but 
"without  blemish,"  "separate  from  sinners,"  voluntary  (John  x.  18),  appointed  to 
death  in  a  particular  manner  (ibid.  xii.  32,  33) ;  a  complete  sacrifice,  vicarious,  for 
all  the  congregation  (1  Tim.  ii.  6 ;  1  John  ii.  2),  in  order  that  God  might  thus  provide 
the  means  of  complete  purification  (Heb.  ix.  13,  14). 

II.  Defilement  was  incdbred  in  the  purifying  process.  This  was  shown  in 
various  ways.  The  heifer  was  not  killed  before  the  altar,  but  outside  the  camp. 
The  high  priest  was  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  it,  nor  was  even  Eleazar  to  kill  it 
himself.  The  blood  was  not  brought  into  the  tabernacle,  but  sprinkled  at  a  distance, 
in  the  direction  of  it  The  priest  that  sprinkled  the  blood  and  burnt  the  cedar  wood 
was  defiled.  The  man  that  burned  the  carcase  was  defiled.  The  man,  ceremonially 
clean,  who  collected  the  ashes  became  unclean.  Even  the  "  clean "  man  who 
sprinkled  the  unclean  with  the  purifying  water  became  himself  unclean.  Thus  God 
seeks  by  type  and  symbol,  "  line  upon  line,"  to  impress  on  us  the  truth  that  sin  is 
"  exceeding  sinful."  And  we  are  reminded  that  even  our  sinless  Priest  and  Sacrifice 
needed  to  be  "  made  sin  "  for  us  in  order  that  we  might  be  cleansed  from  all  un- 
righteousness and  made  "  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him." 

III.  The  purification  provided  was  in  pebpetuai.  demand.  "Deaths  oft  ' 
compelled  frequent  contact  with  the  dead.  A  corpse,  even  a  bone  or  a  grave,  wag 
sufficient  to  cause  defilement.  As  death  is  the  penalty  of  sin,  jn  this  way  too  God 
taught  the  defiling  effect  of  sin,  and  therefore  the  need  of  perpetual  purifications 
(Heb.  X.  1,  2).  These  are  still  needed  even  by  Christians  who  have~  been  justified 
and  have  exercised  "  repentance  from  dead  works  "  (John  xiii.  10 ;  Heb.  vi.  1). 

Thus  we  learn — 1.  The  fearfully  polluting  character  of  sin.  Its  contagion  epreadi 
to  all  who  are'  susceptible.  It  exerts  its  baneful  effects  on  that  part  of  the  creation 
incapable  of  guilt  (Eom.  viii.  20 — 22),  and  even  on  the  sinless  Son  of  God  when  he 
comes  into  contact  with  it  as  a  Saviour  (Isa.  liii.  6,  6 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  24,  &c.).  2.  The 
mysterious  method  of  purification.  Some  of  these  ceremonies  are  "  hard  to  be  under- 
stood," and  we  have  some  difficulty  in  knowing  exactly  how  to  apply  them  to  the 
truths  respecting  spiritual  purification  in  the  gospel.    Just  so  in  "  the  mystery  at 


OH.  XIX.  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  24« 

godlinesa  "  itself  there  are  "  secret  things  which  belong  unto  the  Lord  our  God." 
But  we  may  be  satisfied  because  the  way  of  salvation  is  "  the  gospel  o^  God."  the 
Lamb  slain  is  "  the  Lamb  of  God,"  the  atonement  is  God's  atonement.  In  the  purifi- 
cation of  our  consciences  "  from  dead  works  "  we  have  the  best  proof  of  "  the  mystery 
of  the  gospel "  (Eph.  i.  8,  9  ;  vi.  19)  being  "  the  power  of  God,"  &c.  (Rom.  i.  16). 
3.  Our  entire  dependence  on  this  purification.  The  thoughtless  touching  of  a  dead 
man's  bone  defiled,  and  the  man  who  neglected  the  water  of  purifying  was  "out  off." 
So  with  sinners,  who  should  not  dare  to  plead  forgetfulness  (Ps.  xix.  12),  but  who 
may  be  cleansed  from  every  sin.  But  without  this  cleansing  they  too  will  be  "  cut 
off  »  (IJohn  L  7— 10).— P. 

Vers.  1 — 22. — Defilement  from  the  dead.  In  the  laws  given  to  the  Israelites  there 
is  much  said  concerning  uncleanness.  The  ceremonial  difference  between  the  unclean 
and  the  clean  sets  forth  the  real  difference  between  the  sinful  and  the  sinless.  This 
difference  was  therefore  as  important  in  its  way,  and  as  much  requiring  attention,  as 
that  between  the  holy  and  the  profane.  In  the  Book  of  Leviticus  a  large  section 
(chs.  xi. — XV.)  is  exclusively  occupied  with  regulations  on  the  subject,  pointing  out 
how  uncleanness  was  caused,  and  how  to  be  removed — oftentimes  very  easily  caused, 
but  never  easy,  and  often  very  tedious,  to  remove.  It  was  a  charge  brought  against 
the  priests  long  after  (Ezek.  xxiL  26)  that  they  showed  no  difference  between  the 
unclean  and  the  clean.  Already  in  this  Book  of  Numbers  one  kind  of  defilement, 
that  contracted  by  contact  with  the  dead,  has  been  referred  to  thrice  (ch.  v.  2 ;  vi. 
6 — 12 ;  ix.  6 — 8).  In  the  second  of  these  instances  the  defilement  came  as  a 
hindrance  to  the  Nazarite  in  fulfilling  his  vow,  and  the  maimer  of  his  cleansing  was 
carefully  indicated.  Here  in  ch.  xix.  we  come  to  a  very  elaborate  provision  for 
delilement  by  the  dead  in  general.  The  immediate  occasion  of  this  provision  may 
have  been  the  sudden  and  simultaneous  death  of  nearly  15,000  of  the  people,  by 
which  many  were  of  necessity  defiled,  and  placed  in  great  difficulties  as  to  their 
extrication  from  defilement.  But  whatever  the  occasion,  the  contents  of  this 
chapter  show  very  impressively  and  suggestively  the  way  in  which  God  looks  on 
death. 

I.  We  gather  from  this  chapter  how  niTEELT  OBNOXions  death  is  to  God.  The 
person  who  has  come  in  contact  with  it,  however  lightly  or  casually, — it  may  have 
been  unconsciously, — is  thereby  unclean.  UnUke  the  leper,  he  may  feel  no  difference 
in  himself,  but  he  is  unclean.  Notice  further  why  death  is  so  obnoxious  to  God.  It 
is  the  great  and  crowning  consequence  of  sin  in  this  world.  Sin  not  only  spoils  life 
while  it  lasts,  but  brings  it  to  a  melancholy,  painful,  and  in  most  cases  premature 
end.  Consider  how  much  of  human  life,  that  might  be  so  glorifying  to  God,  so 
useful  to  man,  and  bo  happy  in  the  experience  of  it,  is  nipped  in  the  earliest  bud. 
Doubtless  God  sees  in  death  abominations  of  which  we  have  hardly  any  sense  at  all. 
It  is  obnoxious  to  us  as  interfering  with  our  plans,  robbing  us  of  our  joys,  and  taking 
away  the  only  thing  that  nature  gives  us,  temporal  life.  We  look  at  death  too  much 
as  a  cause.  God  would  have  us  well  to  understand  that  its  great  power  as  a  cause 
conies  from  what  it  is  as  an  effect.  In  one  sense  we  may  say  the  uncleanness  of 
leprosy  was  less  offensive  than  that  of  death,  for  the  power  of  sin  was  less  evident 
in  a  disease  of  the  living  person  than  when  life  was  altogether  gone.  Every  instance 
of  death  is  a  fresh  defiance,  and  apparently  a  successful  one,  of  the  ever-living  God. 
Death  seems  to  wait  on  every  new-born  cliild,  saying,  "Thou  art  mine." 

II.  Wb  should  so  cobeect  cub  thoughts  that  death  may  become  obnoxious 
TO  US  IN  THE  SAME  WAY  AS  IT  IS  TO  GoD,  Do  not  be  Contented  to  talk  of  death 
as  coming  through  disease,  accident,  or  old  age.  Behind  all  instruments  look  for  the 
wielding  hand  of  sin.  Ask  yourself  if  egress  from  this  world  would  not  be  a  very 
different  sort  of  thing  if  man  had  continued  unfallen.  To  a  sinless  nature,  how 
gentle,  painless,  glorious,  and  exultant  might  be  the  process  of  exchanging  the  service 
of  oarai  for  the  service  of  a  still  higher  state  I  Death  in  its  pain  and  gloom  and 
disturbing  consequences  to  survivors  is  something  quite  foreign  to  the  original  con- 
stitution of  human  nature.  Only  by  learning  to  look  on  death  as  God  by  his  own 
example  would  have  us  look,  shall  we  find  the  true  remedy  against  it,  both  in  ita 
actual  power  and  in  the  terrors  which  the  anticipation  of  it  so  often  inspires. 


»60  THE  BOOK  OF.NUMBEKS.  [o&.xtt.  1— 22. 

in.  Occasion  is  given  fob  much  humility  and  sblf-abhoheencb  as  we  consideb 
THE  HOLD  WHICH  SIN  HAS  ON  OUR  MORTAL  BODIES.  The  agonising  appeal  of  sin- 
burdened  humanity  is,  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am  1  who  shall  deliver  me  from 
the  body  of  this  death  ?  "  Every  consideration  should  be  welcomed  which  will  make 
ns  feel  more  deeply  and  abidingly  the  dreadful  power  of  sin,  the  impossibility  of 
getting  rid  of  all  its  consequences  until  we  are  passed  out  of  the  present  life.  Does 
not  a  fair  consideration  of  this  ceremonial  uncleanness  for  the  dead  body  go  far  to 
settle  the  oft-debated  point  as  to  the  possibility  of  complete  holiness  in  this  world  ? 
How  can  there  be  complete  holiness  when  this  supreme  effect  of  sin,  temporal  death, 
remains  undestroyed  ?  What  a  thought  for  a  devout  Israelite,  a  man  of  the  spirit 
of  the  Psalmist,  that,  solicitous  as  he  might  be  all  through  life  to  keep  in  the  way  of 
God's  commandments,  nevertheless,  when  life  had  left  the  body,  he  would  inevitably 
bo  the  means  of  defilement  to  others  1 

IV.  There  is  pointed  out  to  us  the  true  mode  of  triumph  over  death. 
Death  can  be  conquered  only  in  one  way,  by  conquering  sin.  He  who  destroys  the 
power  of  sin  in  a  human  life  destroys  the  power  of  death.  The  raising  of  Lazarus 
was  not  so  much  a  triumph  over  death  as  a  humiliation  of  him  who  has  the  power 
of  death,  an  intimation  that  the  secret  of  his  power  was  known  and  vulnerable. 
Lazarus  was  raised,  but  died  again  in  the  course  of  mortal  nature,  and  only  as  he 
believed  in  Jesus  to  the  attainment  of  eternal  life  did  he  gain  the  real  triumph  over 
death.  If  then  by  any  means  our  life  here  is  becoming  more  and  more  free  from 
sin,  more  abundant  in  holy  service,  then  in  the  same  proportion  the  hellish  glory  of 
death  is  dimmed.  The  physical  circumstances  of  death  are  not  the  chief  thing  to  be 
considered,  but  what  sort  of  future  lies  beyond.  If  it  is  to  be  a  continuance,  im- 
provement, and  perfecting  of  the  spiritual  life  of  Christ's  people  here,  then  where  is 
the  triumph  of  death  ?  To  have  been  transformed  by  the  renewing  of  our  minds, 
and  to  have  found  our  chief  occupation  and  delight  in  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  may  not  indeed  take  away  the  terrors  of  death,  but  they  do  effectually  destroy 
its  power. 

V.  The  very  fact  of  death  being  so  obnoxious  to  God  should  fill  us  wjth  hope 
FOB  its  removal.  Is  it  not  a  great  deal  to  know  that  what  is  peculiarly  dreaded  by 
us  is  peculiarly  hateful  to  him  ?  Is  there  not  a  sort  of  assurance  that  God's  wisdom 
and  power  will  be  steadily  directed  to  the  removal  of  what  is  so  hateful  ? — Y. 

We  have  now  to  notice  the  way  in  which  this  defilement  was  removed — by  sprink- 
lings over  the  defiled  person  running  water  mingled  with  the  ashes,  prepared  is  a 
peculiar  way,  of  a  slain  heifer. 

I.  The  preparation  was  vert  elabobate.  It  needed  great  care  in  its  details, 
and  was,  therefore,  very  easily  spoiled.  There  has  been  much  discussion,  with  little 
agreement,  over  the  significance  of  many  of  the  details,  the  truth  being  that  theie  is 
not  sufficient  information  for  us  to  discern  reasons  which  may  have  been  clear  enough 
to  those  who  had  to  obey  the  command,  though  even  to  them  the  purpose  of  many 
details  was  doubtless  utterly  obscure,  and  even  intentionally  so.  What  room  is  there 
for  faith  if  we  are  to  know  the  why  and  wherefore  at  every  step  ?  One  thing  is 
certain,  that  if  any  detail  had  been  neglected,  the  whole  symbolic  action  would  have 
failed.  The  water  would  be  sprinkled  in  vain.  God  would  intimate  in  no  doubtful 
way  that  the  defiled  person  remained  defiled  still.  So  when  we  turn  from  the  shadow 
to  the  substance,  from  the  cleansing  of  the  death-defiled  body  to  that  of  the  death- 
defiled  person  to  whom  the  body  belonged,  we  find  Christ  complying  in  the  strictest 
manner  with  the  minutest  matters  of  detail ;  and  doing  so,  this  indicated  his  equal 
compliance  inwardly  with  every  requirement  of  the  law  of  God  considered  as  having 
to  do  with  the  spirit*  Thrice  we  know  did  God  intimate  his  satisfaction  with  his 
Son,  as  one  who  in  all  things  was  carrying  out  his  purposes — twice  in  express  terms 
(Matt.  iii.  17 ;  xvii.  5),  and  the  third  time  implying  the  same  thing  not  less  signifi- 
cantly (John  xii.  28).  Then  also  we  are  called  to  notice  how  many  prophecies  as  to 
matters  of  detail,  such  as  places,  circumstances,  &c.,  had  to  be  fulfilled.  As  in  the 
preparing  of  the  heifer  the  commands  of  God  had  to  be  accomplished,  so  in  the 
preparing  of  Jesus  for  his  great  cleansing  work  the  prophecies  of  God  had  to  b* 
accomplished. 


ca.  XI*.  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  251 


II.  The  dbvoted  animal  was  in  a  typical  sense  veby  peculiar.  There  is  the 
selection  of  one  kind  of  animal,  one  sex  in  that  kind,  one  colour,  all  absence  of  blemish, 
and  complete  freedom  from  the  yoke.  May  we  not  say  that  to  find  all  these  marks 
in  one  animal  was  indication  of  some  special  provision  from  on  high  ?  "  It  iiiust  be 
a  red  heifer,  because  of  the  rarity  of  the  colour,  that  it  might  be  the  more  remarkable. 
The  Jews  say,  if  but  two  hairs  were  black  or  white,  it  was  unlawful."  Whether  this 
were  so  or  not,  we  have  in  this  remarkable  typical  animal  a  suggestion  of  him  who 
in  his  person,  works,  claims,  and  influence  is  totally  unlike  any  one  else  who  has  ever 
taken  part  in  human  afEairs.  As  the  heifer  was  without  spot  or  blemish,  so  far  as 
human  eye  could  discern,  so  Jesus  was  faultless  in  the  presence  of  God's  glory.  And 
just  as  the  combination  in  the  heifer  of  all  that  God  required  was  a  great  help  to  the 
people  in  believing  in  the  cleansing  efScacy  of  the  ashes,  so  we,  regarding  Jesus  in 
all  the  peculiarities  which  centre  and  unite  in  him,  may  well  apply  ourselves  with 
fresh  confidence  and  gratitude  to  the  blood  that  cleanseth  from  all  sin. 

III.  The  ashes  were  reserved  for  permanent  use  (ver.  9).  It  is  of  course  an 
exaggeration  to  say  that  the  ashes  of  this  first  heifer  served  for  the  cleansings  of  a 
thousand  years,  but  doubtless  they  served  a  long  time,  thus  suflSciently  indicating 
the  cleansing  power  that  flows  from  him  who  died  once  for  all.  We  stand  in  the 
succession  to  many  generations  who  have  applied  themselves  to  the  one  fountain 
opened  for  sin  and  uncleanness.  Where  the  earliest  believers  stood,  submitting  the 
impurity  of  their  heSrts  to  Jesus,  we  also  stand,  and  the  evident  result  to  th&n,  as 
seen  in  the  record  of  their  experience,  may  well  give  joy  and  assurance  to  lis. 

IV.  Only,  WE  MUST  make  like  closeness  and  fidelity  of  application.  Con. 
sider  what  was  required  from  these  death-defiled  ones.  For  seven  days  they  were 
unclean,  and  on  the  third  day  as  well  as  the  seventh  they  were  to  be  sprinkled.  To 
prepare  the  sprinkling  agent  was  no  light  or  easy  matter,  so  that  its  virtue  might  be 
sure.  But  even  when  prepared  it  required  repeated  applications.  Thus  to  be  cleansed 
from  sin  requires  a  searching  process,  indicated  in  the  New  Testament  by  the  baptism 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  fu-e.  There  must  be  a  discerning  of  the  thoughts  and 
intents  of  the  heart,  and  a  rigorous,  uncompromising  dealing  with  them.  Let  none 
apply  himself  to  the  cleansing  which  Christ  provides  unless  he  is  ready  for  a 
thorough  examination  of  his  nature,  a  disclosure  of  many  deep-seated  abominations, 
and  a  tearing  away  from  his  life  of  much  that  he  has  cherished  and  for  a  time  may 
sadly  miss. 

V.  There  is  no  cleansing  except  in  strict  obedience  to  God's  appointment. 
The  defiled  one  could  not  invent  a  purification  of  his  own,  nor  could  he  go  on  as  if 
defilement  were  a  harmless,  evanescent  trifle.  He  might  indeed  say,  "What  the 
worse  am  I  for  touching  the  dead  ?  "  judging  by  his  own  present  feelings  and  ignor- 
ance of  consequences.  Nor  might  any  immediate  obvious  difEerence  appear  between 
the  defiled  and  the  cleansed ;  nevertheless,  there  was  a  difference  which  God  himself 
would  make  very  plain  and  bitter  in  the  event  of  persevering  disobedience.  So 
between  the  conscious  and  confessing  sinner  who,  humbly  believing,  is  being  washed 
in  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  the  careless,  defiant  sinner  who  neglects  it  as  a  mer? 
imagination,  there  may  seem  little  or  nothing  of  difEerence.  But  the  difEerence  is 
that  between  heaven  and  hell,  and  God  will  make  it  clear  in  due  time. 

Note  the  connection  of  the  following  passage  with  the  whole  chapter : — "  If  the 
ashes  of  an  heifer  sprinkling  the  unclean,  sanotifieth  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh ; 
how  much  more  shall  the  blood  of  Christ,  who  through  the  eternal  Spirit  offered 
himself  without  spot  to  God,  purge  your  conscience  from  dead  works  to  serve  the 
living  God  ?  "  (Heb.  ix.  13, 14).— Y. 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

THK    last    march  :     FROM     K4I>E8H    TO 

Hob  (vers.  1 — 29).  Ver.  1. — Then  came  the 
children  of  Israel,  even  the  whole  congre- 
gation.   The  latter  words  axe  emphatic  here 


and  in  ver.  22,  and  seem  intended  to  mark 
the  period  of  reassembly  after  the  dispersion 
of  nearly  thirty-eight  years.  Probably  a 
portion  of  the  tribes  had  visited  Kadesh 
many  times  during  those  years,  and  perhaps 
it  hM  never  been  wholly  abandoned.     Int* 


252 


THE  BOOK  OF  NOMBBES. 


[oh.  XX.  1—29. 


the  desert  of  Zin,  i.  e. ,  if  the  western  site  be 
maintained  for  Kadesh,  the  Wady  Murreh, 
See  the  note  on  Kadesh.  In  the  first  month. 
In  the  month  Abib  (Nisan),  tlie  vernal 
month,  when  there  was  "much  grass"  (of. 
John  vi.  10)  in  places  at  other  seasons 
desert,  and  when  travelling  was  most  easy. 
From  comparison  of  ch.  xiv.  33 ;  xxxiii.  88 
and  the  sequence  of  the  narrative,  it  appears 
to  have  been  the  first  month  of  the  fortieth, 
and  last,  year  of  wandering.  Then  it  was 
that  they  reassembled  in  the  same  neigh- 
bourhood from  whence  they  had  dispersed  so 
long  before  (see  the  note  before  oh.  xv.). 
And  the  people  abode  (3B^J.  Septuagint, 
tariiiuviv)  in  Kadesh.  From  the  date  given 
in  ch.  xxxiii.  38  it  would  seem  that  they  re- 
mained three  or  four  months  in  Kadesh  on  this 
occasion.  This  Jelaymayhavebeenoocasioned 
partly  by  the  mourning  for  Miriam  (of.  ver. 
29),  and  partly  by  the  necessity  of  awaiting 
answers  from  Edom  and  from  Moab  (see  on 
ver.  14).  And  Miriam  died  there,  and  was 
buried.  Nothing  could  be  more  brief  and 
formal  than  this  mention  of  the  death  of  one 
who  had  played  a  considerable  part  in  Israel, 
and  had  perhaps  wished  to  play  a  more  con- 
siderable part.  It  can  scarcely,  however,  be 
doubted  that  her  death  in  the  unlovely  wil- 
derness was  a  punishment  like  the  death  of 
her  brothers.  There  is  no  reason  whatever 
to  suppose  that  she  had  any  part  in  the  re- 
bellion of  Kadesh,  or  that  the  sentence  of 
death  there  pronounced  included  her;  she 
was  indeed  at  this  time  advanced  in  years, 
Dut  that  would  not  in  itself  account  for  the 
fact  that  she  died  in  exile ;  it  is,  no  doubt, 
to  the  arrogance  and  rebellion  recorded  in 
ch.  xii.  that  we  must  look  for  the  true  ex- 
planation of  her  untimely  end. 

Ver.  2. — There  was  no  water.  There  was 
a  large  natural  spring  at  Kadesh,  and  during 
the  time  of  their  previous  sojourn  there  no 
complaint  of  this  sort  seems  to  have  arisen. 
At  this  time,  however,  the  bulk  of  the  en- 
pampment  may  have  lain  in  a  different  direc- 
tion (cf.  ver.  1  with  ch.  xiii.  26),  or  the  supply 
may  have  failed  from  temporary  causes.  In 
either  case  a  total  absence  of  water  need  not 
be  imagined,  but  only  an  insufficient  supply. 
Ver.  8.  —  And  the  people  ohode  _  with 
Koses.  As  their  fathers  had  done  in  similar 
circumstances,  as  recorded  in  Exod.  xvii 
Would  God  that  we  had  died.  See  on  ch. 
xiv.  2.  When  our  brethren  died  before  the 
lord.  This  is  difficult,  because  the  visita- 
tions of  God  at  Kibroth-hattaavah  (ch.  xi. 
84)  and  at  Kadesh  (ch.  xiv.  87)  had  over- 
taken not  their  brethren,  but  their  fathers, 
gome  thirty-eight  years  before.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  daily  mortality  which  had  carried 
off  their  brethren  is  clearly  excluded  by  the 
phrase,  "  before  the  Lord.      It  may  be  that 


the  rebellion  of  Korah  happened  towards  the 
end  of  the  period  of  wandering,  and  that  the 
reference  is  to  the  plague  which  followed  it ; 
or  it  may  be  that  the  formula  of  complaint 
had  become  stereotyped,  as  those  of  children 
often  do,  and  was  employed  from  time  to 
time  without  variation  and  without  definite 
reference.  The  latter  supposition  is  strongly 
supported  by  the  character  of  the  w*«ds 
which  follow. 

Ver.  4.  —  Why  have  ye  brought  up  the 
congregation  of  the  Lord  into  this  wilder- 
ness ?  These  words  are  almost  exactly  re- 
peated from  Exod.  xvii.  3.  They,  and  those 
which  follow,  are  no  doubt  out  of  place  if 
considered  as  expressing  the  feelings  of  the 
great  bulk  of  the  people,  who  had  no  know- 
ledge of  Egypt,  and  had  grown  up  in  the 
wilderness.  But  on  such  occasions  it  is 
always  the  few  who  put  words  into  the 
mouths  of  the  many,  and  the  ringleaders  in 
this  gainsaying  would  naturally  be  the  sur- 
vivors of  the  elder  generation,  whose  dis- 
position was  exactly  the  same  as  ever,  and 
who  had  always  shown  a  remarkable  want 
of  originality  in  their  complaints. 

Ver.  5. — No  place  of  seed.  Septuagint, 
rijroj  ov  ov  airiipiTai.  A  place  where  there 
is  no  sowing,  and  therefore  no  hai-veat. 

Ver.  6.— They  fell  upon  their  faces.  See 
note  on  ch.  xiv.  5. 

Ver.  8. — Take  the  rod.  The  paffSoe,  or 
staff  of  office,  with  which  Moses  and  Aaron 
had  worked  wonders  before  Pharaoh  (Exod. 
vii.  9  sg.),  and  with  which  Moses  had  smitten 
the  rock  in  Rephidim  (Exod.  xvii.  6).  This 
rod  had  not  been  mentioned,  nor  perhaps 
used,  since  then ;  but  we  might  certainly 
have  supposed  that  the  instrument  of  so 
many  miracles  would  be  reverently  laid  up 
in  the  tabernacle  "before  the  Lord,"  and 
this  we  find  from  the  next  verse  to  have  been 
the  case.  Gather  thou  the  assembly  to- 
gether, t.  e.  by  their  representatives.  Speak 
ye  unto  the  rock  before  their  eyes.  The 
word  used  for  the  rock  in  this  narrative  is 

JfJDri  instead  of  "l-VVn,  as  in  Exod.  xvii.  It 
does  not  seem  that  any  certain  distinction  of 
meaning  can  be  drawn  between  the  words, 
which  are  obviously  interchanged  in  Judges 
vi.  20,  21,  and  are  both  translated  Trirpo  by 
the  Septuagint ;  but  the  careful  use  of  differ- 
ent terms  in  the  two  narratives  sei'ves  to  dis- 
tinguish them,  just  as  the  use  of  Kotpivovc  and 
(Tirvpilas  by  St.  Mark  (vi.  43;  viiL  8,  19, 
20)  helps  to  distinguish  the  two  miracles  ol 
feeding  the  multitude. 

Ver.  10. — Hear  now,  ye  rebels.  D'^Jsn. 
Septuagint,  oi  AiriiSeie.  The  verb  is  used  in 
a  similar  sense  of  Moses  and  Aaron  them- 
selves in  ver.  !L4.  It  has  been  suggested  that 
this  was  the  word  really  used  by  our  Lord 
in  Matt.  v.  22,  and  translated  f<up6£.    This, 


OH.  XX.  1—29.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES. 


253 


however,  ia  extremely  precariouB,  and  is  in- 
deed to  accuse  the  Evangelist  of  a  blunder, 
for  there  is  no  real  correspondence  between 
the  words.  Must  we  fetch  yon  water. 
Septuagint,  ^j)  .  .  i^a^onev  i/iip  ijjwp.  And 
this  is  no  doubt  the  sense.  It  has  been  ren- 
Isred  by  some  "  Can  we  fetch  you  water," 
on  the  supposition  that  Moses  really  doubted 
the  possibUity  of  such  a  miracle,  but  this 
seems  to  be  an  entire  mistake  (see  next  note), 
Ver.  12. — Because  ye  believed  me  not,  to 
sanctify  me  in  the  eyes  of  the  children  of 
Israel.  It  is  very  important,  and  at  the  same 
time  verydifBcult,  to  understand  what  the  pre- 
cise sin  of  Moses  and  Aaron  was  upon  this  occa- 
sion. That  it  was  very  serious  is  manifest  from 
the  punishment  which  is  entailed.  Aaron,  in- 
deed, does  not  appear  in  the  narrative,  save 
in  his  usual  subordinate  position  as  associ- 
ated with  his  brother  by  the  Divine  mandate. 
It  has  been  said  that  he  might  have  checked 
the  unadvised  words  of  Moses,  but  that  is 
wholly  beside  the  mark .  Aaron  had  obviously 
no  control  whatever  over  his  far  more  able  and 
energetic  brother,  and  therefore  could  have 
no  responsibility  in  that  respect.  We  can 
only  suppose  that  he  inwardly  assented  to 
the  language  and  conduct  with  which  he  was 
outwardly  associated,  and  therefore  shared 
the  guilt.  A  less  degree  of  sin  was  (so  to 
speak)  necessary  in  his  cause,  because  he  had 
on  former  occasions  so  greatly  dishonoured 
his  oifioo  ;  and  the  anger  of  God  against  the 
sin  of  his  ministers,  although  laid  to  sleep, 
is  ever  ready  to  awake  npon  the  recurrence 
of  a  similar  provocation.  We  may  therefore 
.  dismiss  him,  and  consider  only  the  case  of 
Moses.  It  is  impossible  to  suppose  that 
Moses  actually  doubted  the  power  of  God  to 
supply  the  present  need,  for  he  held  in  his 
hand  the  very  rod  with  which  he  had  struck 
the  rock  in  Rephidim,  nor  is  there  any- 
thing in  his  words  or  acts  upon  this  occa- 
sion to  imply  any  such  disbelief.  The  lan- 
guage of  eh.  zi.  21,  22  may  be  cited  on  the 
other  side,  but  that  was  spoken  in  passion, 
and  spoken  to  God,  and  cannot  be  neld  aa 
expressing  an  actual  failure  of  faith.  Nor  do 
subsequent  references  point  to  unbelief  as 
having  been  the  sin  of  Moses  (cf.  ch.  xxviL 
14 ;  Deut.  xxxii.  61 ;  Fa.  cvi.  33).  Rather, 
they  point  to  disobedience  and  indiscretion  ; 
to  such  disloyal  conduct  and  language  as  pro- 
duced a  bad  impression  upon  the  people,  and 
did  not  place  the  Divine  character  before  them 
in  its  true  light.  We  must  understand,  there- 
fore, that  the  want  of  belief  with  which  Moses 
stood  charged  was  not  a  want  of  faith  in  the 
power  of  Ciod,  but  a  want  of  obedience  to  the 
will  of  Qod,  bearing  in  mind  that  the  two 
faults  of  disbelief  and  disobedience  are  but 
^u  sides  of  one  inward  fact,  and  are  per- 
petually confounded  in  the  langua^  of  Scrip- 
ture (compare  the  nse  of  aiTEidcTi'm  the  Kew 


Testament).  What  then  was  the  disobedi- 
ence of  Moses !  Here,  again,  the  more 
obvious  answer  is  insufficient.  It  is  true 
that  Moses  struck  the  rock  twice  instead  of 
(or  perhaps  in  addition  to)  speaking  to  it ; 
hut  God  had  bid  him  take  the  rod,  and  he 
might  naturally  think  he  was  meant  to  nse 
it  as  before ;  moreover,  the  people  could  not 
have  known  anything  of  the  exact  terms  of 
the  command,  and  would  have  thought  no 
more  of  his  striking  the  rock  at  Kadesn  than 
at  Bephidim ;  but  it  was  the  fact  of  the 
bad  impression  made  upon  the  people  which 
was  the  ground  of  the  Divine  rebuke.  We 
come  back,  therefore,  to  the  simple  conclnsion 
expressed  by  the  Psalmist  (Ps.  cvi.  82,  83), 
that  Moses  lost  his  temper,  and  in  the  irri- 
tation of  the  moment  spoke  and  acted  in 
such  a  way  and  in  such  a  spirit  as  to  dis- 
honour his  Master  and  to  impair  the  good 
eifect  of  the  Divine  beneficence.  It  is  quite 
likely  that  the  repeated  striking  of  the  rock 
was  one  sign  of  the  anger  to  which  Moses 
gave  way,  but  we  could  hardly  have  attached 
any  serious  character  to  the  act  if  it  had 
stood  alone.  It  is  in  the  words  of  Moses, 
words  in  which  he  associated  Aaron  with 
himself,  that  we  must  find  the  explanation  of 
the  displeasure  he  incurred.  That  he  called 
the  people  "rebels"  was  unseemly,  not 
because  it  was  untrue,  or  because  it  was  an 
uncalled-for  term  of  reproach,  but  because  he 
himself  was  at  that  very  moment  a  rebel,  and 
disloyal  in  heart  to  his  Master  (cf  ver.  24). 
That  he  should  say,  "  Must  we  fetch  you 
water  out  of  this  rook?"  showed  how  com- 
pletely he  was  carried  away.  It  is  true  that 
God  had  said  to  him,  "Thou  shalt  bring 
forth  to  them  water,"  and,  "Thou  shalt  give 
the  congregation  .  .  drink "  (compare  this 
with  Exod.  xvii  6),  and  it  is  probable  that 
his  own  words  were  more  or  less  consciously 
dictated  by  this  remembrance  ;  but  he  knew 
very  well  that  the  Divine  mandate  afforded 
him  no  real  justification ;  that  he  and  Aaron 
were  the  merest  instruments  in  the  hand  of 
God ;  that  it  was  peculiarly  necessary  to 
keep  this  fact  before  the  minds  of  the 
people ;  nevertheless,  his  vexation  and  anger 
betrayed  him  into  putting  himself — a  mere 
man,  and  a  man  too  in  a  very  bad  temper— 
into  the  place  of  God  before  the  eyes  of  the 
whole  congregation.  Moses  had  fallen  at 
least  once  before  (see  on  ch.  xi,  11 — 15)  into 
a  similar  error,  one  so  natural  to  an  angry 
mind ;  but  this  was  the  first  time  that  he 
had  made  his  error  public,  and  thereby  dis- 
honoured Che  Master  whom  it  was  his  special 
duty  to  uphold  and  glorify.  This  was  the 
sin,   and  if  the  punishment  seem  dispro- 

Eortionate,  it  must  be  remembered  that  the 
einousness  of  a  sin  depends  quite  as  much 
on  the  position  of  the  sinner  as  upon  its 
intrinsic  enormity.    Ye  shall  not  bring  this 


264 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[CH.  XX.  1—29 


congregation  into  the  land.  That  they 
should  die  in  the  wilderness  was  implied  in 
this  sentence,  but  was  not  strictly  a  part  of 
the  sentence  itself.  Moses,  indeed,  although 
he  did  not  enter  the  land  of  promise  in  its 
narrower  sense,  yet  he  died  within  the  in- 
heritance of  Israel.  Since  they  had  behaved 
unworthily  of  their  high  office  as  leaders  of 
the  people,  therefore  that  office  should  be 
taken  from  them  before  the  glorious  end. 

Ver.  13. — This  is  the  water  of  Ueribah, 
or  "  water  of  strife. "  Septuagint,  vduip  iv- 
TtKoyiae.  The  word  "Meribah"  appears, 
however,  to  form  part  of  a  proper  name  in 
Deut.  xxxiL  51.  A  simOar  use  of  the  word  is 
recorded  in  Exod.  xviL  7.  That  the  same 
name  was  more  or  less  definitely  attached  to 
these  two  scenes  is  only  another  way  of  say- 
ing that  there  was  a  strong  similarity  between 
the  two  sets  of  associations.  At  the  same 
time  the  differences  are  so  marked  in  the 
narratives  that  they  leave  very  distinct  im- 
pressions upon  the  mind.  And  he  was  sanc- 
tified in  them,  i.  e.  he  revealed  there  his 
holiness  and  power,  and  put  to  silence  their 
evil  murmurings  against  him.  He  was  sanc- 
tified in  them  all  the  more  abundantly  be- 
cause Moses  and  Aaron  failed  to  sanctify  him 
in  the  eyes  of  the  people ;  but  what  they 
failed  to  do  he  brought  to  pass  without  their 
agency. 

Yer.  14. — And  Uoses  sent  messengers 
from  Eadesh  unto  the  king  of  Edom.  On 
the  kings  of  Edom  see  on  Gen.  xxxvi.  31. 
It  would  seem  probable  from  Exod.  xv.  15 
that  the  government  was  at  that  time  (forty 
years  before  the  present  date)  still  in  the 
hands  of  "  dukes,  and  that  the  change  had 
but  recently  taken  place.  It  is  stated  in 
Judges  xi,  17  that  Moses  sent  messengers  at 
this  time  with  a  like  request  to  the  king  of 
Moab.  We  are  not  indeed  obliged  to  sup- 
pose that  Jephthah,  Uving  300  years  after, 
stated  the  facts  correctly;  but  there  is  no 
particular  reason  to  doubt  it  in  this  case. 
That  no  mention  of  it  is  made  here  would  be 
sufficiently  explained  by  the  fact  that  the 
refusal  of  Edom  made  the  answer  of  Moab  of 
no  practical  moment.  That  Moses  asked  a 
passage  through  the  territory  of  Edom  im- 
plies that  he  had  renounced  the  idea  of  in- 
vading Canaan  from  the  south.  This  was 
not  on  account  of  any  insuperable  difficulties 
presented  by  the  character  of  the  country  or 
of  its  inhabitants,  for  such  did  not  exist ; 
nor  on  account  of  any  supposed  presence  of 
Egyptian  troops  in  the  south  of  Palestine ; 
but  simply  on  account  of  the  fact  that  Israel 
had  deliberately  refused  to  take  the  straight 
road  into  their  land,  and  were  therefore  con- 
demned to  follow  a  long  and  circuitous  route 
ere  they  reached  it  on  an  altogether  different 
side.  The  dangers  and  difficulties  of  the 
road  they  actually  traversed  were,  humanly 


speaking,  far  greater  than  any  they  would 
have  encountered  in  any  other  direction ;  but 
this  was  part  of  their  necessary  discipline. 
Thy  brother  Israel  This  phrase  recalled 
the  history  of  Esau  and  Jacob,  and  of  the 
brotherly  kindness  which  the  former  had 
shown  to  the  latter  at  a  time  when  he  had 
him  in  his  power  (Gen.  xxxiii.).  Thou 
knowest  all  the  travel  that  hath  befallen 
us.  Moses  assumed  that  Edom  would  take 
a  fraternal  interest  in  the  fortunes  of  Israel. 
The  parallel  was  singularly  close  between  the 
position  of  Jacob  when  he  met  with  Esau, 
and  the  present  position  of  Israel ;  we  may 
well  suppose  that  Moses  intended  to  make 
this  felt  without  directly  asserting  it. 

Yer,  16. — And  sent  an  angel.  It  is  pro- 
bable that  Moses  purposely  used  an  expres- 
sion which  might  be  understood  in  various 
senses,  because  he  could  not  explain  to  the 
king  of  Edom  the  true  relation  of  the  Lord 
to  his  people.  At  the  same  time  it  was  in 
the  deepest  sense  true  (cf.  Exod.  xiv,  19; 
zzxiL  34),  because  it  was  the  uncreated 
angel  of  the  covenant,  which  was  from  (Jod, 
and  yet  was  God  (ct  Gen.  xxxii.  30 ;  Josh. 
V.  15 ;  vi.  2 ;  Acts  viL  35),  who  was  the  real 
captain  of  the  Lord's  host.  In  Eadesh,  a 
city  in  the  uttermost  of  thy  border.  See 
note  on  Kadesh.  It  is  clear  that  Kadesh 
itself  was  outside  the  territory  of  the  king  of 
Edom,  although  it  lay  close  to  the  frontier. 

Yer.  17. — let  na  pass,  I  pray  thee, 
through  thy  country.  Moses  desired  to 
march  through  Seir  eastwards  and  north- 
eastwards, so  as  to  reach  the  country  beyond 
Jordan.  If  the  northern  portion  of  the 
wilderness  of  Paran  was  at  this  time  held  by 
the  king  of  Edom,  it  would  be  through  this 
region  that  Israel  would  first  seek  to  make 
their  way  from  Kadesh  to  the  Arabah ; 
thence  the  broad  and  easy  pass  of  the  Wady 
Ghuweir  would  lead  them  through  Mount 
Seir  (properly  so  called)  to  the  flains  of 
Moab.  Through  the  fields,  or  throagh  the 
vineyards.  These  words  attest  the  change 
for  the  worse  in  the  condition  of  these  re- 
gions. Even  in  the  Wady  Ghuweir,  although 
springs  and  pasturage  are  abundant,  fields 
and  vineyards  hardly  exist.  Neither  will 
we  drink,  i.e.,  as  appears  from  ver.  19,  with- 
out obtaining  leave  and  making  payment.  By 

the  king's  highway.  ^^»n '^n^.  The  state 
road  used  for  military  purposes. 

Yer.  18. — And  £dom  said, .  .  Thou  shalt 
not  pass  by  me.  This  was  the  first  of  a 
series  of  hostile  acts,  prompted  by  vindictive 
jealousy,  which  brought  down  the  wrath  of 
God  upon  Edom  (compare  the  prophecy  of 
Obadiah).     See,  however,  on  Deut.  li.  29. 

Yer.  19. — And  the  children  of  Israel  said, 
i.  «.,  probably,  the  messengers  sent  by  Moses. 

By  the  highway.     njDp3.   The  Septuagiiit 


CH.  XX.  1—29.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMajiBS. 


259 


translates  vapd  ri  Spoc,  but  no  doubt  the 
word  means  a  "high  road"  in  the  original 
sense  of  a  raised  causeway  (cf,  Isa.  Ivii.  14). 
Such  a  road  is  still  called  Derb  es  Sultan — 
Emperor-road.  I  will  only,  withont  doing 
anything  else,  go  through  on  my  feet. 
Rather,  "  It  is  nothing  ;  "  paj-pS  P!). 
Septua^nt,  dWd  rA  irpdyfta  oiSiv  iarf)  "  I 
will  go  through  on  my  feet."  They  meant, 
"  "We  do  not  ask  for  anything  of  value,  only 
leave  to  pass  through." 

Yer.  22. — ^And  the  children  of  Israel,  even 
the  whole  congregation  (see  note  on  yer. 
1),  journeyed  from  Eadesh,  and  came  unto 
liount  Hot.  If  the  narrative  follows  the 
order  of  time,  we  must  suppose  that  the 
Edomites  at  once  blocked  the  passes  near  to 
Eadesh,  and  thus  compelled  the  Israelites  to 
journey  southwards  for  some  distance  until 
they  were  clear  of  the  Azazimftt ;  they  would 
then  turn  eastwards  again  and  make  their 
way  across  the  plateau  of  Faran  to  the 
Arabah  at  a  point  opposite  Mount  Hor.  It 
is  supposed  by  many,  although  it  finds  no 
support  in  the  narrative  itself,  that  the 
armed  resistance  offered  by  Edom  is  out  of 
chronological  order  in  ver.  20,  and  only 
occurred  in  fact  when  the  Israelites  had 
reached  the  neighbourhood  of  Mount  Hor, 
and  were  preparing  to  ascend  the  Wady 
Ghuweir.  On  the  name  of  Mount  Hor  ("in  r| 
^n)  see  on  ch.  xxxiv.  7,  8.  There  can  be 
no  doubt  that  tradition  is  right  in  identify- 
ing it  with  the  Jebel  Harun  (mount  of  Aaron), 
a  lofty  and  precipitous  mountain  rising 
between  the  ibabah  and  the  site  of  Petra. 
On  one  of  its  two  summits  the  tomb  of 
Aaron  ts  still  shown,  and  although  this  is 
itself  worthless  as  evidence,  yet  the  character 
and  position  of  the  mountain  are  altogether 
in  agreement  with  the  legend. 

Yer.  23. — By  the  coast  of  the  land  of 
Edom.  Mount  Hor  was  on  the  eastern  side 
of  the  Arabah,  which  at  this  point  certainly 
formed  the  frontier  of  Edom ;  but  it  was  no 
doubt  untenanted,  owing  to  its  bare  and 
precipitous  character,  and  therefore  was  not 


reckoned  as  the  property  of  Edom.  "We  may 
suppose  that  at  this  time  the  encampment 
stretched  along  the  Arabah  in  front  of  the 
mountain  (see  on  ch.  xxxiii.  30 ;  Deut.  x.  6). 

Yer.  24. — ^Aaron  shall  be  gathered  unto 
Ms  people.  On  this  expression  see  at  Gen. 
XXV.  8, 

Yer.  25. — Bring  them  np  unto  Mount 
Hor.  It  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  the 
object  of  this  command  was  to  produce  a 
deeper  effect  upon  the  people.  The  whole 
multitude  would  be  able  to  see  the  high 
priest,  whose  form  had  been  so  familiar  to 
them  as  long  as  they  could  remember  any- 
thing, slowly  ascending  the  bare  sides  of  the 
mountain  ;  and  they  kuew  that  he  went  up 
to  die.  The  whole  multitude  would  be  able 
to  see  another  and  a  younger  man  descending 
by  the  same  path  in  the  same  priestly  robes, 
and  they  knew  that  Aaron  was  dead,  and 
that  Eleazar  was  high  priest  In  his  room. 
Death  is  often  most  striking  when  least 
expected,  but  there  are  occasions  (and  this 
was  one)  when  it  gains  in  effect  by  being 
invested  in  a  certain  simple  ceremonial. 

Ver.  28.  — Moses  stripped  Aaron  of  his 
garments,  and  put  them  upon  Eleazar  his 
Bon.  This  was  done  in  token  that  the  office 
was  transferred ;  it  was  done  out  of  sight, 
and  far  above,  in  token  that  the  priesthood 
was  perpetual,  although  the  priest  was  mortal. 
Aaron  died  there.  In  this  case,  as  in  that 
of  Miriam  (ver.  1),  and  of  Moses  hlmselt 
(Deut.  xxxiv.  S),  no  details  are  given.  God 
drew  as  it  were  a  veil  over  a  departure 
hence  which  could  but  be  very  sad,  because 
it  was  in  a  special  sense  the  wages  of  sin. 
We  may  perhaps  conclude  that  Aaron  died 
alone,  and  was  buried,  as  Moses  was,  by  God ; 
otherwise  Moses  and  Eleazar  would  have 
been  unclean  under  the  law  of  ch.  xix.  11 
(cf.  also  Levit.  xxi.  11). 

Yer.  29. — They  mourned  for  Aaron  thirty 
days.  The  Egyptians  prolonged  their 
mourning  for  seventy  days  (Gen.  1.  3),  but 
thirty  days  seems  to  have  been  the  longest 
period  allowed  amoue!  the  Israelites  (cf. 
Deut.  xxxiv.  8). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — ^29. — Sorrows  and  trials  of  the  way.  We  have  in  this  chapter,  spiritually, 
the  final  departure  of  the  Church  of  God  upon  its  last  journey  towards  the  promised 
land ;  and  we  have  certain  sad  incidents  of  moral  failure,  of  disappointment,  and  of 
death  which  marked  the  commencement  of  that  journey. 

I.   CONSIDEB,  THEREFORE,  WITH  RISPEOT   TO  THE  POSITION  OF  ISBABL — 1.    That  he 

was  once  more  at  Kadesh,  not  one  step  nearer  home  than  he  had  been  thirty-eight  years 
before.  Because  he  had  rebelled  then  his  life  had  run  to  waste  ever  since,  and  been 
lost  like  the  fountain  of  Kadesh  in  the  sands,  and  only  now,  after  such  a  lapse  of  time, 
and  after  so  much  suffering,  did  he  find  himself  in  a  position  to  recommence  the  march 
then  suspended.  Even  so  it  is  with  Churches  which  have  reached  a  certain  point, 
and  then  have  rebelled  against  the  voice  of  God.    Their  history  runs  to  waste ;  they 


256  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS.  [oh.  xx.  1— 2J 

exiBt,  but  hardly  live ;  there  is  indeed  a  movement  in  them,  but  it  has  no  definit* 
aim,  it  leads  no  whither;  they  do  but  return  upon  themselves.  Only  after  a  long 
time  (if  God  have  mercy  upon  them)  do  they  find  themselves  once  more  in  a  posi- 
tion to  start  afresh,  and  not  one  step  further  forward  than  all  those  years,  or  cen 
turies,  ago.  Even  so  it  is  with  individuals  who  will  not  go  resolutely  on  when  they 
aro  called.  They  are  spent  and  wasted  in  movement  to  and  fro  which  is  not  progress. 
After  many  years  perhaps — perhaps  after  a  whole  lifetime — of  wandering  in  dry 
places  they  find  themselves  once  more  at  the  very  point  to  which  they  had  attained, 
not  one  step  nearer  heaven  than  so  long  ago.  2.  That  although  Israel  was  once 
more  at  Kadesh,  yet  he  was  in  a  far  worse  position  than  on  the  former  occasion. 
Then  he  might  have  marched  straight  into  Canaan,  now  he  must  reach  it  by  a  long 
and  circuitous  route.  Even  so  with  Churches  and  with  individuals  which  have  done 
despite  to  the  Spirit  of  grace.  By  God's  mercy  their  aimless  wanderings  may  be 
ended,  and  they  may  take  up  the  broken  thread  of  spiritual  progress ;  but  they  can- 
not take  up  the  opportunities  and  possibilities  which  once  were  theirs.  If  theii 
position  be  the  same,  they  are  not  the  same ;  the  effects  of  past  faithlessness  remain  ; 
a  far  more  weary  course  awaits  them  ere  they  attain  to  rest  than  if  they  had  obeyed 
from  the  beginning.  3.  That  Miriam  died  in  Kadesh,  and  went  not  with  them  on 
the  last  march.  She  was  a  "  prophetess,"  and  uttered  inspired  words  of  praise  and 
thanksgiving  (as  Deborah,  Hannah,  and  Mary),  and  was  especially  associated  with 
the  glorious  triumph  of  the  exodus  (Exod.  xv.  20 — 22).  Even  so  the  soul  which 
has  greatly  erred  and  lost  itself,  and  is  at  last  recovered  and  sets  its  face  Zionward, 
may  not  look  to  be  cheered  with  songs  of  gladness  and  of  triumph  on  its  way,  but 
must  do  without  them.  And  note  that  Miriam,  Aaron,  Moses  all  died  this  year,  a 
little  before  the  entrance  into  Canaan  under  Joshua.  The  Fathers  see  in  this  a  figure 
of  the  passing  away  of  prophecy,  the  priesthood,  and  the  law,  and  their  giving  place 
to  Jesus.  "  Videtur  mihi  in  Mari4  (Miriam)  Prophetia  mortua ;  in  Moyse  et  Aaron 
Legi  et  Sacerdotio  Judeeorum  finis  impositus,  quod  nee  ipsi  ad  terram  repromissionis 
transoendere  valeant  nee  credentem  populum  de  solitudine  hujus  mundi  educere,  nisi 
solus  Jesus  Deus  Salvatoi.  ' 

II.  With  eespect  to  the  waters  ok  stbipb  (see  at  Exod.  xvii.).  Consider — 1. 
That  it  was  in  Kadesh  thai  this  temptation  lefell  the  people^  where  they  had  ap- 
jgarently  not  experienced  any  want  of  water  before.  Even  so  it  often  happens  that 
great  religious  trials  and  deprivations  are  permitted  to  overtake  us  when  and  where 
ve  are  least  prepared  to  face  them,  and  pernaps  at  the  very  moment  when  we  hope 
*o  begin  a  new  life  and  make  a  decided  advance.  2.  That  of  all  gifts  which  were 
necessary  to  their  life,  wafer  was  tne  one  the  absence  of  which  was  Tnost  terrible. 
Conceive  the  suffering  and  terror  of  the  multitude  1  Even  so  it  is  the  water  from 
the  Rock  of  Ages,  the  grace  of  Christ,  upon  which  we  daily  and  hourly  depend  in  this 
evil  world ;  and  there  are  moments  when  that  grace  threatens  to  fail  us,  and  spiritual 
death  stares  us  in  the  face  (cf.  1  Cor.  x.  4 ;  xii.  13).  3.  Tliat  they  should  have 
trusted  him  who  had  followed  them  as  a  spiritual  Bock,  giving  them  both  wafer  and 
shade  in  a  thirsty  land ;  but  their  temper  and  their  very  words  were  the  same  as 
forty  years  before.  Even  so  do  we  fail  again  and  again  under  trial,  as  if  all  experience 
went  for  nothing,  and  as  if  fallen  human  nature  were  never  going  to  be  really  altered 
in  us  for  the  better.  Nothing  is  more  striking  than  the  way  in  which  a  man's 
behaviour  under  temptation  repeats  itself  in  spite  of  all  that  he  has  learnt.  4.  That 
the  Lord  did  not  show  any  displeasure  vnth  them,  but  gave  them  water  at  once, 
knowing  their  eore  necessity.  Even  so  patient  and  long-suffering  is  he  with  us,  how- 
ever unreasonable  and  impatient  we  are,  for  he  knoweth  our  feebleness,  and  our 
great  need,  and  that  we  must  die  without  his  grace.  5.  That  the  Lord  was  angry 
(and  declared  it)  with  Moses  because  he  spoke  and  acted  impatiently  and  unworthily  ; 
for  what  he  overlooked  again  and  again  in  the  ignorant  and  unstable  people,  that  he 
could  not  pass  over  in  the  wise  and  powerful  leader,  who  was  to  them  the  visible 
representative  and  mouthpiece  of  the  invisible  God.  Even  so  the  Lord  will  pass 
over  a  thousand  errors  and  faults  in  the  poor  and  ignorant  and  miserable  more 
easily  than  one  in  him  that  has  known  him,  and  that  has  a  ministry  from  him,  and 
that  stands  to  others  in  the  place  of  leader  and  g^de.  It  is  a  fearful  thing  by  word 
or  act  to  dishonour  God  or  his  gospel  in  the  eyes  of  those  who  look  up  to  u»,  and 


OH.  zx.  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS.  257 

■who  will  more  or  less  consciously  take  their  ideas  of  religion  from  our  practice  of  it. 
6.  That  Moses  erred  heoause  he  lost  his  temper,  and  regarded  the  sinfvl  murmuring 
of  the  people  only  as  a  trial  and  vexation  to  himself.  He  had  in  fact  nothing  to 
complain  of,  for  he  was  only  an  instrument  in  God's  hand,  and  it  was  against  God 
that  they  were  sinning.  Even  so  we,  if  we  are  angry  when  men  do  wrongly  and 
foolishly,  are  sure  to  err  greatly  ;  for  anger  can  only  see  the  bad  conduct  of  others 
as  an  offence  to  itself,  and  so  resent  it,  thereby  placing  self  in  the  room  of  God,  and 
presuming  to  judge  and  to  condemn  in  his  stead.  7.  That  Moses  spake  unadvisedly 
with  his  lips  in  calling  the  people  "  rebels,"  because  he  was  himself  a  rebel  in  heart. 
He  was  indeed,  considering  his  position  and  advantages,  more  disloyal  to  his  Master 
at  that  moment  than  even  they  were.  Even  so  when  we  sit  in  judgment  on  others, 
arid  call  them  by  hard  names,  it  often  happens  that  we  are  in  truth  more  unfaithful 
to  our  calling  than  even  they.  Their  unfaithfulness  may  be  of  a  kind  to  arouse  our 
disgust  and  disdain,  but  ours  may  be  in  truth  more  heinous  in  the  eyes  of  God.  8. 
That  he  spake  yet  mare  unadvisedly  in  saying,  "  Must  we  fetch  you  water  ?"  as  though 
it  were  their  power  and  goodness  to  which  the  supply  of  water  was  due.  Even  so 
it  is  a  sore  evil  when  the  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace  of  God  magnify  themselves 
even  in  hasty  words,  and  speak  as  if  they  were  the  authors  instead  of  the  mere  dis- 
pensers of  the  gifts  of  God,  and  lead  men  to  look  to  them  instead  of  through  them, 
and  pass  (as  it  were)  the  free  grace  and  goodness  of  God  through  the  discoloured 
medium  of  their  own  selfish  tempers.  9.  That  he  erred  also  through  wilfulness,  in 
that  he  smote  the  rock  twice  instead  of  speaking  to  it — an  error  trifling  in  itself,  but 
betraying  the  irritation  under  which  he  acted,  and  suggesting  that  the  copious  supply 
was  in  some  ^way  due  to  his  energy.  Even  so  men  often  err  greatly  and  do  harm 
by  acts  in  themselves  inconsiderable  which  are  prompted  by  impatience  and  self- 
will,  as  though  the  necessary  supply  of  Divine  grace  and  the  blessings  of  the  gospel 
were  really  dependent  upon  their  efforts.  If  we  are  stewards  of  the  grace  of  God 
at  all,  we  have  to  act  (1)  with  careful  obedience  towards  him,  (2)  with  quiet  patience 
towards  his  people,  knowing  that  the  result  lies  altogether  with  him.  10.  That 
Moses  was  probably  tempted  to  speak  and  act  as  he  did  because  God  had  said  to 
him,  "  Thou  shalt  bring  forth  to  them  water"  &o.  Even  so  we  find  our  temptation 
to  a  self -asserting  temper  which  dishonours  God  in  the  fact  that  God  has  really  made 
the  interests  of  religion  (humanly  speaking)  dependent  upon  his  servants'  efforts. 
It  is  our  trial  to  remember  this  as  far  as  labour  and  earnestness  are  concerned,  to 
forget  it  (or  rather  to  remember  the  complemental  truth)  as  far  as  personal  feelings 
are  concerned.  11.  That  Ood  did  not  withhold  the  stream  because  Moses  acted 
wrongly.  Even  so  the  blessings  of  the  word  and  sacraments  are  not  withheld  from 
the  souls  of  men  because  there  is  error  and  even  disobedience  in  those  that  minister 
them.  12.  That  God  punished  Moses  and  Aaron  with  personal  exclusion  from  the 
promised  land  because  they  had  failed  to  sanctify  him  in  the  eyes  of  the  people  ;  L  e. 
they  had,  as  far  as  in  them  lay,  obscured  the  revelation  of  the  Divine  power  and 
goodness,  and  impaired  the  good  effect  of  it  upon  the  people.  Even  so  God  will 
certainly  lay  sin  to  the  charge  of  all  who,  being  in  any  way  his  representatives  to 
others,  have  in  anything  dimmed  the  lustre  of  his  beauty  or  distorted  the  features  of 
his  perfection  in  their  eyes.  Thus  have  all,  even  Moses,  sinned  and  come  short  of 
the  glory  of  God,  so  that  none  have  wholly  pleased  him  except  Christ  (Matt.  iii.  17  ; 
xvii.  6 ;  2  Pet.  i.  17)  ;  nor  can  any  look  for  an  entrance  into  rest  save  in  Christ.  13. 
That  the  Lord  was  sanctified  in  the  children  of_  Israd  at  Meribahi  albeit  hit 
appointed  servants  failed  to  sanctify  him.  Their  sentence  was  perhaps  the  most 
effective  possible  revelation  of  his  exceeding  holiness.  Even  do  the  Lord  willmako 
his  glory  to  be  known  and  felt  through  his  servants  if  they  be  faithful,  but  without 
them  i£  they  be  faithless.  He  will  be  sanctified  in  us  to  our  great  reward  in  the  one 
case,  to  our  shame  and  sorrow  in  the  other. 

III.   CONSIDEB  FURTHBB,  WITH  RESPECT  TO  THE  ERROR  OP  MoSES — 1.    That  he  Wat 

now  very  old,  in  his  hundred  and  twentieth  year.  An  irritable  and  hasty  temper  is 
the  special  temptation  of  old  age.  2.  That  he  had  shovm  the  same  temper  on  at  least 
one  previous  occasion  (ch.  xi.),  and  had  then  been  betrayed  into  the  use  of  unseemly 
ana  untrue  language,  which  ought  to  have  been  a  warning  to  him.  There  is  nothing 
which  people  have  more  need  to  watch  yery  carefully  than  their  temper,  for  there  ia 

KUUBEBS.  ■ 


258  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS,  [oh.  xr.  1— ». 

nothing  that  grows  upon  a  man  more  certainly  than  bad  temper.  8.  That  God  had 
been  very  forbearing^  with  him  on  thai  occasion,  hit  on  thtt  was  very  strict;  the 
reason  no  doubt  being  that  then  Moses  uttered  his  unreasonable  and  passionate 
complaints  only  in  the  ear  of  God,  whereas  now  his  angry  insolence  wag  vented 
upon  the  people.  If  we  address  ourselves  directly  to  Ood  he  will  receive  graciously 
even  the  outpourings  of  a  disordered  and  embittered  mind,  and  we  shall  find  relief ; 
if  we  reserve  our  angry  temper  for  our  neighbours — much  more  for  those  committed 
to  our  keeping— Qod  will  be  sore  displeased  at  us  for  their  Bakes.  Art  thou  angry? 
Go  and  complain  to  God  (cf.  Ps.  Izxvii.  3,  P.  B.  V.). 

IV.  CoNSiDEB,  WITH  BE8PK0T  TO  THE  coNDnoT  OF  Edom — 1.  That  Israel  had 
reason  to  expect  no  friendly  treatment  from,  Udomj  because  of  the  bad  conduct  of 
Jacob  towards  Esau,  which  had  left  an  angry  and  jealous  spirit  in  the  minds  of  bis 
descendants  against  Israel  The  quarrels  and  injuries  of  individuals  bear  evil  fruit 
in  years  to  come,  and  in  after  generations,  and  that  especially  among  brethren, 
whether  in  blood  or  in  religion.  2.  That,  nevertheless,  Israel  addressed  Edom  ai 
his  brother,  and  bespoke  his  friendly  sympathy  and  help.  We  are  bound  to  treat 
others  as  our  brethren,  and  to  approach  them  as  such,  and  to  bespeak  their  sympathy 
in  our  religious  interests,  until  we  are  actually  repulsed.  3.  That  Israel  did  not 
claim  any  right,  as  the  c/iasen  people  of  God,  to  be  served  by  Edom,  or  to  take  any- 
ihing  of  him  without  paym^e/nt,  but  only  asked  the  ordinary  courtesy  due  to  a  friendly 
people.  In  addressing  ourselves  to  others  in  matters  of  this  world  we  must  be 
careful  to  ask  and  to  expect  only  what  is  strictly  fair  and  reasonable  from  their 
point  of  view,  and  not  to  claim  any  exceptional  regard  or  deference  because  we  are 
more  highly-favoured  than  they.  4.  That  when  Israel  found  himself  rudely  denied 
and  opposed,  he  did  not  attempt  to  avenge  himself,  hut  turned  away  from  Edom.  If 
we  meet  with  opposition  and  hostility  where  we  looked  for  help  and  sympathy,  it  is 
useless  to  complain,  and  wicked  to  bear  malice ;  the  only  thing  is  to  turn  away  from 
such,  and  leave  them  to  God  and  to  themselves.  5.  That  the  hostile  conduct  of 
Edom  was  not  forgotten  of  God,  but  in  due  tim^e  {not  being  amended)  was  punished. 
It  is  a  great  sin,  out  of  personal  (or  collective)  jealousy  and  dislike,  to  cast  obstacles 
in  the  path  of  others,  or  to  refuse  them  such  friendly  assistance  as  they_  seek  of  us. 

V.  CONSIDEB,   WITH  EESPECT    TO   THE  DEATH  OF  AARON  —  1.  That  it    testified  tO 

the  infirmity  of  human  nature  at  its  greatest.  Aaron  had  been  invested  with  a 
sacred  character,  and  to  that  generation  (which  had  not  known  his  origin)  must  have 
seemed  an  awful  being,  almost  more  than  man ;  yet  he  died,  and  was  not.  2.  That 
it  testified  to  the  inlurent  imperfection  of  the  Levitical priesthood,  in  that  Aaron 
could  not  continue  by  reason  of  death,  so  that  the  continuance  of  the  office  depended 
upon  naturi^  succession,  which  must  some  day  fail — and  has  failed.  3.  That  it 
testified  to  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin.  For  one  little  sin,  and  one  to  which  he  was 
merely  accessory,  the  high  priest  must  die  without  even  beholding  the  land  so  long 
sought,  and  now  so  nearly  found.  4.  That  the  demise  of  Aaron  in  that  lonely 
mountain,  in  a  foreign  land,  testified  to  the  mysterious  and  typical  character  of  hia 
office.  The  anointed  of  the  Lord,  although,  as  being  man  and  sinful,  he  must  die,  yet 
not  as  other  men  die,  but  in  a  vast  farjsolitude  alone  with  God.  6.  That  the  transfer 
of  the  priestly  robes  from  Aaron  to  Eleazar  testified  that  the  priesthood  was  abiding, 
and  would  abide  until  it  vested  in  One  who  shmdd  live  for  ever.  Therefore  was  it 
effected  oujt  of  sight  of  the  people,  and  far  above  them,  in  order  that  no  gap  or 
interval  might  be  perceptible  to  them.  6.  That  the  mourning  for  Aaron  during 
thirty  days  testified  that,  with  all  his  faults,  he  was  yet  honoured  as  a  great  leader 
in  Israel ;  and  perhaps  this  too,  that  Aaron  as  a  man  was  not  so  swallowed  up  in 
Aaron  aa  •  priest  but  that  his  personal  loss  was  duly  felt  and  lamented. 

HOMILIES  BY  VABI0U8  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  12. — The  An  of  Moses.  There  must  have  been  something  in  this  sin  of 
Moses  at  the  crag  in  Kadesh  very  unworthy  of  his  high  place,  and  very  displeasing 
to  God.  The  sharpness  of  the  Lord's  reprimand  and  the  severity  of  the  punishment 
make  this  BufSciently  clear.    By  Moses  hunself  the  punishment  was  felt  to  be  aevenk 


CH.  XX.  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBBBa  269 

And  no  marvel.  For  eighty  long  years  he  had  waited  and  laboured  for  the  fulfil- 
ment of  the  promise.  During  the  last  thirty-seven  of  these  he  had  been  cheering 
himself  with  the  hope  that  he,  along  with  Joshua  and  Caleb,  and  the  men  of  the 
younger  generation,  would  be  suffered  to  take  possession  of  the  land.  This  lay  so 
near  his  heart  that,  after  learning  that  he  was  not  to  set  foot  within  the  promised 
rest,  he  laboured  hard  to  get  the  sentence  reversed  (Deut.  iiL  26). 

I.  WftAT  THEN  WAS  MosES'  SIN  ?  Two  circumstances  are  obvious  on  the  face  of 
the  story.  1.  Moses,  being  directed  to  speak  to  the  rock  that  it  miglit  give  forth  its 
water,  smote  U  instead  with  the  rod  of  God  which  was  in  his  hand  ;  and  this  he  did 
not  once  only,  but  twice.  2.  He  spoke  to  the  people,  not  with  meekness  and  calm 
authority,  but  in  heat  and  bitterness.  "  Ye  rebels,  must  we  fetch  you  water  out  of 
this  rock  ?  "  Thus  he  "  spake  unadvisedly  with  his  lips  "  (Ps.  cvi.  33).  It  is  not 
difficult  to  understand  how  Moses  should  have  so  far  forgotten  himself  on  this  occa- 
sion. Let  the  facts  be  weighed.  The  servant  of  the  Lord  is  now  120  years  old. 
The  generation  which  sinned  thirty-seven  years  ago,  and  was  condemned  to  die 
in  the  wilderness,  is  nearly  all  gone.  Moses  is  mortified  to  find  that  the  new 
generation  is  infected  with  a  touch  of  the  same  impatient  unbelief  which  wrought  in 
their  fathers  so  much  mischief.  No  sooner  are  they  at  a  loss  for  water  than  they 
rise  against  Moses  with  rebellious  murmurings.  For  once  he  loses  command  of  him- 
self. On  all  former  occasions  of  the  kind  his  meekness  was  Unshaken ;  he  either 
held  his  peace,  or  prayed  for  the  rebels,  ^r  at  most  called  on  the  Lord  to  be  his  Wit- 
ness and  Judge.  Now  he  breaks  out  into  bitter  chidings.  At  the  root  of  this  there 
was  a  secret  failure  of  faith.  "  Ye  believed  me  not," — did  not  thoroughly  rely  on  my 
faithfulness  and  power, — "  to  sanctify  me  in  the  eyes  of  the  children  of  Israel "  (ver. 
12).  His  former  meekness  had  been  the  fruit  of  faith.  He  had  been  thoroughly 
persuaded  that  the  Lord  who  was  with  him  could  accomplish  all  he  had  promised, 
and  therefore  he  faced  every  difficulty  with  calm  and  patient  resolution.  Now  a 
touch  of  unbelief  bred  in  him  hastiness  and  bitterness  of  spirit. 

II.  Lessons.  1.  The  failuigs  of  good  men  may  be  culpable  in  Qod's  sight  and  dis- 
pleasing to  him  out  of  all  proportion  to  the  degree  of  blameworthiness  they  present 
to  our  eye.  So  far  is  it  from  being  true  (as  many  seem  to  think)  that  believers' 
sins  are  no  sins  at  all,  and  need  give  no  concern,  that,  on  the  contrary,  the  Lord 
dislikes  the  stain  of  sin  most  when  it  is  seen  in  his  dear  children.  The  case  of  Moses 
is  not  singular.  Sins  which  the  Lord  overlooks  in  other  men  he  will  occasionally 
put  some  mark  of  special  displeasure  UBon,  when  they  are  committed  by  one  who  is 
eminent  for  holiness  and  honourable  service.  It  is,  no  doubt,  a  just  instinct  which 
leads  all  right-thinking  people  to  be  blind  to  the  failings  of  good  men  who  have  been 
signally  useful  in  their  day.  But  if  the  good  men  become  indulgent  to  their  own 
faults  they  are  likely  to  he  rudely  awakened  to  a  sense  of  their  error.  The  better  a 
man  is,  his  sins  may  be  the  more  dishonouring  to  God.  A  spot  hardly  visible  on  the 
coat  of  a  labouring  man,  may  be  glaringly  offensive  on  the  shining  i-aiment  of  a  throned 
king.  2.  The  sins  we  are  least  inclined  to  may  nevertheless  be  the  sins  which  will 
bring  us  to  the  bitterest  grief.  Every  man  has  his  weak  side.  There  are  sins  to 
which  our  natural  disposition  or  the  circumstances  of  our  up-bringing  lay  us 
peculiarly  open  ;  and  it  is  without  doubt  a  good  rule  to  be  specially  on  our  guard  in 
relation  to  these  sins.  Yet  the  rule  must  not  be  applied  too  rigidly.  When  Dum- 
barton Rock  was  taken,  it  was  not  by  assailing  the  fortifications  thrown  up  to  protect 
its  one  weak  side,  but  by  scaling  it  at  a  point  where  the  precipitous  height  seemed  to 
render  defence  or  guard  unnecessary.  Job  was  the  most  patient  of  men,  yet  he 
sinned  through  impatience.  Peter  was  courageous,  yet  he  fell  through  cowardice. 
Moses  was  the  meekest  of  men,  yet  he  fell  through  bitterness  of  spirit.  We  have 
need  to  guard  well  not  our  weak  points  only,  but  the  points  also  at  which  we  deem 
ourselves  to  be  strong. — B. 

Vers.  23 — 29. — The  death  of  Aaron.  The  fortieth  year  of  the  Wanderings,  remark- 
able in  so  many  other  respects,  was  remarkable  also  for  this,  that  it  witnessed  the 
removal  of  the  three  great  children  of  Amram,  who  had  been  the  leaders  of  the  nation 
from  the  time  that  the  Lord  began  to  plague  the  Egyptians  till  the  day  that  the  host 
removed  from  the  oamping-ground  at  Kadesh.    Of  the  three,  Miriam,  seemingly  dio 

b2 


860  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oh.  jx.  1— 2St 

eldest,  wag  the  first  to  be  remoTed.  She  died,  and  was  buried  at  Kadesh,  in  the 
beginning  of  the  year.  Aaron,  the  elder  of  the  brothers,  followed  in  the  fifth  month. 
Lastly,  Moses  died  at  the  end  of  the  year.  The  surpassing  fame  of  Moses  has  thrown 
that  of  Miriam  and  Aaron  into  the  shade.  Nevertheless,  they  were  eminent  both 
for  sanctity  and  public  usefulness.  It  was  not  the  least  of  the  Lord's  benefits  that 
they,  as  wel'  as  Moses,  were  spared  to  the  people  during  so  many  years. 

I.  The  terms  in  which  the  death  of  Aaron  is  foretold  (ver.  23).  Closes  is 
the  first  to  hear  of  the  coming  event ;  and  there  is  something  of  wrath,  or  at  least 
of  displaasure,  against  both  him  and  Aaron  in  the  way  in  which  it  is  announced  :  "  Ye 
shall  not  enter  the  land,  because  ye  rebelled  against  my  word  at  Meribah."  But  the 
displeasure  is  only,  as  it  were,  a  passing  frown.  There  is  in  the  words  much  more  of 
loving  kindness  and  tender  mercy.  Not  only  is  the  saintly  high  priest  forewarned 
of  his  approaching  departure,  but  this  is  done  in  terms  at  once  most  kindly  in  tone 
and  strongly  suggestive  of  hope  regarding  the  future  life.  "  Aaron  shall  be  gathered 
unto  his  people."  Christian  readers  have  always,  as  by  a  kind  of  instinct,  taken  this 
to  mean  that  Aaron,  upon  his  departure  from  this  world,  was  to  pass  into  the  company 
of  those  who  were  his  relatives  in  the  truest  and  tenderest  kindred — the  patriarchs 
who  had  died  in  faith  before  him,  the  congregation  of  the  righteous  beyond  the 
grave.  The  interpretation  is  distasteful  to  certain  critics,  who  have  persuaded 
themselves  that  in  the  Mosaic  age  the  views  and  hopes  of  the  best  of  men  were 
bounded  by  the  grave.  It  is  easy  to  cite  texts  which  seem  to  countenance  that  low 
estimate  of  the  views  which  God  had  opened  up  to  the  early  saints  of  the  patriarchal 
and  Mosaic  times.  But  after  all  it  is  no  better  than  a  paradox,  as  hard  to  reconcile 
with  historical  fact  as  with  the  instinctive  perceptions  of  devout  readers  of  God's 
word.  It  is  a  familiar  fact  that  the  Egyptians,  among  wliom  Moses  and  Aaron  were 
brought  up,  not  only  believed  that  men  survive  the  dissolution  of  the  body,  but 
occupied  their  minds  exceedingly  about  the  other  world.  In  the  absence  of  clear 
and  explicit  statements  to  the  contrary,  we  must  suppose  that  Moses  and  Aaron  knew 
at  least  as  much  as  the  Egyptians,  and  looked  for  a  continued  conscious  existence 
after  death.  But  we  are  not  left  to  surmise.  What  can  this  "gathered  unto  his 
people  "  mean  ?,  It  cannot  mean  "  buried  in  the  sepulchre  where  the  ashes  of  his 
kindred  lie,"  for  in  that  sense  neither  Aaron  nor  Moses  was  ever  gathered  to  his  people. 
Each  was  buried  in  a  solitary  grave.  Nor  can  it  mean  merely  "  gathered  to  the  mighty 
congregation  of  the  dead  "  (although  that  also  would  imply  continued  existence  after 
death),  for  the  phrase  is  used  in  Scripture  regarding  none  but  the  righteous  (Gen. 
XXV.  8, 17  ;  ixxv.  29  ;  xlix.  33,  &c.).     What  then  do  we  gather  from  this  intimation  ? 

1.  There  is,  beyond  the  grave,  a  congregation  of  the  righteous,  where  those  who  die 
in  faith  shall  enjoy  the  congenial  society  of  their  own  people — men  and  women  like- 
minded  with  themselves.  Surely  a  most  comfortable  thought  I  A  great  change  has 
no  doubt  taken  place. in  the  view  presented  to  faith  of  the  future  life  ever  since  our 
blessed  Lord  rose  and  ascended.  The  ancient  conception  of  the  heavenly  life  has  been 
thrown  into  the  shade  by  the  conception  of  it  as  being  "for  ever  with_  the  Lord." 
Yet  the  ancient  conception  has  lost  nothing  either  of  its  truth  or  of  its  power  to 
comfort.  A  new  source  of  comfort  has  now  been  added,  but  the  old  one  has  not 
been  superseded.  We  who  believe  in  Christ  look  forward  not  only  to  "  the  coming 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  but  to  "  our  gathering  together  unto  him  "  (2  Thess.  ii.  1). 

2.  Into  the  congregation  of  the  righteous  God  is  careful  to  gather  his  people  when 
they  die.  They  are  not  driven  away  into  darkness — dismissed  like  Judas  to  their 
own  place.  They  are  gathered ;  they  are  taken  home  :  teith  care,  that  none  be  lost ; 
with  loving  kindness  also,  that  they  may  not  fear. 

II.  The  circumstances  of  Aaeon's  departure.  1.  He  was  divested  of  his  office 
and  robes  before  he  died,  and  they  were  transferred  to  Eleazar  in  his  sight.  The 
priest  was  to  die,  but  the  priesthood  was  to  live.  The  priesthood  was  entailed  in 
Aaron's  house,  but  the  entail  had  not  yet  been  confirmed  by  long  transmission.  To 
prevent  any  attempt  to  alter  the  succession,  the  transference  took  place  while  Aaron 
was  yet  alive.  Probably  there  was  an  eye  also  to  Aaron's  comfort.  It  would  be  a 
satisfaction  to  him  to  see  his  son  invested  with  office  before  he  died.  2.  Aaron's 
death  and  burial  took  place  on  Mount  Hor.  This  was,  in  the  first  instance,  designed 
lor  publicity.    Eleazar  was  to  be  high  priest  to  the  congregation.    It  was  due  to  them 


OB.  tt,  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  Wl 

that  hia  investiture  should  take  place  in  their  sight  (cf.  ch.  xsvii.  22).  Ordination 
to  a  public  office  ought  to  take  place  in  public.  This  particular  mountain  waa 
chosen  because  from  it  Aaron's  eye  might  descry  the  southern  outskirts  of  the  land 
of  promise.  Moses  and  Aaron  were  forbidden  to  enter  it ;  but  to  each  there  wm 
vouchsafed  a  distant  prospect  of  it  before  he  died. 

Eeflection.  In  this  life  good  and  evil  are  inextricably  conjoined.  Within  the 
same  town,  in  the  same  street,  in  the  same  congregation,  in  the  same  family,  there 
are  to  be  found  believers  and  unbelievers,  just  and  unjust,  children  of  God  and  chil- 
dren of  the  wicked  one.  But  hereafter  there  will  come  a  great  severance — lament- 
able separations,  joyous  reunions.  The  haters  of  God  will  be  taken  from  among  the 
just,  and  be  dismissed  to  their  own  place.  The  lovers  of  God  will  be  gathered  to 
their  own  people,  and  sit  down  with  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob  in  the  kingdom. 
This  being  so,  it  behoves  me  to  ask  myself  the  question,  Who  are  my  people  ? 
What  is  the  people  whose  likeness  I  bear,  whose  company  is  to  me  congenial,  whose 
tastes  I  share  ? — B. 

Ver.  12.  —  The  great  sin  of  disobedience  even  under  palliating  circumstances. 
There  are  various  ways  In  which  we  may  show  that  sin  is  "exceeding  sinful:" 
e.  g.  the  character  of  God  ;  the  precepts  of  hia  ceremonial  and  moral  law ;  the  words 
and  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Not  the  least  impressive  proof  of  God's  estimate 
of  sin  is  God's  chastisement  of  his  sinning  children.  Confining  ourselves  to  the 
conduct  of  Moses,  we  note — 

I.  The  nature  or  Mosbs'  sin.  It  is  described  in  ver.  12,  but  is  not  easy  to 
analyse.  1.  Its  root  appears  to  have  been  a  temporary  failure  of  faith,  indicated  by 
the  words  "  must  we,"  or,  "  shall  we  bring  you  water,"  &c.  In  spite  of  the  promise 
(ver.  8),  he  expresses  uncertainty  as  to  whether  such  rebels  will  be  gratified.  Unbe- 
lief is  infectious,  and  needs  a  robust  faith  to  resist  it.  Like  a  powerful  electric 
current,  only  a  strong  non-conductor  can  arrest  its  course.  Apply  to  Christians 
fearing  they  must  fail  in  their  labours  because  of  unbelief  in  others  (cf.  Matt.  xvii. 
17,  20).  This  distrust  led  to  further  faults,  such  as — 2.  Haste  of  temper.  Words, 
acts,  and  manner  indicated  this.  May  it  not  have  been  that  because  of  his  distrust, 
at  the  first  blow,  the  water  did  not  flow  forth  ?  Or  was  it  that  both  blows  were 
given  in  great  haste  ?  "  He  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste."  3.  Disregard  of 
instructions  in  striking  when  merely  told  to  speak  (cf.  Deut.  iv.  2 ;  xii.  32 ;  Prov. 
XXX.  5,  6).  4.  The  appearance,  at  least,  of  assuming  too  much  honour  to  himself 
and  Aaron,  and  thus  failing  to  "  sanctify  "  God  before  the  people  (Ps.  cvi.  33). 
Distrustful  or  disobedient  thoughts,  when  shut  up,  like  rebels,  within  the  citadel  of 
the  heart,  do  mischief  enough  and  give  a  world  of  trouble ;  but  if  they  sally  forth  in 
the  form  of  words  they  may  cause  public  injury  and  lead  to  consequences  some  of 
which  may  be  irreparable.  Combining  the  resolution  of  Ps.  xxxix.  1  with  the  prayer 
of  Ps.  cxli.  3,  we  may  be  safe.     Yet  in  considering  Moses'  sin  we  may  see — 

II.  The  palliations  of  it,  1.  Great  provocations  from  the  rebels,  who,  after  all 
the  lessons  of  the  past,  inherited  and  perpetuated  their  fathers'  sins  (of.  Exod.  xvi. 
3 ;  xvii.  3 ;  Numb.  xi.  6).  2.  His  first  public  offence.  He  was  "  very  meek " 
(ch.  xii.  3),  and  he  needed  to  be.  Now  for  the  first  time  his  meekness  failed 
him.  3.  His  sin  was  very  brief — a  temporary  failure  of  faith,  causing  a  passing 
gust  of  anger,  yet  soon  over ;  he  was  not  "  greatly  moved  "  (Pa.  Ixii.  2).  4.  It  led 
to  no  public  evil  consequences  appreciable  by  the  congregation.  But  though  we 
may  see  in  our  own  sins  or  the  sins  of  others  many  circumstances  that  seem  to 
palliate  the  offence,  we  must  not  expect  to  escape  chastisement  if  we  reflect  on — 

III.  Moses'  punishment.  Moses  had  one  cherished  desire  of  his  life,  that,  having 
led  the  people  through  the  wilderness,  he  might  conduct  them  into  the  promised 
land.  Illustrate  this  from  the  scene  graphically  suggested  to  our  imagination  in 
Deut.  iii.  2.3 — 27.  Tme,  the  punishment  was  only  for  this  life,  and,  like  many  other 
of  God's  fatherly  chastisements,  was  overruled  for  his  child's  good  in  sparing  him 
from  future  conflicts  (cf.  1  Cor.  ii.  32).  But  still  it  was  a  punishment,  reminding  us 
of  the  g^eat  sin  of  disobedience  even  under  palliating  circumstances.     And  the 

Senalty  may  be  more  serious.    Illustrate  from  the  case  of  the  disobedient  prophet 
eceived  at  Bethel  (1  Kings  xiii.)  ;  or  from  some  case  we  may  have  known  of  a  lif* 


M2  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [cH.  xx.  1—29. 

blighted  through  one  sin  of  haste  or  disobedience  in  word  or  act.  The  favour  ot 
God  brings  with  it  great  privileges,  but  imposes  on  us  grave  responsibilities  (ct 
Amos  iii  2 ;  Luke  lii.  47 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  17).  What  need  for  the  confession  and  the 
prayer,  Ps.  xix.  12 — 14 ! — P. 

_Ver.  28. — The  death  of  Aaron  : — "  Mercy  and  Judgment."  This  chapter  begins 
with  the  death  of  Miriam  and  ends  with  Aaron's  decease.  No  chapter  of  any  length 
in  the  history  even  of  a  godly  family  without  death  in  it.  In  every  believer's  death 
there  is  a  blending  of  judgment  and  mercy.    In  this  case  we  see — 

I.  Judgment.  Aaron's  death  was — 1.  A  chastisement  (ver.  24;  Rom.  v.  12  ;  viii. 
10).  2.  A  deprivation  (ver.  26).  His  garments  were  taken  of£  because  his  priest- 
hood was  taken  away.  So  with  the  most  sacred  and  honourable  office  of  the  Christian 
(Heb.  vii.  23 ;  2  Pet.  i.  13 — 16).  3.  A  severance.  The  aged  Moses  loses  the  last 
companion  of  his  early  days.     4.  A  grief  to  many  (ver.  29). 

II.  Mebct  ;  indicated  in  Aaron's  death  by  such  facts  as  these.  It  was,  1.  A  calm 
departure,  not  a  sudden  judgment.  He  was  not  "  cut  off  from,"  but  "  gathered  unto, 
his  people."  2.  A  release  from  the  toils  of  life  in  the  wilderness  and  the  contra- 
diction of  sinners.  3.  A  gentle  dismission  from  the  responsibilities  of  office.  4.  A 
transference  of  his  duties  and  honours  to  a  beloved  son.  He  saw  the  robes  and  the 
office  of  the  priesthood  intrusted  to  Eleazar.  5.  A  promotion  to  the  higher  service 
of  a  sinless  world ;  from  the  mount  of  communion  to  the  heavenly  Mount  Zion. — ^P. 

Ver.  1. — The  abiding  in  Kadesh  and  the  death  of  Miriam.  1.  The  abiding 
in  Kadesh.  This  was  a  return  to  the  district  occupied  at  the  time  when  God 
pronounced  the  doom  of  wandering  for  forty  years  on  the  people  (ch.  xiii.  26). 
We  know  also  that  the  return  took  place  as  this  long  period  was  drawing  to  a 
close.  There  had  been,  so  to  spoak,  a  profitless  and  melancholy  wandering  in 
a  circle.  We  have  but  little  information  concerning  this  period,  and  what  wo 
have  seems  to  have  been  given  for  the  purpose  of  showing  now  rigorously  God 
carried  out  the  sentence.  Ch.  xxxiii.  tells  us  of  the  various  halting-places,  as  if 
to  impress  us  with  the  fact  that  Israel  had  not  been  allowed  to  go  out  of  the 
wilderness.  We  are  told  of  the  rebellion  of  Korah  and  the  giving  of  certain  laws, 
but  there  is  nothing  to  indicate  progress.  Probably,  as  has  been  suggested,  there 
was  more  or  less  of  dispersion  during  the  forty  years.  God  was  waiting  for  an 
obstacle  to  be  taken  out  of  the  way.  In  the  Scriptures  we  do  not  find  anything 
recorded  unless  as  it  bears  on  the  advancement  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  Much  of 
what  the  world  calls  history  is  after  all  mere  trifling,  and  it  is  our  wisdom  and  profit 
to  notice  not  only  what  God  has  revealed,  but  also  what  he  has  concealed.  This 
generation  of  the  Israelites  was  thus  a  type  of  the  many  profitless  lives  that  are 
lived  in  every  generation.  After  a  period  of  wandering  and  toil  they  come  back  to 
where  they  started  from.  Tliere  is  nothing  to  show  for  all  the  years  of  weary  work. 
Sadder  still,  there  are  many  who  come  to  be  looked  on  as  obstacles ;  their  life  stands 
in  the  way  of  human  improvement  and  advance,  and  little  or  nothing  can  be  done 
till  they  go.  The  return  to  Kadesh  was  like  some  great  sign  that  a  long  and  rigorous 
winter  is  drawing  to  its  close.  2.  The  death  of  Miriam.  There  is  a  certain  fitness 
in  following  up  the  regulations  of  ch.  xix.  with  a  record  of  death  and  biurial.  Death 
had  dogged  these  Israelites  all  through  their  wanderings.  There  was  perhaps  no 
halting-place  but  what  might  have  had  this  sentence  joined  with  it:  "Such  a  one 
died  there  and  was  buried  there."  Why  then  is  the  death  of  Miriam  singled  out  for 
special  mention?  In  the  first  place,  she  was  a  person  of  distinction  by  her  office  as 
prophetess,  particularly  as  she  was  not  only  a  prophetess,  but  sister  to  the  two  chief 
men  in  Israel.  Then,  being  so,  it  is  very  noticeable  that  none  of  the  three,  so  eminent 
in  their  life,  wore  allowed  to  enter  the  promised  land.  There  is  mystery  in  their 
calling,  mystery  in  the  services  they  are  called  to  render,  and  mystery  in  the  seeming 
thwarting  of  all  their  hopes.  One  feels  the  hand  of  God  is  in  all  this.  Man  proposes, 
and  reckons  with  something  like  certainty,  but  God  disposes  in  a  very  different 
fashion.  Miriam  had  sinned  a  great  sin  (ch.  xii.),  but  was  it  not  a  long  while  ago  ? 
She  has  lived  on  through  all  these  wanderings,  having  seen  many  younger  than 
herself  falling  on  every  hand.-  May  she  not  then  hope  to  live  a  little  longer,  and  sea 
the  promised  land  beforo  she  dies  ?   Perhaps  such  thoughts  were  in  the  aged  woman's 


CR.  XX.  1— ».]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  MS 

mind,  perhaps  many  a  time  she  had  wept  bitterly  over  her  pride  and  envy  in  the 
past ;  but  God's  determinations  cannot  be  set  aside,  and  even  when  the  earthly  Oanaan 
IS  again  coming  in  sight,  that  sight  ia  not  for  her.  There  tvas  no  way  for  Miriam, 
any  more  than  the  rest  of  us,  to  escape  that  suffering  and  loss  in  this  world  which 
80  often  come  from  wrong-doing.  As  to  her  possible  part  in  the  better  country,  thera 
is  necessary  silence  here.  It  is  Christ  who  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light. 
The  great  thing  to  be  noticed  is  that  Miriam  died  in  Eadesh,  was  buried  there,  and 
consequently  failed  of  entrance  into  the  earthly  Canaan. — T. 

Vers.  2 — 13. — The  gift  of  water  at  Meribah.  I.  Thk  complaint  of  thk  pkoflb. 
1.  It  was  occasioned  by  a  pressing  and  reasonable  want.  "  There  was  no  water  for 
the  congregation."  The  people  were  often  discontented  without  cause,  but  here  was 
a  real  strait.  Experience  shows  that  many  so-called  necessities,  instead  of  being 
necessities,  are  even  injurious.  Life  might  be  made  more  simple  and  frugal  with  no 
loss,  but  rather  increase,  of  the  highest  joys  of  life.  But  if  we  are  to  live  here  at'  all 
there  are  some  things  necessary.  The  bread  and  the  water  must  be  sure.  2.  There 
was  no  apparent  supply  for  the  want.  We  may  presume  that  for  the  most  part 
Israel  had  found  water,  even  in  the  wilderness,  without  much  difficulty.  Unobserved 
and  unappreciated,  God  may  have  opened  up  many  fountains  before  the  Israelites 
approached.  Hence  when  they  came  to  Kadesh  and  found  the  rocks  dry,  they  hastily 
judged  there  was  no  water.  We  are  very  dependent  on  customary  outward  signs. 
3.  Past  experience  of  similar  circumstances  should  have  led  to  calm  faith  and 
expectation.  God  had  made  sweet  for  them  the  bitter  waters  of  Marah,  and  directly 
after  brought  them  to  Elim  with  its  ample  supply  (Ezod.  iv.  23 — 27).  And  when 
they  came  to  Rephidim,  and  found  no  water,  Moses  by  command  of  God  smote  the 
rock  in  Horeb  (Exod.  xvii.).  But  then  the  rising  generation  had  not  been  sufficiently 
instructed  in  these  things,  and  impressed  with  the  goodness  of  God.  How  should 
unbelieving  and  forgetting  fathers  make  believing  and  mindful  children  ?  If  we 
would  only  base  our  expectations  on  what  God  has  done  in  the  past,  we  should  look 
in  vain  for  occasion  of  fear  and  doubt.  After  Jesus  had  fed  one  multitude,  the 
disciples  had  yet  to  ask  with  respect  to  another,  "  Whence  should  we  have  so  much 
bread  in  the  wilderness,  as  to  fill  so  great  a  multitude  ?  "  (Matt.  xv.  33).  Consider 
also  Matt.  xvi.  5 — 10.  We  continually,  and  in  the  most  perverse  way,  confine  our 
views  of  what  is  possible  within  the  limitations  of  our  own  natural  powers.  To 
God  the  wilderness  is  as  the  fruitful  field,  and  the  fruitful  field  as  the  wilderness. 
He  can  make  the  earth  whatever  pleases  him  (Ps.  cvii.  33 — 39).  4.  The  complaint* 
of  the  people  were  not  confined  to  the  urgent  need.  They  do  not  approach  Moses 
with  a  simple,  humble  plea  for  water.  They  had  not  considered  why  they  had  been 
brought  to  Kadesh,  and  that  in  the  plans  of  God  they  were  bound  to  come  again 
into  that  district,  whether  water  was  there  or  not.  First  of  all  they  utter  an  impiomif 
hasty  wish,  though  if  it  had  been  taken  seriously  they  would  have  complained  bitterly. 
Men  are  apt  to  say  they  wish  they  were  dead  when  really  their  circumstances  are 
more  endurable  than  those  of  many  who  have  learned,  like  the  apostle,  in  whatsoever 
state  they  are,  therewith  to  be  content.  A  discontented  heart  makes  a  reckless  tongue. 
The  expression  was  used  thoughtlessly  enough,  just  as  many  take  God's  name  in  vain, 
hardly  conscious  of  what  they  are  sajdng.  Next  they  advance  to  an  wnjtist  reproach. 
Forty  years  of  Divine  chastisements,  sharp  and  severe,  had  taught  them  nothing. 
They  could  see  nothing  more  than  that  Moses  and  Aaron  were  leading  the  people 
about  at  their  own  will.  How  easy  it  is  through  our  ignorance  of  the  unseen  God 
to  attribute  to  the  men  whom  we  do  see  a  power  immensely  beyond  their  resources. 
The  people  came  back  to  Kadesh  as  they  left  it,  blind,  ungrateful,  inconsiderate  as 
ever.  Moses  and  Aaron,  sorrowing  for  their  dead  sister,  have  once  again  to  listen  to 
accusations  which  long  ago  had  been  answered  by  God  himself.  The  reproach  is 
mingled  with  vain  regrets,  still  surviving  all  these  years  of  chastisement.  There 
could  not  now  be  many  survivors  of  the  generation  that  had  come  out  of  Egypt,  yet, 
doubtless,  all  the  while  Egypt  had  been  so  often  mentioned  as  to  have  deeply  infected 
the  minds  of  the  younger  generation.  Garrulous  old  people,  who  might  so  easily 
have  inspired  their  children  by  telling  them  of  God's  dealings  with  Pharaoh  in  Egypt 
•nd  at  the  Bed  Sea,  and  of  all  his  goodness  in  the  wilderness,  were  rather  poisoning 


tt4  THE  BOOK  OF  NTJMBERa  [cS.  «•  1—19. 

and  prejudiciDg  their  hearts  with  recollections  of  carnal  comforts  and  delicaciei 
which  seemed  hopelessly  lost.  Instead  of  pointing  out  that  the  wilderness  with  all 
its  hardships  was  a  place  of  Divine  manifestations,  they  could  only  see  that  it  was 
no  place  of  seeds,  or  figs,  or  yines,  or  pomegranates.  The  mention  <^  water,  coming 
in  at  the  last,  seems  almost  an  after-thought,  as  much  as  to  say,  "Even  if  we  had 
water,  there  would  none  the  less  he  ground  for  great  complaints." 

II.  God's  answeb  to  the  complaint.  1.  The  people  speak  against  Moses  and 
Aaron,  who  thereupon  make  their  usual  resort  to  God.  Beforetime  when  his  glory 
appeared  in  response  to  their  appeal  it  was  the  herald  of  destruction  (ch.  xiv.  10 ; 
zvi.  19,  42) ;  but  now  there  is  no  threatening  of  destruction.  Even  in  the  midst 
of  their  murmuriDg  and  ingratitude  God  recognises  their  real  need.  Thus  as  we 
consider  the  work  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  we  find  a  similar  recognition.  Men 
came  to  Jesus  with  all  sorts  of  selfish  complaints ;  but  while  they  found  in  him  a 
pitying  listener,  there  was  no  disposition  to  deal  with  them  according  to  their  com- 

Elaints.  God  did  not  give  to  Israel  at  Eadesh,  figs,  vines,  and  pomegranates,  but 
e  gave  water  speedily  and  abundantly.  It  is  made  a  charge  against  the  Divine 
providence  and  government,  and  sometimes  a  ground  for  denying  the  reality  of  such 
things,  that  men  are  so  unequally  supplied  with  temporal  possessions.  But  all  this 
falls  to  the  ground  if  only  we  notice  how  prompt,  how  effectual,  God  is  in  meeting 
real  necessities.  It  is  he  who  is  to  judge  of  these.  There  is  no  absolute  necessity 
even  for  the  bread  that  perisheth,  but  there  is  need,  whether  here  or  elsewhere,  to  be 
free  from  sin,  to  have  that  spiritual  food,  that  bread  and  water  of  eternal  life,  which 
Jesus  himself  has  spoken  of  so  largely  and  attractively  in  the  Gospel  of  John.  Thus 
while  the  Jews  went  on  wickedly  complaining  against  Christ,  showing  more  and 
more  their  ignorance  and  selfishness,  he,  on  the  other  hand,  went  on  in  the  midst 
of  all,  revealing,  expounding,  setting  forth  in  the  clear  light  of  his  matchless  teaching 
the  supreme  want  of  men  and  his  own  adequate  supply  for  it.  We  must  cease 
clamouring  for  the  figs,  vines,  and  pomegranates,  and  be  more  athirst  for  that  water 
of  which  if  one  drink  he  shall  never  thirst  again.  God  will  not  supply  everything 
we  think  to  be  wants.  But  let  a  man  come  to  himself  and  discern  his  real  needs, 
and  God,  like  the  father  to  the  prodigal  son,  will  run  to  meet  him  with  an  ample 
supply.  2.  God  makes  the  supply  from  an  unlikely  source.  Moses  was  to  speak  to 
the  rock  before  their  eyes,  the  one  nearest  them  at  the  time.  There  was  no  searching 
about  among  the  hills  if  haply  some  natural  reservoir  might  be  found  which  a  touch 
could  open  in  all  its  fulness  to  the  panting  crowd.  There  was  water  in  the  rock 
before  them,  requiring  nothing  more  than  the  word  of  God  through  his  servant  Moses. 
We  must  consider  what  happened  as  if  Moses  had  completely  carried  out  his  in- 
structions. Thus  in  many  tilings  connected  with  our  salvation  we  are  directed  to 
unlikely  places  and  unlikely  methods.  Who  expects  the  King  of  the  Jews  to  be  bom 
in  Bethlehem  ?  Why  not  in  Jerusalem  ?  Can  any  good  thing  come  out  of  Nazareth  ? 
Shall  one  look  for  the  food  of  a  multitude  among  five  loaves  and  two  small  fishes  ? 
Shall  one  look  for  an  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  in  Paul,  the  fierce  and  persecuting  Jew  ? 
God  makes  a  messenger  out  of  the  child  Samuel,  and  a  champion  out  of  the  stripling 
David.  God  delights  in  finding  everything  he  needs  where  we  can  find  little  or 
nothing.  We  may  be  nearest  help  when  to  our  natural  judgment  we  may  seem 
farthest  from  it.  3.  There  is  thus  a  warning  against  all  hasty  judgm,ents.  We 
who  are  so  utterly  weak,  so  constantly  in  need  of  help,  should  be  very  slow  to  say, 
"  Neither  is  there  any  water  to  drink.  Let  us  bear  in  mind  how  ignorant  we  are 
•f  the  Scriptures  and  the  power  of  God.  God  will  not  leave  his  own  true  children 
unsupplied  with  any  needful  thing.  He  Avill  choose  the  right  time,  and  way,  and 
form.  It  is  the  besetting  sin  of  far  too  many  minds  to  form  conclusions  not  only 
when  there  is  lack  of  suflBcient  information,  but  when  there  is  no  need  of  present 
conclusion  at  all.  "  Wait  on  the  Lord,  be  of  good  courage,  and  he  shall  strengthen 
thine  heart."  Do  not  say  in  haste  and  ignorance  that  there  is  no  strength  to  be  got 
anywhere. — ^Y. 

Vers.  10 — 12. — The  tin  of  Moses  and  Aaron.  It  was  the  sin  of  men  who  had  been 
specially  chosen,  long  occupied,  often  approved,  and  greatly  honoured  as  servants 
«f  God.    If  they,  being  what  they  were,  fell  so  easily,  bow  important  it  is  for  w 


et.tx.  1—29.]  THE  fiOOK  OS"  NtJMBEfiS.  8M 

•arneBtl^  to  consider  the  sin  by  which  they  fell  I  It  is  another  proof  of  the  hold 
which  Bin  has  on  our  nature,  and  of  the  need  that  we  should  walk  warily,  and  look 
for  snares  at  every  step.    Consider — 

I.  How  THE  BIN  WAS  COMMITTED.  1.  /(  vxis  a  stn  of  inattention.  If  there  was 
anything  which  Moses  and  Aaron  should  have  learned  after  forty  years  of  service,  it 
was  that  God's  commandments  required  constant  attention  and  exact  obedience. 
They  had  a  long  experience  of  One  who  gave  details  as  well  as  general  instructions. 
Moreover,  it  was  not  the  first  time  Moses  had  been  charged  to  bring  water  from  the 
rock.  At  Rephidim  God  said  to  him,  "  Thou  shalt  smite  the  rock  "  (Bxod.  xvii.  6). 
At  Eadesh  he  says,  "  Speak  to  the  rock."  The  very  difference  should  have  been 
enough  to  bring  the  command  distinctly  before  him.  Notice  then  what  serious 
results  simple  inattention  may  bring ;  we  know  that  thousands  of  lives  have  been 
lost  by  it.  Furthermore,  how  many  have  failed  in  the  attainment  of  salvation  and 
spiritual  blessedness  through  nothing  more  than  lack  of  attention  1  They  have  not 
run  greedily  in  the  way  of  sin,  but  simply  gone  through  a  decent,  reputable  life, 
neglecting  the  way  of  salvation.  In  the  things  of  God  attention  is  required  as  a 
regular  habit,  not  only  that  we  may  escape  loss,  but  secure  real  advantage.  The 
more  attention  there  is,  the  more  advantage  there  will  be.  2.  It  was  the  inattention 
of  men  whose  very  experience  had  made  them  habitually  careful.  Whatever  Moses 
and  Aaron  may  have  been  by  nature,  they  had  been  trained  to  faithfulness  in  little 
things^  It  has  not  perhaps  been  sufficiently  noticed  how  diligent  and  exact  Moses 
must  have  been  in  his  apprehension  of  all  that  God  revealed  to  him.  When  we 
think  how  easy  misunderstandings  are,  how  easy  it  is  to  get  wrong  impressions  and 
be  confused  among  details,  then  we  feel  how  very  carefully  Moses  must  have  listened. 
Aaron  also  in  his  priestly  service  was  a  man  of  derail.  3.  Hence  there  must  have 
been  some  extraordinary  disturbing  cause  to  throw  them  out  of  their  usual  careful- 
ness. What  this  was  we  can  hardly  make  out  with  certainty.  In  the  murmuring 
and  repining  of  the  people  there  was  nothing  new  either  as  to  spirit  or  language. 
Moses  had  listened  to  the  same  sort  of  attack  before,  and  through  it  all  kept  his 
meekness  and  feeling  of  personal  unworthiness.  But  as  the  last  straw  breaks  the 
camel's  back,  so  even  the  patience  of  Moses  became  at  last  exhausted.  The  weight 
of  years  and  cares  united  were  telling  on  him.  He  was  now  Moses  the  aged,  and 
though  we  are  assured  that  when  he  died  his  eye  was  not  dim,  nor  his  natural  force 
abated,  yet  we  must  not  so  take  these  words  as  to  free  him  from  every  infirmity-  of 
age.  It  was  a  very  hard  thing  for  a  man  after  forty  years  of  service,  through  all 
which  he  had  kept  the  consciousness  of  a  heart  true  to  God  and  to  Israel,  to  have 
the  people  still  meet  him  with  the  old  ingratitude  and  the  old  slanders.  Thus  it  was 
that  he  went  into  the  presence  of  God  with  a  mind  preoccupied,  thinking  a  great 
deal  more  about  the  rebellious  spirit  of  the  people  than  about  the  glory  of  his  Master. 
There  is  no  safety  but  in  keeping  God  first  in  our  thoughts.  We  must  be  like  the 
house  founded  on  the  rock,  never  disconnected  from  it.  The  nature  of  the  founda- 
tion may  seem  to  matter  little  in  calm  weather,  but  the  foundation  and  our  connec- 
tion with  it  are  everything  when  the  tempest  comes.  Let  a  believer  wear  the  whole 
armour  of  <jod,  and  he  is  invincible,  but  let  him  lay  it  aside  for  a  single  moment, 
and  the  waiting,  watching  enemy  may  inflict  a  painful,  serious,  humiliating  wound, 
even  if  it  be  not  a  mortal  one. 

II.  In  what  the  sin  consisted.  1.  In  a  want  of  faith.  "  Because  ye  believed 
me  not."  God  says  nothing  about  inattention  or  irritation,  but  goes  at  once  to  the 
root  of  the  matter.  Moses  had  failed  in  faith ;  not  altogether,  of  course,  for  the  very 
fact  that  he  took  the  rod  and  approached  the  rock  shows  some  faith  and  some  spirit 
of  obedience ;  but  still  faith  must  have  been  lacking,  and  to  a  very  serious  extent. 
It  has  been  suggested  that,  seeing  the  spirit  of  the  people,  Moses  was  after  all  in 
doubt  whether  another  long  term  of  wanderings  might  not  he  in  store  for  them. 
The  one  clear  thing  is  that  God  ascribes  the  sin  with  its  serious  consequences  to  un- 
belief. Outwardly  nothing  appears  but  inattention  and  irritation ;  inwardly  there  is 
an  unbelieving  heart.  Perhaps  even  Moses  himself  may  have  been  startled  to  hear 
such  a  charge,  and  utterly  unconscious  that  his  faith  was  seriously  imperilled.  Had 
h?  been  charged  with  inattention,  irritation,  want  of  strict  obedience,  these  were  only 
t(K  plain  j  bat  want  of  faith  1    Nothing  but  the  clear  word  of  God  could  make  thtli 


2M  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBEES.  [oh.  xx.  1—29. 

credible.  The  lesson  to  us  is  that  an  impaired  faith  may  be  the  cause  of  many  of 
our  spiritual  troubles.  We,  worse  than  Moses,  may  be  habitually  inattentive  and 
irritable,  and  afflicted  with  the  sad  conscicJusnees  that  the  habits  are  becoming  more 
and  more  fixed.  To  treat  them  by  direct  effort  is  only  to  mitigate  the  symptcHns  of 
a  deep  disease,  but  to  get  into  a  truly  believing  state  of  mind,  to  have  faith,  and  to 
have  it  more  abundantly,  will  soon  weaken  and  ultimately  destroy  these  harassing  - 
spiritual  infirmities.^  2.  In  a  consequent  failure  to  sanctify  God  in  the  eyes  of  tlie 
people.  The  unbelief  of  Moses  was  not  only  a  loss  to  him  personally,  but  those  who 
were  out  of  the  way  already  it  led  still  further  out  of  the  way.  All  eyes  were  look- 
ing to  Moses  ;  his  fall  was  not  that  of  some  obscure  man.  Furthermore,  he  made 
God's  action  appear  stern  and  wrathful  just  at  the  very  time  when  it  was  intended 
to  bo  specially  gracious.  For  forty  years  the  people  had  been  under  God's  dis- 
pleasure. Now  the  gloomy  cloud  was  breaking,  the  time  for  entrance  into  Canaan 
drawing  near,  and  at  the  very  place  where  God  had  once  appeared  in  wrath  he 
evidently  intends  now  to  appear  in  grace  and  mercy.  But  the  conduct  of  Moses  and 
Aaron  spoils  all  this  beautiful  revelation.  It  was  a  strange  reversal  of  what  had 
hitherto  happened.  We  no  longer  see  God  threatening  wrath,  and  Moses  offering 
ingenious  pleas  for  mercy,  but  God  is  now  gracious,  overlooking  a  time  of  ignorance, 
and  Moses,  whom  one  would  have  expected  to  see  radiant  with  benignity  and  satis- 
faction, goes  to  the  very  extreme  of  denunciation.  The  grace  of  the  benefit  was 
utterly  spoiled.  It  seemed  as  if  God  threw  down  a  supply  for  the  people's  need,  as 
a  churlish  hand  might  fling  a  loaf  at  a  beggar.  We  must  labour  to  live  as  Christ 
would  have  us  live,  so  that  men  may  glorify  God  in  us,  and  find  no  occasion  to 
blaspheme  ;  following  in  the  footsteps  of  him  who  was  able  to  say, "  I  have  glorified 
thee  on  the  earth :  I  have  finished  the  work  which  thou  gavest  me  to  do "  (John 
xvii.  4). 

III.  The  WAT  IN  WHICH  THE  SIN  WAS  PUNISHED.  Those  who  fail  to  sanctify  God 
before  the  people,  and  make  his  glory  to  appear,  must  in  turn  bear  humiliation  be- 
fore the  people.  This  was  not  a  private  intimation  to  Moses  and  Aaron,  so  that  only 
they  knew  the  reason  why  they  were  to  die  before  entrance  on  the  promised  land.  The 
publication  of  the  doom  was  needed.  Moses  himself  at  the  beginning  of  Deuteronomy 
(ch.  i.  37)  seems  to  make  some  allusion  to  this  doom  upon  him :  "  The  Lord  was  angry 
with  me  for  your  sakes,  saying,  Thou  also  shalt  not  go  in  thither ; "  though  certainly 
there  is  some  difficulty  arising  from  the  blending  of  these  words  with  the  general 
doom  on  the  Israelites  forty  years  before.  Anyway  it  is  plain  that  the  people  knew 
Moses  was  to  die  with  the  doomed  generation.  His  death  happening  as  it  did  was  a 
kind  of  blotting  out  of  all  that  seemed  harsh  in  the  giving  of  the  water.  It  was  an 
impressive  reminder  to  all  future  generations  of  what  God  had  meant  to  be  done. 
We  must  not  exaggerate  this  penalty  beyond  its  proper  extent  and  purpose.  To  the 
people  it  would  seem  very  great,  and  to  Moses  also  at  that  time  it  would  seem  great. 
But,  at  the  worst,  it  was  only  a  temporal  deprivation.  Moses  lost  the  earthly 
Canaan,  but  the  better  land  he  did  not  lose.  Who  was  it  that  appeared  in  glory  to 
Jesus  on  the  mount  ?  This  very  Moses,  with  whom  God  for  rf  time  dealt  so  sternly. 
The  greatest  of  temporal  losses,  the  one  that  now  brings  most  pain,  and  seems  as  if 
it  never  could  be  made  up,  will  look  a  very  little  thing  from  among  the  attainments 
of  eternity.  What  shall  it  hurt  a  man  if  he  lose  the  whole  world  and  gain  a  place 
in  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light  ?  Learn,  lastly,  that  none  can  humiliate  us  or 
bring  us  into  loss  but  ourselves.  It  may  not  be  our  own  fault  if  we  are  ridiculed  ; 
it  is  always  our  own  fault  if  we  are  ridiculous.  Moses  had  suffered  many  things 
from  the  people  in  the  way  of  scorn  and  threatening,  but  through  all  these  things  he 
moves  with  unimpaired  hopes  and  possessions.  It  is  his  own  unbelief  that  brings 
this  bitter  disappointment.  One  traitor  within  the  gates  is  more  dangerous  than  all 
the  army  outside. — Y. 

Vers.  14 — 21. — The  claim  of  kinship  rejected.  I.  The  claim.  1.  It  is  the  claim 
of  a  kinsman,  even  a  brother.  The  message  is  not  from  Moses,  but  "  thy  brother 
Israel,"  who  was  also  a  twin-brother.  The  long  intervening  space  of  years  seems 
to  fade  away,  and  with  it  the  hosts  of  the  Israelites  and  Edomites.  Jacob  and  Esau 
•taud  before  ub,  as  on  the  morning  of  reconciliation,  after  the  wrestling  at  Peoie) 


OH.  TX.  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  M7 

(Gen.  xxxiii.).  The  descendants  had  passed  through  very  different  experiences,  and 
were  now  in  very  different  positions ;  but  Moses  felt  that  this  common  ancestry 
constituted  a  claim  which  he  might  reasonably  plead.  So  wherever  the  believer 
travels,  though  he  cannot  put  in  the  claim  of  grace  upon  the  unbeliever,  he  may  put 
in  the  claim  of  nature.  ''God  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men,"  said  the 
Jew  Paul  to  the  Gentiles  of  Athens.  The  changes  of  grace  transform  the  ties  of 
nature,  but  do  not  destroy  them.  Believers  must  always  do  their  best  to  keep  hold 
of  unbelievers  by  virtue  of  their  common  humanity.  Israel  must  remind  Edom  of 
brotherhood,  not  only  that  Israel  may-profit  by  the  tie,  but  may  also  have  the  chance 
of  profiting  Edom  (1  Cor.  vii.  12 — 16).  2.  It  is  the  claim  of  a  kinsman  in  need. 
We"  are  not  told  exactly  how  the  request  came  to  be  made.  God  commanded  the 
people  to  pass  through  the  coasts  of  Edom  (Deut.  ii.  4),  and  the  presumption  is  that 
Moses  discovered  on  approach  that  the  way  through  Edom  would  be  the  most  direct 
and  convenient  to  the  land  of  Canaan.  One  gets  the  impression  that  the  people  were 
now  allowed  to  make  their  way  to  Canaan  with  what  speed  they  could,  as  if  to  make 
contrast  with  the  penal  delay  which  God  had  so  long  and  sternly  imposed.  If  Edom 
had  been  willing,  Israel  might  have  got  to  Jordan  all  the  sooner.  And  so  the  Church 
of  Christ,  in  its  onward  rush,  has  had  to  plead  with  the  world,  its  brother,  for  tolera- 
tion and  free  passage,  freedom  to  speak  and  act  according  to  conviction.  Our  chief 
resort,  and  always  our  last  one,  is  to  God  himself,  but  there  are  some  ways  in  which 
the  world  can  help,  Paul  counted  it  part  of  his  advantage,  as  an  apostle,  that  he 
could  plead  for  justice,  protection,  and  free  course  as  a  Roman  before  Roman 
tribunals.  3.  It  is  the  claim  of  a  kinsman  who  Had  been  through  very  peculiar 
experiences.  The  great  need  of  Israel  was  that  it  wanted  to  get  home  again.  The 
plea  is  the  plea  of  an  exile,  who  has  been  in  a  strange  land  for  a  long  time,  and  amid 
cruel  oppressors.  Further,  the  experiences  had  been  peculiar  not  only  in  respect  of 
the  cruelty  of  men,  but  also  of  the  goodness  of  God.  He  had  sent  an  angel  to  deliver 
and  guide.  More  indication  Moses  could  not  give,  because  it  would  not  have  been 
understood.  So  peculiar  had  these  experiences  been  that  Edom  had  heard  some- 
thing of  tliem.  The  pjesumption  is  that  all  through  the  past  Edom  had  known 
Bomethmg  of  Israel's  history,  and  Israel  something  of  Edom  b.  The  histories  of  the 
Church  and  the  world  intermingle.  The  world  cannot  but  know  such  experiences  of 
the  Church  as  are  perceptible  to  the  eye  of  sense.  "  This  thing  was  not  done  in  a 
comer,"  said  Paul  to.  the  incredulous  Festus.  The  course  of  the  Church  has  been 
one  of  sufferings,  marvels  and  mysteries,  interpositions  and  favours  of  God,  which 
are  not  to  be  concealed  in  any  appeals  which  are  to  be  made  to  the  world.  "  He 
hath  not  dealt  so  with  any  nation  "  (Ps.  cxlvii.  20).  "  Blessed  is  the  nation  whose 
God  is  the  Lord ;  and  the  people  whom  he  hath  chosen  for  his  own  inheritance " 
(Ps.  xxziii.  12).  4.  It  asks  comparatively  little,  and  promises  much  in  return.  The 
request  throws  great  light  on  Moses'  own  character,  and  shows  clearly  how  far  he 
was  from  reckless  ambition.  It  was  an  honest  request,  founded  in  truth,  and  Moses 
made  it  as  one  quite  reasonable  and  safe  for  Edom  to  grant.  The  people  of  God 
have  but  little  to  ask  the  world  for  themselves,  if  it  will  but  let  them  go  through 
quietly  and  peaceably.  They  want  none  of  this  world's  goods  and  pleasures,  and 
are  ready  to  assure  it  that  these  will  remain  untouched.  There  is  nothing  in  the 
shape  of  a  holy  city,  a  new  Jerusalem,  among  this  world's  possessions.  It  ia  a  grand 
assurance  to  give,  that  no  one  in  the  world  will  be  the  worse  for  the  true  Christians 
who  pass  through  it.  Moses  might  even  have  said,  "  Let  us  through,  and  a  blessing 
will  rest  upon  you."  Wherever  the  Christian  goes,  he  not  simply  refrains  from 
evil,  but  does  positive  good.  "Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth ;  ye  are  the  hght  of  the 
worid." 

II.  The  rejection  or  the  claim.  1.  It  was  rejected  without  giving  reasons. 
There  is  no  answer  but  that  of  the  "  much  people  "  and  the  drawn  sword.  This  in 
general  has  been  the  method  by  which  the  world  has  met  the  Church  when  pleading 
for  toleration,  liberty  of  conscience,  liberty  to  serve  God  according  to  his  will.  The 
world  in  its  pride  will  not  stoop  to  understand  or  calmly  consider  what  the  Church 
may  feel  it  needful  to  ask.  It  gets  its  brute  force  ready  at  once,  whether  in  coarser 
or  more  refined  forms,  for  those  who  have  different  purposes  and  sympathies  (Acts 
iv.  S,  17, 18 ;  V.  18,  40 ;  vii.  57, 68 ;  ix.  1,  2 ;  xiv.  5, 19,  &c.).    2.  Though  no  reasttu 


M  TBE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  t<M.  tx.  i—». 

were  given,  yet  Edom  had  them,  strong  and  potent,  in  its  heart.  It  is  not  always  easy 
or  decent  to  avow  reasons  for  action  ;  besiile  which,  Edom  felt  that  promptitude  in 
action  was  required.  Moses  had  sent  a  message  which  called  up  all  the  past,  not 
only  what  he  wished  called  up,  but  many  things  he  would  rather  not  have  brought 
to  mind.  The  name  of  Esau's  brother  was  Jacob  as  well  as  Israel,  and  both  names 
were  connected  with  disturbing  recollections  to  the  Edomites.  "  Thou  knowest," 
said  Moses.  But  his  way  of  presenting  the  facts,  and  that  alone,  could  not  be  con- 
fidingly accepted  by  Edom.  A  great  deal  of  ugly  and  disquieting  news  must  have 
filtered  through  with  respect  to  this  great  host  of  fighting  men.  The  great  difficulty 
Moses  had  in  keeping  them  in  order  was  probably  not  unknown  to  surrounding 
peoples.  Thus  the  Edomites  would  feel  in  their  hearts  that  the  pledges  of  Moses 
were  but  as  broken  reeds  to  rely  on.  How  could  he  be  responsible  for  the  orderliness 
and  honesty  of  such  a  host,  a  host  with  such  a  suspicious  history  ?  The  world 
has  ever  had  its  instinctive  fears  of  the  Church.  It  hears  of  certain  promises  and 
prophecies,  and  interprets  these  against  its  own  present  security.  Herod,  trembling 
for  his  throne,  slays  the  infants  of  Bethlehem  to  make  sure  of  it.  The  world,  loving 
its  own  and  thinking  there  is  nothing  like  it,  ignorantly  supposes  that  its  possessions 
must  stand  esteemed  by  the  Church  in  the  same  way.  Edom,  in  its  suspicious  spirit, 
looked  on  Israel  much  as  the  Jews  in  Thessalonica  on  Paul  and  Silas:  "These  that 
have  turned  the  world  upside  down  are  come  hither  also."  The  Church  says,  "  I  am 
thy  friend,  0  world,  thy  brother ;  I  will  not  harm  thee ; "  but  the  world  thinks  it  well 
to  be  on  the  safe  side,  and  give  no  chance  of  harm,  if  it  can  prevent  it.  3.  The 
refusal  of  Edom  emphasises  the  peculiar  destiny  of  Israd.  Moses  said  that  Israel 
wanted  nothing  of  all  Edom's  treasures.  Its  treasures  were  elsewhere,  and  it  pressed 
onward  to  possess  them.  Nevertheless,  the  treasures  of  Edom  would  not  have  been 
without  temptation,  and  Edom,  unconsciously,  spares  Israel  h.  trial  of  its  steadfast- 
ness. The  true  people  of  God  have  reason  to  be  thankful  even  for  the  intolerance 
of  the  world.  The  delays  and  toils  of  circuitous  roads,  where  mountains  and  hills 
are  not  yet  brought  low,  nor  the  crooked  made  straight,  and  the  rough  ways  smooth, 
may  have  more  advantages  than  in  the  midst  of  present  discomforts  we  dream  of. 
The  temporal  prosperity  of  its  members  has  not  been  the  boon  to  the  Church  that 
many  think.  The  great  boon  is  to  have  God  continually  impressing  on  our  minds 
that  this  is  not  our  home.  "  I  gave  our  brethren  a  solemn  caution  not  to  love  the 
world,  neither  the  things  of  the  world.  This  will  be  their  grand  danger.  As  they  are 
industrious  and  frugal,  they  must  needs  increase  in  goods.  This  appears  already  in 
London,  Bristol,  and  most  other  trading  towns.  Those  who  are  in  business  have 
increased  in  substance  seven-fold,  some  of  them  twenty,  yea,  a  hundred-fold.  What 
need  then  have  these  of  the  strongest  warnings,  lest  they  be  entangled  therein  and 
perish  I  "  ('  Wesley's  Journal,'  iii.  139).— Y. 

Vers.  22 — 29. — The  death  of  Aaron.  The  chapter,  beginning  with  the  death. of 
the  sister,  closes  with  the  death  of  the  brother,  and  Moses,  in  the  midst  of  many 
official  anxieties,  is  further  smitten  with  great  personal  bereavement.  But  not  a 
word  of  his  feeling  appears.  This  is  a  history  of  the  children  of  Israel,  and  the 
death  of  Aaron  is  recorded  here  not  because  of  Aaron  the  man,  but  because  of  Aaron 
the  priest.  The  whole  solemn  event,  peculiarly  dignified  in  the  transaction  of  it,  is 
peculiarly  dignified  also  in  the  record  of  it.  He  who  had  been  specially  holy  to  God 
during  his  life  passes  away  in  circumstances  accordant  with  the  dignity  and  holiness 
of  his  office. 

I.  His  death,  nevertheless,  is  a  penal  onb.  All  the  holiness  of  the  office 
cannot  obliterate,  it  cannot  even  condone,  the  sin  of  the  man.  Great  as  his  privi- 
leges had  been,  and  great  as  the  power  shown  when  he  stood  successfully  between 
llio  living  and  the  dead,  the  difference  between  him  and  his  brethren  was  only_  in 
office,  not  in  nature.  The  people  were  to  be  impressed  with  the  fact  that  the  priest 
was  not  only  a  great  chosen  mediator,  but  a  sinful  brother.  He  died,  not  in  the 
seclusion  and  privacy  of  a  tent,  but  upon  the  mountain,  in  sight  of  all  the  congrega- 
tion. His  part  in  the  sin  of  Meiibah,  subordinate  ft"  that  part  seemed,  could  not  be 
passed  over.  The  sin  of  omission  is  as  serious  as  the  sin  of  commission.  God  had 
spoken  the  command  in  the  ears  of  both  the  brothers,  and  what  Moses  failed  to 


OH.  XX.  1—29.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


M9 


recollect  or  attend  to,  Aaron  should  have  supplied  from  his  own  knowledge.  Thus 
holy,  faithful,  and  honourable  as  his  life  might  rightly  be  called,  his  sin  at  the  hour 
of  death  is  brought  right  into  the  foreground.  We  justly  magnify  the  lives  of 
God's  servants,  and  point  with  satisfaction  to  the  serenily  and  expectancy  that  mark 
their  closing  days,  and  often  their  closing  hour  itself,  but  never  let  us  forget  what 
sin  has  had  to  do  in  bringing  them  where  they  are.  It  is  because  of  Christ  that  his 
people  die  peacefully,  but  it  is  because  of  sin  that  they  have  to  die  at  all.  He  surely 
dies  the  calmest  who,  forgetting  his  own  good  works,  casts  himself,  more  conscious 
than  ever  of  his  sin,  on  the  mercy  of  God  and  the  redeeming  work  of  Christ. 

II.  Though  penal,  it  was  tranquil  ;  we  may  even  say  it  was  hopeful.  A  great 
deal — more  than  we  can  fathom — may  be  bidden  in  that  expression,  "gathered  unto 
his  people."  If  Aaron  did  not  receive  the  promise,  it  was  because  he  could  not  be 
made  perfect  without  us  (Heb.  xi.  39, 40).  The  man  who  presumptuously  neglected 
the  passover  was  to  be  cut  off  from  among  his  people  (ch.  ix.  13 ;  xv.  30) ;  Korah 
and  his  companions  perished  from  among  the  congregation ;  but  Aaron  was  gathered 
to  his  people.  Doubtless  he  went  up  in  repentance,  faith,  obedience,  and  deep 
humility  to  face  the  great  mystery.  ,  Though  he  had  sinned  at  Meribah,  disobedience 
to  God  and  self-seeking  were  not  the  chosen  and  beloved  princiijles  in  his  life.  It 
IB  a  dreadful  thing  to  die  in  sin,  but  to  the  repentant  sinner,  showing  his  repentance 
in  sufficient  and  appropriate  fruits,  and  steadfastly  believing  in  Christ,  how  can  death 
be  dreadful  ?  Many  who  have  lived  in  long  bondage  to  the  fear  of  death  have  been 
wonderfully  relieved  and  calmed  as  the  dreaded  hour  drew  nigh. 

"  Many  shapes 
Of  Death,  and  many  are  the  ways  that  lead 
To  his  grhn  cave,  aU  dismal ;  yet  to  sense 
More  terrible  at  th'  entrance  than  within." 

in.  Tbb  continuity  op  holt  service  is  provided  fob.  Among  the  kingdoms 
of  this  world  the  cry  is,  "The  king  is  dead — long  live  the  king."  The  departing 
king  keeps  his  authority  and  pomp  to  the  last  breath.  But  here  while  Aaron  is  still 
alive,  before  death  can  stain  those  rich  and  holy  garments  with  its  hated  touch,  they 
are  taken  from  the  father  and  assumed  by  the  son.  Consider  this  transfer  of  office 
thus  made,  in  the  light  of  ch.  xix.  It  was  not  on  Aaron's  part  a  spontaneous  abdica- 
tion,— that  he  could  not  make, — but  a  further  significant  hint  how  abominable  death 
ia  to  God.  It  is  not  the  priest  who  dies,  but  the  sinful  man.  There  in  the  sight  of 
all  the  people  it  was  signified  that  though  they  had  lost  the  man,  never  for  a  moment 
had  they  lost  the  priest.  There  was  nothing  Aaron  had  done  which  Eleazar  could 
not  do  as  well.  Aaron  personally  does  not  seem  to  have  been  a  very  remarkable 
man ;  if  anything,  wanting  in  individuality,  and  easily  led.  Do  not  let  us  look 
with  apprehension  when  those  who  seem  to  be  pillars  are  giving  way.  The  word 
of  Jesus  should  reassure  our  doubts,  and  make  us  utterly  ashamed  of  them.  "  Lo, 
I  am  with  you  alway,  even  to  the  end  of  the  world." — ^Y. 


The  Last  Maboh  :  fboh  Mount  Hob  to  Jordan  (ch.  xxi. — xxn.  1). 
EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  XXL 

Episope  of  the  kino  of  Abas  (vers. 
1 — 3).  Ver.  1. — And  when  king  Arad  the 
Canaanite,  which  dwelt  in  the  sonth,  heard 
tell.  Eather,  "And  the  Canaanite,  the 
king  of  Arad,  which  dwelt  in  the  Negeb, 
heard  telL"  It  is  possible  that  Arad  was 
the  name  of  the  king  (it  occurs  as  the  name 
of  a  man,  1  Chron.  viii.  15),  but  it  was 
almost  certainly  the  name  of  his  place.  The 
"  king  of  Arad "  is  mentioned  in  Josh,  xii 
U,  and  "the  Kegeb  of  And"  in  Jndgea  i. 


16.  From  the  context  of  these  passages  it 
is  evident  that  it  was  situated  in  the  southern- 
most district  of  what  was  afterwards  the 
territory  of  Judah.  According  to  Eusebius, 
it  stood  twenty  Roman  miles  to  the  south  of 
Hebron,  and  its  site  has  been  found  by 
modern  travellers  at  Tel-Arad,  a  low  hill  in 
this  direction.  On  the  Kegeb  see  note  on 
eh.  xiii.  17.  By  the  way  of  the  spies. 
DnriXn  •rjJ'J.  Septuagint,  oSbv  'AStapUv. 
The  translation  is  very  uncertain  ;  atharim 
may  be  a  proper  name,  as  the  Septuagint 
Hems  to  Boppose,  or  it  may  be  an  uuuanal 


270 


THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS. 


[CH.  XXI.  1 — 3. 


plural  formed  from  l-in,  equivalent  to  O'lRH 
"  spies,"  as  the  Chaldee,  Samaritan,  and 
most  of  the  versions  take  it ;  or  it  may  be 
simply  the  plural  from  ^nN,  a  place,  used 
with  som  local  meaning  which  made  it 
practically  a  proper  name.  If  the  render- 
ing of  the  A.  V.  be  correct,  "  the  way  of  the 
?pies  "  must  have  been  the  route  by  which 
they  ascended  to  Hebron  through  the  Negeb 
(ch.  xiii.  17,  22),  and  the  king  of  Arad  must 
have  anticipated  an  Invasion  in  that  direc- 
tion, and  sought  to  forestall  it.  And  took 
some  of  them  prisoners.  This  would  seem 
to  sho  that  he  fell  upon  them  unawares, 
and  cut  ofiF  some  detached  parties.  Nothing 
is  said  of  any  disobedience  on  the  part  of 
Israel  to  account  for  defeat  in  battle. 

Ver.  2.— And  Israel  vowed  a  vow.  On 
these  vows,  and  on  things  "  devoted "  or 
"banned"  (DIQ — dvaSt^a),  see  on  Levit. 
xxvii.  28,  and  on  the  moral  character  of  such 
wholesale  slaughters  see  on  ch.  xxxi.  If  it 
was  righ  to  destroy  the  Canaanites  at  all, 
no  fault  can  be  found  with  the  vow ;  it 
merely  d  d  for  that  military  proceeding  what 
national  feeling  and  discipline  does  for  the 
far  more  bloody  exigencies  of  modern  war- 
fare, ren-.oving  it  from  the  sphere  of  private 
hatred,  levenge,  and  cupidity,  and  placing  it 
upon  a  higher  leveL  The  patriot  soldier  of 
these  days  feels  himself  to  be  a  mere  instru- 
ment in  the  hands  of  the  rulers  of  his  people 
to  maintain  their  rights  or  avenge  their 
wrongs.  The  Israelite  could  not  have  this- 
feeling,  which  was  foreign  to  his  time  and 
place  in  history,  but  he  could  feel  that  he 
was  a  mere  instniment  in  the  hands  of  God 
to  perform  hia  will  upon  his  enemies.  In 
either  case  a  most  important  advantage  is 
secured  ;  the  soldier  does  not  slay  in  order  to 
gratify  his  own  hatred,  or  in  order  to  satisfy 
his  own  cupidity.  It  is  quite  true  that  such 
vows  as  ar  here  mentioned  would  certainly 
in  a  more  advanced  stage  of  civilisation  be 
abused  to  throw  a  cloak  of  religion  over 
frightful  e  ormities  ;  but  it  does  not  in  the 
least  follow  that  they  were  not  permitted  and 
even  encouraged  by  God  in  an  age  to  which 
they  were  natural,  and  under  circimistancea 
in  which  they  were  beneiiciaL 

Ver.  3. — They  utterly  destroyed  them  and 
their  cities.  Rather,  "they  banned  (D^Dl — 
6vaSiiiiaTiaiv)  them  and  their  cities."  No 
doubt  the  banning  implies  here  their  utter 
destruction,  because  it  is  not  the  vow  before 
the  battle,  but  the  carrying  of  it  out  after  the 
victory,  which  is  here  spoken  of.  And  he 
called  the  name  of  the  place  Eormah. 
Rather,  "the  name  of  the  place  was  called 
(impersonal  use  of  the  transitive)  Charmah." 
np'lip.  Septuagint,  'Avode/ta.  It  is  not 
very  clear  what  place  received  this  name  at 
this  time.     It  does  not  appear  to  have  been 


Arad  itself,  as  would  have  seemed  most 
natural,  because  Arad  and  Hormah  are  men- 
tioned side  by  side  in  Josh.  xii.  14.  It  ia 
identified  with  Zephath  in  Judges  i  17.  It 
may  have  been  the  place  where  the  victory 
was  won  which  gave  all  the  cities  of  Arad  to 
destruction.  Whether  it  was  the  Hormah 
mentioned  in  ch.  xiv.  45  is  very  doubtful 
(see  note  there).  The  nomenclature  of  the 
Jews,  especially  as  to  places,  and  most  especi- 
ally as  to  places  with  which  their  own  con- 
nection was  passing  or  broken,  was  vague 
and  confused  in  the  extreme,  and  nothing 
can  be  moi'e  unsatisfactory  than  arguments 
which  turn  upon  tlie  shifting  names  of  places 
long  ago  perished  and  forgotten.  It  must 
be  added  that  the  three  verses  which  narrate 
the  chastisement  of  this  Canaanite  chieftain 
have  caused  immense  embarrassment  to  com- 
mentators. If  the  incident  is  narrated  in 
its  proper  order  of  time,  it  must  have  hap- 
pened during  the  stay  of  the  Israelites  under 
Mount  Hor,  when  they  had  finally  left  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  Negeb,  and  were 
separated  from  the  king  of  Arad  by  many 
days'  march,  and  by  a  most  impracticable 
country.  It  is  therefore  generally  supposed 
that  the  narrative  is  out  of  place,  and  that  it 
really  belongs  to  the  time  when  Israel  wa« 
gathered  together  for  the  second  time  at 
Kadesh,  and  when  his  reappearance  there  in 
force  might  well  have  given  rise  to  the 
report  that  he  was  about  to  invade  Canaan 
from  that  side.  This  is  unsatisfactory,  be- 
cause no  plausible  reason  can  be  assigned  for 
the  insertion  of  the  notice  where  it  stands, 
both  here  and  in  ch.  xxxiii.  40.  To  say  that 
Moses  wished  to  bring  it  into  juxtaposition 
with  the  victories  recorded  in  the  latter  part 
of  the  chapter,  from  which  it  is  separated  by 
the  incident  of  the  fiery  serpents,  and  the 
brief  record  of  many  journeys,  is  to  confess 
that  no  explanation  can  be  invented  which 
has  the  least  show  of  reason.  If  the  nar- 
rative be  displaced,  the  displacement  must 
simply  be  due  to  accident  or  interpolation. 
Again,  it  would  seem  quite  inconsistent  with 
the  position  and  plans  of  Israel  since  the 
rebellion  of  Kadesh  that  any  invasion  and 
conquest,  even  temporary,  of  any  part  of 
Canaan  should  be  made  at  this  time,  and 
that  especially  if  the  attack  was  not  made 
until  Israel  was  lying  in  the  Arabah  on  his 
way  round  the  land  of  Edom.  It  is  therefore 
supposed  by  some  that  the  vow  only  was 
made  at  this  time,  and  the  ban  suspended 
over  the  place,  and  that  it  was  only  earned 
out  as  part  of  the  general  conquest  under 
Joshua ;  that,  in  fact,  the  fulfilment  of  the 
vow  is  narrated  in  Josh.  xii.  14 ;  Judges  i. 
16,  17.  This,  however,  throws  the  narrative 
as  it  stands  into  confusion  and  discredit,  for 
the  ban  and  the  destruction  become  a  mockeiy 
and  an  unreality  if  nothing  more  was  done  to 


OH.  XXI.  1—3.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES. 


271 


the  towns  of  the  king  of  Arad  than  was  done 
at  the  same  time  to  the  towns  of  all  his 
neighbours.  It  would  be  more  reverent  to 
reject  the  story  as  an  error  or  a  falsehood 
than  to  empty  it  of  the  meaning  which  it 
was  obviously  intended  to  convey.  We  are 
certainly  meant  to  understand  that  the  vow 
was  there  and  then  accepted  by  God,  and 
was  there  and  then  carried  into  effect  by 
Israel ;  the  towns  of  Arad  were  depopulated 
and  destroyed  as  far  as  lay  in  their  power, 
although  they  may  have  been  immediately 
reoccupied.  There  are  only  two  theories 
which  are  worth  considering.  1.  The  nar- 
rative may  really  be  displaced,  for  what  cause 
we  do  not  know.  If  so,  it  would  be  more 
satisfactory  to  refer  it,  not  to  the  time  of  the 
second  encampment  at  Kadesh,  but  to  the 
time  of  the  first,  during  the  absence  of  the 
■pies  in  Canaan.  It  is  probable  that  their 
entry  was  known,  as  was  the  case  with 
Joshua's  spies  (Josh.  ii.  2) ;  and  nothing 
could  be  more  likely  than  that  the  king  of 


Arad,  suspecting  what  would  follow,  should 
attempt  to  anticipate  invasion  by  attack. 
If  it  were  so  it  might  help  to  account  for  the 
rash  confidence  shown  by  the  people  after- 
wards (ch.  xiv.  40),  for  the  mention  of  Hor- 
mah  (ch.  xiv.  45),  and  for  tho  reappearance 
of  kings  of  Hormah  and  of  Arad  in  the  days 
of  Joshua.  2.  The  narrative  may  after  all  be 
in  place.  That  the  Israelites  lay  for  thirty 
days  under  Mount  Hor  is  certain,  and  they 
may  have  been  longer.  Duaing  this  period 
they  could  not  get  pasture  for  their  cattle  on 
the  side  of  Edom,  and  they  may  have  wan- 
dered far  and  wide  in  search  of  it.  It  may 
have  been  but  a  comparatively  small  band 
which  approached  the  Negeb  near  enough  to 
be  attacked,  and  which,  by  the  help  of  God, 
was  enabled  to  defeat  the  king  of  Arad,  and 
to  lay  waste  his  towns.  It  had  certainly 
been  no  great  feat  for  all  Israel  to  overthrow 
a  border  chieftain  who  could  not  possibly 
have  brought  6000  men  into  the  fielC 


HOMILETICS. 

Vera.  1—- 3. — Victory  w(m,  and  followed  up.  In  this  brief  narrative  of  three  verses 
we  have  by  anticipation  almost  the  whole  spiritual  teaching  of  the  Book  of  Joshua ; 
we  have,  namely,  the  struggle  and  the  victory  of  the  soldier  of  Christ  over  his  spiritual 
foes,  and  the  consequent  duty  which  he  has  to  perform.     Consider,  therefore — 

I.  That  the  feab  and  the  anger  of  the  Canaanite  were  kindled  by  the 

NEWS  THAT   IsRAEL  WAS  COMING  BY  THE  WAT  OF  THE  SPIES,  i.  e.  were  following  in 

the  steps  of  those  that  had  gone  before  into  the  land  of  promise.  Even  so  the  rage 
of  Satan  and  of  all  evil  spirits  is  stirred  against  us  because  he  knows  that  we  follow 
in  the  way  which  leads  to  heaven,  and  because  it  is  his  ardent  desire  to  keep  us  out, 
if  he  can  and  while  he  can.  If  the  Canaanite  had  perceived  that  Israel  had  rebelled 
and  turned  his  back  on  the  land  of  promise,  he  would  never  have  troubled  to  come 
forth  and  attack  him.  Satan  makes  no  direct  assault  on  those  whom  he  sees  to  be 
walking  contrary  to  God  and  to  rest. 

II.  That  he  attacked  Israel  suddenly  and  unexpectedly,  and  with  some 
BtrcCESS.  Most  likely  they  were  scattered  abroad  in  search  of  pasture  when  he  fell 
upon  them,  and  made  them  prisoners.  Even  so  the  assaults  of  our  spiritual  foes  are 
secretly  prepared  and  suddenly  delivered  at  moments  when  we  are  off  our  guard, 
and  many  a  one  falls  a  victim,  at  least  for  a  while.  The  enemy  goeth  about  indeed 
•B  a  roaring  lion,  but  the  lion  does  not  roar  at  the  moment  that  he  springs  upon  his 
prey,  nor  does  Satan  give  any  signal  of  his  worst  temptations. 

III.  That  he  made  some  of  them  prisoners,  which  seems  to  have  been  his  object — 
perhaps  that  they  might  serve  as  hostages.  Even  so  the  enemy  of  souls  desires  to 
make  prisoners  who  may  not  only  be  held  in  miserable  bondage  themselves,  but  may 
give  him  control  and  influence  over  their  brethren. 

IV.  That  Israel  did  not  attempt  to  meet  the  Canaanites  as  ordinary  foes, 

BUT  VOWED  to  TREAT  THEM  AS  God'S  ENEMIES,  AND  TO  EXTERMINATE  THEM  ACCORD- 
INGLY. Even  so  the  right  way  and  the  only  way  to  overcome  the  temptations  and 
sins,  the  evil  habits,  passions,  and  tempers,  which  assail  us  (and  often  too  success- 
fciUy)  on  the  way  to  heaven,  is  to  regard  them  as  God's  enemies,  as  hateful  to  him, 
and  to  smite  them  accordingly  without  remorse,  weariness,  or  thought  of  self.  Many 
are  vexed  and  annoyed  with  follies  and  tempers  which  get  the  better  of  them,  and 
they  contend  against  them  on  the  ground  of  that  vexation,  wishing  to  get  the  mastery 
over  them,  and  yet  not  caring  to  go  to  extremities  against  them.  But  the  faithful 
Boal  will  solemnly  resolve,  as  before  God  and  for  his  sake,  to  make  an  utter  end  at 
any  cost  oi  the  sins  which  have  prevailed  against  them,  and  so  dishonoured  him. 


»72 


THE  BOOK  01  NUMBERS. 


[cH.  XXI.  4—9. 


V.  That  God  accepted  that  vow  and  gave  them  the  victohy  over  thh 
Canaanites.  Even  so  if  we  regard  and  face  our  spiritual  enemies  in  tlie  true  light, 
as  God's  enemies,  to  be  relentlessly  exterminated,  God  will  give  us  strength  and 
power  to  have  victory  and  to  triumph  over  them,  and  it  may  be  to  set  our  captive 
brethren  free  also  (2  Tim.  ii.  26). 

VI.  That  the  Israelites  proceeded  to  fulfil  their  vow,  although,  as  all 
the  spoil  was  anathema,  they  had  nothing  to  gain  themselves  but  labour  and  loss 
of  time.  Even  so  will  the  good  soldier  of  Christ  not  cease  his  most  earnest  efforts 
until  he  has  quite  destroyed  (so  far  as  may  be  in  this  life)  the  evil  habits  and  evil 
tempers  over  which  God  has  given  him  victory.  The  majority  of  Christian  people 
are  too  lazy  and  selfish  to  do  this ;  they  will  strive  to  overcome  a  known  sin  or  bad 
habit ;  but  when  it  has  been  (as  they  think)  overcome  they  have  not  sufficient  zeal 
to  pursue  it  into  its  last  lurking-places  and  exterminate  it.  As  long  as  it  does  not 
actively  trouble  them  they  are  content,  and  so  the  remnants  remain  to  the  dishonour 
of  God  and  to  their  own  future  loss  and  danger.  How  few  Christians  radically  get 
rid  even  of  a  single  fault  I 

VIL  That  the  place  was  called  Hormah — ^anathema:  a  perpetual  reminder 
that  the  enemies  of  God  are  under  a  ban,  and  should  be  exterminated ;  a  sacred 
delenda  est  Carthago.  Even  so  it  is  ever  impressed  upon  the  soldier  of  Christ  that 
there  can  be  no  truce  between  him  and  sin,  or  even  between  him  and  selfish  indiffer- 
ence. "  If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be  anathema  " — a  Hormah, 
a  thing  devoted,  a  being  with  whom  no  compromise  can  be  made  and  no  amity  knit 
until  that  indifference  of  his  which  is  so  hateful  to  God  be  abolished  for  ever. 


EXPOSITION. 


Thk  fibkt  serpents  (vers.  4 — 9).  Ver. 
4. — ^They  jonmeyed  from  Mount  Hor.  It 
appears  from  comparison  of  ch.  xxxiii.  38 
and  ch.  xx.  29  that  their  departure  was  not 
earlier  than  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  month 
of  the  fortieth  year.  This  season  would  be 
one  of  the  hottest  and  most  trying  for  march- 
ing. By  the  way  of  the  .  Ked  Sea,  i.  e. 
down  the  Arabah,  towards  Ezion-geber,  at  the 
head  of  the  Elanitic  Gulf.  Septuagint,  iSbv 
iiri  daXaaaav  ipvBpav.  Not  far  from  this 
place  they  would  reach  the  end  of  the  Edomit- 
ish  territory,  and  turn  eastwards  and  north- 
wards up  the  Wady  el  Ithm  towards  the 
steppes  of  Moab.  Discouraged.  Literally, 
"shortened"  or  "straitened,"  as  in  Exod. 
vi.  9.  Septuagint,  uiXtyoilivxrii'iv  o  Xaof. 
Because  of  the  way.  The  Arabah  is  a  stony, 
sandy,  almost  barren  plain  shut  in  by  moun- 
tain walls  on  either  side,  and  subject  to 
sand-storms.  It  was  not  only,  however, 
merely  the  heat  and  drought  and  rugged- 
ness  of  the  route  which  depressed  them,  but 
the  fact  that  they  were  marching  directly 
away  from  Canaan,  and  knew  not  how  they 
were  ever  to  reach  it, 

"Ver.  B. — ^There  is  no  bread,  neither  is 
there  any  water.  The  one  of  these  state- 
ments was  no  doubt  as  much  and  as  little 
true  as  the  other.  There  was  no  ordinary 
supply  of  either  ;  but  as  they  had  bread  given 
to  them  from  heaven,  so  they  had  water  from 
the  rook,  otherwise  they  could  not  possibly 
have  existed.  Our  aoul  loatheth  this  light 
InwL   TfffR,  B  stronger  form  than  7^  from 


77|3.  Septuagint,  iiaxivifi.  They  meant  to 
say,  as  their  fathers  had  (ch-.  xi.  6),  that  it 
was  unsavoury  and  unsubstantial  in  com- 
parison with  the  heavy  and  succulent  diet  of 
Egypt  (see  note  on  ch.  xx.  3). 

Ver.  6.— Fiery  serpents.  D'DJP'  D'g'lJJ.. 
Nadhash  is  the  ordinary  word  for  serpent. 
The  word  saraph,  which  seems  to  mean 
"  burning  one,"  stands  (by  itself)  for  a  ser- 
pent in  ver.  8,  and  also  in  Isa.  xiv.  29  ;  xxx. 
6.  In  Isa.  vi.  2,  6  it  stands  for  one  of  the 
symbolic  beings  (seraphim)  of  the  prophet's 
vision.  The  only  idea  common  to  the  two 
meanings  (otherwise  so  distinct)  must  be 
that  of  brilliance  and  metallic  lustre.  It  is 
commonly  assumed  that  the  "  fiery  "  serpents 
were  so  called  because  of  the  burning  pain  and 
inflammation  caused  by  the  bite,  after  the 
analogy  of  the  ir ptiariiptg  and  Koiauivce  of 
Bioscorus  and  Julian.  But  is  hardly  possible 
that  Isaiah  should  have  used  the  same  word 
in  such  wholly  dissimilar  senses,  and  it  is 
clear  from  comparison  with  Ezekiel's  vision 
of  the  cherubim  (Ezek.  i.  7)  that  the  aa/raph 
of  Isa.  vi.  2  was  so  called  from  the  burnished 
lustre  of  his  appearance.  Even  our  Lord 
himself  is  described  in  the  Apocalypse  as 
having  in  the  highest  degree  this  appearance 
of  glowing  brass  (Bev.  L  16  ;  ii.  18).  It  is 
further  clear  that  the  saraph  was  so  named 
from  his  colour,  not  his  venom,  because 
when  Moses  was  ordered  to  make  a  sa/raph 
he  made  a  serpent  of  brass  (or  rather  copper), 
with  the  evident  intent  of  imitating  as  closely 
as  passible  the  appearance  of  the  venomona 


CH.  XXI.  4—9.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


273 


reptile.  We  may  conclude  then  with  some 
confidence  that  these  serpents  were  of  a  fiery 
red  colour,  resembling  in  this  respect  certain 
Teiy  deadly  snakes  in  Australia,  which  are 
known  as  "  copper  snakes. ' '  Travellers  speak 
of  some  such  pests  as  still  abounding  in  the 
region  of  the  Arabah,  but  it  is  quite  uncertain 
whether  the  fiery  serpents  of  that  special 
Tisitation  can  be  identified  with  any  existing 
species. 

Yer.  7. — Pray  unto  the  Lord.  This  is  the 
first  and  only  (recorded)  occasion  on  which 
the  people  directly  asked  for  the  intercession 
of  Moses  (cf.,  however,  oh.  zi.  2),  although 
Pharaoh  had  done  so  several  times,  and  never 
in  vain. 

Ver.  8.— Hake  thee  a  fiery  serpsnt.  A 
$araph.  The  Septuagint,  not  understand- 
ing the  meaning  of  saraph,  has  simply  o0tv 
((£  John  iii.  14).  Set  it  npon  a  pole.  Dj, 
Septuagint,  inj^ctov.  Vulgate,  signum.  The 
same  word  is  better  translated  "ensign"  in 
Bach  passages  as  Isa.  zi  10 ;  "banner"  in 


such  as  Ps.  Ix,  4 ;  "standard"  in  such  aa 
Jer.  li.  27.  The  "pole"  may  have  been  the 
tallest  and  most  conspicuous  of  those  militaiy 
standards  which  were  planted  (probably  on 
some  elevation)  as  rallying  points  for  the 
various  camps  ;  or  it  may  have  been  one 
loftier  still,  made  for  the  occasion. 

.Ver._  9. — When  he  beheld  the  serpent 
(tl'n)  in  all  three  places  of  this  verse)  of 
brass,  he  lived.  The  record  is  brief  and 
simple  in  the  extreme,  and  tells  nothing  but 
the  bare  facts.  The  author  of  the  Book  of 
Wisdom  understood  the  true  bearing  of  those 
facts  when  he  called  the  brazen  serpent  a 
irv/(;3oXav(r(i>ri7pia£(ch.  zvi.  6),  and  when  bi^ 
wrote  i  iiriaTpaipus  ov  lid  rb  biiopovitivov 
(the  thing  he  looked  at)  ciru^ero,  dWd  tiA 
ai  Tov  vavTiav  auTrjpa.  At  an  earlier  day 
Hezekiah  had  estimated  the  avfifioXov  auTii- 
pi'a;  at  its  true  value,  as  being  in  itself 
worthless,  and  under  certain  circumstancM 
mischieTous  (see  on  2  Kings  zviii  4). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vans.  4 — ^9. — iStn  and  the  Saviour.  The  type  of  the  brazen  serpent  lifted  np  in 
the  wilderness  is  the  only  one  which  our  Lord  directly  claims  for  himself  as  a  type  of 
hia  own  crucifixion.  No  one  can  doubt  that  many  other  types,  hardly  less  wonderful 
and  instructive,  exist ;  but  this  one  will  always  have  a  certain  pre-eminence  of  regard, 
because  our  Lord  in  his  own  words  applied  it  to  himself.  Spiritually,  therefore,  wa 
have  in  this  passage  Christ  lifted  up  upon  the  cross  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh  in 
order  to  save  from  the  deadly  virus  of  sin  and  from  eternal  death  all  those  who  will 
raise  the  eye  of  faith  to  him.  There  is  much  elss,  but  all  subordinate  to  this. 
Taking  the  type  as  a  whole,  we  may  divide  it  tmderthe  four  heads  of  discouragement, 
complaint,  destruction,  salvation. 

I.  The  disooueagement  which  gavb  bisb  to  couplainhtg,  and  8o  lbd  to  thb 
KAVAGKS  OF  SIN.  Consider — 1.  That  the  Israelites  were  discouraged,  or  straitened  in 
soul,  because  of  the  way,  and  this  was  the  beginning  of  all  that  suSering  and  death. 
Even  so  are  we  often  and  often  discouraged  because  of  the  way  to  heaven,  the  way 
of  life  by  which  it  pleases  God  to  lead  us,  and  which  seems  so  hard,  so  weary,  so 
interminable,  so  unendurable  at  times.  It  is  "  because  of  the  way  "  that  all  our  dis- 
tresses and  discouragements  arise.  The  "  end  "  is  well  enough ;  who  would  not  seek 
it  ?  but  the  way  is  weary  indeed  I  2.  That  this  discouragement  was  not  only  because 
of  the  hardships  of  the  road,  although  they  were  great,  but  especially  because  it  did 
not  seem  to  be  leading  them  to  Ganaan  at  all — rather  away  from  it.  Even  so  we  are, 
many  of  us,  discouraged  grievously,  not  only  because  the  way  in  which  we  walk  is' 
80  hard  and  painful,  and  demands  so  much  self-denial,  but  especially  because  we 
seem  to  make  no  progress  in  it ;  we  do  not  feel  that  we  are  any  nearer  to  the  pro- 
mised rest ;  the  cross  is  as  heavy  as  ever,  but  the  crown  does  not  show  any  more 
bright ;  rather  we  seem  to  be  getting  further  and  ever  further  from  that  repose  of 
saind  and  soul  to  which  we  had  looked  forward.  3.  That  their  discouragement  because 
of  the  way  was  aggravated  by  the  fact  that  the  evil  was  due  to  theunkindness  of  their 
brother  Edom,  who  forced  them  to  march  round  by  the  Arabah.  Even  so  very  many 
of  our  discouragements  and  difficulties  arise  from  the  unkindness,  the  opposition, 
•ven  the  hostility  in  religious  matters,  of  those  who  are  fnost  nearly  related  to  or 
most  closely  connected  with  us.  Often  they  seem  to  hold  the  passes  through  which 
lies  our  way  to  rest,  and  they  deliberately  block  them  against  us. 

II.  The  COMPLAINING  IN  WHICH  THEIR  DiscouRAGEMENi"  FODND  VENT.    Consider — 
1.  Thajt  they  complained  of  Moseg  and  of  God  instead  of  reproaching  themselvet)  <u 

HUMSERS,  T 


874  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  [oh.  xxi.  4—9. 

they  should  have  done.  Even  so  when  we  are  suffering,  as  we  must  expect  sometimes 
to  suffer,  from  religious  depression  and  discouragement  we  are  in  great  danger  of 
murmuring  against  God  and  of  complaining  of  our  lot.  If  it  were,  as  it  ought 
to  be, 

"  our  cAief  complaint 
That  oar  love  is  weak  and  faint," 

we  should  soon  cease  to  have  cause  to  complain.  2.  That  they  spoke  eontenwtuonslff 
of  the  manna.  Even  so  are  we  tempted  at  times  of  weariness  to  think  slightingly 
and  ungratefully  of  the  spiritual  food  which  God  has  provided  for  us,  as  though  it 
not  only  palled  upon  us  by  reason  of  sameness,  but  failed  to  satisfy  us  by  reason  of 
its  unsubstantial  character.    We  demand  something  more  coarse,  more  exciting. 

IIL  The  destruction  in  which  theib  sinful  murmubing  involved  them.  Con- 
sider— 1.  That  fiery  serpents  came  among  them.  Even  so  it  is  when  men  lose  heart 
and  faith,  and  complain  of  their  lot  (t.  e.  of  God's  providence),  and  contemn  their 
religious  privileges,  that  they  are  especially  in  danger  of  falling  a  prey  to  deadly 
sins  which  war  against  the  soul.  A  heart  discouraged  and  an  angry  mind  are 
Satan's  grand  opportunities,  for  they  mean  God  alienated  and  his  grace  forfeited. 
2.  That  the  serpents  hit  them,  and  their  bite  was  fatal,  for  much  people  died.  Even 
80  do  sins — not  mere  sin  in  the  abstract,  but  definite  and  particular  sins — ^fasten  upon 
unhappy  souls  and  instil  a  poison  into  them  which  works  death ;  for  the  life  of  the 
soul  is  union  with  God,  and  this  union  is  broken  up  by  the  action  of  sin  upon  the 
■oul,  so  that  it  must  die  if  the  poison  be  not  cast  out.     And  many  do  die,  as  we  see. 

IV.  The  salvation  which  God  PBOViDKD.  Consider — 1.  That  the  perishing  people 
cried  to  Moses  to  pray  for  them,  for  he  was  their  mediator.  Even  so  the  ones  of 
men  yearning  to  be  delivered  from  their  sins,  and  from  the  death  which  follows  sin, 
have  always  reached  the  Father  through  the  intercession  of  the  one  Mediator,  even 
though  they  knew  him  not.  2.  That  a  "  saraph  "  was  ordained  to  heal  the  deadly 
bites  of  the  "seraphim."  Even  so  our  Lord  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh, 
— of  that  sinful  flesh  in  which  the  deadly  poison  of  sin  existed, — and  took  that  very 
form  which  in  every  other  case  was  full  of  sin  (Bom.  viii.  3 ;  2  Cor.  v.  21  ;  1  Pet 
ii.  22 — 24).  3.  That  Moses  made  the  serpent  of  brass  in  order  to  resemble  the  fiery 
serpents  in  appearance.  Even  so  our  Lord  was  so  thoroughly  human,  and  in  the 
eyes  of  men  so  like  to  sinners,  that  he  was  freely  suspected,  loudly  accused,  and 
finally  condemned  as  a  sinner.  _  4.  That  the  brazen  serpent,  however  much  a  saraph 
inform  and  colour,  had  no  poison  in  it.  Even  so  our  Lord,  though  truly  and  per- 
fectly human,  was  without  sin,  neither  was  any  guile  found  in  his  mouth.  6.  That 
the  brazen  serpent  wcis  lifted  up  upon  a  standard;  no  doubt  in  order  that  all  eyes 
might  be  drawn  to  the  "symbol  of  salvation."  Even  so  our  Lord  was  lifted  up 
upon  the  cross,  which  is  an  ensign  unto  the  nations,  the  standard  of  the  Lord's  host, 
and  the  sign  {signum — irq/iciov)  of  the  Son  of  man ;  and  he  was  lifted  up  to  draw  all 
men  unto  him  by  the  startling  character  and  persuasive  attraction  of  that  elevation. 
6.  That  whoever  looked  at  the  brazen  serpent  was  healed  of  the  bite  of  the  serpent. 
Even  so  every  one  that  beholdeth  Christ  cracified  with  the  eye  of  faith  is  healed  of 
the  deadly  wound  inflicted  upon  him  by  the  old  serpent,  and  "hath  everlasting  life." 
Moreover,  as  they  died  of  the  bite  of  some  particular  serpent,  and  were  healed  of  that 
bite,  so  do  we  simer  from  the  effects  of  some  particular  sin  or  sins,  and  from  these 
— their  power  and  poison — we  must  be  and  may  be  healed.  Christ  is  evidently  set 
forth  before  us  crucified  that  we  may  be  saved  from  our  besetting  sin,  whatever  it 
may  be ;  and  it  is  to  that  end  that  we  must  look  to  him.  7.  That  everybody  within 
sight  of  the  standard  might  have  been  healed,  but  only  those  who  looked  were  healed. 
Even  so  there  is  in  the  cross  of  Christ  healing  full  and  free  for  all  sinners  to  whom 
the  knowledge  of  the  cross  may  come,  but  as  a  fact  only  those  are  healed  who  fix 
upon  the  Saviour  the  gaze  of  faith.  8.  Thai  it  woLS  not  the  "  symbol  of  salvation," 
Imt  the  power  and  goodness  of  God  acting  through  it,  which  saved  the  people.  Even 
BO  it  is  not  anything  formal  or  material  in  the  sacrifice  of  Calvary,  neither  is  it 
any  definitions  or  dogmas  about  that  sacrifice,  but  it  is  the  saving  grace  of  God  in 
Christ  and  in  him  crucified,  which  delivers  from  the  terror  and  virus  of  sin.  Notice 
further — (1)  That  it  4oet  »ot  sa/j)  that  those  who  beheld  the  serpent  were  relieved  qf  ali 


CH.  XXI.  4—9.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  271 

pain  and  si^ering/rom  their  bites,  only  that  they  "  lived."  Even  so  those  who  are 
saved  through  faith  in  Christ  crucified  are  not  therefore  saved  from  the  sad  and  bitter 
consequences  of  their  sins  in  this  world,  but  the  promise  is  they  shall  "  not  perish, 
but  have  everlasting  life."  (2)  Thai  it  does  not  say  thai  the  serpents  were  taken  away, 
as  it  does  in  the  case  of  the  plagues  of  Egypt.  They  may  have  continued  to  infest 
the  camp  as  long  as  they  travelled  through  that  region,  and  the  brazen  serpent  may 
have  been  daily  lifted  up.  !^ven  so  the  Divine  remedy  appointed  for  sin  has  not 
taken  away  sin  out  of  the  world.  Sins  will  beset  us  still  and  war  against  our  souls, 
and  as  long  as  we  journey  through  this  wilderness  we  shall  need  to  look  for  healing 
to  the  cross  (1  John  i.  10;  ii.  1). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  4. — The  discouragements  of  the  way.  The  circumstances  of  the  Israelites 
suggest  some  of  the  discouragements  of  Christian  pilgrims.  These  may  arise 
from — 

I.  The  direction  of  thb  way.  It  led  away  from  Canaan ;  it  was  apparently  a 
retreat.  Our  circumstances  may  seem  to  be  drawing  us  further  and  further  from 
God  and  heaven ;  but  if  we  are  in  God's  way  it  must  lead  right  at  last.  Illustrate 
from  Exod.  xiii.  17,  18,  and  cf.  Ps.  xxv.  4,  6,  10. 

II.  The  lgnqth  oi'  the  way.  It  might  have  been  shorter,  through  Edom  instead 
of  round  it ;  but  it  would  have  been  a  way  of  war,  on  which  God's  blessing  would 
not  have  rested.  The  length  avoided  loss.  Our  short  cuts  may  be  perilous ;  e.  g. 
David  (1  Sam.  xxvii.  1),  Jeroboam  (1  Kings  xii.  26 — 30). 

III.  The  roughness  of  the  way.  Among  rocky  mountain  defiles  and  treacherous 
foes.  Portions  of  our  pilgrimage  are  among  the  green  pastures  of  peace ;  but  others 
over  hills  of  difficulty,  intricate  paths,  and  rugged  mountain  passes,  and  amidst 
powers  of  darkness  that  tempt  us  to  despair.  Illustrate  JeremiaJi  in  his  trying  and 
unpopular  mission  (Jer.  xii.  6,  6 ;  xv.  10—21). 

IV.  The  companionships  of  the  way.  Some  of  our  comrades  are  complainers, 
and  may  infect  us ;  others  laggards,  and  tempt  us  to  sloth ;  others  apostates,  who 
turn  back  and  bring  an  evil  report  of  the  way  beyond  us  (like  Bunyan's  Timorous 
and  Mistrust).  But  God  may.  be  our  companion  to  the  end  of  the  way  (Ps.  xlviii 
14 ;  kxiii.  24). 

V.  The  provisions  of  the  way  (ver.  6).  This  a  discouragement  of  their  own 
seeking,  and  most  culpable.  Applicable  to  those  who  are  dissatisfied  with  the  truth 
provided  as  spiritual  food  for  the  pilgrimage  (its  quality,  or  quantity,  or  the  means 
of  imparting  it,  as  though  God  must  be  expected  to  satisfy  every  intellectual  whim). 
Applicable  also  to  those  who  distrust  the  providence  and  promises  of  God  in  regard 
to  temporal  supplies. '  Our  only  safe  course  is  to  "  walk  in  "  (Col.  ii.  6)  Christ,  "  the 
Way."— P. 

Vers.  6 — 9. — The  brazen  serpent  as  a  type  of  Christ.  If  this  narrative  was  a  bare 
record  of  facts,  it  would  supply  precious  lessons  respecting  sin  and  salvation ;  but 
being  one  of  the  typical  histories,  applied  by  the  Saviour  to  himself,  it  has  in  itself 
"no  glory  in  this  respect,  by  reason  of  the  glory  which  excelleth."  It  was  a  tjrpe, 
not  through  the  discernment  of  men,  but  by  the  preordination  of  God.  Among  the 
analogies  the  following  may  be  suggested,  from  which  such  truths  may  be  selected 
as  will  best  further  the  object  for  which  the  subject  is  used  in  the  pulpit.  1.  The 
origin  of  the  evil  in  the  camp  and  in  the  world  was  the  same  sin.  2.  The  fiery 
serpents  apt  "ministers"  (2  Cor.  xi.  15)  of  "the  old  serpent,"  and  so  sufferings  and 
death  the  natural  work  of  Satan,  who  "  was  a  murderer  from  the  beginning,"  and 
who  hath  "  the  power  of  death  "  (Rom.  vi.  23 ;  Heb.  ii.  14).  3.  The  devil  could 
have  no  power  to  injure  "except  it  were  given  him  from  above."  "The  Lord  sent 
the  serpents  "  (cf.  Isa.  xlv.  7 ;  Amos  iii.  6 ;  1  Cor.  v.  6 ;  1  Tim.  i.  20).  4.  The  help- 
lessness of  the  sufferers  the  same.  A  new  life  needed  in  each  case.  But  neither 
herbs,  nor  cordials,  nor  caustics,  nor  charms  could  expel  the  poison  from  the  blood. 
And  neither  reformation,  nor  tears,  nor  services,  nor  ceremonies  can  avert  the 
oonoequenceft  of  tin.    6.  The  remedy  of  Divine  appointment.    "  God  sent  foitk 


276  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  [ch.  xxi.  4— ». 

his  Son"  (Bom.  viii.  32;  Gal.  iv.4,  5;  cf.  Wisdom  xvi.  6,  7,  12),  6.  In  both 
cases  a  resemblance  between  the  destroyer  and  the  deliverer.  The  brazen  serpent  a 
deliverer  in  the  likeness  of  the  destroyer ;  Christ  a  Saviour  in  the  likeness  of  ths 
Binner  (Rom.  viii.  3).  But  the  serpent  was  without  venom,  and  Christ  without  sin. 
7.  Deliverance  was  provided  not  by  words,  but  by  deeds.  The  Son  of  man,  like  the 
serpent,  lifted  up.  8.  In  both  cases  a  declaration  of  God's  plan  follows  its  appoint- 
ment. Moses  proclaimed  to  the  camp  the  heaven-sent  remedy,  and  "  we  preach 
Christ  crucified."  9.  An  appropriation  of  God's  oflEer  required :  "  when  he  looketh," 
"whosoever  believeth."  Salvation  limited  to  those  who  trust.  10.  No  obvious  con- 
nection between  the  means  and  the  result.  The  serpent  and  the  cross  "  foolishness  " 
to  the  scoffer.  11.  Saving  faith  impossible  without  "godly  sorrow  working  repent- 
ance "  (cf.  ver.  7  ;  Acts  xx.  21 ;  1  John  i.  9).  12.  The  offer  of  salvation  made  to 
all,  and  the  effect  of  faith  alike  in  all.  Cf.  ver.  9  and  the  world-embracing  "  whoso- 
ever."—P. 

Vers.  4,  5. — A  hard  bit  of  the  road.  "  The  sonl  of  the  people  was  much  discouraged 
because  of  the  way." 

I.  Thb  ACT0AL  BBASON  FOB  DiscoxjEAGEMKNT.  Discouragement  and  trouble  of 
mind  because  of  the  difficulties  of  life  is  of  course  very  common,  but  a  great  deal 
depends  on  where  the  difficulties  come  from.  Here  we  are  plainly  told  the  dis- 
couragement arose  because  of  the  way.  1.  It  appears  to  have  been  a  bad  bit  of  the 
road  in  itself.  None  of  the  way  over  which  the  Israelites  had  travelled  since  they 
left  Egypt  could  be  called  easy.  They  had  begun  with  a  strange  experience,  march- 
ing through  the  depths  of  the  sea,  and  ever  since  they  had  wandered  in  the  wilderness 
in  a  solitary  way ;  they  found  no  city  to  dwell  in.  For  forty  years  they  had  been 
accustomed  to  wilderness  life,  but  the  district  through  which  they  were  now  passing 
is,  by  the  description  of  travellers,  desolate  and  repellent  in  an  extraordinary  degree. 
So  the  course  of  the  Christian,  all  the  way  through,  is  subject  to  external  difficulties 
and  hardships,  and  the  more  faithful  he  is,  the  more  these  may  abound,  and  at  certain 
stages  they  may  be  so  increised  and  intensified  as  to  become  well  nigh  intolerable. 
Discouraged  by  different  things  at  different  times,  there  may  come  a  time  to  us,  as 
to  Israel,  when  we  shall  be  especially  discouraged  because  of  the  way.  2.  It  came 
as  a  sort  of  rebuff  after  God  had  given  them  special  encouragement.  For  forty  years 
they  had  been  under  chastisement,  a  doomed,  dying,  hopeless  generation,  but  recently 
God  had  brought  them  back  to  Kadesh,  and  made  the  dry,  forbidding  rock  to  pour 
forth  plenteously  f or  the  thirst  of  man  and  beast.  Man  is  easily  lifted  up  by  anything 
that  satisfies  his  senses,  and  gives  him  a  visible  support,  and  when  it  subsides  he  is 
correspondingly  depressed.  The  desolate  district  through  which  the  people  passed 
probably  looked  all  the  worse  because  of  the  hopes  which  had  been  excited  in  them 
at  Meribah.  3.  It  was  particularly  vexatious  because  they  had  been  turned  out  of  a 
more  direct  way.  They  were  compassing  the  land  of  Edom,  because  brother  Edom, 
of  whom  Israel  expected  kinder  things,  had  closed  the  way  through  his  land  with  • 
drawn  sword.  Even  though  the  road  had  been  pleasanter  in  itself,  the  very  fact  that 
it  was  circuitous  was  enough  to  cause  some  annoyance. 

II.  This  actual  reason  wab  not  sufficient.  It  was  natural  enough,  to  some 
extent  excusable,  but  not  a  reason  worthy  of  the  people  of  God.  1.  It  pointed  to 
purely  external  difficulties.  It  was  by  no  fault  of  Israel  that  it  found  itself  in  this 
cheerless  and  starving  place.  Canaan  was  not  a  land  easy  to  get  into,  and  the 
Israelites  had  been  shut  up  to  this  road,  difficult  as  it  was.  We  dishonour  God 
greatly  when  we  are  discouraged  by  difficulties  rising  entirely  outside  of  ourselves. 
The  less  of  help  and  comfort  we  can  discern  with  the  eyes  of  sense,  the  more  wo 
should  discern  those  unfailing  comforts  and  resources  which  come  through  a  childlike 
dependence  upon  God.  The  Israelites  wanted  a  Habakkuk  among  them  to  say, 
"  Though  the  fig  tree  shall  not  blossom,  neither  shall  fruit  be  in  the  vines ;  the 
labour  of  the  olive  shall  fail,  and  the  fields  yield  no  meat ;  the  flock  shall  be  cut  off 
from  the  fold,  and  there  shall  be  no  herd  in  the  stalls :  yet  I  will  rejoice  in  the  Lord, 
I  will  joy  in  the  God  of  my  salvation."  2.  Tliere  was  a  negligent  and  ungrateful 
omission  to  consider  reasons  for  encouragement.  Even  if  the  way  was  hard,  it  was  a 
jn«rc/  thito  w%s  a  way  at  ^U.    ^be  wajf  through  Edopi,  4irect  and  easy  a,»  it  looked, 


«lt  tti.  4—9.1  f  ttS  BOOK  Of  NtMBS!tl8.  *?f 

might  have  proved  both  tedious  and  perilous  in  the  end.  God  knows  the  way  of  ths 
righteous,  even  when  the  righteous  himself  scarcely  knows  it.  Bad  as  the  way  was, 
it  is  called  the  way  of  the  Red  Sea,  and  the  very  sight  of  those  memorahle  waters 
should  have  brought  to  mind,  and  kept  in  mind,  an  unparalleled  instance  of  God's 
guiding  and  delivering  power.  3.  The  discouragement  because  of  the  way  prevented 
other  and  weightier  reasons  for  discouragement  from  being  fdt.  The  state  of  the 
heart  within  should  have  caused  far  more  depression  and  anxiety  than  the  state  of 
the  world  without.  We  know  the  people  themselves  were  in  a  bad  state  of  heart, 
for  the  words  of  murmuring  prove  it.  Whatever  hopes  the  gushing  waters  of  Meribah 
had  raised  were  carnal,  and  found  no  sympathy  with  God.  There  are  two  states  of 
heart  on  which  we  may  be  sure  he  looks  with  approval.  (1)  When  his  people,  in 
spite  of  the  way,  surrounded  by  poverty,  sickness,  and  all  the  circumstances  of  a 
cold,  unsympathetic  world,  are  nevertheless  courageous,  trustful,  grateful,  cheerful. 
(2)  When  his  people,  with  everything  in  their  circumstances  pleasant  and  attractive, 
are  nevertheless  utterly  cast  down  because  of  the  proofs  they  daily  get  of  the  power 
of  inbred  gin.  To  trust  God,  in  spite  of  the  badness  of  the  way,  and  to  distrust  and 
abhor  self,  in  spite  of  the  comforts  of  the  way — be  it  our  care  to  attain  and  preserve 
these  states  of  mind  as  long  as  they  are  needed. 
Robert  Hall  has  a  sermon  on  ver.  4. — Y. 

Vers.  6 — 9. — Destruction  and  salvation  through  the  serpent.  Each  time  the  people 
break  into  open  sin  there  is  something  new  in  the  treatment  of  them.  Now  God 
gives  the  fruition  of  their  desires ;  they  are  surfeited  with  quails,  and  perish  with  the 
delicate  morsels  in  their  mouths  (ch.  xi.).  Again  he  makes  as  if  at  one  sudden, 
comprehensive  blow  he  would  sweep  away  the  whole  nation  (ch.  xiv.  12).  Yet  again 
we  read  of  the  fifteen  thousand  who  perished  in  difEerent  ways  at  the  gainsaying  of 
Korah  (ch.  xvi.).  Then  there  is  a  complete  change  of  treatment,  and  though  the 
people  murmured  bitterly  at  Meribah,  God  is  gracious  to  them,  and  visits  Moses  and 
Aaron  in  wrath.  Thus  we  advance  to  consider  this  present  outbreak  of  sin,  which 
is  treated  in  a  novel  and  very  peculiar  way,  and  one  very  profitable  indeed  to 
consider. 

I.  DE8TRt7CTioN  THROUGH  THE  SERPENT.  1.  It  was  through  the  serpent.  Thi 
.  Lord  sent  the  fiery  serpents.  It  is  said  that  the  district  abounds  in  serpents  which 
would  be  well  described  by  the  word_;fery.  But  the  Israelites  were  not  allowed  to 
consider  the  serpents  as  one  of  the  perils  of  the  district,  into  which  they  had  fallen 
by  some  kind  of  chance.  The  Lord  sent  the  serpents.  Because  the  people  ceased  to 
trust  in  him,  he  delivered  them  to  one  of  the  dangers  of  the  way  (Deut.  xxxii.  24 ; 
Job  xxvi.  13 ;  Jer.  viii.  17 ;  Amos  ix.  3).  2.  The  serpent  rather  than  another  mode 
of  destruction  was  chosen.  God  in  his  wrath  does  not  take  the  first  weapon  that 
eomes  to  hand.  If  destruction,  simply  and  only  destruction,  had  been  in  view, 
doubtless  there  were  other  deadly  creatures  in  the  wilderness  which  might  have 
served  the  purpose.  But  it  is  not  enough  for  the  people  to  die ;  the  wap  in  which 
they  die  is  also  significant.  Their  thoughts  are  turned  back  to  the  very  beginning 
and  fountain  of  human  troubles,  to  Eden  before  it  was  lost,  and  to  the  serpent  who 
led  our  first  parents  into  the  ways  of  sin  and  death.  As  the  serpent  had  to  do  with 
bringing  sin  into  the  world,  so  he  is  shown  as  having  to  do  with  the  punishment  of 
it.  3.  The  destruction  is  represented  as  being  in  manp  cases  complete.  "Much  people. 
of  Israel  died."  Probably  some  of  the  few  aged  still  surviving  and  doomed  to  die 
in  the  wilderness  (ch.  xiv.  29)  perished  thus,  confirmed  in  their  rebellious  spirit 
beyond  remedy.  Many  of  those  bitten  by  a  serpent  toss  awhile  in  pain,  looking 
vaguely  for  a  remedy,  but,  being  ignorant  of  the  original  cause  of  their  suffering, 
and  not  understanding  that  God  has  sent  the  serpent,  they  do  not  find  the  remedy, 
and  then  they  die.  4.  But  in  other  cases  the  destruction  is  incomplete.  The  bite  of 
the  serpent,  with  its  efEects,  sets  before  us  that  gnawing  consciousness  of  misery 
which  comes  to  so  many,  and  which  no  art  of  man  can  conjure  away.  Why  were 
somT-iitten  and  others  not  ?  He  who  can  answer  that  question  can  answer  another — 
why  some  can  go  through  life  light-hearted,  never  having  the  weight  of  a  wasted 
life  on  their  consciences,  never  made  miserable  by  anything  save  physical  pain  or 
disappointed  selfishness,  and  happy  at  once  if  the  pain  and  disappointment  cease : 


«•  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBEBS.  [oh.xil  4-* 

while  others  so  soon  have  the  serpent  poisoning'  their  consciousness  and  filling  them 
with  a  deep  sense  of  the  failure,  sadness,  and  misery  of  natural  human  life.  There 
are  some  who  seem  to  have  triple  armour  against  the  serpent-bite.  Of  the  bitten 
ones,  many  had  been  no  worse  in  their  unbelief  than  some  who  remained  unbitten. 
It  is  part  of  the  mystery  of  life  that  it  is  not  the  worst  man  who  is  obviously  in  all 
cases  the  suffering  one.  Then  of  those  who  were  bitten,  tome  went  on  to  death, 
others  sought  if  there  might  be  some  means  of  deliverance.  Many  would  give  them- 
selves up  to  fatalism  and  despair.  Many  do  so  still.  The  question  for  the  miserable 
in  conscience  is,  "  Will  you  go  on  allowing  the  misery  of  the  serpent-bite  to  eat  out 
all  that  ia  salvable  in  you,  or  will  you  do  as  some  of  Israel  wisely  and  promptly  did 
in  their  sore  distress,  namely,  turn  to  God?  Only  he  who  sent  the  serpents  can  take 
the  venom  of  their  bite  away. 

II.  Salvation  thbough  thb  serpent.  1.  The  cry  for  salvation  contained  in 
ver.  7.  There  is  a  show  of  repentance  here,  but  we  must  not  make  too  much  of  it. 
The  people  had  talked  in  the  same  humble  fashion  before,  saying  theyjiad  sinned, 
yet  soon  showing  that  they  did  not  understand  what  sin  was  (ch.  xiv.  40) ;  though 
perhaps  the  expression  in  ver.  6  should  be  particularly  noted — "  the  people  spake 
against  God."  Hitherto  their  wrath  had  been  vented  on  the  visible  Moses  and  Aaron. 
It  is  something  that  even  in  their  murmurings  they  at  last  seem  distinctly  to  recog- 
nise God  as  having  a  hand  in  the  disposition  of  their  course.  And  so  now  they  put 
in  the  confession,  "  We  have  spoken  against  the  Lord."  This  may  have  had  more 
to  do  with  the  peculiar  way  in  which  God  treated  them  than  at  first  appears. 
Whether  their  repentance  is  good  for  anything  will  be  seen  if  they  bring  forth  such 
fruit  of  repentance  as  they  will  presently  have  the  opportunity  of  manifesting.  Note 
also  the  connectv/n  of  the  healing  with  the  request  of  the  people.  If  they  had  gone  on 
in  silent  endurance  they  might  all  in  course  of  time  have  died.  Their  confession  of 
sin  told  the  truth,  whether  they  felt  all  that  truth  or  not.  The  serpent-bite  was 
connected  vnth  their  sin.  Observe  also  their  approach  to  God  tlirough  a  mediator, 
one  whose  services  they  had  often  proved,  yet  often  slighted,  in  the  past.  They  come 
to  Moses  for  a  greater  service  than  they  have  yet  any  conception  of.  Thus  we  are 
encouraged  to  make  Jesus  the  Mediator  of  spiritual  salvation  and  blessing,  by  con- 
sidering how  often,  while  upon  earth,  he  was  the  Mediator  of  salvation  and  blessing 
in  earthly  things.  The  God  who  is  infinite  in  power  and  unfailing  in  love,  and  who 
gave  through  Jesus  the  lesser  blessings  to  some,  waits  also  to  give  through  Jesus  the 
greater  blessings  to  all.  2.  As  the  destruction  was  through  the  serpent,  so  the 
salvation  also.  God  sent  the  fiery  serpents,  and  also  the  serpent  of  brass.  There 
was  nothing  in  it  to  save  if  Moses  had  made  it  as  Aaron  made  the  golden  calf.  It 
had  not  the  eflicacy  of  some  natural  balm.  A  bit  of  brass  it  was  to  begin  with,  and 
to  a  bit  of  brass  in  the  course  of  ages  it  returned  (2  Kings  xviii.  4).  So  Jesus 
expressly  tells  us  that  in  all  his  gradual  approach  to  the  cross  he  was  carrying  out 
his  Father's  will.  All  the  process  by  which  he  was  prepared  to  be  lifted  up  was  a 
process  appointed  by  the  Father.  It  was  his  meat  and  drink,  that  which  really  and 
truly  sustained  him,  and  entered  as  it  were  into  his  very  existence,  to  do  his  Father's 
will  and  finish  his  work.  When  the  brazen  serpent  was  finished,  fixed  and  lifted  on 
the  pole,  this  act  found  its  antitype  in  that  hour  when  Jesus  said,  "It  is  finished." 
All  was  finished  then  according  to  the  pattern  which  God  himself  had  indicated  in 
theWilderness.  3.  As  destruction  was  through  a  serpent,  salvation  also  was  through 
a  sS'pemt.  "  He  was  made  sin  for  us  who  knew  no  sin."  Jesus  was  lifted  on  the 
cross  amid  the  execration  and  contempt  of  well-nigh  all  Jerusalem.  In  its  esteem 
he  was  worse  than  Barabbas.  To  judge  by  the  way  the  people  spoke  and  acted,  the 
consummation  of  all  villanies  was  gathered  up  in  him.  It  was  a  great  insult,  and  so 
considered  in  the  first  days  of  the  gospel,  to  proclaim  him  of  all  persons  as  Saviour 
of  men.  And  so  when  Moses  lifted  up  the  brazen  serpent  it  may  have  been  received 
indignantly  by  some. '  "  Do  you  wish  to  mock  us  with  the  sight  of  our  tormentor  ?  " 
When  we  look  at  Jesus  in  his  saving  relation  to  us,  we  are  brought  closer  than  ever 
to  our  own  sins,  and  indeed  to  the  sin  of  the  whole  world.  We  see  him,  the  sinless 
One,  under  a  curse,  as  having  died  on  the  tree,  manifestly  under  a  curse,  groaning 
forth  as  the  Father's  face  passes  into  the  shade,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou 
forsaken  me  ?  "    Forsaken  of  God,  the  holy  One,  forsaken  of  unfaithful  and  terror* 


es.  txi.  4-9.]  TBE  BOOK  OP  NtJMBEBS.  i?9 

stricken  servants,  hated  by  the  world,  wo  may  well  say  that  the  semblance  of  tha 
serpent  sets  him  forth.  4.  And  yet  it  was  the  semhlance  only.  By  the  way  men 
treated  him,  he  appeared  to  be  judged  as  a  destroyer  and  deceiver,  but  we  know  that 
in  himself  he  was  harmless.  6.  There  is  the  prominence  of  the  saving  object.  The 
serpent  was  set  upon  a  pole.  We  may  suppose  that  it  was  as  central  and  prominent 
an  object  as  the  tabernacle  itself.  It  was  to  be  placed  where  all  could  see,  for  there 
were  many  in  the  camp,  and  the  bitten  ones  were  everywhere  around.  And  what 
Moses  did  for  the  brazen  serpent,  God  himself,  in  the  marvellous  arrangements  of 
the  gospel,  has  done  for  the  crucified  Jesus.  It  is  not  apostles,  evangelists,  theologians 
who  have  pushed  forward  the  doctrine  of  the  cross;  Jesus  himself  put  it  in  the 
forefront  in  that  very  discourse  which  contains  the  deepest  things  of  God  concerning 
our  salvation  (John  iii.  14).  No  one  saw  him  rise  from  the  dead ;  thousands  saw 
him,  or  had  the  opportunity  of  seeing  him,  on  the  cross.  We  can  no  more  keep  the 
cross  in  obscurity  than  we  can  keep  the  sun  from  rising.  6.  The  pure  element  of 
faith  is  brought  in.  Contrast  the  mode  of  God's  treatment  here  with  that  employed 
when  Aaron  with  his  smoking  censer  stood  between  the  living  and  the  dead  (ch.  xvi. 
47).  On  that  occasion  nothing  was  asked  from  the  people.  Aaron  with  his  censer 
was  the  means  of  sparing  even  the  unconscious.  The  mercy  then  was  the  mercy  of 
sparing ;  now  through  the  serpent  it  is  the  mercy  of  saving.  The  serpent  was  of 
no  use  to  those  who  did  not  look.  A  man  may  long  be  spared  in  unbelief,  but  in 
unbelief  he  cannot  possibly  be  saved.  It  is  a  great  advance  from  sparing  to  saving. 
Thus  the  faith  required  was  put  in  sharp  contrast  with  past  unbelief,  which  had  been 
so  sadly  conspicuous  and  ruinous,  gaining  its  last  triumph  a  little  while  before  in  the 
fall  of  Moses  and  Aaron  (ch.  xx.  12).  The  people  were  shut  up  to  pure  faith.  If 
once  in  their  great  pain  and  peril  they  began  to  doubt  how  a  brazen  image  of  a 
serpent  should  save,  then  they  were  lost.  If  there  had  been  anything  in  the  image 
itself  to  save,  there  would  have  been  no  room  for  faith  to  work.  If  one  serpent- 
bitten  person  had  been  healed  without  looking,  that  would  have  proved  faith  no 
necessity.  But  only  those  who  looked  were  healed  ;  all  who  looked  were  healed  ; 
and  those  who  refused  to  look  perished.  Thus  Jesus  early  began  inviting  a  needy 
world  to  look  to  him  with  a  spirit  full  of  faith  and  expectation,  and  the  more  he 
seemed  to  a  critical  world  incapable  and  presumptuous,  the  more  he  asked  for  faith. 
'  "After  that,  in  the  wisdom  of  God,  the  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God,  it  pleased 
God  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching  to  save  them  that  believe"  (1  Cor.  L  21).  7. 
The  salvation  depends  on  the  disposition  of  the  person  to  be  saved.  Man  fell  with 
his  eyes  open  and  in  spite  of  a  solemn  commandment  and  warning.  And  every  man 
must  be  saved  with  his  eyes  open,  turning  himself  intelligently,  wholly,  and  grate- 
fully towards  the  Saviour.  There  is  everything  to  help  the  sinner  if  he  will  only 
turn.  Some  there  might  be  in  Israel  who  seemed  too  far  gone  even  to  turn  their 
eyes,  but  doubtless  God  recognised  the  genuine  turning  of  the  heart.  Though  the 
eyes  of  sense  beheld  not  the  serpent,  the  eyes  of  the  heart  beheld,  and  this  was 
enough  for  healing.  It  was  very  helpful  to  be  assured  that  there  was  one  mode  of 
healing,  and  only  one,  for  only  one  was  needed.  It  is  only  while  we  are  cleaving  to 
our  sins  that  we  find  distraction  and  perplexity.  There  was  distraction,  anxiety,  and 
fear  in  abundance  as  long  as  the  Israelite  lived  in  momentary  terror  of  the  fatal  bite ; 
but  with  the  lifted  serpent  there  came  not  only  healing,  jbut  composure.  God  in 
sending  his  Son  has  not  distracted  us  by  a  complication  of  possible  modes  of 
salvation. — ^Y. 

EXPOSITION. 


The  ekd  or  jotjknbts,  the  beginning 
OF  VICTORIES  (ver.  10 — ch.  xxii  1).  Ver. 
10. — The  children  of  Israel  set  forward, 
and  pitched  in  Oboth.  In  the  list  of  ch. 
xxxiii.  there  occur  two  other  stations, 
Zairaonah  and  Phnnon,  between  Mount  Hor 
and  Oboth.  Phuuon  may  he  the  Pinou  of 
G«n.  xxxvi  ii,  but  it  is  a  mere  conjecture. 


All  we  can  conclude  with  any  certainty  is 
that  the  Israelites  passed  round  the  southern 
end  of  the  mountains  of  Edom  by  the 
Wady  el  Ithm,  and  then  marched  north- 
wards along  the  eastern  border  of  Edom  by 
the  route  now  followed  between  Mekka  and 
Damascus.  On  this  side  the  mountains  are 
far  less  precipitous  and  defensible  than  ou 


sso 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[CH.  XXI.  10— XXII.  1. 


the  other,  and  this  circnmstarice  mnst  have 
abated  the  insolence  of  the  Edomites.  More- 
over, they  must  now  have  seen  enough  of 
Israel  to  know  that,  while  immensely  for- 
midable in  number  and  discipline,  he  had  no 
hostile  designs  against  them.  It  is  therefore 
not  surprising  to  find  from  Deut.  ii  6  that 
on  this  side  the  mountaineers  supplied  Israel 
with  bread  and  water,  just  as  they  supply 
the  pilgrim  caravans  at  the  present  day. 
That  they  exacted  payment  for  what  they 
supplied  was  perfectly  reasonable  :  no  one 
could  expect  a  poor  people  to  feed  a  nation 
of  two  million  souls,  however  nearly  related, 
for  nothing.  Oboth  has  been  identified  with 
the  modem  halting-place  of  el-Ahsa,  on  the 
pilgrim  route  above  mentioned,  on  the 
ground  of  supposed  similarity  in  the  mean- 
ing of  the  names  ;  but  the  true  rendering  of 
Oboth  is  doubtful  (see  on  Levit.  xiz.  31 ),  and, 
■part  from  that,  any  such  similarity  of  mean- 
ing is  too  vague  and  slight  a  ground  for  any 
arffument  to  be  built  upon. 

ver.  11. — And  pitched  at  Ije-abarim. 
Ije  (\'.J!).  or  Ijm  (D'ly),  as  it  is  called  in  ch. 
zzziii.  46,  signifies  "heaps"  or  "ruins." 
Abarim  is  a  word  of  somewhat  doubtful 
meaning,  best  rendered  ' '  ridges  "  or ' '  ranges. " 
It  was  apparently  applied  to  the  whole  of 
Persea  in  later  times  (cf.  Jer.  xxii.  20,  "pas- 
sages "),  but  in  the  Pentateuch  is  confined 
elsewhere  to  the  ranges  facing  Jericho. 
These  "  ruinous  heaps  of  the  ranges  "  lay  to 
the  east  of  Moab,  along  the  desert  side  of 
which  Israel  was  now  marching,  still  going 
northwards  :  they  cannot  be  identified. 

Ver.  12. — Pitched  in  the  valley  of  Zared. 
Rather,  "in  the  brook  of  Zered."  H^J  7033. 
Perhaps  the  upper  part  of  the  Wady  Eerek, 
which  flows  westwards  into  the  Salt  Sea 
(see  on  Deut.  ii.  13). 

Ver.  13. — Pitched  on  the  other  side  of 
Arnon.  The  Anion  was  without  doubt  the 
stream  or  torrent  now  known  as  the  Wady 
MSjeb,  which  breaks  its  way  down  to  the 
Salt  Sea  through  a  precipitous  ravine.  It 
must  have  been  in  the  upper  part  of  its 
course,  in  the  desert  uplands,  that  the 
Israelites  crossed  it ;  and  this  both  because 
the  passage  lower  down  is  extremely  difficult, 
and  also  because  they  were  keeping  well  to 
the  eastward  of  Moabitish  territoiy  up  to 
this  point.  It  is  not  certain  which  side  of 
the  stream  is  intended  by  "the  other  side," 
because  the  force  of  these  expressions  depends 
as  often  upon  the  point  of  view  of  the  writer 
as  of  the  reader.  It  would  appear  from  Deut. 
ii.  26  that  Israel  remained  at  this  spot  until 
the  embassage  to  Sihon  had  returned.  That 
Cometh  out  of  the  coasts  of  the  Amorites, 
i.  e.  the  Arnon,  or  perhaps  one  of  its  con- 
fluents which  comes  down  from  the  north- 
east.    For  Arnon  is  the  border  of  Moab.     It 


was  at    that    time  the  boundary   (tee  on 
ver.  26). 

Ver.  14.  —  Wherefore,  i.  e.  because  the 
Amorites  had  wrested  from  Moab  all  to  the 
north  of  Arnon.  In  the  book  of  the  wan 
of  the  Lord.  Kothing  is  known  of  this  book 
but  what  appears  here.  If  it  should  seem 
strange  that  a  book  of  this  description  should 
be  already  in  existence,  we  must  remember 
that  amongst  the  multitude  of  Israel  there 
must  in  the  nature  of  things  have  been  some 
"poets"  in  the  then  acceptation  of  the 
word.  Some  songs  there  must  have  been, 
and  those  songs  would  be  mainly  inspired  by 
the  excitement  and  triumph  of  the  final 
marches.  The  first  flush  of  a  new  national 
life  achieving  its  first  victories  over  the 
national  foe  Euways  finds  expression  in  songs 
and  odes.  It  is  abundantly  evident  from  the 
foregoing  narrative  that  writing  of  some  sort 
was  in  common  use  at  least  among  the 
leaders  of  Israel  (see  on  ch.  xi.  26),  and  they 
would  not  have  thought  it  beneath  them  to 
collect  these  spontaneous  effusions  of  a  nation 
just  awaking  to  the  poetry  of  its  own  ex- 
istence. The  archaic  character  of  the  frag- 
ments preserved  in  this  chapter,  which  makes 
them  sound  so  foreign  to  our  ears,  is  a  strong 
testimony  to  their  genuineness.  It  is  hardly 
credible  that  any  one  of  a  later  generation 
should  have  cared  either  to  compose  or  to 
quote  snatches  of  song  which,  like  dried 
flowers,  have  lost  everything  but  scientific 
value  in  being  detached  from  the  soil  which 
gave  them  birth.  What  he  did  in  the  Sed 
Gea,  and  in  the  brooks  of  Arnon.  Rather, 
"  Vaheb  in  whirlwind,  and  the  brooks  of 
Arnon."  The  strophe  as  cited  here  has 
neither  nominative  nor  verb,  and  the  sense 
can  only  he  conjecturally  restored.  SHJ  is 
almost  certainly  a  proper  name,  although  of 
an  unknown  place.  np'1D3  is  also  considered 
by  many  as  the  name  of  a  locality  "in  Su- 
phah ; "  it  occurs,  however,  in  Nahum  i  8  in 
the  sense  given  above,  and  indeed  it  ia  not 
at  all  a  rare  word  in  Job,  Proverbs,  and 
the  Prophets ;  it  seems  best,  therefore,  to 
give  it  the  same  meaning  here. 

Ter.  16.— And  at  the  stream  of  the  brooks. 
Rather,  "and  the  pouring  (^I5'^1)  of  the 
brooks,"  i.  e.  the  slope  of  the  watershed. 
Ar.  TSJ  is  an  archaic  form  of  TJJ,  a  city. 
The  same  place  is  called  Ar  Moab  in  ver.  28. 
It  was  situate  on  the  Arnon  somewhat  lower 
down  than  where  the  Israelites  crossed  its 
"  brooks."  The  peculiarity  of  the  site,  "  in 
the  midst  of  the  river"  (Josh.  xiii.  9,  cf. 
Deut.  ii.  86),  and  extensive  ruins,  have 
enabled  travellers  to  identify  the  spot  on 
which  it  stood  at  the  junction  of  the  MSjeb 
(Arnon)  and  Lejum  (Nahaliel,  ver.  19).  It 
is-  uncertain  whether  the  Greeks  gave  the 
name  of  Areopolis,  as  Jerome  asserts,  to  Ar, 


«l.  «i.  10— xxn.  1.]         1?flE  BOOK  Oi'  NtTMBESS. 


m 


bnt  in  later  tiroes  it  was  Babbah,  a  town 
many  miles  further  sonth  in  the  heart  of 
Moab  which  bore  this  name.  At  was  at  this 
period  the  boundary  town  of  Moab,  and  as 
such  was  respected  by  the  Israelites  (Deut.  ii 
9,  29). 

Yer.  16. — And  from  thence ...  to  Beer.  A 
well ;  so  named,  no  doubt,  firom  the  circum- 
stance here  recorded.  That  they  were  told 
to  dig  for  water  instead  of  receiving  it  from 
the  rock  showed  the  end  to  be  at  hand,  and 
the  transition  shortly  to  be  made  from 
miraculous  to  natural  supplies. 

Ver.  17. — Then  Israel  sang  this  song. 
This  song  of  the  well  may  be  taken  from  the 
same  collection  of  odes,  but  more  probably 
is  quoted  from  memory.  It  is  remarkable  for 
the  spirit  of  joyousness  which  breathes  in  it, 
so  different  from  the  complaining,  despond- 
ingtone  of  the  past. 

Ver.  18.— By  the  direction  of  the  law- 
giver, pfj.npa.  liiterally,  "by  the  law- 
giver," or,  as  some  prefer,  "with  the  sceptre." 
The  meaning  of  micTiokeJc  is  disputed  (see 
on  Gen.  xlijt  10),  but  in  either  case  the 
meaning  must  be  practically  as  in  the  A.  V. 
It  speaks  of  the  alacrity  with  which  the 
leadersof  Israel,  Moses  himself  amongst  them, 
began  the  work  even  with  the  insignia  of 
their  office.  And  from  the  wilderness ...  to 
Uattanah.  Beer  was  still  in  the  desert 
country  eastward  of  the  cultivated  belt : 
from  thence  they  crossed,  still  on  the  north 
of  Amon,  and  probably  leaving  it  somewhat 
to  the  south,  into  a  more  settled  country. 

Ver.  19. — And  from  Uattanah  to  Kaha- 
lieL  The  latter  name,  which  means  "  the 
brook  of  God,"  seems  to  be  stUl  retained  by 
the  Encheileh,  one  of  the  northern  affluents 
of  the  Wady  MSjeb.  From  Nahaliel  to 
Bamoth.  Bamoth  simply  means  ' '  heights  " 
or  "high  places,"  and  was  therefore  a  fre- 
quent name.  This  Bamoth  may  be  the  same 
as  the  Bamoth-Baal  of  ch.  zxii.  41;  Josh, 
ziii.  17,  hilt  it  is  uncertain.  A  Beth-Bamoth 
is  mentioned  on  the  Moabite  stone. 

Ver.  20. — And  from  Bamoth  in  the  valley, 
that  is  in  the  conntry  of  Uoab,  to  the  top 
of  Fisgah.  The  original  runs  simply  thus  : 
"And  from  Bamoth — ^the  valley  which  in 
the  field — Moab — the  top— -PiagaJli."  It  may 
therefore  be  read,  "And  from  the  heights 
to  the  valley  that  is  in  the  field  of  Moab, 
viz.,  the  top  of  Pi3gah."_  The  "field"  of 
Moab  (Septuagint,  tv  rtf  irtiiif)  was  no 
doubt  the  open,  treeless  expanse  north  of 
Amon,  drained  by  the  Wady  Waleh,  which 
had  formerly  belonged  to  Moab.  Fisgah 
("the  ridge")  was  a  part  of  the  Abarim 
ranges  west  of  Heshbon,  from  the  summit  of 
which  the  first  view  is  gained  of  the  valley 
of  Jordan  and  the  hills  of  Palestine  (cf.  ch. 
joraiL  47;  Dent.  ilL  37 ;  zzziy.  1).   Which 


looketh  toward  Jeshimon.  Jeshimon,  or 
"  the  waste,"  seems  to  mean  here  that  desert 
plain  on  the  north-east  side  of  the  Salt  Sea 
now  called  the  Ghor  el  Belka,  which  included 
in  its  barren  desolation  the  sonthemmost 
portion  of  the  Jordan  valley. 

Ver.  21. — And  Israel  sent  messengers 
unto  Sihon.  The  narrative  here  returns  to 
the  point  of  time  when  the  Israelites  first 
reached  the  Upper  Amon,  the  boundary 
stream  of  the  kingdom  of  Sihon  (see  on  ver. 
13,  and  cf.  Deut.  ii.  24—37).  The  list  of 
stations  ia  the  preceding  verses  may  probably 
have  been  copied  out  of  some  official  record ; 
it  may  be  considered  as  marking  the  move- 
ments of  the  tabernacle  with  Eleazar  and  the 
Levites  and  the  mass  of  the  non-combatant 
population.  In  the  mean  time  the  armies  of 
Israel  were  engaged  in  victorious  enterprises 
which  took  them  far  afield.  King  of  the 
Amorites.  The  Amorites  were  not  akin  to 
the  Hebrews,  as  the  Edomites,  Moabites,  and 
Ammonites  were,  who  all  claimed  descent 
from  Terah.  They  were  of  the  Canaanitish 
stock  (Gen.  x.  16),  and  indeed  the  name 
Amorite  often  appears  as  synonymous  with 
Canaanite  in  its  larger  sense  (Deut.  i,  7,  19, 
27,  &c.).  If  at  one  time  they  are  mentioned 
side  by  side  with  five  or  six  other  tribes  of 
the  same  stock  (Exod.  xxxiv.  11),  yet  at 
another  they  seem  to  be  so  much  tiie  repre- 
sentative race  that  "the  Amorite"  stands 
for  the  inhabitants  of  Canaan  in  general 
whom  Israel  was  commissioned  to  oust  on 
account  of  his  iniquity  (Gen.  xv.  16).  It  is 
not,  therefore,  possible  to  draw  any  certain 
distinction  between  the  Amorites  of  Sihon's 
kingdom  and  the  mass  of  the  Canaanites  on 
the  other  side  Jordan.  Both  Sihon  and  his 
people  appear  as  intruders  in  this  region, 
having  come  down  perhaps  from  the  northern 
parts  of  Palestine,  and  having  but  recently 
(it  would  seem)  wrested  from  the  king  of 
Moab  all  his  territory  north  of  Amon.  It 
was  the  fact  of  the  Amorites  being  found  here 
which  led  to  the  conquest  and  settlement  of 
the  trans-Jordanic  territory.  That  territory 
was  not  apparently  included  iu  the  origintu 
gift  (compare  ch.  xxxiv.  2 — 12  with  Gen.  i. 
19  and  xv.  19 — 21),  but  since  the  Amorite 
had  possessed  himself  of  it,  it  must  pass  with 
all  the  rest  of  his  habitation  to  the  chosen 
people. 

Ver.  22.-^Let  me  pass  through  thy  land. 
Cf.  ch.  XX.  17.  Israel  was  not  commanded 
to  spare  the  Amorites,  indeed  he  was  under 
orders  to  smite  them  (Deut.  ii.  24),  but  that 
did  not  prevent  his  approaching  them  in  the 
first  instance  with  words  of  peace.  If  Sihon 
had  hearkened,  no  doubt  Israel  would  have 
passed  directly  on  to  Jordan,  and  he  would 
at  least  have  been  spared  for  the  present. 

Ver.  23. — And  he  came  to  Jahaa,  m 
Jahzah,  a  place  of  which  w?  know  nothuf. 


m 


THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS. 


[oB.  XXI.  Id— zxn  X 


Ver.  24. — ^And  Israel  smote  Mm  with  the 
edge  of  the  eword.  This  was  the  first  time 
that  generation  had  seen  war,  if  we  except 
the  uncertain  episode  of  the  king  of  Arad, 
and  they  could  have  had  no  weapons  but 
roch  as  their  fathers  had  brought  out  of 
Egjrpt.  It  was,  therefore,  a  critical  moment 
in  their  history  when  they  met  the  forces  of 
Sihon,  confident  from  their  recent  victory 
over  Moab.  We  may  suppose  that  Joshua 
was  their  military  leader  now,  as  before  and 
after.  From  Amon  unto  Jabbok.  The 
Jabbok,  which  formed  the  boundary  of  Sihon 
on  the  north  towards  the  kingdom  of  Og,  and 
on  the  east  towards  the  Ammonites,  is  the 
modem  Zerka:  it  runs  in  a  large  curve  north- 
east, north-west,  and  west,  until  it  falls  into 
Jordan,  forty-five  miles  north  of  the  mouth 
of  the  Amon.  Xven  unto  the  children  cf 
Ammon :  for  the  border  of  the  children  of 
Ammon  was  strong.  This  is  perhaps  in- 
tended to  explain  rather  why  the  Amorites 
had  not  extended  their  conquests  any  further, 
than  why  the  Israelites  made  no  attempt  to 
cross  the  border  of  Ammon ;  they  had 
another  and  more  suflicient  reason  (see  Dent. 
ii.  19).  Eabbah  of  Ammon,  which  stood  upon 
the  right  (here  the  eastern)  bank  of  the  Upper 
Jabbok,  was  an  extremely  strong  place  which 
effectually  protected  the  country  behind  it, 
even  untU  the  reign  of  David  (see  on  2  Sam. 
zi.,  xii.). 

Ver.  25. — And  Israel  dwelt  in  all  the 
cities  of  the  Amorites.  The  territory  over- 
run at  this  time  was  about  fifty  miles  north 
and  south,  by  nearly  thirty  east  and  west. 
It  was  not  permanently  occupied  until  a 
somewhat  later  period  (ch.  xxxii.  33) ;  but 
we  may  suppose  that  the  flocks  and  herds, 
with  sufficient  forces  to  guard  them,  spread 
themselves  at  onco  over  the  broad  pasture 
lands.  Heshbon,  and  all  the  villages  there- 
of. Literally,  "the  daughters  thereof."  By  a 
similar  figure  we  speak  of  a  "mother  city." 
Heshbon  occupied  a  central  position  in  the 
kingdom  of  Sihon,  half  way  between  Amon 
and  Jabbok,  and  about  eighteen  miles  east- 
ward of  the  point  where  Jordan  falls  into  the 
Salt  Lake  ;  it  stood  on  a  table-land  nearly 
SOOO  feet  above  the  sea,  and  had  been  made 
his  city  (t.  ■;.  his  capital)  by  Sihon  at  the 
time  of  his  victories  over  Moab. 

Ver.  26. — All  his  land.  This  is  qualified 
by  what  follows :  "  even  unto  Amon  "  (cf. 
Judges  xl  13—19). 

Ver.  27. — They  that  speak  in  proverbs. 
DvE'Sn.  Septuagint,  oi  aiviyfiaTtuTai.  A 
class  of  persons  well  marked  among  the 
Hebrews,  as  perhaps  in  all  ancient  countries. 
It  wastheirgift,  and  almost  their  profession,  to 
express  in  the  sententious,  antistrophic  poetry 
of  the  age  such  thoughts  or  such  facts  as  took 
hold  of  men'i  minds.    At »  time  when  there 


was  little  difference  between  poetry  and  rh» 
torio,  and  when  the  distinction  was  hardly 
drawn  between  the  inventive  faculty  of  man 
and  the  Divine  afflatus,  it  is  not  surprising 
to  find  the  word  mcahal  applied  to  the 
rhapsody  of  Balaam  (ch.  xxiii.  7),  to  the 
"taunting  song"  of  Isaiah  (xiv.  4),  to  the 
"riddle"  of  Ezekiel  (xvii.  2),  as  well  as 
to  the  collection  of  earthly  and  heavenly 
wisdom  in  the  Book  of  Proverba.  That 
which  follows  is  a  taunting  song,  most  like 
to  the  one  cited  from  Isaiah,  the  archaic 
character  of  which  is  marked  by  its  strongly 
antithetic  form  and  abrapt  transitions,  as 
well  as  by  the  peculiarity  of  some  of  the 
words.  Come  to  Heshbon.  This  may  be 
ironically  addressed  to  the  Amorites,  lately 
so  victorious,  now  so  overthrown ;  or,  pos- 
sibly, it  may  be  intended  to  express  the 
jubilation  of  the  Amorites  themselves  in  the 
day  of  their  pride. 

Ver.  28.— There  is  a  Are  gone  out  of 
Heshbon.  This  must  refer  to  the  war-fire 
which  the  Amorites  kindled  from  Heshbon 
when  they  made  it  the  capital  of  the  new 
kingdom.  Ar  Moab  and  the  (northern) 
heights  of -Amon  were  the  furthest  points  to 
which  their  victory  extended. 

Ver.  29.— 0  people  of  Chemosh.  E'-10?-Dy. 
Chemosh  was  the  national  god  of  the  Moab- 
ites  (1  Kings  xL  7  ;  Jer.  xlviii.  7),  and  also 
to  some  extent  of  the  Ammonites  (Judges  , 
xi.  24).  It  is  generally  agreed  that  the 
name  is  derived  from  the  root  CSS,  to  sub- 
due, and  thus  .will  have  substantially  the 
same  meaning  as  Milcom,  Molech,  and  Baal ; 
indeed  it  appears  probable  that  there  was  a 
strong  family  likeness  among  the  idolatries  of 
Palestine,  and  that  the  various  names  repre- 
sented different  attributes  of  one  supreme  be- 
ing rather  than  different  divinities.  Thus 
Baal  and  Ashtaroth  (Judg.ii.  13)  represented 
for  the  Zidonians  the  masculine  and  feminine 
elements  respectively  in  the  Divine  energy. 
Baal  himself  was  plural  (Baalim,  1  Kings 
xviii.  18)  in  form,  and  either  male  or  female 
(i;  /3«aX  in  Hosea  ii  8  ;  Eom.  li.  4).  In  the 
inscription  on  the  Moabite  stone  a  god 
"  Ashtar-Chemosh  "  is  mentioned,  and  thus 
Chemosh  is  identified  with  the  male  deity 
of  Phoenicia  (Ashtar  being  the  masculine 
form  of  Ashtoreth),  while,  on  the  other  hand, 
it  was  almost  certainly  the  same  divinity 
who  was  worshipped  under  another  name, 
and  with  other  rites,  as  Baal-Peor  (see  on 
ch.  XXV.  3).  On  the  coins  of  Areopolis 
Chemosh  appears  as  a  god  of  war  armed, 
with  fire-torches  by  his  side.  Human  sacri- 
fices were  offered  to  him  (2  Kings  iii.  26,  27), 
as  to  Baal  and  to  Moloch.  He  hath  given 
his  sons,  i.  e.  Chemosh,  who  could  not  say* 
his  own  votaries,  nor  the  children  of  hil 
people. 


at.  xzi.  10— zzn.  1.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS. 


tM 


Ver.  80.— We  have  shot  at  them.  DTJl. 
A  poetical  word  of  somewhat  doubtful  mean- 
ing. It  is  generally  supposed  to  be  a  verbal 
form  (first  person  plural  imperf.  Kal),  from 

iTIJ,  with  an  unusual  suffix  (of.  DE'3?J  for 
Dg'a!?;  in  Exod.  xxix.  80).  nij  has  the 
primary  meaning  "to  shoot  at,"  the  second- 
ary, "to  overthrow,"  as  in  Exod.  xv.  4. 
Others,  however,  derive  the  word  from  mS, 
a  root  supposed  to  mean  "bum."  Even 
unto  Sibon.  See  on  eh.  xxxii.  84.  The  site 
of  Nophah,  perhaps  the  Nobah  of  Judges 
viii.  11,  is  unknown.  Which  reacheth  unto 
Medeba.  The  reading  is  uncertain  here  as 
well  as  the  meaning.     The  received  text  has 

N3^''D"^I>  IB'X,  which  gives  no  meaning, 
but  the  circle  over  the  resh  marks  it  as 
suspicious.  The  Septuagint  (irDp  eiri  Mwo/3) 
and  the  Samaritan  evidently  read  CS?.  and 
this  has  been  generally  followed :  "  we  have 
wasted  even  unto  Nophah, — ^with  fire  unto 
Medeba."  Medeba,  of  which  the  ruins  are 
still  known  by  the  same  name,  lay  five  or 
six  miles  south-south-east  of  Heshbon.  It 
was  a  fortress  in  the  time  of  David  (1  Chron. 
xix.  7)  and  of  Omri,  as  appears  from  the 
Moabite  stone. 

Ver.  32. — Jaazer.  Perhaps  the  present 
es-Szlr,  some  way  to  the  north  of  Heshbon 
(see  on  Jer.  xlviii.  32).  This  victory  com- 
pleted the  conquest  of  Sihon's  kingdom. 

Ver.  33. — They  turned  and  went  up  by 
the  way  of  Bashan.  The  brevity  of  the 
narrative  does  not  allow  us  to  know  who 
went  upon  this  expedition,  or  why  they 
went.  It  may  have  been  only  the  detachment 
which  had  reconnoitred  and  taken  Jaazer, 
and  they  may  have  found  themselves  threat^ 
ened  by  the  forces  of  Og,  and  so  led  on  to 
further  conquests  beyond  the  Jabbok.  Og 
the  king  of  Bashan.  Og  was  himself  of  the 
aboriginal  giant  race  which  had  left  so  many 
remnants,  or  at  least  so  many  memories,  in 
these  regions  (see  on  Deut.  ii.  10 — 12,  20 — 
23  ;  Josh.  xii.  4  ;  liii.  12) ;  but  he  is  classed 
with  Sihon  as  a  king  of  the  Amorites  (Josh, 
ii.  10)  because  his  people  were  chiefly^  at 
least  of  that  race.  Bashan  itself  comprised 
the  plain  now  known  as  .Jaulan  and  Haulan 
beyond  the  Jarmuk  (now  Mandhur),  the 
largest  affluent  of  the  Jordan,  which  joins  it 


a  few  miles  below  the  lake  of  Tiberias.  Ths 
kingdom  of  Og,  however,  extended  over  the 
northern  and  larger  part  of  Gilead,  a  much 
more  fertile  territory  than  Bashan  proper 
(see  on  Dent.  iii.  1—17).  AtEdrei.  Probably 
the  modem  Edhra'ah,  or  Der'a,  situate  on  a 
branch  of  the  Jarmuk,  some  twenty-four 
miles  from  Bozrah.  The  ancient  city  lies 
buried  beneath  the  modern  village,  and  was 
built,  like  the  other  cities  of  Bashan,  in  the 
most  massive  style  of  architecture.  The 
cities  of  Og  were  so  strong  that  the  Israelites 
could  not  have  dispossessed  him  by  any 
might  of  their  own  if  he  had  abode  behind 
his  walls.  Either  confidence  in  his  warlike 
prowess  or  some  more  mysterious  cause  (see 
on  Josh.  xxiv.  12)  impelled  him  to  leave  his 
fortifications,  and  give  battle  to  the  Israelites 
to  his  own  utter  defeat. 

Ver.  34; — Fear  tiim  not.  He  might  well 
have  been  formidable,  not  only  on  account 
of  his  size  (cf.  Deut.  i.  28 ;  iii.  11 ;  1  Sam. 
xvii.  11),  but  from  the  formidable  nature  of 
those  walled  cities  which  are  stUl  a  wonder 
to  all  that  see  them. 

Ver.  35. — So  they  smote  him.  Acting 
under  the  direct  commands  of  God,  they  ex- 
terminated the  Amorites  of  the  northern  as 
they  had  of  the  southern  kingdom. 

Oh.  xxii.  1. — And  the  children  of  Israel 
get  forward.  Not  necessarily  after  the 
defeats  of  Sihon  and  Og  ;  it  is  quite  as  likely 
that  this  last  journey  was  made  while  the 
armies  were  away  on  their  northern  con- 
quests. And  pitched  in  the  plains  of  Moab. 
The  Arboth  Moab,  or  steppes  of  Moab,  were 
those  portions  of  the  Jordan  valley  which 
had  belonged  to  Moab  perhaps  as  far  north 
as  the  Jabbok.  In  this  sultry  depression, 
below  the  level  of  the  sea,  there  are  tracts  of 
fertile  and  well -watered  land  amidst  pre- 
vailing barrenness  (see  on  ch.  xxxiii.  49). 
On  this  side  Jordan  by  Jericho.  Rather, 
"  beyond  the  Jordan  of  Jericho,"  inn*  ]'r\i>. 
"I35)D.  On  the  phrase, ' '  beyond  the  Jordan  " 
("Persea"),  which  is  used  indifferently  of 
both  sides,  the  one  by  a  conventional,  the 
other  by  a  natural,  use,  see  on  Deut.  i  1. 
The  Jordan  of  Jericho  is  the  river  in  that 
part  of  its  course  where  it  flows  past  the  dis- 
trict of  Jericho. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  10— ch.  xxii.  1.— Progress  and  triumph.  In  this  passage,  which  has  a 
very  distinctive  character,  we  have,  spiritually,  the  rapid  progress  of  the  soul 
towards  rest,  and  the  first  great  triumphs  given  to  it  over  its  spiritual  foes,  after  that, 
by  the  power  of  the  cross  through  faith  in  him  that  was  lifted  up,  the  soul  has  been 
delivered  from  the  deadly  venom  of  the  sins  which  did  beset  it.  There  is  a  time 
when  the  soul  hangs  between  death  and  life  ;  there  is  a  time  when,  this  crisis  past, 
it  Bpeeds  onward  with  unexpected  ease  and  victory  towards  its  goal  in  the  full 


i84  TfiB  feOOfe  Of  NtJMBEfiS.         [oh.  jti.  lO— xxti.  1, 

■ssnrance  (n-Xijpo^opta,  as  nnder  full  sail)  of  faith.  Consider,  therefore,  with  respect 
to  these  last  Journeys — 

I.  That  apteb  the  LiFTiNa  up  of  the  brazen  serpent  the  progress  of  Israel 
WAS  SURPRISINGLY  RAPID  AND  DNINTERRUPTBD ;  most  markedly  80  if  Compared  with  the 
tedious  turnings  and  retumings  of  the  time  before.  This  journey  from  Mount  Hor 
to  Pisgah  occupied  at  most  five  months,  as  compared  with  the  thirty-nine  and  a  half 
years  wasted  theretofore.  Even  so  it  is  with  the  progress  of  the  soul  towards  the 
heavenly  rest.  Until  Christ  has  been  lifted  up,  and  the  poison  of  sin  overcome  through 
the  steadfast  gaze  of  faith  in  him,  there  can  be  no  real  progress,  only  a  drifting  to 
and  fro  in  the  wilderness.  But  after  that,  no  matter  how  difficult  the  road,  or  how 
many  the  foes,  the  soul  goes  forward  swift  and  unhindered  to  the  haven  where  it 
would  be. 

II.  That  after  the  brazen  serpent  we  hear  op  no  more  complainings  or 

REBELLIONS,  B0T,  ON  THE  CONTRARY,  WB  CATCH  THE  ECHOES  OF  A  GLAD  ALACRITY 

AND  OF  A  CHEERFUL  COURAGE.  Even  SO  the  soul  that  has  not  mastered  the  lesson 
nor  known  the  healing  of  the  cross  is  always  unhappy,  sure  to  complain,  and  ready 
to  despair ;  but  when  this  is  past  it  is  of  another  spirit,  joyful  through  hope,  patient 
through  faith,  obedient  through  love. 

III.  That  as  the  journey  drew  to  an  end  Israel  was  encouraged  to  use 
HIS  OWN  EFFORTS  TO  SUPPLY  HIS  NEEDS.  He  bought  bread  and  water  of  the  Edomites, 
and  dug  for  water  at  Beer,  and  probably  helped  himself  to  some  extent  to  the 
provisions  of  the  conquered  Amorites.  Even  so  the  soul  which  is  trained  by  grace 
for  glory  is  encouraged  more  and  more  to  co-operate  with  grace  and  to  "work  out  its 
own  salvation  "  not  because  it  can  do  without  supernatural  grace,  but  because  God 
is  plrased  to  give  his  grace  according  to  its  efforts. 

IV.  That  the  first  song  of  Israel  after  the  triumph  of  the  exodus,  forty 
years  before,  was  over  the  digging  of  a  well,  by  which  God  was  to  give  them 
water.  Even  so  our  work  of  faith,  and  that  labour  which  looks  for  blessing  from 
God,  is  the  only  condition  of  gladness  and  of  spiritual  songs.  And  note  that  this 
labour  was  shared  by  all,  the  very  nobles  beginning  the  work  with  their  staves  of 
office.  Thus  it  is  labour  in  a  good  cause  which  unites  us  all,  and  it  is  the  union  of 
all  that  promotes  a  glad  alacrity. 

Consider  again,  with  respect  to  these  first  victories — 

I.  That  the  conquests  beyond  Jordan  were  not  part,  so  to  speak,  of  God's 
original  plan  for  Israel.  If  Moab  had  been  still  in  possession  to  the  south  of 
Jabbok,  and  Ammon  to  the  north,  then  Israel  would  have  passed  straight  through 
and  over  Jordan  ;  it  was  the  fact  of  Sihon  having  extruded  the  Moabites  which  led 
to  these  conquests  of  Israel.  Even  so  it  is  often  the  case  that  the  triumphs  of 
Christian  principle  and  Christian  faith  are  forced  upon  us,  as  it  were,  by  the  action, 
and  the  evil  action,  of  others,  under  the  providence  of  God.  The  soul  that  would 
pass  quietly  on  its  way  to  heaven  is  driven  to  victories  of  faith  great  and  lasting  by 
the  unexpected  obstacles  in  its  way. 

II.  That  even  Sihon  was  approached  with  words  of  peace,  if  he  would  have 
HAD  peace.  Even  so  it  becomes  us  to  live  peaceably  with  all  men,  even  with  the 
profane  and  accursed,  if  it  be  possible.  He  that  forces  on  a  conflict  with  evil  men 
or  evil  passion,  even  if  that  conflict  be  indeed  inevitable,  may  thereby  forfeit  the 
grace  of  God.  Courtesy  and  forbearance  before  the  encounter  are  the  best  pledges 
for  courage  and  success  in  the  encounter. 

III.  That  Sihon,  although  conquebob  of  Moab,  and  much  more  formidable 

THAN   THE  CANAANITES  WHOM   ISRAEL   HAD   FEARED  AT   KADESH,  FELL   EASILY  BECAUSB 

Israel  fought  in  faith.  There  is  no  adversary  that  can  really  ofEer  any  effectual 
opposition  to  our  onward  march  if  assailed  in  the  strength  of  Christ  with  a  cheerful 
courage.  , 

IV.  That  Oq  the  king  of  Bashan  was  much  more  formidable  even  than  Sihon, 
tkt  he  seems  to  have  fallen  yet  more  easily,  judging  from  the  brief  notice  of  the 
conquest.  Even  so  when  once  we  have  overcome  a  difficulty  or  conquered  an  evil 
habit  in  the  strength  of  faith,  other  conquests  open  out  before  us  readily  and 
naturally  which  we  should  not  have  dared  to  contemplate  before.  It  is  most  true  in 
ftli^on  that  "nothing  succeeds  like  success." 


OH.  XXI.  10— XXII.  1.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  2M 

V.  That  the  east  overthrow  op  Sihon  and  Og  was  providentially  ordekbd  m 
God  for  the  purpose  of  encouraging  and  animating  Israel  for  the  great  work 
of  conquest  in  Canaan  proper  (see  Ps.  czxxvi.  17 — 22).  Even  so  to  the  faithful 
soul  that  fears  the  great  strife  against  sin,  God  is  often  pleased  to  give  some 
anticipatory  victories  of  singular  moment  in  order  to  inspire  it  with  a  dauntless 
confidence  in  him. 

VI.  That  when  Israel  reached  Canaan  proper  he  was  already  possessed  of  a 
large  and  valuable  territory,  which  God  had  enabled  him  to  win  by  his  own 
sword.  Even  so  when  the  soul  shall  reach  its  heavenly  rest  it  will  not  only  enter 
into  its  reward,  but  it  will,  as  it  were,  take  a  part  of  its  reward  with  it,  gained 
already  on  this  side  the  river.  Thus  it  is  said  of  the  dead  that  "  their  works  do 
follow  them ; "  and  thus  the  apostles  were  bidden  to  bring  of  the  fish  which  they  had 
caught  to  add  to  that  heavenly  meal  (John  xxi.  9,  10).  What  we  have  achieved  bv 
the  grace  of  God  here  will  be  part  of  our  reward  there. 

Consider  once  more,  with  respect  to  the  well  of  Beer — 

I.  That  a  well  was  a  perpetual  source  of  comfort  and  centre  of  blessing  ; 
hence  so  many  of  the  events  of  Scripture  are  connected  with  wells.  Even  so  in  the 
gospel  there  are  wells  of  salvation  (Isa.  xii.  3),  from  which  a  man  may  draw  with 
joy ;  nor  only  so,  but  he  shall  have  a  well  of  life  in  himself  which  shall  never  fail 
(John  iv.  14 ;  vii.  38). 

II.  That  to  this  well  Moses  was  to  gather  the  people  ;  God  was  to  give  them 
WATER.  Even  so  in  the  Church  of  God  it  is  the  part  of  human  leaders  to  gather  the 
people  together,  to  direct  their  search,  to  combine  their  efforts  ;  but  it  is  the  part  of 
God,  and  of  God  only,  to  give  the  spiritual  blessing  and  refreshment.  So  too,  in 
another  sense,  Moses  in  the  Pentateuch  gathers  the  people  to  a  well,  a  well  full  of 
Divine  consolation  and  knowledge,  and  God  will  give  them  water  if  they  seek  in 
faith. 

III.  That  Israel  sang  over  the  well,  or  rather  over  the  place  where  God 
promised  them  water.  Even  so  it  is  ours  to  sing  and  make  melody  in  our  hearts, 
and  to  encourage  ourselves  and  others  with  spiritual  songs,  while  we  seek  and  labour 
for  the  sure  mercies  of  God. 

IV.  That  the  princes  and  nobles  digged  the  well.  Even  so  that  God  only 
gives  spiritual  blessings  does  not  dispense  with,  but,  on  the  contrary,  requires  and 
encourages,  earnest  effort  on  our  part.  In  a  settled  and  ordinary  religious  state  the 
fountains  of  salvation  must  not  be  expected  to  gush  in  a  moment  from  the  rock,  but 
must  be  dug  for  in  wells.  So  too  they  that  are  most  eminent  in  the  Church  of  God 
must  be  foremost  in  labour  for  this  purpose. 

V.  That  they  dug  by  the  direction  of  the  lawgiver.  If  they  had  dug  where 
fancy  or  even  their  own  experience  guided  them,  they  had  not  found  water.  Even 
BO  when  we  seek  the  supply  of  grace  and  of  the  Spirit  of  God  we  must  seek  it  by 
the  direction  of  the  one  Lawgiver  (Matt  vii.  29  ;  James  iv.  12),  in  implicit  obedience 
to  him. 

VI.  That  the  nobles  and  princes  dug  the  well  with  their  states,  the  insignia 
of  their  ofiice.  Even  so  in  the  Church  of  God,  if  men  will  labour  for  the  common 
good,  it  must  be  according  to  the  station  which  God  hath  given  them.  If  they  have 
received  authority,  they  must  use  authority ;  if  they  bear  a  commission,  they  must  not 
be  ashamed  of  it.  It  may  be  easier  to  act  merely  as  one  of  the  throng ;  it  does  not 
follow  it  is  right 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Vers.  10 — 35. — A  period  of  unbroken  progress.  The  lifted  serpent  and  the  spirit 
of  faith  excited  among  the  people  produce  not  only  the  immediate  and  direct  effect 
of  healing ;  certain  other  encouraging  effects  are  not  obscurely  indicated  in  the 
remainder  of  the  chapter.  The  events  recorded  must  have  extended  over  soma 
considerable  time,  and  they  took  the  Israelites  into  very  trying  circumstances,  but 
ti^ere  i?  n^t  §  W9i4  o|  failure,  munnurin^,  or  pinne  displevw?.    Tbe  narr«^ve  )« 


286  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [ch.  xxi.  10— xxu.  1 

all  the  other  way,  and  in  this  surely  there  must  be  some  typical  significance.  Look- 
ing to  the  lifted  serpent  made  a  great  difference.  All  things  had  become  new  ; 
there  was  alacrity,  success,  gladness,  hitherto  lacking — a  spirit  and  conduct  altogether 
different.  So  Paul,  speaking  of  those  who  are  justified  by  faith,  and  have  peace 
with  God,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  goes  on  to  indicate  for  them  a  course  of 
satisfaction  and  triumph,  which  is  in  things  spiritual  what  the  course  of  Israel, 
as  recorded  in  the  remainder  of  this  chapter,  was  in  things  typical  and  temporal 
(Rom.  v.). 

L  Thby  advance  up  to  a  cbbtain  point  without  hindeancb  op  any  sobt.  We 
hear  nothing  more  of  this  difficult  and  depressing  way  which  had  troubled  them  bo 
much.  Nothing  ia  spoken  of  as  arresting  their  progress  till  they  come  to  the  top  of 
Pisgah.  God  takes  them  right  onward  to  the  place  where  afterward  he  showed 
Moses  the  promised  land,  and  the  hindrance  which  comes  there  iafrom  outside  them- 
selves.  It  is  not  the  lusting  and  murmuring  of  the  people  that  come  in  the  way,  nor 
is  it  a  craven  fear  of  the  enemy,  nor  the  ambition  and  envy  of  a  Korah.  It  is  the 
enemy  himself  who  comes  in  the  way,  and  of  course  he  must  be  expected,  and  may 
be  amply  prepared  for. 

II.  DUEING  THE  ADVANOB  THERE  WAS    MUCH    SATISFACTION    AND    JOY.      It    Was    a 

negative  blessing,  and  much  to  be  thankful  for,  to  have  no  murmurings  and  discords. 
It  was  a  positive  blessing,  and  even  more  to  be  thankful  for,  to  take  part  in  such  a 
scene  as  that  at  Beer.  How  different  from  Marah,  Rephidim,  and  Meribah,  where 
God's  mercy  came  amid  complainings  I  from  Meribah  especially,  where  the  mercy 
was  accompanied  with  judgments  on  the  leaders  of  the  people.  Here,  unsolicited, 
God  gives  water ;  he  makes  the  princes  and  nobles  of  the  people  his  fellow-workers ; 
and,  above  all,  the  voices  so  long  used  in  murmuring  now  sounded  forth  the  sweet 
song  of  praise.  The  Lord  indeed  put  a  new  song  in  their  mouth.  There  had  been  a 
sad  want  of  music  before.  There  had  been  loud  rejoicings  indeed  at  the  Red  Sea, 
but  that  was  a  long  while  ago.  It  was  something  new  for  the  people  to  sing  as  they 
did  here.  Where  there  is  saving  faith  in  the  heart,  joy  surely  follows,  and  praise 
springs  to  the  lip. 

III.  ISBAEL   MAKES  A  COMPLETE   CONQUEST   OP  THE   FIRST  ENEMY  HE  MEETS.      Israel 

did  not  want  Sihon  to  be  an  enemy.  He  offered  to  go  through  his  land,  as  through 
Edom,  a  harmless  and  speedy  traveller.  If  the  world  will  block  the  way  of  the 
Church,  it  must  suffer  the  inevitable  consequence.  Sihon,  emboldened  doubtless  by 
the  knowledge  of  Israel's  turning  away  from  Edom,  presumed  that  he  would  prove 
an  easy  prey.  But  Sihon  neither  knew  why  Israel  turned  away  nor  how  strong 
Israel  now  was.  The  people  were  no  longer  discouraged  because  of  the  way,  though 
they  were  contending  not  against  the  adversities  of  nature,  but  against  the  united 
forces  of  Sihon  struggling  for  the  very  existence  of  their  land. 

IV.  There  is  an  occupation  of  the  enemy's  territory  (vers.  25,  31)i  "  Israel 
dwelt  in  the  land  of  the  Amorites."  There  was  thus  an  earnest  of  the  rest  and 
possession  of  Canaan,  a  foretaste  of  city  and  settled  life  that  must  have  been  very 
inspiring  to  people  so  long  wandering,  and  having  no  dwelling  more  substantial  than 
the  tent. 

V.  There  is  continued  victoey.  The  second  hindrance  disappears  after  the 
first.  Og,  king  of  Bashan,la8t  of  the  giants  (Deut.  iii.  11),  fared  no  better  for  all  Lis 
strength  than  Sihon.  It  was  not  some  peculiar  weakness  of  Sihon  that  overthrew 
him.  All  enemies  of  God,  however  different  in  resource  they  may  appear  when 
they  measure  themselves  among  themselves,  are  alike  to  those  who  march  in  the 
strength  of  God.  The  power  by  which  the  Christian  conquers  one  foe  will  enable 
him  to  conquer  all.  And  yet  because  Og  did  look  more  formidable  than  Sihon,  God 
gave  his  people  special  encouragement  in  meeting  him  (ver.  34).  God  remembers 
that  even  the  most  faithful  and  ardent  of  his  people  cannot  get  entirely  above  the 
deceitfulness  of  outward  appearances. 

VI.  There  is  great  energy  in  destroying  what  is  evil.  Israel  asks  and  ia 
refused  a  way  through  the  land  of  brother  Edom,  and  then  quietly  turns  aside  to 
seek  another  way.  By  and  by  he  asks  Sihon  for  a  peaceful  way  through  his  land,  and 
ia  again  refused,  whereupon  he  conquers  and  occupies  the  land.  But  Og  did  not  wait 
to  be  asked,  perhaps  would  not  have  been  asked  if  he  bad  waited.    It  was  a  case  of 


OHB.  XMI.— XXIV.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEE8.  287 

presumptuous  opposition  in  spite  of  the  warning  fall  of  Sihon.  And  what  made  Og's 
opposition  especially  evil,  looked  at  typically,  was  that  he  interposed  the  last  barrier 
before  reaching  Jordan.  Having  conquered  him,  Israel  was  free  to  go  right  on  and 
pitch  "  in  the  jjlains  of  Moab,  on  this  side  Jordan,  by  Jericho."  Og,  therefore,  is 
the  type  of  evil  fighting  desperately  in  its  last  stronghold.  And  similarly  the 
destroying  energy  of  Israel  seems  to  show  how  utterly  evil  will  be  smitten  by  the 
believer,  when  he  meets  it  even  at  the  vsrge  of  Jordan.  Thus  we  have  a  cheering 
record  of  unbroken  progress  from  the  time  the  people  looked  to  the  lifted  serpent 
to  the  time  when  they  entered  on  the  plains  of  Moab. — Y. 


PBELIMINAEY  NOTE  TO  CHAPTEK  XXII.  2— XXIV. 

That  this  section  of  the  Book  of  Numbers  has  a  character  to  a  great  extent  peculiar 
and  isolated  is  evident  upon  the  face  of  it.  The  arguments  indeed  derived  from  its 
language  and  style  to  prove  that  it  is  by  a  different  hand  from  the  rest  of  the  Book 
are  obviously  too  slight  and  doubtful  to  be  of  any  weight ;  there  does  not  seem  to 
be  any  more  diversity  in  this  respect  than  the  difference  of  subject  matter  would 
lead  us  to  expect.  The  peculiarity,  however,  of  this  section  is  evident  from  the  fact 
that  these  three  chapters,  confessedly  so  important  and  interesting  in  themselves, 
might  be  taken  away  without  leaving  any  perceptible  void.  From  ch.  xxii.  1  the 
narrative  is  continued  in  ch.  xxv.,  apparently  without  a  break,  and  in  that  chapter 
there  is  no  mention  of  Balaam.  It  is  only  in  ch.  xxxi.  (vers.  8,  16)  thai  two  passing 
allusions  are  made  to  him :  in  the  one  his  death  is  noted  without  comment ;  in  the 
other  we  are  made  acquainted  for  the  first  Ajao  with  a  fact  which  throws  a  most 
important  light  upon  his  character  and  career,  of  which  no  hint  is  given  in  the 
section  before  us.  Thus  it  is  evident  that  the  story  of  Balaam's  coming  and  prophe- 
cies, although  imbedded  in  the  narrative  (and  that  in  the  right  place  as  to  order  of 
time),  is  not  structurally  connected  with  it,  but  forms  an  episode  by  itself.  If  we  now 
take  this  section,  which  is  thus  isolated  and  self-contained,  we  shall  not  fail  to  see  at 
once  that  its  literary  character  is  strikingly  peculiar.  It  is  to  all  intents  and  purposes 
a  sacred  drama  wherein  characters  and  events  of  the  highest  interest  are  handled 
with  consummate  art.  No  one  can  be  insensible  to  this,  whatever  construction  he  may 
or  may  not  put  upon  it.  Probably  the  story  of  Balaam  was  never  made  the  subject 
of  a  miracle  play,  because  the  character  of  the  chief  actor  is  too  subtle  for  the  crude 
intelligence  of  the  age  of  miracle  plays.  But  if  the  sacred  drama  were  ever  reintro- 
duced, it  is  certain  that  no  more  effective  play  could  be  found  than  that  of  Balaam 
and  Balak.  The  extraordinary  skill  with  which  the  strangely  complex  character  of 
the  wizard  prophet  is  drawn  out ;  the  felicity  with  which  it  is  contrasted  with  the 
rude  simplicity  of  Balak  ;  the  picturesque  grandeur  of  the  scenery  and  incident ;  and 
the  art  with  which  the  story  leads  up  by  successive  stages  to  the  final  and  complete 
triumph  of  God  and  of  Israel,  are  worthy,  from  a  merely  artistic  point  of  view,  of  the 
greatest  of  dramatic  poets. 

There  is  no  such  minute  drawing  out  of  an  isolated  character  by  means  of  speech 
and  incident  to  be  found  in  the  Old  Testament,  unless  it  be  in  the  Book  of  Job,  the 
dramatic  form  of  which  serves  to  give  point  to  the  comparison  ;  but  few  would  fail 
to  see  that  the  much  more  subtle  character  of  Balaam  is  far  more  distinctly  indicated 
than  that  of  Job.  Balaam  is  emphatically  a  "  study,"  and  must  have  been  intended 
to  be  so.  Yet  it  must  be  remembered  that  it  is  only  to  modern  eyes  that  this  part  of 
the  varied  truth  and  wisdom  of  Holy  Scripture  has  become  qianif  eat.    To  the  J«w 


tt8  THE  BOOK  OF  NnMBEB&  [ohs.  xxih—xxn. 

Balaam  was  mterestiiig  only  as  a  great  foe,  greatly  baffled ;  as  a  sorcerer  whose 
ghostly  power  and  craft  was  broken  and  turned  backward  by  the  God  of  Israel 
(Deut.  zxiii.  5 ;  Josh,  xiii.  22 ;  zxiv.  10 ;  Micah  yi.  6).  To  the  Christian  of  the  first 
age  he  was  only  interesting  as  the  Scriptural  type  of  the  subtlest  and  most  dangerous 
kind  of  enemy  whom  the  Church  of  God  had  to  dread — the  enemy  who  united 
spiritual  pretensions  with  persuasions  to  vice  (Rev.  ii.  14).  To  the  more  critical 
intellects  of  later  ages,  such  even  as  Augustine  and  Jerome,  he  was  altogether  a 
puzzle ;  the  one  regarding  him  as  prophetam  diaboli,  whose  religion  was  a  mere 
cloak  for  eovetousnesi ;  the  other  as  prophetam  Dei,  whose  fall  was  like  unto  the 
fall  of  the  old  prophet  of  Bethel.  The  two  parallel  allusions  to  his  character  in  2 
Pet.  ii.  15,  16 ;  Jude  11  do  not  take  us  any  further,  merely  turning  upon  the  covet- 
ousness  which  was  his  most  obvious  fault.  Unquestionably,  however,  Balaam  is 
most  interesting  to  us,  not  from  any  of  these  points  of  view,  but  as  a  study  drawn  by 
an  inspired  hand  of  a  strangely  but  most  naturally  mixed  character,  the  broad  features 
of  which  are  constantly  being  reproduced,  in  the  same  unhallowed  union,  in  men 
of  all  lands  and  ages.  This  is  undeniably  one  of  the  instances  (not  perhaps  very 
numerous)  in  which  the  more  trained  and  educated  intelligence  of  modem  days  has 
a  distinct  advantage  over  the  simpler  faith  and  intenser  piety  of  the  first  ages.  The 
conflict,  or  rather  the  compromise,  in  Balaam  between  true  religion  and  superstitious 
imposture,  between  an  actual  Divine  inspiration  and  the  practice  of  heathen  sorceries, 
between  devotion  to  God  and  devotion  to  money,  was  an  unintelligible  puzzle  to  men 
of  old.  To  those  who  have  grasped  the  character  of  a  Louis  XI.,  of  a  Luther,  or  of 
an  Oliver  Cromwell,  or  have  gauged  the  mixture  of  highest  and  lowest  in  the 
religious  movements  of  modern  history,  the  wonder  is,  not  that  such  an  one  should 
have  been,  but  that  such  an  one  should  have  been  bo  simply  and  yet  so  skilfully 
depicted. 

Two  questions  arise  pre-eminently  out  of  the  story  of  Balaam  which  our  want  of 
knowledge  forbidj  us  to  answer  otherwise  than  doubtfully. 

I.  Whence  did  Balaam  derive  his  knowledge  of  the  true  God,  and  how  far  did  it' 
extend  ?  Was  he,  as  some  have  argued,  a  heathen  sorcerer  who  took  to  invoking 
Jehovah  because  circumstances  led  him  to  believe  that  the  cause  of  Jehovah  wm 
likely  to  be  the  winning  cause  ?  and  did  the  God  whom  he  invoked  in  this  mercenary 
spirit  (after  the  fashion  of  the  sons  of  Sceva)  take  advantage  of  the  fact  to  obtain 
an  ascendancy  over  his  mind,  and  to  compel  his  nnwilling  obedience?  Such  an 
assumption  seems  at  once  unnatural  and  unnecessary.  It  is  hardly  conceivable  that 
God  should  have  bestowed  a  true  prophetic  gift  upon  one  who  stood  in  such  a  rela- 
tion to  him.  Moreover,  the  kind  of  ascendancy  which  the  word  of  God  had  over 
the  mind  of  Balaam  is  not  one  which  springs  from  calculation,  or  from  a  mere  intel- 
lectual persuasion.  The  man  who  lives  before  us  in  these  chapters  has  not  only  a 
considerable  knowledge  of,  but  a  very  large  amount  of  faith  in,  the  one  true  God ; 
he  walks  with  God ;  he  sees  him  that  is  invisible ;  the  presence  of  God,  and  God's 
direct  concern  about  his  doings  are  as  familiar  and  unquestioned  elements  of  his 
every-day  life  as  they  were  of  Abraham's.  In  a  word  (whatever  difficulties  a  shallow 
theology  may  find  in  the  fact),  he  has  religious  faith  in  God,  a  faith  which  is  natur- 
ally strong,  and  has  been  further  intensified  by  special  revelations  of  the  unseen ; 
and  this  faith  is  the  basis  and  condition  of  his  prophetic  gift.  Balaam's  religion, 
therefore,  on  this  side  was  neither  an  hypocrisy  nor  an  assumption ;  it  was  a  real 
conviction  which  had  grown  up  with  him  and  formed  part  of  his  inner  self.  It  is 
line  that  ill  Josh.  ziiL  2?  he  is  called  a  soothsayer  (^kosem),  a  name  of  reproach  aQ4 


CHSt  XXII.— XXIV.)  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  289 

infamy  among  the  Jews  (of.  1  Sam.  xv.  23,  "witchcraft ; "  Jer.  xiv.  14,  "  divination  ") ; 
but  no  one  doubts  that  he  played  for  gain  the  part  of  a  soothsayer,  employing  with 
more  or  less  of  inward  unbelief  and  contempt  the  arts  of  heathen  sorcery ;  and  it  was 
quite  natural  that  Joshua  should  recognise  only  the  lower  and  more  obvious  side  of 
his  enemy's  character. 

It  remains  then  to  consider  bow  Balaam,  living  in  Mesopotamia,  could  have  had  so 
considerable  a  knowledge  of  the  true  God ;  and  the  only  satisfactory  answer  is  this, 
that  such  knowledge  had  never  disappeared  from  that  region.  Every  glimpse  which 
is  afEorded  us  of  the  descendants  of  Nahor  in  their  Mesopotamian  home  confirms  the 
belief  that  they  were  substantially  at  one  with  the  chosen  family  in  religious  feeling 
and  religious  speech.  Bethuel  and  Lahan  acknowledged  the  same  God,  and  called 
him  by  the  same  name  as  Isaac  and  Jacob  (Gen.  xxiv.  50 ;  xxxi.  49).  No  doubt 
idolatrous  practices  prevailed  in  their  household  (Gen.  xxxi.  19 ;  xxxt.  2 ;  Josh, 
xxiv.  2),  but  that,  however  dangerous,  was  not  fatal  to  the  existence  of  the  true  faith 
amongst  them,  any  more  than  is  the  existence  of  a  similar  cultus  amongst  Christians. 
Centuries  had  indeed  passed  away  since  the  days  of  Laban,  and  during  those  centu- 
ries we  may  well  conclude  that  the  common  people  had  developed  the  idolatroua 
practices  of  their  fathers,  until  they  wholly  obscured  the  worship  of  the  one  true 
God.  But  the  lapse  of  years  and  the  change  of  popular  belief  make  little  differ- 
ence to  the  secret  and  higher  teaching  of  countries  like  the  Mesopotamia  of  that  age, 
which  is  intensely  conservative  both  for  good  and  evil.  Men  like  Balaam,  who 
probably  had  an  hereditary  claim  to  his  position  as  a  seer,  remained  purely  mono- 
theistic in  creed,  and  in  their  hearts  called  only  upon  the  God  of  all  the  earth,  the 
God  of  Abraham  and  of  Nahor,  of  Melchizedec  and  of  Job,  of  Laban  and  of  Jacob. 
If  we  knew  enough  of  the  religious  history  of  that  land,  it  is  possible  that  we  might 
be  able  to  point  to  a  tolerably  complete  succession  of  gifted  (in  many  cases  Divinely- 
gifted)  men,  servants  and  worshippers  of  the  one  true  God,  down  to  the  Magi  who 
first  hailed  the  rising  of  the  bright  and  morning  Star. 

There  is  connected  with  this  question  another  of  much  narrower  interest  which 
causes  great  perplexity.  Balaam  (and  indeed  Balak  too)  freely  uses  the  sacred  name 
by  which  God  had  revealed  himself  as  the  God  of  Israel  (see  on  Exod.  vi.  2,  3). 
There  are  two  views  of  this  matter,  one  or  other  of  which  is  tolerably  certain,  and 
for  both  of  which  much  may  be  said :  either  the  sacred  name  was  widely  known 
and  used  beyond  the  limits  of  Israel,  or  else  the  sacred  historian  must  have  freely 
put  It  into  the  mouths  of  people  who  actually  used  some  other  name.  There  are 
also  two  views  both  of  which  may  be  summarily  rejected,  because  their  own  advo- 
cates have  reduced  them  to  absolute  absurdity :  the  one  is,  that  the  use  of  the  two 
names  Elohim  and  Jehovah  shows  a  difference  of  authorship ;  the  other,  that  they  are 
employed  by  the  same  author  with  variety  of  sense— Elohim  (God)  being  the  God 
of  nature,  Jehovah  (the  Lord)  the  God  of  grace.  It  is  no  doubt  true  that  there  are 
passages  where  the  sole  use,  or  the  pointed  use,  of  one  or  other  of  these  names  does 
really  point  to  a  diversity  either  of  authorship  or  of  meaning  ;  but  it  is  abundantly 
clear  that  in  the  general  narrative  of  Scripture,  including  these  chapters,  not  the 
least  distinction  whatever  can  be  drawn  between  the  use  of  Elohim  and  Jehovah 
which  will  stand  the  simplest  test  of  common  sense ;  the  same  ingenuity  which 
explains  the  occurrence  of  Elohim  instead  of  Jehovah  in  any  particular  sentence 
would  find  an  explanation  quite  as  satisfactory  if  it  were  Jehovah  instead  of 
Elohim. 
II.  Whence  did  Moses  obtain  bia  knowledge  of  the  incidents  hera  recorded,  many 

NTMBEBS.  B 


290 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[OHS.  XXII.->Xs.( 


of  which  must  have  been  known  to  Balaam  alone?  Was  it  directly,  by  revelation ; 
or  from  some  memorials  left  by  Balaam  himself? 

The  former  suppoBition,  once  generally  held,  is  as  generally  abandoned  now, 
because  it  is  perceived  that  inspiration  over-ruled  and  utilised  for  Divine  purposes, 
but  did  not  supersede,  natural  sources  of  information.  The  latter  supposition  is 
rendered  more  probable  by  these  considerations : — 1.  That  a  man  of  Balaam's  character 
and  training  would  be  very  likely  to  put  on  record  the  remarkable  things  which  had 
happened  to  himself.  Such  men  who  habitually  lead  a  double  life  are  often  keenly 
alive  to  their  own  errors,  and  are  singularly  frank  in  writing  themselves  down  for 
the  benefit  of  posterity.  2.  That  Balaam  was  slain  among  the  Midianites,  and  that 
his  effects  must  have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  victors.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is 
inconceivable  that  Balaam,  being  what  he  was,  should  have  written  these  chapters  at 
all  as  they  stand  ;  the  moral  and  religious  intent  of  the  story  is  too  evident  in  itself, 
and  is  too  evidently  governed  by  Jewish  faith  and  feeling.  It  may  be  allowable  to 
put  it  before  the  reader  as  an  opinion  which  may  or  may  not  be  true,  but  which  is 
quite  compatible  with  profound  belief  in  the  inspired  truth  of  this  part  of  God's 
word,  that  Moses,  having  obtained  the  facts  in  the  way  above  indicated,  was  moved 
to  work  them  up  into  the  dramatic  form  in  which  they  now  appear — a  form  which 
undoubtedly  brings  out  the  character  of  the  actors,  the  struggle  between  light  and 
darkness,  and  the  final  triumph  of  light,  with  much  more  force  (and  therefore  much 
more  truth)  than  anything  else  could.  If  it  be  objected  that  this  gives  a  fictitious 
character  to  the  narrative,  it  may  be  replied  that  when  the  imagination  is  called  into 
exercise  to  present  actual  facts,  existing  characters,  and  prophecies  really  uttered  in 
a  striking  light, — and  that  under  the  over-ruling  guidance  of  the  Divine  Spirit,— the 
result  cannot  be  called  fictitious  in  any  bad  or  unworthy  sense.  If  it  be  added  that 
such  a  theory  attributes  to  this  section  a  character  different  from  the  rest  of  the  Book, 
it  may  be  allowed  at  once.  The  episode  of  Balaam  and  Balak  is  obviously,  as  to 
literary  form,  distinct  from  and  strongly  contrasted  with  the  narrative  which  precedes 
and  follows. 

It  has  been  made  a  question  as  to  the  language  in  which  Balaam  and  his  companions 
spoke  and  wrote.  The  discovery  of  the  Moabite  stone  has  made  it  certain  that  the 
language  of  the  Moabites,  and  in  all  probability  of  the  other  races  descended  from 
Abraham  and  Lot,  was  practically  the  same  as  the  language  of  the  Jews.  Balaam's 
own  tongue  may  have  been  Aramaic,  but  amongst  his  western  friends  and  patrons 
be  would  no  doubt  be  perfectly  ready  to  speak  as  they  spoke. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


The  coming  op  Balaam  (vers.  2—40). 
Ver.  2. — Balak  the  son  of  Zippor.  The 
uame  Balak  is  connected  with  a  word  "to 
make  waste,"  and  "  Zippor  "  is  a  small  bird. 
Balak  was,  as  is  presently  explained,  the 
king  of  Moab  at  this  time,  but  not  the  king 
from  whom  Sihon  had  wrested  so  much  of 
his  territory  (ch.  xxi.  26).  He  seems  to  be 
mentioned  by  name  on  a  papyrus  in  the 
British  Museum  (see  Brngsoh,  '  Geogr.  In- 
Bchr.,'  ii.  p.  32).  The  later  Jews  made  him 
out  to  have  been  a  Midianite,  but  this  is 
notliiiig  but  the  merest  coi]jectura. 


Ver.  8. — Koab  was  lore  afraid  of  tli« 
people.  While  the  Israelites  had  moved 
along  their  eastern  and  north-eastern  border, 
the  Moabites  supplied  them  with  provisions 
(Deut.  li.  29),  desiring,  no  doubt,  to  be  rid 
of  them,  but  not  disdaining  to  make  some 
profit  by  their  presence.  But  after  the 
sudden  defeat  and  overthrow  of  their  own 
Amoiite  conquerors,  their  terror  and  uneasi- 
ness forced  them  to  take  some  action,  al- 
though they  dared  not  commence  op^n  hos- 
tilities. 

Ver.  4. — Moab  said  unto  the  elders  of 
Mldian.  The  Midianites  were  descended 
from  Abraham  and  Keturah  (Gen.  xzv.  t. 


OH.  XXII.  2—10.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEB8. 


»1 


t),  and  were  thus  more  nearly  of  kin  to  Israel 
than  to  Moab.  They  lived  a  semi-nomadio 
life  on  the  steppes  to  the  east  of  Moab  and 
Ammon  (cf.  Gen.  xxxvL  35),  supporting 
themselves  partly  by  grazing,  and  partly  by 
the  caravan  trade  (Gen.  xxxvii.  28).  Their 
institutions  were  no  doubt  patriarchal,  like 
those  of  the  modem  Bedawin,  and  the 
"elders"  were  the  sheiks  of  their  tribes. 
As  the  oz  licketh  np  the  grass  of  the  field. 
The  strong,  scythe-like  sweep  of  the  ox's 
tongue  was  a  simile  admirable  in  itself,  and 
most  suitable  to  pastoral  Moab  and  Midian. 
Yer.  6.— Se  sent  messengers  therefore. 
It  appears  from  ver.  7  that  Balak  acted  for 
Midian  as  well  as  for  Moab  ;  as  the  Midian- 
ites  were  but  a  weak  people,  they  may  have 
placed  themselves  more  or  less  under  the 
protection  of  Balak.     Unto  Balaam  the  son 

of  Beor.  DJ)?3  (Bileam  :  our  common  form 
ii  from  the  Septuagint  and  Kew  Testament, 
BaXaa/i)is  derived  either  from  V73,  to  destroy 
or  devour,  and  D^,  the  people ;  or  simply 
from  JJ73,  with  the  terminal  syllable  D— , 
"  the  destroyer."  The  former  derivation  re- 
ceives some  support  from  Kev.  ii.  14,  16, 
where  "  Nicolaitans "  are  thought  by  many 
to  be  only  a  Greek  form  of  "  Balaamites  " 
(SiKoXaog,  from  vixdu)  and  Xaog).  Beor 
("lW3)  has  a  similar  signification,  from  13^3, 
to  bum,  or  consume.  Both  names  have 
probable  reference  to  the  supposed  efifect  of 
their  maledictions,  for  successful  cursing  was 
an  hereditaiy  profession  in  many  lands,  as  it 
still  is  in  some.  Beor  appears  in  2  Pet.  ii. 
15  as  Bosor,  which  is  called  a  Chaldeeism, 
but  the  origin  of  the  change  is  really  un- 
known. A  "Bela  son  of  Beor"  is  named 
in  Gen.  xxxvi.  32  as  reigning  In  Edom,  but 
the  coincidence  is  of-  no  importance :  kings 
and  magicians  have  always  loved  to  give 
themselves  names  of  fear,  and  their  voca- 
bulary was  not  extensive.  To  Pethor,  which 
is  by  the  river  of  the  land  of  the  children 
of  his  people.  Rather,  "which  is  on  the 
river,"  i.e.  the  great  river  Euphrates,  "in 
the  land  of  the  children  of  his  people,"  i.  e. 
in  his  native  land.  The  situation  of  Pethor 
(Septuagint,  iaiovpa)  is  unknown.  Here  is 
a  people  come  out  of  Egypt.  Forty  years 
had  passed  since  their  fathers  had  left  Egypt. 
Yet  Balak's  words  expressed  a  great  truth, 
for  this  people  was  no  wandering  desert 
tribe,  but  for  all  intents  the  same  great 
organised  nation  which  had  spoiled  Egypt, 
and  left  Pharaoh's  host  dead  behind  them. 

They  abide  over  against  me.  v^D.  Sep- 
tuagint, ixoiiivog  jiov.  This  would  hardly 
have  been  said  when  Israel  was  encamped 
thirty  miles  north  of  Arnon,  opposite  to 
Jericho.    The  two  embassies  to  Balaam  must 


have  occupied  some  time,  and  in  the  mean 
while  Israel  would  have  gone  further  on  hia 
way.  We  may  naturally  conclude  that  the 
first  message  was  sent  immediately  after  the 
defeat  of  Sihon,  at  a  time  when  Israel  waa 
encamped  very  near  the  border  of  Moab. 

Yer.  6. — I  wot  that  he  whom  thon  blesi- 
est  is  blessed,  and  he  whom  thon  cnrsest  !• 
cnised.  This  was  the  language  of  flattery 
intended  to  secure  the  prophet's  services. 
"So  doubt,  however,  Balak,  Ukeother  heathens, 
had  a  profound  though  capricious  belief  in 
the  real  eflect  of  curses  and  anathemas  pro- 
nounced by  men  who  had  private  intercourse 
and  influence  with  the  unseen  powers.  That 
error,  like  most  superstitions,  was  the  per- 
version of  a  truth ;  there  are  both  benedic- 
tions and  censures  which,  uttered  by  human 
lips,  carry  with  them  the  sanction  and  en- 
forcement of  Heaven.  The  error  of  antiquity 
lay  in  ignorance  or  forgetfulness  that,  as 
water  cannot  rise  higher  than  its  source,  so 
neither  blessing  nor  cursing  can  possibly  take 
any  effect  beyond  the  will  and  purpose  of  the 
Father  of  our  souls.  Balaam  knew  this,  but 
it  was  perhaps  his  misfortune  to  have  been 
trained  from  childhood  to  maintain  his 
positipn  and  his  wealth  by  trading  upon  the 
superstitions  of  his  neighbours. 

Ver.  7. — ^With  the  rewards  of  divination. 
D^pU,  "soothsayings."  Septuagint,  rd 
navTiia.  Here  the  soothsayer's  wages,  which 
St.  Peter  aptly  calls  the  wages  of  unrighteous- 
ness. The  ease  with  which,  among  ignorant 
and  superstitious  people,  a  prophet  might 
become  a  hired  soothsayer  is  apparent  even 
from  the  case  of  Samuel  (1  Sam.  ix.  fl — 8). 
That  it  should  be  thought  proper  to  resort  to 
the  man  of  God  for  information  about  some- 
lost  property,  and  much  more  that  it  should 
be  thought  necessary  to  pay  him  a  fee  for  the 
exercise  of  his  supernatural  powers,  shows, 
not  indeed  that  Samuel  was  a  soothsayer,  for 
he  was  a  man  of  rare  integrity  and  independ- 
ence, but,  that  Samuel  was  but  little  distin- 
guished from  a  soothsayer  in  the  popular 
estimation.  If  Samuel  had  learnt  to  care 
more  for  money  than  for  righteousness,  ha 
might  very  easily  have  become  just  what 
Balaam  became. 

Yer.  8. — lodge  here  this  night.  It  was 
therefore  in  the  night,  in  a  dream  or  in  a 
vision  (cf.  Gen.  xx.  3 ;  ch.  xii.  6 ;  Job  iv. 
15,  16),  that  Balaam  expected  to  receive 
some  communication  from  God.  If  he  had 
received  none  he  would  no  doubt  have  felt 
himself  free  to  go. 

Yer.  15. — Uore,  and  more  honourable  than 
they.  Balak  rightly  judged  that  Balaam 
was  not  really  unwilling  to  come,  and  that 
it  was  only  needful  to  ply  him  with  more 
flattery  and  larger  promises.  The  heathens 
united  a  firm  belief  in  the  powers  of  the  seer 
with  a  very  shrewd  appreciation  of  the  motives 
IT  2     - 


S92 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[oh.  XXII.  2—40. 


and  character  of  tlie  seer.  Compare  the  say- 
ing of  Sophocles  (' Antig.,'  1055),  rd  /lavriKov 
yap  TTOLv  ^iXapywpov  yivoQ. 

Ver.  18  — I  cannot  go  beyond  the  word  of 
the  Lord  my  God.  Balaam's  faith  was  para- 
mount within  its  own  sphere  of  operation. 
It  did  not  control  his  wishes  ;  it  did  not 
secure  the  heart  obedience  which  God  loves  ; 
but  it  did  secure,  and  that  absolutely,  out- 
ward obedience  to  every  positive  command 
of  God,  however  irksome ;  and  Balaam  never 
made  any  secret  of  this. 

Ver.  22.— And  God's  anger  was  kindled 
because  he  wont,  or,  "that  he  was  going." 

S-in  '!l7in"*3.  Septuagint,  8n  iiropei^ij 
avTOQ.  There  can  be  no  question  that  the 
ordinary  translation  is  right,  and  that  God 
was  angry  with  Balaam  for  going  at  all  on 
such  an  errand.  It  is  true  that  God  had 
given  him  permission  to  go,  but  that  very 
permission  was  a  judicial  act  whereby  God 
punished  the  covetous  and  disobedient  long- 
ings of  Balaam  in  allowing  him  to  have  his 
own  way.  God's  anger  is  kindled  by  sin, 
and  it  was  not  less  truly  sin  which  prompted 
Balaam  to  go  because  he  had  succeeded  in 
obtaining  formal  leave  to  go.  The  angel  of 
the  Lord  stood  in  the  way.  The  same  angel 
of  the  covenant  apparently  of  whom  Moses 
had  spoken  to  the  Edomites  (see  on  ch.  xx.  16). 

For  an  adversary  against  him.  v  tp^?. 
Septuagint,  iia^aktXv  airSv.  Not  so  much 
because  Balaam  was  rushing  upon  his  own 
destruction  as  because  he  was  going  to  fight 
with  curses,  if  possible,  against  the  Israel  of 
God  (cf.  2  Kings  vi.  17  ;  Ps.  xxxiv.  7). 

Ver.  23. — And  the  ass  saw  the  angel  of 
the  lord.  This  was  clearly  part  of  the 
miracle,  the  uriiiuov  which  was  to  exhibit  in 
such  a  striking  manner  the  stupidity  and 
blindness  of  the  most  brilliant  and  gifted 
intellect  when  clouded  by  greed  and  selfish- 
ness. It  ia  nothing  to  the  point  that  the 
lower  animals  have  a  quicker  perception  of 
some  natural  phenomena  than  men,  for  this 
was  not  a  natural  phenomenon  ;  it  is  nothing 
to  the  point  that  the  lower  animals  are 
credited  by  some  with  possessing  "the 
second  eight,"  for  all  that  belongs  to  the 
fentastic  and  legendary.  If  the  ass  saw  the 
angel,  it  was  because  the  Lord  opened  her 
eyes  then,  as  he  did  her  mouth  afterwards. 

Ver.  25. — She  thrust  herself  unto  the 
wall.  Apparently  in  order  to  pass  the  angel 
beyond  the  reach  of  his  sword  ;  when  this 
was  clearly  impossible  she  fell  down. 

Ver.  28. — And  the  Lord  opened  the  month 
of  the  ass.  On  the  face  of  it  this  expression 
would  seem  decisive  that  an  audible  human 
Toioe  proceeded  from  the  ass's  mouth,  as  St. 
Peter  beyond  doubt  believed :  Ajrojiyior 
afmvov  'tv  dvStpuTrov  ipuvp  tp^ty^niiivov.     It 


is  truly  said,  however,  that  a  passing  illusion 
of  this  kind,  while  it  testifies  that  the 
Apostle  understood  the  words,  like  all  his  con- 
temporaries, in  their  most  natural  and  simple 
sense,  does  not  oblige  us  to  hold  the  same 
view  ;  if  he  was  mistaken  in  this  matter,  it 
does  not  at  all  affect  the  iuspired  truth  of  hia 
teaching.  Two  theories,  therefore,  have 
been  proposed  in  order  to  avoid  the  difficul- 
ties of  the  ordinary  belief,  while  vindicating 
the  reality  of  the  occurrence.  It  has  been 
held  by  some  that  the  whole  affair  took  place 
in  a  trance,  and  resembled  St.  Peter's 
vision  of  the  sheet  let  down  from  heaven 
(Acts  X.  10),  which  we  rightly  conceive  to 
have  been  purely  subjective.  This  is  open 
to  the  obvious  and  apparently  fatal  objection 
that  no  hint  is  given  of  any  state  of  trance  or 
ecstasy,  and  that,  on  the  contrary,  the  word- 
ing of  the  narrative  as  given  to  us  is  incon- 
sistent with  such  a  thing.  In  ver.  31  Balaam's 
eyes  are  said  to  have  been  opened  so  that 
he  saw  the  angel ;  but  to  have  the  eyes  opes 
so  that  the  (ordinarily)  invisible  became 
visible,  and  the  (otherwise)  inaudible  became 
audible,  was  precisely  the  condition  of  which 
Balaam  speaks  (ch.  xxiv.  3,  4)  as  that  of 
trance.  According  to  the  narrative,  there- 
fore, Balaam  was  in  an  ecstasy,  if  at  all,  after 
the  speaking  of  the  ass,  and  not  before.  By 
others  it  has  been  put  forward,  somewhat 
confusedly,  that  although  Balaam  was  in  his 
ordinary  senses,  he  did  not  really,  hear  a 
human  voice,  but  that  the  "cries"  of  the 
ass  became  intelligible  to  his  mind ;  and  it 
is  noted  that  as  an  augur  he  had  been  accus- 
tomed to  assign  meanings  to  the  cries  of 
animals.  If  instead  of  "cries"  we  read 
"  brayin^gs,"  for  the  ass  is  endowed  by  nature 
with  no  other  capacity  of  voice,-  being  indeed 
one  of  the  dumbest  of  "dumb"  animals, 
we  have  the  matter  more  fairly  before  ns. 
To  most  people  it  would  appear  more  in- 
credible that  the  brayings  of  an  ass  should 
convey  these  rational  qiiestions  to  the  mind 
of  its  rider  than  that  the  beast  should  have 
spoken  outright  with  a  man's  voice.  It 
would  indeed  seem  much  more  satisfactory  to 
regard  the  story,  if  we  cannot  accept  it  as 
literally  true,  as  a  parable  which  Balaam 
wrote  against  himself,  and  which  Moses 
simply  incorporated  in  the  narrative ;  we 
should  at  least  preserve  in  this  way  fhe 
immense  moral  and  spiritual  value  of  the 
story,  without  the  necessity  of  placing  non- 
natural  constructions  upon  its  simple  state- 
ments. Supposing  the  miracle  to  have  really 
occurrfd,  it  must  always  be  observed  that 
the  words  put  into  the  ass's  mouth  do 
nothing  more  than  express  such  feelinfa  as  a 
docile  and  intelligent  animal  of  hei  kind 
would  have  actually  felt.  That  domestio 
aiximals,  and  especially  such  as  have  been 
long  in  the  service  of  man,  feel  surprise, 


oa.  xxii.  2—40.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  NDMBERa 


^3 


indij,Tiation,  and  grief  in  the  presence  of 
injustice  and  ill-treatment  is  abundantly 
certain.  In  many  well-authenticated  cases 
they  have  done  things  in  order  to  express 
these  feelings  which  seemed  as  much  beyond 
their  "irrational"  nature  as  if  they  had 
spoken.  We  constantly  say  of  a  dog  or  a 
horse  that  he  can  do  everything  but  speak, 
and  why  should  it  seem  incredible  that  God, 
who  has  given  the  dumb  beast  so  close  an 
approximation  to  human -feeling  and  reason, 
should  for  once  have  given  it  human  voice  ? 
With  respect  to  Balaam's  companions,  their 
presence  need  not  cause  any  difficulty.  The 
princes  of  Midian  and  Moab  had  probably 
gone  on  to  announce  the  coming  of  Balaam  ; 
his  servants  would  naturally  follow  him  at 
some  little  distance,  unless  he  summoned 
them  to  his  side.  It  i?  very  likely  too  that 
Balaam  was  wont  to  carry  on  conversations 
with  himself,  or  with  imaginary  beings,  as 
he  rode  along,  and  this  circumstance  would 
account  for  any  sound  of  voices  which 
reached  the  ears  of  others. 

Ver.  g9. — And  Balaam  said  unto  the  ass. 
That  Balaam  should  answer  the  ass  without 
expressing  any  astonishment  is  certainly 
more  marvellous  than  that  the  ass  should 
speak  to  him.  It  must,  however,  in  fairness 
be  considered — 1.  That  Balaam  was  a  pro- 
phet. He  was  accustomed  to  hear  Divine 
voices  speaking  to  him  when  no  man  was 
near.  He  had  a  large  and  unquestioning 
faith,  and  a  peculiar  familiarity  with  the 
unseen.  2.  Balaam  was  a  sorcerer.  It  was 
part  of  his  profession  to  show  signs  and 
wonders  such  as  even  now  in  those  countries 
confound  the  most  experienced  and  sceptical 
beholders.  It  is  likely  that  he  had  often 
made  dumb  animals  speak  in  order  to  be- 
wilder others.  He  must  indeed  have  been 
conscious  to  some  extent  of  imposture,  but 
he  would  not  draw  any  sharp  line  in  his 
own  mind  between  the  marvels  which  really 
happened  to  him  and  the  marvels  he  dis- 
played to  others.  Both  as  prophet  and  as 
sorcerer,  he  must  h.we  lived,  more  than  any 
other  even  of  that  age,  in  an  atmosphere  of 
the  supernatural.  If,  therefore,  this  portent 
was  really  given,  it  was  certainly  given  to  the 
very  man  of  all  that  ever  Uved  to  whom  it 
was  most  suitable.  Just  as  one  cannot 
imagine  the  miracle  of  the  stater  (Matt. 
ivii.  27)  happening  to  any  one  of  less  simple 
and  childlike  faith  than  St.  Peter,  so  one 
could  not  think  of  the  ass  as  speaking  to 
any  one  in  the  Bible  but  the  wizard  prophet, 
for  whom — both  on  his  good  and  on  his  bad 
aide — the  boundary  lines  between  the  natural 
and  supernatural  were  almost  obliterated. 
8.  Balaam  was  at  this  moment  intensely 
angry,  and  nothing  blunts  the  edge  of  natural 
surprise  so  much  as  rage.  Things  which 
•ftOTWorda,  when  calmly  recollected,   cause 


the  utmost  astonishment,  notoriously  pro- 
duce no  effect  at  the  moment  upon  a  mind 
which  is  thoronghly  exasperated. 

Ver.  31.— The  lord  opened  the  eyes  of 
Balaam,  and  he  saw  the  angel.  As  on 
other  occasions,  the  angel  was  not  perceptible 
to  ordinary  sight,  but  only  to  eyes  in  some 
way  quickened  and  purged  by  the  Divine 
operation.  This  explams  the  fact  that 
Balaam's  companions  would  appear  to  have 
seen  nothing  (cf.  Acts  ix.  7). 

Ver.  32. — Because  thy  way  is  perverse. 
t3T,  an  uncommon  word,  which  seems  to 
mean  "leading  headlong,"  ».«.  to  destmo 
tion.  , 

Ver.  33.— TTnless  . .  surely.  »5"""  'JIK. 
It  is  somewhat  doubtful  whether  this  phrase 
can  be  translated  as  in  the  Septuagint  (e  t  /«i) . . 
vvv  ovv)  and  in  all  the  versions ;  but  even 
if  the  construction  of  the  sentence  be  broken, 
this  is  no  doubt  the  meaning  of  it.  And 
saved  her  alive.  Compare  the  case  of  the 
ass  of  the  disobedient  prophet  in  I  Kings 
xiii.  24.  It  is  plainly  a  righteous  thing 
with  God  that  obedience  and  faithfulness 
should  be  respected,  and  in  some  sense  re- 
warded, even  in  an  ass. 

Ver.  35. — Go  with  the  men.  It  may  be 
asked  to  what  purpose  the  angel  appeared,  if 
Balaam  was  to  proceed  just  the  same.  The 
answer  is  that  the  angel  was  not  a  warning, 
but  a  destroying,  angel,  a  visible  embodiment 
of  the  anger  of  God  which  burnt  against 
Balaam  for  his  perversity.  The  angel  would 
have  slain  Balaam,  as  the  lion  slew  the  dis- 
obedient prophet,  but  that  God  in  his  mercy 
permitted  the  fidelity  and  wisdom  of  the  ass 
to  save  her  master  from  the  immediate  con- 
sequences of  his  folly.  If  Balaam  had  had  a 
mind  capable  of  instniotion,  he  would  indeed 
have  gone  on  as  he  was  bidden,  but  in  a  very 
different  spirit  and  with  very  different  de- 


Ver.  86. — Unto  a  city  of  Moab,  or, 
"unto  Ir-Moab"  (3SiD  "|iJ|-^K),  probably 
the  same  as  the  Ar  mentioned  in  ch.  xxi. 
15  as  the  boundary  town  of  Moab  at  that 
time. 

Ver.  39.  —  Kirjath-hnzoth.  "City  of 
streets."  Identified  by  some  with  the  ruins 
of  Shth&n,  not  far  from  the  supposed  site  of 
Ar. 

Ver.  40. — Balak  oifered  oxen  and  sheep. 
Probably  these  saeiifices  were  offered  not  to 
Chemosh,  but  to  the  Lord,  in  whose  name 
Balaam  always  spoke.  Indeed  the  known 
fact  that  Balaam  was  a  prophet  of  the  Lord 
was  no  doubt  one  of  Balak's  chief  reasons 
for  wishing  to  obtain  his  services.  Balak 
shared  the  common  opinion  of  antiquity,  that 
the  various  national  deities  were  enabled  by 
circumstances  past  human  understanding  to 
do  sometimes  more,  sometimes  less,  foe  theil 


294 


Tflfi  BOOR  OF  NUMBERS. 


[cH.  xxn,  2— 4a 


special  votaries.  He  perceived  that  the  God 
of  Israel  was  likely,  as  things  stood,  to  carry 
all  before  him  ;  but  he  thought  that  he 
might  by  judicious  management  be  won  over, 
at  least  to  some  extent,  to  desert  the  cause  of 
Israel  and  to  favour  that  of  Moab.  To  this 
end  he  "retained"  at  great  cost  the  services 
of  Balaam,  the  prophet  of  the  Lord,  and  to 
this  end  he  was  willing  to  offer  any  number 
of  sacrifices.  Even  the  resolute  and  self- 
reliant  Bomans  believed  in  the  wisdom  of 


such  a  policy.  Thus  Pliny  quotes  ancient 
authors  as  afBrming  "in  oppugnationibug 
ante  omnia  solitum  a  Eomanis  sacrdotibua 
evocari  Deum,  cujus  in  tutela  id  oppidum 
esset,  promittique  illi  eundem  aut  ampliorem 
apud  Bomanos  cnltum,"and  he  adds,  "durat 
in  Fontificnm  discipline  id  sacrum,  constat- 
que  ideo  occultatum,  in  cujus  Dei  tutela 
Boma  esset,  ne  qui  hostium  simUi  mode 
agerent."  And  Bent,  i  «,  portions  of  tha 
sacrificial  meata 


HOMILBTICS. 

Vers.  2 — 40. — The  way  of  Balaam,  In  this  section  we  have  some  of  the 
profoundest  and  most  subtle,  as  well  as  some  of  the  most  practical,  moral  and 
religious  teachings  of  the  Old  Testament.  In  order  to  draw  them  out  fully  we 
may  consider — I.  The  character  and  position  of  Balaam  with  regard  to  God  and 
man ;  II.  The  policy  of  Balak  in  sending  for  Balaam ;  III,  The  conduct  of  Balaam 
when  asked  and  urged  to  come  to  Balak ;  IV.  The  incidents,  natural  and  supernatural, 
of  Balaam's  coming. 

I.  The  character  of  Balaam,  and  his  position  with  regard  to  God  and 
MAN.  Consider  under  this  head — 1.  That  Balaam  had  a  true  knowledge  oftlie  most 
high  God.  He  was  not  in  any  sense  a  heathen  as  far  as  his  intellectual  perception 
of  Divine  things  went.  And  it  was  not  merely  Elohim,  the  God  of  nature  and 
creation,  whom  he  knew  and  revered,  but  distinctly  Jehovah,  the  God  of  Israel  and 
of  grace.  Speculatively  he  knew  as  much  of  God  as  Abraham  or  Job.  2.  That 
Balaam  had  an  unquestioning  faith  in  the  one  true  God.  Whatever  diflScuIties  it 
may  create,  it  is  obviously  true  that  Balaam  walked  very  much  by  faith,  and  not  by 
sight.  The  invisible  God,  the  will  of  God,  the  power  of  God,  the  direct  concern  of 
God  with  his  doings,  were  all  realities  to  Balaam,  strong  realities.  God  was  not  a 
name  to  him,  nor  a  theological  expression,  but  the  daily  companion  of  his  daily  life. 

3.  That  Balaam  had  an  undoubted  prophetic  gift  from  God.  He  was  hot  an 
ordinary  servant  of  the  true  God ;  he  held  as  it  were  a  very  high  official  position  in 
the  service  of  God.  He  enjoyed  frequent  and  direct  intercourse  with  him ;  he 
expected  to  receive  supernatural  intimations  of  the  Divine  will ;  he  professed  to 
speak,  and  he  did  speak,  words  of  inspired  prophecy  far  beyond  his  own  origination. 

4.  That  at  the  same  tims  Balaam's  heart  was  given  not  to  God,  but  to  covetousnest. 
He  loved  the  wages  of  unrighteousness.  Not  perhaps  in  the  lowest  sense.  He  may 
have  valued  influence,  power,  consideration  even  more  than  mere  money ;  but 
money  was  necessary  to  all  these.  5.  That  Balaam  was  a  soothsayer.  He  practised 
magical  arts  and  sought  for  auguries.  He  traded  on  the  superstitions  of  the  heathen, 
and  even  sought  to  prostitute  his  prophetic  powers  to  excite  astonishment,  obtain 
power,  and  make  money.  He  hired  himself  out  to  curse  the  enemies  of  those  who 
employed  him.  And  note  that  Balaam's  fall  in  this  respect  was  accountable  enough ; 
for  we  may  naturally  conclude  (1)  that  Balaam  had  an  hereditary  position  as  seer 
which  it  was  his  interest  to  keep  up  at  any  cost ;  (2)  that  the  ignorant  people  put 
strong  pressure  upon  him  to  play  the  soothsayer.  How  easily  Samuel  might  have 
become  the  same  if  he  had  been  covetous  t  How  constant  is  the  temptation  to  abuse 
spiritual  powers  in  order  at  once  to  gratify  others  and  to  exalt  oneself  I  (cf.  1  Sam. 
ix.  6—8 ;  Jer.  v.  31). 

II.  The  policy  of  Balak,  and  his  errob.  Consider  under  this  head — 1.  That 
Balah  was  afraid  of  Israel,  because  he  was  mighty,  and  had  overthrown  the 
Amorites.  Yet  he  had  no  cause  to  fear,  for  Israel  had  not  touched  him,  and  did  not 
mean  to.  Men  are  afraid  of  the  Church  of  God  because  it  is  a  great  power  in  the 
world,  albeit  it  is  a  power  for  good,  and  not  for  evil.  2.  That  Balah  was  afraid  of 
the  God  of  Israel.  He  rightly  judged  that  Israel's  success  was  due  to  his  God ;  but 
he  wrongly  thought  that  the  Lord  was  but  a  national  deity  who  was  victorious  at 
present,  but  might  be  turned  aside  or  bought  off.  3.  That  Balak  put  his  trust  in 
Balaam  because  he  was  a  prophet  of  the  Lord,  and  might  he  expected  to  use  hit 


OH.  XXII.  2—40.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  296 

influence  to  change  the  purposes  of  the  Lord;  perhaps  even  to  counterwork  thos« 
purposes.  How  often  do  people  seek  the  aid  of  reh'gion  against  G-od  I  How  often 
do  they  seek  for  religious  support  and  solace  in  doing  what  they  must  know  is 
contrary  to  the  moral  law  of  God  !  4.  That  Balah  professed,  and  no  douht  felt,  a 
profound  helief  in  the  efficacy  of  Balaam! s  benedictions  and  maledictions,  even  as 
against  the  people  of  Balaam's  God.  Here  was  the  very  essence  of  superstition,  to 
suppose  that  anything  whatsoever  can  have  any  spiritual  efiScacy  contrary  to,  or 
apart  from,  the  will  of  God;  most  of  all,  that  the  word  of  God,  as  officially  employed 
by  his  ministers,  can  be  made  to  work  counter  to  the  declared  mind  of  God.  As 
though  Peter  could  ban  whom  Christ  hath  blessed.  Yet  note  that  Balak's  superstition 
was  the  depraving  of  a  great  truth.  Balaam  had  no  doubt  authority  to  censure  or 
to  bless  in  the  name  of  God ;  and  his  censures  or  blessings  would  have  had  validity 
if  pronounced  with  a  single  eye  to  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  souls,  and  in 
clear  dependence  upon  the  higher  knowledge  and  necessary  ratification  of  Heaven. 
6._  That  Baldk  sought  to  obtain  supernatural  aid  from  Balaam  by  means  of  flatteries, 
gifts,  and  promises;  and  thought,  no  doubt,  to  buy  over  the  powers  of  the  world  to 
come.  He  rightly  gauged  the  character  of  the  man ;  he  was  utterly  deceived  as  to 
the  worth  of  his  alliance.  How  often  do  shrewd  and  worldly  men  make  the  same 
mistake  I  Because  they  see  through  the  selfishness  and  worldliness  of  the  human 
ministers  of  religion,  they  fancy  they  can  command  the  services,  and  employ  in  their 
own  behalf  the  powers,  of  religion  itself. 

III.  The  coming  of  Balaam.  Consider  under  this  head — 1.  Tliat  Balaam  was 
solicited  to  ccymefor  a  purpose  which  he  must  have  felt  sure  was  wrong.  To  curse  any 
people  was  an  awful  thing,  and  only  to  be  done  with  sorrow  if  commanded  by  God. 
To  curse  Israel,  of  whose  history  Balaam  was  not  ignorant,  was  on  the  face  of  it  treason 
towards  God.  When  men  are  invited  to  lend  theii  aid  in  opposing  or  destroying 
others,  how  careful  should  they  be  to  make  sure  that  such  hostile  action  is  a  matter 
of  duty ;  for  we  are  called  unto  blessing  (1  Pet.  iii.  9).  2.  That  Balaam  was  tempted 
through  his  love  of  money  and  of  good  things.  A  true-hearted  prophet  would  have 
been  ashamed  to  receive  gifts  and  promises  for  the  use  of  his  spiritual  powers,  and 
he  would  have  vehementlysuspected  such  as  offered  them, even  with  flattery  and  defer- 
ence. If  anything  appeals  to  our  cupidity  and  promises  advantage  in  this  world,  we 
ought  all  the  more  f;o  turn  against  it,  unless  it  is  irresistibly  proved  to  be  right.  With 
what  just  scorn  does  the  world  regard  the  universal  propensity  of  religious  people  to 
exercise  their  gifts  and  throw  their  influence  where  and  as  it  pays  the  best  I  3.  That 
Bala,am  was  forbidden  to  go,  for  the  plain  and  unalterable  reason  that  lie  could  not 
~  possibly  do  what  lie  was  wanted  to  do  without  flying  in  the  face  of  God.  If  he  went, 
he  must  either  act  dishonourably  towards  Balak  by  taking  his  money  for  nought,  or 
he  must  act  treasonably  towards  God  by  cursing  his  people.  And  this  was  pei-fectly 
clear  to  Balaam.  The  moral  law  of  God  is  plain  enough  in  its  broad  outlines,  and  if 
men  loved  righteousness  more  than  gain  they  would  have  little  practical  difficulty. 
4.  That  Balaam's  outward  conduct  was  consistently  conscientious.  He  would  not  go 
without  leave  ;  he  refused  to  go  when  forbidden ;  when  allowed  to  go*  he  repeatedly 
protested  that  he  could  and  would  say  nothing  but  what  God  told  him  to  say.  And 
no  doubt  his  protestations  were  sincere.  He  had  no  intention  of  rebelling  against 
God  ;  it  was  a  fixed  principle  with  him  that  God  must  be  obeyed.  6.  That  Balaam's 
inward  desire  was  to  go  if  possible,  because  it  promised  honour  and  gain  to  himself. 
He  obeyed  God,  but  he  obeyed  grudgingly  ;  he  obeyed  God,  but  he  gave  him  clearly 
to  understand  that  he  wished  it  mi^it  be  otherwise ;  he  respected  the  definite  com- 
mand not  to  go,  but  he  paid  no  heed  to  the  reason  given — because  Israel  was  not  to 
be  cursed.  The  only  obedience  which  God  really  cares  for  is  obedience  from  the 
heart  (Rom.  vi.  17 ;  Ephes.  vi.  6).  How  many  are  strict  in  not  violating  the  moral 
law  (as  they  understand  it),  but  not  in  order  to  please  God,  not  because  they  love 
the  will  of  God  I  To  how  many  are  the  commandments  of  God  formal  barriers 
which  they  do  not  overleap  only  because  they  dare  not  I  But  for  such  these  barriers 
are  sooner  or  later  done  away,  that  they  may  have  their  own  way.  6.  That  Balaam 
did  not  get  credit  for  the  conscientiousness  he  did  possess.  He  said  that  God  refused 
to  give  him  leave,  which  was  true,  although  not  expressed  in  a  proper  spirit, 
vhereM  the  messengers  reported  that  he  refused  to  come  ;  and  Balak  believed  that 


IW  THE  BOOK  OF  NtTMBERa  [oh.  xxn. «— 40. 

he  only  wanted  more  pressing.  So  it  is  with  men  who  do  what  is  right,  yet  not 
from  the  true  motive  ;  they  do  not  get  credit  even  for  the  good  that  is  in  them ; 
they  are  always  tempted  afresh,  because  they  are  felt  to  be  open  to  temptation; 
the  world  sees  that  their  heart  is  with  it,  and  puts  their  hesitation  down  to  mere 
self  interest.  There  is  no  safety  for  the  man  whose  heart  is  not  on  the  side  of 
God.  7.  That  Balaam,  when  he  referred  the  matter  again  to  God  {as  if  it  were 
still  open),  was  allowed  to  go.  This  is  the  very  essence  of  tempting  God— to  cast 
about  for  ways  and  means  to  follow  our  own  will  and  compass  our  own  ends  with- 
out open  disobedience.  How  many  treat  the  rule  of  God  as  a  disagreeable  restraint 
which  must  indeed  be  respected,  but  may  be  thankfully  avoided  if  possible  I  Such 
men  find  themselves  able  to  go  with  a  clear  conscience  into  circumstances  of  tempt- 
ation which  are  presently  fatal  to  them.  If  thou  hast  once  had  a  clear  intimation 
of  what  is  right,  cleave  to  it  with  all  thy  heart,  else  shalt  thou  be  led  into  a  snare. 
8.  That  Balaam's  going,  though  permitted,  was  controlled;  and  this  not  in  his  own 
interest  (for  he  should  not  have  gone),  but  in  the  interest  of  Israel.  When  men  will 
go  into  evil  they  are  judicially  permitted  to  go,  and  the  law  of  God  ceases  so  far  to 
constrain  their  conscience ;  but  the  consequences  of  their  inward  disobedience  are 
overruled  that  they  may  not  be  disastrous  to  God's  own  people. 

IV.  Thh  journey  of  Balaam.  Consider  under  this  head — 1.  That  God  was  angry 
vdth  Balaam  for  going,  altliough  he  had  given  him  leave ^  to  go.  For  it  was  sin 
which  made  Balaam  wish  to  go  if  possible ;  and  it  was  his  wish  to  go  on  an  evil 
errand  for  gain  which  obtained  him  leave  to  go.  Even  so  if  men  are  inwardly 
desirous  to  do  what  is  wrong,  God  will  suffer  them  to  persuade  themselves  that  it  is 
not  actually  wrong,  and  they  will  go  on  with  a  clear  conscience;  but  God  will  be 
angry  with  them  all  the  same.  How  many  very  religious  people  find  it  permissible 
to  walk  in  very  crooked  ways  for  the  sake  of  gain,  and  are  yet  resolute  not  to  do 
a  wrong  thing  I  But  God  is  angry  with  them,  and  they  have  forfeited  his  grace 
already.  2.  T/iat  the  destroying  angel  stood  in  the  way  as  an  adversary  to  him. 
Even  so  destruction  awaits  us  in  every  way  wherein  greed  leads  us  contrary  to  the 
will  of  God.  God  himself  is  an  adversary  to  us  (Matt.  v.  25),  and  is  ready  at  any 
moment  to  fall  upon  us  and  cut  us  asunder.  It  is  useless  to  say  that  we  have  done 
nothing  wrong ;  if  our  motives  be  corrupt,  the  sword  of  Divine  justice  is  drawn 
against  us.  3.  That  Balaam  saw  not  the  angd,  but  the  ass  did;  and  this  although 
Balaam  was  a  "  seer,"  and  prided  himself  on  "  having  his  eyes  open,"  and  on  being 
familiar  with  the  unseen  things  of  God.  Even  so  the  "  religious  "  and  "  spiritual " 
man,  who  has  great  "  experiences,"  and  yet  is  secretly  Jed  by  greed  and  self-interest, 
is  often  much  blinder  than  the  most  carnal  and  unenlightened  to  perceive  that  he  is 
rushing  upon  destruction  ;  the  most  stupid  person  has  often  a  clearer  perception  of 
moral  facts  and  situations  than  the  most  gifted,  if  this  be  blinded  by  sin.  4.  That 
the  ass  by  her  fidelity  and  instinct  of  self-preservation  saved  Iter  master.  Even  so 
are  men,  wise  in  their  own  eyes,  often  indeoted  to  the  most  despised  and  neglected 
agencies  tot  preservation  from  the  consequences  of  their  blind  folly.  6.  Thai 
Balaam  was  enraged  with  the  ass,  and  ill-treated  her.  Even  so  f oolisli  men  are  often 
very  angry  with  the  very  circumstances  or  persons  which  are  really  saving  them 
from  destruction.  6.  That  the  ass  was  Divinely  permitted  to  rebuke  Iter  master,  and 
to  teach  him  a  lesson  if  he  would  learn  it;  for  she  had  been  faithful,  and  docile,  and 
had  never  played  him  false  ever  since  she  had  been  his ;  while  he  had  been  and  was 
unfaithful,  obstinate,  and  disloyal  to  his  Master  in  heaven.  Even  so  do  the  very 
beasts  teach  us  many  a  lesson  by  their  conduct';  and  those  whom  we  account  in  some 
sense  worse  than  the  beasts — the  heathen,  and  men  who  have  no  religion  at  all — will 
often,  put  us  to  shame  by  the  strong  virtues  which  they  display  where  we  perliaps 
fail.  7.  Tliat  then  Balaam  saw  and  knew  his  danger.  Even  so  do  men  com- 
placently walk  in  the  road  which  leads  to  destruction,  and  have  not  the  least  idea 
of  it,  but  are  angry  with  any  thaf  thwart  them,  until  some  sudden  influence  openj 
their  eyes  to  their  awful  danger.  8.  That  he  offered  then  to  go  back,  if  neeesscury, 
and  acknowledged  that  hehad  done  wronq  {perhaps  sincerely),  but  wasnot  permiUed 
to  go  back.  Even  so  when  men  have,  as  it  were,  insisted  upon  taking  a  line  which  iff 
nnwise,  dangerous,  and  wrong,  it  is  often  impossible  for  them  to  turn  back.  They 
•n  committed  to  it  and  God's  providence  compels  them  to  go  on  with  it  eves 


oa,  XXII.  2-40.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBEB8.  297 

though  it  brings  awful  peril  to  their  souls;  for  God  is  a  jealous  God,  and  Ihe 
judicial  consequences  of  our  own  (albeit  inward  and  disguised)  disobedience  cannot 
be  got  nd_  of  in  a  moment.  9.  TJiat  he  was  met  hy  Balah  with  honov/r  and  ceremony 
and  religious  rites ;  and  no  doubt  all  that  happened  by  the  way  faded  like  a  dream 
from  his  mind.  Even  so  when  men  walk  after  their  own  covetousness  they  may 
receive  the  most  solemn  and  (at  the  time)  impressive  warnings,  but  amidst  the  con- 
verse of  the  world,  and  the  honour  received  of  men,  and  the  outward  ceremonies  even 
of  religion,  these  warnings  have  no  lasting  effect,  and  are  as  though  they  had  never 
happened. 

Consider  again,  as  to  the  broad  lessons  to  be  drawn  from  Balaam's  charactei 
and  history— 1.  That  there  may  be  in  a  man  high  spiritual  gifts  without  real  good- 
ness. Balaam  was  a  veritable  prophet,  and  had  in  a  remarkaule  degree  the  faculty 
both  of  understanding  the  hidden  things  of  God  and  of  announcing  them  to  men. 
Yet,  as  in  the  case  of  Saul  (1  Sam.  x.  11  ;  xix.  24)  and  Caiaphas  (John  xi.  51), 
his  prophetic  gifts  were  not  accompanied  by  sanctification  of  life.  Even  so  many  in 
all  ages  and  lands  have  great  spiritual  gifts  of  understanding,  of  interpretation,  of 
eloquence,  &c.,  whereby  others  are  greatly  advantaged,  but  they  remain  evil  them- 
selves. 2.  That  a  man  may  have^  a  true  and  strong  religious  faith^nd  yet  that 
faith  shall  not  save  him,  because  it  does  not  effect  his  heart.  That  Balaam  had  a 
strong  faith  in  the  Lord  God  is  evident ;  on  the  intellectual  side  it  was  as  strong  as 
Abraham's ;  he  walked  with  God  as  truly  as  any  in  the  sense  of  being  constantly 
conscious  and  mindful  of  God's  presence  and  concern  with  him.  No  definition  of 
religious  faith  could  be  framed  with  honesty  which  should  exclude  Balaam  and 
include  Abraham.  Yet  he  was  not  saved,  because  his  faith,  although  it  largely 
mingled  with  his  thoughts  and  greatly  influenced  his  actions,  did  not  govern  his 
affections.  Even  so  it  is  useless,  however  usual  and  convenient,  to  deny  that  many 
men  have  strong  religious  convictions  and  persuasions — in  a  word,  have  religious 
faith— who  are  not  saved  by  it,  but  fall  into  deadly  sins  and  become  castaway.  This 
is  not  a  matter  of  theology  so  much  as  of  facts  ;  the  combination  of  strong  religious 
feelings,  and  of  power  to  realise  the  unseen,  with  deep  moral  alienation  fromGod,  is 
by  no  means  uncommon.  3.  That  a  mmt  may  do  much  and  sacrifice  much  in  orde)- 
to  obey  God  without  receiving  any  reward,  Balaam  repeatedly  crossed  his  owe 
inclinations,  and  forewent  much  honour  and  emolument  from  Balak,  from  a  con- 
scientious motive  ;  and  yet  he  was  all  the  time  on  the  verge  of  destruction,  and  was 
miserably  slain  at  last.  Even  so  many  men  do  much  they  do  not  like,  and  give  up 
much  they  do  like,  because  they  feel  they  ought  to ;  and  yet  they  have  no  reward 
for  it  either  here  or  hereafter,  because  their  self-restraint  is  grounded  on  some  lower 
motive  than  love  of  God  and  the  desire  to  please  him.  4.  That  a  man's  condud. 
may  he  to  all  appearance  irreproachable,  and  yet  be  displeasing  to  God-  No  one 
could  have  found  distinct  fault  with  any  one  step  in  Balaam's  proceedings ;  each 
could  be  singly  justified  as  permissible ;  yet  the  whole  provoked  the  Lord  to  anger, 
because  it  was  secretly  swayed  by  greed.  Even  so  many  men  are  careful,  and  to 
ordinary  eyes  irreproachable,  in  their  doings,  because  no  act  is  by  itself  without 
justification ;  yet  their  whole  life  is  hateful  because  its  governing  motive  is  selfish  ' 
ness,  not  love.  It  is  not  enough  to  be  able  to  justify  each  step  as  we  take  it, 
neither  will  a  mere  resolve  to  keep  straight  with  God  insure  his  favour.  6.  That 
a  man  may  have  profound  religious  insight,  and  yet  be  very  blind  to  his  oum  state. 
Balaam  justly  prided  himself  upon  his  intelligent  and  spiritual  religion  as  compared 
with  the  follies  and  mummeries  of  the  heathen  around,  yet  he  was  more  blind  than 
his  own  beast  to  the  palpable  destruction  on  which  he  was  running.  Even  so  many 
of  those  who  are  most  enlightened,  and  most  removed  from  ignorance  and  supersti- 
tion, are  most  blind  to  their  own  entire  moral  failure,  and  to  the  terrible  danger  they 
are  in.  They,  e.g.,  who  most  denounce  idolatry  are  often  utterly  blind  to  the  fact 
that  their  whole  lives  are  dominated  by  covetousness,  which  is  idolatry. 

Consider  again,  with  respect  to  the  miracle  of  the  dumb  beast  speaking  with  human 
voice— 1.  That  the  lower  animals,  of  which  we  reck  so  little,  save  as  a  matter  of  gaht,, 
have  often  great  virtues  by  which  they  teach  us  many  a  lesson.  How  much  more  faith- 
ful are  they  to  us  than  we  to  our  Master  I  It  is  their  pride  and  study  to  observe  and 
follow,  almost  to  anticipate,  the  least  indication  of  our  will.    Bow  iiiferior  are  we  in 


S98  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [ch.  xxii.  2—40 

that  respect  I_  2.  Thai  God  is  not  insensible  to  their  virtues,  as  we  very  generally 
are,  but  at  times  at  least  gives  them  a  certain  recompense  of  reward  (see  on  ver.  33). 
Since  they  seem  to  have  no  future  state,  it  is  a  duty  laid  upon  us  to  remember  and 
reward  their  fidelity  in  this  world.  3.  That  to  be  enraged  with  dumb  animals  when 
their  conduct  vexes  us  is  sin  and  folly.  Sin,  because  we  have  no  right  to  be  angry 
except  with  sin  (Jonah  iv.  4)  ;  folly,  because  they  are  less  in  the  wrong  with  us  than 
we  are  with  God ;  sin  and  folly,  because  such  anger  surely  blinds  the  mind  and 
leaves  us  a  prey  to  temptation.  4.  That  God  delights  to  choose  "  the  foolish  things 
of  the  world  to  confound  the  wise,"  and  ^'things  which  are  despised  and  "things 
which  are  not "  (as  the  intelligible  voice  of  an  ass)  "  to  bring  to  nought  things  that 
are."  Even  so  are  we  often  rebuked  and  reproved  in  our  madness  by  things  most 
contemned  and  familiar,  by  those  whom  we  regard  as  brutish  and  senseless,  and 
standing  upon  a  lower  level  than  ourselves. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vera.  6,  €. — Balaanis  greatness  and  fall.  Balaam's  character  and  history  have 
supplied  materials  for  many  theological  and  ethical  studies.  His  character  and 
conduct,  though  somewhat  perplexing,  are  not  more  so  than  those  of  many  around 
us,  and  are  full  of  instruction  and  warning.  At  present  we  confine  ourselves  to  two 
points : — I.  Balaam's  lofty  position  and  privilbgbs.    II.  The  seobbt  of  Balaam's 

HUMILI4TIN0  FALL. 

I.  (1)  He  had  a  knowledge  of  the  true  God.  Among  the  heathens  of  Mesopotamia 
he  retains  a  knowledge  of  the  God  revealed  "  from  the  creation  of  the  world." 
(Compare  the  cases  of  Melchizedec  and  Job.)  He  was  like  the  evening  star,  showing 
in  which  direction  the  sun  of  truth  had  set  (Rom.  i.  21),  and  reflecting  some  of  its 
light.  His  knowledge  may  be  illustrated  by  his  lofty  utterances  respecting  God  and 
his  people ;  e.  g.  ch.  xxiii.  10,  19 ;  and  according  to  some  interpreters,  ch.  vi.  8. 
(2)  He  enjoyed  the  gift  of  inspiration  by  God.  Though  there  were  no  Scriptures, 
God  was  not  left  without  witnesses,  and  among  them  was  Balaam  "  the  prophet " 
(2  Pet.  ii.  16).  He  expected  Divine  communications,  and  was  not  disappointed.  No 
wonder  then  that  (3)  he  enjoyed  wide-spread  fame.  It  extended  hundreds  of  miles 
away,  to  Moah  and  Midian,  whence  more  than  once  an  embassy  crossed  the  desert 
with  such  flattering  words  as  those  in  ver.  6.  Yet  we  know  that  Balaam  was  a  bad 
man  who  came  to  a  bad  end.  Thus  we  have  lessons  of  warning  for  ourselves,  who 
have  a  fuller  knowledge  of  God  than  Balaam,  and  may  enjoy  gifts,  if  not  as  brilliant, 
yet  more  useful  than  his.  All  of  these  may  avail  nothing  for  our  salvation,  but  may 
be  perverted  to  the  worst  ends.  Illustrations : — Hymenseus  and  Alexander,  the 
companions  of  St.  Paul  (1  Tim.  i.  19,  20) ;  Judas,  the  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  (cf. 
Matt.  vii.  21—23 ;  xi.  23 ;  1  Cor.  xiii.  1,  2). 

II.  Balaam's  name  mentioned  in  the  New  Testament  only  three  times,  and  each 
time  it  is  covered  with  reproach  (2  Pet.  ii.  15 ;  Jude  11 ;  Rev.  ii.  14).  His  root  sin 
was  the  ancient,  inveterate  vice  of  human  nature,  selfishness.  He  knew  God,  but  did 
not  love  him,  for  "  he  loved  the  wages  of  unrighteousness."  He  did  not  follow  the 
Divine  voice,  but  "followed  after"  reward.  God  taught  him  sublime  truths;  he 
"taught  Balak"  base  arts  of  seduction.  His  selfishness  was  shown  in — (1)  Ambition. 
There  was  nothing  of  the  self-forgetfulness  of  such  prophets  as  Elijah,  Elisha, 
Jeremiah,  or  Balaam's  contemporary,  Moses.  He  is  esteemed  as  a  great  man,  and  he 
takes  good  care  he  shall  be  so  esteemed.  He  knows  divination  has  no  power  with 
God,  but  to  magnify  himself  among  the  heathens  of  Moab,  he  resorts  to  ii;  He 
constantly  aspires  to  the  "  very  great  honour  "  to  which  Balak  offers  to  promote  him 
(cl  Ps.  cxxxi.  1 — 3 ;  Jer.  xlv.  6).  (2J)  Covetousness.  He  would  be  rich,  and  therefore 
fell  into  temptation,  &c.  (1  Tim.  vi.  9 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  15).  His  words  were  fair  (ver. 
18),  yet  suspicious,  like  those  of  a  venal  voter  boasting  his  incorruptibility.  Balaam 
coveted  the  offered  honour  and  wealth.  How  could  he  gain  them  while  God  wai 
keeping  him  back?  Two  ways  were  possible.  He  might  get  God  to  change'his 
mind.  He  wanted  to  get  permission  from  God  to  do  what  was  at  present  a  sin. 
He  might  have  known  from  the  first,  as  he  says  (ch.  xKiii.  19).  But  he  struggles 
lo  conquer  God,  as  though  the  fact  was  not  that  God  cannot  change,  but  that  God 


OH.  xxn.  2—40.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  899 

will  not  change.  Hence  his  repeated  changes  of  place  and  new  sacrifices.  At  length 
it  was  clear  that  this  way  was  closed  against  him.  He  is  constrained  to  hless  Israel 
again  and  again.  At  the  close  of  the  narrative  (ch.  xxiv.  10 — 24)  he  seems  to  be 
taking  his  place  boldly  as  an  ally  of  the  people  of  G-od.  But  it  was  only  a  temporary 
impulse,  not  a  true  conversion.  Greedy  for  the  wages  of  unrighteousness,  he  allies 
himself  with  hell.  {" Flectere  si  nequeo  superos,  Acheronta  moveho")  What  a 
contrast  between  his  fair  promises  (ver.  18)  and  this  wicked  deed  I  The  reason  is  that 
in  trying  to  "bend"  God  he  was  miserably  perverting  himself  (like  a  weak  tool  used 
to  move  a  great  weight),  while  seeking  permission  to  sin  he  was  growing  less 
sensitive  to  sin  (see  next  Homily).  Learn  then  from  the  fall  of  this  great  and 
gifted  prophet  to  what  a  depth  of  infamy  selfishness,  that  mother  of  sins,  and  its 
offspring,  ambition  and  covetousness,  may  lead  us.  Warned  by  the  selfishness  of 
Balaam,  may  we  copy  the  unselfishness  of  Christ  (Rom.  xv.  3 ;  Philip,  ii.  3 — 8). — P. 

Ver.  13. — Balaam,  an  illustration  of  systematic  resistance  of  conscience.  The 
final  fall  of  Balaam  was  not  sudden.  A  process  of  deterioration  had  been  going  on, 
the  first  clear  sign  of  which  is  in  the  text.  In  trying  to  change  God's  will  he  had 
been  changing  himself  for  the  worse  (see  Homily  on  vers.  5,  6).  We  can  trace  his 
resistance  of  conscience  step  by  step.  1.  When  the  first  embassy  came,  his  know- 
ledge of  God  and  of  Israel's  history  should  probably  have  led  to  a  decisive  refusal. 
But  if  we  assume  that  he  needed  direction,  it  is  clear  that  the  rewards  of  divination 
made  him  anxious  to  go.  Not  that  he  had  a  desire  to  curse  Israel ;  he  would  just  as 
soon  have  blessed  them  for  reward.  Yet  he  had  no  intention  then  to  disobey.  If  a 
prophet  could  have  shown  him  that  evening  his  future  career,  he  might  have  shrunk 
-  in  loathing  from  the  self  that  was  to  be.  The  will  of  God  is  declared  (ver.  12),  and 
the  struggle  between  conscience  and  covetousness  begins.  At  first  conscience  pre- 
vails, but  the  form  of  refusal  (ver.  13)  indicates  double-mindedness.  In  contrast  to 
Joseph  (Gen.  xxxix.  9),  Balaam  lays  himself  open  to  fresh  temptations.  If  we  give 
Satan  a  hesitating  "No,"  instead  of  a  "Get  thee  behind  me,"  he  will  understand 
that  we  would  like  to  sin,  but  dare  not,  and  will  try  us  with  more  honourable  embassies 
and  costlier  gifts.  2.  The  ambassadors  leave,  but  lingering  regrets  keep  the  fire  of 
covetousness  smouldering  in  Balaam's  heart.  It  flames  up  afresh  on  the  arrival  of 
the  second  embassy  (vers.  16,  17).  Fair  professions  (ver.  18)  reveal  his  weakness, 
for  what  "  more  "  (ver.  19)  could  he  want  God  to  say  unless  it  was  to  give  him 
permission  to  sin  ?  God  gives  him  leave  not  to  sin,  but  to  go.  (Illustrate  this  act  by 
similar  Divine  proceedings:  e.g.  allowing  the  Israelites,  under  protest,  to  elect  a 
king ;  a  wild  youth  receiving  reluctantly  permission  to  carry  out  his  determination 
to  go  to  sea.)  3.  Balaam  went,  and  God  is  angry,  not  because  he  went,  but  because 
he  went  with  a  wicked  purpose.  When  he  found  the  ways  of  transgressors  hard, 
and  offers  to  return  (ver.  34),  God  knows  that  he  would  only  carry  his  body  back  to 
Pethor,  and  leave  his  heart  hankering  after  the  rewards  of  Balak.  May  we  not 
suppose  that  if  he  had  shown  real  repentance  in  the  future,  and  heartily  entered  into 
the  Divine  purposes,  though  he  lost  Balak's  rewards,  he  would  have  received  God's 
blessing  ?  But  he  ran  greedily  after  reward,  and  found,  as  sinners  still  find,  under 
God's  providence,  that  it  is  hard  to  retrace  false  steps.  Therefore,  "  enter  not,"  &c. 
(Prov.  iv.  16).  4.  Balaam  meets  with  a  flattering  reception,  yet  renews  his  good 
professions  (ver.  38).  He  means  them,  for  he  still  hopes  to  gain  God's  consent  to 
his  purpose.  His  use  of  enchantments  to  impose  on  the  heathen  is  one  sign  of 
unoonscientiousness.  His  first  attempt  to  curse  is  a  failure  (ch.  xxiii.  7 — 10),  but 
the  strugglewith  conscience  and  God  is  not  abandoned.  ("Nosun  or  star  so  bright," 
&c.,  Keble's  '  Christian  Year,'  Second  Sunday  after  Easter.)  Three  times  he  persists 
in  this  "  madness,"  trying  to  change  or  circumvent  the  will  of  God.  At  length  he 
seems  to  give  up  the  struggle,  but  is  probably  only  "  making  a  virtue  of  a  necessity ;  " 
at  the  best  it  is  but  a  passing  impulse,  followed  by  a  relapse,  and  by  the  infamous 
act  by  which  he  clutched  his  wages  and  brought  God's  curse  on  Israel  (ch.  xxv.). 
He  thus  shows  that  he  has  renounced  God,  has  entered  thoroughly  into  Balak's 
schemes,  and  even  outstripped  him  in  wickedness.  His  perverted  conscience  does 
not  keep  him  even  from  such  unutterable  baseness.  His  triumph  is  brief,  and  his 
"  end  is  destruction "  (ch.  xxxi.  8 ;  Ps.  zzxiv.  21).     Learn  from  this  the  guilt 


800  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  ica.  mi.  2—40. 

and  danger  of  resisting  and  thus  corrupting  conscience.  (Explain  process  of  this 
corruption,  and  note  natural  analogies  to  a  conscience  dulled  by  persistence  in  sin.) 
To  try  and  bribe  conscience  is  like  seeking  permission  to  sin.  (Illustrate  by  story  or 
Glaucus  inquiring  at  the  oracle  of  Delphi  whether  he  might  keep  stolen  money — 
Herodotus,  vi.  86.)  Conscience,  like  a  railway  signal-lamp,  is  intended  to  warn 
against  danger  or  direct  in  the  path  of  safety.  If  through  negligence  the  lamp  is 
put  out  or  shows  a  wrong  light,  the  consequences  may  be  fatal  (Isa.  v.  20 ;  Matt. 
yi.  23).  A  healthy  conscience  accuses  of  sin  and  warns  of  danger  only  that  it  may 
be  a  minister  to  lead  us  to  Christ. — P. 

Vers.  15 — 17. — The  importunity  and  impudence  of  the  tempter.  Such  appeals  as 
Balak  sent  to  Balaam  are  constantly  addressed  to  us,  in  word  or  substance,  by  human 
tempters,  and  through  them  by.  the  infernal  tempter.  The  honour  offered  is 
represented  as  "  very  great,"  and  as  essential,  and  the  promises  are  as  vast  as  we 
can  desire  ("  whatsoever,"  &c.,  ver.  17  ;  Luke  iv.  6,  7).  Though  at  first  the  tempter 
may  be  resisted,  and  may  depart  "  for  a  season  "  (of.  ver.  14),  yet  his  solicitations 
maybe  renewed  in  a  more  alluring  form  than  at  first,  with  this  appeal,  "Let  nothing," 
&c.  (ver.  16).  Neither  (1)  conscience.  Away  with  childish  scruples  in  a  man  of 
the  world  who  has  to  see  to  his  own  interests.  Nor  (2)  considerations  of  mercy  to 
others.  Balaam  was  required  to  curse  and,  if  possible,  ruin  a  nation  that  had  done 
him  no  harm.  Selfishness  is  bidden  to  make  any  sacrifice  at  its  shrine.  E.  g- 
ambitious  rulers,  dishonest  traders  or  trustees,  heartless  seducers.  Nor  (3)  the 
will  of  God ;  for  who  can  be  sure  whether  God  has  really  revealed  his  will,  or  will 
enforce  it  (Gen.  iii.  1 — 5).  Nor  (4)  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  dying  that 
he  might  save  from  the  ruin  of  sin  ;  for  though  you  sin,  grace  will  abound.  Nor  (5) 
the  fear  of  judgment;  for  after  all  the  threats  of  judgment  may  be  old  wives' 
fables,  or  you  may  make  all  right  before  you  die.  Thus  speaks  the  tempter,  bidding 
us  make  riches  and  honour  "  the  prize  of  our  calling,"-  and  overleap  or  break  down 
every  barrier  that  God  has  set  up  to  hinder  us  from  ruining  ourselves  and  others. 
(Illustrate  from  the  case  of  Judas,  and  the  barriers  he  broke  through  at  the  call  of 
Satan,  and  contrast  the  impregnability  of  Jesus  Christ  when  offered  the  wealth  and 
honour  of  the  world.)  Christ  himself,  the  motives  supplied  by  his  cross  when  applied 
by  his  Spirit,  are  the  greatest  hindrances  to  keep  us  from  yielding  to  the  tempter. — P. 

Ver.  32. — On  cruelty  to  animals.  In  ver.  28  we  are  reminded  of  the  silent  protest 
of  the  brute  creation  against  the  cruelty  of  men.  From  ver.  32  ("  Wherefore  hast 
thou  smitten  thine  ass  these  three  times  ?  ")  we  may  learn  that  this  protest  is  heeded 
and  supported  by  God.  Cruelty  of  all  kinds  is  one  of  the  foulest  of  the  works  of 
the  flesh,  opposed  to  the  character  of  God  and  to  the  instincts  of  humanity.  Cruelty 
to  animals  is  especially  hateful,  because  of  I.  Thb  WRONG  DONE  TO  THB  CREATUEES  ; 
II.  The  effects  on  odrsblvbs. 

I.  1.  They  are  our  inferiors,  therefore  magnanimity  and  sympathy  should  protect 
them.  2.  They  are  often  helpless  to  defend  themselves ;  cruelty  is  then  unutterably 
mean.  3.  Some  of  these  animals  are  part  of  our  property,  and  of  great  value  to  us, 
though  absolutely  within  our  power.  4.  If  they  are  not  "  wont  to  do  so"  when  they 
provoke  us,  some  good  reason  may  exist  which  we  should  seek  to  discover.  There- 
fore— 5.  When  tempted  to  harshness;  short  of  cruelty,  it  is  our  duty  to  consider 
whether  they  need  it,  and  in  this  sense  deserve  it.  For — 6.  Past  misconduct  of 
ourselves  or  of  others  may  have  occasioned  their  present  obstinacy,  through  timidity 
or  some  other  cause.  7.  Animals  suffer  too  much  already,  directly  or  indirectly, 
through  men's  sins  (war,  famines,  &c.)  without  the  addition  of  gratuitous  cruelties. 
8.  No  future  life  for  them  is  revealed,  so  that  we  have  the  more  reason  for  not 
making  them  miserable  in  this  life. 

II.  1.  It  fosters  a  despotic  habit  of  mind,  as  though  might  and  right  were  identical. 
2.  It  hardens  the  heart  and  tends  to  nurture  cruelty  to  men  as  well  as  brutes.  E.  g. 
the  child  Nero  delighting  in  killing  flies.  3.  It  still  further  alienates  us  from  the 
mind  of  Christ,  the  character  of  "the  Father  of  mercies."  4.  It  is  a  sign  of 
unrighteousness  (Prov.  xii.  10),  against  which  God's  wrath  is  revealed,  and  from 
which  we  need  to  be  saved  by  Christ  (Rom.  i.  18  ;  1  John  i,  9). — P. 


OH.  XML «— 40.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBEES.  flOt 

Vers.  2 — t — Moab  takes  alarm.  I.  An  interested  obsebvbb  of  an  impobtant 
ACTION.  "Balak  saw  all  that  Israel  had  done  to  the  Amorites."  The  thing  wai 
worth  observing  in  itself,  that  this  great  host  of  people,  coming  with  but  little  notice, 
having  no  land  of  its  own,  no  visible  basis  of  operations,  no  military  renown,  should 
yet  have  crushed  into  ruin  such  powerful  kings  as  Sihon  and  Og.  It  was  not  merely 
the  conquest  of  one  army  by  another ;  there  was  something  decisive  and  very  signifi- 
cant about  the  conquest.  Just  as  in  profane  history  some  battles,  such  as  Marathon 
and  Salamis,  Waterloo  and  Trafalgar,  stand  out  like  towering  mountains  because  of 
the  great  issues  connected  with  them,  so  these  victories  of  Israel  over  Sihon  and  Og 
are  for  all  generations  of  God's  people  to  consider.  Balak  of  course  was  interested 
as  a  neighbour,  but  we,  living  thousands  of  miles  from  the  scene  of  these  events, 
and  thousands  of  years  after  them,  should  be  not  less  interested.  They  concern  us 
just  as  much  as  they  concerned  Balak.  Distant  as  they  are  from  us  in  time,  they 
have  to  do  very  practically  with  our  interests  and  the  yet  unaccomplished  purposes 
of  the  ever-living  God.  We  are  too  observant  of  trifles,  the  gossip  of  the  passing 
day,  the  mere  froth  on  the  waves  of  time.  The  thing  also  pressed  for  notice.  The 
Amorites  were  Moab's  neighbours,  and  Moab  had  been  conquered  by  them.  If  Israel 
then  had  conquered  the  conqueror,  there  wag  need  for  prompt  action.  So  long  as 
Israel  was  far  away,  wandering  in  the  wilderness,  with  no  aim  in  its  course  that  could 
be  ascertained, — that  course  aimless  rather,  so  far  as  others  could  make  out, — ^there 
was  no  feeling  of  alarm.  But  now,  with  Israel  in  its  very  borders,  Moab  feels  it 
must  do  something.  Yet  the  pressure  was  not  of  the  right  sort.  Moab  was  driven 
to  consider  its  position  not  because  of  dangers  within,  not  because  of  idolatry  and 
unrighteousness  (ch.  xxv.),  nor  that  it  might  become  a  pure  and  noble-minded 
nation,  but  because  of  the  selfish  fear  that  another  people  close  to  its  territory  might 
prove  hostile  and  destructive.  Thus  we  allow  considerations  to  press  on  us  which 
should  not  have  the  slightest  force.  Where  our  minds  should  be  well-nigh  indifferent 
they  are  yielding  and  sensitive ;  and  where  they  should  be  yielding  and  sensitive, 
indifference  too  often  possesses  them.  When  Jesus  fed  the  multitude,  the  action 
pressed  for  notice  not  because  the  multitude  appreciated  the  spiritual  significance  of 
the  action,  but  they  eat  of  the  loaves  and  were  filled.  Balak  did  well  when  he 
noticed  the  victories  of  Israel,  but  very  ill  when  he  noticed  them  simply  as  bearing 
on  the  safety  of  his  kingdom. 

II.  The  consequent  disquietude  op  Moab.  The  Amorites  had  conquered  Moab, 
but  Israel  had  conquered  the  Amorites.  The  presumption  then  was  that  Israel, 
having  the  power,  would  as  a  matter  of  course  advance  to  treat  Moab  in  the  same 
fashion ;  just  as  an  Alexander  or  Napoleon  goes  from  one  conquered  territory  to 
conquer  the  next ;  just  as  a  fire  spreads  from  one  burning  house  to  its  neighbour.  It 
was  therefore  excusable  for  Moab  to  be  sore  afraid ;  but  though  excusable,  it  was  not 
reasonable.  The  alarm  came  from  knowledge  of  some  things,  mixed  with  ignorance 
of  things  more  important  The  alarm  then  was  groundless.  General  as  that  alarm  was, 
Moab  had  really  nothing  to  fear.  Its  way  of  reasoning  was  utterly  erroneous.  If 
Moab  had  known  the  internal  history  of  Israel  half  as  well  as  it  knew  the  present 
external  appearance  and  recent  triumphs,  it  would  not  have  been  alarmed  because  of 
the  children  of  Israel,  and  because  they  were  many.  The  children  of  Israel  had 
been  commanded  to  cherish  other  purposes  than  those  of  conquering  Moab,  and  the 
mind  of  their  leader  was  occupied  with  things  far  nobler  than  military  success. 
Besides,  as  God  had  remembered  the  kinship  of  Israel  and  Edom,  so  he  remembered 
that  of  Israel  and  Moab  (Deut.  ii.  9).  Moab  was  afraid  of  the  people  because  they 
were  many.  What  a  revelation  of  their  craven  and  abject  spirit  in  the  past  he  would 
have  had  if  he  had  seen  them  threatening  to  stone  Caleb  and  Joshua  (ch.  xiv.).  And 
though  they  were  many,  he  would  have  seen  that  all  their  numbers  availed  nothing 
for  success  when  God  was  not  with  them  (ch.  xiv.  40 — i6). 

III.  Moab's  conclusion  with  regard  to  his  own  eesoueces.  He  could  no  more 
resist  Israel  than  the  grass  of  the  field  resist  the  mouth  of  the  ox.  This  expresses 
his  complete  distrust  of  his  own  resources,  and  was  a  prudent  conclusion,  even  if 
humiliating,  as  far  as  it  went,  and  always  supposing  that  Israel  wished  to  play^  the 
part  of  the  ox.  The  fall  of  Sihon  had  taught  nothing  to  Og,  the  self-confident  giant, 
bat  the  fall  of  Sihon,  and  next  the  fall  of  Og,  had  taught  Moab  this  at  least,  that  in 


302  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [ch.  xxii.  2— *0, 

the  battle-field  he  could  do  nothing  against  Israel.  If  a  man  refuses  to  go  in  the 
right  path,  it  is  not,  therefore,  a  matter  of  little  consequence  which  of  the  wrong  paths 
he  chooses.  One  may  take  him  swiftly  in  the  dark  to  the  precipice ;  another,  also 
downward,  may  afEord  more  time  and  occasions  for  retrieval.  It  was  a  wrong, 
blind,  useless  course  to  send  for  Balaam,  but  at  all  events  it  was  not  so  immediate^ 
destructive,  as  to  rush  recklessly  into  the  field  of  battle  against  Israel. — Y. 

Vers.  5,  6. — Baldk's  message  to  Balaam.  War  being  useless,  what  shall  Balak 
do?  In  his  mind  there  were  only  two  alternatives,  either  to  fight  or  to  send  for  Balaaip. 
And  yet  there  was  a  better  course,  had  he  thought  of  it,  viz.,  to  approach  Israel 
peacefully.  But  prejudice,  a  fixed  persuasion  that  Israel  was  his  enemy,  dominated 
his  mind.  We  do  very  foolish  things  through  allowing  traditional  conceptions  to 
rule  us.  That  Israel  was  the  enemy  of  Moab  was  an  assumption  with  not  the  smallest 
basis  of  experience.  Many  of  the  oppositions  and  difSculties  of  life  arise  from 
asBimiing  that  those  who  have  the  opportunity  to  injure  are  likely  to  use  the  oppor- 
tunity. He  who  will  show  himself  friendly  may  find  friends  and  allies  where  he  least 
expects  them.  We  must  do  our  best  in  dubious  positions  to  make  sure  that  we  have 
exhausted  the  possibilities  of  action.  Balak  then  sends  a  message  to  Balaam. 
Notice — 

I.  A  TESTIMONT  TO  THE  FOWEB  OF  BELiGioN.  Balak  cannot  find  BufScient  resources 
in  nature,  therefore  he  seeks  above  nature.  When  men,  who  in  their  selfishness  and 
unspirituality  are  furthest  from  God,  find  themselves  in  extremity,  it  is  then  precisely 
that  they  are  seen  turning  to  a  power  higher  than  their  own  (1  Sam.  xxviii.).  Man 
has  a  clinging  nature,  and  if  he  cannot  lay  hold  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  he  must 
find  some  substitute.  Balak  did  not  know  God  as  Moses  knew  him ;  he  knew  nothing 
of  his  spiritual  perfections  and  holy  purposes.  But  still  he  recognised  the  God  of 
Israel  as  really  existent,  as  a  mighty  potentate ;  he  felt  that  Balaam  had  some  power 
with  him ;  and  thus  even  in  his  ignorance  he  believes.  It  is  a  long,  long  way  to 
pure  atheism,  and  surely  it  must  be  a  dreary  and  difiScult  one.  May  not  the  question 
be  fairly  raised  whether  there  are  any  consistent  atheists,  those  whose  practice  agrees 
even  approximately  with  their  theory  ?  There  are  men  without  God  in  the  world, 
t.  e.  lacking  conscious  and  happy  connection  with  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ ;  but  even  so  they  may  bear  testimony  unthinkingly  to  their  need  of 
him.  The  witnesses  to  the  power  of  religion  are  not  only  many,  but  of  all  sorts, 
giving  testimony  often  when  they  least  suspect  it. 

II.  A  TESTIMONY  TO  THE   EMPTINESS   OF   IDOLATRY.      Balak   had  a  god  of  Us  OWn,   ' 

probably  more  than  one,  and  doubtless  he  would  have  felt  very  uncomfortable  in 
omitting  the  worship  of  them ;  but  he  did  not  trust  in  his  gods.  He  may  have 
gacrificed  to  them  on  this  very  occasion  with  great  profusion  and  scrupulosity,  but 
he  did  not  trust  them.  Though  they  were  near  at  band,  he  felt  more  hope  from 
Balaam  far  away ;  and  yet  if  there  was  any  good  in  his  gods,  this  was  the  very  time 
to  prove  it  and  receive  it.  There  is  a  Nemesis  for  all  idolatry.  The  idols  of  Moab 
were  put  to  shame  before  the  God  of  Israel,  and  that  by  the  very  man  who  was 
bound  to  be  their  champion,  It  does  not  need  always  for  a  Dagon  to  fall  in  the 
presence  of  the  ark.  There  are  other  ways  of  dishonouring  idols  than  casting  them 
to  the  moles  and  the  bats.  They  may  have  shame  written  across  their  brows,  even 
while  they  stand  on  the  pedestal  of  honour.  Thus  we  see  also  an  exposure  of 
formalism.  Balak's  great  need  strips  the  mask  off  his  religion,  and  underneath  we 
see,  not  living  organs,  but  dead  machinery.  And  bear  in  mind,  formalism  in  serving 
the  true  God  is  just  as  certain  to  come  to  shame  as  formalism  in  serving  an  idol. 
The  principle  is  the  same,  whatever  deity  be  formally  acknowledged. 

III.  After  all,  the  resort  to  Balaam  was  a  very  precarious  one,  even  sup- 
posing Balaam  had  all  the  power  with  which  Balak  credited  him.  For  Pethor  was  a 
long  way  ofE,  and  the  dreaded,  victorious  Israelites  were  close  at  hand.  Balaam  did 
not  live  in  the  next  street.  While  you  are  sending  from  Land's  End  for  the  celebrated 
London  physician,  the  patient's  life  is  steadily  ebbing  away.  That  is  no  sufiioient 
help  in  our  supreme  necessities  which  has  to  be  brought  over  land  and  sea.  "  Say 
not  in  thine  heart,  Who  shall  ascend  into  heaven  ?  (that  is,  to  bring  Christ  down  from 
above:)  or.  Who  shall  descend  into  the  deep ?  (that  is,  to  bring  up  Christ  again  ftom 


OH.  XXII.  2—40.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES.  308 

the  dead).  The  word  is  nigh  thee,  even  in  thy  mouth,  and  in  thy  heart "  (Bom.  x. 
6 — 8).  Go  into  thy  closet ;  retreat  into  the  seclusion  and  security  of  thine  own 
heart,  and  meet  the  mighty  Guide  and  Helper  there.  The  God  of  Israel  went  about 
with  his  people.  Jesus  did  not  say,  "  Wheresoever  I  am,  there  my  people  are  to 
gather  together,"  but,  "Where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  my  name^  there 
am  I  in  the  midst  of  them." 

"God  attributes  to  place 
No  sanctity,  if  none  be  thither  brought 
By  men  who  there  frequent,  or  therein  dwell." 

IV.  A   MAN    MAT  BE  IGNOKANT  OF  THINGS  LYING  NEAREST  HIM  AND  UNSPBAKABLT 

IMFORTANT,  while  he  abounds  in  useless  knowledge  of  things  far  away.  Balak  knew 
not  the  needs  of  his  own  heart,  the  real  power  of  Israel,  the  disposition  of  Israel's 
God  to  him,  the  possibilities  of  friendship  which  lay  within  those  tents  on  which  ho 
looked  with  so  much  apprehension.  But  somehow  he  had  got  to  know  concerning 
Balaam  in  far-away  Pernor.  How  much  useless,  deceiving,  pretentious  knowledge 
we  may  accumulate  with  infinite  labour,  and  at  the  time  feeling  great  certainty  of 
its  value.  "Knowledge  comes,  but  wisdom  lingers,"  It  is  of  great  moment  in  a 
world  where  so  much  is  to  be  known,  and  yet  so  little  can  be  acquired,  not  to  misa 
acquiring  the  right  things.  Said  Dr.  Arnold,  "  If  one  might  wish  for  impossibilities, 
I  might  then  wish  that  my  children  might  be  well  versed  in  physical  science,  but  in 
due  subordination  to  the  fulness  and  freshness  of  their  knowledge  on  moral  subjects. 
This,  however,  I  believe  cannot  be ;  and  physical  science,  if  studied  at  all,  seems  too 
great  to  be  studied  iv  vaptpyif.  Wherefore,  rather  than  have  it  the  principal  thing 
in  my  son's  mind,  I  would  gladly  have  him  think  that  the  sun  went  round  the  earth, 
and  that  the  stars  were  so  many  spangles  set  in  the  bright  blue  firmament."  Thus 
also  the  great  discoverer  Faraday  in  his  old  age — "  My  worldly  faculties  are  slipping 
away,  day  by  day.  Happy  is  it  for  all  of  us  that  the  true  good  lies  not  in  them.  As 
they  ebb,  may  they  leave  us  as  little  children,  trusting  in  the  Father  of  mercies  and 
accepting  his  unspeakable  gift  I " 

V.  The  MESSAGE  was  very  flattering  to  Balaam.  Kings  have  much  to  do 
with  courtiers,  and  all  the  delicate,  preparations  of  flattery  must  be  well  known  to 
them.  Balak  made  Balaam  to  understand  that  it  was  not  for  a  trifle  he  had  sum- 
moned him,  for  a  service  that  could  be  rendered  by  a  second-rate  soothsayer.  The 
people  he  so  dreaded  had  come  out  from  Egypt,  that  home  of  strength  in  those  days, 
that  populous  and  wealthy  land,  and  by  no  means  lacking  in  reputed  wise  men, 
■orcerers  and  magicians.  They  had  come  in  great  numbers :  "  behold,  they  cover 
the  face  of  the  earth ;"  and  they  were  in  close  proximity  and  apparently  settled  con- 
dition :  "  they  abide  over  against  me."  There  jls  the  willing  confession  by  Balak  of 
his  own  inability,  and  his  evident  faith  in  Balaam's  power  to  cast  a  fatal  paralysis 
over  all  the  energy  of  Israel.  Now  all  this  must  have  been  very  pleasant  for  Balaam 
to  hear,  sweeter  maybe  than  the  jingle  of  the  rewards  of  divination.  Thus  did  the 
temptation  to  Balaam,  already  only  too  open  to  temptation,  begin.  His  carnal 
mind  was  appealed  to  in  many  ways.  The  rewards  of  divination  were  only  a  part  of 
the  expected  wages  of  unrighteousness.  "  Pride  goeth  before  destruction,  and  an 
haughty  spirit  before  a  fall "  (Prov.  xvi.  18). 

VI.  Balak  had  more  faith  in  falsehood  than  Israel  fob  a  long  time  had 
SHOWN  TOWARDS  TRUTH.  The  conduct  of  Balak  in  sending  so  far,  in  casting  the 
fortunes  of  his  kingdom  with  such  simplicity  on  what  was  utterly  false,  should  put 
us  to  shame,  who  have  the  opportunity  of  resorting  at  all  times  to  well  ascertained 
and  established  truth.  Balak  had  only  a  Balaam  to  seek,  such  an  ignoble  and  double- 
minded  man  as  appears  in  the  sequel ;  not  a  Moses,  who  could  have  told  him  truly, 
not  only  how  the  blessing  and  the  curse  really  come,  but  how  to  secure  the  one  and 
escape  the  other. — Y. 

Vers.  7 — 14. — The  first  vidt  to  Balaam.  I.  Balak's  notion  of  what  would  be 
MOST  acceptable  to  Balaam.  It  is  all  a  matter  of  money,  Balak  thinks.  "  Every 
man  has  his  price,"  and  the  poor  man  who  cannot  pay  it  must  go  to  the  wall.  Not 
iftiat  we  are  to  suppose  Balaam  a  specially  greedy  man,  but  it  has  been  the  mark  of 


8M  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBSl  [oh.  xzii.  2— 40l 

false  religions  and  all  corruptions  of  the  true  service  of  God  that  priests  and  prophets 
have  heen  greedy  after  money.  They  promise  spiritual  things  and  make  large 
demands  for  carnal  things  ;  the  more  they  get  the  more  they  promise,  and  the  more 
they  get  the  more  they  want.  "  The  priests  teach  for  hire,  and  the  prophets  divine 
for  money"  (Micah  iii.  11).  Simon  Magus  must  have  known  well  the  greed  of  his 
trihe  when  he  offered  money  to  Simon  Peter.  It  is  the  mark  of  a  true  bishop  that 
he  is  not  greedy  of  filthy  lucre  (1  Tim.  iii.  3).  Jesus  sent  forth  his  disciples  to 
make  a  free  gift  in  healing  the  sick,  cleansing  the  lepers,  raising  the  dead,  and 
casting  out  devils.  "  Freely  ye  have  received, /r««Zy  give."  "Ho,  every  one  that 
thii'steth,  come  ye  to  the  waters,  and  he  that  hath  no  money ;  come  ye,  buy,  and 
eat ;  yea,  come,  buy  wine  and  milk  without  money  and  without  price"  (Isa.  Iv.  1). 

II.  Balaam's  eeception  of  the  messengers.  He  cannot  give  a  prompt  answer. 
We  are  certainly  very  much  in  the  dark  concerning  Balaam's  past  life  and  present 
position.  If  he  knew  anything  of  Israel's  true  character  and  God's  purpose  concern- 
ing Israel,  then,  of  course,  there  was  not  the  smallest  excuse  for  delay.  But  even 
supposing  him  ignorant  in  this  respect,  was  there  any  excuse  for  delay  to  an  upright 
man  ?  Did  not  Balak's  wish  at  once  suggest  the  answer  an  upright  man  would  have 
given  ?  Blessing  and  cursing  are  great  realities,  not  mere  priestly  fictions  (Deut. 
xxvii.,  xxviii.),  but  they  can  never  become  mere  matters  of  money.  "The  curse 
causeless  shall  not  come."  He  who  deserves  blessing  cannot  be  cursed,  nor  he  who 
deserves  cursing,  blessed.  God's  sovereignty,  mysterious  enough  in  its  operations, 
is  never  arbitrary.  An  upright  man  would  have  felt  it  was  no  use  pretending  to 
consult  God  with  a  bribe  in  his  hand.  The  bribe  vitiated  the  spirit  of  his  prayer, 
and  prevented  a  proper  reception  of  the  answer.  There  are  certain  propositions 
which  upright  men  do  not  need  to  sleep  or  deliberate  over.  The  answer  should 
follow  the  request  like  the  instantaneous  rebound  of  a  ball.  Balak  did  not  send 
asking  advice  in  general  terms,  or  that  Balaam  should  do  the  best  he  could,  but  he 
pointed  out  a  certain,  well-defined  road  which  no  upright  man  could  possibly  take. 
If  we  acquit  the  prophet  of  dishonesty  and  evasion  in  this  plea  of  delay,  we  can  only 
do  it  by  convicting  him  of  great  darkness  in  his  own  spirit  and  great  ignorance  of 
God. 

III.  Thb  interposition  of  God.  God  does  not  seem  to  have  waited  for  any 
request  from  Balaam.  While  the  prophet  is  considering  all  the  honour  and  emolu- 
ment that  may  come  to  hira  out  of  this  affair,  God  comes  to  him  with  the  prompt 
and  sobering  question,  "What  men  are  these  with  thee?"  All  the  depths  of  this 
question  we  cannot  penetrate,  but  at  all  events  it  was  enough  to  prepare  the 
prophet,  one  would  think,  for  an  unfavourable  answer.  And  may  we  not  also 
assume  that  it  was  expressive  of  a  desire  to  extricate  him  when  he  had  only  taken  one 
or  two  steps  into  temptation  ?  As  to  Balak's  request,  God  settles  everything  with  ■ 
brief,  a  very  brief,  but  sufficient  utterance :  "  The  people  are  blessed."  And  blessed 
beyond  all  doubt  they  had  been  of  late,  not  in  word  only,  but  in  deed.  Note  that 
God  does  not  send  any  message  of  reassurance  to  Balak.  There  is  guidance  for 
Balaam,  security  for  Israel,  but  for  Balak  only  blank  denial.  If  Balak  had  come  in 
the  right  spirit  to  Balaam,  and  Balaam  in  the  right  spirit  to  God,  then  the  messengers 
might  have  gone  back  cheerful,  and  welcome  to  their  expectant  master.  But  what 
begins  badly  ends  worse.  He  who  sets  himself  in  opposition  to  God's  people 
cannot  expect  to  hear  comfortable  words  from  God.  If  we  are  to  hear  such  words, 
we  must  approach  him  in  the  right  spirit.  We  must  not  seek  good  for  ourselves  by 
a  selfish  infringement  on  the  good  of  others.  It  was  one  thing  for  Israel,  under  the 
leadership  of  God,  to  attack  the  wicked  Amorites ;  quite  another  for  Moab,  on  a 
mere  peradventure,  to  attack  Israel. 

IV.  Balaam's  answer  to  the  messengers.  He  does  not  repeat  what  the  Lord 
Baid ;  thus  advancing  further  in  the  revelation  of  his  corrupt  heart.  Why  not  have 
told  them  plainly  these  words:  "Thou  shalt  not  curse  the  people,  for  they  are 
blessed  "  ?  Simply  because  it  was  not  pleasant  to  say  such  words  with  the  flatterinc 
message  of  Balak  still  tickling  his  ears.  It  was  not  true  then  that  whom  he  blessea 
was  blessed,  and  whom  he  cursed  was  cursed ;  but  to  have  told  Moab  so  would  have 
been  to  publish  his  humiliation  far  and  wide,  and  hurt  his  repute  as  a  great  sooth- 
layer.    Yet  how  much  better  it  would  have  been  for  Balaam  as  a  man,  and  a  maa 


OH.  xzn.  2—40.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS  30& 

who  had  been  brought  in  some  respects  so  near  to  God,  if  he  had  told  the  whole 
truth.  It  would  perhaps  have  saved  a  second  embassy  to  him.  Men  are  looking  to 
the  main  chance  even  when  among  the  solemn  things  of  God,  and  fresh  from 
hearing  his  voice.  Balaam  first  of  all,  in  speaking  to  God,  omits  from  the  message 
of  Balak,  saying  nothing  of  his  own  reputation  in  the  eyes  of  the  Moabitish  king, 
suspecting  very  shrewdly  that  this  would  be  offensive  to  God.  Then  he  omits  again 
in  his  answer  to  the  messengers,  and,  to  make  all  complete,  they  omit  still  more  in 
their  report  to  Balak.  There  is  nothing  in  their  word  to  show  that  God  had  said 
anything  in  the  matter.  This  is  what  is  called  diplomacy ;  not  telling  a  lie,  but 
only  leaving  out  something  of  the  truth,  as  being  of  no  practical  importance.  It  is 
a  great  blessing  that  there  are  Scriptures  for  us  all  to  read.  Philosophers  and 
preachers  may  leave  out  part  of  the  truth,  or  colour  and  distort  it  to  suit  their  own 
prejudices,  but  they  cannot  get  over  the  written  word.  Out  of  their  own  mouths 
they  may  be  contradicted  when  they  read  one  thing  out  of  the  Scriptures  and  say 
another  as  the  fruit  of  their  own  lips. — ^Y. 

Vers.  15 — 21. — The  second  visit.  I.  The  result  of  mutilated  answers.  1.  As 
concerns  Balak.  Balaam  does  siot  tell  the  first  messengers  all  that  God  had  spoken 
to  him ;  they  do  not  tell  Balak  all  that  Balaam  had  spoken  to  them.  The  consequence 
is  that  he  comes  to  a  wrong  conclusion,  and  really  he  had  no  information  by  which 
to  come  to  a  right  one.  His  thoughts  on  the  subject  may  be  supposed  to  have  run 
thus : — "  All  the  diflSculty  lies  with  Balaam.  He  took  the  night  to  think  the  matter 
over,  and  concluded  it  was  not  worth  his  while  on  such  poor  considerations  to  under- 
take so  serious  a  journey.  My  messengers  and  rewards  have  not  suiBciently  impressed 
him  with  the  rank  of  Moab."  In  Balak's  mind  it  is  all  a  question  of  degree,  and  so 
he  sends  more  princes,  and  more  honourable  than  before.  And  possibly,  if  these  had 
been  unsuccessful,  as  a  last  resort  he  would  have  gone  himself.  Thus  poor  Balak, 
in  the  quagmire  of  misunderstanding  already,  was  led  still  deeper  into  it.  The  great 
end  was  to  get  Balaam's  curse  into  operation,  and  there  was  nothing  to  shake  his 
faith  in  the  possibility  of  this  end  being  gained.  Between  God  and  Balak  there  were 
interposed  a  self-seeking  Balaam,  and,  to  say  the  least,  messengers  who  were  careless, 
if  nothing  more.  Ours  is  a  more  secure  position.  We  come  to  God  through  a  Christ, 
not  through  a  Balaam ;  enlightened  by  a  Spirit  who  teaches  us  the  proper  needs  of 
sinful  men,  and  shows  us  our  real  danger.  2.  As  concerns  Balaam.  Whether  he 
thought  that  by  his  first  answer  he  had  finally  disposed  of  the  request,  or  wanted 
time  to  consider  if  it  should  be  preferred  again,  we  cannot  make  sure.  His  first 
answer  had  to  be  given  very  much  on  the  spur  of  the  moment.  If  it  had  been  a 
truthful  answer,  one  not  only  with  the  lips,  but  with  the  whole  countenance,  and  the 
whole  man  speaking  all  God  had  said,  he  would  not  have  been  troubled  again.  But 
now  he  has  to  deal  with  more  princes,  and  more  honourable  than  before.  He  sees 
precisely  why  tliey  have  been  sent,  and  as  he  listens  to  their  urgent  and  obsequious 
words  and  comprehensive  promises,  he  understands  exactly  what  is  expected  of  him. 
His  proper  answer  even  now  was  to  say  that  he  could  not  go  on  any  consideration. 
But  there  was  no  spirit  and  courage  of  repentance  in  him.  His  reply,  with  all  its 
seeming  emphasis,  is  very  evasive  and  ambiguous.  It  looks  strong  to  say,  "  If  Balak 
wou]d  give  me  his  house  full  of  silver  and  gold,"  and  to  speak  of  God  as  "the  Lord 
my  God,"  but  after  all  he  leaves  the  messengers  in  the  dark  as  to  what  the  word  of 
the  Lord  was,  though  he  knew  it  well.  He  pretends  that  it  is  needful  to  wait  another 
night  for  what  the  Lord  might  say.  This  time  it  is  a  mere  pretence,  beyond  any 
doubt.  Perhaps  he  reckons  that  he  will  have  nothing  to  do  but  wait  till  the  morning, 
and  then  repeat  to  the  second  messengers  what  he  had  said  to  the  first.  How  startled 
then  he  must  have  been,  not  only  to  get  another  revelation  of  God,  but  a  totally 
different  direction  1  And  yet,  when  we  consider,  we  see  that  he  could  not  get  the 
same  answer  as  before.  Balaam  does  not  stand  where  he  did  at  the  time  of  the 
previous  answer.  He  is  a  worse  man;  he  has  yielded  to  temptation  from  which  God 
would  have  preserved  him,  and  now,  with  open  and  greedy  heart,  he  is  in  the  midst 
of  greater  temptation  still.  He  had  daringly  neglected  God's  previous  word,  and 
would  assuredly  neglect  it  again  if  he  got  the  opportunity.  Why  then  should  God 
scpeat  the  word  ?    Balaam  wil}  still  suppress  the  fact  that  he  cannot  curse  |srafi, 


806  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oh.  xhi.  2— 4a 

seeing  they  are  blessed.  What  was  the  needful  word  yesterday  may  become  useless 
to-day.  The  possible  of  one  hour  becomes  the  impossible  of  the  next.  Jesus  says, 
"  Watch  and  pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation  ;■"  but  that  does  not  prevent  him 
saying  very  soon  afterwards,  "  Sleep  on  now,  and  take  your  rest.  ,  ,  .  Bise,  letut  be 
going."  The  father  has  not  changed  because  the  child  whom  he  commands  in  one 
way  to-day  he  commands  in  another  to-morrow.  Different  actions  outwardly  may 
reveal  the  same  character  and  advance  the  same  purpose.  The  appearance  of  con- 
tradiction in  God's  dealing  arises  from  our  hasty  thinking,  not  because  there  is  any 
reality  corresponding  to  the  appearance.  God  was  speaking,  as  we  more  and  more 
clearly  see,  both  for  the  real  good  of  Balaam  and  the  safety  and  blessedness  of  his 
own  people. 

II.  The  world's  confidence  in  the  atteactiveness  op  its  rewards.  The  world 
never  has  any  doubt  but  what  it  can  make  its  possessions  fascinating  to  every  man, 
and  appeal  successfully  to  his  affections  and  sympathies.  Weak  as  the  world  is,  it 
never  loses  its  self-confidence.  Though  Balak's  throne  is  in  peril,  he  brags  of  the 
honours  he  can  confer  on  Balaam  ;  and  when  he  sends  the  second  message,  he  does 
not  change  the  considerations,  but  simply  increases  them  to  the  utmost.  So,  to  take 
the  other  side,  the  world  is  equally  confident  in  the  terrifying  power  of  its  penalties. 
Nebuchadnezzar,  sorely  troubled  about  his  forgotten  dream,  does  not  for  all  that 
forget  to  play  the  despot.  He  menaces  the  astrologers,  threatening  them  with  a 
dreadful  death,  in  right  royal  style.  It  must  be  acknowledged  also  that  the  result 
only  too  often  ehows  that  the  confidence  is  justified.  We  cannot  guard  too  carefully 
against  the  world,  alike  in  its  attractions  and  its  threats ;  and  he  does  this  best 
who  is  filled  with  a  purer  love  and  a  worthier  fear  than  anything  in  the  world  can 
inspire. 

III.  Balak's  alarm  had  not  been  lost  noe  lessened  by  the  lapse  op  time. 
"The.se  Israelites  are  not  going  to  steal  away  my  suspicions  by  their  quietude.  The 
less  they  look  my  way,  the  more  sure  I  am  they  mean  ultimate  mischief."  And  yet 
what  was  Israel  doing  all  this  time  of  going  to  Balaam  and  returning  and  going 
again  ?  Why,  while  Balak  is  in  all  this  fret  and  stir,  Israel  is  steadily  preparing  for 
the  promised  land.  Whatever  God's  enemies  may  do  in  plot  and  counsel,  let  it  not 
hinder  our  advance.  Enemies  outside  cannot  hinder,  if  only  we,  whom  God  has 
called  and  guided,  lay  aside  every  weight,  and  the  sin  which  doth  so  eiwily  beset 
us.— Y. 

Vers.  22— 35.— 2%«  angel,  the  prophet,  and  the  ass.    I.  We  must  look  not  only 

AT   THE  LETTER  OF   God's   COMMANDS,  BUT   THE  SPIRIT  OP  THEM.        "  If  the  men  Come 

to  call  thee,  rise  up,  and  go  with  them"  (ver.  20).  "God's  anger  was  kindled 
because  he  went"  (ver.  22).  It  has  been  said  indeed  that  God  was  angry  not 
because  he  went,  but  with  something  that  happened  on  the  journey  ;  and  to  support 
this  view  grammatical  considerations  are  urged,  from  the  participle  being  used 
instead  of  the  finite  verb  ('Keil  and  Delitzsch  on  the  Pentateuch,'  iii.  168.  Clark's 
Translations).  It  is  further  urged,  as  a  consequence  of  this  construction,  that  the 
encounter  with  the  angel  took  place  not  at  the  outset  of  the  journey,  but  rather 
towards  its  close.  All  tliis  may  be  true,  but  there  is  no  distinct  afiirniation  of  it 
in  the  narrative  and  it  is  not  necessary  to  assume  it  for  reconciling  purposes. 
There  is  no  dithculty  in  admitting  that  God  was  displeased  with  Balaam  because  ha 
went  at  all.  We  must  not  go  by  words  simply.  There  is  something,  even  in  com- 
munications between  men,  which  cannot  be  put  into  words.  And  just  as  the  Spirit 
makes  intercession  for  us  with  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered,  so  there  are  com- 
munications of  the  answering  God  which  can  be  put  in  no  human  tongue.  The 
obedient  heart  will  distinguish  between  the  permissive  and  the  imperative,  between 
the  concession  to  human  weakness  and  the  call  to  holy  duty.  Those  who  want  to 
be  right  with  God,  to  attend  to  his  will  rather  than  their  own  desires,  will  never  lift 
a  permission  into  a  command  Our  interpretations  of  God's  words  are  a  searching 
test  of  our  spiritual  state.  How  many  jump  at  them  to  excuse  self-indulgence,  but 
conveniently  ignore  equally  prominent  words  that  call  for  self-denial.  The  word 
telling  Balaam  that  he  might  go  to  Balak  was  not  like  the  call  to  Abram  to  get  out 
of  his  country  and  away  from  his  kindred  to  a  land  which  the  Lord  Wiuld  ^hotf 
hims  nor  like  the  sending  of  Moses  to  Pharaoh,  and  Jonah  to  Nineveh. 


OH,  xxn.  2-40.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS.  3W 

II.  Balaam  was  going  on  this  expedition  evidently  fdll  of  the  desiees  of  hm 
OWN  HEABT.  All,  so  far  as  he  could  see,  was  pointing  in  the  way  he  wanted.  Ha 
could  plead  God's  permission,  which  was  a  very  comfortable,  not  to  say  a  necessary, 
beginning  to  one  who  was  a  prophet.  As  he  rode  along,  his  heart  filled  with  ex- 
pectation of  the  future — riches,  honours,  fame,  power — an  ample  share  in  the  king- 
doms of  this  world  and  the  glory  of  them.  God's  permission  may  have  seemed  to 
the  infatuated  man  a  clear  indication  of  further  favours.  If  he  allowed  Balaam  to 
have  his  own  way  in  one  thing,  why  not  in  others  ?  Thus  he  had  in  view  the  possi- 
bility of  exercising  an  extraordinary  power,  one  that  would  make  him  famed  and 
dreaded  far  and  wide.  It  is  something  to  make  a  man's  heart  swell  when  he  can 
wield  the  immense  forces  of  nature,  say  in  the  strength  of  a  disciplined  army,  or  of 
some  huge  steam-engine.  But  Balaam  had  in  view  the  possibility  of  wielding  forces 
above  nature,  cursing  Israel  so  that  its  strength  might  utterly  melt  away.  What 
wonder  God  was  angry  with  him,  seeing  he  had  desires  in  his  heart  which  could 
only  be  satisfied  by  accomplishing  the  ruin  of  the  chosen  race  1  Not  that  he 
deliberately  desired  their  destruction ;  but  selfishness  in  its  blind  absorption  destroys 
with  little  scruple  all  that  comes  in  its  way.  There  is  some  parallel  between 
Balaam  and  Paul,  all  the  mort.  striking  because  it  extends  only  a  little  way.  Paul 
set  out  for  Damascus,  like  Balaam  for  Moab,  his  fanatical  heart  brimful  of  darling 
projects.  Hence  in  both  instances  we  see  special,  eoetraordinary,  and  unfailing 
methods  adopted  to  check  the  men  and  bring  them  to  consideration.  Men  who  are  in 
the  ordinary  paths  of  sin  may  be  dealt  with  by  ordinary  methods,  peculiar  indeed  to 
each  individual,  yet  never  rising  above  the  ordinary  experiences  of  humanity.  Bat 
Balaam  and  Paul,  being  extraordinary  transgressors,  were  dealt  with  by  extraordinary 
methods.  We  do  not  expect  sinners  to  be  "met  by  angels  now,  or  to  hear  human 
speech  from  brute  beasts.  Still  we  may  have  this  much  in  common  with  Balaam 
and  Paul,  that  we  may  be  so  absorbed  in  our  own  things,  so  utterly  careless  of  God, 
Christ,  salvation,  and  eternity,  as  to  require  sharp,  sudden,  accumulated  agencies  to 
•tir  up  our  attention.     It  takes  a  great  deal  to  bring  some  men  to  themselves. 

Ill  The  process  adopted  to  make  Balaam  fully  conscious  of  the  wbath  of 
God.  1.  The  presence  of  an  angel  in  front.  Why  an  angel  ?  Why  not  communi- 
cate with  Balaam  as  before  ?  The  answer  is  that  Balaam  did  not  appreciate  such 
communications.  He  heard  them  indeed,  but  they  did  not  lay  hold  of  his  conscience, 
they  did  not  secure  his  obedience,  they  did  not  even  make  him  think  seriously  of  his 
danger.  Hence  the  appearance  of  a  visible  sign  in  the  angel — one  who  should 
equally  speak  the  word  of  God  and  he  seen  as  he  spoke.  We  know  that  persons  were 
greatly  terrified  and  impressed  by  the  visits  of  angels  (Judges  xiii.).  Men  can  go 
about  the  world  delighting  in  sin,  unconscious  that  all  the  time  they  are  in  the 
presence  of  God  himself,  but  let  them  see  what  seems  an  apparition  from  another 
world,  and  they  tremble  like  the  aspen.  The  disciples  in  their  earlier,  carnal- 
hearted  days  were  not  much  afEected  by  the  holiness  and  spiritual  beauty  of  their 
Master's  life ;  but  what  an  impression  he  made  when  they  saw  him  walking  on  the 
sea !  They  thought  it  was  an  apparition.  So  soon  as  Balaam  perceived  the  presence 
of  the  angel  it  brought  him  up  at  once.  "  He  bowed  down  his  head,  and  fell  flat  on 
his  face."  God  makes  use  of  visible  agents  to  prepare  results  in  the  sphere  of  the 
invisible.  And  not  only  did  an  angel  appear,  hut  he  was  right  in  front,  signifying 
that  he  was  there  to  meet  with  Balaam.  He  had  also  his  sword  drawn.  There  wag 
significance  in  meeting  a  messenger  bearing  a  sword,  but  the  drawing  of  the  sword, 
even  without  a  single  word  spoken,  was  the  clearest  possible  intimation  of  opposition. 
The  way  of  transgressors  may  be  hard  in  more  senses  than  one.  How  many  perse- 
vere in  the  ways  of  sin  inNspite  of  urgent,  repeated  warnings  and  entreaties,  every- 
thing short  of  physical  force,  from  those  who  love  and  pity  them !  Such  at  all 
events  cannot  say  that  no  one  has  cared  for  their  souls.  2.  The  extraordinary 
means  hy  which  God  made  Balaam  to  notice  the  angel.  Balaam  would  not  attend  to 
the  warnings  of  an  invisible  God  presented  to  the  eye  within,  therefore  a  visible  angel 
was  sent  to  appeal  through  the  eye  without  to  the  eye  within.  But  though  the  angel 
was  in  front  with  the  drawn  sword,  Balaam  did  not  see  him.  Sow  then  shall  he  hi 
made  te  see  him  t  God,  as  his  custom  is,  takes  the  weak  things  of  the  world  to 
confound  the  ipighty.    He  opens  the  mouth  of  tl|e  prophet's  ass.     Bidiciiloui  I  say 

X  2 


308  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS,  [oh.  xxu.  4—40. 

the  men  who  will  have  no  miracles,  no  admission  of  the  supernatural ;  and  ludicrous 
as  well  as  ridiculous,  seeing  that  it  is  an  ass,  of  all  animals,  which  is  chosen  to  speak. 
But  that  is  only  because  we  associate  Balaam  with  the  despised  and  bufEeted  animal 
which  the  word  "  ass  "  recalls  to  us.     We  may  be  sure  that  a  man  of  Balaam's 
dignity  would  have  a  beast  to  carry  him  such  as  became  his  dignity.     And  as  to  the 
absurdity  of  an  animal  uttering-  human  speech,  it  is  no  harder  to  believe  that  God 
should  here  have  opened  the  mouth  of  the  ass,  than  that  he  should  afterwards  have 
opened  the  mouth  of  Balaam,  being  such  a  man  as  he  was,  to  utter  glorious  predic- 
tions concerning  the  people  whom  it  was  in  his  heart  to  curse.     If  we  were  allowed 
to  think  of  things  as  beiyig  either  easy  or  difficult  to  God,  we  might  say  that  it  was 
more  difBcult  for  him  to  control  the  mouth  of  a  carnal-minded  man  like  Balaam  than 
the  mouth  of  a  brute  beast.     It  is  not  pretended  that  he  changed  the  intellect  and 
gave  the  ass  human  thoughts  along  with  human  speech.     The  words  were  the  words 
of  a  man,  but  the  thoughts  were  the  thoughts  of  an  ass.     Balaa/m  himself  was  not 
astmdshed  to  hear  it  speak.     He  was  too  much  exasperated  with  the  strange  stub- 
bornness of  an  animal  hitherto  so  docile  and  serviceable,  to  notice  the  still  stranger 
power  with  which  it  had  been  so  suddenly  endowed.     Observe,  again,  hmu  naturally 
all  leads  up  to  the  speaking  of  the  ass.     The  ass  is  not  brought  specially  on  the 
scene,  as  the  angel  was.     Balaam  saddles  the  ass,  and  takes  the  road  on  it  in  his 
customary  way.    At  first  there  is  nothing  miraculous.     The  ass  sees  the  angel,  and 
turns  aside  into  the  field ;  there  is  nothing  strange  in  that.     Coming  to  the  path  of 
the  vineyards,  and  still  seeing  the  angel,  it  crushes  Balaam's  foot  against  the  wall ; 
there  is  nothing  strange  in  that.     Still   advancing  into  the  narrow  place,  and  still 
seeing  the  angel,  it  sinks  to  the  grouiid  ;  there  is  nothing  strange  in  that.     The  ass 
was  in  a  strait  before  and  behind,  on  the  right  side  and  on  the  left.    Thus  its  speaking 
is  prepared  for  as  a  climax.     Accept  tlie  statement  that  the  ass  spoke,  and  all  the 
previous  narrative  leads  beautifully  up  to  it.     Deny  the  statement,  and  the  chief 
virtue  of  the  narrative  is  lost.     3.  Let  us  not  fail  to  notice  this  instance  of  the  lower 
creation  recognising  God's  messenger.     The  question  of  course  suggests  itself,  Who 
was  this  angel  ?  one  of  the  unnamed  host,  or  the  Son  of  God  himself  in  his  old 
covenant  guise  ?     If  the  latter,  then  he  who  while  in  human  flesh  signified  his  will 
to  the  stormy  sea  might  well  signify  his  warning  presence  to  the  ass.     Not  that  the 
ass  knew  the  angel  as  a  human  being  could  ;  but  even  as  the  lower  creation  is  sensible 
in  its  own  way  of  the  presence  of  man,  so  the  ass  might  be  sensible  in  its  own  way 
of  the  presence  of  the  angel.     We  argue  concerning  the  lower  animals  far  more 
from  ignorance  and   carelessly-accepted   tradition  than  from  real   and  discerning 
knowledge.     We  know  positively  nothing  as  to  what  sort  of  consciousness  underlies 
the  phenomena  of  their  existence.     We  know  wherein  they  are  not  like  us,  but  what 
they  are  in  themselves  we  caimot  know.    4.  Every  Balaam,  has  hit  a»s,  i.  c,  every 
man  who  has  the  spirit  and  conduct  of  Balaam  in  him  may  expect  to  be  pulled  up  at 
last  in  like  manner.     What  God  made  the  ass  to  his  master,  that  God  makes  their 
consciences  to  many.     For  a  long  time  the  ass  had  only  been  of  ordinary  and  com- 
monly-accepted use.     Balaam  had  ridden  on  it  ever  since  it  was  his,  a  long  time  we 
may  conclude,  and  doubtless  rejoiced  in  having  so  convenient  and  trustworthy  a 
servant.     And  thus  many  find  their  consciences  as  little  troublesome,  as  constantly 
agreeable,  as  the  ass  was  to  Balaam.     Some  sort  of  conscience  they  must  have,  but 
it  amounts  to  nothing  more  than  taking  care  to  keep  a  reputation  for  honesty  and 
respectability.     They  find  such  a  conscience  useful  in  its  way,  just  as  Balaam  found 
his  ass  when  out  on  soothsaying  business.     But  even  as  the  ass  sees  the  angel,  so  can' 
science  hegins  to  waken  to  nobler  uses.     One  gets  out  of  the  little  world  of  mere  give 
and  take,  business  customs  and  local  habits.     Something  suggests  that  wfe  are  in  the 
wrong  road,  pulls  us  up  for  a  moment,  tries  to  turn  us  aside.     In  reality  God  is 
beginning  to  close  with  us  for  our  own  good.     At  first  there  is  latitude,  opportunity 
of  evasion.     We  go  a  little  further,  and  God  comes  closer.     Onward  still  1  and  at  last 
the  soul  cannot  escape.     Blessed  is  that  man,  blessed  in  his  opportunity  at  all  events, 
whose  conscience,  once  the  humble  instrument  of  his  baser  self,  is  thoroughly  roused 
BO  that  it  will  not  allow  him  further  with  its  consent  in  his  chosen  and  accustomed 
way.     The  crisis  comes,  and  the  question  is,  "  Will  you  from  the  heart  obey  the 
')ivine  command,  come  in  subjection  to  the  angel  of  God,  or  go  on  greedily  in  t)i9 


oa.  Mil.  2—40.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  809 

way  of  unrighteousness,  which  you  have  been  so  clearly  shown  is  also  the  way  of 

destruction  ?  " 

ly.  The  extent  to  which  the  pbocess  is  successful.  1.  Balaam  is  enlightened 
at  last,  but  after  all  only  partially  enlightened.  At  last,  and  only  when  forced  to  it, 
does  he  become  aware  of  the  angel's  presence.  And  now  he  is  quick  enough  and 
hnnjble  enough  to  recognise  that  presence,  but  not  with  the  quickness  and  humility 
of  a  full  repentance.  The  Lord  opened  the  eyes  of  Balaam,  evei«  as  he  opened  the 
eyes  »f  the  ass,  but  the  opening  left  his  disposition  and  wishes  unchanged,  even  as  it 
left  the  ass-nature  unchanged.  He  saw  the  angel,  the  drawn  sword,  his  danger  at 
the  moment,  and  the  danger  he  had  been  in  before ;  but  his  folly,  his  duplicity,  his 
covetousness,  his  spiritual  danger  he  did  not  see.  Then  when  his  eyes  were  opened, 
and  at  the  same  time  his  ears  unstopped,  the  angel  goes  on  to  speak  to  him  such 
words  as  might  bring  him  to  a  right  state  of  mind.  Nothing  was  left  undone  that 
could  be  done.  The  angel  shows  him  plainly  in  what  danger  he  had  been  from  the 
first  swerving  of  the  ass,  and  how  the  ass  was  perhaps  more  aware  of  the  master's 
danger  and  solicitous  for  his  safety  than  was  the  master  himself.  Nothing  but  the 
sagacity  and  fidelity  of  the  ass  had  saved  his  life.  'The  ass  was  more  faithfulto 
its  master  than  the  master  had  been  to  God.  2.  Hence,  the  enlightenment  being 
partial,  the  confession  is  inadequate,  indeed  worthless.  "  I  have  sinned."  There  are 
no  more  complaints  against  the  ass  ;  there  is  no  extenuation  with  the  lip ;  so  far 
all  is  satisfactory.  What  is  said  is  all  right  so  far  as  it  goes. .  The  mischief  is  in 
what  is  left  unsaid,  because  unthought.  Balaam  should  have  asked  himself,  "  How 
is  it  that  though  my  ass  saw  the  angel,  I  did  not  ?  "  His  confession  was  lacking  in 
that  he  did  not  say,  "  I  have  sinned  because  my  heart  has  not  been  right.  I  have 
sinned  in  going  on  an  expedition  to  glorify  and  enrich  myself.  I  will  turn  back  at  once. " 
The  only  thing  of  real  use  and  worth  in  God's  sight  is  a  voluntary  turning  from  the 
ways  of  sin.  When  the  younger  son  came  to  himself,  he  did  not  say,  "  I  will  go  back 
to  ray  father  if  he  wislies  me  to  go,  if  he  will  not  let  me  stop  where  I  am^'  but  definitely, 
"  I  will  arise  and  go,"  &c.  Tlierefore,  in  spite  of  the  angel's  presence,  the  drawn 
sword,  the  thrice  intimation  through  the  ass,  in  spite  of  all  the  words  to  make  all 
plain,  Balaam  goes  on.  He  may  indeed  plead  God's  permission,  but  this  plea  will 
avail  him  nothing.  For  hinjself  it  matters  little  now,  seeing  he  is  not  one  whit 
changed  in  heart,  whether  he  goes  forward  or  backward ;  any  path  that  he  takes  is 
doimwa/rd.  If  he  returns  to  Pethor,  it  will  not  be  to  a  life  of  true  repentance.  He 
is  the  s.ime  low-minded  man  wherever  he  is,  and  it  matters  little  to  himself  whether 
he  is  destroyed  in  Pethor  or  in  Moab.  Let  him  then  go  forward  into  Moab,  so  that 
in  his  further  descent  and  ultimate  destruction  he  may  at  the  same  time  be  used  for 
the  glory  of  God.  Even  if  he  refuses  a  willing  obedience,  God  may  get  gain  out  of 
him  by  an  unwilling  one. — Y. 

Vers.  36— 38.— 5atoOT  and  Balak  meet  at  last.  I.  Balak's  solioitudk  to  con- 
ciliate Balaam  and  show  him  honour.  Balak  does  not  yet  know  what  unhealed 
wounds  may  he  in  the  prophet's  pride,  or  whether  that  pride  has  been  sufficiently 
pleased  by  the  dignity  of  the  second  deputation  and  the  extent  of  the  promises  it  has 
made.  He  does  all  he  can,  therefore,  to  minister  to  Balaam's  vanity.  The  children 
of  this  world  are  wiser  in  their  generation  than  the  children  of  light.  They  will  leave 
nothing  undone  to  gain  their  ends  ;  they  will  creep  to  reach  them,  if  they  cannot  reach 
them  standing  erect.  Balak  goes  to  meet'  the  prophet  at  the  utmost  border  of  his 
land.  It  is  a  dangerous  thing  to  offend  the  powerful  ones  of  this  world  ;  they  must 
be  kept  in  good  humour.  How  different  from  the  spirit  in  which  God  would  have  us 
approach  him  or  any  one  whom  he  may  send  I  If  he  sends  to  bless  us,  it  is  because 
of  our  need  ;  he  is  not  a  man,  that  he  should  be  kept  in  a  favourable  disposition  by 
our  flatteries  and  fawnings.  We  need  to  remember  this.  Cornelius  had  a  sincere 
desire  to  serve  God,  but  very  mistaken  apprehensions  in  some  respects  of  what  God 
required,  seeing  how  he  fell  before  Peter's  feet  and  worshipped  him.  Let  us  take 
heed  lest  in  our  anxiety  to  offer  God  what  we  think  he  wants  we  are  found  utterly 
insensible  as  to  what  he  really  wants.  We  cannot  be  too  solicitous  to  please  God, 
if  only  we  are  doing  it  according  to  his  will ;  we  cannot  be  too  solicitous  to  conciliate 
men,  if  only  we  are  doing  it  for  their  good.     There  is  nothing  degrading  or  ajuuanl/i 


8ia  TfiE  BOOK  Of  NtMBESS.  fcB.  isil.  2-40. 


nothing  that  compels  cringing  or  obsequiousneSB,  in  the  service  of  God.  When  we 
bow  before  the  grandees  and  plutocrats  of  the  world  and  watch  their  wishes  as  a  dog 
the  eyes  of  its  master,  then  we  are  reptiles,  not  men.  We  must  be  all  things  to  all 
men  only  when  it  will  save  them,  not  simply  to  advantage  ourselves. 

II.  Balaam  and  Balak  meet,  in  spite  of  all  the  hindrances  pdt  in  the  way. 
Balak  of  course  has  his  own  notion  of  these  hindrances ;  he  thinks  they  lay  in  Balaam's 
waiting  for  a  sufficient  inducement ;  and  very  likely  he  congratulates  himself  on  his 
insight,  his  knowledge  of  the  world,  his  pertinacity,  his  choice  of  agents,  and  of  the 
right  sort  of  bait  to  attract  Balaam.  Yet  after  all  Balak  had  not  the  slightest  idea  of 
what  great  hindrances  he  had  overcome.  If  he  had  known  of  God's  interferences, 
he  might  have  been  prouder  than  ever  ;  that  is,  if  the  knowledge  of  these  interferences 
had  not  changed  his  pride  to  alarm.  Balak's  earnest  sending  had  been  more  potent 
and  fascinating  than,  in  his  greeting  to  Balaam,  he  unwittingly  supposed.  It  had 
outweighed  the  direct  commands  of  God,  the  mission  of  the  angel,  the  influence  of  a 
very  peculiar  miracle  and  a  very  narrow  escape  from  death.  How  much  there  must 
have  been  in  Balaam's  greedy  heart  to  draw  him  on  when  even  mighty  aid  unusual 
obstacles  like  these  could  only  stay  him  for  a  moment  1  Balak  drew  him  because  in 
his  heart  there  was  something  to  be  drawn ;  and  they  came  together  as  streams  that, 
rising  miles  apart,  and  winding  much  through  intervening  lands,  yet  meet  at  last 
because  each  pursues  its  natural  course.  All  the  obstacles  put  in  our  way  to  perdition 
will  not  save  ua  if  we  are  bent  on  the  carnal  attractions  to  be  found  in  that  way. 
Drawing  is  a  mutual  thing.  There  was  nothing  in  Balaam's  heart  to  be  drawn  towards 
God.  'The  hugeet  magnet  will  do  no  more  than  the  least  to  attract  another  body  to 
it  unless  in  that  body  there  itt  something  to  be  attracted. 

III.  The  meeting,  after  all,  does  not  seem  a  satisfactory  one.    One  Would 
,  have  thought  that,  after  overcoming  so  many  hindrances,  these  two  kindred  spirits 

would  have  met  each  other  with  cordial  congratulations.  But  instead  of  this  be^g 
so,  Balak  must  show  himself  a  little  hurt  with  what  he  thinks  Balaam's  want  of 
confidence  in  his  word  and  prerogative  as  king.  And  though  Balaam's  difficulty  has 
not  lain  in  these  things,  he  cannot  explain  the  misunderstanding ;  he  has  to  hear 
that  word  "  wherefore  "  as  if  he  heard  it  not.  "  Lo,  I  am  come  unto  thee,"  that  must 
be  sufficient.  And  as  to  Balak's  expectations,  he  can  only  fall  back  upon  the  old  mis- 
leading generalities ;  he  cannot  meet  the  king  with  the  open,  eager,  joyous  counten- 
ance of  one  who  sees  success  within  his  grasp.  Balak,  he  sees,  has  more  confidence  in 
him  than  he  can  possibly  have  in  himself,  considering  the  strange  things  he  has  ex- 
perienced since  he  set  out  on  his  journey.  It  is  not  even  the  proverbial  slip  between 
the  cup  and  the  lip  that  he  has  to  prepare  for.  It  is  not  the  probabiliiy  of  success  with 
the  possibility  of  failure,  but  the  strong  probability  of  failure  with  just  the  possibility 
of  success.  "  Have  I  now  any  power  at  all  to  say  anything  ?  the  word  that  God 
putteth  in  my  mouth,  that  shall  I  speak."  Not  that  we  are  to  suppose  Balak  was 
unduly  taken  aback  by  such  a  want  of  ardour  and  sympathy  in  Balaam.  Very  likely 
he  thought  it  was  nothing  more  than  a  proper  professional  deference  to  Jehovah,  and 
that  in  the  event  all  would  be  right ;  just  as  men  say  "  God  willing "  and  "  please 
God ' '  when  they  are  in  the  midst  of  schemes  where  God's  will  and  pleasure  are  never 
thought  of  at  all. — Y. 

Vers.  13, 14. — Balaam — the  summons.  The  story  of  Balaam  is  full  of  contrarieties. 
The  pure  faith  and  worship  of  Jehovah  is  seen  coming  into  strange  contact  with  the 
superstitions  of  heathenism ;  and  as  regards  the  personal  character  of  Balaam,  utterly 
discordant  moral  elements  are  seen  struggling  together  in  the  same  breast.  The  chief 
interest  of  the  story  centres  in  the  moral  phenomenon  presented  by  the  man  himself — 
"that  strange  mixture  of  a  man,"  as  Bishop  Newton  well  calls  him.  He  was  a 
heathen  soothsayer,  and  yet  had  some  real  knowledge  of  God.  He  was  under  the 
influence  of  sordid  passions,  and  yet  was  in  personal  converse  with  the  Spirit  of 
truth,  and  received  from  him,  at  least  for  the  time,  a  real  prophetic  gift.  He  had  no 
part  or  lot  with  the  chosen  people,  but  rather  with  their  worst  enemies,  and  yet  hi* 
"eyes  were  opened,"  and  he  had  very  lofty  conceptions  of  Israel's  dignity  and 
blessedness.  His  history  has  its  clearly-marked  stages.  In  this  first  stage  we  have 
the  summons  that  came  to  him  from  Balak,  and  the  answer  he  was  constrtuned  to 
■end  back  to  it,     Note  here— 


OH.  Mn.  8-40.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  Ml 

I.  Heathkn  faith  in  the  unseen.  Balak  in  the  extremity  of  his  fear  sends  be- 
yond tlie  limits  of  his  own  people,  into  distant  Mesopotamia,  to  secure  the  help  of  one 
supposed  to  be  endowed  with  supernatural  gifts,  in  special  relation  to  the  invisible 
powers,  able  to  "  curse  and  to  bless  "  (ver.  6).  A  striking  illustration  of  that  blind 
instinct  of  human  nature  by  virtue  of  which  it  believes  ever  in  the  interposition  of 
Deity  in  the  world's  affairs.  All  idolatrous  rites,  oracles,  divinations,  incantations, 
sacerdotal  benedictions  and  maledictions,  rest  ultimately  on  this  basis.  It  is  this 
makes  the  sway  of  the  priest  and  the  supposed  "  prophet  of  the  Invisible  "  so  mighty 
in  every  land  and  age.  Christianity  teaches  us  to  lay  hold  on  the  substantial  truth 
that  underlies  these  distorted  forms  of  superstition.  It  enlightens  this  blind  instinct ; 
reveals  the  righteous  '•  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth  ;  "  leads  humanity  to  Him  who 
is  at  once  its  "  Prophet,  Priest,  and  Kirg." 

II.  The  witness  for  God  that  may  be  found  in  the  soul  of  a  depraved  man, 
even  of  one  whose  inward  dispositions  and  whole  habit  of  life  are  most  opposed  to 
his  will.  Balaam  practised  an  art  that  was  "  an  abomination  unto  the  Lord  "  (Deut. 
xviii.  12),  and  his  way  was  altogether  "perverse"  (ver.  32),  and  yet  God  was  near 
to  him.  God  spoke  to  him,  and  put  the  spirit  of  prophecy  into  his  heart,  and  a  word 
into  his  mouth.  He  "heard  the  words  and  saw  the  vision  of  the  Almighty." 
Whether  his  knowledge  of  God  was  the  result  of  dim  traditions  of  a  purer  faith 
handed  down  from  his  forefathers,  or  of  influences  that  had  spread  in  his  own  time 
into  the  land  of  his  birth,  we  at  least  see  how  scattered  rays  of  Divine  light  then 
penetrated  the  deep  darkness  of  heathendom.  So  now  God  is  often  nearer  to  men 
than  we  or  they  themselves  suppose.  He  does  not  leave  himself  without  a  witnesiv, 
even  in  the  most  ignorant  and  vile.  The  light  in  them  is  never  totally  extinguished. 
They  have  their  gleams  of  higher  thought,  their  touches  of  nobler,  purer  feeling. 
Conscience  rebukes  their  practical  perversity,  and  the  Spirit  strives  with  them  to 
lead  them  into  a  better  way.  When  God  is  absolutely  silent  in  a  man's  soul,  all 
hope  of  guiding  him  by  outward  persuasions  into  the  path  of  righteousness  is  gone. 

III.  The  prostitution  of  noble  powers  to  base  uses.  Hero  is  a  man  whose 
widespread  fame  was  the  result,  probably,  to  a  great  extent  of  real  genius.  His 
native  capacity — mental  insight,  influence  over  men,  poetic  gift — was  the  secret  of 
this  fame.  Like  Simon  Magus,  he  "  bewitched  the  people,"  so  that  they  all  "  gave 
heed  to  him,  from  the  least  unto  the  greatest,  saying,  'This  man  is  the  great  power 
of  God."  But  these  extraordinary  powers  are  perverted  to  the  furtherance  of  an  un- 
hallowed cause  ;  he  makes  them  the  servants  of  his  own  base  ambition  and  desire 
for  gain.  "  He  loved  the  wages  of  unrighteousness."  It  was  in  his  heart  to  obey 
the  behest  of  Balak  and  secure  the  offered  prize.  There  is  a  tone  of  disappointment 
in  the  words,  "The  Lord  refuseth  to  give  me  leave  to  go  with  you."  He  lets  "  I 
dare  not "  wait  upon  "  I  would."  And  notwithstanding  all  his  poetic  inspiration 
and  his  passing  raptures  of  devout  and  pious  feeling, 

"Yet  in  the  prophet's  soul  the  dreams  of  avarice  stay." 

How  full  is  all  human  history  of  examples  of  the  waste  of  noble  faculties,  the 
prostitution  to  evil  uses  of  God-given  powers  I  The  darkest  deeds  have  ever  been 
done  and  the  deepest  miseries  inflicted  on  the  world  by  those  who  were  most  fitted 
by  nature  to  yield  effective  service  to  the  cause  of  truth  and  righteousness,  and  to 
confer  blessings  on  mankind.  And  it  is  generally  some  one  base  affection — ^the 
lust  of  the  flesh,  self-love,  avarice,  an  imperious  will,  &c. — that  turns  the  rich  tide 
of  their  life  in  a  false  direction.  As  the  spreading  sails  of  a  ship  only  hasten  its 
destruction  when  the  helm  fails,  so  is  it  with  the  noblest  faculties  of  a  man  when  he 
has  lost  the  guidance  of  a  righteous  purpose. 

IV.  The  Divine  restraint  of  man's  liberty  to  do  evil.  "And  God  said.  Thou 
shalt  not  go  with  them,"  &c.  The  spell  of  a  higher  Power  is  over  him.  In  a  sense 
contrary  to  that  of  Paul  the  Apostle,  he  "cannot  do  the  thing  that  he  would."  So 
are  wicked  men  often  made  to  feel  that  there  is  after  all  a  will  stronger  than  their 
will ;  that,  free  as  they  seem  to  be,  some  invisible  hand  is  holding  them  in  check, 
limiting  their  range  of  action,  thwarting  their  purposes,  compelling  them  to  do  the 
very  thing  they  would  fain  avoid,  turning  their  curses  into  blessings,  so  that  in  the 
end  they  serve  the  cause  they  meant  to  destroy.    The  Lope  of  the  world  lies  in  tlM 


Hi  tH£  600R  Ot'  NtTMfeEM  [cB.  iili.  2—40. 

absolute  maatery  of  the  Will  that  is  "holy,  and  just,  and  good"  over  all  conoeivabla 
opposing  forms  of  human  and  Satanic  power. — W. 

Vers.  31—35. — Balaam— the  arrest.  The  secret  willingness  of  Balaam  to  yield 
to  the  solicitations  of  Balak,  seen  at  first  in  the  tone  of  his  answer,  "  The  Lord 
refuseth,"  &o.,  was  still  more  manifest  in  his  parleying  with  the  second  appeal 
Though  he  felt  the  resistless  force  of  the  Divine  restraint,  yet  he  delayed  the  return 
of  the  messengers  for  the  night  in  hope  of  getting  a  reversal  of  the  sentence  (vers. 
18,  19).  No  wonder  God's  anger  was  kindled  against  him,  and  that,  though  per- 
mission was  at  last  given  him  to  go,  he  was  made  in  this  startling  way  to  feel  that  he 
was  in  the  hands  of  a  Power  that  would  not  be  mocked.  Whatever  view  we  take  of 
the  strange  incidents  of  this  narrative,  whether  as  objective  realities,  or  as  the 
visions  of  a  trance,  the  moral  lessons  remain  substantially  the  same.  Three  features 
of  Balaam's  conduct  are  specially  prominent. 

I.  His  cruel  anger.  His  rough  treatment  of  the  dumb  ass  is  marked  with 
reprobation.  It  was  both  itself  evil  and  the  symptom  of  a  hidden  eviL  1.  We 
may  believe  that  the  secret  unrest  of  his  conscience  had  a  great  deal  to  do  with  this 
outburst  of  anger.  Note  the  subtle  connection  that  often  exists  between  certain 
unusual  phases  of  conduct  and  the  hidden  workings  of  the  heart.  Jonah's  anger  at 
the  withering  of  the  gourd  was  but  one  of  the  signs  of  his  general  want  of  sympathy 
with  the  Divine  proceedure.  Balaam,  perhaps,  was  not  a  cruel  man,  but  the  sense  of 
wrong  within  and  the  feeling  that  he  was  doing  wrong  betrayed  itself  even  in  this 
form  of  behaviour.  Conscience  made  him  a  coward,  and  cowai-dice  is  always  cruel. 
If  it  had  not  been  for  the  "madness"  of  his  passion,  he  might  have  judged,  as  a 
diviner,  that  the  unwillingness  of  the  beast  to  pursue  her  journey  counselled  him  to 
return  ;  but  when  a  man's  heart  is  not  right  with  God,  resentment  is  often  roused 
agiiinst  that  which  is  meant  to  turn  him  into  a  better  way.  'Am  I  become  your 
enemy  because  I  tell  you  the  truth  ?  "  (Gal.  iv.  16).  2.  It  illustrates  the  sad  sub- 
jection of  the  inferior  creatures  to  the  curse  of  moral  evil.  "  The  creature  was  made 
Buhjeot  to  vanity,  not  willingly."  "  The  whole  creation  groaneth,"  &c.  We  think  it 
strange  that  the  dumb  ass  should  "  speak  with  man's  voice  and  rebuke  the  prophet's 
mildness,"  but,  to  the  ear  that  can  hear  it,  such  a  voice  is  continually  going  forth 
from  all  the  innocent  creatures '  that  suffer  the  cruel  consequences  of  man's  abuse. 
Well  may  St.  Paul  represent  them  as  "waiting  with  earnest  expectation  for  the 
mnnifestation  of  the  sons  of  God"  (Rom.  viii.  19,  22). 

II.  His  blind  infatuation.  It  is  deeply  significant  that  he  should  not  have  seen 
the  angel.  Even  the  poor  dumb  creature  that  he  rode  saw  more  than  he  did.  It  was 
his  moral  perversity,  the  frenzy  of  his  carnal  ambition,  that  was  the  true  cause  of  the 
dulness  of  his  spiritual  vision.  Note — 1.  Sin  blinds  men  to  the  things  that  it  is 
most  needful  for  them  to  apprehend  and  know.  Mental  blindness  often,  not  always, 
has  a  moral  cause.  "This  people's  heart  is  waxed  gross,  and  their  ears  are  dull  of 
hearing,"  &o.  (Matt.  xiii.  16).  The  highest  spiritual  truths,  realities  of  the  spirit 
world,  tokens  of  the  Divine  presence  and  working,  eternal  moral  laws,  sacred  responsi- 
bilities of  life,  &c. — all  these  are  darkly  hidden  from  him  whose  heart  is  "  thoroughly 
set  in  him  to  do  evil."  2.  Even  animal  instinct  is  a  safer  guide  than  the  moral 
sense  of  a  bad  man.  It  effectually  warns  of  danger,  and  prompts  to  the  pursuit  of 
the  good  nature  requires.  It  is  to  the  animal  a  sufficient  law.  But  when  the  "  spirit 
in  man,  the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty  that  giveth  him  understanding,"  the  sove- 
reignty of  reason  and  conscience,  is  overborne  by  base  fleshly  lust,  man  sinks  lower 
Ihan  the  brutes  that  perish.  Their  obedience  to  the  law  of  their  being  puts  him  to 
shame.  Though  they  "speak  not  with  man's  voice,"  their  silent  wisdom  "  rebukes 
him  for  his  iniquity."     "  If  the  light  that  is  in  thee  be  darkness,"  &c.  (Matt.  vi.  23). 

III.  His  helplessness.  This  is  seen — 1.  In  his  abject  submission.  "  He  bowed 
down  his  head,  and  fell  flat  on  his  face,"  saying,  "  I  have  sinned  ; "  "  now,  therefore, 
if  it  displease  thee,  I  will  get  me  back  again."  He  must  have  known  from  the 
beginning  that  his  obstinate  self-will  was  displeasing  to  God,  but  now  that  the  con- 
sequences df  it  stare  him  in  the  face  he  is  filled  with  alarm.     There  are  those  who 

frieve  over  their  sin  only  when  it  is  found  out.     It  is  not  the  evil  itself  they  dread, 
ttt  only  its  discovery  and  punishment.    Fear  often  makes  men  repent  and  reform 


eft.  xxiL  41— xxiv.] 


tttte  feOOtt  OP  NtlMBteM 


ii» 


■when  there  is  no  genuine  abhorrence  of  wrong-doing.  2.  In  the  Divine  compiilaion 
under  -which  he  is  placed  to  pursue  his  journey.  "  Go  with  the  men,"  &o.  He  would 
fain  draw  back,  but  it  is  too  late  now ;  he  must  do  the  work  and  bear  the  testimony 
that  God  has  determined  for  him.  When  men  are  bent  upon  that  which  is  evil,  God 
often  allows  them  to  become  entangled  in  circumstances  of  danger  from  which  there 
is  no  escape,  that  "  they  may  eat  of  the  fruit  of  their  own  way,  and  be  filled  with 
their  own  devicea  "  (Prov.  i.  31). — W. 


EXPOSITION. 


Balaam's  pbopheoies  (ch.  xxii.  41 — 
xxiv.).  Ch.  xxii.  41. — The  high  places  of 
Baal,  or  "  Bamoth-Baal."  Perhaps  the  Ba- 
moth  mentioned  in  ch.  xxi.  19,  20.  This 
is,  however,  by  no  means  certain,  because 
high  places  were  no  doubt  numerous,  and 
that  Bamoth  would  seem  to  have  been  too 
far  from  the  present  camp  of  Israel.  In 
any  case  they  crossed  the  Amon,  and  rac 
some  risk  by  adventuring  themselves  on 
hostile  territory.  That  thenee  he  might 
see  the  utmost  part  of  the  people.  Accord- 
ing to  the  quasi-sacramental  character  at- 
tributed to  the  cursing  of  a  seer,  it  was  held 
necessary  that  the  subject  of  the  curse  should 
be  in  view.  Balak  desired  to  attain  this 
object  with  as  little  risk  as  possible,  and 
therefore  he  took  Balaam  first  of  all  to  these 
heights,  whence  a  distant  and  partial  view  of 
Israel  might  be  had. 

Ch.  xxiii.  1. — Build  me  here  seven  altars. 
According  to  the  common  opinion  of  the 
hfathen,  it  wag  necessary  to  propitiate  with 
sacrifices  the  God  with  whom  they  had  to 
do,  and  if  possible  to  secure  his  favourable 
consideration  on  their  side.  The  number 
seven  was  especially  connected  with  the 
revelation  of  the  true  God,  the  Creator  of 
the  world,  and  was  probably  observed  here 
for  this  reason.  The  sacrifices  were  offered  no 
doubt  to  Jehovah. 

Ver.  3. — Feradventure  the  Lord  will  come 
to  meet  me.  It  might  be  concluded  from 
ch.  xxiv.  1  that  Balaam  went  only  to  look 
for  "auguries,"  i.e.  for  such  natural  signs 
in  the  flight  of  birds  and  the  like  as  the 
heathen  were  wont  to  observe  as  manifesta- 
tions of  the  favour  or  disfavour  of  God,  the 
success  or  failure  of  enterprises.  It  seems 
clear  that  it  was  his  practice  to  do  so,  either 
as  having  some  faith  himself  in  such  uncer- 
tainties, or  as  stooping  to  usual  heathen  arts 
which  he  inwardly  despised.  But  from  the 
fact  that  God  met  him  (we  know  not  how), 
and  that  such  supernatural  communication 
was  not  unexpected,  we  may  conclude  that 
Balaam's  words  meant  more  for  himself  than 
the  mere  observance  of  auguries,  whatever 
they  may  have  meant  for  Balak.  To  an 
high  place.  Bather,  "to  a  bald  place" 
('Pj^ — compar*  the  meaning  of  "  Calvary  "), 


from  which  the  immediate  prospect  was  nn- 
interrupted. 

Ver.  4. — I  have  prepared  seven  altars. 
Balaam,  acting  for  the  king  of  Moab,  his 
heathen  patron,  in  tliis  difficult  business, 
points  out  to  God  that  he  had  given  him  the 
full  quota  of  sacrifices  to  begin  with.  It  was 
implied  in  this  reminder  that  God  would 
naturally  feel  disposed  to  do  something  for 
Balaam  in  return. 

Ver.  7.— Took  up  his  parable.  ^B'D  (cf. 
ch.  xxi.  27).  Balaam's  utterances  were  in 
the  highest  degree  poetical,  according  to  the 
antithetic  form  of  the  poetry  of  that  day, 
which  delighted  in  sustained  parallelisms,  in 
lofty  figures,'  and  in  abrupt  turns.  The 
"mashal"  of  Balaam  resembled  the  "bur- 
den "  of  the  later  prophets  in  this,  that  it 
was  not  a  discourse  uttered  to  men,  but  a 
thing  revealed  in  him  of  which  he  had  to 
deliver  himself  as  best  he  might  in  such 
wcirds  as  came  to  him.  His  inward  eye  was 
fixed  on  this  revelation,  and  he  gave  utter- 
ance to  it  without  consideration  of  those 
who  heard.  Aram,  i.e.  Aram-Naharaim,  or 
Mesopotamia  (cf.  Gen.  xxix.  1  ;  Deut.  xxiii. 
4).  Defy,  or  "threaten,"  i.  e.  with  the 
wrath  of  Heaven.  Jacob.  The  use  of  this 
name  as  the  poetical  eqiiivalent  of  Israel 
shows  that  Balaam  was  familiar  with  the 
siory  of  the  patriarch,  and  understood  his 
relation  to  the  people  before  him. 

Ver.  9. — The  people  shall  dwell  alone, 
and  shall  not  be  reckoned.  Bather,  "  It  is 
a  people  that  dwelleth  apart,  and  is  not 
numbered."  It  was  not  the  outward  isolation 
on  which  his  eye'  was  fixed,  for  that  indeed 
was  only  temporary  and  accidental,  but  the 
religious  and  moral  separateness  of  Israel  as 
the  chosen  people  of  God,  which  was  the 
very  secret  of  their  national  greatness, 

Ver.  10. —  The  fourth  part  of  Israel. 
J??1"n^  is  so  rendered  by  the  Targnms,  as 
alluding  to  the  four  great  camps  into  which 
the  host  was  divided.  The  Septuagint  has 
irijiovQ,  apparently  from  an  incorrect  read 
ing.  'The  Samaritan  and  the  older  versions, 
followed  by  the  Vulgate,  renderit  "progeny," 
but  this  meaning  is  conjectural,  and  ther* 
seems  no  sufficient  reason  to  depart  from  the 
common  translation.    Let  me  die  the  doatll 


ftt4 


Tflfi  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS 


fofe.  XXII.  41-~xxttr. 


of  the  righteous.  The  word  "righteous" 
is  in  the  plural  (DHE'?,  SiKaloiv) :  it  may  refer 
either  to  the  Israelites  as  a  holy  nation, 
living  and  dying  in  the  favour  of  God  ;  or 
to  the  patriarchs,  such  as  Abraham,  the 
promises  made  to  whom,  in  faith  of  which 
they  died,  were  already  so  gloriously  fulfilled. 
If  the  former  reference  was  intended,  Balaam 
must  have  had  a  much  fuller  and  happier 
knowledge  of  "  life  and  immortality  "  than 
the  Israelites  themselves,  to  whom  death 
was  dreadful,  all  the  more  that  it  ended  a 
life  protected  and  blessed  by  God  (cf.  e.  g. 
Ps.  Ixxxviii.  10—12 ;  Isa.  xxxviii.  18,  19). 
It  is  hardly  credible  that  so  singular  an 
anticipation  of  purely  Christian  feeling  should 
really  be  found  in  the  mouth  of  a  prophet  of 
that  day,  for  it  is  clear  that  the  wordfj,  how- 
ever much  inspired,  did  express  the  actual 
emotion  of  Balaam  at  the  moment.  It  is 
therefore  more  consistent  with  the  facts  and 
probabilities  of  the  case  to  suppose  that 
Balaam  referred  to  righteous  Abraham  (cf. 
Isa.  xli.  2)  and  his  immediate  descendants, 
and  wished  that  when  he  came  to  die  he 
might  have  as  sure  a  hope  as  they  had  en- 
joyed that  God  would  bless  and  multiply 
their  seed,  and  make  their  name  to  be  glorious 
in  the  earth.  Let  my  last  end  be  like  his. 
n^'inS  (last  end)  is  the  same  word  trans- 
lated "latter  days"  and  "latter  end"  in 
ch.  jcxiv.  14,  20.  It  means  the  last  state  of 
a  people  or  of  a  man  as  represented  in  his 
offspring ;  the  sense  is  not  incorrectly  ex- 
pressed by  the  Septuagint,  yl  voiro  to  airipfta 
fiov  UQ  rd  otriptia  tovtwv. 

Ver.  13. — Come  .  .  unto  another  place. 
Balak  attributed  the  miscarriage  of  his  enter- 
prise thus  far  to  something  inauspicious  in 
the  locality.  Thon  shalt  see  but  the  utmost 
part  of  them.  nNn.ri  -inVi?  DSSt.  Both 
the  meaning  of  the  nouns  and  the  tense  of 
the  verb  are  disputed.  By  some  "  ephes 
katsehu"  (the  end  of  the  last  of  them)  is  held 
equivalent  to  "  the  whole  of  them,"  which 
seems  to  contradict  the  next  clause  even  if 
defensible  in  itself.  The  ordinary  rendering 
is  favoured  by  the  Septuagint  (dXV  ti  iiipoQ 
Tt  aiiTov  o^u)  and  by  the  Targums.  On  the 
other  hand,  some  would  read  the  verb  in  the 
present  tense,  and  Understand  Balak's  words 
to  refer  to  the  place  they  were  leaving.  This 
•is  in  accordance  with  the  statement  in  ch. 
xxii.  41,  and  it  would  certainly  seem  as  if 
Balak  and  Balaam  moved  each  time  nearer 
to  that  encampment  which  was  for  different 
reasons  the  centre  of  attraction  to  them 
both. 

Ver.  14. — The  field  of  Zophim,  i. «.  of  the 
watchers.  Probably  a  well-known  outlook. 
To  the  top  of  Fisgah.  They  followed  ap- 
parently on  the  track  of  their  enemies  (see 
Ml  ch.  nL  SO). 


Ver.  15. — While  I  meet  the  Lord  yonder. 
Eather,  "and  I  will  go  and  meet  thus." 
n3  n^iPX  ''?iNl.  Balaam  does  not  say  whom 
or  what  he  is  going  to  meet,  but  from  the 
use  of  the  same  term  in  ch.  xxiv.  1  it  is 
evident  that  he  employed  the  language  of 
soothsayers  looking  for  auguries.  He  may 
have  spoken  vaguely  on  purpose,  because  he 
was  in  truth  acting  a  part  with  Balak. 

Ver.  20. — I  have  received  commandment 
to  bless.  The  word  "  commandment "  is  not 
wanted  here.  Balaam  had  received,  not  in- 
structions, but  an  inward  revelation  of  the 
Divine  will  which  he  could  not  contravene. 

Ver.  21. — He  hath  not  beheld  iniquity  in 
Jacob.  The  subject  of  this  and  the  parallel 
clause  is  left  indefinite.  If  it  is  God,  accord- 
ing to  the  A.  V. ,  then  it  means  that  God  in 
his  mercy  shut  his  eyes  to  the  evil  which  did 
exist  in  individuals,  and  for  his  own  sake 
would  not  impute  it  to  the  chosen  nation. 
If  it  be  impersonal,  according  to  the  Sep- 
tuagint and  the  Targums,  "one  does  not 
behold  iniquity,"  &c.,  then  it  means  that  the 
iniquity  was  not  ilagrant,  was  not  left  to 
gather  head  and  volume  until  it  brought 
down  destruction.     Ferverseness.    Bather, 

"  suffering  "  (/By.  Septuagint,  ttovoc),  the 
natural  consequence  of  sin.  Compare  the 
use  of  the  two  words  in  Ps.  x.  7 ;  xc.  10. 
The  shont  of  a  king  is  among  them.  The 
"shout"  (njfnri)  is  the  jubilation  of  the 
nation  with  which  it  acclaims  its  victor  king 
(cf.  1  Sam.  iv.  5,  6).  In  Levit.  xxiii.  24 ; 
Ps.  xlvii.  5  it  is  used  of  the  sounding  of  the 
sacred  trumpets.       . 

Ver.  22. — God.  7X,  and  also  at  the  end 
of  the  next  verse,  and  four  times  in  tie  next 
chapter  (vers.  4,  8,  16,  23).  Tlie  use  seems 
to  be  poetic,  and  no  particular  signification 
can  be  attached  to  it.  Brought  them,  or, 
perhaps,  "is  leading  them."  So  the  Sep- 
tuagint: Stoc  o  i^ayayiov  avrSv.  Unicom. 
Hebrew,  DNl.  It  is  uniformly  rendered 
fioi>oicEpi>i£  by  the  Septuagint,  under  the  mis- 
taken notion  that  the  rhinoceros  was  in- 
tended. It  is  evident,  however,  from  Deut. 
xxxiii.  17  and  other  passages  that  the  reem 
had  two  horns,  and  that  its  horns  were  its 
most  prominent  feature.  It  would  also 
appear  from  Job  xxxix.  9 — 12  and  Isa.  xxxiv. 
7  that,  while  itself  untameable,  it  was  allied 
to  species  employed  in  husbandry.  The 
reem  may  therefore  have  been  the  aurochs 
or  uiTis,  now  extinct,  but  which  formerly 
had  so  large  a  range  in  the  forests  of  the  old 
world.  There  is  some  doubt,  however, 
whether  the  urus  existed  in  those  days  in 
Syria,  and  it  may  have  been  a  wild  buffalo, 
or  some  kindred  animal  of  the  bovine  genui, 
whose  size,  fierceness,  and  length  of  hoiv 
made  it  a  wonder  and  a  fear. 


€i.  f  JtJt.  il—txi^.] 


Tfifi  60dK  OJ*  NtJMfefiftS. 


§1^ 


Vcr.  23.— Enchantment,  Cnj.  Rather, 
'atigury."  Septuagint,  oiwrirr/iog.  See  on 
Levit.  xix.  26,  where  the  practice  is  for- 
bidden to  Israel.  Against  Jacob,  or,  "  in 
Jacob,"  as  the  marginal  reading,  and  this  is 
favoured  by  the  Septuagint  and  the  Tar- 
gums,  and  is  equally  true  and  striking.  It 
was  the  proud  peculiarity  of  Israel  that  he 
trusted  not  to  any  magic  arts  or  superstitious 
rites,  uncertain  in  themselves,  and  always 
leading  to  imposture,  but  to  the  direction 
and  favour  of  the  Almighty.  Divination. 
DDjJ.  Septuagint,  fiamia.  The  art  of  the 
soothsayer.  According  to  this  time  it  shall 
be  said  of  Jacob  and  of  Israel.  Bather, 
"in  season,"  i.e.  in  God's  good  time,  "it  shall 
be  said  to  Jacob  and  to  Israel."  What  hath 
God  wrought!  or,  "what  God  doeth." 
The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  augury  and 
divination  were  useless  and  vain  in  the  case 
of  Israel,  because  God  himself  declared  and 
would  declare  his  mighty  acts  in  behalf  of 
his  people,  and  that  by  no  uncertain  vatici- 
nation, but  by  open  declaration.      , 

Ver.  2i. — As  a  great  lion.  X*3^,  gener- 
ally translated  "old  lion,"  as  in  Gen.  xlix. 
9.  By  some  it  is  rendered  lioness  (cf  Job 
iv.  11  ;  Nahum  ii.  12).  As  a  young  lion. 
'IX  the  ordinary  term  for  a  lion  without 
further  distinction.  It  is  altogether  fantastic 
to  snppose  that  Balaam  had  just  seen  a  lion 
coming  up  from  the  ghor  of  Jordan,  and  that 
this  "omen"  insiiired  his  "mctshal."  The 
rising  of  a  lion  from  its  covert  was  one  of  the 
most  common  of  the  more  striking  phe- 
nomena of  nature  in  those  regions,  and  the 
imagery  it  afforded  was  in  constant  use  ;  but 
in  truth  it  is  evident  that  these  similes  are 
borrowed  from  Jacob's  dying  prophecy  con- 
cerning Judah  (Gen.  xlix.  9),  in  which  the 
word  "prey"  (Hebrew,  f)lD,  a  torn  thing)  is 
also  found.  Balaam  was  acquainted  with 
that  prophecy,  as  he  was  with  the  promises 
made  to  Abraham  (cf.  ver.  10  with  Gen.  xiii. 
16  ;  xxviii.  14). 

Ver.  27. — I  will  bring  thee  unto  another 
place.  At  first  (ver.  25)  Balak  had  in  his 
vexation  desired  to  stop  the  mouth  of  Balaam, 
but  afterwards  he  thought  it  wiser  to  make 
yet  another  attempt  to  change  the  mind  of 
God  ;  as  a  heathen,  he  still  thought  that  this 
might  be  done  by  dint  of  importunity  and 
renewed  sacrifices. 

Ver.  28. — Unto  the  top  of  Peer.  On  the 
meaning  of  Peor  see  on  eh.  xiv.  3.  Thia 
Peor  was  a  summit  of  the  Abarim  ranges 
northwards  from  Pisgah,  and  nearer  to  the 
Israelites.  The  adjacent  village,  Beth- Peor, 
was  near  the  place  of  Moses'  burial  (Deut. 
xxxiv.  6).  From  the  phrase  used  in  Deut. 
iii.  29  ;  iv.  46,  with  which  the  testimony  of 
Eusebius  agrees,  it  must  have  lain  almost 
opposite  J«iicIio  on  the  heights  behind  Qm 


Arboth  Moab.  From  Peor,  therefore,  the 
whole  encampment,  in  all  its  length  and 
breadth,  would  lie  beneath  their  gaze.  Jeshi- 
mon.    See  on  ch.  xxi.  20. 

Ch.  xxiv.  1. — As  at  other  times,  or, 
"as  (he  had  done)  time  after  time."  Sep- 
tuagint, Kara  rb  duSiog,  To  seek  for  en- 
chantments.   Bather,  "  for  the  meeting  with 

auguries."  D'B'DJ  nN'lR?.  Septuagint,  ti'c 
awavriiaiv  rots  oiwroij.  NacTiasMm,  as  in 
ch.  xxiii.  23,  is  not  enchantments  in  the 
sense  of  magical  practices,  but  definitely 
auguries,  i.  e.  omens  and  signs  in  the  natural 
world  observed  and  interpreted  according  to 
an  artificial  system  as  manifesting  the  pur- 
poses of  God.  As  one  of  the  commonest  and 
worst  of  heathen  practices,  it  was  forbidden 
to  Israel  (Levit.  xix.  26 ;  Deut.  xviii.  10) 
and  held  up  to  reprobation,  as  in  2  Kings 
xvii.  17 ;  xxi.  6 ;  2  Chron.  xxxiii.  6.  To- 
ward the  wilderness.  131Bn.  Not  "Je- 
shimon,"  but  apparently  the  Arboth  Moab  in 
which  Israel  was  encamped,  and  which  were 
for  the  most  part  desert  as  compared  with 
the  conntry  around. 

Ver.  2. — The  spirit  of  God  came  upon  him. 
This  seems  to  intimate  a  higher  state  of  in- 
spiration than  the  expression,  "  God  put  a 
word  into  his  mouth  "  (ch.  xxiii.  5,  16). 

Ver.  3. — Balaam  .  .  hath  said.  Bather, 
"the  utterance  of  Balaam."  DNJ  is  con- 
stantly used,  as  in  ch.  xiv.  28,  for  a  Divine 
utterance,  effaUim,  Dei,  but  it  does  not  by 
itself,  apart  from  the  context,  claim  a  super- 
human origin.  The  man  whose  eyes  are  open. 
i;5jn  Onf-l^iT}.  The  authorities  are  divided 
between  the  rendering  in  the  text  and  the 
opposite  rendering  given  in  the  margin. 
DHD  is  used  in  Dan.  viii.  26,  and  DHB'  in 

-    T  '  T    T 

Lam.  iii.  8,  in  the  sense  of  "  shut ; "  but,  on 
the  other  hand,  a  passage  in  the  Mishnah 
distinctly  uses  QriE'  and  DHD  in  opposite 
senses.  The  Vulgate,  on  the  one  hand,  has 
oUuratus;  the  Septuagint,  on  the  other, 
has  6  <i^q^(l'<S£  opiSv,  and  this  is  the  sense 
given  by  the  Targums.  Strange  to  say,  it 
makes  no  real  difference  whether  we  read 
"open"  or  "shut,"  because  in  any  case  it 
was  the  inward  vision  that  was  quickened, 
while  the  outward  senses  were  closed. 

Ver.  4. — Falling  into  a  trance.  Bather, 
"falling  down."  Qui  cadit,  Vulgate.  The 
case  of  Saul,  who  "  fell  down  naked  all  that 
day  "  (1  Sam.  xix.  24),  overcome  by  the  il- 
lapse  of  the  Spirit,  affords  the  best  com- 
parison. Physically,  it  would  seem  to  have 
been  a  kind  of  catalepsy,  in  which  the  senses 
were  closed  to  outward  things,  and  the  eyes 
open  but  unseeing.  The  word  for  "open" 
in  this  verse  is  l^e  ordinary  one,  not  that 
wed  in  rer.  8, 


di6 


ttlE  BOOK;  OF  N0MBER8. 


[CH.  XXII.  41 — XXIV. 


Yet.  6.  —  As  the  valleys,  or,  "'as  the 
torrents"  (DvPIJ),  wMcli  pour  down  in 
parallel  courses  from  the  upper  slopes.  As 
gardens  by  the  river's  side.  The  river 
("inp,  as  in  ch.  xxii.  5)  means  the  Euphrates. 
Balaam  combines  the  pleasant  imagery  of  his 
own  cultivated  land  with  that  of  the  wilder 
scene  amidst  which  he  now  stood.  As  the 
trees  of  ligu  aloes.  D  vHI*?.  Aloe  trees, 
such  as  grew  in  the  further  east,  where  Balaam 
had  perhaps  seen  them.  Which  the  Lord 
hath  planted,  or,  "the  Lord's  planting," 
a  poetical  way  of  describing  their  beauty  and 
rarity  (cf,  Ps.  i.  3;  civ.  16). 

Ver.  7.— He  shall  pour  the  water,  or, 
"the  water  shall  overflow,"     Out  of  Ms 

hnckets.  1  v'J  is  the  dual,  "his  two  buckets." 
The  image,  familiar  enough  to  one  who  lived 
in  an  irrigated  land,  is  of  one  carrying  two 
buckets  on  the  ends  of  a  pole  which  are 
so  full  as  to  run  over  as  he  goes.  And  his 
seed  .  .  in  many  waters.  It  is  uncertain  in 
■what  sense  the  word  "  seed  "  is  used.  It  may 
be  an  image  as  simple  as  the  last,  of  seed 
lown  either  by  or  actually  upon  many  waters 
(cf.  Eccles.  xi.  1),  and  so  securing  a  plentiful 
and  safe  return  ;  or  it-may  stand  for  the  seed, 
t.  e.  the  posterity,  of  Israel,  which  should 

frow  up  amidst  many  blessings  (Isa.  xliv.  4). 
he  former  seems  most  in  keeping  here. 
His  king  shall  he  higher  than  Agag. 
Rather,  "  let  his  king  be  higher  than  Agag." 
The  name  Agag  (33S,  the  fiery  one)  does  not 
occur  again  except  as  the  name  of  the  king 
of  Amalek  whom  Saul  conquered  and  Samuel 
slew  (1  Sam.  xv. ) ;  yet  it  may  safely  be 
assumed  that  it  was  the  official  title  of  all 
the  kings  of  Amalek,  resembling  in  this 
"Abimelech"  and  "Pharaoh."  Here  it 
seems  to  stand  for  the  dynasty  and  the 
nation  of  the  Amalekites,  and  there  is  no 
reason  to  suppose  that  any  reference  was 
Intended  to  any  particular  individual  or 
event  in  the  distant  future.  The  "king" 
of  Israel  here  spoken  of  is  certainly  not  Saul 
or  any  other  of  the  kings,  but  God  himself 
in  his  character  as  temporal  Ruler  of  Israel ; 
and  the  "kingdom"  is  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  as  set  forth  by  way  of  anticipation  in 
the  polity  and  order  of  the  chosen  race.  As 
a  fact,  Israel  had  afterwards  a  visible  king 
who  overthrew  Agag,  but  their  having  such' 
a  king  was  alien  to  the  mind  of  God,  and 
due  to  a  distinct  falling  away  from  national 
faith,  and  therefore  could  find  no  place  in 
this  prophecy. 

Yer.  8. — ^And  shall  break  their  bones. 
D^3'  (cf.  Ezek.  xxiii,  34)  aeems  to  mean 
"  crush  "  or  "  smash."  The  Septuagint  has 
iK/ivcXitX,  "shall  suck  out,"  i.  «,  the  marrow, 
but  the  word  does  not  seem  to  bear  this 
meaning.    Fierce  them  through  with  his 


arrows,  or,  "dash  in  pieces  his  arrows," 
i.  e.  the  arrows  shot  at  him.  ^rip?  V-yn. 
The  difficulty  is  the  possessive  suffix  to 
"arrows,"  which  is  in  the  singular;  other- 
wise this  rendering  gives  a  much  better 
sense,  and  more  in  keeping  with  the  rest  of 
the  passage.  The  image  in  Balaam's  mind  is 
evidently  that  of  a  terrible  wild  beast  devour- 
ing his  enemies,  stamping  them  underfoot, 
and  dashing  to  pieces  in  his  fury  the  arrows 
or  darts  which  they  vainly  launch  against 
him  (compare  the  imagery  in  Dan.  vii.  7). 

Ver.  9.— A  lion.  nN.  A  great  lion. 
X*??.  See  on  ch.  xxiii.  24,  and  Gen.  xlix.  9. 
Blessed  is  he  that  blesseth  thee,  &o.  In  these 
words  Balaam  seems  to  refer  to  the  terms  of 
Balak's  first  message  (ch.  xxii.  6).  Far  from 
being  affected  by  blessings  and  cursings  from 
without,  Israel  was  itself  a  source  of  blessing 
or  cursing  to  others  according  as  they  treated 
him. 

Ver.  12.— Spake  I  not  also.  This  was 
altogether  true.  Balaam  had  enough  of  the 
true  prophet  about  him  not  only  to  act  with 
strict  fidelity,  as  far  as  the  letter  of  the  com- 
mand went,  but  also  to  behave  with  great 
dignity  towards  Balak. 

Ver.  14.— I  will  advertise  thee.  ^W*^ 
has  properly  the  meaning  "advise"  (Sep- 
tuagint, aji/ifSovXivauj),  but  it  seems  to  have 
here  the  same  subordinate  sense  of  giving 
information  which  "advise"  has  with  ns. 
The  Vulgate  here  has  followed  the  surmise 
of  the  Jewish  commentators,  who  saw  nothing 
in  Balaam  but  the  arch-enemy  of  their  race, 
and  has  actually  altered  the  text  into  "  dabo 
consilium  quid  populus  tuus  popnlo  hiiio 
faciat"  (cf.  ch.  xxxi.  16). 

Ver.  16.  —  Knew  the  knowledge  of  the 
Most  High.  Septuagint,  itriirTiiiievos  iirta- 
TriiirjVTTapd  'YipicTov.  This  expression  alone 
distinguishes  this  introduction  of  Balaam's 
mashal  from  the  former  one  (vers.  3,  4), 
but  it  is  difficult  to  say  that  it  really  adds 
anything  to  our  understanding  of  his  mental 
state.  If  we  ask  when  Balaam  had  received 
the  revelation  which  he  now  proceeds  to 
communicate,  it  would  seem  most  natural  to  ' 
reply  that  it  was  made  known  to  him  when 
"  the  Spirit  of  God  came  upon  him,"  and  that 
Balak's  anger  had  interrupted  him  in  the 
midst  of  his  masJial,  or  possibly  he  had  kept 
it  back,  as  too  distasteful  to  his  patnm, 
until  he  saw  that  he  had  nothing  more  to 
expect  from  that  quarter. 

Ver.  17. — I  shall  see  him,  bntnotnow: 
I  shall  behold  him,  but  not  nigh.  Rather, 
"  I  see  him,  but  not  now :  1  behold  him,  but 
not  near"  (•Un-IB'S  •  •  •  -UN-lgl  exactly  ea  In 
ch.  xxiii.  9).  Balaam  does  not  mean  to  say 
that  he  expected  himself  to  see  at  any  future 
time  the  mysterious  Being  of  whom  h» 
speajEs,  who  is  identical  witb  the  *^M*f " 


OH.  XXIL  41— XXIV.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES. 


317 


•nd  the  "Sceptre ''  of  the  following  clauses ; 
he  speaks  wholly  as  a  prophet,  and  means 
that  his  inner  gaze  is  fixed  upon  such  an  one, 
with  full  assurance  that  he  exists  in  the 
ooiinsels  of  God,  but  with  clear  recognition 
of  the  fact  that  his  actual  coming  is  yet  in 
the  far  future.  There  shall  come  a  Star  out 
of  Jacob.  Septuagint,  dvartXi!  darpov.  It 
may  quite  as  well  be  rendered  by  the  present ; 
Balaam  simply  utters  what  passes  before  his 
inward  vision,  The  star  is  a  natural  and  com- 
mon poetic  symbol  of  an  illustrious,  or,  as 
we  say,  "brilliant,"  personage,  and  as  such 
recurs  many  times  in  Scripture  (of  Job  xxxviii. 
7  ;  Isa.  xiv.  12 ;  Ban.  viii.  10  ;  Matt.  xxiv. 
29  ;  Philip,  ii.  15  ;  Rev.  i.  20  ;  ii.  28).  The 
celebrated  Jewish  fanatic  called  himself  Bar- 
cochab,  "son  of  the  Star,"  in  allusion  to 
this  prophecy.  A  Sceptre  shall  rise  out  of 
Israel.  This  further  defines  the  "star"  as 
a  ruler  of  men,  for  the  sceptre  is  used  in  that 
sense  in  the  dying  prophecy  of  Jacob  (Gen. 
xlix.  10),  with  which  Balaam  was  evidently 
acquainted.  Accordingly  the  Septuagint  has 
here  avaffriiaiTat  dv&'pdnrog.  Shall  smite 
the  corners  of  Moab.  Rather,  "the  two 
comers  "  (dual),  or  "  the  two  sides  of  Moab," 
i.  6.  shall  crush  Moab  on  either  side.  And 
destroy  all  the  children  of  Sheth.  In  Jer. 
xlviii.  45,  where  this  prophecy  is  in  a  manner 
quoted,  the  word  "IfJIiS  {qca-qar,  destroy)  is 
altered  into  IpljJ  (guadqod,  crown  of  the 
head).  This  raises  a  very  curious  and  inter- 
esting question  as  to  the  use  made  by  the 
prophets  of  the  earlier  Scriptures,  but  it 
gives  no  authority  for  an  alteration  of  the 
text.  The  expression  JlE^"*;!?  has  been 
variously  rendered.  The  Jewish  comment- 
ators, followed  by  the  Septuagint  (TraV raj 
tiioif  S^.&)  and  the  older  versions,  understand 
it  to  mean  the  sous  of  Seth,  the  son  of 
Adam,  i,  e.  aU  mankind.  Many  modem 
commentators,  however,  take  DB'  as  a  con- 
traction of  nsg'  (Lam.  iii.  47- — "desola- 
tion"), and  read  "sons  of  confusion,"  as 
equivalent  to  the  unruly  neighbours  and 
relations  of  IsraeL  This,  however,  is  ex- 
tremely dubious  in  itself,  for  HE'  nowhere 
occurs  in  this  sense,  and  derives  no  support 
from  Jer.  xlviii.  45.  It  is  true  that  nB*  *33 
is  thei'e  replaced  by  jiSB'  »33,  "sons  of 
tumult, "'but  then  this  very  verse  afl'ords  the 
clearest  evidence  that  the  prophet  felt  no 
hesitation  in  altering  the  text  of  Scripture 
to  suit  his  own  inspired  purpose.  If  it  be 
true  that  "Ii?")!?  ^iU  iiot  bear  the  meaning 
given  tc  it  in  the  Targums  of  "  reign  over," 
still  there  is  no  insuperable  difficulty  in  the 
common  rendering.  Jewish  prophecy,  from 
beginning  to  end,  contemplated  the  Messiah 
(9  th«  Qon^ueror,  the  Subduer,  an4  even  the 


Destroyer  of  all  the  heathen,  i.  e.  of  all  who 
were  not  Jews.  It  is  only  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment that  the  iron  sceptre  with  which  ha 
was  to  dash  in  pieces  the  heathen  (Ps.  ii.  9) 
becomes  the  pastoral  staff  wherewith  he 
shepherds  them  (Rev.  ii.  27 — jroi/invel,  after 
the  Septuagint,  which  has  here  misread  the 
text).  The  prophecy  was  that  Messiah 
should  destroy  the  heathen  ;  the  fulfilment 
that  he  destroyed  not  them,  but  their  heathen- 
ism (ef.  e  g.  Ps.  ciUx.  6 — 9  with  James  v. 
20). 

Yer.  18. — Seir  also  shall  he  a  possession 
for  his  enemies.  Seir  (Gen.  xxxii.  3),  or 
Mount  Seir  (Gen.  xxxvi.  8),  was  the  old  name, 
still  retained  as  an  alternative,  of  Edom.  It 
is  uncertain  whether  the  rendering  "  for  his 
(i.  e.  Edom's)  enemies"  is  correct.  The 
Hebrew  is  simply  V^.^K,  which  may  stand  in 
apposition  to  Edom  and  Seir,  "his  enemies," 
i.  e.  the  enemies  of  IsraeL  So  the  Septuagint, 
"Hoau  o  ix^pbg  aiiTov.  Shall  do  valiantly, 
or,  "shall  be  prosperous"  (c£  Cent.  viii. 
17  ;  Ruth  iv.  11). 

Ver.  19.— Shall  come  he  that  shall  have 
dominion.  T]^!}.  Literally,  "  one  shall 
rule,"  the  subject  being  indefinite.  Of  the 
city.  TV??  i  uot  apparently  out  of  any  city 
in  particular,  but  "out  of  any  hostile  pity." 
The  expression  implies  not  only  conquest, 
but  total  destraction  of  the  foe. 

Ver.  20.— He  looked  on  Amalek.  This 
looking  must  have  been  an  inward  vision, 
because  the  haunts  of  the  Amalekites  were 
far  away  (see  on  Gen.  xxxvL  12 ;  Exod. 
xvii.  8 ;  Numb.  xiv.  25,  45),  The  first  of 
the  nations.  Amalek  was  in  no  sense  a 
leading  nation,  nor  was  it  a  very  ancient 
nation.  It  was  indeed  the  very  first  of  the 
nations  to  attack  Israel,  hut  it  is  a  most 
arbitrary  treatment  of  the  words  to  under- 
stand tiiem  in  that  sense.  The  prophet 
Amos  (vi.  1)  uses  the  same  expression  of  the 
Jewish  aristocracy  of  his  day.  As  it  was  in 
no  better  position  than  Amalek  to  claim  it  in 
any  true  sense,  we  can  but  suppose  that  in 
either  case  there  is  a  reference  to  the  vain- 
glorious vauntings  of  the  people  threatened ; 
it  would  be  quite  in  keeping  with  the  Be- 
dawin. character  if  Amalek  gave  himself  out 
be  "the  first  of  nations." 

Ver.  21.— He  looked  on  the  Kenitea.  This 
m/ishal  is  excessively  obscure,  for  both  the 
subject  of  it  and  the  drift  of  it  are  disputed. 
On  the  one  hand,  the  Kenites  are  mentioned 
among  the  Canaanitish  tribes  that  were  to 
be  dispossessed,  in  Gen.  iv.  19 ;  on  the  other, 
they  are  identified  with  the  Midianitish  tril» 
to  which  Hobab  and  Raguel  belonged,  in 
Judges  i.  '6,  and  apparently  in  1  Sam.  xv 
6  (see  on  ch.  x.  29).  It  has  been  supposed 
that  the  friendly  Kenites  had  by  this  time 
left  the  c^inp  of  Israel  and  established  the©* 


818 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBBBa 


[CB.  XXII.  41— XZIT. 


■elves  hy  conquest  in  the  south  of  Canaan, 
and  even  that  they  had  occupied  the  terri- 
tory and  taken  the  name  of  the  original 
Keiiites  of  Gen.  xv.  19.  This,  however,  is  a 
mere  conjecture,  and  a  very  improbable  one. 
That  a  weak  tribe  like  that  of  Hobab  should 
have  done  what  Israel  had  not  dared  to  do, 
and  settled  themselves  by  force  of  arms  in 
Southern  Palestine,  and,  further,  that  they 
should  be  already  known  by  the  name  of 
those  whom  they  had  destroyed,  is  extremely 
unlikely,  and  is  inconsistent  with  the  state- 
ment in  Judges  i.  16.  And  thou  puttest 
thy  nest  in  a  rock.  Eather,  "  and  thy  nest 
laid  (D^B*)  upon  a  rock."  We  do  not  know 
where  the  Kenites  dwelt,  and  therefore  we 
cannot  tell  whether  this  expression  is  to  be 
understood,  literally  or  figuratively.  If  the 
Canaanitish  tribe  is  here  spoken  of,  it  is  very 
likely  they  had  their  residence  in  some  strong 
mountain  fastness,  but  if  the  Midianitish 
tribe,  then  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that 
they  had  crossed  the  Jordan  at  alL  In  that 
case  the  "nest"  must  be  wholly  figurative, 
and  must  refer  to  that  strong  confidence 
which  they  placed  in  the  protection  ef  the 
God  of  Israel. 

Yer.  22.— NeTertheless  the  Eenite  shall 
be  wasted.  ^.15  lya'?  njri?"DK  *|.  Eather, 
"  Kain  shall  surely  not  be  wasted."  DS"  '3 
is  of  doubtful  meaning,  but  it  seems  here  to 
have  the  force  of  a  negative  question  equiva- 
lent to  a  negation.  Kain  is  mentioned  in 
Josh.  XV.  57  as  one  of  the  towns  of  Judah, 
but  there  is  little  reason  to  suppose  that  an 
insignificant  village  is  here  mentioned  by 
name.  Probably  "  Kain  "  stands  for  the 
tribe-father,  and  is  simply  the  poetical 
equivalent  of  Kenite.  TJutil.  nD"!^.  There 
is  some  uncertainty  about  these  two  particles, 
which  are  sometimes  rendered  "how  long?" 
In  the  sense  of  "  until "  they  are  said  to  be 
m  Aramaism,  but  this  is  doubtful. 

Ver.  23.— When  God  doeth  this.  Liter- 
ally,   "from  the  settling  of  it  by  God." 

7ii  iOt^P,  i.  e.  when  God  shall  bring  these 
terrible  things  to  pass.  Septuagint,  orav  Sj 
Tavra  i  Stos.  This  exclamation  refers  to 
the  woe  which  he  is  about  to  pronounce, 
which  involved  his  own  people  also. 

Ver.  24. — Chittim.  Cyprus  (see  on  Gen.  i. 
4).  The  "  isles  of  Chittim  are  mentioned  by 
Jeremiah  (ii.  10)  and  by  Ezekiel  (xxvii.  6)  in 
the  sense  apparently  of  the  western  islands 
generally,  while  in  Dan.  xi.  30  "the  ships  of 
Cbittim  "  may  have  ui  even  wider  refereuco. 


Indeed  the  Targum  of  Palestine  makes  men< 
tion  of  Italy  here,  and  the  Vulgate  actually 
translates  "venient  in  trieribus  de  ItaliS. 
There  is,  however,  no  reason  to  suppose  that 
Balaam  knew  or  spoke  of  anything  further 
than  Cyprus.  It  was  "from  the  side  of" 
piP)  Cyprus  that  the  ships  of  his  vision 
came  down  upon  the  Phoenician  coasts, 
wherever  their  original  starting-point  may 
have  been.  Shall  afflict,  or,  "  shall  bring 
low."  The  same  word  is  used  of  the  oppres- 
sion of  Israel  ia  Egypt  (Gen.  xv.  13).  Eber. 
The  Septuagint  has  here  'E/Bpaiows,  and  is 
followed  by  the  Peschito  and  the  Vulgate. 
It  is  not  likely,  however,  that  Balaam  would 
have  .substituted  "Eber"  for  the  "Jacob" 
and  "  Israel"  which  he  had  previously  used. 
The  Targum  of  Onkelos  paraphrases  "Eber" 
by  "beyond  the  Euphrates,"  and  that  of 
Palestine  has  "  all  the  sons  of  Eber."  From 
Gen.  X.  21  it  would  appear  that  "the  children 
of  Eber"  were  the  same  as  the  Shemites; 
Asshur,  therefore,  was  himself  included  in 
Eber,  but  is  separately  mentioned  on  account 
of  his  fame  and  power.  And  he  also  shall 
perish  for  ever.  The  subject  of  this  pro- 
phecy is  left  in  obscurity.  It  is  difficult  on 
grammatical  grounds  to  refer  it  to  Asshur, 
and  it  does  not  seem  appropriate  to  "Eber." 
It  may  mean  that  the  unnamed  conquering 
race  which  should  overthrow  the  Asian 
monarchies  should  itself  come  to  an  end  for 
evermore  ;  or  it  may  be  that  Balaam  added 
these  words  while  he  beheld  with  dismay 
the  coming  destruction  of  his  own  Shemitic 
race,  and  their  final  subjugation  by  more 
warlike  powers .  It  must  be  remembered  that 
the  Greek  empire,  although  overthrown,  did 
not  by  any  means  "perish  for  ever"  in  the 
same  sense  as  the  previous  empires  of  the 
East. 

Ver.  25. — And  returned  to  his  place. 
\  pP^3E';.  It  is  doubtful  whether  this  ex- 
pression, which  is  used  in  Gen.  xviii.  33  and 
in  other  places,  implies  that  Balaam  re- 
turned to  his  home  on  the  Euphrates.  If  he 
did  he  must  have  retraced  his  steps  almost  im- 
mediately, because  he  was  slain  among  the 
Midianites  shortly  after  (ch.  xxxi.  8).  The 
phrase,  however,  may  merely  mean  that  he 
set  off  homewards,  and  is  not  inconsistent 
with  the  supposition  that  he  went  no  further 
on  his  way  than  the  head-quarters  of  the 
Midianites.  It  is  not  diflicult  to  understand 
the  iufatuation  which  would  keep  him  within 
reach  of  a  people  »o  strange  and  tairiblak 


OH.  MIL  41— XXIV.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES.  S19 


NOTE  ON  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  BALAAM. 

That  the  prophecies  of  Balaam  have  a  Messianic  character,  and  are  only  to  be  fully 
understood  in  a  Christian  sense,  seems  to  lie  upon  tlie  face  of  them.  The  Targums 
of  Onkelos  and  Palestine  make  mention  of  King  Mesliiha  here,  and  the  great  mass  of 
Christian  interpretation  has  uniformly  followed  in  the  track  of  Jewish  tradition.  It  is 
of  course  possible  to  get  rid  of  the  prophetic  element  altogether  by  assuming  that  the 
utterances  of  Balaam  were  either  composed  or  largely  interpolated  after  the  events  to 
which  they  seem  to  refer.  It  would  be  necessary  in  this  case  to  bring  their  real  date 
down  to  the  period  of  the  Macedonian  conquests,  and  much  later  still  if  the  Greek 
empire  also  was  to  *'  perish  for  ever."  The  difiSculty  and  arbitrary  character  of  such 
an  assumption  becomes  the  more  evident  the  more  it  is  considered  ;  nor  does  it  seem 
consistent  with  the  form  into  which  the  predictions  are  cast.  A  patriotic  Jew  looking 
hade  from  the  days  of  Alexander  or  his  successors  would  not  call  the  great  Eastern 
power  by  the  name  of  Asshur,  because  two  subsequent  empires  had  arisen  in  the  place 
of  Assyria  proper.  But  that  Balaam,  \o6kmg forward  down  the  dim  vista  of  the  future, 
should  see  Asshur,  and  only  Asshur,  is  in  perfect  keeping  with  what  we  know  of 
prophetic  perspective, — the  further  off  the  events  descried  by  inward  vision,  the 
more  extreme  the  foreshortening, — according  to  which  law  it  is  well  known  that  the 
first  and  second  advents  of  Christ  are  inextricably  blended  in  almost  every  case. 

If  we  accept  the  prophecies  as  genuine,  it  is,  again,  only  possible  to  reject  the 
Messianic  element  by  assuming  that  no  Jewish  prophecy  overleaps  the  narrow  limits  of 
Jewish  history.  The  mysterious  Being  whom  Balaam  descries  in  the  undated  future, 
who  is  the  King  of  Israel,  and  whom  he  identifies  with  the  Shiloh  of  Jacob's  dying 
prophecy,  and  who  is  to  bring  to  nought  all  nations  of  the  world,  cannot  be  David, 
although  David  may  anticipate  him  in  many  ways  ;  still  less,  as  the  reference  to  Agag, 
Amalek,  and  the  Kenites  might  for  a  moment  incline  us  to  believe,  can  it  be  Saul.  At 
the  same  time,  while  the  Messianic  element  in  the  prophecy  cannot  reasonably  be 
ignored,  it  is  obvious  that  it  does  not  by  any  means  exist  by  itself ;  it  is  so  mixed  up 
with  what  is  purely  local  and  temporal  in  the  relations  between  Israel  and  the  petty 
tribes  which  surrounded  and  envied  him,  that  it  is  impossible  to  isolate  it  or  to  exhibit 
it  in  any  clear  and  definite  form.  The  Messiah  indeed  appears,  as  it  were,  upon  the  stage 
in  a  mysterious  and  remote  grandeur ;  but  he  appears  with  a  slaughter  weapon  in  his 
hand,  crushing  such  enemies  of  Israel  as  were  then  and  there  formidable,  and  exter- 
minating the  very  fugitives  from  the  overthrow.  Even  where  the  vision  loses  for 
once  its  local  colouring  in  one  way,  so  that  the  King  of  Israel  deals  with  all  the  sons 
of  men,  yet  it  retains  it  in  another,  for  he  deals  with  them  in  wrath  and  destruction, 
not  in  love  and  blessing.  There  is  here  so  little  akin  to  the  true  ideal,  that  we  are 
readily  tempted  to  say  that  Christ  is  not  here  at  all,  but  only  Saul  or  David,  or  the 
Jewish  monarchy  personified  in  the  ruthlessness  of  its  consolidated  power.  But  if 
we  know  anything  of  the  genius  of  prophecy,  it  is  exactly  this,  that  the  future  and  the 
grand  and  the  heavenly  is  seen  through  a  medium  of  the  present  and  the  paltry  and 
the  earthly.  The  Messianic  element  almost  always  occurs  in  connection  with  some 
crisis  in  the  outward  history  of  the  chosen  people  ;  it  is  inextricably  mixed  up  with 
what  is  purely  local  in  interest,  and  often  with  what  is  distinctly  imperfect  in  morality. 
To  the  Jew — and  to  Balaam  also,  however  unwillingly,  as  the  servant  o^  Jehovah— 
the  cause  of  Israel  was  the  cause  of  God ;  he  could  not  discern  between  them.  "  Our 
country,  right  or  wrong,"  was  an  impossible  sentiment  to  him,  because  he  could  not 
copceive  of  bis  country  being  wrong ;   he  kpew  nothirg  of  moral  yictories,  or  tb« 


3t0  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBBBS.  [OE.  xxii,  41— xziv. 

triumphs  of  defeat  or  of  sufEering ;  he  could  not  think  of  God's  kingdom  as  asserting 
itself  in  any  other  way  than  in  the  overthrow,  or  (better  still)  the  annihilation,  of 
Moab,  Edom,  Assyria,  Babylon,  Rome,  the  whole  world  which  was  not  Israel.  The 
sufferings  of  the  vanquished,  the  horrors  of  sacked  cities,  the  agonies  of  desolated 
homes,  were  nothing  to  him ;  nothing,  unless  it  were  joy — ^joy  that  the  kingdom  of  God 
should  be  exalted  in  the  earth,  joy  that  the  reign  of  wickedness  should  be  broken. 

All  these  feelings  belonged  to  a  most  imperfect  morality  and  we  rightly  look  upon  them 
with  horror,  because  we  have  (albeit  as  yet  very  imperfectly)  conformed  our  sentiments 
to  a  higher  standard.  But  it  was  the  very  condition  of  the  old  dispensation  that  God 
adopted  the  then  moral  code,  such  as  it  was,  and  hallowed  it  with  religious  sanctions 
and  gave  it  a  strong  direction  God-ward,  and  so  educated  his  own  for  something 
higher.  Hence  it  is  wholly  natural  and  consistent  to  find  this  early  vision  of  the 
Messiah,  the  heaven-sent  King  of  Israel,  introduced  in  connection  with  the  fall  of  the 
petty  pastoral  state  of  Moab.  To  Balaam,  standing  where  he  did  in  time  and  place, 
and  all  the  more  because  his  personal  desires  went  with  Moab  as  against  Israel,  Moab 
stood  forth  as  the  representative  kingdom  of  darkness,  Israel  as  the  kingdom  of  light. 
Through  that  strong,  definite,  narrow,  and  essentially  imperfect,  but  not  untrue, 
conviction  of  his  he  saw  the  Messiah,  and  he  saw  him  crushing  Moab  first,  and  then 
trampling  down  all  the  rest  of  a  hostile  world.  That  no  one  would  have  been  more 
utterly  astonished  if  he  had  beheld  the  Messiah  as  he  was,  is  certain  ;  but  that  is  not 
at  all  inconsistent  with  the  belief  that  he  really  prophesied  concerning  him.  That 
he  should  put  all  enemies  under  his  feet  was  what  Balaam  truly  saw ;  but  he  saw  it 
and  gave  utterance  to  it  according  to  the  ideas  and  imagery  of  which  his  mind  was 
full.  God  ever  reveals  the  supernatural  through  the  natural,  the  heavenly  through 
the  earthly,  the  future  through  the  present. 

It  remains  to  consider  briefly  the  temporal  fulfilments  of  Balaam's  prophecies. 

Moab  was  not  apparently  seriously  attacked  until  the  time  of  David,  when  it  was 
vanquished,  and  a  great  part  of  the  inhabitants  slaughtered  (2  Sam.  viii.  2).  In  the 
division  of  the  kingdom  it  fell  to  the  share  of  Israel,  with  the  other  lands  beyond 
Jordan,  but  the  vicissitudes  of  the  northern  monarchy  gave  it  opportunities  to  rebel, 
of  which  it  successfully  availed  itself  after  the  death  of  Ahab  (2  Kings  i.  1).  Only 
in  the  time  of  John  Hyrcanus  (b.o.  129)  was  it  finally  subdued,  and  ceased  to  have 
an  independent  existence. 

Edom  was  also  conquered  for  the  first  time  by  David,  and  the  people  as  far  a." 
possible  exterminated  (1  Kings  xi.  15,  16).  Nevertheless,  it  was  able  to  shake  ofi 
the  yoke  under  Jorani  (2  Kings  viii.  20),  and,  although  defeated,  was  never  again  sub- 
dued (see  on  Gen.  xxvii.  40).  The  prophecies  against  Edom  were  indeed  taken  u]i 
again  and  again  by  the  prophets  (e.  g.  Obadiah),  but  we  must  hold  that  they  were 
never  adequately  fulfilled,  unless  we  look  for  a  spiritual  realisation  not  in  wrath,  but  i  1 1 
mercy.  The  later  Jews  themselves  cametoregard  "Edom"  as  a  Scriptural  synonym 
for  all  who  hated  and  oppressed  them. 

Amalek  was  very  thoroughly  overthrown  by  Saul,  acting  under  the  directions  of 
Samuel  (1  Sara.  xv.  7,  8),  and  never  appears  to  have  regained  any  national  existence. 
Certain  bands  of  Amalekites  were  smitten  by  David,  and  others  at  a  later  period  in 
the  reign  of  Hezekiah  by  the  men  of  Simeon  (1  Ghron.  iv.  39 — 43). 

The  prophecy  concerning  the  Kenites  presents,  as  noted  above,  great  difficulty,  be- 
cause it  is  impossible  to  know  certainly  whether  the  older  Kenites  of  Genesis  or  the 
later  Kenites  of  1  Samuel  are  intended.  In  either  case,  however,  it  must  be  acknow- 
ledged that  sacred  history  throws  no  light  whatever  on  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  ; 
^^  Jtflpw  n9thing;  at  all  9a  \o  tlie  fat;e  of  tliis  sifl^ll  c}w-    No  4wbt  it  \j}tipiately 


m.  XXII.  41— xziv,]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBBB8.  321 

shared  the  lot  of  all  the  inhabitants  of  Falestine,  with  the  exception  of  Judah  and 
Jerusalem,  and  was  transplanted  by  one  of  the  Assyrian  generals  to  some  £ar-o£C 
spot,  where  its  very  existence  as  a  separate  people  was  lost. 

The  "  ships  from  the  side  of  Cyprus  "  clearly  enough  represent  in  the  vision  of 
Balaam  invaders  from  over  the  western  seas,  as  opposed  to  previons  conquerors  from 
over  the  eastern  deserts  and  mountains.  That  the  invasion  of  Alexander  the  Great 
was  not  actually  made  by  the  way  of  Cyprus  is  nothing  to  the  point.  It  was  never 
any  part  of  spiritual  illumination  to  extend  geographical  knowledge.  To  Balaam's 
mind  the  only  open  way  from  the  remote  and  unknown  western  lands  was  the  water- 
way by  the  sides  of  Cyprus,  and  accordingly  he  saw  the  hostile  fleets  gliding  down 
beneath  the  lee  of  those  sheltering  coasts  towards  the  harbours  of  Phoenicia.  Doubt- 
less the  ships  which  Balaam  saw  were  rigged  as  ships  were  rigged  in  Balaam's  time, 
and  not  as  in  the  time  of  Alexander.  But  the  rigging,  like  the  route,  belonged  to  the 
local  and  personal  medium  through  which  the  prophecy  came,  not  to  the  prophecy 
itself.  As  a  fact  it  remains  true  that  a  maritime  power  from  the  West,  whose  home 
was  beyond  Cyprus,  did  overwhelm  the  older  power  which  stood  in  the  place  and 
inherited  the  empire  of  Assyria.  Whether  the  subsequent  ruin  of  this  maritime  power 
also  is  part  of  the  prophecy  must  remain  doubtful. 

HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  41 — ch.  xxiv. — Balaam  and  Ms  prophecies.  The  prophecies  of  Balaam 
were  the  utterances  of  a  bad  man  deeply  penetrated  by  religious  ideas,  and  inspired 
for  certain  purposes  by  the  Spirit  of  God ;  hence  it  is  evident  that  many  deep 
moral  and  spiritual  lessons  may  be  learnt  from  them,  apart  from  their  evidential 
value  as  prophecies.  Consider,  therefore,  with  respect  to  the  moral  character  and 
conduct  of  Balaam — 

I.  That  Balak  and  Balaam  thodqht  to  move  the  God  of  Iskael  by  nipon- 

TUNITT,   OR    PERHAPS    TO   GET  THE    BETTER   OF    HIM    BY  CONTRIVANCE;    hence    Balak 

repeatedly  shifted  his  ground  and  brought  Balaam  to  another  point  of  view.  Even 
so  do  ungodly  men  imagine  that  the  immutable  decrees  of  right  and  wrong  may 
somehow  be  changed  in  their  favour  if  they  use  sufficient  perseverance  and  address. 
By  putting  moral  questions  in  many  different  lights,  by  getting  their  outward  or 
inward  adviser  to  look  at  them  from  diverse  points  of  view,  they  think  to  make  right 
wrong,  and  wrong  right.  With  what  insensate  perseverance,  e.  g.,  do  religious  people 
strive,  by  perpetually  shifting  their  ground,  to  force  the  Almighty  to  sanction  in 
their  case  that  covetousness  which  he  has  so  unmistakably  condemned. 

II.  That  Balaam  clearly  hinted  to  the  Almighty  that,  as  he  had  pbocubed 

MUCH  HONOUR   FOB  HIM  FROM   BALAK,  HE  WAS  EXPECTED  TO  DO  WHAT  WAS  POSSIBLE  IH 

THE  MATTER  FOR  HIM.  Even  80  do  men  who  are  in  truth  irreligious,  although  often 
seeming  very  much  the  reverse,  give  the  Almighty  to  understand  (indirectly  and 
unavowedly,  but  unmistakably)  that  they  have  done  much,  laid  out  much,  g^ven  up 
much  for  his  honour  and  glory,  and  that  they  naturally  look  for  some  equivklenU 
To  serve  God  for  nought  (Job  i.  9)  does  not  enter  into  the  thoughts  of  selfish  people; 
to  them  godliness  is  a  source  of  gain  (1  Tim.  vi.  5),  if  not  here,  then  hereafter. 

III.  That  Balaam  was  moved  to  wish  he  might  die  the  death  of  the  RiGHTSons^ 

BUT  WAS  NOT  DISPOSED  TO  LIVE  THE  LIFE  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS  ;   hence  his  wish  waS  aS 

futile  as  the  mirage  of  the  desert,  and  was  signally  reversed  by  the  actual  character 
of  his  end.  Even  so  do  evil  men  continually  desire  the  rewards  of  goodness,  which 
they  cannot  but  admire,  but  they  will  not  submit  to  the  discipline  of  goodness.  A 
sentimental  appreciation  of  virtue  and  piety  is  worse  than  useless  by  itself. 

IV.  That  Balaam  received  no  reward  from  Balak  because  he  had  not  cubsed 
Israel,  and  none  from  God  because  he  had  wished  to  curse  him.  Even  so  it  is 
with  men  whose  religious  feelings  restrain,  but  do  not  direct,  their  lives.  They  miss 
the  rewards  of  this  world  because  they  are  outwardly  oonscientious,  and  the  rewards 
of  the  next  world  because  they  are  inwardly  covetous. 

NUMBEBS,  X 


822  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [ch.  xxii.  41— xxiv. 

V.  That  Balaam  betuemed  to  his  place,  t.  e.  he  went  back,  as  it  seemed,  to  hia 
old  home  and  hia  old  life  on  the  hanks  of  Euphrates ;  in  truth  "  he  went  to  his  own 
place"  (Acts  i.  25), for  he  rushed  blindly  on  destruction,  and  received  the  recompense 
of  death. 

Consider  again,  with  respect  to  tlu  sayings  of  Balaam — 

I.  That  it  is  not  possible  to  ouesb  whom  God  hath  hot  C0Bsbd.  There  is  in 
fact  but  one  curse  which  there  is  any  reason  to  dread,  and  that  is  "  Depart  from  me." 
Any  malediction  of  men,  unless  it  be  merely  the  echo  of  this  upon  earth,  spoken  with 
authority,  does  but  fall  harmless,  or  else  recoil  upon  him  that  utters  it. 

II.  That  the  sinqulab  olobt  of  Isbael  was  his  separateness — a  separateness 
which  was  outwardly  marked  by  a  sharp  line  of  distinction  from  other  peoples,  but 
was  founded  upon  an  inward  and  distinctive  holiness  of  life  and  worship.  Even  so 
is  the  glory  of  the  Church  of  Christ  and  of  each  faithful  soul  to  be  "  separate  from 
sinners,"  as  was  Christ.  And  this  separation  must  needs  be  outwardly  marked  in 
many  ways  and  in  many  cases  (1  Cor.  v.  11 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  17) ;  but  its  essence  is  an 
inward  divergence  of  motive,  of  character,  and  of  condition  before  God.  To  be 
"  even  as  others  "  is  to  be  the  "  children  of  wrath  "  (Ephes.  ii.  3)  ;  to  be  Christians  is 
to  be  "  a  peculiar  people  "  (Titus  ii.  14).  If  men  cannot  bear  to  be  peculiar,  they 
need  not  look  to  be  blessed ;  if  they  must  adopt  the  fashions  of  this  world,  they  must 
be  content  to  share  its  end  (Gal.  i.  4  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  10 ;  1  John  ii.  15 — 17). 

III.  That  the  death  or  the  bighteods  is  blessed  and  an  object  of  desibe  in  a 
far  higher  sense  than  Balaam  was  able  to  comprehend.  It  may  appear  to  the  foolish 
that  the  life  of  the  righteous  is  full  of  sadness,  but  none  can  fail  to  see  that  his  death 
is  full  of  immortality,  that  he  is  in  peace  by  reason  of  a  good  conscience,  and  in 
hope  of  glory  by  reason  of  the  sure  mercies  of  God. 

IV.  That  the  latter  end  or  the  eighteous  is  mobb  blessed  and  desibable  than 
his  death  ;  for  this  is  to  live  again,  and  to  live  for  ever,  and  to  inherit  eternity  of 
bliss  in  exchange  for  a  few  short  years  of  strife  and  patience. 

V.  That  it  is  not  possible  fob  man  to  eevebse  the  benedictions  which  God  has 
pbonouncbd  upon  his  people.  This  has  been  tried  by  Balaam,  and  by  very  many 
since,  but  to  no  effect.  The  blessings  which  we  are  called  to  inherit,  as  set  forth  in 
the  New  Testament,  will  certainly  hold  good  in  every  age  and  under  all  circum- 
stances. No  matter  what  the  world  may  say,  or  we  be  tempted  to  think,  the  "  poor  " 
and  the  "meek  "  and  the  " merciful "  and  the  "  persecuted  for  righteousness'  sake " 
will  always  be  "  blessed,"  in  spite  of  all  appearances  to  the  contrary. 

VI.  That  God  doth  not  behold  iniquity  in  his  people.  Not  that  it  doth  not 
exist  (as  it  existed  then  in  Israel),  but  because  it  is  not  imputed  to  them  that  repent 
and  believe  in  Christ  Jesus.  God  doth  not  behold  sin  in  the  faithful  soul,  because 
he  regards  it  not  in  its  own  nakedness,  but  as  clothed  with  the  righteousness  of 
Christ,  which  admits  not  any  spot  or  stain  (Gal.  iii.  27 ;  Philip,  iii.  9 ;  Eev.  iii.  18). 
And  this  non-imputation  of  sin  is  not  arbitrary  now  (as  it  was  to  a  great  degree  in 
the  case  of  Israel),  because  it  is  founded  upon  a  real  and  living  union  with  Christ  as 
the  source  of  holiness.  There  is  a  spirUval  unity  of  life  with  him  (John  iii.  6  ;  vi. 
67  ;  XV.  4  ;  Gal.  ii.  20 ;  Ephes.  v.  30),  and  there  is  a  consequent  moral  unity  of  life 
with  him  (Col.  iii.  3 ;  1  John  ii.  6 ;  iii.  3  j  iv.  17,  &c.),  which  is  only  slowly  and 
partially  attained  in  this  life  ;  but  it  hath  pleased  God  for  the  sake  of  the  spiritual 
unity  to  regard  the  moral  unity  as  though  it  were  already  achieved,  and  therefore  he 
imputeth  not  sin  to  them  that  "walk  in  the  light "  (1  John  i.  7). 

VII.  That  if  the  Loed  odr  God  be  with  us,  then  the  shout  of  a  king  is  among 
us,  i.  e.  the  joyful  acclamation  of  them  that  welcome  the  King  who  never  fails  to  lead 
them  to  victory.  And  this  is  one  note  of  the  faithful,  that  they  rejoice  in  their  King 
(Ps.  cxlix.  2,  5,  6 ;  Matt.  xxi.  9 ;  Philip,  iv.  4),  and  that  gladness  is  ever  found  in 
their  hearts  (Rom.  xiv.  17)  and  praise  in  their  mouths  (Acts  xvi.  25 ;  Heb.  xiii.  15  ; 
1  Pet.  ii.  9  ;  and  cf.  Bph.  v.  18—20). 

VIII.  That  no  magical  influence  can  be  brought  to  beak  against  thb 
xighteods.  If  they  fear  God  they  need  not  fear  any  one  else  (Luke  xii.  4,  5  ;  Rom. 
viii.  38,  39).  Superstitious  fears  are  unworthy  of  a  Christian.  But  note  that, 
according  to  the  other  rendering  of  ch,  xziii.  23,  the  spiritual  meaning  is  that  th« 


OH.  3DCII.  41— XXIV.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  323 

faithful  have  no  need  of,  and  no  resort  to,  any  such  uncertain  and  unanthorised 
pryings  into  the  unseen  and  unrevealed  as  superstition  and  irreligioh  do  ever  favour. 
Here  is  a  warning  against  all  the  arts  of  so-called  "  spiritualism,  which  (if  it  be  not 
wholly  an  imposture)  is  rank  heathenism  and  abominable  to  God.  If  the  gospel  be 
true,  then  we  have  all  the  light  we  need  for  our  present  path,  and  we  have  the 
assurance  of  all  the  light  we  could  desire  in  our  future  home  (John  viii.  12 ;  1  Cor. 
xiii.  12  ;  1  John  iii.  2). 

IX.  That  the  camp  of  Israel  was  lovelt  in  the  etes  op  the  peophet  not 

so  MUCH  BT  EEASON  OF  ITS  SIZE,  AS  BECAUSE  OF  THE  OEDBR  AND  METHOD  WITH  WHICH 

IT  WAS. LAID  OUT — like  the  cultivated  gardens  of  the  East.  Even  so  is  the  order 
Divinely  imparted  to  the  Church  its  chiefest  beauty.  It  is  not  its  mere  size,  in  which 
indeed  it  is  inferior  to  some  false  religions,  but  its  unity  in  the  midst  of  variety,  its 
coherence  side  by  side  with  manifold  distinctions,  which  stamps  it  as  a  thing  of 
heavenly  origin  and  growth.  The  highest  art  of  the  gardener  is  to  allow  to  each 
tree  the  fullest  liberty  of  individual  growth,  while  arranging  them  for  mutual  pro- 
tection and  for  beauty  of  eSect ;  even  so  is  the  art  of  the  Divine  Husbandman  (John 
XV.  1)  with  the  trees  which  he  hath  planted  in  his  garden. 

X.  That  the  future  peosperitt  of  Israel  was  spoken  of  by  Balaam  under 

TWO  figures — of  overflowing  BUCKETS  USED  IN  lEEIGATION,  AND  OF  SEED  SOWN  BY 

MANY  WATEES.  Even  SO  the  prosperity  of  the  Church  has  a  twofold  character:  it 
stands  partly  in  the  diligent  and  ample  watering  of  that  which  is  already  sprung  up, 
which  is  her  pastoral  work ;  partly  in  the  widespread  sowing  by  many  waters,  far 
and  near,  which  is  her  missionary  work. 

XI.  That  the  Chuech  of  God  is  not  affected  by  the  blessing  oe  cursing, 

THE  good  or  evil  WILL  OF  MEN,  BUT,  ON  THE  CONTRARY,  IS  THE  SOURCE  OP  BLESSING 

OR  CURSING  TO  THEM  ;  according  as  they  treat  her,  so  must  they  fare  themselves.  For 
since  Christ  hath  loved  her  and  given  himself  for  her  (Ephes.  v.  25),  his  interests  and 
hers  are  all  one,  and  howsoever  we  act  towards  the  Church,  he  taketh  it  unto  himoelf 
(cf.  Matt.  XXV.  40,  45). 

Consider  again,  with  respect  to  the  enterprise  of  Balaam— - 

I.  That  Balaam  was  hieed  to  cuesb  Israel,  but  was  constrained  to  Btrns 
HIM  ALTOGETHER  (cf.  Deut.  xxiii.  6 ;  Josh.  xxiy.  10 ;  Micah  vi.  6).  Even  so  all  the 
efforts  of  the  world  to  cast  infamy  and  odium  upon  the  Church  are  turned  backward, 
unless  indeed  she  is  untrue  to  herself.  No  weapon  is  forged  against  her  more  terrible 
than  the  interested  enmity  of  gifted  and  intellectaal  men,  which  often  promises  to 
succeed  where  brute  force  is  powerless ;  but  even  this  cannot  prosper.  It  is  often 
the  policy  of  the  world  to  assail  religion  by  religious  influences,  but  God  overrules 
this  also.  Gifts  which  are  truly  of  his  giving  cannot  be  really  turned  aguinst  him 
or  his. 

II.  That  God's  purposes  and  pronouncements  concerning  his  Church  are 

ETERNAL  AND   IMMUTABLE,   SINCE    HE  CANNOT  DENY    HIMSELF,  NOB  GO   BACK    FROM    HIS 

WORD.  The  future  of  his  Church  is  perfectly  safe  and  absolutely  unassailable,  because 
it  depends  not  on  any  human  counsel  or  constancy,  but  upon  the  eternal  predestina- 
tion and  changeless  will  of  God. 

Consider  again,  with  respect  to  thai  which  Balaam  spake  by  the  Spirit  of  Ood— 

I.  That  Balaam  had  a  vision  of  Christ  himself,  i.  e.  of  a  mysterious  Being,  a 
King  of  Israel,  exalted  and  extolled,  and  very  high,  whom  the  Jews  believed,  and 
we  know,  to  be  the  Christ.  Even  so  all  true  prophecy  looks  on,  more  or  less  con- 
sciously, to  him  in  whom  all  the  promises  of  God  are  Amen  (2  Cor.  i.  20),  and  in 
whom  all  the  gifts  of  God  to  men  are  concentrated.  The  spirit  of  prophecy  is  the 
testimony  of  Jesus  (Eev.  xix.  10),  because  there  was  nothing  else  really  worth 
prophesying. 

II.  That  Balaam  saw  him  under  the  emblems  or  A  stab  and  of  a  sceptre. 
Even  so  the  Lord  is  both  a  luminary  (Luke  ii.  32 ;  2  Pet.  i.  19 ;  Bev  xxii.  16)  and  a 
ruler  (Luko  i.  33 ;  Heb.  i.  8 ;  Eev.  xii.  6)  for  ever. 

IIL  That  Balaam  saw  him  as  a  destroyer,  crushing  the  enemies  of  God  ane 
OF  HIS  PEOPLE.    And  this  is  at  first  sight  strange,  because  he  came  not  to  deatroy 


884  THE  BOOK  OF  NUHBEBa  [oh.  xxil  41— xxiV. 

men's  liyes,  but  to  save  them.  But  as  it  is  quite  naturally  explained  from  a  moral 
point  of  view  -when  we  take  into  account  the  moral  ideas  of  Balaam's  age,  so  it  is 
found  perfectly  true  in  a  spiritual  sense  when  we  consider  what  the  work  of  Christ 
really  is.  For  that  work  is  indeed  a  work  of  destruction :  he  came  to  destroy  the 
works  of  the  devil  (1  John  iii.  8)  ;  he  came  to  destroy — ^not  men,  but — all  that  ig 
sinful  in  men  ;  not  the  enemies  of  God  (forOod  has  no  enemies  among  men),  but  all 
in  men  which  is  inimical  to  him  and  to  his  truth.  Hence  he  is  ever  represented  as  a 
destroyer  in  the  Apocalypse,  which  reverts  to  the  imagery  of  the  Old  Testament 
(Eev.  vi.  2  ;  xix.  11,  13,  15,  &c.).  And  this  aspect  of  his  work,  which  is  true  and 
necessary,  and  is  jealously  guarded  as  his  in  Holy  Scripture,  ought  not  to  be  set  aside 
or  obscured  by  the  gentler  and  pleasanter  aspects  of  his  reign.  That  he  must'put  all 
enemies  under  his  feet  is  the  first  law  of  his  kingdom,  and  must  somehow  or  other  be 
brought  to  pass  in  us,  as  in  others, 

IV.  That  Balaam  baw  (AccoRDma  to  his  day)  the  enemies  of  the  Chubch 
OF  God  under  the  semblance  of  Moabites,  Edohites,  Amalekites,  Kbnites,  and 
Assyrians.  And  these  may  be  interpreted  in  a  spiritual  sense  as  typifying  the 
different  forms  in  which  a  common  hostility  to  the  truth  of  Christ  displays  itself. 
In  Moab  we  may  see  the  hostility  of  cunning,  which  fears  an  open  contest,  but  enlists 
the  intellect  and  craft  of  others  on  its  side ;  in  Edom  the  hostility  of  insolent 
opposition,  which  loses  no  opportunity  of  inflicting  annoyance  and  injury ;  in  Amaiek ' 
we  may  see  vainglorious  anger,  which  resents  pretensions  greater  than  its  own,  and 
rushes  upon  a  hopeless  conflict ;  in  the  Kenites  we  may  see  confidence  in  earthly 
strength,  and  in  a  lodgment  so  naturally  strong  as  to  defy  all  assaults ;  in  Asshur  wo 
have  the  embodiment  of  brute  force  brutally  used.  If,  however,  the  Kenites  were 
the  friends,  not  the  foes,  of  Israel,  then  we  may  see  in  them  how  vain  is  the  self- 
confidence  even  of  religious  people  in  any  advantages  of  position  or  circumstance. 
The  Kenites  are  not  known  to  have  provoked  God,  as  Israel  did,  and  their  abode  was 
peculiarly  inaccessible  and  defensible ;  nevertheless,  they  too  fell  victims  to  Assyria, 
at  the  very  time  perhaps  when  Hezekiah  and  Jerusalem  escaped. 

V.  That  Balaam  was  struck  with  fear  when  he  foresaw  thebb  destruc- 
tions EXTENDING  EVEN  TO  HIS  OWN  PEOPLE.  Who  shall  live  ?  In  the  crash  of  these 
great  contending  world-powers  who  could  hope  to  escape  ?  How  much  more  may 
evil  men  fear  "  when  God  doeth  this  "  which  he  bath  so  clearly  foretold  1  And  not 
evil  men  onlv,  but  all  who  are  not  in  the  truest  sense  of  the  Israel  of  God  (1  Pet.  L 
17  ;  iv.  17,  18  ;  2  Pet.  iii.  11), 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOBS. 

Ver.  8. — The  lafety  of  all  who  enjoy  the  blessing  of  God.  God's  "  defiance  "  the 
signal  of  destruction ;  God's  "  curse,"  fatal.  But  if  protected  from  these  we  are 
B^e,  for  "the  curse  causeless  cannot  come."  We  are  safe  from — 1.  Malicious 
designs.  £!.  g.  Balaam's  wish  to  curse ;  the  plot  of  the  Jews  to  stone  Paul  at  Ico- 
nium  (Acts  xiv.  5),  and  to  assassinate  him  at  Jerusalem  (Acts  xxiii).  2.  Words  of 
execration.  £.  a.  Shimei  (2  Sam.  xvi.)-;  the  blasphemies  spoken  against  Christ,  and 
the  libels  uttered  against  his  people  (Matt.  x.  24 — 26),  3,  Witchcraft  and  divina- 
tion. In  reply  to  all  such  foolish  fears  let  it  sufSce  to  say, "  I  believe  in  God  "  (Isa. 
viii.  13, 14  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  13).  4.  Assaults  and  all  violence.  E.  g.  the  various  attempts 
to  seize  or  kill  Jesus  Christ  when  "  his  hour  was  not  yet  come.''  When  the  hour  for 
suffering  "  as  a  Christian  "  is  come, "  let  him  glorify  God  "  (1  Pet  iv.  12 — 16).  Such 
calamities  are  not  "  curses  "  from  God,  and  God  can  change  all  other  curses  into 
blessings,  as  in  the  case  of  Balaam  (Deut.  xxiii.  6).  fi.  Every  kind  of  persecution 
(Bom.  viii.  35 — 39).  The  devil's  curse  is  a  telum  imhelle;  his  defiance  an  empty 
threat.  The  objects  of  God's  care  are  invincible,  if  not  invulnerable  (Isa.  liv. 
17).— P. 

Ver.  19. — The  unchangeable  faUhfulnest  of  God.  Two  truths  are  snggested  in 
contrast.  I.  It  is  natural  to  men  to  change  their  mind  and  break  their  worh, 
1.  They  repent,  t.  e.  they  change  their  mind,  frequently,  hastily,  because  of  ignore 
•noe,  or  short-sightedness,  or  prejudice,  or  narrow-mindedness,      Pictiue  a  maili 


OB.  XML  41— XXIV.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERa  SU 

fickle,  irresolute,  and  therefore  "  unstable  "  (James  i.  8).  When  he  does  not  repent  it 
may  be  a  sigh  of  obstinacy  rather  than  of  laudable  firmness  ( Jer.  viii.  6).  2.  They 
lie.  Children  of  Satan  (John  viii.  44),  often  trained  from  childhood  in  ways  of  false- 
hood (Ps.  Iviii.  3),  they  help  to  undermine  the  foundations  of  society  (Isa.  lix.  13 — 
16),  and  to  tempt  truthful  men  to  universal  distrust  (Ps.  cxvi.  11).  Such  men  are 
apt  to  think  that  God  is  like  themselves,  changeable  and  unfaithful.  They  project 
an  image  of  themselves,  like  idolaters,  and  call  it  God  (Ps.  cxv.  8).  JE.  g.  Balak  (vers. 
13,  27),  and  Balaam  himself  at  first  (ch.  xxii.  8, 19). 

II.  It  18  "  IMPOSSIBLE  FOB  GoD  TO  LIB."  Some  of  Ood'a  threats  and  promises  are 
conditional,  though  in  form  they  may  seem  absolute.  H.g.  Numb.  xiv.  11,  12; 
Ezek.  xxxiii.  12 — 20.  But  others  are  fixed  and  absolute.  We  see  this  in — 1  Threats. 
M.  g.  exclusion  of  Hebrews  from  Canaan  (oh.  xiv.  20—22);  Saul's  loss  of  the 
kingdom  (1  Sam.  xv.  22 — 29) ;  exclusion  of  the  impure  from  heaven  (Heb.  xii, 
14 ;  •  Rev.  xxi.  27).  Hence  learn  the  folly  of  those  who  hope  that  God  may  change 
his  mind,  while  theirs  is  unchanged ;  that  God  may  repent  instead  of  themselves. 
(Illustrate  from  Simon  Magus,  who  desired  to  escape  God's  wrath  while  he  gave 
no  hint  of  abandoning  his  sins — Acts  viii.  24.)  2.  Promises.  J?,  gr.  (1)  To  Abraham, 
hundreds  of  years  before  (Gen.  xii.  1 — 3).  Therefore  Balaam  says,  vers.  19,  20. 
So  we  may  trace  the  efEects  of  the  promise  down  to  the  latest  of  the  Old  Testament 
prophets  (Mai.  iii.  6)  and  the  greatest  of  the  Christian  apostles  (Eom.  xi.  28,  29). 
(2)  To  believers  in  Christ.  Because  with  God  there  is  "  no  variableness,"  &c.,  there- 
fore we  have  "  strong  consolation,"  &c.  (Heb.  vi.  18,  19 ;  James  i.  17),  and  hope  of 
the  fulnessof  "eternal  life,  which  God,  who  cannot  lie,  promised,"  &c.  (Matt.  xxiv. 
35;  Titus  i_.  2).  (3)  To  suppliants  who  claim  God's  promises.  God  can  as  soon 
cease  to  exist  as  refuse  to  "  make  good  "  any  promise  claimed  with  faith  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. — P. 

Ver.  39 — oh.  ixiii.  12. — The Jirst prophecy.  I.  The  necessary  preparations.  1.  The 
sacrifices.  Balak  and  Balaam,  however  different  their  thoughts  in  other  respects,  were 
agreed  as  to  the  necessity  of  the  sacrifices,  if  the  desired  curse  were  to  be  put  in  the 
prophet's  mouth.  And  so  there  was  abundance  of  sacrificing.  Balak  first  makes  spon- 
taneous ofEerings,  and  then  such  as  were  specified  by  Balaam.  They  felt  that  God 
was  not  to  be  approached  in  an  irregularwayor  with  empty  hands.  As  Balak  thought 
of  Balaam,  so  he  thought  of  God.  The  prophet  was  to  be  bought  with  riches  and 
honours,  and  God  was  to  be  bought  with  sacrifices  of  slain  beasts.  Here  then  is  this 
common  element  in  the  practice  Of  two  men  so  different  in  other  respects,  It  is 
in  Aram  and  Moab  alike.  The  tradition  of  Abel's  accepted  offering  has  come  down 
far  and  wide,  so  that  both  men  are  found  feeling  that  such  sacrifices  were  in  some 
way  acceptable  to  God.  But  the  faith  and  spirit  of  Abel  could  not  be  transmitted 
along  with  the  knowledge  of  his  outward  act.  These  men  did  not  understand  that 
these  sacrifices  were  worthless  in  themselves.  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  cannot  eat  the 
flesh  of  bulls  and  drink  the  blood  of  goats.  Shedding  of  blood  was  for  the  remission 
of  sins,  and  these  men  neither  felt  sin,  confessed  it,  nor  desired  the  removal  of  it. 
2.  The  sight  of  the  people  to  be  cursed.  The  king  took  the  prophet  into  the  high 
places  of  Baal,  that  he  might  see  the  utmost  part  of  the  people.  Very  likely  Balak 
himself  had  not  seldom  stood  there,  and  gone  down  again  each  time  more  alarmed 
than  ever.  Balaam  must  now  see  these  dreadful  people,  to  satisfy  himself  that  it 
was  neither  a  trifling  nor  a  needless  work  he  had  been  called  to  do ;  to  see  how  close 
at  hand  they  were,  and  to  be  impressed  with  the  necessity  of  making  the  curse 
potent,  speedy,  and  sure.  Added  to  which,  Balak  probably  believed  that,  for  the  curse 
to  operate,  Balaam's  eyes  must  rest  on  the  people.  Lane  in  his  '  Modem  Egyptians ' 
tells  us  how  dreaded  is  the  evil  eye.  Here  then  Balaam  looked  on  these  people  in 
something  of  their  wide  extent.  What  an  opportunity  for  better  thoughts  if  the 
spirit  that  brings  them  had  been  in  his  heart  I  How  he  might  have  said,  "  Have  I 
been  called  then  to  blast  this  mighty  host,  who  have  now  lain  so  long  in  such  close 
neighbourhood  to  Balak,  yet  harmed  him  not  ?  "  3.  The  prophet  has  his  own  special 
preparations.  While  Balak  attends  to  the  sacrifices,  Balaam  retires  to  his  secret 
enchantments  (ch.  xxiv.  1)  in  some  high,  solitary  place.  God  did  choose  that  hii 
■enrants  should  go  into  such  places  to  meet  with  him  alone,  but  how  differently 


S26  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oh.  zxii.  41— xzrr. 

Balaam  looks  here  from  Moses  going  up  into  Sinai,  or  Elijah  when  he  went  his  day's 
journey  into  the  wilderness,  or  Ezekiel  when  he  heard  the  Lord  say,  "  Arise,  go  forth 
into  the  plain,  and  I  will  there  talk  to  thee  "  (Ezek.  iii.  22) ;  above  all,  from  Jesus,  in 
those  solitary,  refreshing,  blessed  hours  of  which  we  have  some  hints  in  the  Gospels  1 
How  far  this  retirement  was  sincere,  how  far  it  was  meant  to  deceive  Balak,  and 
how  far  it  was  mere  habit,  we  cannot  telL  The  conscience  that  is  well-nigh  dead  to 
practical  righteousness,  to  justice,  compassion,  and  truth,  may  yet  be  in  an  everlasting 
fidget  with  superstitious  fear. 

II.  Thb  unexpected  besult.  1.  To  Balaam.  The  whole  of  what  happened 
may  not  have  been  unexpected.  The  meeting  with  God  he  certainly  would  be  pre- 
pared for.  He  had  met  with  God  only  too  often  of  late,  and  not  at  all  to  his  peace 
of  mind  and  the  furtherance  of  his  wishes.  We  may  conclude  that  God  allowed  him 
to  go  through  with  his  enchantments,  else  he  would  hardly  have  gone  to  repeat  them 
a  second  time  (cf.  ch.  xxiii.  16  and  xxiv.  1).  And  perhapfe  the  very  fact  that  there  was 
no  interruption  to  his  enchantments  may  have  lifted  his  mind  in  hope  that  God  was 
at  last  going  to  be  propitious.  If  so  it  was  but  higher  exaltation  in  order  to  deeper 
abasement.  God  meets  with  him,  puts  a  word  in  his  mouth,  and  commands  him 
thus  to  speak  with  Balak.  Are  we  to  understand  that  by  having  the  word  put  into 
his  mouth,  Balaam  there  and  then  had  all  the  prophecy  clearly  before  his  mind,  so 
that  he  could  consider  every  word  he  had  presently  to  utter  ?  Possibly  so.  And  it 
is  possible  also  that  as  he  went  back  to  Balak  he  considered  how  he  could  trim  this 
prophecy,  as  previously  he  had  trimmed  the  commands  of  God.  And  now  comes 
something  for  which,  with  all  his  assertions  of  only  being  able  to  speak  the  word 
God  put  in  his  mouth,  Balaam,  was  probably  quite  unprepared.  He  gets  no  chance 
of  exerting  his  skill  to  trim  and  soften  down  unacceptable  words.  God  assumes  per- 
fect control  of  those  rebellious,  lying  lips.  God,  who  opened  the  mouth  of  an  ass 
and  made  it  utter  human  speech,  now  opens  the  mouth  of  one  whose  heart  was  ready 
to  deceive  and  curse,  and  makes  that  mouth  to  utter  truth  and  blessing.  2.  To  Balak. 
The  words  of  the  prophecy  must  have  been  utterly  unexpected  by  him.  He  had 
counted  with  all  confidence  on  getting  what  he  wanted.  Not  a  shadow  of  doubt 
had  crossed  his  mind  as  to  Balaam's  power  to  curse  and  his  own  power  to  buy  that 
power.  Hardly  a  more  impressive  instance  could  be  found  of  a  man  given  over  to 
strong  delusion,  to  believe  a  lie.  Counting  on  the  curse  as  both  attainable  and 
efBcacious,  he  now  finds  to  his  amazement,  horroi',  and  perplexity  that  Balaam  cannot 
even  speak  the  words  of  cursing ;  for  doubtless  when  the  Lord  took  possession  of 
Balaam's  mouth  he  took  possession  also  of  eyes,  expression,  tone,  gesture,  so  that 
there  would  be  no  incongruity  between  the  words  and  the  way  in  which  they  were 
uttered. 

III._  The  pbophect  itself.  1.  A  dear  statement  of  how  these  two  men  come  to  he 
gtanding  together.  Balak  brings  Balaam  all  this  long  way  in  order  to  curse  .Jacob 
and  defy  Israel;  The  object  of  all  these  messages  and  these  smoking  sacrifices  is 
stated  in  naked  and  brief  simplicity.  There  is  no  reference  to  motives,  inducements, 
difBculties.  The  simple  historical  fact  is  given  without  any  note  or  comment ;  the 
request  of  Balaam  mentioned,  in  order  that  it  may  be  clearly  contrasted  with  the 
reason  why  it  is  refused.  2.  Balaam  is  forcedinto  a  humiliating  confession,.  What 
he  had  so  long  concealed,  as  dangerous  to  his  reputation,  he  must  now  publish  from 
the  high  places  of  Baal.  And  notice  that  he  confines  himself  to  saying  that  the 
required  curse  and  defiance  are  impracticable.  No  more  is  put  into  his  mouth  than 
he  is  able  truthfully  to  say.  Glorious  as  this  prophecy  is,  one  might  imagine  it  being 
made  more  glorious  still  by  the  mingling  with  it  of  a  penitent,  candid  confession  of 
wrong-doing.  He  might  have  said,  "  Balak  hath  brought  me,"  &c.,  and  surely  God 
would  not  have  sealed  his  lips  if  it  had  been  in  his  heart  to  add,  "  I  bitterly  repent 
that  I  came."  He  might  have  said, "  How  can  I  curse  whom  God  hath  not  cursed?  'and 
indeed  I  discovered  this  long  ago,  but  pride  and  policy  kept  the  discovery  confined 
within  my  own  breast."  And  so  we  see  how,  while  God  kept  Balaam  from  uttering 
falsehood,  and  forced  him  to  utter  sufScient  truth,  yet  Balaam  the  rrMn  remained  the 
same.  He  says  no  more  than  he  is  obliged  to  say,  but  it  is  quite  enough  ;  with  his 
own  lips  he  publishes  his  incapacity  to  the  world.  3.  The  very  place  of  spealdng 
becomes  subservient  to  the  purpose  of  God.     We  may  presume  that  Balak  well  knew 


oa.  ixn.  41— Xxiv.]  TflE  BOOK  OP  NUMBEES.  827 

he  was  taking  Balaam  to  the  most  favourable  view-point.  It  was  thought  to  be  the 
best  place  for  cursing,  and  from  what  Balaam  now  sees  and  says  it  would  seem  to 
be  a  very  fit  place  for  blessing.  4.  And  now,  as  Balaam  looks  from  the  top  of  the 
rocks  and  from  the  hills,  what  does  he  see  ?  He  may  have  been  struck  even  already, 
and  at  that  distance,  and  before  he  began  the  prophecy,  with  the  outward  peculiarities 
of  Israel.  Some  peculiarities  of  Israel  could  only  be  known  by  a  close  and  detailed 
inspection ;  others,  e.  g.  the  arrangement  of  the  camp  around  the  tabernacle,  were 
best  known  by  a  sort  of  bird's-eye  view.  An  intimate  knowledge  of  London  is  only 
to  be  gained  by  going  from  street  to  street  and  building  to  building,  but  one  thus 
gaining  a  very  intimate  knowledge  of  London  would  yet  be  without  such  an  im- 
pression of  it  as  is  to  be  got  from  the  top  of  St.  Paul's,  As  Balaam  looks  down 
from  the  tops  of  the  rocks  he  sees  enough  for  the  present  purposes  of  God.  He  sees 
enough  to  indicate  the  «eparaiio»  and  the  vast  numerical  forceof  Israel.  It  was  not 
needful  here  to  speak  of  more.  The  immediate  purpose  of  the  prophecy  was  served 
if  it  deterred  Balak  from  further  folly.  A  great  deal  more  might  have  been  said  of 
Israel,  and  was  said  afterwards.  In  one  sense  this  was  an  introductory  prophecy, 
followed  up  by  fuller  revelations  in  later  ones ;  in  another  sense  it  stands  by  itself. 
The  others  would  not  have  been  spoken  if  the  first  had  proved  sufBcient.  Passing 
over  the  concluding  wish  of  Balaam,  "  Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  let 
my  last  end  be  like  his  1 "  which  demands  to  be  considered  by  itself,  we  note — 5.  The 
state  of  suspenRe  in  which  the  prophecy  leaves  Balak  as  to  his  own  position.  It  would 
have  been  so  easy  to  introduce  a  reassuring  word — one  which,  if  it  did  not  actually 
take  away  Balak's  alarm,  would  at  all  events  have  been  fitted  to  do  so.  But  the 
king's  request  had  something  so  peremptory  and  dictatorial  about  it  that  God's  answer 
is  confined  to  a  refusal.  He  might  have  explained  that  Israel  was  now  busy  with  its 
own  internal  affairs,  and  would  soon,  according  to  his  purpose,  cross  Jordan,  and 
that  in  the  mean  time,  if  Balak  would  show  himself  friendly,  there  was  nothing  in 
Israel  to  make  it  his  foe.  But  Balak  had  so  acted  that  the  great  thing  to  be  done 
was  to  impress  him  with  a  deep  sense  of  the  strength  and  security  of  Israel.  If  we 
prefer  unreasonable  and  arrogant  requests,  we  must  expect  to  receive  answers  which, 
if  we  were  uneasy  before,  will  leave  us  more  uneasy  still.  God  must  go  on  speaking 
and  acting  so  as  to  shake  the  ground  under  all  selfishness. — Y. 

Ver.  10. — "  Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  let  my  last  end  he  like  his  !  " 
The  secret  of  Israel's  prosperity.  This  certainly  appears  an  extraordinary  wish 
when  we  bear  in  mind  the  position  and  character  of  the  man  who  uttered  it.  Any 
one  taking  these  words  on  his  lips,  and  thereby  making  them  his  own,  would  inevit- 
ably direct  our  attention  to  his  life,  and  compel  us  to  consider  what  he  might  be 
doing  to  make  the  wish  a  reality.  From  the  time  of  his  first  entrance  on  the  scene 
Balaam  unconsciously  reveals  his  character.  He  could  not  by  any  stretch  of  the 
word  be  described  as  a  good  man ;  the  whole  narrative  is  little  but  an  illustration  of 
his  duplicity,  selfishness,  vanity,  greed  of  gain  and  glory,  and  utter  disregard  of  the 
plain  commandments  of  God.  T!ha  position,  of  Balaam  at  this  particular  time  is  also 
to  be  remembered.  He  has  been  called  to  curse,  twice  pressed  to  make  a  long  jour- 
ney for  this  special  purpose ;  he  has  offered  sacrifices  and  sought  enchantments  to 
secure  it ;  and  yet  he  not  only  fails  to  curse,  but,  more  than  that,  is  compelled  to 
bless  ;  and,  last  of  all,  to  crown  the  reversal  of  what  had  been  so  carefully  prepared 
for,  he  is  heard  expressing  an  emphatic  wish  that  he  himself  might  be  found  among 
this  blessed  people. 

I.   CONSIDBK  FOB  A  MOMENT  THESE  WOEDS  OF  BALAAM  DISCONNECTED  FEOM  ALL  THEIB 

OBIGINAL  ciKCUMSTANCES.  Consider  them  as  placed  before  some  one  who  knew 
neither  the  character  nor  position  of  Balaam  as  the  speaker,  nor  the  position  of 
Israel  as  the  nation  referred  to.  Let  him  know  simply  that  these  words  were  spoken 
once  upon  a  time,  and  ask  him  to  imagine  for  himself  the  scene  in  which  they  might 
he  fitly  spoken.  Whither  then  would  his  thought  be  turned?  Would  it  not  be  to 
some  aged  believer,  gradually  sinking  to  rest,  with  the  experience  that  as  the  out- 
ward man  decayed,  the  inward  man  was  renewed  from  day  to  day,  and  with  the  con- 
viction that  to  be  absent  from  the  body  was  to  be  present  with  the  Lord  ;  looking 
forward  from  time  into  eternity,  according  to  the  familiar  illustration,  aa  being  "  but 


828  THE  BOOK  OF  NOMBEE&  [oh.  xxii.  41— xxiv. 

a  going  from  one  room  into  another."  Such  would  be  the  view  suggested  by  the 
term  "  righteous,"  and  the  person  expressing  the  wish  would  seem  to  be  some 
studious,  susceptible  observer,  with  frequent  opportunities  for  observation,  who  had 
been  impressed  by  the  reality  and  the  superlative  worth  of  the  experience  on  which 
he  had  gazed.  Then  let  such  a  one  as  we  have  supposed  be  confronted  with  these 
original  eircumstanees.  How  perplexed  he  would  be  when  told  that  the  words  were 
spoken  by  such  a  man  as  Balaam  appears  in  the  narrative,  and  of  a  people  that  had 
done  such  things  as  are  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Numbers  1  These  words,  looked  at 
in  a  particular  light,  might  be  taken  as  indicating  deep  spiritual  convictions  and 
earnest,  faithful  life  on  the  part  of  whoever  speaks  them.  But  we  are  bound  to  look 
at  them  now  in  the  light  of  Balaam's  character,  and  in  the  light  also  of  Israel's  past 
career. 

II.  CoNsiDBE  THE  ACTUAL  EXTENT  OP  BALAAM'S  WISH.  He  wishes  to  die  the  death 
of  the  righteous.  Do  not  be  misled  by  the  prominence  of  the  word  "  righteous " 
into  supposing  that  for  its  own  sake  Balaam  cared  about  righteousness.  It  was  not 
righteousness  that  he  desired,  but  what  he  saw  to  be  the  pleasant,  enviable  effects  of 
righteousness.  He  cared  nothing  about  the  cause  if  only  he  could  get  the  effects.  He 
loved  the  vine  because  it  produced  grapes,  and  the  fig-tree  because  it  produced  figs, 
but  if  he  could  have  got  grapes  from  thorns  and  figs  from  thistles,  he  would  have 
loved  thorns  and  thistles  just  as  well.  We  have  God  revealing  to  an  ungodly  man 
as  much  as  an  ungodly  man  can  perceive  of  the  blessedness  of  the  righteoits.  Balaam 
was  entirely  out  of  sympathy  with  the  purposes  of  God.  He  showed  by  the  best  of 
all  evidence  that  he  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  righteousness  as  a  state  of  heart, 
habit  of  conduct,  and  standard  in  all  dealings  with  God  and  men.  But  though 
Balaam  did  not  appreciate  the  need  of  righteousness,  he  did  appreciate  happiness, 
and  that  very  warmly,  in  his  own  carnal  way.  He  saw  in  Israel  everything  a  man 
could  desire.  To  have  Balaam  uttering  this  wish  was  as  emphatic  a  way  as  any 
God  could  have  taken  to  show  Balak  his  favour  to  Israel.  Not  only  from  the  top  of 
the  rocks  does  the  prophet  see  the  separated  and  multitudinous  people,  which  in  itself 
was  enough  to  drive  Balak  to  unfavourable  inferences,  but  so  desirable  does  the  state 
of  the  people  appear,  that  Balaam  cannot  help  wishing  it  were  his  own.  God  had 
told  him  at  first  "  the  people  are  blessed,"  and  now,  as  soon  as  he  sees  them,  God  also 
makes  the  greatness  of  the  blessedness  sufSciently  manifest  even  to  his  carnal  and 
obscured  heart. 

IIL  Thus  wb  see  the  deep  impression  which  the  blessed  life  of  God's  peoplb 
IS  CAPABLE  OP  making  ON  THE  UNGODLY.  Those  who  as  yet  have  no  sympathy  with 
righteousness  may  have  a  keen  desire  for  security,  joy,  and  peace,  and  a  keen  per- 
ception of  the  fact  that  these  somehow  belong  to  real  believers  in  Christ.  It  is  a 
characteristic  of  the  Scriptures,  and  a  very  notable  and  important  one,  that  many  of 
the  appeals  found  in  it  are  to  what  seem  comparatively  low  motives.  Has  it  not 
indeed  been  made  a  charge  against  Christian  ethics  that  they  make  so  much  of  re- 
wards and  punishments  ?  But  surely  this  is  the  very  wisdom  of  God  to  draw  men 
by  inducements  suitable  to  their  low  and  miserable  state,  to  promise  joy  to  the  joy- 
less, peace  to  the  distracted,  security  to  the  fearful,  life  to  the  dying.  Certainly 
Christ  the  Saviour  can  do  nothing  for  us  as  long  as  we  remain  impenitent,  unbelieving, 
and  unreconciled,  but  in  his  mercy  he  speaks  first  of  all  in  the  most  general  and 
sympathetic  terms  concerning  our  needs.  The  most  comprehensive  invitation  the 
Saviour  ever  gave  runs  thus :  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy 
laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  Not  a  word  there  of  conviction  of  sin,  wrath  of 
God,  need  of  righteousness,  need  of  saving  faith  I  Is  it  by  accident  that  the  first 
psalm  begins  with  a  reference  to  happiness  ?  The  sermon  on  the  mount  starts  with 
this  as  the  very  beginning  of  Christ  s  teaching ;  "  Men  are  unhappy  ;  how  can  they 
fiind  and  keep  blessedness,  real  happiness  ?  "  Suppose  a  man  who  has  no  experi- 
mental knowledge  of  the  saving  power  of  Christ,  reading  through  the  promises  of  the 
New  Testament  and  the  actual  experiences  therein  recorded  ;  suppose  him  to  see 
that  if  words  count  for  anything,  godliness  is  indeed  profitable  for  the  life  that  now 
is.  Would  it  be  anything  strange  for  such  a  man  to  say,  "  If  righteousness  brings 
■nch  effects  as  these,  then  let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous  "  ?  Appealing  t« 
high  motives  alone  would  be  all  very  well  if  those  appealed  to  were  unfallen  spirits 


OH.  XXII.  41— XXIV.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  S2« 

or  perfected  saintB ;  but  men  being  what  they  are,  God  does  not  esteem  it  too  great 
a  condescension  to  draw  them  to  himself  by  the  promise  of  blessedness,  high, 
peculiar,  rich,  and  lasting. 

IV.  God  gives  hbbe  through  Balaam  a  cleab  indication  of  how  this  desibablk 
BLESSEDNESS  COMES.  Israel  is  not  only  the  happy  people,  but  the  righteous  people. 
Righteousness  brings  the  happiness,  and  is  the  condition  and  the  guarantee  of  its 
continuance.  Wherever  there  is  righteousness  there  is  an  ever-living  and  ever- 
fruitful  cause  of  blessedness.  The  presence  of  this  righteousness  as  essential  is  still 
more  clearly  indicated  in  the  next  prophecy :  "  God  hath  not  beheld  iniquity  in 
Jacob."  That  is  the  great  difEerence  between  Israel  and  Moab.  Moab  is  not  with- 
out its  possessions  and  treasures,  its  carnal  satisfactions ;  Moab  has  much  that  it 
thinks  worth  fighting  for ;  it  has  honours  and  rewards  to  offer  Balaam  such  as  have 
brought  him  all  this  way  to  utter,  if  he  can,  a  curse  against  Israel.  But  Moab  is  not 
righteous,  and  the  sight  of  its  happiness  will  never  provoke  such  a  wish  as  Balaam's 
here. 

V.  This  bbings  us  to  consideb  the  fechliab  way  in  which  the  wish  is  expressed. 
"  Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  let  my  last  end  be  like  his  1  "  This  is 
as  comprehensive  a  way  as  was  possible  at  the  time  of  stating  the  blessedness  of 
the  righteous.  Life  and  immortality  were  not  yet  brought  to  light.  To  die  the 
death  of  the  righteous  was  a  very  emphatic  way  of  indicating  the  present  life  of  the 
righteous  in  all  its  possible  extent.  No  matter  how  long  that  life  may  stretch,  it  is 
one  to  be  desired.  ."  The  righteous  goes  on  as  far  as  I  can  see  him,"  Balaam  seems 
to  say,  "  and  comes  to  no  harm."  The  blessedness  of  God's  people,  if  only  they  ob- 
serve the  requisite  conditions,  is  a  continuous,  unbroken  experience ;  not  an  alternation 
of  oases  and  deserts.  The  fluctuations  in  that  blessedness,  the  flowing  and  ebbing 
tides,  come  from  defects  in  ourselves.  Where  there  is  the  fulness  of  faith,  prayer, 
and  humility  there  surely  will  be  the  fulness  of  blessedness  also.  Then  also,  when 
we  consider  what  Christ  has  shown  us  by  his  own  experience  of  what  lies  beyond 
death ;  when  we  consider  his  own  personal  triumph,  and  the  definite,  unhesitating 
way  in  which  a  blessed  resurrection  is  assured  to  his  followers,  and  an  inheritance 
incorruptible,  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away,  we  see  a  great  prophetic  import- 
ance in  this  particular  mode  of  expression :  "  Let  me  die  the  death."  Balaam's  wish 
in  the  verj'  form  of  it,  so  peculiar,  and  we  may  even  say  at  first  so  startling,  ex- 
pressed far  more  than  he  had  any  possible  conception  of.  Death  stands  crowning 
with  one  hand  the  temporal  life  of  the  righteous,  and  with  the  other  opening  to  him 
the  pure  fulness  of  eternity. 

VI.  It  is  very  important  to  notice  that  by  the  reference  to  Israel  as  the  righteous 
AN  unerring  indication  is  given  as  to  where  righteousness  is  to  be  found.  Not 
they  who  call  themselves  righteous,  but  whom  God  calls  righteous,  are  the  people 
whose  death  one  may  desire  to  die.     The  true  Israelite  is  he  who  fulfils  the  law  and 

.the  prophets,  as  he  is  called  to  do  and  made  competent  to  do  by  the  fulness  of  that 
Holy  Spirit  which  is  given  to  every  one  who  asks  for  him.  "  If  ye  know  these  things, 
happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them."  There  is  a  worthless  and  deceiving  righteousness 
which  excludes  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  though  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  its 
possessors,  make  much  of  it.  There  is  also  a  righteousness  to  be  hungered  and 
thirsted  after  (Matt.  v.).  We  must  be  careful  in  this  matter,  lest  we  spend  money 
for  that  which  is  not  bread,  and  labour  for  that  which  satisfieth  not  (Isa.  Iv.  2). 
God  hath  not  beheld  iniquity  in  Jacob,  for  where  he  beholds  iniquity  the  seed  of 
Jacob  is  assuredly  absent.  Those  who  have  learned  the  corruption  and  deception, 
the  necessary  ignorance  and  incapacity,  of  the  unrenewed  heart,  and  thereby  been 
impelled  to  seek  and  enabled  to  find  renewal,  life  and  light  from  on  high,  and  holy 
principles  and  purposes  for  their  future  course,  they  are  the  righteous.  Israel  bom  of 
the  flesh  exists  but  as  the  type.  We  must  not  limit  our  view  "by  him.  "  Think  not 
to  say  within  yourselves.  We  have  Abraham  to  our  father:  for  I  say  unto  you,  that 
God  »  able  of  these  stones  to  raise  up  children  unto  Abraham  "  (Matt.  iii.  9). — Y. 

Vers.  13 — 26. — The  second  prophecy,  BalaMs  state  of  mind.  Balaam  has  cursed 
where  he  was  expected  to  bless,  ne  has  said  things  very  hard  to  listen  to  and  keep 
pieaence  of  mind,  but  Balak  has  not  by  any  means  lost  faith  in  Balaam  and  hii 


880  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  [pi.  ixit.  41— Mi*. 

resources.  He  rather  takes  the  blame  to  himself  than  to  Balaam.  If  there  be  wrath 
in  his  heart  with  the  speaker,  who,  instead  of  cursing  Israel,  has  blessed  it  altogether, 
he  manages  to  conceal  the  wrath.  He  cannot  afford  to  quarrel  with  Balaam,  the 
only  known  resource  he  has.  He  suggests,  therefore,  as  the  great  cause  of  failure 
that  the  place  of  cursing  has  been  badly  chosen.  Remove  the  cause,  and  the  effect 
win  disappear.  Let  the  prophet  come  away  from  the  top  of  the  rocks  to  where  his 
mind  will  not  be  filled  with  the  presence  of  this  bewildering  multitude ;  and  Balaam, 
whatever  his  private  thoughts,  consents  to  the  experiment.  It  is  the  way  of  the 
blind,  deluded  world ;  all  reasons  for  failure  are  accepted  and  acted  on  save  the  right 
one.  Balak  cannot  yet  see,  will  not  see  for  a  while,  perhaps  will  never  really  see, 
that  there  is  no  place  on  earth  where  such  requests  can  be  granted.  He  is  showing 
himself  now,  as  Balaam  had  done  before,  unsatisfied  with  the  ^rst  intimation.  Balaam 
had  been  told  plainly  at  the  very  first  that  Israel  was  blessed,  yet  here  he  is  dabbling 
in  superstitions,  in  enchantments  and  divinations,  with  no  clear  perception  of  the 
nature  and  character  of  God.  Thus,  all  the  narrative  through,  we  see  what  egre- 
gious and  scarcely  credible  blunders  men  make  when  they  are  left  to  themselves  to 
make  discoveries  of  God.  What  a  proof  that  revelation  in  all  the  large  extent  of 
its  Scriptural  fulness  is  absolutely  indispensable !  God  must  not  only  give  us  the 
truth  concerning  himself,  and  the  proper  relation  of  men  to  him,  but  must  also  open 
our  hearts  and  our  eyes,  and  give  us  light  whereby  we  may  see  the  truth  already 
given.  How  constantly  we  should  remember  the  inevitable  ignorance  of  those  to 
whom  gospel  truth,  light,  and  perceptive  power  have  not  yet  penetrated  1  Take  pity 
on  them  and  help  them — such  darkened  minds — as  you  think  of  Balak  stumbling 
from  one  blunder  to  another,  from  one  discredited  resource  to  another,  from  one 
disappointment  to  another,  only  to  find  at  last  that  all  his  schemes  are  vanity.  And 
now  we  advance  to  consider  the  second  prophecy.  It  is  not  only  spoken  in  Balak's 
hearing,  but  is  a  direct  appeal  to  himself.  We  are  to  imagine  Balak  standing  with 
strained  and  eager  look,  already  full  of  excitement  and  expectation,  before  ever  a 
word  is  spoken.  But  this  is  not  enough ;  he  must  be  solemnly  exhorted  to  attention. 
"  Things  are  about  to  be  said  directly  concerning  you,  and  it  may  be  that  when  you 
have  heard  them,  and  allowed  them  to  have  full  efiect  on  your  mind,  you  will  cease 
from  these  foolish  attacks  on  the  established  purpose  and  counsel  of  Jehovah." 
That  this  call  upon  Balak  for  attention  was  not  a  superfluous  one  is  shown  by  the 
fact,  that  after  hearing  the  prophecy  he  nevertheless  made  a  third  attempt,  modified 
indeed,  but  still  such  as  to  show  that  he  had  not  taken  in  the  prophecy  to  anything 
like  its  full  extent.  We  know  how  the  Scriptures  abound  in  expressions  of  which 
"  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear,"  and  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,"  are 
representative.  Such  expressions  do  not  make  truth  any  truer,  but  they  do  throw  on 
us  a  great  responsibility,  and  involve  us  in  unquestionable  blame  for  neglect  of  tha 
things  which  belong  to  our  salvation. 

I.  The  peophect  begins  by  coeeeoting  Balak's  fatal  misappebhensions  con- 
CEENINQ  God.  Balak  having  failed  the  first  time  he  tried  Balaam,  succeeded  the 
second ;  having  failed  the  first  time  he  tries  Jehovah,  it  is  natural  for  him  to  think  he 
may  succeed  the  second.  Hitherto  he  has  known  only  the  idols  of  Moab,  and  these 
of  course  only  in  such  aspects  as  the  priests  presented  them.  As  the  priests  were, 
80  were  the  gods  ;  and  Balak,  having  experienced  Balaam's  final  compuanoe,  might 
excusably  argue  from  Balaam  to  that  Being  whom  he  took  to  be  Balaam's  God.  And 
now  there  falls  out  of  a  holier  sphere  some  unexpected  and  much-needed  knowledge 
for  poor  Balak,  whose  chief  experience  had  been  of  equivocating,  vacillating,  unstable 
men.  "  God  is  not  what  you  think  him  to  be ;  he  is  true  and  steadfast,  neither 
changing  his  purposes  nor  failing  in  them."  Notice  the  way  in  which  this  all- 
important  statement  is  put.  God  puts  himself  in  contrast  with  his  fallen,  unfaithful, 
and  disgraced  creature,  man.  "  God  is  not  a  man ; "  and,  as  if  to  emphasise  this 
matter,  he  speaks  the  word  of  truth  concerning  his  own  truth  through  lying  lips. 
"  Men  change  their  minds,  and  therefore  break  their  words  ;  they  lie  because  they 
repent."  What  a  hint  then  for  us  all  to  change  from  deceitful  hearts  to  sincere  ones, 
from  lying  lips  to  truthful  ones,  from  vain  purposes  that  must  some  day  be  relin- 
qniahed,  engendered  as  they  are  in  our  own  selfishness  and  folly,  to  such  purposes  M 


oa.  txn.  41— Xxm]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBES8.  BSI 

are  inspired^  by  the  unchanging  God  himself  I  Changing  thus,  we  shall  get  into  s 
state  partaking  somewhat  of  God's  own  steadfastness ;  or,  rather,  the  only  change  will 
be  from  good  to  better  and  better  to  best.  Man  may  become  such  that  it  shaU  no 
longer  be  his  reproach  that  he  lies,  either  carelessly,  ignorantly,  or  maliciously,  and 
repents,  playing  the  weathercock  to  every  wind  that  blows.  God,  we  may  be  sure, 
desires  the  day  to  come  when,  instead  of  finding  in  man  this  awful  and  humiliating 
contrast  to  himself,  he  will  rather  be  able  to  say,  "  Man  is  now  true,  clear  from  all 
belief  in  lieSj  from  all  deception  and  evasion,  and  steadfast  in  all  the  ways  of  right- 
eousness, holmess,  and  love. 

II.  The  prophecy  goes  on  to  kevbal  still  more  of  Israel's  strength.  The 
unchangeable  God,  having  purposed  to  bless  Israel,  must  go  on  blessing  them.  He 
does  it  in  word  continually  through  the  great  ofBoial  channel  (ch.  vi.  22 — 27),  and 
now  it  is  Balaam's  lot  (strange  expositor  of  the  Divine  goodness  I)  to  show  clearly 
that  the  blessing  of  God  is  anything  but  a  nominal  or  a  secondary  one.  Much 
has  been  done  to  show  this  in  the  first  prophecy,  but  a  great  deal  more  is  done  in 
the  second.  God  has  not  only  put  Israel  by  themselves  and  made  them  into  this 
vast  multitude,  which  was  a  great  deal  to  do,  for  Jacob's  posterity  is  likened  to  the 
dust  in  number ;  but  now  through  Balaam  he  shows  quality  as  well  as  quantity.  The 
people  are  not  only  separated  outwardly  and  visibly,  but  separated  still  more  by  some 
great  peculiarity  in  their  inward  life.  Their  vast  numbers  are  but  the  most  easily 
perceptible  result  of  the  vigorous,  abundant  vitality  within.  When  Balaam  got  his 
first  glance  from  the  top  of  the  rocks  he  saw  the  most  obvious  fruit  of  Israel's 
peouliai  relation  to  God.  Now  in  the  second  survey  he  comes  as  it  were  nearer,  and 
sees  the  root  and  trunk  and  branches,  the  sap  and  substance  whence  these  fruits  take 
their  origin.  1.  There  is  the  righteousness  of  the  people.  God,  who  searches  into  all 
secrets,  and  to  whom  the  darkness  and  the  Ught  are  both  alike,  has  beheld  no  iniquity 
in  Jacob,  no  wrong  in  Israel ;  that  is  to  say,  putting  the  thing  plainly,  there  was  no 
iniquity  in  Jacob.  And  though  it  seems  a  strange  thing  to  say,  considering  God's 
late  dealings  with  the  people,  we  feel  at  once  that  it  must  not  only  be  true,  but  very 
important,  or  it  would  not  be  put  so  prominently  forward.  God  looks  upon  the  ideal 
Israel  which  lies  yet  andeveloped  in  the  midst  of  all  the  udbelief  and  carnality  of 
the  present  generation.  Though  at  the  present  moment  any  dozen  Israelites  might 
be  as  debased  as  any  dozen  Moabites,  yet  in  Israel  there  was  a  seed  of  holiness,  a 
sure  beginning  of  the  perfect  and  the  blessed,  which  was  not  to  be  found  anywhere 
in  Moab.  God,  bear  in  mind,  sees  what  we  cannot  see.  God  js  not  a  man,  that  he 
should  lie ;  neither  is  he  a  man  that  his  eye  should  be  stopped  by  the  surface  and 
first  appearance  of  things.  Jesus  sought  a  solid  ground  for  the  future  of  his  saving 
work  in  the  world,  and  he  fpund  it  not  amidst  the  world's  wisdom,  but  where  we 
assuredly  should  never  have  looked — among  the  stumbling,  ignorant  disciples  whom 
he  gathered  in  Galilee.  Looking  with  other  eyes  than  men,  and  where  proud  men 
never  look,  he  finds  what  they  never  find.  2.  There  is  the  presence  of  God  vnih 
them,  and  that  not  only  as  God,  but  as  King.  "When  you  attack  Israel,  0  Balak, 
you  attack  the  kingdom  of  God.  You,  the  king  of  Moab,  appeal  to  the  King  of 
Israel  to  curse  his  own  people."  His  sanctuary  is  also  his  throne,  and  where  he  ia 
worshipped,  there  he  also  rules.  Every  act  of  worship  is  also  an  expression  of 
loyalty.  Balak  described  Israel  as  a  people  come  out  of  Egypt  (ch.  xxii.  5)  ;  he  is 
now  to  learn  that  they  came  because  they  were  brought ;  because  that  very  God 
brought  them  whose  curse  he  had  so  laboriously  and  patiently  sought  to  invoke. 
"  Does  it  stand  to  reason,  0  Balak,  that  God  can  have  brought  them  so  far  now  to 
leave  them  for  the  sake  of  your  sacrifices  and  Balaam's  enchantments  ?  "  Thus  also 
we  may  gather  that  as  God  in  all  the  fulness  of  his  being.  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit, 
has  so  long  given  his  indubitable  presence  to  his  Church,  he  will  assuredly  for  this 
very  reason  continue  it  to  the  end.  God  indeed  looks  on  that  Church  in  its  actual 
coldness,  indolence,  and  carnality, — and  the  Israel  of  God  to-day  is  quite  as  far  away 
from  the  fulness  of  its  privileges,  the  perfection  of  its  faith,  and  the  exactness  of  its 
service  as  was  Israel  in  the  wilderness, — but  he  regards  the  ideal  still.  It  is  through 
the  believers  in  Christ  alone,  the  spiritual  children  of  the  faithful  Abraham,  that  the 
nations  are  to  be  truly  blessed.   The  ideal  believer  is  the  ideal  man.   Where  the  faithful 


asa  TH£  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS.  [oh.  zxu.  41— xzit 

and  true  God  finds  germs  of  faithfulness  and  truth  in  man,  there  he  will  abide  and 
never  depart.  3.  Tli&re  is  strength  for  all  required  service  and  toil.  "  He  hath  as  it 
were  the  strength  of  the  unicorn  (or  buffalo).  "  Much  increase  is  by  the  strength  o£ 
the  ox"  (Prov.  xiv.  4),  but  an  animal  stronger  even  than  the  ordinary  oz  is  needed  to 
set  forth  the  extent  of  Israel's  advantages.  We  may  take  it  that  the  figure  here  is 
intended  to  set  forth  strength  pure  and  simple.  Israel  will  have  power  to  do  what- 
ever the  course  of  events  may  bring  to  be  done.  It  is  strong  to  do  God's  work  as 
long  as  it  is  left  to  the  peaceful  pursuit  of  that  work,  and  it  is  also  strong  to  make  a 
complete  defence  whenever  it  may  be  attacked.  "  Bouse  Israel  by  your  attacks,  and 
the  force  that  has  hitherto  been  used  for  internal  progress  will  become  a  wall  against 
you ;  and  not  only  so,  but  you  may  be  swept  away  in  the  rush  of  the  roused  and  ' 
maddened  unicorn."  There  is  thus  a  warning  to  Balak  not  to  provoke.  It  is  when 
the  Church  has  been  provoked  by  persecution  that  her  true  strength  has  been  shown 
to  the  world.  What  a  mockery  of  this  world's  boasted  resources,  when  all  its  per- 
suasions, cajoleries,  threats,  and  torments  have  failed  to  shake  the  faith  of  humble 
believers  I  It  can  burn,  but  it  cannot  convert.  It  is  marvellous,  the  strength,  energy, 
and  patience  which  God  has  bestowed  on  some  of  his  servants.  Paul  toiling  on 
among  infirmities  and  persecutions  is  a  proverb ;  but,  to  come  nearer  home,  consider 
John  Wesley,  hardly  ever  out  of  the  saddle  except  when  he  was  in  the  pulpit,  amply 
furnished  for  all  the  weariness  of  travel  and  the  work  of  incessant  preaching  till 
long  past  his  eightieth  year ;  and  in  matters  of  defence  so  wonderfully  strengthened 
with  the  strength  of  the  unicorn  that  he  passed  unharmed  through  all  physical  perils 
and  social  opposition.  It  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  of  all  his  remarkable 
experiences  that  he  could  say  in  his  seventy-fourth  year,  "  I  have  travelled  all  roads 
by  day  and  by  night  these  forty  years,  and  never  was  interrupted  yet."  4.  God 
gives  his  people  certain,  authoritative,  regular  knowledge  as  to  his  viUl  and  favour. 
He  does  not  leave  them  to  auguries  and  divination.  These  things  indeed  were  not 
only  useless,  but  forbidden  (Levit.  xix.  26).  Whatever  he  has  to  say  he  says  through 
appointed  and  recognised  channels,  and  confirms  and  illustrates  it  by  suitable  acts. 
There  was  place  and  need  for  lawgivers,  prophets,  and  priests  in  Israel,  but  no  room 
for  men  like  Balaam,  augurs,  magicians,  and  priestcraft  in  general.  Enchantments 
and  divination  had  been  the  mainstay  of  Balak's  hope,  and  though  Balaam's  experience 
may  have  prevented  him  from  trusting  so  fully  in  them,  he  nevertheless  considered 
them  a  very  important  element  in  propitiating  Jehovah.  MarHs  ways  of  reaching 
God  are  all  vanity.  God  himself  has  to  come  down  and  lay  a  way  very  clearly 
marked  and  strictly  prescribed.  In  that  way,  and  in  that  alone,  there  is  certainty  and 
sufSciency  of  knowledge,  safety,  and  blessedness  of  life.  "  The  law  of  his  God  is  in 
his  heart ;  none  of  his  steps  shall  slide  "  (Ps.  zxxvii.  31). 

III.   THB  prophecy  CliCSBS  BY   INDICATING  HOW  THERE  WILL  BE  IN  ISRAEL  THE  SPIRIT 

0»  DESTRUCTION  AND  THB  STRENGTH  TO  DESTROY.  Israel  has  not  Only  the  strength 
of  the  buffalo,  but  the  spirit  and  propensities  of  the  lion.  This  is  the  first  intimation 
of  threatening.  The  prophecy  closes  with,  as  it  were,  a  growl  and  menace  from  the 
lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah.  Up  to  this  time  God  has  told  Balak  to  go  round  about 
Zion  and  tell  the  towers  thereof,  and  mark  well  her  bulwarks  (Ps.  xlviii.  12, 13),  that 
he  might  see  how  God's  ideal  people  are  invulnerable  to  all  enemies.  But  now  the 
defensive  is  suddenly  turned  into  the  offensive.  Israel  is  a  lion.  We  know  from  the 
frequent  references  to  the  lion  in  the  Old  Testament  that  this  figure  must  have  been 
a  very  impressive  one  to  Balak.  In  Isaiah's  prophecy  concerning  Moab  we  find 
these  words:  "I  will  bring  lions  upon  him  that  escapeth  of  Moab"  (Isa.  xv.  9).  The 
roar,  the  spring,  the  resistless  attack,  the  sudden  and  complete  collapse  of  the  victim, 
all  rise  to  our  minds  the  moment  this  majestic  animal  is  mentioned.  The  idea  of 
defence  scarcely  enters  into  our  minds  in  connection  with  the  lion.  His  resources 
are  those  of  attack.  What  shall  Balak  do  if  he  has  to  meet  a  foe  whose  strength  is 
that  of  the  unicorn,  and  whose  ardour  is  that  of  the  lion  ?  The  figure,  remember,  is 
suitable  to  the  occasion.  There  is  a  time  to  compare  the  people  of  God  to  the  sheep 
whom  the  shepherd  leads  out  and  in,  and  gathers  within  the  protecting  fold,  but 
there  is  also  a  time  to  compare  them  to  the  restless  lion,  seeking  for  his  prey,  and  not 
lying  down  till  he  drinks  its  blood.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  a  destroying  institution, 
and  this  part  of  its  work  must  not  be  concealed  and  softened  down  to  suit  the  preja< 


DH.  XXII,  41— XXIV.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  333 

dices  of  the  world.  The  claws  of  the  lion  must  not  be  clipped  when  it  is  dealing 
with  vested  interests  and  established  iniquities.  As  it  is  not  the  way  of  the  lion  to 
make  compromises  with  its  prey,  so  neither  must  we  make  compromises  with  any 
evil.  We  nave  nothing  to  do  with  evil,  save,  in  the  name  of  the  God  of  righteousness, 
to  destroy  it  as  soon  as  we  can.  Nor  need  there  he  any  fear  of  carrying  the  com- 
parison too  far.  He  who  has  taken  in  the  meaning  of  those  words,  "Be  wise  as 
serpents,  and  harmless  as  doves,"  will  well  understand  how  to  bo  ardent,  enthusiastic, 
uncompromising,  almost  fierce  and  lion-like,  against  monster  evils,  yet  at  the  same  time 
gentle  as  the  lamb,  pitiful  as  God  himself,  towards  the  men  whose  hearts  have  been 
hardened  and  their  consciences  blinded  by  the  way  in  which  their  temporal  interests 
have  become  intimately  mixed  with  wrong.  Wilberforce  was  one  of  the  most  gentle, 
afEectionate,  and  considerate  of  men,  always  on  the  alert  to  say  a  word  or  write  a 
letter  for  the  spiritual  good  of  others,  yet  his  greatest  work  took  the  form  of  destroy- 
ing evil.  For  many  long  years  he  had  to  look  in  the  sight  of  the  world  a  combatant 
more  than  anything  else.  When  the  slave  trade  was  abolished  in  1807  it  is  reported 
of  him  that  he  asked  his  friend  Thornton,  "  What  shall  we  abolish  next  ?  "  a  plajrf u\ 
question,  of  course,  but  capable  of  a  very  serious  meaning.  No  sooner  does  one 
great  evil  vanish  from  the  scene  than  another  becomes  conspicuous.  Evil  seems 
continually  growing  as  well  as  good.  It  is  perhaps  not  without  significance  that  so 
many  associations  clamouring  for  the  attention  of  good  and  patriotic  men  have  in 
the  names  of  them  such  words  as  these:  "abolition,"  "repression,"  "prevention." 
It  must  needs  be  so,  even  to  the  end.  The  devil  well  knows  how  to  make  the  selfish 
interests  of  one  half  the  world  dependent  on  the  sufferings  and  miseries  of  the  other 
half.— Y. 

Ver.  27— Ch.  xxiv.  14. — The  third  prophecy,  I.  The  cieotmstances  in  which 
IT  WAS  UTTEEED.  1.  With  regard  to  Balak.  After  hearing  the  second  prophecy, 
•  and  especially  its  menacing  conclusion,  he  is  naturally  much  irritated.  It  is  bad 
enough  to  have  been  disappointed  even  once,  but  kings  like  worse  to  have  threatening 
added  to  disappointment,  and  at  first  Balak  makes  as  if  he  would  have  nothing  more 
said  on  the  subject,  one  way  or  another.  If  Balaam  cannot  curse  the  people,  neither 
shall  he  bless  them.  But  becoming  a  little  calmer,  Balak  determines  to  try  a  third 
time,  and  from  a  still  different  place ;  so  little  did  he  need  the  solemn  assertion  of 
Ood's  unchangeable  purposes  to  which  his  attention  had  been  specially  called.  The 
conduct  of  Balak  is  a  warning  to  us  to  keep  our  hearts  right  at  all  times  with  regard 
to  the  reception  of  Divine  truth.  Truths  stated  very  clearly  and  emphatically,  and  in 
critical  circumstances,  may  yet  be  utterly  neglected.  That  which  is  necessary  to  be 
known  will,  we  may  be  quite  sure,  have  a  clearness  corresponding  to  the  necessity. 
However  clear  and  simple  statements  are  in  themselves,  they  must  needs  be  as  idle 
breath  if  we  refuse  to  give  humble  and  diligent  attention  to  them.  2.  With  regard 
to  Balaam.  He  no  longer  goes  out  seeking  for  enchantments,  although  he  still  clings 
to  the  inevitable  sacrifices.  This  forsaking  of  the  enchantments  and  clinging  to 
the  sacrifices,  iS  it  not  a  sort  of  testimony  out  of  the  very  depths  and  obscurities 
of  heathenism  that  God  cannot  be  approached  without  something  in  the  way  of 
vicarious  sufiEering?  Balaam  saw  that  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bless  Israel.  It 
had  taken  him  a  long  time  and  caused  him  a  great  deal  of  trouble  to  see  this,  and 
yet  the  sequel  proves  (ch.  xxxi.  8,  16)  that,  after  all,  seeing,  he  did  not  perceive, 
and  hearing,  he  did  not  understand.  Nevertheless,  at  this  time  he  saw  sufficient  to 
convince  him  how  vain  were  Balak's  hopes  of  a  curse  from  Jehovah.  If  Israel  was 
to  be  overthrown,  it  was  not  in  that  way.  Observe  that  in  uttering  this  prophecy 
Balaam  is  thrown  into  a  higher  state  of  receptivity  than  before.  When  Balak  refused 
to  be  satisfied  with  the  first  prophecy,  he  got  a  second  one,  specially  addressed  to 
himself,  and  fuller ;  more  indicative  of  Israel's  resources,  varied,  ample,  and  unfailing 
as  they  were  for  every  possible  need.  But  now  he  does  not  so  much  get  a  prophecy 
fuller  in  itself ;  it  is  rather  a  clearer  proof  that  Balaam  is  indeed  employed  by  God  as  a 
prophet.  He  is  thrown  into  an  ecstatic  state.  His  eyes  are  closed  to  the  outward 
world,  but  the  mind's  eye  is  opened,  and  a  picture,  first  beautiful,  and  then  terrible,  is 
presented  to  his  vision.  We  see  from  this  hovi  much  God  can  do  in  controlling^  the 
poteert  of  carnal  and  unsympathising  men.    God  not  only  puts  his  own  words  into 


834  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [ch.  xxii.  41— xxiv. 

Balaam's  lying  lips,  but  he  makes  him  see  such  visions  as  were  customarily  confined 
to  men  who  were  spiritually  fit  for  them.  Balaam  doubtless,  looking  away  into  tha 
distance  of  time  from  the  present  encampment  of  Israel  in  Moab  to  their  future  life 
in  Canaan,  would  rather  have  seen  ruin,  confusion,  and  desolation — something  to  rejoice 
the  heart  of  his  employer,  and  bring  to  himself  the  promised  rewards.  But  he  could 
only  see  what  God  showed  him.  If  then  God  held  this  ungodly  Balaam  in  such 
control,  what  may  not  his  power  be  over  those  who  submit  to  him  with  all  their  hearts  I 
There  is  a  sort  of  proportion  in  the  matter.  As  the  unwilling  Balaam  is  to  the  com- 
pletely submissive  believer,  so  what  God  did  to  Balaam  is  to  what  God  will  do  for 
such  a  believer.  The  more  you  give  to  God  for  working  on,  the  more,  by  consequence, 
he  will  give  to  you  in  return.  Yield  yourselves  to  God,  that  he  may  not  only  work 
through  you  by  his  mighty  power,  but  in  you  and  for  you  according  to  the  purpose  of 
his  love  and  the  riches  of  his  grace.  The  sad  reflection  is  that  Balaam  allowed  himself 
to  be  an  evidence  of  the  power,  but  not  the  grace ;  allowed  God's  blessings  to  go 
through  him,  yet,  in  spite  of  his  own  expressed  wish,  made  no  attempt  to  keep  blessings 
for  himself. 

II.  The  peophect  itself.  Here  are  set  before  us  two  pictures,  as  it  were,  a  beauti- 
ful one  and  a  terrible  one.  Picture  the  first.  A  spectator  in  an  ordinary  state  of  mind, 
looking  down  with  his  natural  vision  on  the  Israelite  camp,  sees  long  ranges  of  tents, 
set  in  four  divisions,  and  at  a  reverent  distance  from  the  tabernacle  in  the  midst  of 
them.  The  people  dwelt  "  not  in  stately  palaces,  but  in  coarse  and  homely  tents, 
and  those,  no  doubt,  sadly  weather-beaten.  But  Balaam  in  his  ecstasy,  when  the 
Spirit  of  God  came  upon  him,  looked  upon  a  more  attractive  and  mspiring  scene. 
What  he  gazed  upon  at  first  was  indeed  these  rows  of  tents,  but,  just  as  if  in  a  dissolving 
view,  they  faded  away  before  his  eyes,  and  in  place  of  them,  valleys,  gardens  by  the 
river-side,  aloes  of  Jehovah's  planting,  and  cedars  beside  the  waters  were  spread  out 
before  him.  Everything  is  suggestive  of  quiet,  steady  prosperity,  of  fruitfulnesa, 
peace,  and  beauty.  This  is  the  internal  life  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  when  his  people 
are  living  to  the  extent  of  their  privileges.  This  is  the  difference  between  the  external 
appearance  and  the  inward  life  and  experience.  Just  at  that  moment  when  the  lot  of 
the  Christian  looks  least  attractive  to  the  casual  and  uninstructed  glance,  it  may  be 
l.-ich  in  all  the  grea.,  elements  of  true  blessedness.  The  position  of  the  Christian  in 
this  world  is  not  seldom  like  that  of  the  kernel  within  the  shell :  outside,  the  rough, 
repulsive,  unpromising  shell ;  inside,  the  precious  kernel,  with  "  the  promise  and 
potency  "  in  it  of  a  tree  like  that  from  which  it  was  taken.  "  Eye  hath  not  seen^  nor 
ear  heard,  neither  have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  the  things  which  God  hath 
prepared  for  them  that  love  him.  Bvi  God  hath  repealed  them  unio  us  by  his 
Spirit "  (1  Cor.  ii.  9,  10).  And  thus  it  is  here.  It  was  not  possible  for  Balaam  to 
describe  the  blessed  circumstances  of  Israel  in  direct  language.  He  had  to  fall  back 
on  the  comparison  to  certain  visible  things,  such  things  as  would  raise  in  the  mind  of 
a  dweller  in  Moab  or  Canaan,  or  anywhere  round  about,  a  picture  of  the  highest  satis- 
faction and  success.  Picture  the  second.  The  first  picture  is  beautiful,  and  very 
beautiful ;  it  is  Eden  raised  in  the  waste'  wilderness.  The  second  picture  is  terrible, 
and  very  terrible ;  yet  what  else  could  be  expected  ?  If  Balak  will  go  on  presumptu- 
ously defying  the  sacred  and  beloved  people  of  God,  undeterred  by  the  menaces  to 
which  he  has  already  listened,  then  those  menaces  must  be  repeated  with  all  the  force 
and  thoroughness  of  expression  that  can  be  thrown  into  them.  The  sudden  transition 
from  such  a  peaceful,  beautiful  scene  as  goes  before  heightens  the  effect,  and  probably 
was  meant  to  do  so.  On  one  side  is  Israel  engaged  in  tilling  the  gardm,  the  work  to 
which  man  was  set  apart  in  the  first  days  of  innocence,  watering  his  far-spread  crops 
and  enjoying  his  fragrant  aloes  and  his  cedars ;  on  the  other  side  is  Israel  the  Destroyer, 
emphatically  the  Destroyer.  The  qualities  of  no  one  animal,  however  destructive, 
are  suflSoiently  expressive  to  set  him  forth.  Fierce,  furious,  strong,  resistless  as  the 
lion  is,  the  lion  by  himself  is  not  enough  to  show  forth  Israel,  and  you  must  add  the 
unicorn;  and  there  you  are  invited  to  gaze  on  this  unioom-lion,  strong  in  power, 
thorough  in  execution,  leaving  not  one  of  his  enemies  unsubdued  and  undestroyed. 
Let  Balak  well  understand  that  Israel,  under  the  good  hand  of  God,  is  climbing  to  the 
highest  eminence  among  the  nations.  The  repetition  of  the  references  to  the  unicorn 
and  tb'>  lion  shows  how  important  the  references  are,  and  how  needful  it  is  to  let  the 


m.  xxn.  41— Miv.J  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  331 

Dund  of  the  Christian  dwell  encouragingly  on  them.  Balak  sets  forth  the  intolerant 
and  suspicious  spirit  of  the  world  in  all  its  kingdoms ;  and  the  world  does  not  heed 
prophecies  ;  it  does  not  take  them  to  heart,  else  it  would  cease  to  be  the  world. 
These  prophecies,  though  they  were  first  spoken  by  a  Balaam  and  listened  to  by  a 
Balak,  were  meant  in  due  course  to  reach,  guide,  assure,  and  comfort  Israel.  If  there 
are  times  when  we  are  tempted  to  fear  the  world,  with  its  designs,  its  resources,  and 
the  might  of  its  fascinating  spirit,  then  we  shall  do  well  to  recollect  that,  by  a  double 
and  enlarged  assurance,  God  reckons  his  Church  to  have  the  strength  of  the  unicorn 
and  the  spirit  of  the  lion,  utterly  to  subdue  and  destroy  all  those  kingdoms  of  the 
world  which,  to  keep  up  the  figure,  are  considered  as  the  natural  prey  of  the 
Church.— Y. 

Vers.  7 — 10. — Balaam — ihe  first  parable.  The  word  "  parable  "  is  used  here  in 
a  somewhat  peculiar  sense.  It  is  not,  as  in  the  New  Testament,  a  fictitious  narrative 
embodying  and  enforcing  some  moral  truth,  but  a  "  dark  saying,"  a  mystic  prophecy 
cast  in  the  form  of  figurative  poetic  language,  a  prophecy  that  partakes  of  the  nature 
of  allegory.  In  these  ecstatic  utterances  the  impulse  of  Balaam's  better  nature  over- 
masters his  more  sordid  passion,  and  a  true  prophetic  spirit  from  God  takes  the  place 
of  the  false  Satanic  spirit  of  heathen  divination.  The  thoughts  respecting  Israel  to 
which  Balaam  gives  utterance  in  this  first  parable  are  deeply  true  of  the  redeemed 
people  of  God  in  every  age. 

I.  Their  special  privilege  as  objects  of  the  Divine  favour.  "  How  shall  I 
curse,"  &c.  Balak  had  faith  in  Balaam's  incantations.  "  I  wot  that  he  whom  thou 
blessest,"  &c.  (ch.  xxii.  6).  But  he  himself  knew  well  that  there  was  an  arbitrament 
of  human  interests  and  destinies  infinitely  higher  than  his.  God  has  absolute 
sovereignty  for  good  or  ill  over  all  our'human  conditions.  There  is  no  real  blessing 
where  his  benediction  does  not  rest,  nor  need  any  curse  he  dreaded  by  those  who 
live  beneath  his  smile.  "  If  God  be  for  us,"  &c.  (Eom.  viii,  31).  No  alternative  so 
momentous  as  this — the  favour  or  the  disfavour  of  God.  Note,  respecting  the  Divine 
favour,  that — 1.  It  is  determined  hy  spiritual  character.  Not  an  arbitrary,  capricioua 
bestowment.  It  is  for  us  to  supply  the  conditions.  We  must  "  be  reconciled  to 
God  "  if  we  would  know  the  benediction  of  his  smile.  God  is  "for"  those  who  are 
for  him.  The  cloud  in  which  his  glory  dwells  gives  light  to  those  who  are  in  spiritual 
accord  with  him,  but  is  darkness  and  confusion  to  his  foes.  2.  It  is  neither  indicated 
nor  disproved  by  the  outward  experiences  of  life.  External  conditions  are  no  criterion 
of  the  state  of  the  soul  and  its  Divine  relations.  The  wicked  may  "  have  all  that 
heart  can  wish  "  of  the  good  of  this  life,  and  their  very  "  prosperity  may  slay  them ; " 
while  it  is  often  true  that  "whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth"  with  sorest 
tribulations,  and  those  tribulations  "  work  out  for  them  a  far  more  exceeding  and 
eternal  weight  of  glory."  We  judge  very  falsely  if  we  suppose  that  spiritual 
experiences  must  needs  be  reflected  in  outward  conditions.  3.  It  is  the  source  of  the 
purest  joy  of  which  the  soul  of  a  man  is  capable.  This  is  true  blessedness — to  walk 
consciously  in  the  light  of  God's \iountenance.  "His  favour  is  life,"  his  loving 
kindness  "  better  than  li£e."  This  was  the  pure  joy  of  the  well-beloved  Son — the 
abiding  sense  of  the  Father's  approval  Have  this  joy  in  you,  and  you  may  defy 
the  disturbing  influences  of  life  and  the  bitterest  maledictions  of  a  hostile  world. 

II.  Their  separatbness.  "  Lo,  the  people  shall  dwell  alone,"  &c.  (ver.  9).  The 
Jews  were  an  elect  people  ("Ye  shall  be  a  peculiar  treasure  unto  me  above  all 
people" — Exod.  xix.  6),  chosen  and  separated,  not  as  monopolising  the  Divine  regard, 
but  as  the  instruments  of  a  Divine  purpose.  They  were  called  to  be  witnesses  for 
God  among  the  nations, --the  majesty  of  his  Being,  the  sanctity  of  his  claims,  the 
method  of  his  government,  &c., — and  to  be  the  channels  of  boundless  blessing  to  the 
world.  The  same  grand  distinction  belongs  to  all  whom  Christ  has  redeemed  from 
among  men.  "  Ye  are  a  chosen  generation,"  &c.  (1  Pet.  ii.  9).  He  says  to  all  his 
followers,  "Ye  are  not  of  the  world,"  &c.  (John  xv.  19;  xvii.  16,  17).  This 
separation  is— 1.  Not  circumstantial,  hut  moral;  lying  not  in  the  renunciation  of  any 
human  interest  or  the  rending  of  any  natural  human  tie,  but  in  distinctive  qualities 
of  spiritual  character  and  life.  In  moral  elevation  and  spiritual  dignity  oily  are  they 
called  to  "  dwell  alone."    8.  Not  fw  the  worMa  deprivation,  but  for  Us  hen^t. 


886  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [cH.xxn.  41— xxir. 

Not  to  withdraw  from  it  powers  that  might  better  be  consecrated  to  its  service,  but 
to  bring  to  bear  upon  it,  in  the  cause  of  righteousness,  an  energy  higher  and  divinet 
than  its  own. 

III.  Theib  multiplicity.  "  Who  can  count  the  dust,"  Ac.  The  promise  given 
to  Abraham  is  gloriously  fulfilled  in  God's  spiritual  Israel.  "  Thy  seed  shall  be  as 
the  dust  of  the  earth,"  &c.  (Gen.  xxviii.  14).  This  indicates  at  once  the  grandeur  of 
the  Divine  purpose  and  the  diffusive  power  of  the  Divine  life  in  men.  On  both 
these  grounds  their  numbers  will  surely  multiply  till  they  "  cover  the  face  of  all  the 
earth."  Little  as  we  may  be  able  to  forecast  the  future,  we  know  that  the  question, 
"Are  there  few  that  be  saved?"  will  find  its  triumphant  answer  in  "the  great 
multitude  which  no  man  can  number,  of  all  nations,"  &c.  (Rev.  vii  9). 

IV.  The  blessedness  of  their  end.  "  Let  me  die  the  death,"  &c.  We  gather 
from  this  not  only  Balaam's  faith  in  the  intrinsic  worth  of  righteousness,  but  also  in 
the  happy  issue  to  which  a  righteous  life  in  this  world  must  lead  as  regards  the  life 
to  come.  Why  this  wish  if  he  had  no  faith  in  a  glorious  immortality  and  in 
righteousness  asthe  path  to  it?  There  is  an  instinct  in  the  soul  even  of  a  bad  man 
that  leads  to  this  conclusion,  and  his  secret  convictions  and  wishes  will  often  bear 
witness  to  a  diviner  good  of  which  his  whole  moral  life  is  the  practical  denial.  You 
must  be  numbered  with  the  righteous  now  if  you  would  find  your  place  with  them 
hereafter,  and  live  their  life  if  you  would  die  their  death. — W. 

Ver.  23. — Balaam— the  second  parable.  We  may  look  upon  Balaam  here  as 
representing  the  Satanic  powers  that  have  ever  been  plotting  and  working  against 
the  kingdom  of  God  among  men,  and  as  the  unwilling  prophet  of  their  ultimate 
defeat.  The  spell  of  a  higher  Power  is  over  him,  and  he  cannot  do  the  thing  that  he 
would.  Looking  down  from  "  the  high  places  of  Baal "  upon  the  tents  of  Israel 
spread  out  over  the  plain  beneath,  he  is  constrained  in  spite  of  himself  to  utter  only 
predictions  of  good.  His  magic  arts  are  utterly  bafSed  in  presence  of  the  Divinity 
that  overshadows  that  strange  people.  It  is  a  picture  o£  what  is  going  on  through 
all  the  ages.  In  the  triumphant  host  approaching  the  borders  of  the  land  of  promise 
we  see  the  ransomed  Church  moving  on  to  its  glorious  destination,  its  heavenly  rest ; 
the  kingdom  that  Christ  has  founded  among  men  consummating  itself,  "  covering 
the  face  of  the  whole  earth."  And  in  the  failure  of  his  enchantments  we  see  the 
impotence  of  the  devices  of  the  powers  of  darkness  to  arrest  its  progress.  The 
Satanic  working  has  assumed  difiEerent  forms. 

I.  Pekseoution.  The  followers  of  Christ  soon  verified  his  prophetic  word:  "In  the 
world  ye  shall  have  tribulation."  The  infant  Church  was  nursed  and  cradled  in  the 
storms.  It  no  sooner  began  to  put  forth  its  new-born  energies  than  it  found  the 
forces  of  earth  and  hell  arrayed  against  it.  But  what  was  the  result  ?  The  first 
outbreak  of  hostility  only  brought  to  the  minds  of  those  feeble  men,  with  a  meaning 
undiscovered  before,  the  triumphant  words  (Ps.  ii.),  "  Why  do  the  heathen  rage," 
Ac.  It  drove  them  nearer  to  the  Divine  Fountain  of  strength.  It  made  them  doubly 
bold  (Acts  iv.  23,  30).  Scattered  abroad,  they  "went  everywhere  preaching  the  word, 
and  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  with  them."  A  prophecy  was  thus  given  of  the  way 
in  which  persecution  would  always  serve  the  cause  it  meant  to  destroy,  and  God 
would  "  make  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  him."  Ecclesiastical  authority  has  leagued 
itself  with  the  tyrannous  powers  of  the  world  in  this  repressive  work.  The  sanctions 
of  religion  have  been  invoked  for  the  destruction  of  the  truth.  But  ever  to  the  same 
issue.  Whatever  form  it  takes,  the  persecuting  spirit  is  always  essentially  Satanic ; 
there  is  nothing  Divine  in  it.  And  it  always  defeats  its  own  end.  "  The  blood  of 
the  martyrs  is  the  seed  of  the  Church."  The  fire  that  has  swept  over  the  field, 
consuming  the  growth  of  one  year,  has  only  enriched  it  and  made  it  more  prolific  the 
next  The  kingdom  of  Christ  has  rooted  itself  in  the  earth,  and  its  Divine  energies 
have  been  developed  by  reason  of  the  storms  that  have  raged  against  it.  Not  only 
has  "  no  weapon  formed  against  it  prospered,"  but  the  weapon  has  generally  recoiled 
on  the  head  of  him  who  wielded  it.  The  Satanic  enchantments  have  been  foiled  just 
when  they  seemed  to  reach  the  climax  of  their  success,  and  the  curses  of  a  hostile 
world  have  turned  to  blessings. 

II.  CORBUFTINO  influences  WITHIN  THE  PALE  OF  THE  ChUROH  IT8KLF.      Christiollitjy 


OH.  XXII.  41— xxiv.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  337 


has  suffered  far  more  from  foes  within  than  ever  it  did  from  foes  without.  Christ 
has  been  wounded  most  "  in  the  house  of  his  friends."  Read  the  history  of  the  first 
three  or  four  centuries  of  the  Christian  era  if  you  would  know  to  what  an  extent  the 
hand  of  man  may  mar  the  fair  and  glorious  work  of  God.  They  tell  how  Christian 
doctrine,  worship,  polity,  social  life  gradually  lost  their  original  simplicity  and  purity. 
The  traditions  of  Judaism,  heathen  philosophies  and  mythologies,  the  fascinations 
of  a  vain  world,  the  basest  impulses  of  our  nature,  all  played  their  part  in  the  cor- 
rupting process.  The  human  element  overbore  and  thrust  aside  the  Divine,  till  it 
seemed  as  if  Satan,  ba£3ed  in  the  use  of  the  extraneous  persecuting  powers,  were 
about  to  triumph  by  the  subtler  forces  of  corruption  and  decay.  But  God  has  never 
left  his  Church  to  itself  any  more  than  to  the  will  of  its  adversaries.  In  the  darkest 
times  and  under  the  moat  desperate  conditions  the  leaven  of  a  higher  life  has  been 
secretly  working.  Nothing  is  more  wonderful  than  the  way  in  which  the  interests 
of  Christ's  kingdom  have  been  preserved,  not  only  in  spite  of,  but  often  through,  the 
instrumentality  of  events  and  institutions  that  in  themselves  were  contrary  to  its 
spirit  and  its  laws.  What  are  many  of  our  modern  agitations  but  the  struggles  of  the 
religious  life  to  cast  off  the  fetters  that  long  have  bound  it,  to  shake  itself  from  the 
dust  of  ages,  symptoms  of  the  vis  vitce  by  which  nature  throws  off  disease.  Even 
the  retrograde  movements  that  sometimes  alarm  ns  will  be  found  by  and  by  to  have 
conspired  to  the  same  end.  And  when  the  Church  shall  "  awake,  and  put  on  her 
beautiful  garments"  of  simple  truth  and  love  and  power,  when  "the  Spirit  is 
poured  out  upon  her  from  on  high,"  then  shall  it  be  seen  how  utterly  even  these 
subtler  Satanic  "enchantments"  have  failed  to  arrest  her  progress  towards  the 
dominion  of  the  earth. 

III.  The  assaults  of  unbelief.  The  intellectual  force  of  the  world  in  some  of 
its  most  princely  and  commanding  forms  has  ever  set  itself  in  deadly  antagonism  to 
the  Church  of  Christ.  Far  be  it  from  us  to  say  that  all  who  hold  or  teach  anti- 
Christian  doctrine  are  consciously  inspired  by  the  spirit  of  evil.  But  beneath  tho 
fairest  aspects  of  aggressive  unbelief  we  digcem  the  Satanic  aim  to  darken  the  glory 
that  shines  from  heaven  on  human  souls.  It  is  given  to  "  the  mystery  of  iniquity  " 
to  pervert  the  genius,  the  learning,  even  the  very  mental  integrity  and  honest  purpose 
of  men  to  its  own  false  uses.  But  have  these  forces  of  unbelief  ever  gained  a 
substantial  victory  ?  One  would  suppose,  from  what  is  often  said  on  their  side,  that 
they  were  victorious  along  the  whole  line.  Is  it  really  so  ?  Is  there  any  one  strong- 
hold of  revealed  truth  that  they  have  stormed  and  taken  ?  In  all  the  battles  that 
have  been  fought  on  the  field  of  Christian  doctrine,  has  any  ground  really  been  lost  ? 
Have  any  of  the  "  standards "  fallen  ?  Is  Christianity  in  any  sense  a  defeated  or 
even  damaged  cause  ?  Nay,  we  rather  believe  that  "  the  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser 
than  men,"  and  "  the  weakness  of  God  is  stronger  than  men."  The  camp  of  Israel 
need  fear  no  hostile  "enchantment,"  for  "the  Lord  their  God  is  with  them,  and  the 
shout  of  a  king  is  among  them." — W. 

Vers.  10 — 14. — Balah  relinquishes  his  project.  He  sees  now  clearly  that  there  is 
no  chance  of  prevailing  over  Israel  by  means  of  a  curse,  and  that  any  further  appeal 
to  the  prophet  would  only  bring  words  more  galling  to  his  pride  and  more  menacing 
to  his  position,  if  indeed  such  words  could  be  found.  Considerations  of  policy  and 
prudence  need  no  longer  restrain  him  in  speaking  out  all  his  mind  to  the  prophet. 

I.  Balak's  treatment  of  his  unsuccessful  accomplice.  1.  An  outbreak  of  selfish 
wrath.  Balaam  indeed  did  not  deserve  much  sympathy,  seeing  how  he  had  played 
into  Balak's  hands  from  the  very  beginning.  But  if  he  had  deserved  sympathy  ever 
80  much,  he  would  not  have  met  with  it.  Balak  has  eyes,  heart,  and  recollection 
for  nothing  but  his  own  disappointment.  He  has  no  real  sympathetic  regard  for 
Balaam,  no  consideration  for  one  who  is  far  from  home,  and  whose  professional 
reputation  all  around  will  be  sadly  damaged  by  this  failure  on  a  critical  occasion. 
Wicked  men  in  the  hour  of  disaster  show  small  consideration  for  their  accomplices. 
Those  in  whose  hearts  the  temptation  of  some  great  reward  for  evil-doing  is  begin- 
ning to  prevail  should  consider  that  if  they  fail  they  will  meet  with  scant  mercy  or 
excuse.  When  the  Balaks  of  the  world  get  a  Balaam  into  their  hands,  they  look  on 
him  just  as  a  tool.    If  the  tool  does  its  work  as  they  want  it,  well  and  good  ;  keep  it 

NUMBBBS.  S 


338  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBEES.  [ch.  xxii.  41— txiv. 

carefully  for  further  use  ;  but  if  it  turns  out  a  failure,  fling  it  without  more  ado  on 
the  dunghill.  Balak  acts  here  towards  Balaam  just  as  he  might  be  expected  to  act. 
2.  He  lays  the  whole  blame  on  Balaam.  He  does  not  consider  that  the  evil  purposes 
of  his  own  heart  must  needs  be  frustrated.  Three  prophecies,  full  of  solemn  and 
weighty  matter,  uttered  in  his  hearing,  have  not  made  him  in  the  slightest  degree 
conscious  of  the  folly  and  iniquity  of  his  project.  He  sees  indeed  that  the  project 
must  fail,  but  is  blind  as  a  bat  to  the  real  reason  of  the  failure.  All  that  he  has  heard 
concerning  Jehovah,  his  character,  his  past  dealings  with  Israel,  and  his  purposes  for 
them,  has  not  impressed  him  one  whit,  save  with  the  fact  that  somehow  he  cannot 
get  his  own  way.  His  curse  project  has  ended  in  a  huge,  humiliating,  exasperating 
failure,  and  Balaam  must  bear  the  blame  of  it.  Wicked  men  cannot  be  got  to  give 
Heaven  credit  for  all  its  timely  and  irresistible  interferences  with  their  darling  schemes. 
The  fault  in  Balak's  angry  eye  rested  with  Balaam,  and  with  him  alone.  "  The  Lord 
hath  kept  thee  back  from  honour. "  A  true  word  indeed,  but  not  applicable  in  the  way 
in  which  Balak  intended  it.  The  Lord  had  kept  Balaam  hack  from  honour,  but  not  from 
the  paltry  honour  which  Balak  would  have  conferred  on  him.  The  lesson  for  us  is, 
that  whenever  any  selfish  plan  of  ours  fails,  we  should  not,  like  this  blind,  besotted 
king,  go  laying  blame  elsewhere,  as  if  it  would  exonerate  ourselves.  Balaam  of  course 
was  to  blame,  grievously  to  blame,  a  great  deal  more  than  Balak,  seeing  he  sinned 
against  greater  light.  But  we  must  not  let  the  grievous  and  conspicuous  faults  of 
others  cast  our  own  into  the  shade.  We  are  at  the  best  very  poor  judges  of  the 
transgressions  of  our  fellow-men.  When  we  fail  in  anything,  it  is  far  the  wisest, 
kindest,  and  most  profitable  course  to  give  diligent  heed  to  such  causes  of  failure  as 
are  in  our  own  heart.  Whatever  disappointments  may  come  to  us  in  life,  we  shall 
never  fail  in  anything  of  real  importance  if  only  we  keep  our  own  hearts  right  vnth 
God. 

II.  Balak's  vain  attempt  to  get  prompt  riddance  of  the  prophet.  He  thinks  it 
is  enough  to  say,  "  Stop."  But  as  he  was  not  able  to  make  Balaam  speak  what  he 
wanted  and  when  he  wanted,  bo  neither  is  he  able  to  make  Balaam  cease  when  the 
Lord's  message  is  on  his  lips.  God  opened  Balaam's  mouth,  and  it  is  not  for  Balak 
to  close  it.  Before  Balak  is  left,  his  impotence  shall  be  manifested  in  the  completest 
possible  way.  He  had  been  the  thoughtless  and  unwitting  means  of  turning  on  the 
stream  of  glorious  prophecy,  and  now  he  finds  he  cannot  stop  that  stream  at  will. 
Jehovah  did  not  seek  this  occasion,  but  when  it  is  furnished  he  deems  it  well  to  avail 
himself  of  it  to  the  full.  And  now  Balak  finds  that,  whether  he  will  or  not,  he  must 
listen  to  the  doom  of  his  own  people,  expressly  and  clearly  announced.  Learn  that 
when  you  begin  the  headstrong  course  of  making  everything  on  earth — and  perhaps, 
after  Balak's  fashion,  in  heaven  as  well — subservient  to  self,  you  cannot  stop  when- 
ever the  consequences  begin  to  get  troublesome.  Balak  said,  "  Let  my  will  be  done, 
not  because  it  is  right,  hut  because  it  is  mine,"  and  he  was  not  contented  with  a  refusal, 
once  or  even  twice.  He  must  have  it  a  third  time,  and  then  he  finds  that  the  choice 
is  no  longer  under  his  control.    Let  us  choose  wisely  while  we  are  able  to  choose. — Y 

Vers.  16 — 25. — The  Star  out  of  Jacob  and  the  Sceptre  out  of  Israel.  The  final 
prophecy,  unsolicited  by  Balak,  which  indeed  he  would  have  been  glad  to  stop,  goes 
far  beyond  the  concerns  of  his  kingdom  and  his  reign.  It  stretches  over  an  ever- 
widening  extent  of  space  and  time.  As  long  as  there  is  any  Moab  kind  of  nation  to 
be  destroyed,  Israel  must  continue  to  prevail.  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  not  only 
will  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  of  his  Christ,  but  no  other  conclusion  is 
easily  conceivable.  The  power  by  which  Israel  conquers  one  enemy  enables  it  to 
conquer  all ;  and  the  disposition  which  leads  it  against  one  enemy  must  lead  it 
against  all.  It  will  again  and  again  be  attacked,  and  must  defend  where  it  is  attacked. 
It  must  expand  by  the  ever-strengthening  life  within.  The  more  it  grows,  the 
more  room  it  will  require,  until  at  last  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  become  its  own. 
Notice — 

I.  The  advance  in  this  prophecy  upon  the  preceding  one,  as  shown  by  the 
DIFFERENT  FIGURE  EMPLOYED.  The  lion  destroys,  and  that  most  efEectually,  but  he 
can  do  nothing  more  than  destroy.  The  horse  or  the  ox  will  draw  the  cart,  and  thus 
serve  constrijctivo  purposes.    Even  the  tiniest  bird  can  build  its  compact  and  sym- 


OH.  XXII.  41— xxnr.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  339 


metrical  nest,  but  the  lion  can  do  nothing  save  destroy.  You  may  cage  "it  and  curb 
its  savage  propensities  a  little,  but  it  is  not  tamed ;  the  lion-nature  is  there,  and  the 
smallest  taste  of  blood  will  cause  it  to  burst  forth  in  all  its  fury.  The  lion  being 
thus  a  destroyer,  and  nothing  but  a  destroyer,  it  is  needful  to  present  Israel  as  able 
to  do  more — able  to  destroy  in  order  that  there  may  be  room  for  the  construction  of 
something  more  worthy  to  endure.  It  does  not  become  God  to  stay  the  current  of 
prophecy  with  a  menace  of  dreadful  destruction  as  the  last  word,  and  so  he  makes 
Balaam  to  speak  of  the  star  and  the  sceptre.  The  lion,  as  it  rages  about,  can  make 
a  solitude ;  it  can  take  away  wickedness  by  taking  away  all  wicked  men ;  but  a 
solitude  is  not  a  kingdom.  The  true  kingdom  of  God  is  only  gained  when  he  gets 
willing  hearts.  The  destruction  which  is  spoken  of  with  such  energy  and  almost 
fierceness  of  illustration  is  for  the  purpose  of  completely  taking  away  the  evil  out 
of  human  society,  so  that  only  the  good  may  remain  to  serve  and  glorify  the  Maker 
of  mankind. 

II.  The  significance  of  the  stab,  as  indicating  the  method  in  which  God 
■WILL  WORK  TO  CONQUER  EVIL  AND  ESTABLISH  GOOD.  The  Star,  it  Is  Said,  is  mentioned 
here  as  the  symbol  of  governing  power,  according  to  the  astrological  notions  of 
antiquity.  It  is  further  said  that  the  joining  of  the  sceptre  with  the  star  shows  that 
authority  and  supremacy  are  the  main  things  to  be  indicated  by  the  mention  of  the 
star.  Certainly  the  prophecy  is  full  of  the  idea  of  supremacy  and  authority ;  but  if 
this  idea  was  the  only  thing  to  be  considered,  the  mention  of  the  sceptre  would  be 
enough.  The  star  is  a  symbol  of  power,  but  it  is  also  a  symbol  of  many  great 
realities  besides.  Let  us  ask  not  only  why  the  sceptre  is  joined  with  the  star, 
but  why  the  star  is  joined  with  the  sceptre.  The  very  first  thing  that  a  star  indicates 
M  light.  God  will  establish  his  rule  by  sending  the  Star  out  of  Jacob  to  rise  in  the 
darkness.  Christ,  the  fulfilment  of  the  star,  has  come  a  light  into  the  world,  a  rival 
to  existent  lights,  and  destined  to  outshine  them  all.  He  is  a  light  ever  protesting 
against  the  darkness,  not  comprehended  by  it,  not  swallowed  up  and  lost  in  it. 
Rejoice  in  this,  that  the  Star  out  of  Jacob  is  inaccessible  to  the  meddling  of  those  who 
hate  its  inconvenient  revelations.  Christ  comes  to  destroy,  and  at  the  same  time  to 
construct  by  letting  light  in  upon  all  dark,  idolatrous  chambers  and  all  self-deceiving 
hearts.  The  light  is  from  him  who  knows  what  is  in  man,  his  wickedness,  his 
weakness,  and  his  wants.  He  brings  reality  where  others  only  bring  appearance. 
He  brings  truth  where  they,  even  in  their  very  sincerity,  bring  error.  There  is  no 
room  for  a  Balaam  in  his  kingdom.  The  Demas  who  makes  a  few  steps  within  soon 
retreats  from  a  light  far  too  trying  for  the  darkness  of  his  heart.  Notice,  further, 
that  the  light  of  the  star  m  in  some  respects  more  significant  of  the  work  of  Christ 
than  would  be  the  light  of  the  sun.  We  must  have  a  figure  which  will  keep  before 
us  both  the  light  and  the  darkness.  To  us,  individually,  Christ  may  be  as  the  sun 
(and  may  he  be  I),  filling  our  hearts  with  light.  We  know,  alas,  that  he  is  far  from 
being  a  sun  to  many.  Their  light  is  still  darkness,  but  the  Star  of  Bethlehem  shines 
in  the  firmament,  waiting  for  the  hour  when  in  humility  they  may  betake  themselves 
to  it.  After  all  the  search  for  truth,  and  whatever  knowledge  may  be  gained,  there 
is  still  the  sense  of  incompleteness  ;  the  knowledge  stops  with  the  intellect ;  it  does 
not  find  its  way  to  enlighten  and  comfort  the  whole  heart.  We  can  by  no  means 
dispense  with  the  Star  out  of  Jacob,  the  Star  that  shines  from  every  page  of  the 
Scriptures. 

III.  The  SIGNIFICANCE  of  the  sceptre,  as  indicating  the  bealitt  op  the 
DOMINION.  The  sceptre  is  that  of  Christ's  truth,  wielded  with  all  the  power  of  God's 
Holy  Spirit.  We  must  have  much  assurance,  not  only  of  the  illumination  that  comes 
from  Christ,  but  of  the  consequent  actual  illumination  in  accepting  human  hearts. 
We  must  ever  be  ready  in  our  approaches  to  God  to  say,  "  Thine  is  the  kingdom 
atid  the  power.  Thine  is  not  only  the  rightful  authority,  but  also  the  actual  authority.' ' 
What  is  a  more  ofEensive  sight  than  a  merely  nominal  submission  to  Christ  ?  How 
soon  it  becomes  evident  to  the  discerning  eye  that  there  is  an  utter  want  of  harmony  I 
Those  who  are  really  Christ's  subjects  soon  justify  their  .loyalty  by  the  commotion 
they  make  among  the  accepted  customs  and  traditions  of  the  world.  There  is  a 
■sise  in  which  they  may  covet  often  to  hear  the  word,  "They  that  have  turned  the 
▼«r!d  upside  down  have  come  hither  also."    As  we  read  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles, 

z2 


840  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS.  [ch.  xxii.  41— xxiv. 

we  feel  thai  there  was  not  only  a  new  teaching  being  diffused  among  men,  but,  above 
all  things,  a  new  power.  It  was  not  only  fresh  thought  they  brought  to  men,  but  a 
new  and  gladdening  life. 

IV.  The  significance  op  the  maky  nations  befeeked  to,  as  indicating  the 
EXTENT  AND   COMPLETENESS  OF   THE   DOMINION.     The  details  Connected  with  each 
nation  have  of  course  their  peculiar  significance,  but  the  significance  of  the  details  is 
not  quite  so  clear  as  that  of  the  great  common  element  which  runs  through  them  all. 
All  the  details  point  forward  to  a  time  when  the  Star  out  of  Jacob  shall  outshine  the 
star  out  of  every  other  nation,  when  the  Sceptre  out  of  Israel  shall  break  every  other 
sceptre.    The  kingdoms  of  the  world  are  to  fall — the  kingdoms  of  mammon,  of 
pleasure,  of  unbelief  in  Christ,  of  science  falsely  so  called,  of  rationalism,  of  atheism, 
of  individual  self-assertion.     These  are  kingdoms  that  now  stretch  their  authority 
far  and  wide,  in  all  continents,  and  in  all  ranks  of  men,  and  many  are  subjects  of 
more  than  one  of  the  kingdoms.     In  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  it  is  largely  true 
that  there  is  neither  Jew  nor  Greek,  bond  nor  free,  male  nor  fen)ale.     The  Star  out 
of  Jacob  then  has  a  large  work  to  do  in  subduing  and  transforming  the  many  and 
mighty  kingdoms  of  this  world.     And  all  the  glorious  burden  of  prophecy  heaves 
and  swells  with  the  emphatic  assurance  that  he  will  do  it    The  day  is  to  come  when 
we  shall  all  learn  that  to  be  king  over  one's  own  nature  is  more  than  to  sway  the  most 
populous  and  wealthy  territory  among  men.   Then  indeed  will  the  description, "  King 
of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords,"  fully  apply,  when  God  in  Christ  Jesus  reigns  over  kings 
and  lords  such  as  these.     The  cry  concerning  man  will  no  longer  be, 

"  Lord  of  himself,  that  heritage  of  woe ! " 

but,  lord  of  a  heritage  reclaimed,  purified,  and  made  docile  by  the  work  of  Jesus  as 
he  inspires  in  the  breast  every  loving,  righteous,  and  truthful  motive. — Y. 

Vers.  1 — 9. — Balaam — the  third  parable.  This  passage  marks  the  period  at  which 
Balaam  becomes  finally  convinced  that  it  is  vain  for  him  to  attempt  to  satisfy  Balak, 
or  to  carry  out  the  baser  promptings  of  his  own  heart.  He  confesses  his  defeat, 
gives  up  his  enchantments,  "  sets  his  face  towards  the  wilderness  "  where  the  camp 
of  Israel  lay,  and  utters  the  words  that  God  puts  into  his  mouth.  But  still  his  spirit 
is  not  subdued,  for,  as  we  learn  from  ver.  14,  instead  of  casting  in  his  lot,  as  he  might 
have  done,  with  the  chosen  nation,  he  resolves  in  spite  of  all  to  go  back  to  his  own 
people  and  his  old  ways.  Combining  these  two  features  of  his  case,  we  see  how  a 
man  may  "  approve  the  right  and  follow  the  wrong."  It  affords  a  striking  example 
of  (1)  true  convictions  followed  by  (2)  a  false  and  fatal  determination. 

I.  True  convictions.  Though  it  was  by  the  constraint  of  a  higher  Power  that 
Balaam  uttered  these  words  of  benediction,  we  must  regard  them  also  as  being,  to 
a  great  extent,  the  result  of  his  own  intuitions,  symptoms  of  the  struggling  of  better 
thought  and  feeling  within  him.  He  was  not  the  mere  senseless  medium  of  the  spirit 
of  prophecy.  Unwillingly,  but  not  altogether  unwittingly,  was  he  made  the  organ 
of  a  Divine  inspiration.  A  bad  man  may  utter  words  that  are  good  and  true,  and 
may  often  be  compelled  by  the  force  of  outward  testimony,  or  of  the  inward  witness 
of  his  own  conscience,  to  do  honour  to  that  in  others  which  condemns  himself.  There 
are  chiefly  three  characteristics  here  which  find  their  higher  counterpart  in  the  spiritual 
Israel,  and  which  her  enemies,  like  Balaam,  have  often  been  constrained  to  confess. 
1.  Beauty.  "  How  goodly  are  thy  tents,  0  Jacob  I  "  Rich  valleys,  smiling  gardens, 
lign-aloes  and  cedars  planted  beside  the  watet^courses,  are,  to  the  poetic  imagination 
of  the  seer,  the  fitting  images  of  their  goodly  array.  But  what  is  the  beauty  that 
captivates  the  eye  compared  with  that  which  appeals  to  the  sensibility  of  the  soul  ? 
All  outward  forms  of  loveliness  are  but  the  shadow  and  reflection  of  the  Diviner 
beauties  of  holiness,  the  spiritual  glory  of  truth,  purity,  goodness — the  "  adorning  of 
the  hidden  man  of  the  heart  in  that  which  is  not  corruptible."  The  richest  Oriental 
imagery  can  but  feebly  represent  the  changing  phases  of  this  beauty.  And  many  a 
man  has  felt  the  charm  of  it,  and  yet  been  utterly  destitute  of  that  sympathy  of 
spirit  that  would  move  him  to  make  it  his  own.  It  compels  his  admiration,  but  does 
not  win  his  love.  2.  World-toide  fruitfultiess.  "  He  shall  pour  the  water  out  o£ 
his  buckets,"  &c. — the  image  of  abundant,  far-reaching  beneficence.    The  promise  to 


ea.  XXII.  41— XXIV.]  THB  BOOK  OF  NUMBBRS.  Ul 

Abraham  was  fulfilled :  "  In  thy  Beed  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed  " 
(Gen.  xxii.  16,  17).  The  benefits  the  seed  of  Abraham  conferred  upon  the  human 
race  did  but  foreshadow  those  of  Christianity,  It  is  the  "  light  of  the  world,"  the 
-"  salt  of  the  earth,"  carrying  the  stream  of  a  new  life  over  all  lands,  diffusing  a  healing 
influence  through  all  the  waters.  Its  adversaries  know  this,  and  are  often  constrained 
in  spite  of  themselves  to  acknowledge  it.  They  are  themselves  living  witnesses  to 
its  truth,  for  they  owe  to  Christianity  the  very  culture,  the  spiritual  force,  the  social 
advantages,  the  literary  facilities,  &c.,  that  they  turn  as  weapons  against  it.  3. 
Victoriotis  power.  The  triumphant  way  in  which  God  led  forth  his  people  out  of 
Egypt  was  prophetic  of  the  power  that  should  always  overshadow  them  and  dwell 
among  them  ;  often  a  latent,  slumbering  strength  like  that  of  a  crouching  or  sleeping 
lion,  but  irresistible  when  once  it  rouses  itself  to  withstand  their  foes.  Such  power 
dwells  ever  in  the  redeemed  Church.  "  God  is  in  the  midst  of  her,"  &c.  (Ps.  xlvi. 
6).  "  The  weapons  of  our  warfare,"  &c.  (2  Cor.  x.  4).  Nothing  so  strong  and 
invincible  as  truth  and  goodness.  The  light  must  triumph  over  the  darkness.  The 
kingdom  of  Christ  is  a  "  kingdom  that  cannot  be  moved,"  and  many  a  man  whose 
heart  has  had  no  kind  of  sympathy  with  the  cause  of  that  kingdom  has  been  unable 
to  suppress  the  secret  conviction  that  it  will  surely  win  its  way,  till  it  shall  have 
vanquished  all  its  enemies  and  covered  the  face  of  the  whole  earth. 

II.  A  FALSE  AND  FATAL  DETBBMINATION.  "And  now,  behold,  I  go  nnto  my 
people  "  (ver.  14).  He  returns  to  his  former  ways,  plunges  again  into  the  darkness 
and  foulness  of  idolatrous  Mesopotamia,  having  first,  it  would  appear,  counselled 
Balak  as  to  how  he  might  corrupt  with  carnal  fascinations  the  people  whom  it  was 
vain  for  him  to  "  curse  "  (see  ch.  zxxi.  16 ;  Bev.  ii,  14),  and  at  last  is  slain  with  the 
eword  among  the  Midianites  (ch.  xxzi.  8 ;  Josh.  ziii.  22).  Learn — 1.  How  power- 
less are  the  clearest  perceptions  of  the  truth  in  the  case  of  one  whose  heart  is 
thoroughly  set  in  him  to  do  evil.  There  are  those  who  "  hold  the  truth  in  un- 
righteousness "  (Eom.  i.  18).  "  They  profess  that  they  know  God,  but  in  works  they 
deny  him"  (Titus  i.  16).  2.  How  there  is  often  a  deeper  fall  into  the  degradation 
of  sin  when  such  an  one  has  been  uplifted  for  a  while  by  the  vision  and  the  dream 
of  a  better  life.  "  The  last  state  of  that  man  is  worse  than  the  first "  (Matt.  zii.  45). 
"  For  it  had  been  better  for  them  not  to  have  known  the  way  of  righteousness,"  &c. 
(2  Pet.  ii.  21,  22).— W. 

Ver.  17. — Balaam — the  fourth  parMe.  Balaani  appears  before  us  here  as  one 
who  "seeing,  sees  not."  His  "eyes  are  open,"  but  he  has  no  real  vision  of  the 
eternal  truth  of  things.  He  has  a  "knowledge  of  the  Most  High,"  but  not  that 
which  consists  fn  living  sympathy  with  his  character  and  will  and  law.  He  recog- 
nises the  blessedness  of  the  ransomed  people,  but  has  no  personal  share  in  that 
blessedness.  He  discerns  the  bright  visions  of  the  future,  the  rising  of  Jacob's  Star, 
the  gleam  of  the  royal  Sceptre  tihat  shall  rule  the  world,  the  coming  of  the  world's 
redeeming  Lord,  but  he  sees  him  only  from  afar.  Not  "  now,"  not  "  nigh,"  does  he 
behold  him  ;  not  with  a  vivid,  quickening,  self-appropriating  consciousness ;  not  as 
the  light,  the  hope,  the  life,  the  eternal  joy  of  his  own  soul.  It  is  a  moral  por- 
traiture, a  type  of  spiritual  condition  and  personal  character,  with  which  we  are  only 
too  familiar.  The  faith  of  many  is  thus  destitute  of  efiScient  saving  power.  "  It  is 
dead,  being  alone. "  Their  religious  perceptions  are  thus  divorced  from  religious  life. 
They  have  just  such  a  formal,  ideal  acquaintance  with  God,  without  any  of  that 
immediate  personal  fellowship  with  him  which  renews  their  moral  nature  after  his 
likeness.  They  walk  in  the  embrace  of  his  presence,  but  their  "  eyes  are  holden  that 
they  should  not  know  him."  So  near  is  He,  and  yet  so  far ;  so  clearly  revealed,  and 
yet  so  darkly  hidden  ;  so  familiar,  and  yet  so  strange. 

I.  This  is  seen  in  the  insensibility  of  men  to  the  Divineb  meaning  op  nature. 
The  material  universe  exists  for  spiritual  ends.  God  has  surrounded  his  intelligent 
creatures  with  all  the  affluence  and  glory  of  it  in  order  to  reveal  himself  to  them  and 
attract  their  thought  and  affection  to  himself.  "  The  invisible  things  of  him  from  the 
beginning  of  the  world  are  clearly  seen,"  &o.  (Rom.  1.  20).  But  how  dead  are  men 
often  to  Divine  impressions  I  They  hear  no  voice  and  feel  no  influence  from  God 
wming  to  them  through  his  works.    They  know  none  but  the  lower  uses  of  nature, 


JI42  1?SE  BdOK  OF  NUMBES8.  [cA.  ixii.  41-XxiV. 

and  never  dream  of  entering  through  it  into  communion  with  Him  who  inspires  it 
with  the  energy  of  his  presence.  Tribes  whose  life  is  nursed  and  cradled  in  the 
fairest  regions  of  the  earth  are  often  mentally  the  darkest  and  morally  the  most 
depraved.  The  worst  forms  of  heathenism  have  been  found  in  those  parts  of  the 
world  where  the  Creator  has  most  lavished  the  tokens  of  his  glorious  beneficence. 
The  sweet  associations  of  rural  and  pastoral  life  in  a  Christian  land  like  ours  are 
connected  less  than  we  should  expect  them  to  be  with  quickness  of  spiritual  per- 
ception and  tenderness  of  spiritual  sensibility.  Stranger  still  that  men  whose  souls 
are  most  keenly  alive  to  all  the  beauty  of  the  world,  and  with  whom  it  is  an  all- 
absorbing  passion  to  search  out  its  wonders  and  drink  in  its  poetic  inspirations,  should 
fail,  as  they  so  often  do,  to  discern  in  it  a  living  God.  Physical  science  is  to  many  as 
a  gorgeous  veil  that  darkly  hides  him,  rather  than  the  glass  through  which  the  beams 
of  his  gloiy  fall  upon  them,  the  radiant  pathway  by  which  they  climb  up  to  his  throne. 
Their  eyes  are  wondrously  "  open ; "  they  have  a  "  knowledge  of  the  Most  High  "  in 
the  forms  and  modes  of  his  working  such  as  few  attain  to ;  "  visions  of  tlie  Almighty  " 
in  the  glorious  heavens  above  and  the  teeming  earth  beneath  pass  continually  before 
them,  and  yet  they  see  and  feel  and  know  him  not.  How  different  such  a  case  from 
that  of  Job :  "  0  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  him  ! "  &c.  (Job  xxiii.  1 — 10).  There 
you  have  the  passionate  outbreathing  of  a  soul  that  is  hungering  and  thirsting  after  a 
God  that"hideth  himself."  Here  yon  have  God  urging,  pressing  upon  men  the 
signals  and  proofs  of  his  presence  without  effect.  There  is  no  blindness  darker  and 
sadder  than  that  of  those  who  boast  that  their  "  eyes  are  open,"  and  yet,  in  a  glprious 
world  like  this,  can  find  no  living  God. 

II.  It  is  seen  in  the  indisposition  op  men  to  becoqnise  the  voice  of  God  in 
Holy  Scbipturb.  To  know  that  the  Bible  is  a  revelation  of  truth  from  God,  and  to 
know  God  as  he  reveals  himself  in  the  Bible,  are  two  widely  different  things.  There 
are  those  to  whom  revelation  is  as  a  Divine  voice  uttered  long  ago,  but  "  not  now ; " 
a  voice  coming  down  to  them  through  the  ages  as  in  distant  echo,  but  not  instant- 
and  near.  To  them  these  old  records  may  be  sacred,  venerable,  worthy  to  be  pre- 
served and  defended,  but  in  no  sense  are  they  a  channel  of  direct  personal  communi- 
cation between  the  living  God  and  our  living  souls ;  "  inspired "  once,  but  not 
instinct  with  the  spirit  of  inspiration  now.  No  wonder  the  word  is  powerless  and 
fruitless  under  such  conditions.  It  is  of  no  use  to  tell  men  that  the  Scriptures  are 
"  inspired  "  if  they  don't  feel  God  to  he  in  them,  dealing  as  a  personal  Spirit  with 
their  spirits  to  draw  them  into  fellowship  with  himself.  A  new  kind  of  consciousness 
is  awakened,  a  new  order  of  effects  produced,  when  once  a  man  begins  to  feel  that 
the  written  word  is  the  living  voice  of  God  to  his  own  soul.  He  cannot  despise  it 
then.  It  carries  with  it  an  authority  that  needs  no  extraneous  authority  to  support 
it — the  true  "demonstration  of  tne  Spirit."  Apart  from  this,  the  soul  in  presence 
of  all  these  Divine  revelations  is  like  one  under  the  influence  of  some  powerful 
ansesthetic,  receiving  impressions  on  the  outward  sense  of  all  that  is  going  on  around 
him,  but  conscious  of  nothing.  The  "  eyes  are  open,"  but  there  is  no  living,  spiritual 
realisation.  "  They  seeing,  see  not,  and  hearing,  hear  not,  neither  do  they  under- 
stand "  (Matt.  xiii.  13 ;  John  xii.  40 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  3,  4). 

III.  It  is  seen  in  the  pubely  ideal  relation  in  which  men  too  often  stand 
TOWARDS  Christ.  By  multitudes  Christ  is  seen,  as  it  were,  "  afar  off."  He  is  to 
them  but  as  the  vision  of  a  dream,  a  vague,  distant  abstraction,  a  mere  historic  figure, 
the  central  actor  in  a  tragical  historic  drama.  They  have  never  entered  into  any 
kind  of  personal  relation  with  him,  have  never  bowed  before  him  in  heart-broken 
penitence,  adoring  wonder,  childlike  trustfulness,  grateful,  self-surrendering  love. 
"  Virtue  "  has  never  gone  forth  out  of  him  to  heal  the  disease  of  their  souls,  because 
they  have  not  yet  "  touched  him."  There  is  a  wide  distinction  between  the  know- 
ledge that  comes  by  mere  hearsay  and  that  which  comes  by  personal  converse, 
between  a  distant  vision  and  the  living  "touch."  Though  faith  be  in  great  part 
blind  and  unintelligent,  y^t  if  there  is  the  quick  sensibility  of  life  in  it,  it  is  better 
than  all  the  clear,  unclouded  vision  of  an  eye  that  is  no  real  inlet  to  the  soul.  There 
is  e,  future  manifestation  of  Christ.  "  Behold,  he  cometh  with  clouds ;  and  every  ey» 
shaU  see  him  "  (Re,v.  i  7).  What  shall  be  the  relation  in  which  we  stand  towards 
him  then  ?    There  are  those  whose  eyes  will  then  be  opened  as  they  never  ver« 


ea.  XXV.  1— ikj 


fM  Book  0^  iJTJMBfiB^. 


^ 


before.  Shall  it  be  only  to  have  them  closed  again  in  everlasting  night,  "  consumed 
with  the  brightness  of  his  appearing"?  You  must  be  in  living  fellowship  with 
Christ  now  if  you  would  look  with  joy  upon  him  when  he  comes  in  his  "  power  and 
great  glory." — W. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


The  sin  of  Israel  and  atonement  op 
.  Phinehas  (vers.  1 — 18).  Ver.  1. — ^Abode  in 
Shittim.  For  a  considerable  time ;  from  their 
first  arrival  in  the  Arboth  Moab  until  the 
crossing  of  the  Jordan.  Shittim  is  the 
shortened  form  of  Abel-Shittim,  "Field  of 
Acacias"  (ch.  xxxiii.  49).  It  seems  to  have 
been  the  northernmost  part  of  the  last 
encampment  of  Israel  on  that  side  Jordan, 
and  the  head-quarters  of  the  host  (Josh.  ii. 
1 ;  iii.  1).  Began  to  commit  whoredom  with 
the  daughters  of  Moab.  This  commence- 
ment of  sin  seems  to  have  been  made  by 
Israel  without  special  provocation.  The  very 
victories  won,  and  the  comparative  ease  and 
affluence  now  enjoyed,  after  long  marches  and 
hardships,  may  well  have  predisposed  them  to 
this  sin,  for  which  they  now  for  the  first  time 
found  abundant  opportunity. 

Ver.  2. — ^And  they  called,  i.  e.  the  women 
of  Moab,  encouraged  to  do  so  by  the  licen- 
tious intercourse  which  had  sprung  up. 
"Without  such  encouragement  it  is  difficult 
to  suppose  that  they  would  have  ventured  on 
such  a  s'tep.  And  the  people  did  eat. 
Gluttony  added  its  seductions  to  lust.  No 
doubt  this  generation  were  as  weary  of  the 
manna  and  as  eager  for  other  and  heavier 
food  as  their  fathers  had  been  (see  on  ch.  zi. 
4 ;  xxi.  5). 

Ver.  3. — Israel  joined  himself  unto  Baal- 
Peor.  This  is  a  technical  phrase,  repeated 
in  ver.  .5,  and  quoted  in  Ps.  cvi.  28,  express- 
ing the  quasi-sacramental  union  into  which 
they  entered  with  the  heathen  deity  by  par- 
taking of  his  sacrificial  meats  and  by  sharing 
in  his  impure  rites  (cf  Hosea  ix.  10  and  the 
argument  of  St.  Paul  in  1  Cor.  x.).  There 
can  be  little  doubt  that  Peor  ("lij!?,  from  lyS, 
to  open)  has  the  sense  of  aperiens,  in  usu 
obsceno,  and  that  it  was  the  distinguishing 
name  of  Baal  or  Chemosh  when  worshipped 
as  the  god  of  reproduction  with  the  abomin- 
able rites  proper  to  this  cultus.  For  a  notice 
of  the  same  thing  in  the  last  days  of  Israel 
see  Hosea  iv.  14,  and  for  the  practice  of 
Babylonian  and  (to  some  degree)  Egyptian 
women,  see  Herodotus,  i.  199;'ii.  60).  The 
Septuagint  has  here  iTiXsaSrtj  T<p  Bee\<pty<!ip, 
"was  consecrated,"  or  "initiated,"  unto 
Baal-Peor,  which  admirably  expressed  the 
sense. 

Ver.  4. — The  lord  laid  unto  Uosei.    It 


seems  strange  that  so  fearful  an  apostas;  had 
gone  so  far  without  interference  on  the  part 
of  Moses.  He  may  have  been  absent  from 
the  camp  on  account  of  the  wars  with  the 
Amorite  Kings ;  or  he  may  have  trusted  to 
the  chiefs  to  see  that  due  order  and  disci- 
pline was  maintained  in  the  camps.  Take  all 
the  heads  of  the  people,  i.  e.  the  chiefe, 
who  ought  to  have  prevented,  and  might 
have  prevented,  this  monstrous  irregularity, 
but  who  seem,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  case 
of  Zimri,  to  have  countenanced  it.  The  mere 
neglect  of  duty  in  so  gross  a  case  was  reason 
enough  for  summary  execution.  Hang  them 
up  before  the  Lord.  Either  by  way  of  im- 
palement or  by  way  of  crucifixion,  both  of 
which  were  familiar  modes  of  punishment. 
In  this  case  the  guUty  persons  were  probably 
slain  first,  and  exposed  afterwards.  The 
hanging  up  was  not  ordered  on  account  of  its 
cruelty,  nor  merely  for  the  sake  of  publicity 
("against  the  sun"),  but  in  order  to  show 
that  the  victims  were  devoted  to  the  wrath 
of  God  against  sin  (cf.  Deut.  xxi.  23  ;  2  Sam. 
xxi.  2 — 6).  The  Septuagint  has  here  irapa- 
Stifiiariaov  airoig.  Cf.  Heb.  vi.  6,  when 
this  word  is  coupled  with  "  crucify."  Thern 
is  no  authority  for  referring  the  "them" 
(DniS)  to  the  guilty  persons  instead  of  to 
the  heads  of  the  people,  as  is  done  by  the 
Targums  and  by  many  commentators.     . 

Ver.  5.— The  judges  of  Israel.  *l?PB'-7K. 
This  is  the  first  place  where  "the  judges" 
are  mentioned  by  this  name  (cf.  Deut.  i.  16  ; 
Judges  ii.  16),  but  the  verb  is  freely  used  in 
Exod.  xviii.  in  describing  the  functions  of 
the  officers  appointed  at  Sinai.  Every  one 
his  men.  The  men  who  were  under  his  par- 
ticular jurisdiction.  This  command  given 
by  Moses  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  the 
previous  command  given  to  Moses  to  hang 
up  all  the  chiefs.  Moses  only  could  deal 
with  the  chief,  but  it  was  within  the  power 
and  the  province  of  the  judges  to  deal  with 
ordinary  offenders.  It  does  not,  however, 
appear  how  far  either  of  these  commands 
was  put  in  practice. 

Ver.  6. — A  Midianitish  woman.  Rather, 
"the  Midianitish  woman."  niyisn-ns. 
Septuagint,  t-^v  MaSiavirriv.  The  writer 
deals  with  an  incident  only  too  notorious, 
>and  -which  by  the  peculiar  aggravation  of  its 
circumstances  had  fixed  itself  deeply  in  the 
popular  memory.  This  is  the  first  mention 
of  the  Midianites  in  connection  with  this 


844 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[CH.  XXV.  1 — 18. 


affair,  and  it  prepares  ns  to  learn  withont 
surprise  that  tney  were  in  reality  the  authors 
of  this  mischief.  All  the  congregation,  .  . 
who  were  weeping.  According  to  the  loose 
sense  in  which  this  cxpressionis  used  through- 
out the  Pentateuch,  it  evidently  means  that 
those  who  truly  represented  the  nation,  not 
only  as  a  political,  but  also  as  a  religious 
community,  were  gathered  in  this  distress 
before  the  presence  of  their  invisible  King. 
They  wept  on  account  of  the  wrath  of  God 
provoked  ;  probably  also  on  account  of  the 
wrath  of  God  already  gone  forth  in  the  form 
of  a  pestilence. 

Ver.  7.— PhinehaB,  the  son  of  Eleazar. 
See  on  Exod,  vi.  25.  He  seems  to  have  been 
the  only  son  of  Eleazar,  and  his  natural  suc- 
cessor in  the  office  of  high  priest. 

Ver.  8.— Into  the  tent.  naiSP)-?^.  Sep- 
tnagint,  tie  t^v  k&iui-ov.  The  word  signi- 
fies an  arched  recess  (cf.  the  Arabic  "alcove," 
from  the  same  root,  and  the  Latin  fomitij, 
and  means  probably  the  inner  division  which 
served  as  the  women's  room  in  the  larger 
tents  of  the  wealthier  Israelites.  There  is 
no  sufficient  ground  for  supposing  that  a 
special  place  had  been  erected  for  this  evil 

Eurpose ;  if  it  had  been,  it  would  surely 
ave  been  destroyed.  Throngh  her  belly. 
Fljp^i?"?^.  Septuagint,  ii&  rqs  iifirpas  avTtjt. 
So  the  plague  was  stayed.  No  plague  has 
been  mentioned,  but  the  narrative  evidently 
deals  with  an  episode  the  details  of  which 
were  very  fresh  in  the  memory  of  all,  and  is 
extremely  concise.  >  That  a  plague  would 
follow  such  an  apostasy  might  be  certainly 
expected  from  the  previous  experiences  at 
Kibroth-hattaavah,  at  Kadesh,  and  after  the 
rebellion  of  Korah. 

Ver.  9. — Were  twenty  and  four  thousand. 
"  Fell  in  one  day  three  and  twenty  thou- 
sand," says  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  x.  8).  As  the 
Septuagint  does  not  deviate  here  from  the 
Hebrew,  the  Apostle  mnst  have  followed 
some  Babbinical  tradition.  It  is  possible 
enough  that  the  odd  thousand  died  on  some 
other  day  than  the  one  of  which  he  speaks, 
or  they  may  have  died  by  the  hands  of  the 
judges,  and  not  by  the  plague. 

Ver.  10. — The  Lord  spake  nnto  Hoses, 
Mying.    On  the  Divine  commendation  here 


bestowed  upon  the  act  of  Phinehas  see  the 
note  at  the  end  of  the  chapter.  .  In  the 
Hebrew  Bible  a  new  section  begins  here, 

Ver.  11. — While  he  was  zealous  for  my 
sake.  Rather,  "  while  he  was  zealous  with 
my  zeal"  ('nKJjJTlS.  Septuagint,  iv  no 
SijXuffai  fiov  rbv  S^Xov,  where  /lov  stands 
emphatically  before  SijXov).  In  my  jealousy. 
Kather,  "in  my  zeal;"  the  same  word  is 
used. 

Ver.  14. — ITow  the  name  of  the  Israelite 
These  details  as  to  names  seem  to  have  been 
added  as  an  after-thought,  for  they  would 
naturally  have  been  given  in  ver.  11,  where 
the  man  and  the  woman  are  first  mentioned. 
The  woman's  name  is  given  again  in  ver.  18, 
as  if  for  the  first  time.  We  may  probably 
conclude  that  vers.  14,  15  were  inserted  into 
the  narrative  either  by  the  hand  of  Moses 
himself  at  a  later  date,  or  possibly  by  some 
subsequent  hand.  Zimri.  This  was  not  an 
uncommon  name,  but  the  individual  who 
bears  it  here  is  not  elsewhere  mentioned. 

Ver.  15. — Head  over  a  people,  and  of  a 
chief  house  in  Uidian.  Rather,  "head  of 
tribes  (n'\)3^,  for  the  use  of  which  cf.  Gen. 
ixv.  16)  of  a  father's  house  in  Mldian."  It 
seems  to  mean  that  several  clans  descended 
from  one  tribe -father  looked  up  to  Zur 
as  their  head.  In  ch.  xxxi.  8  he  is  called 
one  of  the  five  "kings"  of  Midian.  That 
the  daughter  of  such  a  man  should  have  been 
selected,  and  should  have  been  willing,  to 
play  such  a  part  throws  a  strong  light  upon 
the  studied  character  and  the  peculiar  danger 
of  the  seduction. 

Ver.  17. —Vex  the  Midianites.  The 
Moabites,  although  the  evil  began  with  them, 
were  passed  over ;  perhaps  because  they 
were  still  protected  by  the  Divine  injunction 
(Deut.  ii.  9)  not  to  meddle  with  them;  more 
probably  because  their  sin  had  not  the  same 
studied  and  deliberate  chaiacter  as  the  sin 
of  the  Midianites.  We  may  think  of  the 
women  of  Moab  as  merely  indulging  their 
individual  passions  after  their  wonted  manner, 
but  of  the  women  of  Midian  as  employed  by 
their  rulers,  on  the  advice  of  Balaam,  in  a 
deliberate  plot  to  entangle  the  Israelites  in 
heathen  rites  and  heathen  sins  which  would 
alienate  from  them  the  &vour  of  Qod. 


NOTE  ON  THE  ZEAL  OP  PHINEHAS. 

The  act  of  Phinehas,  the  son  of  Eleazar,  in  slaying  Zimri  and  Cozbi  is  one  of  thb 
aaost  memorable  in  the  Old  Testament ;  not  so  much,  however,  in  itself,  as  in  the 
commendation  bestowed  upon  it  by  God.  It  is  unquestionably  surprising  at  first  sight 
thkt  an  act  of  nnauthorised  zeal,  which  might  so  i«adily  be  made  (as  indeed  it  WM 


OH.  MT.  1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  S4& 

made)  the  excuse  for  deeds  of  murderous  fanaticism,  should  be  commended  in  the 
strongest  terms  by  the  Ahnighty  ;  that  an  act  of  summary  vengeance,  which  we  find 
it  somewhat  hard  to  justify  on  moral  grounds,  should  be  made  in  a  peculiar  sense 
and  in  a  special  degree  the  pattern  of  the  great  atonement  wrought  by  the  Saviour 
of  mankind  ;  but  this  aspect  of  the  deed  in  the  eyes  of  God  by  its  very  unexpected- 
ness draws  our  attention  to  it,  and  obliges  us  to  consider  wherein  its  distinctivo 
religious  charaeter  and  excellence  lay. 

It  is  necessary  in  the  first  place  to  point  out  that  the  act  of  Phinehas  did 
really  receive  stronger  testimony  from  God  than  any  other  act  done  proprio 
motu  in  the  Old  Testament.  What  he  did  was  not  done  officially  (for  he  held 
no  office),  nor  was  it  done  by  command  (for  the  offenders  were  not  under  his 
jurisdiction  as  judge),  nor  in  fulfilment  of  any  revealed  law  or  duty  (for  no  blame 
would  have  attached  to  him  if  he  had  let  it  alone),  and  yet  it  had  the  same  effect 
in  staying  the  plagpie  as  the  act  of  Aaron  when  he  stood  between  the  living 
and  the  dead  with  the  hallowed  fire  in  bis  hand  (see  on  ch.  xvi.  46—48).  Of 
both  it  is  said  that  "  he  made  an  atonement  for  the  people,"  and  so  far  they  both 
appear  as  having  power  with  God  to  turn  away  his  wrath  and  stay  his  avenging 
hand.  But  the  atonement  made  by  Aaron  was  official,  for  he  was  the  anointed 
high  priest,  and,  being  made  with  incense  from  the  sanctuary,  it  wasma-le  in  aeoord- 
anoe  with  and  upon  the  strength  of  a  ceremonial  law  laid  down  by  God  whereby 
he  had  bound  himself  to  exercise  his  Divine  right  of  pardon.  The  act  of  Phinehas, 
on  the  contrary,  had  no  legal  or  ritual  value ;  there  is  no  power  of  atonement  in  the 
blood  of  sinners,  nor  had  the  death  of  24,000  guilty  people  had  any  effect  in  turning 
away  the  wrath  of  God  from  them  that  survived.  It  remains,  therefore,  a  startling 
truth  that  the  deed  of  Phinehas  is  the  only  act  neither  official  nor  commanded,  but 
originating  in  the  impulses  of  the  actor  himself,  to  which  the  power  of  atoning  for 
sin  is  ascribed  in  the  Old  Testament :  for  although  in  2  Sam.  xxi.  3  David  speaks 
of  making  an  atonement  by  giving  up  seven  of  Saul's  sons,  it  is  evident  from 
the  context  that  the  "  atonement "  was  made  to  the  Gibeonites,  and  not  directly 
to  the  Lord.  Again,  the  act  of  Phinehas  merited  the  highest  reward  from  God, 
a  reward  which  was  promised  to  him  in  the  most  absolute  terms.  Because  he 
had  done  this  thing  he  should  have  God's  covenant  of  peace,  he  and  his  seed 
after  him,  even  the  covenant  of  an  everlasting  priesthood.  This  promise  must 
mean  that  he  and  his  seed  should  have  power  with  God  for  ever  to  make  peace  be- 
tween heaven  and  earth,  and  to  make  reconciliation  for  the  sins  of  the  people ;  and, 
meaning  this,  it  is  a  republication  in  favour  of  Phinehas,  and  in  Tnore  absolute  terms, 
of  the  covenant  made  with  Levi  as  represented  by  Aaron  (see  on  Mai.  ii.  4,  5).  Nor 
is  this  all.  In  Ps.  ovi.  31  it  is  said  of  his  deed  that  "  it  was  counted  unto  him  for 
righteousness  unto  all  generations -for  evermore."  This  word  "counted"  or  "im- 
puted "  is  the  same  (3C^n)  which  is  used  of  Abraham  in  Gen.  xv.  6,  and  the  very 

words  of  the  Septuagint  here  (iXoyiff&ij  airif  Ug  StKatoaiivtiv)  are  applied  to  the  obedi- 
ence of  Abraham  in  James  ii.  23.  It  appears  then  that  righteousness  was  imputed  to 
Phinehas,  as  to  the  father  of  the  faithful,  with  this  distinction,  that  to  Phinehas  it 
was  imputed  as  an  everlasting  righteousness,  which  is  not  said  of  Abraham.  Now 
if  we  compare  the  two,  it  must  be  evident  that  the  act  of  Phinehas  was  not,  like 
Abraham's,  an  act  of  self-sacrificing  obedience,  nor  in  any  special  sense  an  act  of 
faith.  While  both  aeted  under  the  sense  of  duty,  the  following  of  duty  in  Abraham' s 
case  put  the  greatest  possible  strain  upon  all  the  natural  impulses  of  mind  and  heart ; 
in  the  case  of  Phinehas  it  altogether  coincided  with  the  impulses  of  his  ovn  will.    If 


hit  TSa  fiOOK  OF  trUMBEpS.  [Ori.  xiv,  1—18. 

faith  was  imputed  to  Abraham  for  righteousness,  it  is  clear  that  zeal  was  imputed 
to  Phinehae  for  righteousness  for  evermore. 

This  being  bo,  it  is  necessary  in  the  second  place  to  point  out  that  the  act  in  ques- 
tion (like  that  of  Abraham  in  sacrificing  his  son)  was  distinctly  one  of  moral  virtue 
according  to  the  standard  then  Divinely  allowed.  An  act  which  was  in  itself  wrongs 
or  of  doubtful  rectitude,  could  not  form  the  ground  for  such  praise  and  promise,  even 
supposing  that  they  really  looked  far  beyond  the  act  itself.  Now  it  is  clear  (1) 
that  under  no  circumstances  would  a  similar  act  be  justifiable  now ;  (2)  that  no 
precedent  could  be  established  by  it  then.  The  Jews  indeed  feigned  a  "  zealot-right," 
examples  of  which  they  saw  (amongst  others)  in  the  act  of  Samuel  slaying  Agag 
(1  Sam.  XV.  33),  of  Mattathias  slaying  the  idolatrous  Jew  and  the  king's  commissioner 
(1  Mace.  ii.  24 — 26),  of  the  Sanhedrim  slaying  St.  Stephen.  But  the  last-mentioned 
case  is  evidence  enough  that  in  the  absence  of  distinct  Divine  guidance  zeal  is  sure 
to  degenerate  into  fanaticism,  or  rather  that  it  is  impossible  to  distinguish  zeal  from 
fanaticism.  Every  such  act  must  of  necessity  stand  upon  its  own  merits,  for  it  can 
only  be  justified  by  the  coexistence  of  two  conditions  which  are  alike  beyond  human 
certainty :  (1)  that  the  deed  is  itself  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  God ;  (2)  that 
the  doing  of  it  is  inspired  by  motives  absolutely  pure.  That  Christ  came  to  save 
men's  lives,  and  that  God  would  have  all  men  to  repent,  has  made  for  us  the  primary 
condition  impossible,  and  therefore  the  act  of  Phinehas  would  be  immoral  now.  No  one 
may  take  life  unless  he  has  the  mandate  of  the  State  for  doing  so.  But  it  wag  not 
so  then  ;  God  was  the  King  of  Israel,  and  the  foes  of  Israel  were  the  foes  of  God,  with 
whom  there  could  be  no  peace  or  amity  as  long  as  they  threatened  the  very  existence 
of  God's  people  and  worship.  The  Israelite  who  indulged  in  sinful  intercourse  with  a 
heathen  was  a  rebel  against  his  King  and  a  traitor  to  his  country ;  he  became  ipso 
facto  an  "  outlaw,"  to  slay  whom  was  the  bounden  duty  of  every  true  patriot.  If  it 
be  said  that  this  view  of  things  belongs  to  an  inferior  code  of  morality,  which  ignored 
the  universal  brotherhood  of  men  and  Fatherhood  of  God,  that  is  admitted  at  once. 
The  elder  revelation  founded  itself  plainly  and  avowedly  upon  the  moral  law  as  then 
universally  held  (and  by  no  means  supplanted  yet  by  the  higher  law  of  Christ),  that 
men  were  to  love  their  brethren  and  hate  their  enemies.  To  complain  that  the  act  of 
Phinehas  was  moral  in  a  Jewish  and  not  in  a  Christian  sense  is  only  to  find  fault 
with  God  for  suffering  a  confessedly  imperfect  and  preparatory  morality  to  do  its 
work  until  the  fulness  of  time  was  come. 

While,  therefore,  we  recognise  the  act  of  Phinehas  as  one  determined,  in  its  outward 
form,  by  the  imperfect  morality  of  the  dispensation  under  which  he  lived,  it  is  neces- 
sary to  look  below  the  act  to  the  spirit  which  animated  it  for  its  permanent  value 
and  significance.  That  spirit  is  clearly  defined  by  the  testimony  of  God — "  while  he 
was  zealous  with  Tny  zeal."  The  excellence  of  Phinehas  was,  that  he  was  filled  with  a 
zeal  which  was  itself  Divine  against  sin,  and  that  he  acted  fearlessly  and  promptly 
(whilst  others  apparently  hesitated  even  when  commanded)  under  the  impulse  of 
that  zeal ;  in  other  words,  what  pleased  God  so  greatly  was  to  see  his  own  hatred 
of  sin,  and  his  own  desire  to  make  it  to  cease,  reflected  in  the  mind  and  expressed  in 
the  deed  of  one  who  acted  upon  righteous  impulse,  not  under  any  command  or 
constraint. 

It  is  impossible,  in  the  third  place,  not  to  see  that  this  record  throws  a  flood  of  light 
upon  the  doctrine  of  the  atonement ;  for  the  act  of  Phinehas  stands,  in  some  respects, 
npon  a  higher  level  thari-all  the'  types  and  shadows  of  the  cross  which  had  gone 
before ;  being  neither  an  act  of  submission  to  a  definite  command,  like  the  sacrifice 
o£  Isaac,  nor  a  piece  of  ordered  ritual,  like  the  sending  forth  of  the  goat  for  Azazel ; 


Ott.  xtv.  1—180  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  Si? 

but  a  spontaneous  deed,  having  a  moral  value  of  its  own.  Partly  at  least  for  tha 
sake  of  what  it  was,  not  merely  what  it  showed  in  a  figure,  it  was  accepted  as  an 
atonement  for  the  sin  of  Israel  (which  was  very  gross),  and  was  imputed  to  its  author 
for  an  everlasting  righteousness.  Phinehas,  therefore,  in  one  very  important  sense, 
would  seem  to  bear  a  stronger  resemblance  to  our  Lord  in  his  atoning  work  than  any 
other  person  in  the  Old  Testament.  It  may  therefore  be  submitted  that  we  must 
seek  the  truest  ground  of  the  atonement  wrought  by  Christ  not  in  the  simple  fact  of 
the  passion  and  death  of  the  God-man,  nor  in  the  greatness  or  value  of  his  sufEer- 
ings  as  such ;  but  in  that  zeal  for  God,  that  Divine  indignation  against  sin  as  the 
opposite  of  God,  that  consuming  desire  to  cause  it  to  cease,  which  first  animated  the 
life  of  the  Redeemer,  and  then  informed  his  death.  Phinehas  in  his  measure,  and 
according  to  his  lights,  was  governed  by  the  same  Spirit,  and  surrendered  himself 
to  the  prompting  of  the  same  Spirit,  by  which  Christ  offered  himself  without  spot 
unto  God.  And  that  Spirit  was  the  Spirit  of  a  consuming  zeal,  wherein  our  Lord 
hastened  with  an  entire  eagerness  of  purpose  (Luke  xii.  60 ;  John  ii.  17 ;  xii.  27, 
28,  &c.)  to  "condemn  sin  in  the  flesh"  and  so  to  glorify  God,  and  to  accomplish 
the  object  of  his  mission  (Eom.  viii.  3),  not  by  the  summary  execution  of  individual 
sinners,  but  after  an  infinitely  higher  fashion,  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself  as  the 
representative  of  the  whole  sinful  race. 

Lastly,  it  must  be  noted  that  as  the  act  of  Phinehas  enables  us,  almost  more  than 
anything  else,  to  enter  into  the  nature  of  our  Lord's  atonement,  so  it  is  only  in  the 
light  of  that  atonement  that  we  can  justify  to  ourselves  either  the  strength  of  the 
Divine  commendation  accorded  to  Phinehas,  or  the  vastness  of  the  promises  made  to 
him.  For  the  deed  was  after  all  an  act  of  violence,  and  a  dangerous  precedent, 
humanly  speaking ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  covenant  of  peace  given  to  him  and 
to  his  seed,  even  the  covenant  of  an  everlasting  priesthood,  failed  to  give  any  peace 
at  all,  save  in  a  very  broken  and  partial  manner,  and  did  not  even  continue  in  the 
keeping  of  his  family.  As  the  house  of  Bleazar  was  the  elder  of  the  two  descended 
from  Aaron,  it  would  have  been  only  natural  that  the  high  priestly  dignity  should 
remain  with  its  members ;  as  a  fact,  however,  it  passed  to  the  house  of  Ithamar  from 
the  days  of  Eli  until  Solomon,  for  political  reasons,  deposed  Abiathar  in  favour  of 
Zadok ;  and  it  was  lost  for  ever  with  the  final  fall  of  Jerusalem.  As  in  so  many 
cases,  therefore,  we  have  to  acknowledge  that  the  act  of  Phinehas  was  accepted  as 
an  atonement  for  the  sake  of  that  truer  atonement  which  (in  a  remarkable  sense)  it 
anticipated ;  and  that  the  promises  given  to  Phinehas  were  only  partially  intended 
and  partially  fulfilled  for  him,  while  the  true  and  eternal  fulfilment  was  reserved  for 
him  of  whom  Phinehas  was  a  figure.  To  Christ,  in  whom  was  combined  an  entire 
zeal  against  sin  and  an  entire  love  for  the  sinner,  was  indeed  given  God's  covenant 
of  peace  and  an  everlasting  priesthood. 

HOMILETICa 

Vers.  1 — 18. — Sin,  zeal,  and  atonement.  We  have  in  this  chapter  the  sin  of  man 
and  the  righteousness  of  God  set  before  us  in  the  most  striking  light;  the  virulence 
of  the  one,  and  the  triumph  of  the  other  through  the  zeal  of  God's  servant.  We 
may  cuntemplate  here — I.  The  seductions  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  devil,  and  the  apos- 
tasy to  which  they  lead ;  II.  The  insolence  of  sin  when  allowed  to  gain  a  head , 
III.  The  zeal  against  sin  which  pleases  God  and  obtains  favour ;  IV.  In  a  figure, 
the  atonement  wrought  by  God's  holy  servant  Jesus.  .-,     ■ 

I.  Consider,  theref oi'e,  with  resfject  to  The  Apostasy  of  Israel — 1.  That  it  was 
due  to  two  things — thmr  own  licentiousness,  and  the  craft  of  Balaam  taking 
advantage  of  it,   Thay  knew  not  indeed  that  Balaam  had  any  part  in  it,  but  we  know 


848  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBBE8.  [o*  ttv.  1—18, 

that  the  inBtigation  came  from  him.  Even  so  there  is  the  same  double  origination 
of  all  grave  fallings  away  from  God  and  grace.  A  man  is  drawn  away  of  his  own 
lust  (James  i.  14),  and  enticed  by  the  lust  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  eyes  (1  John  ii. 
16) ;  but  beneath  and  behind  all  these  temptations  is  the  craft  of  an  evil  will  counter- 
working the  grace  and  purpose  of  God  (Ephes.  vi.  11,  16 ;  1  Pet  v.  8).  And  note 
that  Balaam  could  not  harm  them  by  his  cUrses  or  magical  practices,  but  only  by 
taking  advantage  of  their  evil  concupiscence.  So  has  our  adversary  no  power  against 
us,  save  through  our  own  sine.  2.  That  the  dn  of  Israel  began  vnth  idleness,  and 
the  reaction,  from  toU  and  victory,  which  encouraged  them  to  give  the  rein  to  wander- 
ing desires.  Even  so  the  most  dangerous  moments,  morally  speaking,  in  a  Christian's 
life  are  those  intervals  of  comparative  inactivity  and  apparent  safety  when  dangers 
seem  to  be  surmounted,  foes  overcome,  and  toils  left  behind.  3.  That  the  danger  of 
Israel  against  which  they  had  been,  so  strongly  warned  now  beset  them,  viz.,  the 
danger  of  too  friendly  intercourse  with  people  whose  religion  and  morality  were 
altogether  inferior  to  that  of  Israel.  Even  so  the  great  and  constant  danger  of 
Christian  people — especially  of  such  as  mix  much  with  others — lies  in  intercourse 
with  a  world  which  does  not  acknowledge  the  laws  of  God,  and  in  the  almost 
inevitable  lowering  of  the  moral  and  religious  tone  which  follows.  4.  That  the  first 
fatal  step  was  indulgence  in  carnal  pleasures — an  indulgence  such  as  was  now  for 
the  first  time  thrown  in  their  way.  And  this  is  still  the  frequent  source  of  apostasy ; 
a  snare  into  which  the  most  unlikely  persons  constantly  fall  when  it  is  suddenly 
presented  to  them.  How  many  of  the  greatest,  intellectually,  and  most  promising, 
spiritually,  have  fallen  through  lust  I  how  many  deem  themselves  absolutely  above 
it  simply  because  the  temptation  has  never  yet  come  in  their  way  1  5.  That  fellow- 
ship in  sin  led  directly  to  fellowship  in  idolatry:  the  two  things  being  mutually 
intermixed  in  the  abominations  of  those  days.  Even  so  it  is  impossible  to  tako 
part  in  the  sinful  indulgences  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  world  without  denying  God 
and  committing  treason  against  him.  Immorality  is  not  simply  evil  in  the  sight  of 
God,  it  is  an  outrage  upon  him,  and  a  direct  renunciation  of  our  allegiance  to  him. 
The  first  Christians  rightly  regarded  Venus  and  Bacchus  as  devils.  Fleshly  sin 
involves  a  quasi-sacramental  union  with  the  enemy  of  God  (1  Cor.  vi.  13 — 20 ;  x. 
21,  22;  and  of.  Ps.  Ixxiii.  27;  Acts  xv.  20;  1  Tim.  v.  11).  6.  That  the  wrath  of 
God  burnt  especially  against  the  heads  of  the  people,  because  they  had  permitted 
these  iniquities  to  go  on,  and  had  perhaps  encouraged  them.  Even  so  their  sin  is 
greatest  and  their  punishment  wilf  be  sorest  who  fail  to  use  their  position  and 
authority  to  discourage  vice ;  much  more  if  they  countenance  it  by  their  example. 
7.  That  the  sentence  of  death  was  pronounced  upon  all  who  were  joined  to  Baal-Peor. 
It  is  not  the  will  of  God  that  sin  as  such  should  now  be  punished  by  the  magistrate, 
but  none  the  less  is  the  sentence  of  eternal  death  gone  forth  against  all  who  through 
sinful  indulgence  have  made  themselves  over  to  the  prince  of  this  world  (Bom.  i. 
18, 32 ;  vi.  23  ;  Ephes.  v.  6 ;  Eev.  xix.  20 ;  xxi.  8).  8.  That  the  judges  of  Israel  were 
commanded  to  execute  Judgm^it,  not  indiscriminaiely,  Imt  each  upon  such  as  he  was 
responsible  for.  Even  so  is  every  Christian  held  bound  to  extirpate  by  all  needful 
violence  his  own  sins  and  sinful  inclinations  which  cleave  unto  iniquity  and  do  dis- 
honour to  God.  For  each  one  of  us  is  responsible  for  all  that  is  within  him,  and  not 
for  others,  save  by  example  and  admonition  (Rom.  viii.  13 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  27 ;  Gal.  vi.  5 ; 
Ephes.  V.  11  ;  Col.  iii.  6,  where  "  mortify  "  is  simply  "  put  to  death  "), 

II.  Consider  again,  with  respect  to  thb  8in  of  Zimri — 1.  That  the  bad  example 
and  negligence  qf  the  chiefs  went  further  in  encouraging  this  evil  than  the  declared 
wrath  of  God  in  discouraging  it.  It  would  have  been  impossible  for  such  a  thing 
to  have  occurred  if  the  leaders  of  Israel  had  been  doing  their  duty.  Even  so  in  a 
society  nominally  Christian  the  bad  example  of  its  leaders  has  much  more  effect 
than  all  the  denunciations  of  Scripture.  Nothing  is  more  remarkable  than  the  ex- 
treme insolence  with  which  the  worst  vices  are  ever  ready  to  assert  themselves,  and 
to  flaunt  their  vileness  in  the  face  of  day,  if  they  find  encouragement,  or  even  toler- 
ation, with  those  that  lead  opinion  and  set  the  fashion.  Worse  sins  than  that  of 
Zimri,  such  as  adultery,  and  murder  (in  the  form  of  duelling),  have  been  and  are 
practised  without  shame  and  without  rebuke  by  those  who  claim  the  name  and 
privilege  of  Christiana.    2.  That  the  rank  of  the  two  ofenderi  no  dmiht  increased 


CM.  XXV.  1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBBBS.  849 

their  jyresumptimi,  as  shielding  them  from  punishment.  Even  so  in  the  Churchei 
of  Christ  it  has  ever  been  the  rich  and  the  great  who  have  dragged  down  the  moral 
law  and  outraged  the  holiness  of  their  calling,  because  they  seemed  to  be  beyond 
the  reach  of  discipline  or  correction  in  this  world.  3.  That  their  sin  was  intensified 
by  contrast  with  the  penitential  sorrow  and  the  trouble  all  around  them.  Even  so 
does  the  reckless  sin  of  abandoned  people  assume  a  darker  hue  in  the  sight  of  God 
and  of  good  men,  because  it  shows  itself  side  by  side  with  all  the  sorrow  and  the 
pain,  the  penitence  and  supplication,  which  that  very  sin  has  worked  in  unnumbered 
souls.  There  is  not  a  city  in  Christendom  where  that  scene  of  sin  and  weeping  in 
the  camp  of  Israel  is  not  ever  being  reproduced  in  full  sight  of  God,  if  not  of  men. 
4.  That  the  sin  of  Zimri  was,  and  is,  revolting  to  everybody/,  not,  however,  because  it 
was  really  worse  than  numberless  other  such  acts,  but  only  because  it  asserted  itself 
in  its  naked  hideousness.  Even  so  the  most  revolting  crimes  which  all  men  cry  out 
upon  are  not  really  worse  than  those  which  are  committed  every  day ;  it  is  only  that 
circumstances  have  robbed  them  of  the  disguises  and  concealments  b«neath  which 
men  hide  their  ordinary  sins. 

III.  Consider  again,  with  respect  to  THE  ZEAL  of  Phinehas — 1.  That  it  urns  well- 
pleasing  in  the  sight  of  God  because  it  was  a  zeal  for  God,  and  against  sin.  Even 
such  must  be  the  character  of  all  true  religious  zeal;  it  must  have  no  lesser  or 
meaner  inspiring  motive  than  the  pure  desire  that  God  may  be  glorified  and  sin  may 
be  destroyed.  It  is  this  zeal,  and  nothing  else,  which  puts  the  creature  at  once  on 
the  side  of  the  Creator,  and  produces  an  active  harmony  of  will  and  purpose  between 
God  and  man.  How  little  religious  zeal  has  this  pure  character  !  Hence,  although 
it  achieves  much, — builds  churches,  wins  converts,  gains  all  its  ends  on  earth, — yet  it 
does  not  obtain  any  commendation  or  reward  from  God.  2.  That  it  stood  in  strong 
eontrast  to  the  supineness  of  the  chief s,and  even  apparentlj/  of  Moses;  they  (at  best) 
only  mourned,  Phinehas  acted.  True  zeal  is  always  rare,  and  most  rare  in  high 
places.  It  is  so  much  easier  to  deplore  the  existence  of  evils  than  to  throw  oneself 
into  active  contention  against  them.  The  enthusiasms  and  reforms  which  have 
purged  the  Church  of  its  grosser  moral  corruptions  have  never  come  from  its 
leaders.  3.  That  it  was  aU  the  more  acceptable  with  God  because  it  was  spon- 
taneous, and  not  official.  Even  so  the  zenl  which  pleases  God  is-  that  which  is 
not  paid  for  directly  or  indirectly,  and  which  is  not  prompted  by  any  human  ex- 
pectations, and  does  not  wait  for  any  advantages  of  position.  _  How_  often  do  men 
tacitly  agree  to  leave  zeal  for  religion  and  morality  to  their  official  exponents, 
as  if  it  were  a  professional  matter  to  seek  the  glory  of  God  and_  the  triumph  of 
righteousness  I  4.  That  it  m,erited  the  favour  of  Heaven  because  it  was  unhesitat- 
ing and  unabashed.  No  one  else  perhaps  would  have  ^'  followed  "  when  and  where 
Phinehas  followed.  Even  so  a  genuine  religious  zeal  does  not  hesitate  to  seek  its 
ends  by  painful  courses,  and  such  as  natural  feeling  and  ordinary  sentiment  shrinks 
feom.  Zeal  knows  no  shame  except  the  shame  of  doing  wrong  or  of  sufEering  wrong 
to  be  done  if  it  can  be  helped.  6.  That  the  act  of  Phinehas  was  commended  because 
it  was  (1)  according  to  the  will  of  God,  and  (2)  inspired  by  zeal  for  God  unmixed 
with  lower  motives.  According  to  the  law  of  Israel,  as  then  understood  and  sanc- 
tioned by  God,  it  was  right  that  these  sinners  should  die,  and  right  that  any  private 
person  in  Israel  should  execute  judgment  upon  them  if  the  rulers  hesitated ;  and 
Phinehas  had  no  private  ends  to  gain  or  malice  to  gratify  by  w-hat  he  did.  Even 
such  is  the  ultimate  test  of  every  act  of  religious  zeal,  by  which  it  must  be  weighed 
in  the  last  account.  If  a  thing  be  right  in  itself,  according  to  the  revealed  will  of 
God  yet  if  it  be  done  from  any  motive  but  the  highest,  it  has  no  reward  hereafter, 
because  it  seeks  its  reward  here.  6.  That  the  act  of  Phinehas  was  one  which  was 
right  then,  but  would  be  wrong  now,  because  the  present  dispensation  is  built  upon 
eternal,  not  upon  temporal,  sanctions.  Yet  is  his  zeal  and  ours  all  one  in  its  essence : 
we  must  put  to  death  the  deeds  of  the  flesh  by  the  arms  of  righteousness ;  every 
man  must  be  a  Phinehas  to  hie  own  lusts  in  act— to  others  in  word  and  example  only 
(cf.  2  Cor.  vii.  11). 

IV.  Consider  lastly,  with  respect  to  Phinehas  as  a  figubb  of  Christ  in  his 
ATONEMENT — 1.  That  the  act  of  Phinehas  was  accepted  as  an  atonement  because  it 
was  inspired  by  a  pure  zeal  for  God  and  against  m,  without  regard  of  »df.    And 


860  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [ch.  xxv.  1—18. 

this  was  the  moral  element,  the  controlling  motive  power,  in  the  life  and  death  of 
Christ,  which  made  it  infinitely  precious  in  the  eyes  of  God,  and  infinitely  available 
for  the  remission  of  sins.  2.  That  God  had  sought  for  stick  an  atonanent  before  and  it 
had  not  been  given  (see  ver.  4 :  "  Hang  them  up, . .  .  that  the  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord 
may  be  turned  away  from  Israel ").  And  God  had  looked  in  vain  among  the  children 
of  men  for  any  that  should  have  perfect  sympathy  with  his  own  hatred  of  sin,  and 
perfect  self-devotion  in  seeking  to  destroy  it  (cf.  Isa.  liii,  11,  "my  righteous 
servant ; "  Ixiii.  4,  5  ;  Matt.  iii.  17,  &c.).  3.  Thai  Fhineftas  "satisfied"  the  wrath  of 
God  against  sin,  itmsmuchas  he  gave  expression  in  the  most  open  and  public  way  to 
the  real  mind  of  God  in  respect  of  sin.  And  our  Lord  did  not  merely  regard  sin  with 
the  eyes  of  God,  but  he  manifested  unto  all  the  world  in  the  very  highest  sense  the 
righteousness  of  God  as  arrayed  against  the  sinfulness  of  sin.  Beholding  the  carcases 
of  those  sinners,  Israel  awoke  from  his  evil  dream  to  a  consciousness  of  what  such 
lust  really  was.  Gazing  upon  the  dead  face  of  him  that  was  made  sin  for  us,  we 
realise  what  the  hatef  ulness  and  hideousness  of  sin  truly  is.  4.  That  Phinehas  con- 
demned sin  in  the  flesh  by  the  death — since  nothing  less  would  suffice— of  the  sinners- 
And  God  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh  not  by  inflicting  death,  but  by  sending  his  only- 
begotten  to  suffer  death  in  the  name  and  in  the  place  of  that  sinful  race  with  which 
he  had  wholly  identified  himself.  6.  That  Phinehas,  having  displayed  and  vindi- 
cated the  righteousness  of  God,  delivered  the  rest  of  Israd  from  the  plague.  Even 
BO  our  Lord,  having  condemned  sin  by  his  own  death,  through  death  destroyed  the 
power  of  death,  and  delivered  his  brethren  from  the  fear  of  death.  6.  That  Phinehas 
received  for  his  zeal  Godls  covenant  of  peace,  and  the  promise  of  an  everlasting  priest- 
hood. And  our  Lord,  for  that  he  made  atonement  for  the  sins  of  the  world,  and 
reconciled  in  one  life  and  death  the  holiness  and  the  love  of  God,  became  himself 
our  peace  (Ephes.  ii.  14),  and  was  made  a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchiz- 
edec  (Heb.  v.  9,  10).  7.  That  Phinehas  could  not  abide  because  of  death,  nor  his  seed 
because  of  infirmity  and  change;  wherefore  the  promise  could  not  be  permanently 
made  good  to  hiro.  But  Christ  abideth  for  ever,  for  ever  the  same,  eternal  inheritor  of 
all  the  promises  made  to  all  holy  men  (Heb.  vii.  24 ;  xiii.  8,  &c.).  See  the  note  above. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  10 — 13. — A  terrible  atonement.    We  see  in  this  narrative — 

I.  The  nation  which  God  had  blessed,  cursed  through  its  own  bins.  The 
Israelites,  impregnable  against  the  curses  of  Balaam,  succumb  to  his  wiles.  We  dis- 
cover parts  of  a  plot.  In  the  foreground  are  women  (true  daughters  of  Eve  the 
tempter),  alluring  feasts,  flatteries,  idolatries.  In  the  background  we  discern  the 
malignant  face  of  the  covetous  Balaam  (ch.  xxxi.  16  ;  Rev.  ii.  14),  and  behind 
him  his  master  the  devil.  Learn  to  discriminate  the  seen  and  unseen  agents  of 
temptation  (Ephes.  vi.  12),  and  to  guard  against  the  devices  of  our  diabolical  foe 
(2  Cor.  ii.  11 ;  xi.  14,  16).  Sin  did  what  Balaam  could  not  do.  The  wrath  of  God, 
the  plague  on  the  thousands  of  Israelites,  the  execution  of  the  ringleaders,  follow 
in  quick  succession.  Note  the  destructiveness  of  sin.  Of  every  sinner  it  may 
be  said  as  of  Achan,  "  That  man  perished  not  alone  in  his  iniquity."  The  guilt 
of  the  nation  reached  its  climax  in  the  shamelessness  and  audacity  of  the  sin  of 
Zimri.  While  shame,  one  of  the  precious  relics  of  paradise,  survives,  there  is  more 
hope  of  restoration,  but  when  shame  is  gone,  sin  is  ripe  for  judgment  (Jer.  v,  7 — 9  ; 
vi.  15).    If  God's  wrath  had  continued  to  bum,  the  whole  nation  must  have  perished. 

II.  The  weath  removed  by  a  terrible  atonement.  1.  The  essence  of  it  was 
not  an  outward  act,  but  a  state  of  heart.  It  was  Phinehas'  zeal  for  God  which  made 
the  act  possible  and  acceptable.  Just  so  in  the  atonement,  of  a  very  different 
character,  made  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  essence  of  it  was  the  zeal  for  the  will 
of  God  which  prompted  the  obedience  unto  death,  the  offering  of  the  body  of  Christ 
once  for  all  (Heb.  x.  6 — 10).  2.  The  form  of  the  atonement  was  a  terrible  mani- 
festation of  the  righteousness  of  God  in  the  prompt  punishment  of  the  two  a  la- 
cious  transgressors.  They  expiated  their  crime  by  their  lives.  Phinehas'  conduct, 
being  inspired  by  godly  zeal,  is  justified  by  God  himself.  Instead  of  being  treated 
as  a  crime,  it  is  regarded  as  a  covering  over  cf  the  nation's  sin.    Where  that  «» 


OH.  XXV.  1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  881 

reached  its  climax,  there  it  received  such  sudden  retribution  as  to  stamp  it  as  an 
abominable  thing  which  God  hates.  Zimri  and  his  paramour  are  branded  with 
eternal  infamy,  while  Phinehas  is  rewarded  by  "  the  covenant  of  an  everlasting 
priesthood."  We  learn  thus  that  there  is  more  than  one  way  of  making  an  atone- 
ment to  God.  In  both  cases  it  is  by  the  manifestation  of  the  righteousness  of  God 
(Bom.  iii.  21,  25),  but  in  different  ways.  1.  By  his  holy  wrath  flaming  forth 
against  sin,  whether  immediately  (e.  g.  Josh.  vii.  11,  12)  or  through  the  zeal  of  a 
man  of  God.  The  weeping  of  the  people  was  not  an  atonement,  fer  it  did  not 
manifest  the  righteousness  of  God  as  the  act  of  Phinehas  did.  2.  By  his  righteous 
grace  allowing  another  to  interpose  on  behalf  of  sinners,  to  do  or  to  suffer  whatever 
God  sees  needful  for  a  manifestation  of  his  righteousness  in  the  covering  over  of  sin. 
Thus  Moses  (Exod.  xxxii.  30 — 33)  and  Paul  (Rom.  ix.  3)  were  willing  to  have  made 
atonement,  if  possible.  Thus  the  sinless  Son  of  God  did  atone  (Rom.  iii.  21 — 26), 
and  sin  is  covered  not  by  the  destruction  of  the  sinner,  but  by  the  righteous  pardon 
of  penitents  trusting  the  atonement  of  Christ. — P. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — Moab  finds  a  more  ^ective  weapon.  In  spite  of  all  his  efforts  and 
confident  expectations,  Balak  fails  in  bringing  down  Jehovah's  curse  on  IsraeL  But 
what  cannot  be  accomplished  in  the  way  Balak  proposes  now  gives  fair  promise  of 
being  speedily  accomplished  in  another  way.  While  Israel  abode  inShittimthe  people 
began  to  commit  whoredom  with  the  daughters  of  Moab. 

I.  ISBAEL,   FDLLT    AWABB    OF    SOME    DANGERS,   IS    EQUALLY    REGARDLESS    OF    MUCH 

GREATER  ONES.  Israel  having  been  refused  passage  through  Edom,  and  having  also 
had  to  fight  its  way  through  the  strong  opposing  forces  of  Sihon  and  Og,  came  at 
last  into  the  plains  of  Moab,  doubtless  expecting  a  similar  conflict  with  Balak.  While 
he  was  looking  for  Israel  to  attack  him,  Israel  would  be  wondering  why  he  left  it 
unmolested.  And  while  Balak  is  waiting  for  the  expected  curse,  Moab  puts  on  a 
peaceful,  harmless  appearance.  What  wag  more  natural  than  that  Israel  should 
enter  into  neighbourly  intercourse  ?  The  nearness  of  the  two  peoples  gave  every 
facility  for  this.  There  must  also  have  been  a  great  charm  in  seeing  fresh  faces  and 
hearing  unaccustomed  voices.  As  day  followed  day  without  any  signs  of  hostility, 
Israelite  and  Moabite  would  mingle  more  freely  together.  If  Balak  had  followed 
the  example  of  Sihon  and  Og,  it  would  have  been  far  better  for  Israel.  The  worst 
enemies  are  those  who,  on  their  first  approach,  put  on  the  smiling  face  and  give  the 
salutation  of  peace.  We  know  what  to  do  with  the  open  enemy,  who  bears  his 
hostility  in  his  countenance ;  but  what  shall  we  do  with  him  who  comes  insidiously, 
to  degrade,  corrupt,  and  utterly  pervert  the  life  within ;  and  this  by  a  very  slow 
process,  of  which  the  victim  at  the  beginning  must  not  be  conscious  at  all,  arid  indeed 
as  little  conscious  as  possible  until  it  is  too  late  for  escape  ?  Puritanism,  so  much 
condemned,  laughed  at,  and  satirised,  is  really  the  only  safety  of  God's  people.  Go 
with  the  courage  which  he  inspires  into  any  den  of  lions,  into  any  physical  peril 
whatsoever,  remembering  what  Jesus  has  said :  "  Whosoever  shall  seek  to  save  his 
life  shall  lose  it ;  and  whosoever  shall  lose  his  life  shall  preserve  it ''  (Luke  xvii.  33) ; 
but  refrain  with  equal  courage  from  everything  that  is  mere  pleasure,  mere  comfort 
of  the  flesh,  for  in  doing  so  you  may  keep  clear  from  some  temptations  in  a  world 
which  is  crowded  with  them.  Remember  that  to  go  in  the  way  of  one  temptation  is 
to  go  in  the  way  of  more  than  one,  perhajps  of  many.  Israel  got  conversing  with  the 
daughters  of  Moab,  and  this  led  to  whoredom,  which  assuredly  was  bad  enough ; 
but  worse  remained,  for  whoredom  led  on  to  idolatry,  and  idolatry  to  the  manifested 
wrath  of  God.  The  devil  was  delighted  when  he  saw  the  sons  of  Israel,  God's  own 
chosen  and  beloved  race,  of  whom  such  glorious  things  had  been  spoken  in  prophecy, 
in  abominable  intercourse  with  the  daughters  of  Moab ;  still  more  delighted  when  he 
saw  the  bowings  to  Moab's  gods ;  and  his  delight  was  crowned  when  24,000  died 
in  the  plague.  One  cannot  enter  a  grocer's  shop  now-a-days  without  noticing 
how  many  things  are  hermetically  sealed,  in  order  to  be  kept  free  from  taint.  The 
very  smallest  crevice  would  be  fatal.  We  cannot  indeed  be  hermetically  sealed — that 
would  be  to  go  out  of  the  world,  and  Christ's  prayer  is,  not  that  we  should  be 
taken  from  the  world,  but  kept  from  the  wicked  one.  But  surely  we  shall  not  bo 
glow  in  seconding  Christ's  prayer  and  effort  with  our  prayer  and  effort.     We  mu(t 


W2  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEB8.  [oh.  xxv.  1—18. 

Kve  in  this  world  as  knowing  how  corruptible  we  are,  and  that  ceaseless  vigilance  it 
the  price  of  spiritual  safety. 

II.    BALAK,  fully  PEBSUADED  of  the  rOWEB  OP  ONE  WEAPON,  IS  OTTEBLT  UNOON- 

BCiorrs  OP  the  gebateb  power  op  another.  Balak,  sending  all  this  long  way  for 
Balaam,  was  utterly  ignorant  of  a  resource  lying  close  at  hand,  which  probably 
began  to  operate  even  while  his  negotiations  with  Balaam  were  in  progress.  The 
world  is  not  conscious  of  its  greatest  resources  against  the  Church  ;  it  does  its  greatest 
damage  unwittingly.  Balaam  certainly  seems  to  have  had  something  to  do  with 
bringing  out  to  its  full  extent  this  power  of  the  daughters  of  Moab  (ch.  xxxi.  16), 
but  it  must  have  been  already  in  action,  revealing  to  him  something  of  the  dis- 
position of  the  Israelites,  before  he  guessed  what  could  be  done  with  it  towards 
utterly  destroying  them.  The  world  inflicts  much  spiritual  mischief  simply  by 
doing  its  own  things  in  its  own  way — pursuing,  with  energy  and  vivacity,  its  godless, 
mammon-worshipping,  pleasure-loving  path,  and  thus  drawing  towards  it  God's 
people,  never  sufficiently  heedful  of  their  steps,  never  sufficiently  looking  away  from 
the  world  to  Jesus.  It  is  in  the  resources  which  the  world  does  not  consider  that  toe 
are  to  look  for  the  greatest  dangers.  Balak  was  simply  counting  the  fighting  men 
of  Moab  ;  the  women  he  considered  of  no  consequence.  The  world,  it  would  seem,  is 
given  to  despise  its  own  weak  ones  as  much  as  it  despises  the  weak  ones  of  the  Church. 
God  takes  weak  ones  to  do  his  work,  but  he  takes  them  consciously,  deliberately,  and 
with  well-ascertained  ends,  serviceable  to  the  good  of  his  people  and  the  glory  of 
his  name.  The  world  also  has  weak  ones  to  do  its  work,  but  it  knows  not  all  they 
do  or  can  do.  The  lustful  daughters  of  Moab  were  more  dangerous  than  a  corps  of 
Amazons,  for  they  led  Israel  into  idolatry,  and  that  was  even  worse  than  if  Israel's 
prime  and  strength  had  been  stretched  dead  on  some  bloody  field.  Women  have 
done  untold  and  peculiar  service  in  the  Church ;  and  what  they  have  done  is  but  a 
small  part  of  their  possible  service,  if  they  would  only  all  waken  to  their  powers  and 
opportunities,  and  if  they  were  only  allowed  to  make  full  proof  of  them.  The  ill 
that  these  daughters  of  Moab  did  is  the  measure  of  the  great  good  that  truly 
Christian  women  may  accomplish.  Notice  that  all  the  daughters  of  Moab  were  not 
as  these  mentioned  here.  There  was  one  daughter  of  Moab,  not  so  many  generations 
after,  of  a  very  different  spirit — Bath,  the  great-grandmother  of  David. — Y. 

Vers.  6 — 15. — Xeal  for  God :  the  result  and  reward  of  it  I.  Zeal  for  God 
1.  The  occasion  on  which  it  was  shown.  The  people  were  passing  through  great 
sufEering,  as  is  evident  from  the  mention  of  the  weeping  crowd  before  the  tabernacle, 
and  the  great  number  who  perished  in  the  plague  (ver.  9) — a  number  much  exceeding 
that  in  the  great  visitation  of  wrath  after  the  rebellion  of  Korah.  God  himself  had 
sentenced  the  leaders  of  the  people  to  a  peculiar  and  shameful  death.  The  people 
had  sinned,  it  would  seem,  even  beyond  their  usual  transgressions,  and  now  they  are 
being  smitten  in  a  way  utterly  to  terrify  and  abase  them.  Yet  Zimri,  a  man  of  high 
rank  in  Israel,  and  Cozbi,  a  woman  of  corresponding  rank  among  her  own  people, 
choose  this  moment  to  commit  a  most  audacious  and  shameless  act  in  the  presence 
of  weeping  Israel.  2.  The  person  who  showed  this  zeal.  Phinehas,  son  of  Eleazar 
the  priest,  and  the  man  who  in  due  time  would  become  priest  himself.  He  might 
have  said,  "  Is  it  laid  on  me  more  than  on  any  one  else  to  become  executioner  of 
Heaven's  wrath  on  this  daring  couple  ?"  or,  "  Doubtless  the  Lord  will  signify  his 
will  concerning  them."  But  holy  indignation  becomes  his  guide,  and  he  rightly 
judges  that  this  is  an  instance  of  presumptuous  sin  deserving  immediate  and  terrible 
retribution.  He  shows  here  the  true  spirit  of  the  servant  of  God  in  an  ofBce  such 
as  that  for  which  he  was  in  training.  Those  who  had  to  do  with  the  tabernacle  as 
closely  as  the  Aaronio  family  thereby  professed  to  be  nearer  God  than  others.  And 
if  their  service  was  anythifig  more  than  a  hollow  form,  then  when  the  honour  of 
Jehovah  was  peculiarly  in  question  it  was  to  be  expected  that  his  true  servants  would 
be  correspondingly  indignant.  What  would  be  thought  of  an  ambassador  who  should 
listen  cool,  unmoved,  and  unresenting  to  the  greatest  insults  upon  the  nation  from 
which  he  had  come  ?  The  act  of  Phinehas  was  not  that  of  a  common  Israelite ;  there 
was  not  merely  indignation  because  of  Zimri's  callous  indifference  to  the  sufferings 
»nd  sorrows  of  his  brethren ;  he  was  zealous  for  the  Lord.    It  was  daring,  shameleu 


OH.  XXV.  1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  853 

tin  which  provoked  his  wrath ;  it  was  as  if  he  looked  to  heaven  in  going  forth  and 
said,  "  Against  thee,  thee  only  have  they  sinned."  To  be  easily  tolerant  in  the 
presence  of  great  sins  shows  a  heart  far  from  right  towards  God.  Mere  cynical 
observations  on  the  frailties  and  eccentricities  of  fallen  human  nature  do  not  fall 
with  good  grace  from  the  lips  of  the  Christian,  however  much  they  may  consist  with 
the  conduct  of  a  man  of  the  world.  3.  The  way  in  which  the  zeal  was  shorvn.  A 
violent  and  extreme  measure  certainly,  but  we  are  not  allowed  to  judge  it.  God  has 
taken  judgment  out  of  our  hands  by  unmistakably  indicating  his  approval.  Wb 
must  distinguish  between  the  spirit  of  the  act  and  the  outward  mode  of  its  com- 
mission. If  the  spirit  and  essence  of  the  act  be  right,  then  the  mode  is  a  secondary 
matter.  The  mode  largely  depends  on  the  times.  Criminals  were  punished  in 
England  only  a  few  centuries  ago  in  ways  which  would  not  be  tolerated  now.  What 
is  wanted  is  that  we  should  emulate  the  zeal  of  Phinehas  without  imitating  the 
expression  of  it.  One  might  almost  say,  better  run  a  javelin  through  sinners  than 
have  that  easy-going  toleration  for  sins  which  some  show  who  call  themselves  godly. 
If  God  is  worth  serving  at  all,  he  is  worth  serving  with  zeal.  Zeal  according  to 
knowledge  must  be  as  free  from  mock-charity  and  humility  on  the  one  hand  as  from 
bigotry  on  the  other.  The  more  men  there  are  in  the  Church  of  the  stamp  of  Phinehas 
the  better.  There  are  even  harder  things  to  be  done  now-a-daye  than  to  thrust 
javelins  through  shameless  fornicators.  It  needs  a  pure  and  fervent  zeal  to  take 
one's  stand  with  the  few,  or  even  alone,  against  all  sorts  of  worldly  principles  and 

Practices  prevailing  in  what  ought  to  be  God's  kingdom  through  Glirist  Jesus.    When 
'aul  withstood  Peter  to  the  face  because  he  was  to  be  blamed,  he  did  something  quite 
as  hard  as  if  he  had  run  a  javelin  through  him. 

II.  Thb  result.  The  plague  was  stayed.  A  strange  difference  in  method,  is  it 
not,  from  that  adopted  on  the  occasion  when  Moses  commanded  Aaron  to  take  the 
censer  and  stand  in  the  midst  of  the  congregation,  making  atonement  for  them  ?  (ch. 
xvi.  46),  Why  was  not  something  of  this  sort  done  now  ?  Did  Moses  feel  that  it 
would  be  of  no  use,  or  was  his  tongue  mysteriously  stayed  from  the  command  ?  It 
is  plain  that  Jehovah  felt  his  honour  was  seriously  in  question.  The  people  had 
actually  bowed  before  idols.  The  chosen  race  is  disintegrating  within  sight  of  the 
promised  land.  The  patriotism  of  the  theocracy  is  dead.  The  shout  of  a  king 
(ch.  xxiii.  21)  is  not  met  by  the  answering  shout  of  confiding  and  grateful  subjects. 
They  have  utterly  forgotten  that  God  is  a  jealous  God  (Exod.  xx.  5).  Stay  1  there 
is  one  man  at  least,  and  he,  be  it  marked,  in  the  priestly  succession,  who  does  show 
an  adequate  jealousy  against  these  idols,  so  suddenly  and  ungratefully  exalted  over 
against  Jehovah.  It  is  the  act  of  only  one  man ;  but  the  act  of  one  man  rightly 
moved,  full  of  holy  indignation,  energy,  and  heroism,  is  enough  to  stem  Jehovah's 
wrath.  Mark,  it  is  not  said  that  Phinehas  did  this  in  order  to  stop  the  plague.  The 
narrative  is  evidently  intended  to  convey  the  impression  that  what  he  did  was  in 
holy  indignation  at  the  slight  put  upon  Jehovah.  But  a  righteous  action  is  never 
wanting  in  good  results.  The  zeal  of  Phinehas  for  Jehovah  stood  as  an  atonement 
for  the  monstrous  disobedience  of  Israel. 

III.  The  eewabd.  The  result  was  in  itself  a  reward.  To  a  man  of  the  stamp  of 
Phinehas  it  must  surely  have  been  no  small  joy  to  see  the  plague  stayed.  May  we 
not  presume  that  even  the  leaders  escaped  their  doom,  as  in  a  most  comprehensive 
amnesty  ?  £ut  there  is  a  specified  reward  beside.  Phinehas  has  shown  his  fitness 
to  wear  Aaron's  robes ;  nay,  in  a  sense  he  has  worn  them,  seeing  he  has  made  atone- 
ment. The  real  reward  for  every  one  faithful  to  his  present  opportunity  is  to  enlarge 
his  opportunity  and  give  him  more  and  higher  service.  He  who  has  the  joy  of 
faithfulness  in  present  and  perhaps  humble  duties  cannot  have  a  greater  joy  than 
that  of  faithfulness  in  all  of  larger  and  more  conspicuous  service  that  may  come 
before  him.  Our  Lord  himself,  being  zealous  for  his  Father  on  earth  (whiph  the 
formal  and  professed  custodians  of  the  Divine  honour  were  not),  cleansing  his 
Father's  house  from  profane  and  even  unrighteous  uses,  was  advanced  to  still  higher 
service  in  the  glorious  opportunities  belonging  to  a  place  at  God's  right  hand.  Among 
men  there  is  lamentable  waste,  humiliating  and  ridiculous  failure,  because  men  are 
•0  seldom  proportioned  to  the  ofiioes  they  fill.  The  fit  man  in  the  great  multitude  of 
instances  does  not  seem  to  get  his  chance.    But  in  Qod's  service  every  one  really  gett 

NUVBEBS.  X  A 


854 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[oh.  xztl  1 — 65. 


his  chance.  Phinehas  got  his  chance  here.  Everything  depended  on  himself.  The 
act  was  the  outcome  of  his  honest,  fiery,  devoted,  godly  heart.  He  had  not  to  go 
to  his  father  or  to  Moses,  saying,  "  Think  you  I  should  do  this  thing?  "  If  there  is 
zeal  in  us,  occasion  will  not  he  lacking.  Phinehas  had  been  required  to  show  the 
zeal  of  the  destroyer,  and  it  proved  to  be  also  <A«  zeal  of  the  preserver.  We  have  to 
be  zealous  for  a  God  who  is  not  only  righteous  and  holy,  and  jealous  of  rivalry  from 
any  other  god  whatsoever,  but  also  loving,  and  who  desires  not  the  death  of  a  sinner. 
The  zeal  that  can  do  nothing  but  protest,  denounce,  and  destroy,  God  will  never 
approve  or  reward.  The  becoming,  fruitful,  and  praiseworthy  zeal  under  the  gospel 
is  that  which,  following  in  the  train  of  Paul,  is  all  things  to  all  men  in  order  to  save 
some. — Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  XXVI. 


The  second  musterino  (vers.  1  —  65). 
Yer.  1. — It  came  to  pass  after  the  plague. 
This  plague  was  the  last  event  which  seriously 
diminished  the  numbers  of  the  Israelites ; 
perhaps  it  was  the  last  event  which  dimin- 
ished them  at  all,  for  it  seems  to  be  through- 
out implied  that  none  died  except  through 
their  own  fault.  It  is  often  supposed  that 
this  plague  carried  off  the  last  survivors  of 
the  generation  condemned  at  Kadesh  (see 
ver.  64) ;  but  this  is  opposed  to  the  statement 
in  Deut.  ii.  14,  16,  and  is  essentially  im- 
probable. The  victims  of  the  plague  would 
surely  be  those  who  had  joined  themselves 
to  Baal-Peor  ;  and  these  again  would  surely 
be  the  younger,  not  the  older,  men  in  Israel, 
It  is  part  of  the  moral  of  the  story  that  these 
offenders  deprived  themselves,  not  merely  of 
a  few  remaining  days,  but  of  many  years  of 
happy  rest  which  might  have  been  theirs. 

ver.  2. — Take  the  sum  of  all  the  con- 
gregation. This  was  certainly  not  com- 
manded with  a  view  to  the  war  against 
Midian,  which  was  of  no  militaiy  import- 
ance, and  was  actually  prosecuted  with  no 
more  than  12,000  men  (ch.   xxxi.   6).     A 

general  command  to  "vex  the  Midianites" 
ad  indeed  been  given  (ch.  xxv.  17)  on  the 
principle  of  just  retribution  (cf.  2  Thess.  i 
6),  but  no  attempt  seems  to  lu.ve  been  made 
to  act  upon  it  until  a  more  specific  order  was 
issued  (ch.  xxxi.  2).  In  any  case  the  present 
mustering  has  to  do  with  somethmg  far 
more  important,  viz.,  with  the  approaching 
settlement  of  the  people  in  its  own  territory. 
This  is  clear  from  the  instructions  given  m 
vers.  52 — 56,  and  from  the  distribution  of 
the  tribes  into  families.  From  twenty  years. 
See  on  ch.  i.  3. 

Ver.  3. — Spake  with  them,  ».  e.  no  doubt 
with  the  responsible  chiefs,  who  must  have 
assisted  in  this  census,  as  in  the  previous  one 
(ch.  i.  4),  although  the  fact  is  not  men- 
tioned. 

Ver.  4. — Take  the  sum  of  the  people. 
These  words  are  not  in  the  text,  but  are 
borrowed  from  rer.  2.    Nothing  is  set  down  in 


the  original  hnt  the  brief  instruction  given 
to  the  census-takers — "from  twenty  years 
old  and  upward,  as  on  the  former  occasion." 
And  the  children  of  Israel  which  went  forth 
out  of  the  land  of  £gypt.  This  is  the 
punctuation  of  the  Targums  and  most  of  the 
versions.  The  Septuagint,  however,  detaches 
these  words  from  the  previous  sentence  and 
makes  them  a  general  heading  for  the  cata- 
logue which  follows.  It  may  DC  objected  to 
tms  that  the  people  now  numbered  did  not 
come  out  of  Egypt,  a  fuU  half  having  been 
bom  in  the  wild.emeBs,  but  see  on  ch.  zxiii. 
22 ;  zxiv.  8. 

Ver.  6. — The  children  of  Keiihen._  The 
four  names  here  registered  as  distinguishing 
families  within  the  tribe  of  Eeuben  agree 
with  the  lists  given  in  Gen.  xlvl.  9  ;  Exod. 
vi.  14  ;  1  Chron.  v.  8. 

Ver.  7. — These  .  .  the  families  of  the 
Benbenitea.  The  mustering  according  to 
families  (nhSE'P— Septuagint,  J^/ioi)  was 
the  distinguishing  feature  of  this  census, 
because  it  was  preparatory  to  a  territorial 
settlement  in  Canaan,  in  which  the  unity  of 
the  family  should  be  preserved  as  well  as  the 
unity  of  the  tribe. 

Ver.  8. — And  the  sons  of  Falln.  This 
particular  genealogy  is  added  because  of  the 
special  interest  much  attached  to  the  fate 
of  certain  members  of  the  family.  The 
plural  "sons"  is  to  be  explained  here  not 
from  the  fact  (which  has  nothing  to  do  with 
it)  that  several  grandsons  are  afterwards 
mentioned,  but  from  the  fact  that  ^3!3-1  ("and 
the  sons  ")  was  the  conventional  heading  of 
a  family  list,  and  was  written  do\^  by  the 
transcriber  before  he  noticed  that  only  one 
name  followed, 

Ver.  10.— Swallowed  them  up  together 

with  Korah.  mp-n^l  Dp'K  P^39i  Sep- 
tuagint,  Karciricv  avroit  <ta.i  Kopi.  This 
distinct  statement,  which  is  not  modified  in 
the  Targums,  seems  decisive  as  to  the  fate  of 
Korah.  If  indeed  it  were  quite  certain  from 
the  detailed  narrative  in  ch.  xvi.  that  Korah 
perished  with  his  own  company,  and  not 


OH  XXVI.  1 — 65.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS, 


865 


with  the  Benhenites,  then  it  might  be 
deemed  necessary  to  force  this  statement 
into  accordance  with  that  certainty ;  but  it 
is  nowhere  stated,  or  even  clearly  implied, 
that  he  perished  by  fire,  and  therefore  there 
is  no  excuse  for  doing  Tiolence  to  the  obvious 
meaning  of  this  verse.  Eorah,  Bathan,  and 
Abiram  were  swallowed  up,  we  are  told,  at 
the  same  time  that  Eorah's  company  were 
consumed  by  fire  ;  that  is  a  clear  statement, 
and  cannot  be  set  aside  by  any  supposed 
necessity  for  avenging  the  sacrilegious  am- 
bition of  Korah  by  the  element  of  fire.  And 
they  became  a  sign.  The  Hebrew  D2  pro- 
perly means  a  banner  or  ensign,  and  is  un- 
usual in  this  sense.  It  exactly  corresponds, 
however,  to  the  Greek  aijiiuov,  and  has  no 
doubt  the  same  secondary  signification  —  a 
something  made  conspicuous  in  order  to 
attract  attention  and  enforce  a  warning  (cf. 
ch.  xvi  30,  38). 

Ver.  11. — The  children  of  Korah  died  not. 
The  confused  nature  of  the  narrative  in  ch. 
xvi.  is  well  exemplified  by  this  statement; 
we  should  certainly  have  supposed  from  ch. 
xvi.  32  that  Korah's  sons  had  perished  with 
him,  if  we  were  not  here  told  to  the  con- 
trary. The  sons  of  Korah  are  frequently 
mentioned  among  the  Levites,  and  Samuel 
himself  would  seem  to  have  been  of  them 
(see  on  1  Chron.  vi.  22,  28,  83—38,  and 
titles  to  Ps.  xlii.,  Ixxxviii,  &c) ;  it  is,  how- 
ever, slightly  doubtful  whether  theKohathite 
Korah  of  1  Chron.  vL  22,  the  ancestor  of 
Samuel,  is  the  same  as  the  Izharite  Korah, 
the  ancestor  of  Heman,  in  1  Chron.  vi.  38, 

"Ver.  12. — The  sons  of  Simeon.  As  in  Gen. 
xlvi.  10  ;  Exod.  vi.  15,  with  the  omission  of 
Ohad,  who  may  not  have  founded  any  family. 
In  such  cases  it  is  no  doubt  possible  that 
there  were  children,  but  that  for  some  reason 
they  failed  to  hold  together,  and  became 
attached  to  other  families.  In  1  Chron.  iv, 
24  the  sons  of  Simeon  appear  as  Nemuel, 
Jamin,  Jarib,  Zerah,  and  Shauh  In  Genesis 
and  Exodus  the  first  appears  as  JemueL 
These  minute  variations  are  only  important 
as  showing  that  Divine  inspiration  did  not 
preserve  the  sacred  records  from  errors  of 
transcription. 

Ver.  15. — The  children  of  Gad.  C£  Gen. 
ilvi.  16,  the  only  other  enumeration  of  the 
sons  of  Crad. 

Ver.  20. — The  sons  of  Judah  after  their ' 
families.  The  Beni-Judah,  or  "  men  of 
Judah,"  according  to  their  sub-tribal  divisions, 
are  clearly  distinguished  from  the  "  sons  of 
Judah "  as  individuals,  two  of  whom  are 
mentioned  in  the  previous  verse.  Of  the 
families  of  Judah,  three  were  named  after 
«ons,  two  after  grandsons.  As  the  Pharzites 
lemained  a  distinct  family  apart  from  the 
EamuUtes  and  Hezronites,  it  may  be  sup- 


posed that  Pharez  had  other  sons  not  men- 
tioned here,  or  in  Gen.  xlvi,  12,  or  in  1  Chron. 
ii  3,  i,  6. 

Ver.  23. — The  sons  of  Issachar.  As  in 
Gen.  xlvi.  13  ;  1  Chron.  vii.  1,  except  that 
in  Genesis  we  have  Job  instead  of  Jashub  ; 
the  two  names,  however,  appear  to  have  the 
same  meaning. 

Ver.  26. — The  sons  of  Zehnlnn.  Aa  In 
Gen.  xlvL  14. 

Ver.  29. — The  sons  of  Manasseh.  There 
is  considerable  difficulty  about  the  families 
of  this  tribe,  because  they  are  not  recorded 
in  Genesis,  while  the  details  preserved  in 
1  Chron.  vii.  14  — 17  are  so  obscure  and 
fragmentary  as  to  be  extremely  perplexing. 
According  to  the  present  enumeration  there 
were  eight  families  in  Manasseh,  one  named 
after  his  son  Machir,  one  after  hia  grandson 
Gilead,  and  the  rest  after  his  great-grand- 
sons. The  list  given  in  Josh.  xvii.  1,  2 
agrees  with  this,  except  that  the  Machirites 
and  the  Gileadites  are  apparently  identified. 
It  appears  from  the  genealogy  ia  1  Chron, 
vii.  that  the  mother  of  Machir  was  a  stranger 
from  Aram,  the  country  of  Laban.  Tbia 
may  perhaps  account  for  the  fact  that 
Machir's  son  received  the  name  of  Gilead, 
for  Gilead  was  the  border  land  between  Aram 
and  Canaan ;  it  more  probably  explains  the 
subsequent  allotment  of  territory  in  that 
direction  to  the  Machirites  (ch.  xxxii.  40). 
GUead  appears  again  as  a  proper  name  in 
Judges  xi.  2. 

Ver.  33. — Zelophehad  .  .  had  no  sons, 
but  daughters.  This  is  mentioned  here 
because  the  case  was  to  come  prominently 
before  the  lawgiver  and  the  nation  (cf.  ch. 
xxviL  1 ;  xxxvi.  1  ;  1  Chron.  vii.  15). 

Ver.  35. — The  sons  of  Ephraim.  These 
formed  but  four  families,  three  named  after 
sons,  one  after  a  grandson.  In  1  Chron.  vii, 
21  two  other  sons  of  Ephraim  are  mentioned 
who  were  killed  in  their  father's  lifetime, 
and  a  third,  Beriah,  who  was  the  ancestor  of 
Joshua.  He  does  not  seem  to  have  founded 
a  separate  family,  possibly  because  he  waa  so 
very  much  younger  than  his  brothers. 

Ver.  38. — The  sons  of  Benjamin.  These 
formed  seven  families,  five  named  after  sons, 
two  after  grandsons.  .  The  list  in  Gen.  xlvi. 
21  contains  three  names  here  omitted,  and 
the  rest  are  much  changed  in  form.  There 
is  stiU  more  divergence  between  these  and 
the  longer  genealogies  found  in  1  Chron.  vii. 
6 — 12  ;  viii.  1—5  sq.  It  is  possible  that  the 
family  of  Becher  (Genesis),  who  had  nine 
sons  (1  Chron.),  went  under  another  name, 
because  there  was  a  family  of  Becherites  in 
Ephraim  (ver.  85) ;  and  similarly  the  family 
of  the  Ephraimite  Beriah  (1  Chron.)  may 
have  ceded  its  name  in  favour  of  the  Asherita 
family  of  Beriites  (ver,  44).  But  it  must  be 
acknowledged  that  the  various  genealogiai 
A  a2 


356 


THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBEBS. 


[oh.  zxti.  1 — 65. 


of  Benjamin  cannot  be  reconciled  aa  they 

stand. 

Yer.  42. — The  sons  of  San.  These  all 
formed  bnt  one  family,  named  titer  Shuham 
(elsewhere  Hnshim),  the  only  son  of  Dan 
that  is  mentioned.  It  is  possible  that  Dan 
had  other  children,  whose  descendants  were 
incorporated  with  the  Shuhamites. 

Ver.  44.— The  children  of  Asher.  Of 
these  three  families  were  named  after  sons, 
two  after  grandsons.  In  Gen.  xlvi  17 ;  1 
Chron.  rii  SO,  81  a  sixth   name  occurs. 


Ishnab,  or  Isnah.  It  b  possible  that  its 
similarity  to  the  following  name  of  Isui  or 
Ishui  led  to  its  accidental  omission  ;  but  if 
the  family  continued  to  exist  in  Israel,  such 
an  omission  could  scarcely  be  overlooked. 

Ver.  48. — The  sons  of  Naphtali.  As  in 
Gen.  zlvi.  24  ;  1  Chron.  vii.  13. 

Yer.  61. — ^These  were  the  numbered  of  the 
children  of  Israel.  The  results  of  this  census 
as  compared  with  the  former  may  be  tabu- 
lated thus :— 


Trlb*. 

No.  of 
families. 

4 

FInt  Cennu. 

Second  Cennu. 

DeeniMe. 

IncreaMb 

Reuben. 

46,500 

43,730 

6p.  c. 

Simeon. 

6 

69,300 

22,200 

63    „ 

Gad. 

7 

45,650 

40,600 

11     » 

Judah. 

6 

74,600 

76,600 

•   •         •   • 

2ip.  & 

Issaehar. 

4 

64,400 

64,300 

*  •         •  • 

18      » 

Zebulun. 

3 

67,400 

60,600 

■    •         •  • 

Si    » 

Ephraim. 

4 

40,500 

82,600 

20    „ 

Manasseh. 

8 

32,200 

52,700 

•  •        •  • 

63      n 

Benjamin. 

7 

35,400 

45,600 

•  •        «  * 

29  .; 

Dan. 

1 

62,700 

64,400 

•  •        •  • 

2J    „ 

Asher. 

6 

41,500 

63,400 

■  •        •  • 

28      „ 

Naphtali 

4 

53,400 

45,400 

15    „ 

603,650 

It  is  evident  that  the  numbers  were  taken 
by  centuries,  aa  before,  although  an  odd 
thirty  appears  now  in  the  return  for  Reuben, 
as  an  odd  fifty  appeared  then  in  the  return 
for  Gad.  It  has  been  proposed  to  explain 
this  on  the  ground  of  their  both  being 
pastoral  tribes ;  but  if  the  members  Of  these 
tribes  were  more  scattered  than  the  rest,  it 
would  be  just  in  their  case  that  we  should 
expect  to  find  round  numbers.  The  one 
fact  which  these  figures  establish  in  a  startling 
way  is,  that  while  the  nation  as  a  whole  re- 
mained nearly  stationary  in  point  of  numbers, 
the  various  tribes  show  a  most  unexpected 
variation.  Manasseh,  e.g.,  has  increased  his 
population  63  per  cent,  in  spite  of  the  fact 
that  there  is  not  one  man  left  of  sixty  years 
of  age,  whUe  Simeon  has  decreased  in  the 
same  i>roportion.  There  is  indeed  little  diffi- 
culty in  accounting  for  diminishing  numbers 
amidst  so  many  hardships,  and  after  so  many 
plagues.  The  fact  that  Zimri  belonged  to 
the  tribe  of  Simeon,  and  that  this  tribe  was 
omitted  soon  after  from  the  blessing  of 
Moses  (Deut.  xxxiii.);  may  easily  lead  to  the 
conclusion  that  Simeon  was  more  than  any 
other  tribe  involved  in  the  sin  of  Baal-Peor 
and  the  punishment  which  followed.  But 
when  we  compare,  e.g.,  the  tvrin  tribes  of 
Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  concerning  whom 
nothing  distinctive  is  either  stated  or  hinted, 
whether  bad  or  good  j  and  when  we  find  that 
the  one  has  decreased  20  per  cent,  and  the 
other  increased  63  per  cent,  during  the  same 
taterral)  and  under  th*  same  general  circum- 


601,730 

stances,  we  cannot  even  guess  at  the  causes 
which  must  have  been  at  work  to  produce  so 
striking  a  difference.  It  is  evident  that  each 
tribe  had  its  own  history  apart  from  the 
general  history  of  the  nation — a  history 
which  had  the  most  important  results  for  its  ^ 
own  members,  but  of  which  we  know  almost 
nothing.  It  is  observable,  however,  that 
all  the  tribes  under  the  leadership  of  Judah 
increased,  whilst  all  those  in  the  camp  of 
Reuben  decreased. 

Ver.  63. — According  to  the  number  of  the 
names.  The  intention  clearly  was  that  the 
extent  of  the  territory  assigned  to  each  tribe, 
and  called  by  its  name  (ver.  66,  b.),  should  be 
regulated  according  to  its  numbers  at  the 
discretion  of  the  rulers. 

Ver.  55. — Notwithstanding  the  land  shall 
be  divided  by  lot.  This  can  only  be  recon- 
ciled with  the  preceding  order  by  assuming 
that  the  lot  was  to  determine  the  situation 
of  the  territory,  the  actual  boundaries  being 
left  to  the  discretion  of  the  rulers.  Recourse 
was  had  as  far  as  possible  to  the  lot  in  order 
to  refer  the  matter  directly  to  God,  of  whose 
will  and  gift  they  held  the  land  (cf.  Prov. 
xvi.  83;  Acts  i.  26).  The  lot  would  also 
remove  any  suspicion  that  the  more  numerous 
tribes,  such  as  Judah  or  Dan,  were  unfairly 
favoured  (ver.  66). 

Yer.  68. — These  are  the  families  of  the 
Levites.  The  three  Levitical  sub-tribes  have 
been  named  in  the  preceding  verse,  and  the 
present  enumeration  of  families  is  an  inde. 
pendent  one.   The  Libnites  were  Gershonitei 


OH.  XXVI.  1—66.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  NDMBEES. 


367 


!ch.  iiL  21),  the  Hebronites  and  Korathitea 
or  Korahites)  were  Kohathites  (oh.  iii.  19 ; 
xri.  1),  the  Mahlites  and  Mushites  were 
Meran'tes  (ch.  iii.  83).  Two  other  families, 
the  Shimites  (ch.  iii.  21)  and  the  IJzzielites 
(ch.  ilL  27  ;  1  Chron.  xzvi.  23,  and  cf.  Exod. 
Ti.  22 ;  1  Chron.  zziv.  24,  25),  are  omitted 
here,  perhaps  because  the  list  is  imperfect 
(see,  however,  the  note  on  ver.  62). 

Ver.  59. — Jochebed,  the  daughter  of  Levi, 
whom  her  mother  bare  to  Levi  in  Egypt. 
Eather,  "whom  she  (rIp'K)  bare."  The 
missing  subject  is  usually  supplied,  as  in  the 
A.  v.,  and  there  certainly  seems  no  more 
difficulty  in  doing  so  here  than  in  1  Kings  i, 
6.  Some  critics  take  "  Atha  "  as  a  proper 
name — "  whom  Atba  bare ; "  others  render 
"who  was  bom;"  this,  however,  like  the 
Septuagint,  9  Itikc  tovtovs  rif  Aivi,  requires 
a  change  of  reading.  Perhaps  the  text  is  im- 
perfect. The  statement  here  made,  what- 
ever difficulties  it  creates,  is  in  entire  agree- 
ment with  Ezod.  vi.  20 ;  1  Chron.  xxiii.  6, 
12, 13,  and  other  passages.  If  two  Amrams, 
the  later  of  whom  lived  some  200  years  after 
the  earlier,  have  been  confused  (as  we  seem 
driven  to  believe),  the  confusion  is  consist- 


ently maintained  through  all  the  extant 
records  (see  the  note  on  ch.  iii.  28). 

Ver.  62.— Those  that  were  numbered  of 
them.  We  have  here  again  a  round  number 
(23,000),  showing  an  increase  of  1000  since  the 
former  census.  It  ia  evident  that  the  males 
of  Levi  were  not  counted  by  anything  less 
than  hundreds,  and  probable  that  they  were 
counted  by  thousands  (see  note  on  ch.  iii 
29).  The  smaUness  of  the  increase  in  a 
tribe  which  was  excepted  from  the  general 
doom  at  Kadesh,  and  which  in  other  ways 
was  so  favourably  situated,  seems  to  point  to 
some  considerable  losses.  It  ia  possible  that 
portions  of  the  tribe  suffered  severely  for 
their  share  in  the  rebellion  of  Eorah  ;  if  ao, 
the  families  of  the  Shimites  and  of  the  Uz- 
zieljles  may  have  been  so  much  reduced  aa 
to  be  merged  in  the  remaining  families. 

Ver.  66.— There  was  not  left  a  man  of 
them.  This  had  been  known  to  be  prac- 
tically the  case  before  they  left  the  wilder- 
ness, properly  so  called  (Dent.  ii.  14, 15),  but 
it  was  now  ascertained  for  certain.  For  the 
necessary  exceptions  to  the  statement  see  note 
on  cii.  xiv.  24. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 65. — The  final  numhering  qf  the  elect.  Both  the  nnmberinga  of  the 
children  of  Israel  are  to  be  apirituafly  interpreted  of  that  knowledge  which  God 
has  of  his  elect,  and  of  their  inscription  in  the  registers  of  life.  The  people  of 
God  are  to  him  as  his  flock  is  to  the  shepherd ;  he  knows  his  sheep,  and  calleth 
his  own  sheep  by  name,  and  leadeth  them  out  to  the  journey,  or  leadeth  them  in 
to  rest.  Again,  the  people  of  God  are  to  him  as  his  army  is  to  the  captain ; 
they  are  drawn  up  (rirayiiivot,  Acts  xiii.  48)  and  set  in  array  unto  eternal  life, 
every  one  in  his  proper  place,  so  that  each  may  act  most  to  his  own  advantage,  and 
to  the  advantage  of  all.  "The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his"  (2  Tim.  ii  19), 
according  to  the  saying,  "  I  know  thee  by  name  "  (Exod.  xxxiii.  17  ;  of.  Isa.  xliii.  1), 
and,  "  I  will  not  blot  out  his  name  out  of  the  book  of  life  "  (Bev.  iii.  5  ;  cf.  Philip,  iv. 
S).  But  as  the  numberings  of  Israel  were  two,  and  a  great  distinction  between 
them,  so  God's  knowledge  of  his  elect  has  a  double  character,  which  is  in  some  im- 
portant respects  strongly  contrasted.  The  first  numbering  (see  the  homiletic  notes 
on  ch.  i. )  was  for  that  march  which  was  to  prove  a  fieiy  trial  to  all,  and  did  in  fact 
involve  the  destruction  of  most,  albeit  entirely  through  their  own  default ;  the  second 
Durabeiing  was  for  the  actual  entry  into  and  possession  of  their  long-promised  rest. 
In  like  manner  there  is  a  twofold  election  on  the  part  of  God,  according  to  which  his 
people  are  counted  his  indeed,  and  are  personally  known  to  him.  There  is  the  elec- 
tion unto  grace,  whereby  we  have  been  called  out  of  darkness,  and  made  the  soldiers 
of  the  cross,  and  assigned  our  place  in  the  "  one  body"  (Col.  iii.  15),  to  share  in  its 
privileges  and  trials,  its  strifes  and  consolations ;  there  is  also  the  election  unto  glory, 
whereby,  when  the  probation  is  past  and  the  temptation  overcome,  we  are  numbered 
imto  eternal  life  and  inheritance  among  the  saints.  On  this  distinction  hangs  all  the 
teaching  of  this  chapter.  Consider,  therefore,  with  respect  to  this  mustering  as  a 
whole — 

L  That  there  should  have  been  but  one  census  taken,  since  all  who  vtorb 

NUMBERED  AT  SiNAI  WERE  NUMBERED  FOR  VICTORY  AND  FOR  SPEEDY  INHERITANCE  IN 

Canaan.    That  a  second  muster  was  needful  at  all  was  entirely  due  to  the  rebellion 
at  Kadesh,  and  the  subsequent  rejection  of  that  generation.    Even  so  there  is  in  th< 


368  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBBB8.  [oh.  xxvl  1—68. 

will  of  God  concerning  ns,  as  declared  at  large  in  the  gospel,  but  one  election  and 
one  enrolling  in  the  ranks  of  salvation.  All  who  are  called  to  grace  are  designed 
for  glory  ;  none  are  enlisted  under  the  cross  but  may,  and  should,  attain  the  crown  ; 
the  Christian  name  and  calling  is  not  a  mockery  in  any  case.  That  there  is  a  double 
election,  that  names  may  be  blotted  out  of  the  book  of  life,  that  it  is  not  possible 
to  maintain  a  consistent  scheme  of  salvation  on  the  ground  of  the  Divine  predestina- 
tion alone,  is  all  due,  and  only  due,  to  the  sin  and  "iwardiee  of  men,  which  does  not 
indeed  cancel  the  election  or  impair  the  glory  of  God's  Church,  but  does  alter  the 
personal  composition  of  that  Church. 

IL  That  as  a  fact  not  one  (ordinabt)  name  remained  in  the  second  MnsTBB 
WHICH  BELONGED  TO  THE  FIRST.  Even  80  there  is  not  in  any  case  an  assurance  that 
those  who  are  called  to  grace  will  persevere  unto  glory.  Not  all  indeed  to^l,  but  all 
mai/,  be  lost  through  their  own  rebellion.  The  two  lists,  of  the  baptised  and  of  the 
finally  saved,  ougkt  (in  a  true  sense)  to  be  coincident ;  as  •  fact  they  will  no  doubt 
be  startlingly  dissimilar. 

IIL  That  those  foemebly  enrolled  DiaAPFEABED  one  bt  one,  accobdino  to  the 

DECLAKATION  OF  GOD,  BECAUSE  THEY  HAD  REFUSED  AT   KADESH  TO  ENTER  INTO  BEST. 

Even  so  if  men  fall  out  of  the  number  of  such  as  are  being  saved  (ol  auZiiuvot,  Acts 
ii.  47),  it  is  simply  because  they  have  refused  to  enter  upon  their  lot,  and  have  coimted 
themselves  unworthy  of,  or  unequal  to,  the  attainment  of  eternal  life. 

IV.  That,  nevertheless,  some  names  webb  found  in  both  lists  ;  as  those  of  Caleb, 
Joshua,  Eleazar,  and  presumably  many  of  the  Levites.  Even  so  it  is  abundantly 
evident,  not  only  from  the  testimony  of  Scripture,  but  from  the  example  of  our 
brethren,  that  nothing  in  our  probation  need  be  fatal  to  our  hopes,  if  only  we  be  true 
to  God  and  to  ourselves.  And  note  that  here  is  one  of  the  great  contrasts  between 
that  dispensation  and  ours,  that  whereas  only  two  individuals  out  of  the  twelve  tribes 
obtained  inheritance  at  the  last,  there  will  be  of  us  "  a  great  multitude  whom  no  man 
can  number."    Nevertheless,  we  have  the  same  warning  (cf.  Luke  xiii.  23,  24). 

V.  That  in  each  case  the  mustebinq  was  limited  to  the  same  class  of  men, 
VIZ.,  such  as  were  fit  to  bear  arms.  Even  so  there  is  no  difierence  between  election 
to  grace  and  to  glory  as  far  as  the  position  and  character  of  the  individual  is  con- 
cerned. The  two  states  are  so  far  one,  even  when  looked  at  from  the  side  of  man,  that 
whoso  is  called  to  the  one  needs  nothing  more  to  be  ready  for  the  other  ;  he  only  needs 
to  remain  what  he  is,  a  soldier  of  Christ,  in  order  to  be  crowned  (cf.  Eev.  ii.  7,  &c.). 

VI.  That  the  total  number  of  all  Israel  remained  pbactically  stationaby  ; 
so  that  as  many  entered  after  all  as  had  refused  at  Kadesh.  Even  so  God  will  have 
his  kingdom  filled  (Luke  xiv.  21 — ^23),  and  his  calling  is  without  repentance  (Eom. 
xi.  29) ;  so  that  if  some  fall  short  of  salvation,  others  will  be  found  to  take  their  place. 
And  note  that  the  long  waiting  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness  was  due  to  the  necessity 
of  an  evil  generation  dying  out,  and  another  growing  up  to  equal  it  in  numbers.  It 
may  be  that  the  long  and  unexpected  tarrying  of  Christ  is  due  to  a  like  necessity ; 
that  the  number  of  the  elect  is  slowly  filled  up  amidst  the  defection  and  unworthiness 
cf  so  many. 

VII.  That  the  vabious  tbibes  of  Israel  showed  a  remarkable  variation  ;  some 
showing  a  great  increase,  others  a  decrease  quite  as  great.  Even  so  while  the 
Church  of  Christ  as  a  whole  maintains,  it  may  be,  its  position  relative  to  the  rest  of 
the  world,  how  great  has  been  the  variation  in  size  and  importance  of  various  branches 
of  the  church  I  Think,  e.  g.,  what  the  Greek -speaking  Churches  were  at  one  time, 
and  how  they  are  now  reduced ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  to  what  relative  importance 
have  the  English-speaking  Churches  grown  from  small  beginnings. 

VIII.  That  in  one  case  we  can  trace  the  cause  of  decline  with  some  assue- 
ANCE.  Simeon,  the  tribe  of  Zimri,  omitted  in  the  blessing  of  Moses,  must  have  joined 
himself  more  especially  to  Baal-Peor.  Even  so  the  one  thing  which  we  can  un- 
hesitatingly assign  as  the  fruitful  cause  of  loss  of  spiritual  life  and  decay  of  Churches 
is  immorality.  Doubtless  purity  of  doctrine  is  most  potent  for  good,  but  impurity 
of  life  is  still  more  potent  for  evil.  That  Church  will  train  fewest  souls  for  heaven 
which  gives  most  place  to  those  fleshly  lusts  which  war  against  the  soul.  And  note 
that  this  census  was  taken  "  after  the  plague  "  which  followed  on  the  harlotry  of 
Baal-Peor;  for  the  thousands  who  perished  then  were  not  of  them  that  were 


OH.  ixTi.  1— «6.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  86« 

doomed  at  Kadesh  (see  Deut.  ii.  14),  but  of  those  who  would  have  inherited  Canaan 
in  a  few  months.  So  it  is  "  after  the  plague  "  of  fleshly  sin  and  of  its  ruinous  effects 
that  the  servants  of  God  are  numbered  for  eternal  life.  "  The  pure  in  heart  shall  see 
God  "  (cf.  Gal.  V.  19—21 ;  Ephes.  v.  6  ;  Bev.  xxii.  15). 

IX.  That  in  another  case  wb  can  discern  a  possible  reason  for  decay,  in  that 

ALL  the  tribes  UNDER  THE  LEADERSHIP  OF  EeUBEN  FELL  OFF  IN  NUMBERS  (Reuben, 

Simeon,  Gad).  This  may  point  to  the  unhappy  effects  of  bad  example,  and  the 
contagious  nature  of  a  turbulent  and  self-willed  spirit  in  religious  matters. 

X.  That,  on  the  contrary,  all  the  camps  which  were  under  the  standard  of 
JUDAH  increased  (Judah,  Issachar,  Zebulun).  For  to  Judah,  as  having  the  birth- 
right, appertained  now  the  promise,  "  In  thee  and  in  thy  seed  shall  all  nations  be 
blessed."  Thus  for  the  sake  of  Jesus,  who  sprang  from  the  tribe  of  Judah,  the  com- 
panions of  Judah  were  blessed  long  ago  :  and  this  no  doubt  because  his  character 
and  example  were  more  or  less  in  accordance  with  the  dignity  of  his  position. 

XL  That  after  all  the  causes  of  increase  or  decline  are  for  the  most  part 

UNKNOWN,  and  LIE  BENEATH  THE  SURFACE  OF  THE  SACRED  RECORD.      How  little  do  we 

know  of  the  inner  history  of  Bphraim  and  Manasseh,  which  has  left  no  trace  in  the 
narrative,  and  yet  had  such  important  effects  in  their  comparative  prosperity  I  Even 
so  how  little  do  we  know  of  the  real  life  of  Churches  ;  how  little  can  we  estimate 
those  forces  which  determine  their  spiritual  growth  or  decadence  ! 

XII.  That  nothing  brought  to  light  the  great  differences  between  the 
TRIBES  EXCEPT  THE  MUSTERING  ON  THE  VERGE  OF  JoEDAN.  Even  SO  nothing  can  really 
test  the  comparative  excellence,  the  success  or  failure,  of  a  Church,  except  the  verdict 
of  "  that  day,"  and  the  numbers  then  found  worthy  to  stand  before  the  Son  of  man. 

Consider  also,  with  respect  to  the  Levites — 

That  thby  had  increased,  but  not  nearly  so  much  as  they  should  have  done, 
CONSIDERING  THEIR  IMMUNITIES  AND  PRIVILEGES.  Four  tribes,  although  uiider  the 
condemnation  of  Kadesh,  had  prospered  more  than  they.  Even  so  it  is  certain  that 
no  situation  of  vantage,  ecclesiastical  or  religious,  delivers  us  from  spiritual  loss,  or 
really  makes  religious  progress  easier.  Many  who  have  fewer  advantages  and 
greater  difiBculties,  many  even  who  have  at  some  time  fallen  under  greater  con- 
demnation, will  nevertheless  outstrip  us  in  the  heavenly  race. 

Consider  again,  with  respect  to  the  inheritance  of  each  tribe  in  Canaan — 

I.  That  its  situation  was  to  be  decided  by  lot,  i.  e.  by  Divine  dlsposition,  apart 
FROM  HUMAN  CHOICE  OR  FAVOUR.  Even  SO  our  "  place  in  heaven  "  will  be  allotted  to 
us  by  God  himself,  being  predestinated  for  us  according  io  his  infinite  wisdom,  with- 
out any  respect  of  persons. 

II.  That  its  boundaries  were  to  be  determined  by  estimation  of  the  size  and 
NEEDS  OF  EACH.  Evcn  SO  our  "  place  in  heaven  "  will  be  our  own,  not  only  as  given 
to  us  of  God's  free  grace,  but  as  being  exactly  suited  for  us,  and  precisely  adapted  to 
our  measure  of  spiritual  growth. 

Consider  again,  with  respect  to  the  sins  of  Korah — 

That  they  did  not  perish  with  their  father  (not  being  op  his  "company"), 
BUT  lived  to  found  an  honourable  and  useful  family  in  Israel.  Even  so  God 
does  not  visit  the  sins  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children,  unless  the  children  also  "  hate 
him."  It  is  a  thing  pleasing  to  God  when  the  children  retrieve  the  forfeited  honour 
of  their  father's  name  by  their  good  works.  How  often  does  the  Church  of  God  find 
its  ornaments  and  supports  amongst  the  children  of  its  greatest  enemies  1 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  52 — 66. — The  lot  is  to  decide  where  every  tribe  shall  receive  its  inheritance. 
Seventy  years  ago  a  party  of  emigrants  from  the  Scottish  border  found  themselves 
at  the  entrance  of  the  valley  in  South  Africa  which  had  been  assigned  for  their 
setlJement.  The  patriarch  of  the  party,  gazing  wistfully  on  the  goal  of  Iheir  long 
vanderings,  gave  vent  to  the  feeling  of  his  heart  in  the  exclamation,  And  this  at 
length  is  the  lot  of  our  inheritance  1     A  sure  instinct  taught  him  to  »ee,  in  the  pro- 


860  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEE8.  [oh.  xxvi.  1—65. 

▼idential  ordering  of  the  momentous  turning-point  in  life  which  he  and  his  com- 
panions had  now  reached,  the  same  thoughtful  and  wise  Hand  which  appointed  to 
the  tribes  under  Joshua  their  inheritance  in  the  promised  land ;  and  the  language  of 
the  Old  Testament  history  rose  naturally  to  his  lips. 

I.  To  do  justice  to  this  aspect  of  Divine  providence,  it  is  of  consequence  to  con- 
sider well  WHAT  AN  IMPORTANT  BUSINESS  IS  THE  OBDERINQ  01'  THE  LOCALITY  IN  WHICH 

MEN  ARE  TO  PASS  THEIR  DAYS.  The  complexion  of  a  nation's  life  and  the  tenor  of  its 
history  are  exceedingly  affected  by  the  sort  of  locality  where  it  has  its  seat.  A 
nation  whose  lot  is  fixed  in  the  impenetrable  depths  of  Africa,  how  different  its 
history  must  necessarily  be  from  that  of  a  nation  which  has  received  for  inheritance 
a  sea-girt  land,  like  Greece  or  Italy,  Great  Britain  or  Scandinavia  I  The  one  is 
sequestered  from  all  quickening  intercourse,  and  is  likely  to  sleep  on  in  a  semi-torpid 
state ;  the  other  lies  open  to  the  influence  of  every  tide  of  forefgn  thought  and 
sentiment.  Now  it  was  precisely  this  question  of  locality  which  was  determined  for 
the  tribes  by  lot.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  lot  determined  everything.  The 
division  of  the  country  was  to  proceed  on  the  principle  that  the  extent  of  territory 
bestowed  on  the  respective  tribes  was  to  be  proportioned  to  the  number  of  names  in 
each  (vers.  63,  64).  A  glance  at  the  map  will  show  how  carefully  this  was  attended 
to.  The  number  of  acres  which  fell  to  the  lot  of  "  little  Benjamin  "  was  much 
smaller  than  the  number  embraced  in  the  inheritance  of  "the  miglity  tribe  of  Ephraim." 
The  business  of  thus  apportioning  to  every  tribe  a  domain  corresponding  to  the  num- 
ber of  its  families  was  devolved  on  a  Commission  of  Twelve,  under  the  oversight  of 
Eleazar  and  Joshua  (ch.  xxxiv.  16—29).  But  before  these  commissioners  could 
make  the  apportionment,  it  had  first  to  be  determined  whereabouts  each  tribe  was  to 
be  planted ;  and  this  was  done  by  lot.  The  Lord  reserved  to  himself  the  business 
of  determining  the  bounds  of  his  people's  habitation.  And,  I  repeat,  this  was  a 
momentous  determination.  If  Judah,  instead  of  occupying  the  inland  hills  and  val- 
leys of  the  south,  had  received  for  its  inheritance  the  lot  of  Simeon,  on  the  coast  of 
the  Mediterranean,  and  in  the  way  of  the  Gentiles,  how  different  the  course  of  its 
history  would  have  been  1 

II.  Consider  the  providence  of  God  in  this  matter  of  orderinq  the  bounds  of 
men's  habitations.  It  is  not  the  tribes  of  Israel  only  about  whose  bounds  Divine 
providence  is  exercised.  Bead  Deut.  xxxii.  8  and  Acts  xvii.  26.  But  allhough 
God  "  from  the  place  of  his  habitation  looketh  upon  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth," 
it  is  equally  evident  from  the  Scripture  that  his  providence  occupies  itself  very 
Bpecially  about  the  affairs  of  his  chosen  people,  and  particularly  about  the  ordering 
of  their  lot.  1.  How  true  this  is  might  be  shown  by  many  clear  testimonies  of 
Holy  Scripture.  At  present  it  may  be  sufBcient  to  remind  you  of  the  testimony 
borne  by  daily  experience.  When  you  left  school  you  had  in  your  mind  many  pro- 
jects and  resolves  about  the  future — where  you  would  settle,  and  what  you  would  do. 
Have  these  stood  ?  Have  they  not  rather,  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten,  been  quite  over- 
ruled ?  You  proposed,  but  God  disposed.  Your  portion  has  fallen  to  you  by  lot. 
2  This  being  so,  it  is  surely  your  duty  to  consider  &o^s  hand  and  providence  in  the 
matter.  "  The  lot  is  cast  into  the  lap ;  but  the  whole  disposing  thereof  is  of  tho 
Lord"  (Prov.  xvi.  33).  Here  again  experience  says  Amen  to  God's  word.  Tho 
man  must  have  been  blind  indeed  who  has  never  perceived  the  hand  of  a  special 
providence  prospering  or  frustrating  his  purposes,  and  ordering  his  lot  far  better 
than  he  could  himself  have  ordered  it.  3.  Due  consideration  of  God's  hand  will 
move  the  soul  to  trrist  his  providence.  Abraham,  being  told  of  a  coimtry  which  he 
should  afterwards  receive  for  inheritance,  went  out  trustfully,  although  he  knew  not 
whither  he  went.  This  we  also  are  to  do ;  it  is  the  proper  fruit  and  demonstration 
of  our  faith.  And  as  we  are  to  go  forward  in  faith  ourselves,  so  we  are  in  faith  to 
send  forth  into  the  world  those  most  dear  to  us.  We  need  not  doubt  that  in  answer 
to  the  prayer  of  faith  the  Lord  will  appoint  to  them  a  suitable  lot,  and  give  them 
cause  to  sing,  "  The  lines  are  fallen  unto  me  in  pltmsant  places ;  yea,  I  have  a  goodly 
heritage  "  (Ps.  xvi.  6),— B. 

Vers.  1 — 62. — The  second  censru.  I.  The  purpose  of  it.  1.  The  number  of  thost 
able  It  go  to  tear  i»  Israel  had  still  to  be  ascertained.     Though  ttie  people  are  nov 


OH.  ixvi.  1—65.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBBBS.  861 

reposing  in  unaccustomed  and  grateful  quietude,  with  the  promised  Canaan  just  over 
against  them,  it  is  being  impressed  upon  them  in  many  ways  that  they  must  win  it 
by  conquest.  The  children,  while  inheriting  the  promises  given  to  their  fathers,  in- 
herit at  the  same  time  the  services  which  the  fathers  had  been  found  incompetent 
and  unworthy  to  render.  We  may  gather  from  this  repeated  census  that  God  would 
have  his  people  in  every  generation  to  count  up  their  strength  for  conflict.  It  is 
only  too  easy  to  depreciate  and  forget  our  spiritual  resources,  and  think  them  less 
than  they  are.  Even  a  man  like  Elijah  professed  himself  left  alone,  when  the  Lord 
knew  there  were  still  in  Israel  seven  thousand  who  had  not  bowed  to  Baal,  Those 
going  forward  into  life  must  be  made  ready,  so  far  as  the  advice  and  arrangements 
of  others  can  make  them  ready,  both  for  the  certain  conflict  peculiar  to  each  person, 
and  for  a  part  in  the  great  battle  against  darkness  and  wrong  which  goes  on  through 
every  age,  under  the  leadership  of  Christ  himself.  2.  Possession  of  the  land  had  to 
he  prepared  for  (vers.  52 — 56).  The  conflict  will  be  a  great,  an  arduous,  and  a  tax- 
ing one,  but  it  will  assuredly  end  in  victory.  Ood's  command  to  prepare  for  war 
brings  as  its  logical  and  cheering  sequence  the  command  to  prepare  for  possession. 
God  is  able  to  make  regulations  for  the  future,  which,  if  men  were  spontaneously  to 
make  them  for  themselves,  would  savour  of  braggadocio  (ch.  xv.  2). 

II.  The  exact  time  at  which  it  was  made.  It  was  after  the  plague.  We 
may  presume  that  Israel  had  been  to  some  extent  purified  by  this  visitation,  although 
the  plague  was  doubtless  no  respecter  of  persons,  but  involved  innocent  and  guilty 
in  one  common  temporal  suffering,  according  to  the  fixed  law  of  our  fallen  nature 
that  the  sins  of  the  fathers  are  visited  on  the  children.  The  dreadful  result  which 
the  infecting  idolatries  of  Moab  had  brought  upon  Israel  was  indeed  a  very  impressive 
intimation  that  the  full  strength  of  the  people  was  required.  Those  numbered  in  the 
army  by  reason  of  iit  age  were  to  see  to  it,  and  examine  their  hearts,  and  become  as 
fit  as  possible  in  all  other  respects. 

III.  The  method.  Still  the  same  as  before,  by  tribes.  There  had  been  many 
changes,  losses,  and  sad  disturbances  during  this  time  of  wandering  and  severity,  but 
each  tribe  had  kept  itself  distinct.  They  were  still  ranged  in  the  same  order  round 
the  tabernacle,  and  regarding  it  from  the  same  point  of  view.  So  if  we  take  a  period, 
say  of  forty  years,  in  the  course  of  Christ's  Church,  we  shall  find  the  ^ects  at  the 
beginning  of  the  period  still  existent  at  the  end  of  it.  The  men  who  looked  at  truth 
from  a  certain  point  of  view  at  the  beginning  have  their  spiritual  successors  who 
look  at  truth  from  the  same  point  of  view.  The  differences,  the  marked,  emphasised, 
and  pertinacious  differences,  found  amongst  believers  are  not  so  much  between  truth 
and  error  as  between  different  aspects  of  the  same  external  object 

IV.  The  bbsult.  It  must  have  been  anxiously  waited  for,  not  only  to  see  the 
grand  total,  but  the  relative  position  of  each  tribe.  The  result  shows  somewhat 
fewer  in  number,  but,  as  we  have  suggested,  they  were  possibly  purer  in  quality. 
Some  tribes  have  increased,  others  decreased.  In  Simeon  there  is  a  most  extraordin- 
ary falling  away,  but  still  it  was  quite  within  truth  to  Bay  that  for  practical  purposes 
the  number  had  not  diminished.  Yes ;  but  if  Israel  had  not  been  passing  through  a 
temporary  curse  there  ought  to  have  been,  and  probably  would  have  been,  a  marl^ed 
and  exhilarating  increase.  But  instead  of  increase  there  is  a  slight  decrease.  Things 
had  not  been  going  lately  as  they  did  in  Egypt,  when  "  the  children  of  Israel  were 
fruitful,  and  increased  abundantly,  and  multiplied,  and  waxed  exceeding  mighty ;  and 
the  land  was  filled  with  them  "  (Exod.  i.  7).  Certainly  if  one  goes  by  the  actual  state 
of  the  people,  there  is  but  little  room  for  Balaam's  cheering  words  concerning  the 
dust  of  Jacob  and  the  fourth  part  of  Israel  (ch.  xxiii.  10).  In  the  light  of  this 
second  census  the  whole  narrative  is  seen  to  harmonise  in  a  most  subtle  way.  If 
Israel  were  under  a  curse  these  forty  years,  if  there  were  a  real  suspending  of  God's 
favour  and  of  the  previous  communications  of  his  energy,  it  is  just  what  might  be 
expected  that  at  the  end  of  the  period  the  people  would  be  found  no  further  forward 
than  at  the  beginning— 600,000  when  they  left  Sinai,  600,000  still  when  they  reach 
Jordan. — Y. 

Vers.  64,  66. — A  generation  gone.  Certain  things  strike  us  in  examining  this 
second  census  and  comparing  it  with  the  former  one  at  Sinai :  «.  g.  the  difference 


862  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oh.  xxvi  1— €6. 

as  to  numbers ;  the  fluctuations  of  the  tribes,  some  increasing,  others  decreasing ; 
in  particular,  the  extraordinary  decrease  in  Simeon  arrests  attention.  But  all  these 
are  passed  over  as  not  needing  notice.  There  is  one  thing,  however,  to  which 
attention  is  specially  called,  and  indeed  it  must  have  been  kept  in  view  all  the  census 
through,  namely,  that  not  one  of  those  numbered  in  the  previous  census  was  now 
alive.    Those  counted  now  had  not  been  counted  before. 

I.  AiTENTiON  IS  CALLED  TO  A  FULFILLED  PREDICTION.  It  deserves  Special  attention 
as  a  very  remarkable,  exact,  and  early  fulfilment  of  prediction.  Most  of  God's  pre- 
dictions for  Israel  worked  on  to  their  fulfilment  slowly  and  imperceptibly  through 
many  generations ;  some  in  the  highest  sense  of  them  are  still  incomplete ;  but  here 
was  a  prediction  concerning  the  present,  moving  to  its  fulfilment  under  the  very  eyes 
of  many  whom  in  their  turn  it  would  also  include.  Surely  it  must  often  have  been 
talked  of  in  the  tents  of  Israel.  And  here  was  another  purpose  that  the  census  served 
—to  show  clearly  and  impressively  that  the  prediction  had  been  fulfilled.  The  fulfil- 
ment had  its  dark  side  and  its  bright  one.  It  was  an  impressive  proof  that  what 
penalties  God  attaches  to  sin  he  can  accomplish  to  their  fuU  extent.  All  had  perished 
save  Caleb  and  Joshua.  Things  had  happened  exactly  as  God  said  they  would,  the 
people  themselves  being  witnesses.  "  If  any  one  numbered  in  the  previous  census  is 
still  aUve,  save  Caleb  and  Joshua,  let  him  step  forward,"  Moses  and  Eleazar  might 
have  said.  But  they  were  all  silent  in  the  mystery  of  a  peculiar  death.  Eightly 
looked  at,  it  was  very  comforting  and  inspiring  for  Israel  to  go  into  Canaan  with 
such  a  wonderful  proof  of  God's  power  in  their  minds.  He  who  had  so  manifestly 
fulfilled  such  a  peculiar  prediction  might  be  confidently  expected  to  keep  his  worn 
in  all  others. 

II.  The  completeness  of  the  Divine  contkol  oveb  the  teem  of  human  life. 
What  God  did  in  the  particular  instance  of  this  generation  he  can  do  in  any  and 
every  generation,  with  any  and  every  one  of  the  children  of  men.  We  talk  very 
grandly  sometimes  of  the  value  of  a  sound  constitution,  the  prudence  of  attending  to 
the  laws  of  health,  and  taking  such  means  as  may  preserve  life  to  a  ripe  old  age. 
But  while  these  considerations  are  indeed  not  to  be  neglected,  God's  will  also  must 
be  taken  into  account,  as  at  least  a  possible  regulating  force  in  the  term  of  every 
human  life.  He  may  have  some  weighty  reason  of  his  own  for  shortening  or  length- 
ening, which  will  nullify  alike  the  prudence  of  some  and  the  recklessness  of  others. 
It  is  not  competent  for  us  to  say  that  he  does  actually  interfere  in  every  instance,  as 
he  so  plainly  did  with  the  men  of  this  doomed  generation ;  it  is  enough  for  us  to  feel 
that  he  has  power  to  do  it.  We  have  here  but  one  out  of  many  evidences  to  be 
found  in  the  Scriptures  that  God  has  death  completely  under  restraint.  He  can 
keep  us  back  from  its  grasp  as  long  as  may  seem  good  to  him.  He  can  also  allow 
us  to  fall  into  its  grasp,  if  thereby  his  own  purposes  will  be  better  served.  They  are 
much  more  important  than  the  devices  and  desires  which  arise  out  of  our  selfish, 
ignorant,  and  unexperienced  hearts. 

III.  The  special  intervention  in  this  instance  suggests  that,  as  a  genekai. 
bule,  nature  is  left  to  its  own  course.  Every  one  entering  this  world  is  left  to 
the  play  of  what,  for  want  of  a  better  term,  may  be  called  the  forces  of  nature.  So 
much  of  natural  vitality  and  energy,  so  much  power  of  assimilation  and  growth,  so 
much,  sometimes  good  and  sometimes  bad,  by  way  of  inheritance  from  parents,  and, 
over  and  above  what  may  be  peculiar,  the  taint  of  that  depravity  which  is  the  common 
calamity  of  the  children  of  men — these  are  the  elements  with  which  we  have  to  do 

-  our  best.  And  might  we  not  hope,  if  only  the  obstacles  were  taken  away  which 
arise  from  ignorance,  error,  prejudice,  sensuality,  and  slavery  to  base  appetites  of 
every  sort,  that  the  term  of  human  life  would  be  extended  far  beyond  what  it  is  in 
the  great  majority  of  instances  ?  Should  it  not  be  reckoned  the  normal  state  of 
things,  the  state  of  things  according  to  God's  own  wish,  for  those  who  come  into  the 
world  as  infants  to  go  out  of  it  as  old  men  ?  The  reason  why  so  many  do  not  should 
be  made  a  matter  of  urgent,  light-seeking,  personal  inquiry.  It  is  a  very  misleading 
thing  to  speak,  and  without  any  real  authority  to  do  so,  of  God  calling  people  away ; 
particularly  infants  and  children,  who  furnish  such  a  large  and  melancholy  proportion 
of  the  world's  mortality.  We  foreclose  many  questions  of  the  greatest  moment  by 
B  traditional,  thought-benumbing  fatalism,  a  seemingly  pious,  yet  really  impioue^ 


CH.  XXVI.    1—65.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS. 


363 


profession  of  submission  to  the  ■will  of  God.  The  will  of  God  would  sooner  be  com- 
plied with  in  this  ignorant,  purblind  world  if  Christians,  who  pray  that  God's  will 
may  be  done  on  earth  as  in  heaven,  would  only  set  themselves  to  discover  what  the 
will  of  God  really  is.  Surely  it  is  a  strange  and  horrible  thing  that,  without  some 
plain  reason  such  as  we  find  in  2  Sam.  xii.  14,  many  infants  should  breathe  their  little 
lives  so  quickly  away ;  and  it  is  all  the  more  horrible  when  they  thus  die  in  spite  of 
the  solicitude  and  patient  care  of  a  loving  mother.  Where  love  abounds,  wisdom 
may  yet  be  lacking.  A  world  wiser  to  consider  the  laws  of  nature  and  self-denyingly 
to  obey  them  would  be  a  less  anguished  and  sorrowing  world.  Mothers  would  not 
BO  often  be  sharing  Bachel's  bitter  lot,  weeping  for  her  children  and  refusing  to  be 
comforted. 

IV.  The  extension  of  God's  wrath  ovek  this  long  peeiod  especially  marks 
IT  OUT  AS  WRATH  AGAINST  nNRiGHTEOUSNESS  (Eom.  i.  18).  God  is  not  a  man,  that 
he  should  be  carried  away  in  sudden  bursts  of  passion,  and  need  the  exhortation, 
"  Let  not  the  sun  go  down  upon  your  wrath."  For  forty  years  he  went  patiently 
through  the  vineyard,  cutting  down  the  cumberers  of  the  ground.  Sudden  as  were 
the  flamings  out  of  the  Divine  wrath  on  Israel,  it  was  because  Israel  was  as  dry, 
susceptible  fuel  to  the  flame.  Wherever  there  is  unrignteousness  of  men  there  must 
be  wrath  of  God.  In  the  deliberate,  steady  fulfilling  of  God's  wrath  on  the  doomed 
generation  we  see  a  most  sublime  contrast  with  the  caprice,  uncertainty,  and  partiality 
of  human  passion. 

V.  ThEEB  IS  A  VEET  EMPHATIC  ASSTIEANCB  OP  GOD'S  INTEREST  IN  ISRAEL  INDI- 
VIDUALLY. Each  man  who  thus  died  had  the  eye  of  the  Lord  on  him  as  an  individuaL 
And  though  he  suffered  temporal  death  as  a  necessary  consequence  of  belonging  to 
the  doomed  generation,  yet  the  very  same  watchful  care  of  God  which  acted  with 
severity  in  one  way  was  equally  available  to  act  with  mercy  in  another.  The  doom 
which  fell  upon  the  Israelite  as  Israelite  was  quite  compatible  with  mercy  to  the 
Israelite  as  a  man.  Let  us  in  the  midst  of  our  need,  in  the  midst  of  our  difBculties 
in  finding  a  way  to  God,  lay  hold  of  every  assurance  we  can  get,  and  especially  in 
the  Scriptures,  as  to  the  reality  of  God's  dealings  with  individuals.  There  is  special 
record  in  the  Scriptures  of  his  dealings  with  some,  but  of  many  there  is  of  necessity 
no  such  record.  Here  there  is  clear  evidence  of  God's  dealings,  individually,  with 
more  than  600,000  men  in  forty  years.  That  period  was  given  for  every  one  of 
them  to  pass  from  the  earth,  so  that  at  the  end  of  it  there  was  not  a  survivor  to 
enter  the  promised  land,  save  the  two  men  who  had  been  singled  out  for  preservation. 
Atid  God  is  dealing  with  every  individual  now,  and  by  his  goodness  would  lead  him 
to  repentance.  What  is  wanted  in  return  is  that  every  individual  thus  aripealed  to, 
when  he  meets  the  angel  of  repentance  in  the  way,  should  have  dealings  with  God 
such  as  may  end  in  the  full  reception  of  eternal  life  and  increased  glory  to  the  fulness 
of  the  Divine  Trinity. — Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXVIL 


Thk  daughters  of  Zblophbhad  (vers. 
1—11).  Ver.  1. — The  daughters  of  Zelophe- 
had.  The  genealogy  here  given  agrees  with 
those  in  ch.  xxvi  29 — 33  and  in  Josh.  xvii. 
8.  These  women  would  appear  to  have  been 
in  the  eighth  generation  from  Jacob,  which 
hardly  accords  with  the  470  years  requued 
by  the  narrative  ;  some  links,  however,  may 
have  been  dropped. 

Ver.  2. — By  the  door  of  the  tahernacle 
of  the  congregation,  i.  e.  evidently  by  the 
entrance  of  the  sacred  enclosure.  Here,  in 
the  void  space,  in  the  midst  of  the  camp, 
and  close  to  the  presence-chamber  of  God, 
th« 'princes  H.  e.  the  tribe  princes  who  were 


engaged  upon  the  censns)  and  the  represent- 
atives of  the  congregation  assembled  for  the 
transaction  of  business  and  for  the  hearing  of 
any  matters  that  were  brought  before  them. 
Ver.  3. — He  was  not  in  the  company  of 
them  that  gathered  themselves  together 
against  the  Lord.  He  had  not  been  amongst 
the  two  hundred  and  fifty  who  gathered 
themselves  together  in  support  of  Koraii's 
pretensions.  It  does  not  appear  why  they 
should  have  thought  it  necessary  to  make 
this  statement,  unless  they  felt  ihat  the  fact 
of  his  having  died  without  sons  might  raise 
suspicion  against  him  as  one  who  had  greatly 
provoked  the  wrath  of  God.  But  died  in  his 
own  sin.  This  cannot  mean  that  Zelophe- 
had  was  one  of  those  who  died  in  the  wilder- 


S64 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[oh.  xxtii.  1 — IL 


ness  in  consequence  of  the  rebellion  at  Eadesh 
(see  the  next  note).  Apparently  his  daughters 
meant  to  acknowledge  that  they  had  no  com- 
plaint against  the  Divine  justice  becanse  of 
thur  father's  death,  but  only  against  the  law 
because  of  the  unnecessary  hardship  which  it 
inflicted  upon  them. 

Ver.  i. — Give  unto  us  .  .  a  possession 
among  the  brethren  of  our  father.  The 
daughters  of  Zelophehad  did  not  ask  for  any 
share  of  what  had  been  their  father's,  but 
they  asked  that  the  lands  which  would  have 
been  assigned  to  their  father  in  the  settle- 
ment of  Canaan  might  still  be  assigned  to 
them,  so  that  their  father's  name  might  at- 
tach to  those  lands,  and  be  handed  down 
with  them.  The  request  assumes  that  the 
"  brethren  "  of  Zelophehad  would  receive  an 
inheritance  in  the  promised  land,  either  per- 
sonally or  as  represented  by  their  sons ; 
hence  it  seems  clear  that  Zelophehad  was  not 
of  the  elder  generation,  which  had  forfeited 
all  their  rights  and  expectations  in  Canaan, 
but  of  the  younger,  to  whom  the  inheritance 
was  transferred  (ch.  xiv.  29 — 32).,  This  is 
confirmed  by  the  consideration  that  these 
women  were  not  married  .until  some  time 
after  this  (ch.  xxxvi.  11 ;  cf.  Josh,  xvii  3, 
4),  and  must,  therefore,  according  to  the 
almost  invariable  custom,  have  been  quite 
young  at  this  time.  It  is  reasonable  to  sup- 
pose that  the  heads  of  separate  families  to 
whom  the  land  was  distributed  would  be  at 
this  time  men  of  from  forty-flve  to  sixty 
years  of  age,  comprising  the  elder  half  of  the 
generation  which  grew  up  in  the  wUdemess. 
Zelophehad  would  have  been  among  these, 
but  that  he  was  cut  off,  perhaps  in  the 
plague  of  serpents,  or  in  the  plague  of  the 


Arboth  Moab,  and  left  only  unmarried  girli 
to  represent  him. 

Yer.  5. — Hoses  brought  their  cause  before 
the  Lord.  Presumably  by  going  into  the 
tabernacle  with  this  matter  upon  his  mind, 
and  awaiting  the  revelation  of  the  Divine 
will  (cf.  Exod.  xviii.  19 ;  ch.  zii.  8). 

Ver.  8. — If  a  man  die,  and  have  no  son. 
On  this  particular  case  a  general  rule  of  much 
wider  incidence  was  founded.  The  Mosaic 
law  of  succession  followed  the  same  lines  as 
the  feudal  law  of  Europe,  equally  disallowing 
disposition  by  wUl,  and  discouraging,  if  not 
disallowing,  alienation  by  grant.  Upon  the 
land  was  to  rest  the  whole  social  fabric  of 
Israel,  and  all  that  was  valued  and  per- 
manent in  family  life  and  feeling  was  to  be 
tied  as  it  were  to  the  landed  inheritance. 
Hence  the  land  was  in  every  case  so  to  pass 
that  the  name  and  fame,  the  privilege  and 
duty,  of  thS  deceased  owner  might  be  as  far 
as  possible  perpetuated.  TTnto  his  daughter. 
Not  for  her  maintenance,  but  in  order  that 
her  husband  might  represent  her  father. 
In  most  cases  he  would  take  her  name,  and 
be  counted  as  one  of  her  father's  family. 
This  had  no  doubt  already  become  customary 
among  the  Jews,  as  among  almost  all  nations. 
Compare  the  cases  of  Sheshan  and  Jarha 
(1  Chron.  ii.  34,  35),  of  Jair  (ch.  xxxii.  41), 
and  subsequently  of  the  Levitical  "sons  of 
Barzillai  "  (Ezra  ii.  61).  The  question,  how- 
ever, would  only  become  of  public  importance 
at  the  time  when  Israel  became  a  nation  of 
landed  proprietors. 

Yer.  11.— A  statute  of  judgment.  t3|I^D 
Djpn?.  Septuagint,  jncafiu/ia  Kfiaius.  A 
statute  determining  a  legal  right. 


HOMILETICS. 

•Vers.  1—11. — The  certainty  of  thej)romised  inheritance.  The  case  of  Zelophehad'a 
daughters  is  no  doubt  in  keeping  with  that  favourable  consideration  of  women,  as 
capable  of  claiming  rights  and  holding  a  position  of  their  own,  which  certainly  dis- 
tinguished the  Mosaic  legislation,  and  affected  for  good  the  Jewish  character.  But 
the  one  thing  which  we  may  spiritually  discern  here  is  the  security  of  the  heavenly 
inheritance  and  the  faitlifulness  with  which  it  is  Divinely  reserved  for  them  that 
have  received  the  promise.  Zelophehad  died,  and  that  through  sin,  but  since  he 
was  not  of  the  disinherited,  therefore  his  name  did  not  cease,  neither  was  his  portion 
taken  away  from  among  the  people  of  the  Lord.    Consider,  therefore — 

I.  Teat  Zelophehad,  as  one  op  the  tounqeb  genbbation,  had  a  peomise  op 

AN  INHERITANCE  IN  CaNAAN  TO  BE  HIS  (i.  6.  HIS  FAMILY'S)  FOB  EVEB.      Even  SO  WO, 

in  that  we  belong  to  "this  generation"  (cf.  St.  Matt.  sxiv.  34),  which  has  received 
the  promise  of  eternal  life,  and  a  kingdom  which  cannot  be  moved  (Heb.  xii.  28'/, 
are  without  question  heirs  of  salvation,  and  look  foi'ward  to  a  portion  amongst  the 
faithful. 

II.  That  Zelophehad  himself  died  in  the  wilderness,  and  that  by  reason 
OF  SOME  SIN  WE  KNOW  NOT  WHAT.  Even  so  we  die  without  having  received  the 
promised  glory ;  in  all  probability  we  shall  all  so  die ;  and  death  is  the  wages  of  sin, 
•nd  the  body  is  turned  to  corruption  because  of  sin. 

III.  Teat  tee  death  of  Zblophebad  seemed  to  bab  his  cxaiu  to  ant  ih- 


OH.  XXVII.  1—11.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  36» 

BERITANOB  AMONGST  HIS  BRETHREN,  SEEING  HB  HAD  NO  BON  TO  TAKE  HIS  PLACE  AND 

NAME.  Even  SO  death  seems  at  first  sight,  and  in  the  eyes  of  the  unwise,  to  cut  ofE 
hope  and  to  separate  from  the  living,  and  to  deprive  those  that  "  are  not "  of  the 
reward  to  which  they  looked.  And  this  was  thought  to  be  the  case  even  by  them 
that  believed  in  the  first  days  (1  Thess.  iv.  13,  sq.). 

IV.  That  by  the  will  or  God,  his  name  and  inhebitancb  webe  preserved  in 
Israel  by  means  of  his  daughters.  Even  so,  neither  death  nor  failure  in  this 
■world  will  be  permitted  to  deprive  us  of  that  inheritance  in  a  better  world  which  the 
mercy  of  God  reserves  for  us,  not  because  we  have  deserved  it,  but  because  he  has 
promised  iti 

Consider  again,  with  respect  to  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad— 

I.  That  they  received  the  reward  of  faith,  in  that  they  doubted  not  that 
THE  Lord's  people  would  receive  every  man  his  portion  in  the  land  of 
pbomise  ;  although  they  were  yet  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan.  It  is  in  perfect 
faith  of  the  fulfilment  of  God's  promises  that  we  must  so  ask  as  to  reosive. 

II.  That  they  received  the  reward  of  couragb,  in  that  they  being  women 

WITHOUT    any    natural    PROTECTOR,  BROUGHT    THEIR    CAUSE  OPENLY  BEFORE  MoSES, 

AND  SO  BEFORE  GoD.  It  IS  with  boldness,  not  confounded  by  our  own  weakness, 
that  we  are  to  make  our  requests  known  unto  God  (Eph.  Hi.  12  ;  Heb.  x.  19),  assured 
that  no  one  is  unimportant  with  him,  and  no  cause  disregarded  by  him. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — The  disabilities  of  sex.  I.  The  possible  injustice  consequent  on 
A  strict  adherence  to  social  traditions.  Try  to  imagine  how  this  appeal  of  the 
daughters  of  Zelophehad  arises.  Canaan  is  now  very  near,  the  borders  of  it  visible 
across  the  flood ;  and  God  has  just  told  Moses  the  great  general  principles  on  which 
it  is  to  be  allotted.  Thus  the  minds  of  the  people  are  naturally  filled  with  the 
thoughts  of  the  inheritance.  They  can  no  longer  complain  of  being  in  desolate 
places.  There  was  good  land  even  before  they  crossed  Jordan  (ch.  xxxii.),  and  so 
Canaan  was  looked  forward  to  with  great  expectations.  In  such  circumstances, 
every  family  would  be  on  the  look-out  to  anticipate  and  assert  its  share.  The  disciples 
after  they  had  heard  Jesus  discoursing  so  frequently  and  earnestly  on  the  coming 
kingdom  of  heaven,  fell  to  in  hot  rivalry  as  to  who  should  be  greatest  in  the  kingdom. 
So  here  we  may  well  suppose  that  the  sons  of  Hepher  were  only  too  ready  to  reckon 
the  daughters  of  their  brother  Zelophehad  as  outside  any  right  to  the  land  that  would 
fall  to  Hepher's  children.  Natural  relations  are  only  too  easily  trampled  on  in  the 
greed  of  gain.  Disputes  over  the  division  of  property  breed  and  sustain  deadly 
quarrels  among  kindred  (Luke  xii.  13).  Very  possibly  the  brothers  of  Zelophehad 
told  their  nieces  that  they  had  no  claim  to  inherit,  it  being  the  settled  custom  that 
inheritances  were  to  go  to  sons.  Let  them  be  satisfied  with  marriage  into  some 
other  family.  But  the  daughters  felt  pride  in  their  father's  name.  They  do  not 
claim  great  things  for  him,  feeling  that  such  a  claim  would  not  accord  with  the  lot 
of  one  who  belonged  to  the  doomed  generation  ;  but  at  all  events  they  can  say  that 
he  died  in  his  own  sin ;  he  was  free  from  the  taint  of  that  great  rebellion  which  left 
HO  deep  an  impression  on  Israel's  mind.  Why  then  should  his  name  perish  from 
among  his  family,  because  he  had  no  son  ?  The  answer  which  we  are  led  to  infer 
is  very  simple ;  very  worldly  also,  it  is  true,  but  all  the  more  conceivable  because  of 
that,  "  We  cleave  to  our  customs ;  we  cannot  even  give  way  to  feelings  which  are  so 
creditable  to  daughters."  This  perhaps  openly — then  in  their  own  hearts  they  would 
add,  "  They  are  only  women  ;  they  can  do  nothing." 

II.  A  BOLD  revolt  against  the  artificial  disabilities  of  BEX.  We  have 
imagined  an  actual  refusal  to  let  these  women  share  in  the  possession.  But  even  if 
it  were  not  actual,  they  have  a  shrewd  idea  of  what  will  happen,  and  oomo  appealing 
to  Moses,  in  the  most  public  manner,  so  that  they  may  have  his  weighty  authority  to 
settle  the  matter  before  he  goes.  They  were  but  women,  yet  they  had  all  a  man's 
decision  and  courage — and  more  than  belongs  to  most  men — to  break  away  from  I'll 
conventional  notions  rather  than  tamely  submit  to  injustice.    Paul's  disapproval  of 


366  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oh.  xxvii.  1—11. 

women  speaking  in  the  churches  was  of  course  very  good  as  pointing  out  a  general 
rule,  but  probably  he  would  have  allowed,  on  a  prudent  occasion  for  allowing  it,  that 
it  was  a  rule  not  without  exceptions.  He  may  have  reckoned  it  well  at  the  time,  for 
reasons  drawn  from  the  state  of  a  particular  church,  to  make'the  injunctions  express 
and  decided.  Who  were  to  speak  for  these  women,  if  not  they  themselves  i  When 
the  down-trodden  find  no  sufficient  ad  rocate  among  spectators,  it  is  time  for  them  to 
raise  their  own  voices.  Is  it  not  plain  that  these  women  were  the  best  judges  of  their 
mm  position  1  So  in  the  pressure  of  modern  social  life,  is  it  not  very  inconsistent 
with  the  maintenance  of  liberty  and  truth,  to  hinder  women  from  asserting  their 
claims  in  whatever  way  they  deem  best  ?  They  may  indeed  be  unfit  for  many  fields 
of  labour  which  they  profess  their  fitness  and  anxiety  to  occupy,  but  at  all  events  let 
them  discover  the  unfitness  for  themselves.  Has.it  not  been  said  beforehand  of 
many  achieved  and  glorious  facts  that  they  were  impossible  of  attainment  ?  Modern 
history  abounds  with  such  disgraced  predictions.  Paul  said,  "  Let  every  man  be  fully 
persuaded  in  his  own  mind,"  which  is  surely  every  whit  as  needful  and  every  whit 
as  serviceable  for  the  woman  as  the  man. 

III.  The  action  op  these  women  was  justified  by  the  result.  God  approves 
their  action,  as  they  gain  from  him  the  authoritative  laying  down  of  a  general 
principle,  applied  indeed  to  property,  but  surely  of  equal  application  to  all  disabilities 
of  sex  which  arise  in  other  ways  than  from  the  impassable  limits  of  nature.  God 
has  written  for  the  woman,  in  her  own  nature,  certain  laws  she  must  not  transgress, 
but  he  never  gave  man  the  right  to  construe  these  laws,  certainly  not  after  the 
domineering  fashion  he  so  frequently  adopts.  It  is  undoubtedly  true  that  God  made 
the  woman  for  the  man ;  human  nature  finds  here  its  completeness,  derives  hence 
the  means  of  its  continuance,  and  that  diversity  of  personality  and  character  which 
constitute  so  much  of  the  peculiar  riches  of  humanity.  But  man  is  not  therefore  to 
settle  the  woman's  sphere  with  his  strong  and  irresponsible  hand.  Is  it  not  a  thing 
almost  certain  that  many  disabilities  of  sex  have  arisen  through  man  being  from  the 
first  the  stronger  ?     In  the  days  when  might  made  right — 

He  took  advantage  of  his  strength  to  be 
First  in  the  field. 

There  is  a  parallel  between  much  in  man's  treatment  of  woman  and  his  treatment  of 
tlie  Sabbath.  Christ  had  to  free  the  Sabbath,  in  his  day,  from  Pharisees.  It  had 
been  so  fettered  up  by  opinionated,  obstinate  dingers  to  the  traditions  of  the  fathers, 
as  to  have  become  useless  for  its  original  purposes,  a  burden  and  a  terror  more  than 
anything  else.  He  freed  it  by  the  great  declaration  that  the  Sabbath  was  made  for 
man,  and  now  we  have  those  who  rush  to  the  other  extreme,  and  quote  his  words  for 
purposes  utterly  alien  from,  his  own.  So  there  are  the  two  extremes  in  judging  the 
place  of  woman  and  the  scope  of  her  life  and  service.  Some,  blindly  wedded  to 
custom,  would  shut  woman  up  in  strict  limitations,  which  though  not  as  degrading 
as  those  of  a  Turkish  harem,  are  quite  as  unjust  and  injurious  in  their  own  way. 
Others  there  are  who  seem  inclined  to  claim  for  women  more  than  nature  in  its 
utmost  kindliness  will  ever  yield.  Women,  who  know  their  own  nature  best,  can  be 
the  only  true  judges,  ever  under  the  guidance  of  God  himself,  as  to  the  capabilities 
of  their  sex,  Paul  pleading  for  oneness  in  Christ  Jesus,  says,  that  in  relation  to  him, 
as  there  is  neither  Jew  nor  Greek,  bond  nor  free,  so  there  is  neither  male  nor  female. 
The  woman  is  on  the  same  level  as  the  man  in  the  sight  of  Christ.  To  Christ  she  is 
directly  responsible,  bound  to  serve  him  with  the  fulness  of  her  powers.  Hence  to 
take  the  highest  ground,  that  of  allegiance  to  Christ,  it  is  unfaithfulness  to  him  to 
put  even  the  smallest  obstacles  in  the  way  of  women  acting  as  their  own  hearts  tell 
them  they  may  best  serve  their  Master. 

IV.  We  see  a  God  of  equity  showing  his  disregard  for  mere  legal  rights. 
Nowhere  is  it  shown  more  clearly  than  in  the  Scriptures  that  law  is  one  thing  and 
equity  another.  How  should  a  world  ignorant  of  the  righteousness  of  God,  and  full 
of  the  selfish  and  domineering,  make  laws  such  as  he  will  sanction  and  uphold  ?  "  We 
have  law  with  us,"  the  uncles  may  have  said.  Possibly  so  ;  but  not  the  law  of  him 
who  spoke  from  Sinai.  Any  law  of  men  which  contradicts  the  law  of  love  to  God, 
and  love  to  the  neighbour,  is  doomed  in  the  very  making  of  it.    And  is  it  not  • 


CH,  xxvu.  1—11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBBE8.  3«7 

blessed  thing  that  such  laws  get  broken  and  ultimately  destroyed  by  the  energy  of 
an  expanding  life  which  cannot  be  contained  within  them  1  (Matt.  ix.  10 — 13  ;  xiL 
1—13  J  XV.  1—20 ;  xix.  3—9 ;  rxiL  34— 40  j  Rom.  xiv.  6  ;  Gal.  iil  28).— Y. 

Ver,  3. — The  man  who  died  in  his  own  sin.  I.  A  plba  foe  favoitrablis  considbr- 
ATION.  The  daughters  of  Zelophehad  felt  that  if  he  had  been  numbered  among  the 
conspirators  with  Eorah,  it  would  have  been  very  difficult  for  them  to  stand  forward 
and  make  this  claim.  It  is  one  of  the  saddest  things  in  •  world  of  sad  things  that 
the  innocent  children  of  guilty  parents  are  made  to  inherit  the  shame  of  the  parental 
offence.  The  parental  name,  instead  of  being  one  of  the  sweetest  sounds  to  fall  upon 
their  ears,  becomes  one  of  the  most  hideous  and  torturing.  Not  seldom  they  are 
looked  upon  with  suspicion,  and  though  it  be  admitted  they  cannot  help  the  parents' 
crime,  yet  they  begin  life  with  a  millstone  round  their  necks.  The  words  of  these 
women,  meant  only  as  a  plea  for  themselves,  inflicted  at  the  same  time  a  blow,  none 
the  less  severe  because  unconsciously  given,  on  any  children  of  Eorah  (ch.xxvi.  11) 
or  of  his  confederates  who  might  be  present.  Not  that  it  made  any  real  difference 
to  the  principle  of  the  matter  in  question,  whether  Zelophehad  died  in  his  own  sin  or 
•a  {lavtaker  in  a  huge  rebellion,  but  it  did  make  a  difference  in  the  spirit  with  which 
these  women  presented  their  case.  The  fact  that  they  were  women  did  not  make 
them  afraid  to  go  into  the  face  of  the  whole  congregation,  but  if  they  had  been 
children  of  Korah,  the  chances  are  that  a  sense  of  shame  would  have  compelled 
them  to  suffer  wrong.  What  an  admonition  to  those  who  stand  among  temptations 
to  some  shameless  and  heinous  deed  to  ponder  well  the  consequent  stain  and  difficulty 
that  may  come  to  their  innocent  progeny  I  That  the  sins  of  the  fathers  are  visited 
on  the  children  is  a  fact  apparent  in  nature,  but  society  heartily  accepts  the  principle, 
and  only  too  often  works  it  out  in  the  most  unsparing  fashion. 

II.  It  was  the  right  spirit  op  approach  to  God  in  thb  circttmstances. 
Zelophehad  belonged  to  the  doomed  generation.  He  may  indeed  have  been  a  better 
man  than  most,  but  a  census  had  just  been  taken  which  revealed  the  fact  that  there 
was  not  a  single  survivor  of  the  generation ;  and  it  was  not  the  time  to  say  more  in 
way  of  commendation  than  that  Zelophehad  died  in  his  own  sin.  A  deferential 
humble  recollection  of  the  holiness  of  Jehovah  we  may  well  believe  to  have  marked 
the  present  approach  of  these  women.  He  would  hardly  have  connected  the  assertion 
of  a  general  principle  with  their  request  if  there  had  been  anything  unseemly  or 
insolent  in  the  manner  of  it.  We  shall  do  well  not  to  claim  too  much  for  men  in  the 
way  of  commendation,  when  we  are  thinking  of  them  in  relation  to  God.  We  must 
neither  abase  them  too  low  nor  exalt  them  too  high,  but  preserve  the  golden  mean  of  a 
loving,  charitable,  and  Christian  appreciation.  How  offensive  in  the  hearing  of  God 
many  eulogies  of  men  must  sound,  where  not  only  superlative  is  piled  on  superlative, 
but  altogether  erroneous  principles  of  judgment  are  adopted.  There  is  a  time  and  a 
need  to  praise  devoted  servants  of  God,  and  to  maintain  their  reputation  for  fidelity, 
zeal,  and  spiritual  success,  but  never  let  it  be  forgotten  that  the  very  best  of  men,  to 
say  the  least  of  him,  dies  in  his  own  sin.  That  will  be  largely  his  own  consciousness. 
Whatever  his  services  may  have  been,  it  is  in  the  grace,  wisdom,  and  ample  pre- 
paredness of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  that  he  will  find  his  only  hope.  It  only  needs  a 
little  thought  to  see  the  impropriety  of  praising  men,  because  they  are  laden  with 
the  free  gifts  of  God's  grace,  and  at  the  very  time  when  the  suitability  of  those  gifts 
is  especially  made  manifest.  Any  sort  of  praise  of  human  excellence  and  service 
which  even  for  a  moment  pushes  into  the  background  the  universal  depravity  of 
man  and  the  universal  necessity  of  God's  grace  and  mercy,  is  thereby  self -condemned. 

III.  THOTOH    a    man    DIB    IN    HIS  OWN  BIN  ONLY,  TET  THAT   IS  ENOUQH  TO  WORK 

IRREPARABLE  MISCHIEF.  It  was  Well  to  be  able  to  say  of  Zelophehad  that  he  had 
kept  out  of  Eorah's  conspiracy,  but  it  was  a  poor  thing  to  say,  if  there  was  nothing 
better  behind.  Out  of  negations,  nothing  but  negations  will  ever  come.  It  is  of  no 
avail  to  keep  out  of  ten  thousand  wrong  ways,  unless  we  take  the  one  right  way. 
The  sum  of  human  duty  is  to  leave  undone  all  the  things  which  ought  to  be  left 
undone,  and  to  do  all  the  things  which  ought  to  he  done.  Your  own  ein,  small  as  it 
may  seem  in  your  present  oonsciousnuss,  is  enough  to  bring  death.  The  mustard- 
seed  of  inborn  alienation  from  God  will  grow  to  a  mighty  and  everlasting  ourse  if 


3G8 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[oh.  XXVII.  1 — 12. 


you  do  not  stop  it  in  time.  Those  who  have  passed  through  untold  agoniea  because 
of  conviction  of  sin,  once  laughed  at  sin  as  a  little  thing.  They  did  not  dream  it 
would  give  them  such  trouble,  and  drive  them  about  inr^essantly  till  they  got  the 
question  answered,  "  What  must  1  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  Sin  sleeps  in  most,  as  far  as 
the  peculiar  consciousness  of  it  is  concerned,  but  when  it  wakes  it  will  prove  itself 
a  giant.  Look  at  the  analogy  in  physical  life.  A  man  says  that  he  is  full  of  health 
and  vigour,  and  he  looks  it ;  he  even  gets  complimented  upon  it.  Suddenly,  in  the 
midst  of  these  compliments,  he  is  stricken  down  with  a  fierce  disease,  and  a  few  days 
number  him  among  the  dead.  Why  ?  The  real  disease  was  in  him  already,  even 
with  all  his  consciousness  of  health.  There  must  have  been  something  in  his  body 
to  give  the  outward  cause  a  hold.  Our  present  consciousness  is  no  criterion  of  our 
spiritual  state.  The  word  of  God  in  the  Scriptures,  humbly  apprehended  and  obeyed, 
is  the  only  safe  guide  to  follow. 

IV.  Though  a  man  must  needs  die  in  his  own  sin,  he  may  also  die  ih  the 
FULNESS  OP  Christ's  salvation  fbom  _sin.  The  end  of  life,  with  all  its  gloom,  with 
all  its  manifestations  of  despair,  callousness,  and  self -righteousness  in  some,  is  in 
others  an  occasion  to  manifest  in  great  beauty  the  power  of  God  in  the  spirits  of 
men.  One  must  die  in  his  own  sin,  yet  he  may  also  experience  the  cleansing  of  that 
blood  which  takes  away  all  sin.  One  must  die  in  his  own  sin,  yet  this  very  necessity 
may  also  lead  to  dying  in  the  faith  of  Jesus,  in  the  hope  of  glory,  and  in  the  arms  of 
infinite  love.    ■ 

V.  We  should  aim  that  kothino  woesb  than  dying  in  cub  own  sin  mat  be 
said  of  us.  It  is  bad  enough  that  sin  should  be  dominant,  even  without  compelling 
na  to  leave  the  ordinary  paths  of  life ;  those  reckoned,  among  men,  useful  and  harm- 
less. It  is  bad  enough  to  feel  that  in  us  there  are  the  possibilities  of  the  most 
abandoned  and  reckless,  of  the  worst  of  tyrants,  sensualists,  and  desperadoes ;  only 
lacking  such  temptations,  associations,  and  opportunities,  as  may  make  the  possible 
actual.  Be  it  ours,  if  we  cannot  show  a  spotless  record,  if  we  cannot  claim  a  person- 
ality that  started  from  innocence,  at  all  events  to  show  as  little  of  harm  to  the  world 
as  possible.  We  cannot  keep  out  of  Zelophehad's  company ;  let  us  keep  out  of 
Korah'8.    There  is  a  medium  between  being  a  Pharisee  and  a  profligate. — Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


MosBs  and  Joshua  (vera.  12 — 23).  Ver. 
12. — And  tlie  Lord  said  unto  Hoses.  It  is 
impossible  to  determine  the  exact  place  of 
this  amioniicement  in  the  order  of  events  nar- 
rated. It  would  appear  from  eh.  HKxi.  1 
that  the  war  with  the  Midianites  occurred 
later,  and  certainly  the  address  to  the  people 
and  to  Joshua  in  Deut.  zxxi.  1 — 8  presup- 
poses the  formal  appointment  here  recorded ; 
but  the  chronology  of  the  concluding  chap- 
ters of  Numbers  is  evidently  very  uncertain ; 
they  may,  or  may  not,  be  arranged  in  order 
of  time.  We  may  with  good  reason  suppose 
that  the  summons  to  die  was  only  separated 
from  its  fulfilment  by  the  brief  interval 
necessary  to  complete  what  work  was  yet 
unfinished  (such  as  the  punishment  of  the 
Midianites  and  the  provisional  settlement  of 
the  trans-Jordanic  country)  before  the  river 
was  crossed.  Into  this  Uount  Abarim.  See 
on  ch.  xxxiii.  47  ;  Deut.  xxxii.  49  sq.,  whore 
this  command  is  recited  more  in  detaiL 
Abarim  was  apparently  the  range  behind  the 
Arboth  Moab,  the  northern  portion  of  which 
opposite  to  Jericho  was  called  Pisgah  (ch. 
sxi.   20 ;  Deut.  iii.   27),   and  the  highest 


point  Nebo  (Deut.  xxxii.  49  ;  xxxiv.  1),  after 
the  name  of  a  neighbouring  town  (ch.  xxxiii. 
47).  And  see  the  land.  Moses  had  already 
been  told  that  he  should  not  enter  the  pro- 
mised land  (ch.  zx.  12),  yet  ha  is  allowed  the 
consolation  of  seeing  it  with  his  eyes  before 
his  death.  It  would  seem  from  Deut.  iii. 
26 — 27  that  this  favour  was  aooorded  him  in 
answer  to  his  prayer. 

Ver.  14; — Por  ye  rebelled  against  my 
oonunandment.  Bather,  "as  ye  rebelled.^' 
The  same  word,  lE'SS,  guomodo,  is  used  here 
as  in  the  previous  clause.  That  is  the  water 
of  Meribah  in  Eadesh  in  the  wilderness  ol 
Zin.  These  words  have  all  the  appearance 
of  an  explanatory  gloss  intended  to  make 
the  reference  more  plain  to  the  reader  or 
hearer.  It  is  impossible  to  suppose  that 
they  formed  part  of  the  Divine  message ;  nor 
does  it  seem  probable  that  Moses  would  have 
added  them  to  the  narrative  as  it  stands, 
because,  in  view  of  ch.  xx.  13,  no  necessity 
for  explanation  existed.  It  is  quite  possible 
that  both  ch.  xx.  13  and  the  present  clause 
are  subsequent  additions  to  the  text  intended 


OH.  xxvn.  12—23.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES. 


S69 


to  clear  up  an  obvious  confusion  between  the 
"strife"  at  Kephidim  (Ezod.  xvii.  7)  and 
that  at  Kadesh. 

Ver.  16. — And  Koses  spake  unto  the 
Lord.  The  behaviour  of  Moses  as  here  re- 
corded (see,  however,  on  Deut.  iii.  23  sq., 
which  seems  to  throw  a  somewhat  different 
light  upon  the  matter)  was  singularly  and 
touchingly  disinterested.  For  himSelf  not 
even  a  word  of  complaint  at  his  punishment, 
which  must  have  seemed,  thus  close  at 
hand,  more  inexplicably  severe  than  ever; 
all  his  thoughts  and  his  prayers  for  the 
people — that  one  might  take  his  place,  and 
reap  for  himself  and  Israel  the  reward  of  all 
his  toil  and  patience. 

Ver.  17. — Which  may  go  ont  before  them, 
and  which  may  go  in  before  them.  A 
comparison  with  the  words  of  Moses  in  Deut. 
xxxi.  2,  and  of  Caleb  in  Josh.  xiv.  11,  shows 
that  the  going  out  and  coming  in  refer  to  the 
vigorous  prosecution  of  daily  business,  and 
the  fatigues  of  active  service.  Which  may 
lead  them  out,  and  which  may  bring  them 
in.  The  underlying  image  is  that  of  a  shep- 
herd and  his  flock,  which  suggests  itself  so 
naturally  to  all  that  have  the  care  and  govern- 
ance of  men  (cf.  John  x.  3,  4,  16).  As  sheep 
'Which  have  no  shepherd.  And  are,  there- 
fore, helpless,  bewildered,  scattered,  lost,  and 
devoured.  The  image  is  frequent  in  Scrip- 
ture (cf.  1  Kings  xxii.  17  ;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  5 ; 
Zech.  X.  2 ;  Matt.  ix.  36).  The  words  of 
the  Septuagint  are  itatl  7rp6;8ara  oils  oiiK 
Id  n  TTOtjuqi', 

Yer.  18. — Take  thee  Joshua.  Joshua  was 
now  for  the  first  time  designated  at  the  re- 
quest of  Moses  as  his  successor ;  he  had, 
however,  been  clearly  marked  out  for  that 
office  by  his  position  as  one  of  the  two 
favoured  survivors  of  the  elder  generation, 
and  as  the  "minister"  and  confidant  of 
Moses.  In  regard  of  the  first  he  had  no 
equal  but  Caleb,  in  regard  of  the  second  he 
stood  quite  alone.  A  man  in  whom  is  the 
spirit  nn  here,  although  without  the 
definite  article,  can  only  mean  the  Holy 
Spirit,  as  in  ch.  xi.  25  sq.  Lay  thine  hand 
upon  him.  According  to  Deut.  xxxiv.  0, 
th'is  was  to  be  done  in  order  that  Joshua 
might  receive  with  the  imposition  of  hands 
a  spiritual  gift  (charisma)  of  wisdom  for  the 
discharge  of  his  high  office.  It  would  appear 
also  from  the  next  paragraph  that  it  was 


done  as  an  ontward  and  public  token  of  the 
committal  of  authority  to  Joshua,  as  th« 
successor  of  Moses. 

Ver.  19. — Give  him  a  charge.  rH[l*-lV, 
Septuagint,  ivri^y  avTif,  Command  or  in- 
struct him  as  to  his  duties. 

Ver.  20. — Put  some  of  thine  honour  upon 
him,  or,  "some  of  thy  dignity"  (Tl^HlJ), 
Septuagint,  iiiiatiq  r^j  W?ijc  ffow  iir  a\]T6v. 

Ver.  21. — He  shall  stand  before  Eleazar 
the  priest.  This  points  In  the  essential  dif- 
ference between  Moses  and  Joshua,  and  all 
who  came  after  until  the  "Prophet  like 
unto"  Moses  was  raised  up.  Moses  was 
as  much  above  the  priests  as  he  was  above 
the  tribe  princes ;  but  Joshua  was  only  the 
civil  and  military  head  of  the  nation,  and 
was  as  much  subordinate  to  the  high  priest 
in  one  way  as  the  high  priest  was  subordin- 
ate to  him  in  another.  In  after  times  no 
doubt  the  political  headship  quite  over- 
powered and  overshadowed  the  ecclesiastical, 
but  this  does  not  seem  to  have  been  so 
intended,  or  to  have  been  the  case  in  Eleazar's 
lifetime.  Who  shall  ask  counsel  for  him 
after  the  judgment  of  Vrim  before  the  Lord. 
Eather,  "who  shall  inquire  for  him  in  the 
judgment  of  Urim."  D'T-INn  D3^'p3.  Sep- 
tuagint, rfiv  Kptaiv  Tdv  SriXuiv.  The  Urim 
of  this  passage  and  of  1  Sam.  xxviii.  6  seems 
identical  with  the  Urim  and  Thummim  of 
Exod.  xxviii.  30 ;  Levit.  viii.  8.  What  it 
actually  was,  and  how  it  was  used  in  con- 
sulting God,  is  not  told  us  in  Scripture,  and 
has  left  no  reliable  trace  in  the  tradition  of 
the  Jews  ;  it  must,  therefore,  remain  for  ever 
an  insoluble  mystery.  It  does  not  appear 
that  Moses  ever  sought  the  judgment  of 
Urim,  for  he  possessed  more  direct  means  of 
ascertaining  the  will  of  God;  nor  does  it 
seem  ever  to  have  been  resorted  to  after  the 
time  of  David,  for  the  "more  sure  word  of 
prophecy"  superseded  it.  Its  real  use, 
therefore,  belonged  to  the  dark  ages  of  Israel, 
after  the  light  of  Moses  had  set,  and  before 
the  Ught  of  the  prophets  had  arisen.  At  his 
word.  Literally,  "after  his  mouth,"  i.e. 
according  to  the  decision  of  Eleazar,  given 
after  consulting  God  by  means  of  the  Urim 
(cf.  Josh.  ix.  14 ;  Judges  i.  1). 

Ver.  23. — And  gave  him  a  charge.  This 
charge  is  nowhere  recorded,  for  it  cannot 
possibly  be  identified  with  the  passing  words 
of  exhortation  in  Deut.  xxxi.  7> 


HOillLBTICS. 

Vers.  12 — 2S. — The  outward  failure  and  inward  victory  of  Moses.  In  this  section 
we  have  two  things  very  plainfy :  spiritually,  we  have  tne  weakness  ot  Ine  law,  and 
its  inability  to  do  what  only  Jesus  can  do  for  his  people :  morally,  we  have  the  beauty 
of  an  uncomplaining  submission  to  the  chastening  hand  of  God,  and  of  gladly  seeing 
others  reap  where  we  have  sown ;  succeed  where  we  have  failed.   Consider,  therefore— 

N0MBEB8.  B  B 


870  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oh.  xxvii.  18—29. 

L  That  Moses  must  not  lead  thb  feofls  into  the  fbomisbd  land  beoaubb 
or  THE  FBOTED  IMFBBFECTION  OF  HIS  CHABACTGB.  It  Can  hardly  indeed  be  Bupposed 
that  Joshua  was  in  himself  more  perfect,  or  on  the  whole  more  dear  to  God,  than 
Moses :  but  Joshua  was  not  known  to  have  failed  distinctly  and  publicly  as  Moses 
was  at  Meribah ;  therefore  be  seemed  to  answer  to  the  Divine  ideal,  to  the  require- 
ment of  perfect  holiness,  better  than  Moses.  Even  so  the  law  made  nothing  per- 
fect, accomplished  nothing  fully,  because  it  was  known  and  felt  to  be  imperfect.  As 
applied  to  the  guidance  and  training  of  human  life  for  a  better  world  it  broke  down. 
Therefore  it  must  be  set  aside  in  favour  of  something  more  perfect :  its  glory  must 
be  done  away  before  the  glory  that  excelleth  (2  Cor.  iii  10 ;  Heb.  vii.  18,  19 ; 
X.  1,  &c.). 

II.  That  Moses  was  not  permitted  tx)  obobs  the  Jordan:  bo  much  of  the 
inheritance  of  Israel  as  lay  on  the  wilderness  side  of  Jordan,  he  might  enter  and 
settle,  but  he  must  not  cross  the  river.  Even  so  it  was  not  possible  for  the  law  to 
enter  in  any  wise  upon  the  life  to  come,  the  land  which  is  very  far  ofE,  beyond  the 
stream  of  Death.  This  was  its  limitation  imposed  upon  it  by  God,  by  reason  of  its 
weakness,  that  it  dealt  only  with  this  life,  and  with  such  religious  sanctions,  joys, 
and  consolations,  as  lie  upon  this  side  the  grave  exclusively.  Immortal  life  was 
without  the  province  of  the  law,  and  could  only  be  enteredf  in  Jesus  (John  i.  17 ; 
xi.  25 ;  2  Tim.  i  10). 

III.  That  Moses  was  permitted  to  see  the  land  ere  he  departed.  Even  so 
the  law,  which  brought  men  to  the  very  confines  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but 
could  not  bring  them  in  (of.  Matt.  xi.  11),  had  yet  within  itself  a  clear  vision  of  the 
fulfilment  of  its  own  hopes.  The  Song  of  Simeon  and  the  Voice  of  the  Baptist  are 
the  dying  testimony  of  the  law,  seeing  the  salvation  of  God  to  which  it  had  led 
through  many  a  weary  year,  and  so  content  to  pass  away  without  enjoying  it  (Luke 
ii  29,  30 ;  John  iii.  29—31,  and  cf.  Heb.  xi.  13 ;  John  viiL  56). 

IV.  That  Moses  craved  op  God  a  sucoessoe  to  himself  who  should  do  what 
HE  COULD  NOT  DO.  Even  so  the  law  through  all  its  voices  craved  for  one,  and 
demanded  one  of  God,  who  should  really  save,  who  should  indeed  open  that  king- 
dom of  heaven  to  which  itself  pointed,  yet  was  too  feeble  to  enter. 

V.  That  God  designated  Joshua  ('lijcroBc)  to  take  up  and  to  fulfil  the  work  or 
Moses.  Even  so,  what  the  law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the  flesh, 
that  hath  God  accomplished  by  his  holy  servant  Jesus  (Acts  xiii.  39 ;  Bom,  viii.  3). 

VI.  That  Moses  instituted  Joshua  to  his  office  before  the  people,  and 
DECLARED  his  WORE  TO  HIM.  Even  SO  was  Jesus  proclaimed  beforehand  to  all  the 
faithful  by  the  law  which  pointed  him  out  as  the  Captain  of  our  salvation ;  and  our 
Lord  himself,  in  his  human  nature,  learnt  from  the  law  what  himself  should  be  and 
do  and  sufEer  (Luke  xxiv.  26,  27 ;  John  xix.  28 ;  cf.  Matt,  xxvi  54 ;  Acts  xiii.  27 ; 
xvii.  3 ;  xxvi.  23 ;  xxviii.  22). 

Consider  again,  with  respect  to  the  conduct  of  Moses  at  this  time,  wherein  he  is 
not  a  foil  to  one  greater,  but  a  pattern  to  all  the  servants  of  God  — 

I.  That  his  punishment  seemed  vert  bitter  at  this  time:  much  more  so 
surely  than  when  first  announced,  because  then  the  land  was  far  ofE,  now  it  was  very 
nigh ;  Uien  there  was  yet  hope  that  the  Lord  would  repent  him  of  his  sternness,  now 
the  decree  was  palpably  final  and  irrevocable.  After  so  many  additional  toils,  and 
after  so  many  happy  anticipations  of  victory,  to  find  that  the  sentence  of  exclusion 
still  held  good  must  have  been  bitter  indeed  I 

II.  That  his  punishment  was  in  fact  inexplicable  to  himself,  and  to  all, 

at  teat  time — FOR  THE  EXPLANATION  WAS  NOT   TO  COMB   FOB  MANY  CENTURIES.     It 

is  only  in  the  glory  of  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration  that  we  can  understand  or  justify 
the  apparent  severity  with  which  Moses  was  treated.  His  sentence  was  "  exem- 
plary," for  the  sake  of  the  people,  in  order  to  show  in  the  most  striking  instance  that 
God  requireth  a  perfect  holiness,  and  a  sinless  Mediator.  But  for  himself,  as  (on  the 
whole)  a  most  faithful  servant,  the  sentence  was  in  fact  reversed;  the  wrath  was 
swallowed  up  in  mercy.  Moses  died  outside  the  promised  land,  but  his  body  was 
preserved  from  corruption  by  the  power  of  God  (cf .  Deut.  xxxiv.  6  with  Jude  9), 
and  in  that  body  he  did  actually  stand  within  the  inheritance  of  Israel  and  talk  with 


OH.  xivii.  12—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEB8.  871 

JeauB  of  the  decease  {lio!op)  which  he  should  accomplish  at  Jerusalem  (Luke  ix. 
31,  &o.).  And  note,  that  in  Mosea  and  Joshua  we  may  clearly  see  the  distinction 
between  the  Divine  treatment  of  men  as  types  and  as  individuals.  Moses,  e.  sr.,was 
made  in  his  own  time  to  yield  to  Joshua,  to  die  in  exile  while  Joshua  led  on  to 
victory  and  home ;  and  that  obviously  because  Moses  represented  the  weakness  of 
the  law,  Joshua  the  power  of  the  gospel.  We,  however,  with  the  New  Testament 
in  our  hands,  have  no  difficulty  in  seeing  that  as  individual  servants  of  God,  Moses  is 
more  honoured  and  more  greatly  rewarded  than  Joshua ;  for  God  is  not  extreme  to 
mark  what  is  done  amiss  by  those  who  in  the  main  serve  him  nobly,  unselfishly,  and 
patiently ;  nor  is  it  in  truth  a  righteous  thing  with  God  for  one  sin  of  temper  to 
confiscate  the  rewards  of  many  years  of  devotion.  As  a  type  Joshua  stands  higher 
because  he  was  unblamed :  as  a  man  Moses  is  more  dear  to  God,  because  his  work 
was  far  more  hard,  his  position  more  discouraging,  and  his  lot  less  happy,  than  that 
of  Joshua,  and  he  himself  not  less  faithful. 

III.  That  Moses  did  not  complain  ob  rebel.  We  know  indeed  from  his  own 
mouth  (Deut.  iii.  24),  that  he  privately  besought  the  Lord  to  let  him  go  over ;  but 
when  the  Lord  refused  him  (for  the  time  present)  he  submitted  without  a  word  of 
complaint.  Here  was  Moses'  meekness  (ch.  xii.  3)  ;  not  that  he  was  not  sometimes 
provoked  so  that  he  forgot  himself ;  but  that  he  habitually  humbled  himself  to  bear 
meekly  even  what  seemed  most  hard. 

IV.  That  his  habitual  unselfishness  showed  itself  in  concebh  fob  hib 
FEOFLE  when  he  was  GONE.  He  did  not  harp  upon  his  own  fate,  or  brood  upon 
his  own  sorrow,  but  thought  only  of  the  people,  what  should  become  of  them, 

V.  That  in  his  unselfish  concern  foe  them  he  was  willing  and  anxious 
that  another  should  be  placed  oybb  them  in  his  stead.  And  this  showed  the 
highest  generosity  of  mind,  because  even  very  noble  and  otherwise  unselfish  people 
constantly  betray  jealousy  and  displeasure  at  the  thought  of  others  taking  their 
place.  To  one  who  had  wielded  absolute  power  for  forty  years,  it  might  well  have 
seemed  impossible  to  ask  for  a  successor. 

VI.  That  in  his  loyalty  to  the  King  of  Israel  hb  gladly  devolved  hib  own 

DIGNITY    UFON    ONE    WHO    HAD    BEEN    HIB    OWN    BEBVANT,  AND    OF    ANOTHER    TBI6B. 

Moses  made  no  efEort  to  advance  his  sons,  as  even  Samuel  did  (1  Sam.  viii.  1),  nor 
had  they  any  name  or  pre-eminence  in  Israel ;  nor  did  he  show  the  least  jealousy  of 
Joshua,  although  he  had  been  his  own  minister  and  (humanly  speaking)  owed 
everything  to  him. 

Consider,  again,  with  respect  to  Joshua  as  a  figure  of  our  Lord — 
I.  That  he  was  to  sufbbbbdb  Mobeb.    (See  above,  and  cf .  Matt.  v.  17 ;  Acts  vL 
14 ;  Heb.  iii  3.) 

IL  That  he  was  appointbd  in  answbb  to  the  prayer  that  God  would  "  bet 
A  man  oveb  the  congregation."  Even  so  the  Lord  is  that  Son  of  man  whom  God 
hath  ordained  to  be  the  Head  of  the  Church,  the  human  arbiter  of  human  destiniea, 
the  human  pattern  and  guide  of  all  believers  (Acts  ii.  36  ;.x.  42  ;  Heb.  ii.  16 — 18  ; 
Eph.  i.  22,  23). 

III.  That  hb  was  to  oo  out  and  to  go  in  befobb  his  people  ;  ^  <.  he  was  to 
lead  an  active  and  busy  life  in  their  sight  and  in  their  behalf.  _  Even  so  our  Lord 
fulfilled  his  ministry  before  the  eyes  of  all  the  people,  not  in  solitary  meditation  nor 
in  calm  retirement,  but  in  a  ceaseless  activity  of  labour  for  the  bodies  and  souls  of 
men  (Luke  ii.  49  ;  John  iv.  34 ;  ix.  4 ;  xviii.  20 ;  Acts  x.  38). 

IV.  That  he  was  to  lead  his  people  out,  and  to  bring  them  in,  as  a  shepherd 
does  his  flock.  Even  so  our  Lord  goes  before  his  own  in  all  things  whether  in  life 
or  in  death,  leading  them  out  of  the  uncertain  wilderness  of  this  world,  bringing 
them  in  to  the  unchangeable  rest  of  the  world  to  come  (Ps.  xxiii.  4 ;  John  x.  3,  sq^. ; 
1  Pet.  ii.  21 ;  Rev.  i.  18). 

V.  That  he  wab  to  be  a  shepherd  to  them  that  had  otherwise  been  shephbbd- 
LEBB  (Ezek.  xxxiv.  23  j  Matt.  ix.  36 ;  Heb.  xiil  20 ;  1  Peter  v.  4 ;  Rev.  vii.  17).  Bvi 
note,  whereas  Joshua  was  to  stand  before  Eleazar,  and  seek  counsel  and  command 
through  him,  our  Saviour  is  both  Captain  and  Priest  of  his  people,  and  knoweth  of 
himself  the  will  of  the  Father  (Matt.  xt.  27  ;  John  i.  18 ;  x.  16),  and  is  the  Shepherd 
•nd  Overseer  of  souls  as  well  as  bodies  (1  Pet.  ii.  25). 

bb2 


»72  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [ch.  xxvii.  12—23. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Vera.  12 — 14. — 6o^»  word  to  his  dying  servant.  The  death  of  Moses  was  as 
singular  as  his  life  had  been.  The  scene  of  it,  a  mountain-top,  where  he  might  be 
alone  with  God  and  yet  have  a  wide  prospect  of  the  promised  land ;  the  manner  of 
it,  not  by  gradual  failure  of  natural  strength,  but  while  he  was  still  able  to  breast  the 
steep  mountain  side ;  the  mystery  of  it,  such  that  no  man  knew  where  he  was  buried. 
Yet  underneath  this  singularity  there  was  much  that  is  often  seen  in  the  departure 
of  God's  servants,  and  which  we  shall  find  it  profitable  to  contemplate. 

I.  The  Lord  reminds  his  dying  servant  op  his  sin  (ver.  14).  Dying  thoughts 
are  serious  thoughts,  and  it  would  be  strange  if  they  did  not  often  turn  on  the  falls 
and  shortcomings  of  the  past  life.  Thoughts  about  sin  are  of  two  kinds : — 1.  There 
may  be  the  recollection  of  sin  without  any  knowledge  of  forgiveness.  It  was  not  so 
that  Moses  remembered  Meribah.  The  remembrance  of  unforgiven  sin  banishes 
peace.  The  soul  cannot  bear  to  look  back,  for  the  past  is  full  of  shapes  of  terror ;  it 
cannot  bear  to  look  up,  for  it  sees  there  the  face  of  an  offended  God ;  it  cannot  bear 
to  look  forward,  for  the  future  is  peopled  with  unknown  terrors.  2.  There  may  be 
the  recollection  of  sin  and  at  the  same  time  an  assured  persuasion  of  forgiveness. 
This  is  by  no  means  inconsistent  with  peace.  Not  that,  even  thus,  the  remembrance 
of  sin  is  pleasant.  Moses  is  put  in  mind  of  Meribah  to  keep  him  humble.  Sin 
remembered  cannot  but  cause 'shame  ;  yet  it  is  quite  compatible  with  great  peace  of 
mind.  Not  only  80,'there  is  a  calm  and  soul-filling  peace  which  is  the_ fruit  of  for- 
giveness, and  diffuses  itself  most  abundantly  when  the  soul  expatiates  on  the 
remembrance  at  once  of  its  own  sin  and  the  Lord's  forgiving  grace.  "  Bless  the 
Lord,  oh  my  soul,  who  forgiveth  all  thine  iniquities." 

II.  The  Lord  comforts  his  servant  in  the  prospect  of  depabtube.  1.  By  giving 
him  a  sight  of  the  good  in  store  for  the  Church.  It  is  remarkable  how  often  saints 
who  have  spent  their  strength  on  some  great  Christian  enterprise,  and  earnestly 
desired  to  see  it  accomplished  before  their  departure,  have  been  denied  this  gratifica- 
tion. Moses  did  not  cross  the  Jordan ;  David  did  not  see  the  Temple,  nor  Daniel 
the  Return,  nor  John  the  Baptist  the  manifestation  of  Christ's  glory.  Yet  to  all  those 
saints  there  was  granted  some  such  view  as  that  which  gladdened  the  eye  of  Moses 
on  Nebo.  He  who  knows  the  hearts  knew  how  dear  to  Moses'  heart  was  the  good 
of  Israel.  It  is  an  excellent  token  of  g^ace  in  the  heart  when  the  prospect  of  good 
days  in  store  for  the  Church  and  cause  of  God  is  a  cordial  in  one's  last  sickness.  2. 
By  telling  him  of  the  good  and  congenial  society  that  awaits  him  in  the  other  world. 
"  Thy  people."  When  we  die  we  go  to  God.  The  ascension  of  Christ  in  our  nature 
has  filled  heaven  for  us  with  such  a  blaze  of  fresh  light  that  we  must  ever  think  of 
heaven  chiefly  as  a  "  being  with  the  Lord."  Yet  it  is  a  precious  thought,  and  full  of 
comfort,  that  those  who  fall  asleep  in  Jesus  are  gathered  to  their  people,  their  true 
kindred.  Moses  goes  to  be  with  Abraham  and  Isaac  and  Jacob,  with  Joseph,  with 
Miriam  and  Aaron. — B. 

Vers.  18—20. — The  appovntinant  of  Joshua  to  he  Moses'  successor.  Moses,  after 
having  been  the  leader  of  his  people  for  forty  years,  is  at  length  to  get  his 
discharge.  Nothing  has  yet  been  determined  regarding  a  successor.  The  point  is, 
on  every  account,  too  important  to  be  left  open  till  the  present  leader  has  passed 
away.  A  change  of  leadership,  always  hazardous,  is  especially  hazardous  when  the 
army  is  in  the  field  and  the  enemy  is  on  the  watch.  If  the  Divine  wisdom  judged  it 
necessary  that  Eleazar  should  be  invested  with  the  high  priesthood  before  Aaron 
died,  much  more  is  it  necessary  that,  before  Moses  lays  down  the  sceptre,  a  successor 
should  be  appointed  and  placed  in  command.  We  are  now  to  see  how  this  was  done. 
The  story,  besides  its  intrinsic  interest,  which  is  not  small,  is  interesting,  moreover, 
on  this  account,  that  the  mode  of  procedure  prescribed  and  followed  in  this  case 
furnished  precedents  which  continue  to  be  observed  amongst  us  down  to  the  present 
day.     Three  topics  claim  notice. 

I.  At  whose  instance  this  appointment  took  place.  It  was  Moses  who  sued  for 
•  saccessor.    It  was  not  the  people  who  urged  on  the  business,  nor  was  it  necessaiy 


OH.  xxvii.  12—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES,  373 

to  overcome  the  reluctance  of  the  present  leader  by  a  Divine  command.  No  sooner 
does  Moses  receive  notice  to  demit  than  he  prays  lor  a  successor,  and  begs  that  his 
eyes  may  see  him  before  he  dies.  His  experience  of  the  government  makes  him 
dread  the  dangers  of  an  interregnum.  "  Sheep  without  a  shepherd,"  such  would  the 
tribes  be  without  a  leader ;  unable  to  keep  order  among  themselves,  and  exposed  to 
every  enemy.  It  betokened  great  nobility  of  soul  in  Moses  that  this  was  the  thought 
uppermost  m  his  mind  on  hearing  that  his  hour  was  come.  The  paramount  feeling 
of  his  heart  was  concern  for  the  honour  of  the  Lord  and  the  good  of  Israel  after  his 
decease.  Some  men  cannot  endure  the  sight  of  a  successor ;  Moses  earnestly  desired 
to  see  his  successor  before  be  died.  Such  being  his  desire,  see  where  he  carries  it. 
"  Let  the  Lord  set  a  man  over  the  eongregatioiar  From  the  Lord  he  had  received 
his  commicsion  at  the  bush;  from  the  Lord  he  sues  for  a  successor.  Moses  was 
emphatically  the  "servant  of  the  Lord;"  and  none  but  the  Lord  has  authority  to 
nominate  the  beir  to  so  high  an  o£Bce.  Moses  has  another  reason  for  turning  God- 
wards  at  this  time.  None  but  the  Lord  knows  the  fittest  man,  or  can  furnish  him 
with  the  wisdom  and  valour  the  office  will  crave.  He  is  "  the  God  of  the  spirits  of 
all  flesh."  He  made  men's  souls,  and  he  knows  them.  He  admits  them  into  mtimacy 
with  himself.  He  is  their  Saviour  and  Portion.  When  the  Church,  or  any  part  of 
it,  finds  itseU  in  want  of  a  man  fit  to  be  intrusted  with  some  ofSce  of  high  responsi- 
bility, or  to  be  sent  forth  on  some  peculiarly  di£5cult  mission,  this  is  the  quarter  to 
which  it  must  turn.  The  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh  can  furnish  them  with  the 
man  they  want ;  He,  and  no  other. 

II.  On  whom  thb  appointment  was  bestowed.  "  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  a  man 
in  whom  is  the  spirit."  Joshua  was  no  stranger  to  Moses ;  he  had  been  "  Moses' 
minister  from  his  youth  "  (ch.  xi.  28),  and  known  to  him  as  a  man  every  way  fitted 
to  be  his  successor.  He  must  have  thought  of  him ;  yet  he  did  not  presume  to 
suggest  his  name ;  he  waited  to  hear  what  the  Lord  would  speak.  N.B.  When 
Moses  was  about  to  die  and  a  successor  was  sought,  it  turned  out  that  the  Lord  had 
anticipated  the  want.  The  successor  of  Moses  was  in  training  for  forty  years  before 
Moses  died.     This  happens  of  tener  than  many  suppose. 

III.  The  manner  of  the  investitcbe.  1.  Joshua  was  presented  to  the  congrega- 
tion in  a  public  assembly.  To  be  sure,  he  owed  his  appointment  to  Divine  nomin- 
ation, not  to  popular  election.  He  was,  like  Moses,  the  Lord's  vicegerent.  Never- 
theless, the  people  were  acknowledged  in  the  appointment.  They  were  to  be  Joshua's 
subjects,  but  not  his  slaves.  Accordingly,  it  was  judged  only  fair  and  right  that  they 
should  be  informed  publicly  of  the  appointment ;  that  they  should  witness  the 
investiture  and  hear  the  charge  (of.  ch.  xx.  27).  2.  Moses  laid  his  hands  upon  him. 
This  is  the  earliest  example  in  Scripture  of  a  rite  of  investiture  which  was  afterwards 
much  in  use,  which  was  transferred  by  the  apostles  to  the  New  Testament  Church, 
and  is  the  familiar  custom  of  the  Churches  of  Christ  still.  The  terms  in  which  it  is 
here  enjoined  place  the  intention  of  it  in  a  clear  light.  (1)  It  denoted  the  investiture 
of  Joshua  with  the  ofBce  of  leader  and  commander  in  succession  to  Moses.  "  Thou 
shalt  put  some  of  thine  honour  upon  him,  that  all  the  congfregation  maybe  obedient" 
(ver.  20).  Not  all  his  honour ;  for  Moses  was  set  over  all  God's  house,  and  in  that 
respect  had  no  successor;  h\iipart  of  his  honour,  particularly  that  part  in  virtue  of 
which  he  was  captain  of  the  host  of  Israel  (of.  Acts  vi.  6 ;  xiii.  3).  (2)  It  denoted 
also  the  bestowment  on  Joshua  of  the  gifts  appropriate  to  his  new  o£Sce.  Not  that 
Joshua  was,  till  now,  without  valour  or  wisdom.  During  his  long  apprenticeship  of 
forty  years  he  had  given  abundant  evidence  of  a  rich  dowry  of  these  virtues.  .But 
the  laying  on  of  the  hands  of  Moses  by  Divine  command  was  a  token  and  pledge 
that  a  double  portion  of  his  master's  spirit  would  be  thenceforward  bestowed,  to 
strengthen  him  to  take  up  his  master's  task  and  cany  it  forward  to  completion.  The 
pledge  was  redeemed.  "  Joshua  was  full  of  the  spirit  of  wisdom,  for  Moses  had  laid 
his  hands  upon  him  "  (Deut.  xxxiv.  9 ;  cf.  1  Tim.  iv.  14).  3.  Moses  gave  him  a 
charge.  The  scope  and  substance  of  the  charge  are  recorded  in  Deut.  iii.  28  and 
xxxi.  7,  8.  The  design  of  this  part  of  the  service  was  twofold.  On  the  one  hand, 
Moses  faithfully  expounded  the  duties  belonging  to  the  office  with  which  he  was 
now  invested.  He  certified  him  that  it  was  no  idle  dignity  he  was  now  entering 
apon,  but  an  arduous  work.    And  this  was  done  not  within  a  tent,  or  in  some  aoUtar;^ 


S74  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [ch.  Xxvii.  18—23. 

place,  but  publicly,  and  before  all  the  congregation,  that  they  as  well  as  Joshua 
might  hear.  On  the  other  hand,  Moses  laboured  to  strengthen  hia  successor's  heart. 
No  man  was  so  well  able  to  comfort  Joshua  as  Moses  was.  The  Lord  in  calling 
Moses  at  the  bush  had  given  him  the  promise, "  Surely  I  will  be  with  thee."  He  had 
kept  the  promise.  Moses  was  able  to  testify  that  when  God  calls  a  man  to  any  duty, 
he  will  be  with  him  in  the  discharge  of  the  duty  ;  so  that  the  most  timid  man  may 
well  be  strong  and  of  a  good  courage  in  the  work  the  Lord  has  given  him  to  do. — B. 

Vers.  12, 13. — The  alleviation*  of  death.  Death  a  penalty  even  in  the  adopted 
family  of  God,  though  turned  into  a  blessing  to  the  believer.  Some  of  the  allevia- 
tions of  the  penalty  suggested  by  this  command  to  Moses.  Through  faith  in  Christ 
we  may  enjoy — 

I.  A   CLEAR  VIEW  OF  THE  GLOKIOUS  FUTUBE  OF   THE  ChUBCH.     As  MoseS  Saw  the 

land,  not  yet  possessed,  but  already  "  given,"  so  may  faith  anticipate  the  goodly 
heritage  of  the  future.  Illustrate  Joseph's  death-bed  (Gen.  1.  24) ;  David's  antici- 
pations of  an  age  of  glory  under  Solomon ;  the  bright  glimpses  of  the  future  with 
which  nearly  every  one  of  the  minor  prophets  concludes. 

II.  A  EELEASE  FEOM  THE  GRAVE  RESPONSIBILITIES   OF    THAT    FUTURE.      Moses  Was 

spared  from  the  wars  of  the  Lord  in  the  conquest  of  Canaan.  And  Christians, 
though  willing, like  the  aged  Dr.  Lyman  Beecher,to  "  enlist  again  in  a  minute,"  "to 
begin  life  over  again,  and  work  once  more"  ('Autobiography,'  ii.  552),  are  spared 
from  the  conflicts  of  the  "  perilous  times  "  of  tiie  future. 

III.  An  ASSURANCE  THAT  THE  WORK  OF  GOD  WILL  BE  EFFICIENTLY  CARRIED  ON  WITH- 
OUT US.  Not  even  a  Moses  is  essential  to  the  Church  of  God  ;  Joshua  will  do  the  work 
M  well. 

IV.  An  admittance  to  the  company  of  the  pious  dead.  "  Thy  people,^'  who  died 
in  faith,  and  now  live  with  God.  With  brighter  hopes  than  any  heathens,  or  even 
than  Moses,  we  may  say,  "  I  go  to  the  majority." 

V.  A  peaceful  departure  such  as  other  loved  ones  have  experienced.  "  As 
Aaron  thy  brother  was  gathered."  We  have  seen  "  the  end  of  their  course  "  (Heb. 
xiii.  7),  and  may  expect  grace  for  dying  hours  such  as  they  enjoyed. — P. 

Vers.  18 — 21. — The  qwili/ications  for  the  public  service  of  God.  Some  of  these 
are  illustrated  in  the  case  of  Joshua. 

I.  The  iNDWELLiiiG  OF  THE  SPIRIT  OF  GoD  (ver.  18).  This  obvious  from  the 
past  history  of  Joshua,  especially  at  Kadesh  (chs.  xiii.,  xiv.).  Union  with  Christ 
through  faith,  attested  by  his  Holy  Spirit,  essential  for  us. 

II.  A  clear  CONVICTION  OF  DUTY.  We  need  the  assurance  of  a  mission, "  a  charge  " 
(Ter.  19),  whether  addressed  from  without  or  heard  in  the  secret  of  the  soul. 

III.  A  PROVIDENTIAL  APPOINTMENT.  "  Lay  thine  hand  upon  him."  Not  every  im- 
pulse is  to  be  taken  for  a  Divine  "  charge,"  lest  we  should  run  without  being  sent  (cf. 
Pb.  XXV.  4,  5  ;  cxliii.  8). 

IV.  The  CONFIDENCE  OF  THE  PEOPLE  OF  GOD  (ver.  20 ;  cf.  1  Tim.  iii.  7).  In  carry- 
ing on  our  work  we  may  need  the  cheerful  co-operation,  or  even  "  obedience  "  (ver. 
20),  which  confidence  in  our  character  and  commission  inspires. 

V.  Ceaseless  communion  with  and  direction  from  God  (ver.  21).  For  the  wel- 
fare of  a  "congregation  "  or  of  a  nation  may  depend  on  the  instructions  given,  or 
assumed  to  be  given,  in  God's  name. — P. 

Vers.  12 — ^23. — Preparing  for  the  end.  God  has  kept  in  view  this  solemn  depar- 
ture of  Moses,  even  from  the  time  of  sentence  on  him  for  his  transgression.  The 
heights  of  Abarim  were  visible  to  God  from  Meribah.  And  now  Israel  lies  at  their 
base,  the  work  of  Moses  is  done,  and  God  intimates  the  immediate  preparations  for 
his  departure.  God  had  already  said  to  Ijim  that  aftc  taking  vengeance  on  the 
Midiaa'tes  he  should  be  gathered  to  his  people  (ch.  xxxi.  2).  (Evidently  the  events 
of  ch.  ^xxi.  are  earlier  in  time  than  those  of  ch.  xxvii.  12 — 23.) 

I.  Tpe  place  of  departure  is  also  tee  place  of  a  glorious  vision.  The  eyes  of 
the  dyiJK  leader  closed  upon  the  sight  of  the  land  which  the  Lord  had  given  to  the 
Childrei  of  Israel.     We  may  be  sure  that  God  directed  the  feet  of  Mosee  to  th«  on« 


OH.  Kvii.  12—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBBE8.  376 

spot  -where  there  was  the  most  suggestive  view  of  Canaan,  Not  of  necessity  the 
view  of  greatest  geographical  extent,  but  probably  one  that  would  sufficiently  in- 
dicate the  variety  of  surface  and  products,  showing  also  something  of  the  populous 
citiei.  There  would  be  everything  to  impress  on  Moses  a  most  decided  and  cheering 
contrast  with  the  wilderness.  There  might  be  no  place  even  in  the  promised  land 
itself  where  he  could  get  a  better  view  for  the  purpose.  He  may  have  climbed  to 
difEerent  heights  during  the  sojourn  of  the  people  in  Moab,  and  seen  many  things  to 
gladden  his  heart,  yet  never  found  just  the  Abarim  point  of  view,  until  God  signified 
It  to  him.  There  are  many  points  of  wide  and  spirit-filling  view  to  which  we  may 
come  in  our  excursions  through  the  high  lands  of  Scriptural  truth  and  privilege,  but 
we  must  wait  for  God  himself  to  give  us  the  great  Abarim  point  of  view.  Many  a 
Moabite  shepherd  had  wandered  on  those  heights,  and  seen  with  the  outward  eye  the 
■ame  landscape  as  Moses ;  but  it  needed  a  Moses,  with  a  long-instructed,  experienced, 
and  privileged  heart,  to  see  what  the  Lord  would  show  him.  Balaam  was  driven 
from  one  height  to  another  by  the  unsatisfied  Balak,  yet  from  them  all  even  he,  the 
man  of  carnal  and  corrupt  mind,  saw  something  glorious.  What  then  must  not 
Moses  have  seen,  being  so  difEerent  a  man  from  Balaam,  and  looking  from  God's  own 
chosen  point  of  view  ? 

II.  It  is  also  the  place  fob  oheebinq  anticipations  or  the  earthly  puTnEE  of 
God's  people.  Moses  is  to  see  with  his  own  eyes  that  the  land  was  worth  forty 
years'  waiting  and  suffering  for.  The  object  stands  revealed  before  him  as  worthy 
of  the  effort.  And  though  the  earthly  future  of  Israel  is  not  to  be  his  future,  yet 
how  could  he  look  upon  it  otherwise  than  with  as  much  interest  and  solicitude  as  if 
it  were  his  own  ?  Certainly  that  future  was  assured,  as  far  as  promise  could  assure 
it,  and  all  the  tenor  of  experience  in  the  past.  Whatever  the  circumstances  of  Moses' 
death,  they  could  not  materially  afEect  the  course  of  the  people,  seeing  the  ever-loving, 
all-comprehending  God  had  them  in  charge.  But  it  became  God — it  was  a  sign  of 
loving  care  for  a  faithful  servant — ^that  Moses  should  die  as  he  did.  Quite  conceiv- 
ably he  might  have  died  in  the  gloom  caused  by  some  fresh  aberration  of  the  people, 
or  at  the  best  in  the  ordinary  circumstances  of  daily  life,  with  nothing  more  to  mark 
his  departure  than  if  he  were  one  of  the  most  obscure  persons  in  the  camp.  But 
God  orders  all  things  so  that  he  shall  depart  where  and  when  his  mind  may  be  filled 
with  great  joy  because  of  Israel's  coming  years  in  Canaan.  It  happened  not  to  him, 
as  it  has  happened  often  in  great  crises  of  human  affairs,  that  the  leader  has  been 
suddenly  called  away  with  the  feeling  in  his  heart,  "  After  me  the  deluge."  None 
indeed  knew  better  than  Moses  that  Canaan  would  have  its  own  difficulties.  From 
the  wilderness  to  Canaan  was  in  many  things  only  an  exchange  of  difficulties,  but  still 
Canaan  had  things  the  wilderness  never  had,  never  could  have,  else  it  would  not 
have  been  the  promised  land.  Moses  looks  down  on  Canaan,  and  he  sees  not  only 
the  land,  but  a  Joshua,  with  600,000  fighting  men  under  him,  a  tabernacle,  an  ark  of 
the  covenant,  institutions  in  a  measure  consolidated  by  the  daily  attention  of  forty 
years. 

III.  The  similar  assurances  we  may  have  as  to  the  future  of  God's  work  in 
the  world.  We  have  things  which  our  fathers  had  not — instruments,  opportunities, 
liberties,  and  successes  which  were  denied  to  them.  Yet  they  saw  the  bright  day 
coming ;  its  first  streaks  fell  on  their  dying  faces  ;  and  they  rejoiced  even  in  what 
they  could  not  share.  Aged  and  boflei-weary  Israelites  who  died  just  as  the  people 
were  leaving  Egypt  would  neverthelesS,rejoice  with  all  their  hearts  in  the  deliver- 
ance of  their  children.  And  Moses,  who  had  b^en  born  an  exile,  who  had  lived  forty 
years  among  strangers  in  Egypt,  forty  years  more  in  the  second  exile  of  Midian,  and 
forty  years  in  the  wilderness,  was  just  the  man  to  appreciate  the  satisfactions  which 
were  coming  to  his  brethren  at  last.  Thus  we:,ehould  learn  to  rejoice  with  all  our 
hearts  in  the  advent  of  possessions  and  privilege?  which  have  come  too  late  for 
ns  individually  to  share.  It  is  not  enough  languidly  to  say  that  things  will  be  better 
for  the  next  generation  than  they  are  for  the  present  ;:^^ould  be  our  joy  to  live 
and  work  as  Moses  did  for  the  attainment  of  this.  Let  all  oiir  life  be  a  slow  climb- 
ing of  Abarim,  then  our  closing  days  will  be  rewarded  with  Abatim's  view.  It  was 
the  glory  and  joy  of  Moses  that  while  he  looked  from  ^e  top  of  the  mount,  Israel 
yrui  in  the  plain  beneath.    They  were  not  far  away  in  the  wilderress  of  Sinai  or, 


ate  THE  B005:  Of  NUMBEkS.  [oh.  XXVII  12—23. 

worse  still,  in  the  brick-yards  of  Egypt.  Moses  had  brought  them  with  him,  or  rathei 
God  had  brought  him  and  them  together.  All  humble,  unselfish,  and  God-respeoting 
hearts,  who  work  through  evil  report  and  good  report  to  make  the  world  better,  will 
assuredly,  have  something  of  the  reward  of  Moses  from  the  top  of  Abarim.  As  con- 
cerns the  greatest  treasures  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  it  matters  not  in  what  generation 
we  live.  It  was  better  to  be  a  believing  Israelite  in  the  wilderness,  even  though  ho 
died  there,  than  an  unbelieving  one  in  Canaan.  It  will  be  better  in  the  judgment 
for  the  man  of  two  thousand  years  ago  who  looked  forward  longingly  for  the  Messiah 
than  for  the  man  of  to-day  Who  looks  back  carelessly  on  the  cross.  The  resources 
and  revelations  of  eternity  will  equalise  the  disparities  of  time.  All  the  same  it  will 
be  no  small  matter  if  those  who  have  taken  part  in  guiding  a  generation  through  the 
wilderness  see  the  earthly  Canaan  on  which  it  is  entering  before  they  are  gathered 
to  their  people.  Each  generation  should  leave  to  the  next  more  of  Canaan  and  less 
of  the  wilderness.  Each  generation,  though  it  enters  in  some  sort  upon  a  Canaan, 
should  leave  it  as  only  a  wilderness  compared  with  the  brighter  Canaan  that  is  to 
follow.  Let  our  confident,  determined  cry  ever  be.  Out  of  Christ  there  is  no  hope 
for  the  world.  Out  of  Christ  the  generations  of  men  must  become  more  and  more 
corrupt,  and  give  more  hold  for  the  pessimist  with  his  dismal  creed.  But  equally 
our  cry  must  be,  In  Christ  there  is  no  room  even  for  despondency,  let  alone  despair. 
Black  as  the  outlook  remains  on  a  world's  sins  and  sorrows,  the  God  who  showed 
Canaan  to  Moses  from  Abarim  holds  his  resources  undiminished  still  (Matt,  zxviii. 
20  ;  Eom.  viii.  28  ;  xi.  33—36 ;  xv.  19,  29  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  58  ;  2  Cor.  i.  20).— Y. 

Vers.  16 — 17. — The  solicitude  of  Moses  for  the  helpless  flock.  I.  The  pigubb 
USDEB  WHICH  MosBS  INDICATES  ISRAEL.  He  Speaks  of  them  as  a  flock  of  sheep, 
thus  venturing  on  a  meek  reference  to  the  quality  of  his  own  past  services.  He 
speaks  like  a  man  who  had  been  long  preparing,  even  before  Meribah,  for  an  emer- 
gency such  as  this.  He  knew  he  could  not  live  always,  and  he  saw  no  sufficiently 
hopeful  change  in  Israel.  He  had  to  deal  with  the  sheep-nature  in  them  from  the 
first,  and  that  nature  was  in  them  still  in  undiminished  vitality.  They  would,  he 
implies,  be  as  helpless  in  Canaan  as  in  the  wilderness.  He  had  not  yet  got  the  view 
from  Abarim,  but  that  view  would  only  deepen  his  thankfulness  that  God  had  given 
the  people  a  shepherd.  For  the  more  impressive  the  view,  and  the  more  there 
was  revealed  of  rich  and  abundant  pasture,  the  more  evident  it  would  become  that 
the  sheep  needed  guidance  in  order  to  make  full  use  of  the  pasture.  Passing  from 
the  wilderness  into  Canaan,  while  it  vastly  enlarges  the  sheep-privileges,  does  not 
in  itself  change  the  sheep  -  nature.  The  need  remains  in  equal  force  both  for 
guidance  and  protection.  Where  the  privileges  are  greater,  there,  consequently,  the 
possessions  will  be  greater ;  there  also  there  will  be  more  to  attack,  more  danger  of 
attack,  and  more  need  of  defence.  And  in  like  manner  how  helpless  we  are  of 
ourselves  among  the  vast  resources  and  promises  which  belong  to  God's  grace  in 
Christ  Jesus.  Unless  we  have  some  one  to  guide  and  strengthen,  and  show  us  the 
meaning  and  power  of  Divine  truth,  we  are  as  helpless  as  an  infant  would  be  with  a 
steam-engine.  Weak  and  strong  are  relative  terms.  Sheep  are  strong  enough  in 
certain  ways — strong  to  rebel  against  wholesome  restraints  and  break  through  them, 
but  not  strong  enough  to  repel  the  dangers  which  come  when  the  restraints  are 
broken  through.  Moses  had  only  too  often  seen  Israel  hanging  together  like  sheep, 
going  in  troops  after  some  headstrong  Korah,  while  men  of  the  Caleb  and  Joshua 
order  were  almost  to  be  counted  on  one's  fingers. 

II.  The  people  being  such,  a  shepherd  was  a  manifest  necessity.  Given 
■heep,  it  does  not  take  much  reasoning  to  infer  a  shepherd.  Moses  had  neen  a 
shepherd  himself,  both  literally  and  figuratively,  and  his  experience  of  the  sheep  in 
Midian  doubtless  sharpened  his  sense  of  the  analogy  as  he  gazed  on  the  human 
sheep  whom  he  had  led  for  forty  years.  A  man  unfamiliar  with  pastoral  life  might 
indeed  talk  in  a  general  way  of  the  fallen  children  of  men  as  sheep ;  but  it  needed  a 
Moses  to  speak  of  the  shepherd's  work  with  such  minuteness  and  sympathetic  interest 
as  he  shows  here.  The  shepherd  is  to  go  out  before  the  sheep.  With  him  rests  the 
responsibility  of  choosing  the  place  of  pasture.  And  he  must  lead  the  sheep.  He 
must  go  before  them,  and  not  too  far  bef or«  them,  or  he  cannot  truly  lead.    He  leads 


CH.  xxvn.  12—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS,  371 

them  out  to  find  pasture,  and  he  leads  them  in  to  insure  security.  The  Good  Shepherd 
is  in  himself  the  guarantee  both  for  nourishment  and  security,  and  the  sheep  follow 
him,  as  if  to  show  that  the  real  nourishments  and  securities  of  religion  must  come  by 
a  voluntary  acceptance.  There  is  much  difference  between  being  drawn  and  driven. 
The  sheep  following  the  shepherd  is  not  like  the  ox  dragging  the  plough  and  quick- 
ened by  its  master's  goad.  There  are  times  indeed  when,  like  the  ox,  we  must  be 
driven  and  chastised,  but  the  greatest  results  can  only  be  gained  when  we  are  drawn 
like  the  sheep.  In  the  lives  of  God's  people  there  is  a  very  instructive  mingling  of 
freedom  and  constraint.  Let  us  add,  that  in  thinking  of  the  responsibility  of  the 
shepherd  for  the  providing  of  pasture  it  must  not  be  forgotten  how  soon  the  manna 
ceased  when  Canaan  was  entered  (Josh.  v.  12).  The  people  then  needed  guiding 
into  a  forethought  and  industry  from  which,  in  the  presence  of  the  daily  manna, 
they  had  long  been  free. 

III.  It  is  manifest  that  nothing  but  a  Divine  appointment  was  adequate 
TO  MEET  this  NECESSITY.  Populwr  elcctioti  wos  certainly  not  available.  The  sheep 
would  make  a  poor  business  of  it  if  they  had  to  choose  a  shepherd.  Popular 
government  is  less  objectionable  than  the  rule  of  despots,  but  it  has  its  own  delusions, 
its  own  narrow  aims.  The  natural  man  is  the  natural  man,  circumscribed  by  the 
limits  of  time,  and  sense,  and  natural  discernment,  whether  he  be  noble  or  peasant. 
The  follies  and  cruelties  of  democracy  have  caused  as  sad,  humiliating  pages  to 
be  written  in  the  history  of  the  world  as  the  follies  and  cruelties  of  any  despot 
whatever.  The  man  who  says  vox  populi,  vox  Dei  speaks  error  none  the  less 
because  he  speaks  out  of  a  generous,  enthusiastic  heart.  Never  till  the  voice  of 
Christ  becomes  the  willing  and  gladsome  voice  of  the  people  can  vox  populi,  vox 
Dei  be  the  truth.  Equally  plain  is  it  that  the  choice  of  Moses  was  not  available.  He 
feels  that  the  thing  can  only  be  done  in  entire  submission  to  God.  Moses  himself, 
in  the  day  of  his  first  call,  had  spoken  very  depreciatingly  of  his  own  qualifications. 
Yet  not  only  had  God  chosen  him,  but  also  proved  the  choice  was  right.  The  event 
had  shown  that  he  was  the  leader  after  God's  own  heart.  What  a  thing  if  he  had 
turned  out  like  Saul ;  but  that  he  could  not  do,  he  was  so  completely  the  choice  of 
God.  It  was  not  for  Moses  then,  who  had  gone  so  tremblingly  from  Midian  to 
Egypt,  to  say,  "  Who  is  fittest  man  for  shepherd  now  ?  "  Moses  felt  well  able  to 
estimate  the  qualifications  of  a  leader ;  but  who  best  supplied  those  qualifications 
was  a  question  which  none  but  the  all-searching,  all-knowing  God  could  answer. 
God  had  not  only  seen  fitness  in  Moses,  but  he  had  seen  fitness  in  Moses  ordy;  for 
we  must  ever  believe  that  in  each  generation,  and  for  each  emergency,  he  takes  the 
very  fittest  man  among  the  thousands  of  Israel.  God  had  chosen  at  the  departure 
from  Egypt ;  God  also  shall  choose  at  the  entrance  into  Canaan. 

IV.  Notice  the  sugqestive  and  appropriate  way  in  which  God  is  addressed. 
"  The  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh."  It  is  God  who  breathes  in  the  breath  of  life, 
sustains  and  controls  it,  and  can  fix  the  time  of  its  cessation.  Speaking  to  God  in 
this  way,  there  is  thus  an  expression  of  humble  personal  submission.  Moses  cannot 
choose  the  time  of  death,  any  more  than  he  has  been  able  to  choose  anything  else. 
God  had  shielded  the  faint  and  delicate  breath  of  the  infant  as  it  lay  in  the  flags 
by  the  river's  brink,  and  now  he  calls  upon  the  old  man  of  a  hundred  and  twenty 
years,  who  has  passed  through  such  a  difficult  and  oft-endangered  course,  to  yield 
that  breath  up.  There, is  also  in  this  mode  of  address  a  clear  recognition  of  how  it 
is  that  God  may  be  looked  to  for  the  choice  of  a  leader.  God  has  but  lately  proved 
his  knowledge  of  individual  men  by  his  complete  control  over  those  dying  in  the 
wilderness  (ch.  xxvi.  64, 65).  He  who  assuredly  knows  the  hearts  of  all  the  600,000 
lately  counted  can  say  who  of  them  is  fittest  to  be  leader.  God  knows  who  is 
nearett  to  him  as  a  follower.  There  is  no  fear  but  the  sheep  will  recognise  those 
whom  God  appoints.  In  spite  of  all  the  difficulties  of  Moses,  in  spite  of  rebellions 
and  curses,  in  spite  of  the  crumbling  away  of  a  whole  generation,  the  nation  is  still 
there.  Moses  can  say,  on  the  verge  of  Jordan  and  at  the  foot  of  Abarim,  "  Here 
am  I  and  the  flock  that  was  given  me."  But  all  this  achievement  only  glorified  God 
the  more,  that  God  who  had  chosen  Moses  and  hedged  up  his  way.  Any  other 
leader  than  the  one  God  had  chosen  could  never  have  got  out  of  Egypt,  Any  other 
laader  than  the  one  God  will  now  choose  cannot  get  across  Jordan. — Y, 


378  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [ca.  xxvii.  12—23. 

■ 

Vers.  18 — 23. — The  solicitude  relieved  by  the  appointment  of  Joshua.  God  makes 
an  immediate^  gracious,  and  full  compliance  witn  the  request  of  Moses.  It  is  a 
welcome  sight  when  the  will  of  God  rims  forward  as  it  were  to  meet  the  wishes  of 
man.  God  has  so  often  to  reveal  himself  refusing  and  thwarting  the  wishes  of  men, 
or  at  all  events  complying  with  them  only  in  part.  This  request  must  have  been 
expected,  and  the  command  to  go  up  into  Abarim  prepared  the  way  for  it  to  be 
made. 

I.  The  qdalifioation  of  Joshua.  "A  man  in  whom  is  the  spirit;"  a  spirit 
doubtless 'such  as  was  bestowed  on  the  seventy  elders,  of  whom,  in  all  probability, 
Joshua  was  one  (ch.  xi. ).  Having  the  spirit  was  the  one  indispensable  thing.  Nothing 
of  such  work  as  Joshua  had  to  do  could  be  done  without  it.  There  are  diversities 
of  operations,  but  they  are  all  the  operations  of  those  in  whom  there  are  special  and 
necessary  endowments  for  the  work  they  have  to  do.  Others  beside  Joshua  had 
tome  of  the  gualijications  he  possessed,  but,  lacking  the  spirit,  th^y  might  as  well  have 
lacked  everything.  What,  for  instance,  was  tiiere  to  prevent  Caleb  from  being  leader  ? 
Like  Joshua,  he  had  been  one  of  the  spies,  and  seen  Canaan  before.  He  strikes  us  as 
being  even  a  bolder  and  more  resolute  man  than  Joshua ;  but  courage,  fidelity,  the 
following  of  God  rather  than  man,  while  these  are  the  qualities  that  make  martyrs, 
they  are  not  enough  to  make  leaders.  A  Christian  might  make  an  excellent  figure 
at  the  stake  who  would  be  nowhere  as  the  guide  of  the  flock.  It  is  beautiful  to  feel 
that  CaleB  continued  his  simple-hearted  devotion  to  the  cause  of  Israel.  Joshua  and 
he  seem  to  have  continued  the  best  of  friends  (Josh.  xiv.).  Whether  a  man  is  a 
leader  or  not  should  not  aSect  our  judgment  of  him  in  his  whole  humanity.  Let  ua 
esteem  most  those  who  are  best.  It  is  a  foolish  question  to  ask  who  is  greatest  in 
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  for  every  one  may  conceivably  have  such  excellence  of 
spiritual  qualities  as  may  put  him  in  the  first  place.  We  may  conclude  then  that, 
good  and  true  man  as  Caleb  was,  he  lacked  the  particular  spirit  which  Joshua  pos- 
sessed. Notice,  again,  that  some  who  certainly  had  the  spirit  as  well  as  Joshua  lacked 
other  gualijications.  For  one  thing,  Joshua  had  been  long  and  intimately  connected 
with  Moses.  It  is  interesting  to  notice  how  many  things  were  done  to  give  Moses 
pleasure  in  this  departing  hour.  His  death  before  crossing  Jordan  is  a  necessity ; 
there  is  no  way  to  obviate  it ;  but  really  as  we  read  of  it  we  have  hard  work  to 
connect  the  usual  gloom  of  death  with  the  event.  The  view  that  he  gets,  the  com- 
phance  with  his  request,  and  the  choice  of  one  who  had  been  long  his  faithful  and 
affectionate  companion,  all  these  things  made  the  cup  of  the  dying  Moses  run  over. 
It  was  euthanasia  indeed.  The  friendship  of  Joshua  with  Moses  may  have  had  a 
very  great  deal  to  do  with  the  appointment  Those  who  choose  the  company  of  the 
good  and  remain  steadfast  in  it  are  likely  to  gain  such  positions  as  may  enable  them 
to  transmit  the  influence  of  the  good.  Passing  over  the  immediate  circumstances  of 
the  appointment,  which  were  such  as  to  impress  deeply  both  the  shepherd  and  the 
sheep,  and  remain  in  the  shepherd's  mind,  at  all  events,  till  his  latest  hour,  we 
notice — 

II.  The  great  bulk  fob  the  shepherd's  guidancb.  God  was  not  about  to  visit 
Joshua  as  he  did  Moses.  Moses  stood  in  lonely  and  awful  eminence  as  the  prophet 
with  whom  God  spoke  face  to  face  (ch.  xii.  8 ;  Dent,  xxxiv.  10).  Such  a  mode  of 
revelation  was  needed  for  the  work  Moses  was  called  to  do.  The  work  in  the  wilderness 
was  a  peculiarly  critical  one.  In  one  sense  we  may  say  it  was  even  more  important 
than  the  work  in  Canaan.  Given  your  foundation,  which  may  require  great  toil  and 
great  destruction  of  existing  things  if  you  are  to  get  down  to  the  rock ;  given  your 
materials,  which  have  to  be  accumulated  with  much  searching,  discernment,  and 
exactitude ;  given,  above  all  things,  your  design,  in  which  even  me  least  thing  is  to 
have  vital  connection  with  the  great  principles — given  all  these,  and  then  the  chief 
thing  required  is  a  competent,  honest,  and  industrious  builder.  Moses  was  the  man 
who  gets  to  the  foundation,  gathers  tiie  material,  and  furnishes  the  design  ;  Joshua, 
the  subordinate,  to  come  in  afterwards  and  by  simple-hearted,  plodding,  tenacious 
fidelity  to  complete  the  construction  of  what  was  intrusted  to  him.  There  was  no 
need  for  God  to  visit  Joshua  as  he  did  Moses.  The  signs  of  the  Urim  were  quite 
BufScient,  and  therefore  nothing  more  was  given.  Notice  also  that  the  priest  became 
thus  associated  with  the  leader,  to  confirm  his  position  when  right,  and  to  check  hiw 


OHS.  XXVIII.,  XXEC.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


S79 


in  case  he  showed  signs  of  going  ■wrong.  If  Joshua  had  gone  anywhere  else  than 
to  the  intimations  of  Urim,  the  resort  itself  would  have  heen  sufficient  to  condemn 
him.  God  took  care  of  Moses  in  all  the  directions  he  had  to  give  hy  immediately 
and  most  abundantly  strengthening  and  supporting  him.  And  so  Joshua  here  was 
wonderfully  helped  by  the  Urim.  Any  one  who  refused  obedience  to  him  must  have 
been  resolutely  opposed  to  truth,  for  who  could  deny  intimations  plainly  palpable  to 
the  senses  ?  Thus  we  are  helped  by  the  thought  of  what  the  Urim  was  to  Joshua  in 
our  consideration  as  to  the  authority  of  the  New  Testament  Scriptures  over  Christians. 
It  is  sometimes  asked  why  inspiration  should  be  held  to  stop  with  the  canon  of 
Scripture.  An  equally  pertinent  question  is  to  ask  why  it  should  continue.  God 
alone  is  the  judge  as  to  the  modes  of  revelation,  and  the  duration  of  those  modes. 
It  is  out  of  the  sovereignty  and  wisdom  of  him  whose  ways  are  unsearchable  that 
he  dealt  with  Moses  after  one  fashion,  and  with  Joshua  after  another.  And  it  is  by 
a  practical  reference  to  the  same  sovereignty  and  wisdom  that  we  shall  account  for 
the  difference  between  the  New  Testament  Scriptures  and  even  the  most  copious 
and  esteemed  of  the  earlier  post-apostolic  writings.  We  have  our  Urim  in  the  great 
principles  of  the  New  Testament. 

III.  The  choice  was  justified  by  the  besult.  The  Book  of  Joshua  is  a  very 
remarkable  one  for  this  peculiarity,  which  it  shares  with  the  Book  of  Daniel,  that 
there  is  no  record  of  any  stumbling  on  the  part  of  its  leading  character.  Joshua  is 
always  alert,  obedient  to  God,  jealous  of  God's  honour,  and  keeping  the  great  end 
in  view.  There  is  sin  recorded  in  the  Book  and  a  dilatory  spirit,  but  Joshua  himself 
appears  in  striking  contrast  to  this.  And  so  it  always  has  been  and  always  will  be ; 
he  whom  God  chooses  will  justify  the  choice.  The  successful  leaders  whom  God 
has  given  his  people  in  the  past  are  an  ample  assurance  that  he  wiU  continue  to 
provide  them. — Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTERS  XXVIII.,  XXIX. 

The  routine  op  saoeifioial  opferinos 
(chs.  xiviil.,  xxix.).  Ver.  1. — The  lord 
spake  unto  Hoses.  It  is  impossible  to  say 
with  any  assurance  whether  the  law  of  offer- 
ings contained  in  these  two  chapters  was 
really  given  to  Moses  shortly  before  his 
dSath,  or  whether  it  was  ever  given  in  this 
connected  and  completed  form.  It  is  ob- 
vious that  the  formula  with  which  the 
section  opens  might  he  used  with  equal  pro- 
priety to  introduce  a  digest  of  the  law  on  this 
subject  compiled  by  Moses  himself,  or  by 
some  subsequent  editor  of  his  writings  from 
a  number  of  scattered  regulations,  written  or 
oral,  which  had  Divine  authority.  It  is 
indeed  quite  true  that  this  routine  of  sacrifice 
was  only  suitable  for  times  of  settled  habit- 
ation in  the  promised  land,  and  therefore 
there  is  a  certain  propriety  in  its  introduc- 
tion here  on  the  eve  of  the  entry  into  Canaan. 
But  it  must  be  remembered,  on  the  other 
hand,  that  the  same  thing  holds  true  of  very 
much  of  the  legislation  given  at  Mount  Sinai, 
and  avowedly  of  that  comprised  in  ch.  xv. 
(see  ver.  2),  which  yet  appears  from  its 
position  to  have  been  given  before  the  rebel- 
lion of  Korah  in  the  wilderness.  It  is  indeed 
plain  that  the  ritual,  festal,  and  sacrificial 
system,  both  as  elaborated  in  Leviticus  and 
M  tnpplemented  in  Numbers,  presupposed 


throughout  an  almost  immediate  settlement 
in  Canaan.  It  is  also  plain  that  a  system  so 
elaborate,  and  entailing  so  much  care  and 
expense,  could  hardly  have  come  into  regular 
use  during  the  conquest,  or  for  some  time 
after.  It  cannot,  therefore,  be  said  with  any 
special  force  that  the  present  section  finds  its 
natural  place  here.  AH  we  can  affirm  is  that 
the  system  itself  was  of  Divine  origin,  and 
dated  in  substance  from  the  days  of  Moses. 
In  any  case,  therefore,  it  is  rightly  intro- 
duced with  the  usual  formula  which  attests 
that  it  came  from  God,  and  came  through 
Moses.  It  must  be  noted  that  a  great 
variety  of  observances  which  were  zealously 
followed  by  the  Jews  of  later  ages  find  no 
place  here.  Compare,  e.  g.,  the  ceremonial 
pouring  of  water  during  the  feast  of  taber- 
nacles, to  which  allusion  is  made  by  the 
prophet  Isaiah  (xii.  3)  and  our  Lord  (John 
vii.  37,  38). 

Ver.  2. — Uy  offering,  and  my  bread. 
Literally,  "my  leorban,  my  bread."  The 
general  term  korban  (anything  offered  to 
God ;  cf  ch.  vii.  3  ;  Mark  vii.  11)  is  here 
restricted  by  the  words  which  follow  to  the 

meat  offering.  "  Bread  "  (DliJ^)  is  translated 
"food"  in  Levit.  iii.  11,  16  (see  the  nots 
there).  Sweet  savour.  D''!.  Septuagint, 
ti'c  6itnfiv  liiallas  (see  on  Gea.  viii.  21 ;  I,evit, 
iii.  16  ;  Ephes.  v.  2), 


380 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[OHS.  XXTUI.,  XXIX. 


Ver.  3. — This  is  the  offering  made  ty  Are. 
The  daily  offering  prescribed  at  Exod.  xxix. 
38 — 42,  and  which  had  presumably  never 
been  intermitted  since,  la  specified  again  here 
because  it  formed  the  foundation  of  the  whole 
sacrificial  system.  Whatever  else  was  of- 
fered was  in  addition  to  it,  not  in  lieu  of  it. 
The  sabbath  and  festival  use  of  the  Jews 
was  developed  out  of  the  ferial  use,  and 
rested  upon  it.  Hence  in  a  connected  re- 
publication of  the  law  of  offering  it  could  not 
be  omitted.  Without  spot.  DD'OP.  Sep- 
tuagint,  a/iu/iovf.  This  necessary  qualifica- 
tion had  not  been  expressed  in  the  original 
ordinance,  but  in  respect  of  other  sacrifices 
had  been  continually  required  (see  on  Exod. 
rii.  5  ;  Levit.  i.  3  ;  ch.  xix.  2  ;  Heb.  ix.  14  ; 
1  Pet  i  19). 

Ver.  7.— In  the  holy  place.  B'^pa.  Sep- 
tuaglnt,  if  Tif  ayiif.  Josephus  paraphrases 
this  by  jrepi  rbv  ^idjjlov  ('  Ant.,'  iii.  10),  and 
so  the  Targum  of  Onkeloa ;  Jonathan  and 
the  Targum  of  Palestine  render,  "  from 
the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary."  The  former 
would  seem  to  be  the  real  meaning  of  the 
original.  Theie  is  nowhere  any  specific 
direction  as  t.i  the  ritual  of  the  drink  offer- 
ing (see  on  Levit.  xxiii.  and  oh.  xv.  7,  10), 
nor  is  it  certain  whether  it  was  poured  at 
the  foot  of  the  altar  (as  apparently  stated  in 
Ecclus.  1.  15)  or  poured  upon  the  flesh  of 
the  sacrifice  on  the  altar  (as  seems  to  be  im- 
plied in  Philip,  ii.  17).  The  strong  wine. 
"O^.  Septuagint,  aUtpa.  The  Targums 
render  it  "old  wine,"  because  the  drink 
offering  was  in  every  other  instance  or- 
dered to  be  made  with  wine  (Exod.  zxix.  40, 
&c.).  Shecar,  however,  was  not  wine,  but 
strong  drink  other  than  wine  (such  as  we 
caE  "  spirits"),  and  it  is  invariably  used  in 
that  sense  in  contradistinction  to  wine  (see 
on  Levit.  x.  9  ;  ch.  vi.  8,  &o.).  It  can  only 
be  supposed  that  the  difficulty  of  procuring 
wine  in  the  wilderness  had  caused  the  coarser 
and  commoner  liquor  to  be  substituted  for 
it.  It  is  certainly  remarkable  that  the 
mention  of  shecar  should  be  retained  at  a 
time  when  wine  must  have  been  easily  ob- 
tainable, and  was  about  to  become  abund- 
ant (Deut.  viii.  8).  As  it  would  seem  im- 
possible that  shecar  should  have  been  sub- 
stituted for  wine  after  the  settlement  in 
Canaan,  its  mention  here  may  be  accepted  as 
evidence  of  the  wilderness-origin  of  this  par- 
ticular ordinance.  The  quantity  ordained 
(about  a  quart  for  each  lamb)  was  very  con- 
siderable. 

Yer.  9. — ^And  on  the  sabbath  day.  The 
special  offering  for  the  sabbath  is  ordered 
here  for  the  first  time.  It  does  not  say  when 
the  two  lambs  were  to  be  slain,  but  in  prac- 
tice it  was  immediately  after  the  morning 
sacr^ce  of  the  day. 


Ver.  10. — The  burnt  oflbring  of  everj 
sabbath.  Literally,  "the  sabbath  burnt 
offering  for  its  sabbath.'' 

Ver.  11.  — In  the  beginning*  Of  your 
months.  The  new-moon  offering  alsia  is 
here  enjoined  for  the  first  time,  the  festival 
itself  having  only  been  incidentally  men- 
tioned in  ch.  X.  10.  There  can  be  no  doubt 
that  this  (unlike  the  sabbath)  was  a  nature- 
festival,  observed  more  or  less  by  all  nationa 
As  such  it  did  not  require  to  be  instituted, 
but  only  to  be  regulated  and  sanctified  in 
order  that  it  might  not  lend  itself  to  idolatry, 
as  it  did  among  the  heathen  (cf.  Deut.  iv. 
19 ;  Job  xxxi  28,  27 ;  Jer.  vii.  18  ;  viii.  2). 
The  new-moon  feast,  depending  upon  no 
calendar  but  that  of  the  sky,  and  more 
clearly  marked  in  that  than  any  other  recur- 
ring period,  was  certain  to  fix  itself  deeply 
in  the  social  and  religious  habits  of  a  simple 
pastoral  or  agricultural  people.  Accordingly 
we  find  it  incidentally  mentioned  as  a  day  of 
social  gathering  (1  Sam.  xx.  5),  and  as  a  day 
for  religious  instruction  (2  Kings  iv.  23). 
From  the  latter  passage,  and  from  such  pas- 
sages as  Isa.  Ixvi.  23 ;  Ezek.  xlvi  1  ;  AmOs 
viii.  5,  it  is  evident  that  the  feast  of  the 
new  moon  became  to  the  month  exactly  what 
the  sabbath  was  to  the  week — a  day  of  rest 
and  of  worship  (see  also  Judith  viii  6). 

Ver.  15.— One  kid  of  the  goata.  "One 
hairy  one  (T'^B')  of  the  she  goats  (])))."  See 
on  ch.  vii.  16.  This  was  probably  offered 
first  in  order,  according  to  the  usual  analogy 
of  such  sacrifices  (Exod.  xxix.  10 — 14).  There 
is  no  authority  for  supposing  that  this  sin 
offering  superseded  the  one  mentioned  in  ch. 
XV.  24  sq.  This  was  essentially  part  of  the 
customary  routine  of  sacrifice ;  VuU  was 
essentially  occasional,  and  proper  to  some 
unforeseen  contingency.  It  is  likely  enough 
that  the  national  conscience  would  in  fact 
content  itself  with  the  first,  but  it  does  not 
in  the  least  follow  that  such  was  the  inten- 
tion of  the  legislator. 

Ver.  17. — In  the  fifteenth  day  of  this 
month  is  the  feast.  The  fourteenth  day  of 
Abib,  or  N  isan,  the  day  of  the  passover  proper, 
was  not  a  feast,  but  a  fast  ending  with  the 
sacred  meal  of  the  evening.  Only  the  ordin- 
ary daily  sacrifice  was  offered  on  this  day. 
Unleavened  bread.  nVVD  (inaMsoth).  Sep- 
tuagint, aZv/ta,  unleavened  cakes. 

Ver.  18.— In  the  first  day,  i.e.  on  the 
fifteenth  (see  on  Exod.  xii.  16  ;  Levit.  xxiii. 
7). 

Ver.  19.-.-Te  shall  offer  a  sacrifice.  This 
offering,  the  same  for  each  day  of  Mattsoth 
as  for  the  feast  of  the  new  moon,  had  not 
been  prescribed  before,  and  almost  certainly 
not  observed  at  the  one  passover  kept  in  the 
wilderness  (ch.  ix.  6). 

Ver.  23.— Te  shall  offer  these  beside  tht 


OHS.  XXTin.,  ZXIX.J 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


381 


bnrnt  offering  in  the  morning,  «'.  e.  in  ad- 
dition to,  and  immediately  after,  the  usual 
morning  sacrifice.  Even  when  it  is  not  ex- 
pressly stated,  the  presumption  is  that  all 
the  sacrifices  here  treated  of  were  cumulative. 
Thus  the  sabbath  of  the  passover  (John  xix. 
81)  would  have  the  proper  sacrifices  (1)  of  the 
day,  (2)  of  the  sabbath,  (3)  of  the  feast  of 
Mattsoth,  comprising  two  bullocks,  one  ram, 
eleven  lambs,  with  their  meat  oiferings  and 
drink  ofierings. 

Ver.  26. — ^In  the  day  of  the  first-fruits. 
The  feast  of  weeks,  or  day  of  Pentecost 
(Levit.  xxiii.  15—21). 

Ver.  27.— Ye  shall  offer  the  burnt  offer- 
ing. The  festal  sacrifice  here  prescribed  is 
exactly  the  same  as  for  the  days  of  Mattsoth 
and  for  the  feast  of  the  new  moon.  It  is  not 
the  same  as  that  prescribed  for  the  same  day 
in  Levit.  xxiii.,  and  it  is  difficult  to  deter- 
mine whether  it  was  meant  to  supersede  the 
previous  ordinance,  or  to  be  distinct  and  ad; 
ditional.  The  fact  that  no  notice  is  taken 
of  the  sacrifice  already  ordered  would  seem 
to  point  to  the  former  conclusion ;  but  the 
further  fact  that  no  mention  is  made  of  the 
offering  of  wave-loaves,  with  which  the  sacri- 
fices in  Leviticus  were  distinctively  con- 
nected, seems  to  show  that  the  two  lists 
were  independent  (cf.  Josephus,  'Ant. ,'  iii. 
10,  6).  The  fact  seems  to  be  that  through- 
out this  section  no  sacrifices  are  mentioned 
save  such  as  formed  a  part  of  the  system 
which  is  here  for  the  first  time  elaborated. 

Ch.  xxix.  1. — In  the  seventh  month,  on 
the  first  day  of  the  month.  The  month 
Ethanim  had  been  already  specially  set  apart 
for  holy  purposes  beyond  all  other  months 
(Levit.  xxiii.  23  sq.). 

Yer.  2.— Ye  shall  offer  a  burnt  offering. 
Such  an  ofiering  had  been  commanded 
(Levit.  xxiii.  25),  but  not  specified.  It  com- 
prised one  bullock  less  than  the  new  moon 
offering,  but  the  reason  of  the  difl'erence  is 
wholly  unknown,  unless  it  were  in  view  of 
the  large  number  of  bullocks  required  at  the 
feast  of  tabernacles. 

Ver.  7.— On  the  tenth  day.    The  great 


day  of  atonement  (Levit.  xvi  29 ;  xxiii. 
27  sq.). 

Yer.  12.— On  the  fifteenth  day.  The  first 
day  of  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  which  com- 
menced at  sunset  on  the  fourteenth  (Levit. 
xxiii.  86), 

Ver.  13. — ^Ye  shall  offer  a  burnt  offering. 
This  also  was  ordered,  but  not  prescribed,  in 
Levit.  xxiii  As  it  was  the  feast  of  the  in- 
gathering, when  God  had  crowned  the  yeai 
with  his  goodness,  and  filled  the  hearts  ol 
men  with  food  and  gladness,  so  it  was  cele- 
brated with  the  greatest  profusion  of  burnt 
offerings,  especially  of  the  largest  and  co.st- 
liest  kind.  Thirteen  young  bullocks.  The 
number  of  bullocks  was  so  arranged  as  to  be 
one  less  each  day,  to  be  seven  on  the  seventh 
and  last  day,  and  to  make  up  seventy  alto- 
gether. Thus  the  sacred  number  was  studi- 
ously emphasised,  and  the  slow  fading  of 
festal  joy  into  the  ordinary  gladness  of  a 
grateful  life  was  set  forth.  It  seems  quit* 
fanciful  to  trace  any  connection  with  tht 
waning  of  the  moon.  The  observance  of  the 
heavenly  bodies,  although  sanctioned  in  the 
case  of  the  new  moon  feast,  was  not  further 
encouraged  for  obvious  reasons. 

Yer.  35.— On  the  eighth  day.  On  the 
twenty-second  day  of  Ethanim  (see  on  Levit. 
xxiii.  36).  The  offering  here  specified  re- 
turns to  the  smaller  number  ordered  for  the 
first  and  tenth  days  of  this  month.  The 
feast  of  tabernacles  ended  with  sundown  on 
this  day. 

Yer.  89. — These  things  shall  ye  do,  or 
"  sacrifice."  •1{5'J?FI.  Septuagint,  ravra 
irBiTjaiTf  (cf.  Luke  xxii.  19).  Beside  your 
TOWS,  and  your  free-will  offerings.  These 
are  treated  of  in  Levit.  xxii.  18  sq. ;  ch. 
XV.  3  sq.  The  words  which  follow  are 
dependent  upon  this  clause.  All  the  offer- 
ings commanded  in  these  chapters  amounted 
to  1071  lambs,  113  bullocks,  37  rams,  30 
goats,  in  the  lunar  year,  together  with  112 
bushels  of  fiour,  more  than  870  gallons  of 
oil,  and  about  340  gallons  of  wine,  supposing 
that  the  drink  offering  was  proportionate 
throughout. 


HOMILETICa 

Chs.  xxviii.,  xxix. — The  perfect  system  ofsaxrijUx.  We  have  in  this  section  the  round 
of  sacrifice — daily,  weekly,  monthly,  and  annual— drawn  out  in  all  its  completeness 
and  in  all  its  symmetry.  There  were  indeed  other  sacrifices  ordained,  such  as  those  of 
the  goat  for  Azazel  and  of  the  red  heifer,  which  find  no  place  here ;  but  these  were 
essentially  (as  it  would  seem)  of  an  exceptional  nature,  and  stood  out  against  the 
unvarying  background  of  the  sacrificial  routine  here  depicted.  No  longer  left  to  be 
gathered  from  scattered  enactments,  it  is  here  ordained  as  a  system,  pervadsd  and 
inspired  by  certain  definite  and  abiding  principles.  That  those  principles  were  not 
read  into  a  fortuitous  assemblage  of  ancient  rites  by  the  pious  ingenuity  of  a  later 
ind  more  gelf-conicious  age,  but  underlay  those  rites  from  the  beginning,  and  deter- 


382  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBEES.  [ohb.  nvra.,  xxn, 

mined  their  character  and  mntnal  relation,  can  hardly  be  doubted  bjr  any  one  who 
believes  the  aystem  to  have  been  of  Divine  origination ;  and  this,  again,  can  hardly 
be  doubted  by  any  one  who  recognises  the  profound  congruity  between  the  sacrificial 
system  of  Moses  and  the  sacrificial  aspect  of  Christianity.    It  is  this  congruity  which 
gives  a  living  interest,  because  an  abiding  truth,  to  the  sacrifices  of  the  law.     They 
were  not  merely  shadows  to  amuse  the  childhood  of  the  world ;  they  were  shadows  of 
coming  realities,  the  most  tremendous  and  of  the  profonndest  moment.     It  is  true 
that  the  inspired  writers  of  the  New  Testament  dwell  rather  on  the  contrast  than  on 
the  correspondence  between  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  and  the  sacrifices  of  the  law ;  but 
they  do  so  just  because  they  took  the  correspondence  for  granted,  not  because  they 
ignored  it.    The  correspondence,  in  fact,  was  so  obvious  and  so  strong  that  it  was 
necessary  to  emphasise  the  points  of  contrast,  lest  they  should  be  overlooked.     He 
that  magnifies  the  substance  above  the  shadow  does  not  thereby  deny  that  the  shadow 
owes  both  its  existence  and  its  form  to  the  substance.     If  we  follow  up  the  Pauline 
image  of  body  and  shadow  (CoL  ii.  17,  where  the  reference  is  to  this  very  round  of 
festivals),  we  shall  get  at  the  truth  of  the  matter.    The  relation  of  the  shadow  to 
the  body  is  not  one  of  simple  resemblance,  even  of  outline  (except  in  one  particular 
position),  but  it  is  one  of  certain  correspondence.     Given  the  position  of  the  light, 
and  the  form  of  the  surface  on  which  the  shadow  falls,  the  shadow  itself  can  be  pre- 
cisely determined  from  the  outline  of  the  body,  and  vice  versd.    Now  the  light  in  our 
case  is  the  twilight  of  the  Divine  revelation  as  it  veiled  its  brightness  to  shine  in 
part  upon  a  darkened  world ;  the  surface  on  which  it  shone  was  formed  by  the 
crude  religious  ideas  and  half-barbarous  morals  of  the  chosen  race — a  race  whoso 
hearts  were  hard,  and  whose  eyes  were  dim,  and  whose  rugged  nature  of  necessity 
distorted  any  spiritual  truth  which  came  to  them.     Such  was  the  light  shining  upon 
such  a  surface  ;  the  body  was  "  of  Christ,"  i.  e.  was  the  solid  and  enduring  fulness  of 
his  salvation ;  and  the  shadow  which  it  threw  before  was  the  sacrifical  system  of  the 
Jews.     We  should  therefore  expect  from  analogy  to  find  (1)  a  general  and  unmis- 
takable resemblance  ;  (2)  a  failure  of  resemblance  in  parts  and  proportions,  a  likeness 
mingled  with  distortion,  as  in  the  shadows  cast  upon  a  rugged  slope  by  the  rising 
sun.     This  is  exactly  what  we  do  find,  comparing  the  substance  of  the  gospel  with 
the  shadows  of  the  law.    No  human  art  could  have  constructed  the  Christian  scheme 
from  the  fore-shadows  which  it  threw,  because  no  human  skill  could  have  allowed 
for  the  peculiarities  of  the  Jewish  dispensation.     But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  can 
trace  along  the  entire  outline  of  the  substance  a  correspondence  to  the  shadow  which 
cannot  be  due  to  chance.    It  is  of  course  possible  to  admit  the  fact  of  this  analogy, 
and  to  explain  it  by  the  assumption  that  Christianity  itself  was  the  creation  of  minds 
saturated  with  Jewish  ideas,  and  habituated  to  the  Jewish  system  of  sacrifices.     But 
if  this  had  been  the  case,  the  correspondence  had  surely  been  more  direct,  and  much 
less  oblique  than  it  is,  much  less  subtle  in  parts  and  less  unequal  as  a  whole.     It 
would  seem  as  much  beyond  the  practical  powers  of  man  to  translate  the  types  of 
the  law  into  the  substantial  and  consistent  beauty  of  the  gospel,  as  to  reduce  the 
irregularity  and  distortion  of  a  shadow  to  the  regular  symmetry  of  the  unseen 
human  form.     We  have,  therefore,  in  accordance  with  apostolic  teaching,  to  regard 
the  daily  offerings,  the  sabbaths,  the  new  moons,  the  sacred  months  and  annual 
festivals  of  the  Jews,  as  so  many  shadows  which  are  of  interest  only  as  they  in  part 
resemble,  and  therefore  in  part  illustrate,  the  body,  the  reality,  which  belongs  to 
Christ,  and  so  to  us.    Consider,  therefore,  with  respect  to  this  system  as  a  whole — 

I.  That  it  was  designed  to  consecrate  with  burnt  offerings  and  oblations 
THK  whole  round  OF  THE  JEWISH  CALBNDAB.  It  formed  a  complete  system,  com- 
bining variety  with  regularity,  under  which  every  day  by  itself,  every  week  in  its 
seventh  day,  every  month  in  its  first  day,  every  year  in  its  seventh  month  and  in  its 
gieat  festivals,  was  consecrated  by  the  shedding  of  blood,  by  the  acknowledgment 
that  their  lives  were  forfeit,  by  vicarious  death,  and  by  vicarious  dedication  of  self 
to  God.  Even  such  is  the  pervading  meaning  and  purpose  of  Christianity ;  that  our 
whole  life  from  end  to  end  should  be  consecrated  to  God  by  the  blood  of  Christ, 
offered  for  us  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  dedicated  to  God  by  a  voluntary  and 
perfect  self-surrender.  As  the  Jewish  year  was  hallowed  by  an  endless  round  of 
sacrifice,  so  the  Christian  life  is  sanctified  by  a  never-exhausted  self-sacrifice — ^the 


OHs.  xxviii.,  XXIX.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  388 

self-sacrifice  of  Christ  wrought /or  us  on  the  cross,  the  self-sacrifice  of  Christ  wrought 
in  us  by  his  Spirit. 

II.  That  the  whole  system  rested  upon  the  dailt  sacrifice,  which  was 

KEVBR   OMITTED,  TO  WHICH    ALL    OTHER   SACRIFICES  WERE    SUPERADDED.       Not   even 

the  triumph  of  the  passover  or  the  a£Siction  of  the  day  of  atonement  affected  the 
daily  sacrifice.  Even  so  in  Christ  does  all  religious  life  rest  upon  the  hallowing  of 
each  day,  as  it  comes  and  goes,  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Whatever  special  observ- 
ance may  be  given  to  sacred  days  and  seasons,  or  reserved  for  times  of  special 
grace,  yet  such  only  is  true  religion  which  is  daily  renewed  and  daily  practised. 
And  note  that  the  daily  use  taking  precedence  of  all  additional  observances)  testified 
even  to  the  Jews  of  the  underlying  equality  of  all  days  as  holy  to  the  Lord.  Since 
each  day  was  essentially  sacred,  it  followed  that  all  distinctions  of  days  were  arbi- 
trary and  transitory.  And  this  was  undoubtedly  what  St.  Paul  desired  to  see 
realised  in  the  Church  of  Christ  (Rom.  xiv.  6,  6 ;  Gal.  iv.  10,  &c.). 

III.  That  upon  the  daily  use  a  sabbatic  use  was  raised  up  with  extreme  care  ; 
not  only  the  seventh  day  of  every  week,  but  also  the  seventh  month  of  every  year, 
being  made  festal  and  marked  by  special  sacrifices.  This  was  ii^  truth  arbitrary  to 
the  Jewish  apprehension,  although  it  was  mystically  connected  with  the  relation 
between  God  and  the  world  (Exod.  xx.  11),  and  historically  associated  with  the  deliver- 
ance from  Egypt  (Deut.  v.  16) ;  but  it  served  to  keep  the  Jew  in  mind  of,  and  bring 
him  into  connection  with,  an  order  of  things  above  and  beyond  the  labour  and  gain 
and  profit  and  loss  of  this  world.  Even  so,  while  the  sacredness  of  the  sabbatic 
number  (in  days  or  months  or  years)  is  vanished  in  Christ,  yet  the  meaning  of  the 
number,  the  sabbath  or  rest  of  the  soul  in  God,  the  rest  from  sin,  from  self,  and  from 
sorrow,  is  the  dominant  idea  which  we  find  in  Christ  first  and  last.  This  is  his  first 
invitation  (Matt.  xi.  28),  and  this  his  last  promise  (Rev.  iii.  21). 

IV.  That  to  the  daily  and  sabbatic  use  was  added  the  new  moon  festival 
with  great  honour  in  the  way  op  saokifices  ;  and  this  although  the  festival  was 
one  of  natural,  and  not  of  sacred,  origin.  This  may  have  been  partly  from  a  wise 
caution  lest  superstition  should  usurp  what  religion  left  unoccupied,  but  more 
beoause  the  God  of  g^ace  is  the  God  of  nature,  and  he  who  made  the  Church  made 
the  moon  to  rule  the  night.  Even  so  it  is  the  will  of  God  that  all  natural  turning- 
points  and  periods  in  our  lives  should  be  consecrated  by  religion  and  hallowed  with 
the  blood  of  Christ ; .  for  our  whole  body,  soul,  and  spirit  are  his.  Religion  does  not 
war  against  nature,  but  takes  nature  under  her  patronage.  Whatever  springs  naturally 
out  of  our  physical  and  social  life  (not  being  evil  of  itself)  may  be  and  should  be 
connected  with  religious  sanctions,  and  adorned  with  holy  gladness  as  before  God. 

V.  That  to  the  daily,  sabbatic,  and  new  moon  use  was  added  the  observance 

OF  THE  three  festivals  WHICH  WERE  ASSOCIATED  AT  ONCE  WITH  THE  FACTS  OF  PAST 

DELIVERANCE  AND  OF  PRESENT  PLENTY.  For  the  passover  itself,  which  was  mainly  a 
commemoration,  also  marked  the  first  beginning  of  the  harvest ;  and  the  feast  of 
weeks,  which  was  essentially  a  harvest  festival,  recalled  also  the  giving  of  the  law 
on  Mount  Sinai.  Even  so  in  Christ,  besides  the  other  elements  of  religion,  the  sancti- 
fication  of  daily  life,  the  hallowing  of  natural  changes  and  outward  events,  the  cease- 
less seeking  for  rest  in  God,  there  must  be  found  prominently  the  devout  and  grateful 
celebration  of  the  great  triumphs  of  redemption  in  the  past,  and  of  the  abounding 
blessings  of  grace  in  the  present.  And  note  that  none  of  these  may  be  absent  without 
grievous  loss.  The  new  moon  feasts,  which  seemed  so  wholly  secular,  and  would  not 
keep  time  with  the  sabbaths  of  Divine  obligation,  were  as  much  honoured  as  the 
days  of  passover.  And  so  a  religion  which  does  not  blend  itself  with  and  twine 
itself  about  the  secular  joys  and  interests  of  our  natural  life  is  wanting  in  a  most 
important  point,  and  is  not  perfect  before  God. 

Consider  again,  witn  respect  to  the  ordered  sacrifices — 

I.  That  thb  daily  offering,  which  never  varied,  was  one  lamb.  Even  so  the 
Lamb  of  God  is  the  one  sacrifice,  ei;  ri  Sitiviieist  by  which  each  day  is  sanctified — a 
continual  burnt  offering  acceptable  to  God. 

II.  That  the  lamb  was  offered  both  morning  and  evening.  Even  so  the  Lamb 
of  God  was  in  a  manner  doubly  offered :  in  purpose  and  will  "from  the  foundation  of 


384  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oBS.  zzvili.,  xxiz. 

the  world  "  (Rev.  xiii.  8),  but  in  outward  act  only  "  in  these  last  days  "  (Heb.  i.  2), 
*.  e.  in  the  morning  and  the  evening  of  the  world. 

III.  That  whilb  other  sacbipicbs  week  mostly  coNrrNED  to  the  uobninq  eoubs, 
THE  DAiLT  LAMB  WAS  OFFERED  AT  MORN  AND  EVE.  Even  BO  each  day  of  life  is  to  be 
sanctified  by  prayer  at  its  opening  and  its  close — prayer  which  is  "based  upon  the 
sacrifice  of  Christ. 

IV.  That  the  lamb,  albeit  the  substance  of  the  sacrifice,  was  nevbb  pre- 
sented WITHOUT  ITS  ACCOMPANTING  MEAT  AND  DRINK  OFFERINGS ;  and  these  Consider- 
able in  quantity  and  value.  Even  so,  while  we  plead  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  which 
alone  is  meritorious,  we  must  offer  with  it  the  tribute  of  good  works,  such  as  are  the 
result  and  outcome  (like  the  flour  and  oil  and  wine)  of  human  toil  and  industry 
making  the  most  of  Divine  gifts ;  "  for  with  such  sacrifices,"  when  sanctified  and 
sustained  by  the  one  offering,  "  God  is  well  pleased  "  (Heb.  xiii.  16).  See  above  on 
ch.  XV.  And  note  that  the  flour,  the  oil,  and  the  wine,  which  made  up  the  meat 
and  drink  offerings,  may  be  typical  of  Christian  labour,  Christian  suffering  (cf.  Geth- 
semane,  the  oil-press),  and  Christian  gladness  respectively  (see  on  Ps.  iv.  7 ;  civ.  15  ; 
Zech.  ix.  17). 

V.  That  the  special  offering  for  the  sabbath  morn  was  also  the  sACRiiricE  of 
A  IAMB,  ONLY  DOUBLED.  Even  SO  there  is  nothing  in  the  devotions  of  the  Lord's  day 
different  from  those  of  any  other  day,  save  that  we  are  to  seek  God  through  Christ 
with  redoubled  ardour. 

VI.  That  the  new  moon  feast  called  fob  a  larger  number  of  burnt  offerings 
THAN  the  ordinary  DAY  OR  THE  SABBATH.  Even  SO  days  of  natural  joy  and  festiA  ity 
need  to  be  more  carefully  and  earnestly  dedicated  to  God  by  supplication  and  by 
self -surrender  than  days  of  secular  work  or  of  religious  rest. 

VII.  That  a  sin  offering  was  added  to  this  feast,  as  well  as  to  thb  GREiW 
FEASTS  of  the  BUMMER  SEASON.  Evcn  80  there  is  almost  always  sin  in  times  of 
excitement — ^not  only  of  secular  excitement,  but  of  religious  excitement  too.  There 
is  always  occasion  in  them  to  seek  forgiveness  for  sins  of  ignorance  and  negligencft^ 

VIII.  That  the  feast  of  tabernacles  in  the  autumn  was  elevated  by  a 
SPECIALLY  ELABORATE  RITUAL  ABOVE  ALL  OTHER  FEASTS;  possibly  bccause  it  fore- 
shadowed the  incarnation  (see  on  John  i.  14),  but  probably  because  it  marked  the 
consummation  of  the  year,  and  so  was  typical  of  the  gathering  together  in  one  of  all 
things  in  Christ,  and  of  the  fulness  of  joy  in  heaven  (Acts  iii.  21 ;  Ephes.  i,  10 ;  2 
Thess.  ii.  1 ;  Eev.  xiv.  15,  compared  with  xv.  3).  Even  bo,  whatever  glories  and 
gifts  the  gospel  has  for  the  present,  its  chiefest  blessings  are  reserved  for  the  end  of 
all  things. 

IX.  That  the  ceremonial  of  the  feast  op  tabernacles  was  ordered  on  a 
BLOWLY  decreasing  SCALE  THROUGHOUT.  Even  SO  the  law  itself,  like  all  things 
transitory  and  preparatory,  was  in  its  nature  evanescent  and  doomed  to  dwindle.  So 
again  are  all  things  ordered  in  the  predestination  of  God,  that  the  sabbatic  number 
("  on  the  seventh  day  seven  ")  may  be  finally  fulfilled  in  the  rest  of  heaven. 

X.  That  in  all  these  sacrifices  God  spakb  op  "my  offering"  and  "my  bread 
FOB  MY  sacrifices."  Even  so  all  cur  devotions  and  our  worship  aro  not  ours,  but 
God's.  They  are  his  because  due  to  him ;  his  because  of  his  own  do  we  give  unto 
him ;  ours  only  because  we  are  privileged  to  render  them  unto  him.  Here  is  the 
rebuke  of  all  pride  and  self-esteem  in  what  we  offer  unto  God.  "  Nemo  Buum  offert 
Deo,  sed  quod  offert,  Domini  est  cui  reddit  quae  sua  sunt "  (Origen).  On  the  tjrpical 
significance  of  the  three  feasts  see  on  Exod.  xii.,  and  above,  ch.  iz. ;  Exod.  xxiii. ; 
Levit.  xxiii. ;  Deut.  xvi. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  3 — 9.-^The  lessons  of  the  daily  burnt  offering.  In  verses  1  and  2  we  have  a 
general  statement  respecting  offerings  to  God,  reminding  us  (1)  of  the  paramount 
claims  of  God  (note  repetition  of  "my"  and  "me"),  and  (2)  the  promptness  and 
punctuality  needed  in  meeting  those  claims  ("  in  their  due  season  ").  Then  follow 
directions  as  to  the  most  frequent  of  these  offerings — the  daily  burnt  offering,  which 
suggests  lesBong  derived  from — I.  Its  character  ;  II.  Its  costinuancm. 


0H8,  XXYHI.,  XXIX.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  886 

L  It  consisted  of  two  parts :  (1)  a  Iamb,  a  bleeding  sacrifice ;  (2)  a  meat  and 
drink  offering,  flour,  &c.,  bloodless;  but  the  whole  was  to  be  burned  before  God. 
We  see  here — 1.  Expiation.  This  we  need  every  morning,  for  we  awake  and  leave 
our  beds  sinful,  and  requiring  an  atonement  that  we  may  be  able  to  present  accept- 
able service  during  the  day.  And  we  need  it  every  evening  that  daily  sins  may  be 
forgiven,  and  that  we  may  rest  at  peace  with  God,  "  clean  every  whit  "  (John  xiii. 
10).  2.  Dedication.  In  the  burnt  offering,  as  distinguished  from  tlie  trespass 
offering,  expiation  by  blood-shedding  is  taken  for  granted,  but  the  burning,  as  the 
symbol  of  entire  surrender  to  God,  is  the  culminating  point.  The  various  parts  of 
the  burnt  offering  may  be  regarded  as  typical  of  our  surrender  to  God  of  all  the 
varied  powers  and  gifts  he  has  bestowed.  (Illustrate  from  Eom.  xii.)  As  Christ 
presented  himself  in  complete  sacrifice  to  God,  so  should  we  (Ephes.  v.  2,  &c,). 

II.  "  A  continual  burnt  offering  "  (ver.  3).  So  constant  must  the  Christian's  self- 
Hurrender  be.  With  each  morning  comes  the  summons  " Sursum  corda"  and  the 
appeal.  Bom.  zri.  1.  Evening  brings  rest  from  earthly  toil,  but  no  cessation  from  a 
renewed,  continual  dedication  to  God.  We  should  desire  no  exemption  from  this 
continual  offering  of  ourselves  when  we  remember  the  motives  to  it.  1.  We  our- 
selves and  all  we  have  are  God's.  2.  We  have  enjoyed  expiation  through  the  per- 
fect sacrifice  of  Christ.  The  law  of  the  daily  offering  is  urged  because  "  ordained  in 
Mount  Sinai "  (ver.  6).  The  law  of  Christian  self-sacrifice  was  published  by  deed, 
and  not  by  word,  at  Calvary  (1  Pet.  ii.  24  ;  iii.  18).  3.  Such  sacrifice  is  pleasing,  a 
sweet  savour  unto  God  "  the  Lord  "  (ver.  6).  4.  Such  acts  insure  Divine  manifest- 
ations. See  Exod.  xxix.  38—43,  which  suggests  that  the  neglect  of  the  d?iily  offering 
would  interrupt  comuiunion  with  God.  5.  Thus  complete  self-surrender  brings  us 
into  the  fullest  sympathy  with  God,  and  thus  into  the  most  perfect  liberty  (Fa.  ozix. 
45  ;  John  viii.  36,  &c.).— P. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  daily  offering.  I.  The  pbopkiett  of  the  daily  offbbing.  All 
the  offerings  were  to  be  made  in  their  due  season,  and  every  day  that  passed  over 
the  head  of  the  Israelite  people  was  a  due  season  to  make  offerings  to  Jehovah  in 
connection  with  the  daily  manifestations  of  his  goodness.  As  what  might  be  called 
the  ordinary  and  common  gifts  of  God  came  day  by  day,  so  it  was  appropriate  for 
Israel  to  make  ordinary  and  common  offerings  day  by  day.  We  must  remind  our- 
selves continually  of  the  unfailing  goodness  of  God.  Whatever  the  special  mercies 
in  each  individual  life,  there  are  certain  great  common  mercies  for  us  all,  always  some- 
thing, in  acknowledging  which  every  one  can  join.  We  know  that  to  God  the  mere 
offering  was  nothing,  apart  from  the  state  of  mind  in  which  it  was  made.  God  gave 
the  form,  and  it  was  required  of  the  people  that  they  should  fill  it  with  the  spirit  of 
acceptance,  appreciation,  and  gratitude.  We  have,  indeed,  no  command  for  daily 
offering  now,  no  stipulation  of  times  and  seasons  ;  but  how  shall  we  utter  the  petition, 
"  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread,"  unless  we  feel  that  the  bread  is  a  daily  gift  ? 
This  one  petition  implies  that  petition,  and  therefore  all  the  constituents  of  prayer, 
must  belong  to  our  life  every  day.  'There  must  be  the  feeling  that  although  the 
actual  production  of  the  bread  is  spread  over  a  long  time,  we  have  to  take  it  in  daily 
portions ;  and  our  physical  constitution  is  in  itself  the  witness  to  the  daily  duty  of 
making  an  offering  to  God  in  return.  We  can  store  up  grain  for  months,  for  the 
seven  years  of  famine  if  need  be,  but  we  cannot  store  up  thus  the  strength  of  our 
own  bodies.  Man  is  not  a  hibernating  aiumal.  "  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread  " 
implies  daily  strength  to  work  for  it,  daily  power  within  to  assimilate  it  when  eaten. 
And  since  spiritual  supplies  and  strength  are  meant  to  be  received  in  like  fashion, 
an  acknowledgment  of  these  should  be  a  principal  thing  in  our  daily  offering. 
Considerations  drawn  from  the  thought  of  God's  daily  gifts,  both  for  natural  life  and 
spiritual  life,  should  be  beautifully  blended  in  our  daily  approaches  to  him.  Notice 
that  these  daily  offerings  were  appropriately  mentioned  here  at  a  time  when  the  camp 
relation  (ch.  ii.)  was  about  to  be  dissolved.  Israel  was  soon  to  be  distributed,  not 
only  from  Dan  to  Beersheba,  but  on  both  sides  of  Jordan.  Hence  the  daily  offering 
would  be  very  serviceable  in  helping  to  manifest  the  unity  of  the  people,  and  to 
preserve  the  feeling  of  it.  It  was  also  especially  needful  to  be  reminded  of  this 
national  duty  of  daily  offering  after  the  humiliating  apostasy  to  idols  while  Israel 
KUUBSSS.  0  0 


38«  THE  BOOK  01"  NUMBEBS.  [chs.  xxvm.,  xxa. 

abode  in  Shittim  (cli.  xxv.').  The  only  guarantee  against  the  soul  lapsing  into 
idolatrous  offerings  is  to  be  continually  engaging  in  heai-ty  and  iiitelligent  offerings 
to  God. 

U.  It  must  be  a  mobning  and  evening  offebinq.  To  make  a  daily  offering  was 
not  enough.  Israel  was  not  left  to  its  own  will  as  to  the  time  of  day  for  the  offer- 
ing. The  sustaining  of  life  is  indeed  going  on  all  day  long,  by  the  secret  and  un- 
failing power  of  God,  and  the  recognition  of  this  power  is  always  meet  at  any  hour 
of  day  or  night.  But  the  day  has  its  own  peculiar  blessings,  and  also  the  night,  and 
they  are  to  be  made  special  in  our  thoughts,  as  they  are  made  special  in  our  experi- 
ence. Th€  dawn  and  the  twilight  bring  each  their  own  associations.  In  the  morn- 
ing we  look  back  on  the  rest,  the  sleep,  and  the  protection  of  the  night,  and  forward 
into  the  work,  the  duties,  the  burdens,  and  the  needs  of  the  day.  Similarly  evening 
will  have  its  appropriate  retrospect  and  anticipation.  That  is  no  true  thanksgiving 
which  does  not  discriminate,  marking  the  difference  between  thanksgivings  which 
may  be  offered  at  any  hour,  and  those  which  are  peculiar  to  the  mtming  and  even- 
ing. The  very  recollection  of  the  gradual  regular  changes  in  the  time  of  sunrise  and 
sunset  should  impart  an  ever-freshening  sense  of  the  faithfulness  of  God,  and  of 
how  orderly  and  exact  all  his  arrangements  are. 

III.  The  constituents  of  the  offering.  The  lambs,  the  flour,  the  oil,  the  wine. 
These  were  parts  of  the  actual  prodvlbt  of  Israelite  industry-  In  presenting  the 
Iamb  there  was  the  thought  that  Israel  had  shepherded  it,  had  watched  over  the 
little  creature  from  the  day  of  its  birth,  and  taken  all  care  to  obtain  the  unblemished 
yearling  for  the  burnt  offering.  All  the  shepherd's  thoughtfulness,  vigilance,  and 
courage  are  represented  in  the  offering.  And  mark,  these,  not  as  the  qualities  of 
one  man,  but  of  all  Israel.  The  service  of  the  particular  man  is  merged  in  the 
shepherd-service  of  Israel  as  a  whole.  So  with  the  offering  of  the  flour ;  in  it  fliere 
is  uie  work  of  the  ploughman,  the  sower,  the  reaper,  the  miller.  The  oil  is  there 
because  the  labour  of  the  olive  has  not  failed,  and  the  wine  because  men  have  obeyed 
the  command,  "Go  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard."  In  presenting  so  much  o£  the 
result  of  its  work,  Israel  was  thereby  presenting  part  of  the  work  itself.  But  these 
offerings  were  not  only  the  result  of  work,  they  were  also  the  sustenance  of  Israel, 
and  the  preparaiion  for  future  work.  The  lambs,  the  flour,  the  oil,  the  wine  were 
taken  out  of  the  present  food  store  of  Israel.  The  Israelites  were  therefore  present- 
ing part  of  their  own  life.  If  these  things  had  not  been  taken  for  offerings  they 
would  soon  have  entered  into  the  physical  constitution  of  the  people.  The  accept- 
ability of  the  offering  lay  to  a  great  extent  in  this,  that  it  was  from  Israel's  daily 
ordinary  food.  There  would  have  been  no  propriety  in  making  an  offering  from 
occasional  luxuries.  The  significance  of  the  unblemished  lamb  thus  becomes  obvious. 
The  lamb  for  God  was  to  be  unblemished ;  but  surely  this  was  a  hint  that  all  the  food 
of  Israel  was  to  be  unblemished,  as  far  as  this  could  be  attained.  The  presumption 
was  that  if  Israel  would  only  give  due  attention,  there  would  be  much  of  the  un- 
blemished and  the  satisfying  in  all  the  products  of  the  soil.  We  are  largely  what 
we  eat,  and  unblemished  nutriment  tends  to  produce  unblemished  life.  The  consti- 
tuents of  this  offering  further  remind  us  of  the  great  demand  onus  as  Christians. 
It  is  the  weighty  and  frequent  admonition  of  Paul  that  we  are  to  present  our  bodies 
to  God  as  a  living  sacrifice.  The  offering  is  no  longer  one  of  dead  animals,  grain, 
&c.,  mere  constituents  of  the  body,  and  still  outside  of  it.  We  are  to  offer  the  body 
itself,  made  holy  and  acceptable  to  God.  We  must  so  live  then,  we  must  so  eat 
and  drink,  we  must  so  order  habit  and  conduct,  that  all  the  streams  from  the  outside 
world  which  flow  into  us  may  contribute  to  the  health,  purity,  and  effective  service 
of  the  whole  man.  Let  everything  be  tested  according  to  its  ability  to  make  na 
better  Christians,  and  therefore  better  men.  In  relation  to  this  great  offering  which 
is  asked  from  us,  let  us  ponder  earnestly  these  typical  offerings  of  ancient  Israel, 
and  set  ourselves  to  f  ulili  the  law  connected  with  them.  Here  almost  more  than 
anywhere  else  let  it  be  true  of  us  that  we  are  advancing 

"  From  shadowy  types  to  truth,  from  flesh  to  spirit. 
From  imposition  of  strict  laws  to  free 
Acceptance  of  large  grace,  from  servile  fear 
To  filial,  works  of  law  to  works  of  faith." 


CHS.  XXVIII.,  XXII.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  887 

Let  life  be  an  offering  to  God,  and  it  will  be  ballowed,  beautified,  and  glorified  as  h 
cannot  otherwise  be. — Y. 

Vers.  9,  10. — The  sabbath  offering.  I.  The  lesson  of  the  bpecuIi  offebino 
Special  blessings  belonged  to  the  sabbath,  over  and  above  those  of  the  ordinary  day, 
and  it  became  a  duty  to  recognise  them.  The  sabbath  offerings  represented  what 
Israel  had  gained  by  the  rest  of  the  sabbath.  We  make  our  gains  not  only  by  the 
food  we  eat  and  the  work  we  do,  but  also  by  the  intervals  of  rest  in  the  midst  of 
labour.  Moreover,  by  this  offering  God  indicated  that  the  sabbath  was  to  have  its 
own  appropriate  occupation.  Most  emphatically,  by  precept  (Exod.  xx.  10),  and  by 
punitive  example  (cli.  xv.  32 — 36),  God  had  commanded  to  Israel  the  cessation  from 
ordinary  work.  Here  he  indicates  that  the  most  effectual  way  of  providing  for 
cessation  is  to  find  a  holy  work  to  do.  We  cannot  be  too  earnest  in  finding  such  a 
positive  use  of  the  day  of  rest  as  will  please  God  and  promote  our  own  spiritual 
advancement.  Surely,  in  the  judgment,  many  who  have  reckoned  themselves 
Christians  will  be  convicted  of  a  sore  misuse  of  the  weekly  opportunity.  We  may 
be  very  precise  and  even  punctilious  in  our  abstentions,  but  what  will  this  avail  by 
itself?  The  mind  that  is  not  earnestly  and  comfortably  occupied  with  Divine  things 
will  assuredly  be  occupied  in  thinking  of  things  that  belong  to  the  ordinary  day. 
As  it  is  now,  instead  of  the  Sunday  casting  its  brightness  on  the  week-day,  the  week- 
day too  often  casts  its  shadow  on  the  Sunday.  God  is  able  to  make  the  appropriate 
occupation  of  his  day,  if  we  enter  on  it  in  a  right  spirit,  a  joy  all  the  day  long.  la 
the  world,  and  through  the  week,  we  have  to  deal  with  all  sorts  of  men.  There  is 
the  strain,  the  discord,  and  the  suspicion  that  must  belong  to  all  human  relations  in 
this  mixed  and  sinful  state.  The  week-day  is  the  world's  day,  wherein  we  cannot 
get  away  from  the  world.  The  Lord's  day  ought  to  be  what  the  name  suggests,  the 
day  for  us  to  feel  that  we  have  not  only  to  do  with  the  hard  conditions  of  a  selfish 
world,  but  with  One  in  heaven,  who  is  most  considerate,  and  most  able  to  satisfy  us 
with  all  good  things. 

11.  The  lesson  of  the  daily  opfeeinq  which  was  not  to  be  omitted.  The 
sabbath,  in  respect  of  God's  gifts  and  dealings  in  nature,  was  the  same  as  an  ordinary 
day,  and  therefore  had  to  be  acknowledged  as  such.  So  far  as  God's  operations  in 
nature  are  concerned  all  goes  on  without  a  break,  Sunday  and  week-day  alike.  The 
sun  rises  as  on  other  days,  the  clouds  gather  and  the  rain  falls,  the  rivers  run,  and 
the  tides  flow  and  ebb.  It  is  as  true,  Sunday  as  week-day,  that  in  God  we  live  and 
move  and  have  our  being.  Th.e  great  difference  is  that  while  God  in  nature  is  making 
all  to  go  on  just  as  usual,  man,  if  he  be  in  harmony  with  the  will  of  God  in  Christ 
Jesus,  is  resting  from  his  toils.  God  needs  not  rest  in  the  sense  in  which  we  need  it. 
He  rested  from  the  exercise  of  his  creative  energy,  but  not  because  of  exhaustion. 
We,  who  have  to  eat  our  bread  in  the  sweat  of  our  face  till  we  return  to  the  ground, 
need  that  regular  and  frequent  interval  of  rest  which  he  has  so  graciously  provided. 
And  thus,  coming  as  we  sometimes  do  to  the  close  of  the  week,  utterly  spent  and 
exhausted,  ready  to  welcome  the  brief  respite  from  toil,  we  have  the  joy  of  recollect- 
ing, as  we  see  God  continuing  on  the  sabbath  his  work  in  the  natural  world,  that  he 
is  indeed  the  everlasting  God,  the  Lord,  the  Creator  of  the  ends  of  the  earth,  he  who 
f ainteth  not,  neither  is  weary.  "  He  giveth  power  to  the  faint ;  and  to  them  that 
have  no  might  he  increaseth  strength  "  (Isa.  xl.  28 — 31). — Y. 

Vers.  11 — 15. — The  offering  at  the  new  mocm.  Here  the  services  rendered  to  man 
by  God  in  nature  are  once  again  linked  in  with  the  duties  of  religion.  As  God 
required  offerings  in  the  morning  and  evening  of  every  day,  so  on  the  day  when  the 
new  moon  fell  there  was  an  additional  and  largely  increased  offering.  Why  should 
such  special  notice  be  taken  of  this  occasion  ? 

I.  The  moon  is  cub  own  satellite  and  PEcnLiAs  servant.  It  has  evidently 
been  given  for  our  special  benefit.  The  sun  serves  us  with  our  share,  as  it  does  the 
other  planets  that  circle  round  it,  hut  the  moon  is  peculiarly  ours.  When,  therefore,  it 
had  passed  through  all  its  phases,  it  was  well  to  mark  the  renewal  of  service  by  a 
special -offering.  If  it  be  said  that  Israel  was  not  aware  of  this  nice  distinction 
between  the  services  of  the  sun  and  moon,  the  distinction  is  nevertheless  reel,  was 

002 


388  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  [oHS.  xxviii.,  xxa. 

known  then  to  God,  and  is  known  now  to  us.  The  commandmenta  of  God  took  into 
consideration  not  only  what  was  known  at  the  time  of  their  announcement,  hut  what 
would  be  further  discovered  in  the  progress  of  human  inquiry.  We  can  Bee  a 
propriety  in  this  ordinance  of  the  monthly  offering,  as  we  think  of  the  peculiar 
relation  which  the  moon  alone  of  all  the  heavenly  bodies  sustains  to  our  earth. 

II.  The  moon  is  an  emblem  op  apparent  change  and  yet  real  steadfastness, 
Thus  it  is  an  emblem  of  the  way  in  which  God's  dealings  appear  often  to  us.  The 
Unchanging  One  looks  like  a  changing  one,  and  it  takes  all  our  faith  to  be  sure  of 
his  faithfulness.  We  talk  of  the  waxing  and  the  waning  moon,  but  we  know  that 
the  moon  itself  remains  the  same,  that  the  change  of  appearance  arises  from  change 
of  position,  and  depends  on  how  it  catches  the  light  of  the  sun.  When  we  do  see  it, 
we  see  the  same  face  always  turned  towards  us,  and  mysterious  as  its  movements  are 
to  the  ignorant  and  the  savage,  they  are  nevertheless  so  regular  that  all  can  be  pre- 
dicted beforehand.  The  moon  therefore  is  a  peculiar  and  suggestive  emblem  of 
constancy,  if  we  look  on  it  aright.     Juliet,  indeed,  in  her  love-sick  prattle  says, 

O,  swear  not  by  the  moon,  the  inconstant  moon, 
That  monthly  changes  in  her  circled  orb. 

But  appearance  is  one  thing  and  reality  is  another,  and  we  are  reminded  of  one  who 
found  a  very  different  emblematic  value  in  the  moon  when  he  said,  "  They  shall  fear 
thee  as  long  as  the  sim  and  moon  endure,  throughout  all  generations."  The  faith- 
fulness of  God  is  the  same,  even  when  his  face  is  hidden,  and  when  his  mercy,  like 
the  waning  moon,  seems  to  diminish  before  our  very  eyes.  The  mysterious  hind- 
rances, sorrows,  and  gloomy  peculiarities  of  our  present  life  would  be  largely  cleared 
up,  if  we  only  knew  as  much  of  the  wheels  within  wheels  of  God's  moral  government, 
as  we  do  of  the  wheels  within  wheels  in  the  motions  and  relations  of  the  heavenly 
bodies. 

III.  The  connection  of  the  moon  with  the  month  is  also  to  be  borne  in 
MIND.  Spring,  summer,  autumn,  winter,  are,  after  all,  vague  terms.  We  mark  the 
changing  phenomena  of  the  year  far  more  accurately  by  the  months  than  by  the 
longer  seasons.  We  speak  of  blustering  March,  showery  April,  chill  October,  drear 
December,  and  may  we  not  suppose  that  the  Israelites  had  somewhat  of  the  same  way 
of  thinking  with  regard  to  their  months  ? — each  month  with  its  own  character  and 
making  its  own  contribution  to  the  fulness  of  the  year  (Deut.  xvii.  3  ;  xxxiii.  14  ; 
1  Sam.  XX.  5  ;  2  Kings  iv.  23  ;  Ps.  Ixxxi.  1 — 1 ;  Ixxxix.  37 ;  Isa.  ixx.  26 ;  Ix.  20 ; 
GaL  iv.  10 ;  Eev.  xxii.  2).— Y. 

Vers.  16 — 26. — The  feast  at  the  pattover  time.  I.  It  was  a  reminder  of  how 
SERIOUSLY  God's  gifts  to  the  Israelites  had  been  interfered  with.  There  was 
the  gift  of  the  day  with  its  morning  and  evening,  the  gift  of  the  new  moon,  and 
probably  we  shall  not  do  wrong  in  concluding  that  the  patriarchs  understood  and 
appreciated  much  of  the  blessing  of  the  Sabbath.  But  what  were  these  to  the 
Israelites  amid  the  bitterness  of  their  bondage  in  Egypt  ?  Pharaoh  had  taken  the 
choice  gifts  of  God  and  distorted  them  into  agents  of  the  most  exquisite  pain.  Instead 
of  having  a  heart  for  the  morning  and  evening  sacrifice,  they  were  in  a  state  such  as 
Moses  indicated  might  occur  to  them  again  in  the  event  of  disobedience  (Deut.  xxviii. 
67).  Their  morning  cry  might  justly  have  been,  "  Would  God  it  were  even  I "  and 
their  evening  cry,  "Would  God  it  were  morning  I "  In  Egypt  they  had  not  materials 
enough  for  daily  work,  let  alone  holy  service.  Thus  we  have  a  forcible  illustration 
of  the  way  in  which  spiritual  evil  has  embittered  all  God's  natural  gifts.  In  the  use 
of  them,  they  get  turned  away  from  his  intentions  so  as  to  serve  the  selhsh  purposes 
of  some,  and  cause  perhaps  the  life-long  privations  and  miseries  of  others.  We  must 
indeed  be  thankful  for  what  God  gives,  even  when  it  is  interfered  with,  for  the  gift 
shows  the  disposition  of  the  giver,  and  it  is  a  good  thing  for  us  to  be  at  all  times 
assured  of  this.  But  then  we  must  also  carefully  mark  how  much  there  is  in  human 
society  to  intercept,  distort,  and  even  as  it  were  transmute  these  loving  and  suitable 
gifts  of  God.  The  very  abundance  of  the  blessings  which  God  is  disposed  to 
bestow,  should  lead  us  to  view  with  much  alarm,  with  deep  and  abiding  concern, 


cOta.  zxTm.,  XZB.]  THB  BOOS  09  NUMBEBS.  3S« 

the  obstacleB  which  lie  in  the  way  of  a  complete  and  profitable  reception  of  tho 
bleBsings. 

II.  It  was  a  bemindbe  or  how  complbtelt  God  had  taken  the  obstacles  ovi 
OP  THE  way.  The  week  of  unleavened  bread  was  a  period  for  joyous  comrnemora- 
tion  of  the  deliverance  from  Egypt ;  and  by  their  offerings  Israel  recognised  that 
the  deliverance  was  entirely  by  the  act  of  God.  Israel  did  nothing  but  walk  out  of 
the  prison-door  when  it  was  opened.  This  was  an  inestimable  blessing,  to  be  a  free 
nation,  even  although  a  nation  whose  territory  had  yet  to  be  gained.  Liberty  leads 
to  all  other  blessings.  We  cannot  rejoice  too  much  in  the  spiritual  liberty  which 
Christ  has  achieved  for  the  children  of  men.  We  are  bound  to  commemorate  it  in 
fitting  ways ;  ways  adequate  to  glorify  God,  and  to  impress  us  more  and  more  with 
the  magnitude  of  the  blessing  we  have  gained.  As  to  the  particular  mode  of  com- 
memoration, every  Christian  must  judge  for  himself,  as  in  the  sight  of  God,  with 
respect  to  the  due  season  (ver.  2).  Easter  has  come  as  a  matter  of  fact  to  have 
special  associations  and  special  value  for  many.  They  feel  that  they  have  proved 
the  worth  of  the  season  in  their  own  experience,  and  can  amply  justify  the  observing 
of  it.  Those  of  us  who  live  outside  tlie  traditions,  the  habits  of  thinking,  and  the 
peculiar  spirit  fostered  by  the  observance  of  an  ecclesiastical  year,  can  hardly  claim 
to  be  competent  judges  of  the  value  of  such  times  and  seasons.  But  mark  one  thing. 
Ifo  observance  can  be  worth  calling  such  unless  it  commemorates  an  actual,  personal 
deliverance.  God  not  only  put  his  strong  hand  on  the  gaoler  Pharaoh,  but  drew 
forth  the  captive  Israel.  When  Christ  our  passover  was  sacrificed  for  the  children 
of  men,  he  brought  them  into  a  new  relation  to  God,  one  of  possible  reconciliation 
to  him,  and  possible  liberty  for  the  whole  man.  How  far  the  reconciliation  and 
liberty  shall  be  actual  depends  on  our  personal  repentance  and  faith. 

IlL  The  particular  commemorative  valub  of  the  dnlbavenbd  briad.  The 
people  leaving  Egypt  were  not  allowed  to  finish  the  preparing  of  their  bread  accord- 
ing to  their  wont.  They  were  hastened  out  of  the  land  at  a  moment's  notice.  And 
it  was  not  God  who  did  this,  as  when  the  angels  hastened  Lot  out  of  Sodom.  The 
Israelites  were  thrust  out  hy  the  Egyptians  themselves.  The  gaoler  himself  was 
found  a  fellow-laboarer  with  the  liberator.  Thus  the  unleavened  bread  becomes  an 
impressive  reminder  of  the  complete  rupture  which  God  makes  between  his  peop'e 
and  their  spiritual  enemies.  As  there  could  be  no  mistake  about  the  effect  which 
was  produced  in  Egypt  by  the  death  of  the  first-bom,  bo  there  can  be  no  mistake 
about  the  efficacy  of  the  blow  which  God  in  Christ  Jesus  has  dealt  on  our  great 
spiritual  adversary.  That  our  Saviour  in  his  own  person,  and  for  himself,  has  com- 
pletely conquered  sin,  is  a  fact  which  we  cannot  dwell  upon  too  much,  as  full  of  hope 
for  ourselves  and  for  a  sinful  and  miserable  world. 

IV.  Note  the  season  of  the  tear  in  which  this  feast  was  observed.  It 
happened  in  the  first  month  of  the  year,  made  the  first  month  on  account  of  this 
very  deliverance.  How  devoutly  would  the  true  Israelite  look  upon  the  beginning 
of  this  month  I  Hail  I  new  moon  which  brings  near  the  season  for  celebrating  the 
deliverance  from  Egypt.  Who  can  doubt  that  such  a  soul  as  Simeon  kept  the  days 
of  unleavened  bread  in  the  very  spirit  of  them,  living  as  he  did  in  those  dark  humili- 
ating times,  which  were  Egypt  over  again,  when  the  land  of  his  fathers  was  captive, 
and  the  temple  of  his  God  neglected  by  its  own  custodians  ?  It  is  the  most  fitting 
time  to  recollect  the  sure  mercies  of  the  past  when  we  need  a  renewal  and  perhaps 
an  increase  of  them. 

V.  The  CONTINUAL  obligation  op  the  daily  offeeino.  The  bondage  in  Egypt 
embittered  the  gifts  of  God,  yet  even  then  a  patient  and  willing  soul  would  find 
something  to  be  thankful  for.  And  when  liberty  came,  if  right  thoughts  came  with 
it,  the  gifts  of  God  becoming  available  for  use  would  inspire  special  thankfulness 
for  the  mercy  that  had  made  them  so.  How  much  God's  daily  blessings  should  be 
heightened  and  sweetened  in  our  esteem  by  the  larger  use  which  we  can  make  of 
them  as  believers  in  Christ  I  We  must  not  under-value  common,  daily  mercies  even 
in  the  presence  of  God's  unspeakable  gift.  He  who  is  the  brightness  of  the  Father's 
glory  casts  something  of  that  brightness  on  every  gift  of  the  Father's  love.  That  is 
no  right  appreciation  of  God's  mercy  in  Christ  Jesus  which  does  not  lead  us  to  a 
better  appreciation  of  every  other  mercy.    God,  whose  presence  and  power  we  are 


B90  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [ciH3.  xXTin.,  xx« 

called  to  observe  in  the  redemption  of  the  world,  would  have  vw  to  see  the  sam« 
presfnoe  and  power  wherever  we  have  faculties  to  see  them.  To  go  from  the  cross, 
with  the  meaning  of  it  and  the  spirit  of  it  filling  our  minds,  and  in  such  a  mood  to 
receive  the  common  mercies  of  God  as  one  by  one  they  come  to  us,  will  fill  them 
with  a  new  power.  Henceforth  they  will  minister,  not  only  to  the  wants  of  flesh 
and  blood,  but  to  our  growth  in  grace  and  meetness  for  glory. — ^Y. 

Vers.  26 — 31. — The  featt  of  the  first-fruiU.  I.  A  recognition  oj  thb  annual 
SUPPLY  OP  FOOD  FROM  GOD.  The  day  of  the  first-fruits  was  the  day  for  bringing 
"  a  new  meat  ofEering  unto  the  Lord  "  (ver.  26).  This  meat  offering  was  to  consist 
of  two  wave  loaves  made  of  fine  flour  (Levit.  xxiii.  17).  Hence  by  this  an  indication 
was  given  that  the  chief  constituent  of  the  daily  meat  offering  would  not  be  lacking 
during  the  following  twelve  months.  Corn  is  appropriately  singled  out  above  all 
the  fruits  of  the  earth  as  furnishing  the  staple  of  man's  food.  Otb«r  things,  even 
the  oil  and  the  wine,  are  to  be  counted  as  luxuries  in  comparisoD.  The  prominence 
here  given  to  bread  accords  with  our  Lord's  teaching,  when  he  tells  us  to  pray  not 
for  daily  food  in  general,  but  for  the  daily  bread.  It  was  a  good  thing  thus  to  mark 
in  a  special  way  the  completion  of  the  corn  harvest,  that  which  had  been  "  sown  in 
the  field,"  and  not  to  wait  and  merely  include  it  when  the  labours  of  the  year  had 
been  gathered  in  (Ezod.  xziii.  16).  God's  mercy  in  the  daily  bread  flows  out  of  his 
mercy  in  the  annual  harvest.  We  are  called  upon  to  behold  him,  year  after  year, 
filling  the  storehouse  whence  day  by  day  he  draws  and  distributes  the  daily  supply. 
As  we  behold  the  annual  harvest  we  can  join  the  appreciative  souls  of  the  world  m 
thanking  God  for  the  production  of  bread.  And  then  in  the  daily  offering  we 
equally  thank  him  for  the  distribution  of  what  has  been  produced. 

II.  A    RECOGNITION    OF   God'S   EFFECTUAL   BLESSING    ON    HUMAN    INDUSTRY.       How 

much  in  the  way  of  combined  effort  is  suggested  by  the  sight  of  a  tiny  grain  of 
com  I  What  mighty  forces  are  represented  there — heat,  light,  air,  moisture,  soil — 
all  acting  on  a  living  germ  I  And  not  only  these.  That  grain  also  represents  human 
industry,  forethought,  attention,  patience,  all  crowned  with  the  blessing  of  God 
(1  Cor.  iii.  6).  And  if  we  look  upon  the  grain  now,  we  see  the  light  of  modem 
science  brought  to  bear  upon  its  growth  and  increase  in  addition  to  all  the  other 
necessary  effort.  We  may  be  quite  sure  that  God  will  bless  all  honest,  intelligent, 
and  sedulous  effort  to  increase  the  fruits  of  the  earth.  After  all  these  centuries, 
man  hardly  yet  seems  to  appreciate  the  scope  of  that  command,  "Subdue  the  earth" 
(Gen.  i.  28).  Man  has  rather  learnt  to  replenish  the  earth  with  those  who  use  it  as  a 
vantage  ground  whereon  to  subdue  and  devour  one  another. 

III.  To  a  Christian  the  feast  of  the  first-fruits  must  ever  bring  to  mind  the  ALL- 

IMPOBTANT  EVENT  WHICH  HAPPENED  AT  THE  FIRST  PeNTBCOST  AFTER  THB  ASCENSION 

OF  Christ.  There  was  doubtless  some  weighty  reason  for  choosing  the  time  when 
the  day  of  Pentecost  was  fully  come  as  the  time  when  the  disciples  were  to  be  all 
filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  There  was  a  close  connection,  we  know,  between  the 
Passover  feast  and  the  Pentecost  feast.  A  complete  week  of  weeks,  a  perfect  period, 
intervened  between  that  day  of  the  Passover  feast  when  a  sheaf  of  the  harvest  first- 
fruits  was  waved  before  the  Lord  (Levit.  xxiii.),  and  the  day  of  Pentecost,  when  the 
full  meat  offering  was  presented.  Thus  in  this  interval  the  harvest  was  gathered  in, 
and  then  by  the  Pentecostal  service  it  was  signified  that  in  the  strength  of  the  food 
which  he  had  gathered  man  could  go  on  for  another  year.  And  as  God  ahose  the 
Passover  season,  when  the  great  deliverance  from  Egypt  was  celebrated,  for  that 
death  and  resurrection  of  Christ  whereby  he  delivers  his  people  from  guilt,  and 
spiritual  bondage,  and  helplessness,  so  he  chose  Pentecost  for  the  entrance  of  that 
Holy  Spirit  who  makes  the  deliverance  to  be  followed  by  such  unspeakable  positive 
consequences.  The  risen  Saviour  gives  liberty  to  those  who  believe  in  him,  and 
then  he  gives  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  the  right  of  liberty  may  not  be  a  barren  gift. 
What  is  even  a  free  man  without  daily  food  ?  What  advantage  is  it  to  a  man  if 
you  liberate  him  from  prison  merely  to  turn  him  into  a  sandy  desert?  The  forgiven 
sinner  with  his  awakened  spirit  and  new  needs  has  the  evident  fulness  of  G"d'? 
Spirit  to  which  he  may  continually  apply  himself.  God  availed  himself  of  the  place 
which  Pentecost  naturally  held  in  the  minds  of  the  disciples  to  teach  them  a  great 


OHB.  XXVIII.,  ixn.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBBBS.  tn 

lesson.  Hebrew  Christians  were  not  likely  to  give  up  their  old  times  and  seasons, 
and  80  the  Passover  feast  was  still  further  glorified  by  the  recollection  of  Jesua 
dying  for  them,  and  the  Pentecost  feast  by  the  recollection  of  how  the  Spirit  had 
been  poured  upon  all  flesh.  It  is  very  certain  that  we  do  not  sufficiently  appreciate 
the  practical  significanee  of  that  memorable  Pentecost,  It  ought  to  stand  in  our 
minds  side  by  side  with  that  other  memorable  day  when  the  Word  that  became 
flesh  first  breathed  at  Bethlehem  the  air  of  this  sin-tainted  world.  Is  it  not  a  matter 
of  the  greatest  significance  that  after  Pentecost  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  was  among 
men  as  he  was  not  before  ?  What  a  blessing,  and  yet  what  a  responsibility,  to  feel 
that  thus  and  then  he  came,  and,  as  he  came,  still  remains  1 — T, 

Vers.  7,  12. — A  solemn  fast  and  a  joyous  feast.  Lessons  may  be  drawn  from  the 
dates  and  the  order  of  these  two  annual  solemnities,  viz.,  (1)  the  day  of  atonement, 
on  the  tenth  day  of  the  seventh  month  ;  (2)  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  on  the  fifteenth 
day  of  the  same  month. 

I.  God's  order  is  first  an  atonement ;  secondly,  a  festival.  The  expiation  of  the 
nation's  sins  on  the  most  solemn  day  of  the  year  was  God's  preparation  for  the  most 
joyous  season  of  the  year  (cf,  Levit.  xxv.  9 — the  trumpet  of  Jubilee  was  sounded  on 
the  day  of  atonement).  The  world's  great  atonement  must  precede  the  world's  feast 
of  tabernacles.  The  feast  of  tabernacles  was — 1.  A  commemoration  of  the  nation's 
low  estate  during  its  life  in  the  wilderness.  The  booths  ordered  probably  lest  they 
should,  in  their  prosperity,  forget  the  lowliness  of  their  past  condition  (Deut.  viii.  2— 
18).  2.  A  thanksgiving  for  harvest  blessings  ("  feast  of  ifigathering,"  Exod,  zziii, 
16),  We  too  may  "keep  the  feast"  (1  Cor.  v.  8)  of  the  Christian  life  as— (1)  A 
grateful  commemoration  of  the  low  estate  out  of  which  God  called  us.  (Illustrate 
from  Deut.  xxvi.  1 — 11 ;  cf.  Ps.  xl.  1 — 3  ;  Ephes.  ii.  4—7.)  (2)  A  joyous  feast  of 
ingathering  of  spiritual  harvest,  of  blessings  for  ourselves  and  others  through  the 
atonement  of  Christ  (Ephes,  i.  3,  7—13  ;  1  Pet.  i,  3—5), 

II.  The  knowledge  of  personal  reconciliation  with  God  prepares  for  the  joys  of 
life.  Each  Israelite  who  was  penitently  confiding  in  God's  mercy  could  appropriate 
the  blessings  of  the  day  of  atonement  (cf.  Bom.  v.  1,  11 ;  Gal.  ii.  20).  (Illustrate 
from  2  Chron.  xxii.  27.)  An  accepted  sacrifice  brings  songs  to  the  offerer's  lips. 
Humiliation  precedes  exaltation  in  Christ  (Philip,  ii.  7 — 11)  and  in  Christians  (Luke 
i.  62  ;  John  xvi.  20 ;  James  iv.  10).  'Those  who  "  sow  in  tears "  of  genuine 
humiliation  and  "  afilicting  of  the  soul  "  on  the  tenth  day  shall  "reap  in  joy'  on  the 
fifteenth.     Many  seek  to  reverse  this  order ;  e.  g.  Isa.  xxii.  12,  13. 

III.  Days  of  rejoicing  are  yet  to  be  days  of  sacrifice.  More  sacrifices  were  offered 
at  the  feast  of  tabernacles  than  at  either  of  the  other  great  festivals.  So  the  joys  of 
life  and  the  greater  joys  of  salvation  are  to  be  the  occasion  of  the  more  entire 
dedication  of  ourselves  to  God,  and  of  cheerful  service  to  others  (Neh.  viii.  9 — 12 ; 
Heb.  xiii.  10— 16).— P. 

Ch.  xxix. — The  offerings  of  the  seventh  month.  I,  Consideb  thk  incbbasb  in  the 
OPFBBINGS  DUBINQ  THIS  MONTH.  There  was  the  customary  morning  and  evening 
offering  for  every  day ;  the  customary  offering  at  the  bej^liming  of  the  month  ;  and 
an  additional  offering,  as  if  to  signify  that  it  was  the  beginning  of  a  more  than 
ordinary  month.  There  would  also  he  the  appointed  offerings  on  the  sabbaths  of  the 
month.  The  tenth  day  of  the  month  brought  the  great  day  of  atonement,  when  there 
was  to  be  much  affliction  of  soul  because  of  sin.  Then,  to  crown  all,  there  were  the 
eight  days  of  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  when  an  unusual  quantity  of  offerings  were 
presented.  We  may  therefore  consider  the  seventh  month  as  being,  conspicuously, 
a  month  devoted  in  Israel  to  the  service  of  God. 

II.  Consider  the  lessons  we  are  taught  by  this  month  of  special  service.  1. 
Ifote  that  it  was  at  the  season  of  the  pear  when  the  fruits  were  all  gathered  in.  "The 
feast  of  ingathering,  which  is  in  the  end  of  the  year,  when  thou  hast  gathered  in  thy 
labours  out  of  the  field  "  (Exod.  xxiii.  16).  There  was  thus  a  time  of  leisure — not  the 
commanded  leisure  of  the  sabbath,  but  the  natural  leisure  of  the  man  who  has  finished 
his  year's  work.  There  is  an  interval  between  gathering  the  fruits  of  one  year  and 
preparing  tor  the  fruits  of  the  next.    What  is  io  he  done  with  this  time  i   The  answer 


892 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES. 


[OHS.  XXVlIL,  XXIX 


is,  Man's  leisure  must  be  used  for  God.  Let  there  be  a  month  largely  occupied  with 
Bpecial  national  approach  to  God.  And,  depend  upon  it,  something  similar  is  expected 
from  UB.  There  is  nothing  in  which  the  lot  of  men  is  less  equal  than  in  the  amount 
of  leisure  time  which  they  have  at  their  disposal.  One  man  has  to  labour  long  hours 
and  hardly  finds  a  holiduy  all  the  year  round,  while  another  has  abundant  leisure. 
What  an  awful  responsibility  for  the  rich  and  selfish  triflers  who  lounge  away  their 
lives  in  a  world  where  so  much  may  be  done  for  the  miserable  and  the  needy  I  How 
he  spends  his  leisure  is  one  of  the  great  tests  of  a  man.  Where  his  heart  is,  there 
he  will  go,  when  for  a  few  hours  he  is  slipped  out  of  harness.  If  we  are  God's  at 
all,  all  our  time  is  God's.  If  our  hearts  are  right  with  him,  our  greatest  joy  will  be 
in  our  religion,  and  we  shall  hail,  we  shall  grasp,  every  opportunity  of  increasing  our 
knowledge  of  God,  of  the  Scriptures,  and  of  how  to  render  that  service  to  Christ 
which  is  so  plainly  expected  from  us.  The  spirit  in  which  an  Israelite  entered  on  this 
festal  month  would  be  a  great  test  of  him  altogether.  2.  7/"  God  requires  a  service 
out  of  the  common,  he  will  furnish  sufficient  opportunity  for  it.  God  did  not  institute 
these  services  simply  to  fill  up  a  leisure  month.  They  had  to  be  rendered  at  some 
time  or  other,  and  he  selected  a  season  when  all  the  details  of  them  could  be  most 
conveniently  carried  out.  If  God  requires  any  service  from  us,  we  may  be  sure  that 
he  will  make  the  duty  of  that  service  clear  to  conscience.  It  is  not  allowed  to  any 
of  us  to  say,  "  I  have  no  time  for  this  service,  no  opportunity  for  it,  therefore  I 
cannot  do  it."  The  method  of  God  is  to  put  a  service  clearly  before  us,  and  then  tell 
us  to  trust  him  for  the  making  of  a  way.  He  will  not  allow  us  to  plead  want  of  time 
and  opportunity,  any  more  than  he  allowed  Moses  to  plead  want  of  ability  (Exod. 
iv.  11,  12).  Here  is  the  reason  why  faithful  and  obedient  spirits  have  been  so 
successful.  God  has  said  "  Go,"  and  they  have  gone,  when  there  seemed  no  way 
more  than  a  single  step  ahead.  Wherever  God  finds  a  real  believer  he  makes  a  way 
for  him,  like  that  royal  road  to  which  the  Baptist  referred  (Luke  iii.  4,  5)..  We  see 
here  how  the  events  of  the  ecclesiastical  year  are  gathered  and  arranged.  When  the 
Israelites  first  received  these  commandments  to  make  offerings,  receiving  them  as 
they  did  at  different  times,  they  may  have  said  to  themselves,  "  How  can  we  possibly 
get  through  so  much  ?  "  But  here  they  are  all  put  in  order,  and  it  is  seen  that  there 
is  a  time  for  everything,  and  that  everything  can  be  done  in  its  time.  The  lesser 
service  prepares  for  the  greater.  God  does  well  continually  to  ask  his  servants  for 
more,  because  he  is  ever  making  them  able  to  give  more.  3.  The  day  of  temporal 
fulness  is  the  day  of  spiritual  danger.  It  is  not  only  that  the  time  of  leisure  is  the 
time  of  temptation;  tliere  is  a  peculiar  temptation  in  the  leisure  because  it  follows 
on  worldly  success.  In  such  circumstances  men  are  tempted  to  think  of  their  own 
industry  and  skill  more  than  of  the  needful  blessing  of  God.  Not  without  reason 
did  the  great  day  of  atonement  stand  in  this  month.  Everything  is  good  which  will 
force  upon  a  man,  in  the  midst  of  his  worldly  prosperity,  a  sense  of  the  presence  and 
claims  of  God.  When  Israel  had  a  good  harvest,  the  time  of  leisure  that  followed 
would  be  a  time  of  great  anxiety  to  many  as  to  how  they  might  most  profitably 
dispose  of  the  harvest.  It  is  oftentimes  the  rich  man  who  is  in  danger  of  having  the 
least  leisure ;  when  hia  riches  lie  in  capital,  the  use  of  which  he  must  watch 
continually. — Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXX. 


O?  TOWS  MADE  BY  WOMEN  (verS.  1 — 16). 

Ver.  1. — And  Moses  spake  unto  the  heads 
of  the  tribes.  The  regulations  here  laid 
down  about  vows  follow  with  a  certain  pro- 
priety upon  those  concerning  the  ordinary 
routine  of  sacrifices  (see  ver.  39  of  last  chap- 
ter), but  we  cannot  conclude  with  any  assur- 
ance that  they  were  actually  given  at  this 
particular  period.  It  would  appear  upon  the 
face  of  it  that  we  have  in  Levit.  xxvii.  and 
in  this  chapter  two  fragments  of  Mosaic 


legislation  dealing  with  the  same  subject,  but, 
for  some  reason  which  it  is  useless  to  attempt 
to  discover,  widely  separated  in  the  inspired 
record.  Nor  does  there  seem  to  be  any  valid 
reason  for  explaining  away  the  apparently 
fragmentary  and  dislocated  character  of  these 
two  sections  (see  the  Introduction).  The 
statement,  peculiar  to  this  passage,  that  these 
instructions  were  issued  to  the  "  heads  of 
the  tribes "  itself  serves  to  differentiate  it 
from  all  the  rest  of  the  "  statutes  "  given  by 
Moses,  and  suggests  that  this  chapter  wa» 
inserted  either  by  some  other  hand  or  firom  a 


OB.  XXX.  1— 1&] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS. 


8M 


different  sonrce.  There  is  no  reason  what- 
ever for  supposing  that  the  "heads  of  the 
tribes"  were  more  interested  in  these  par- 
ticular regulations  than  in  many  others  which 
concerned  the  social  life  of  the  people  (such 
as  that  treated  of  inch.  v.  6 — 31)  which  were 
declared  in  the  ordinary  way  nnto  "the 
children  of  Israel "  at  large. 

Ver.  2. — If  a  man  vow  a  vow.  1^3,  a 
TOW,  is  commonly  said  to  he  distinctively  a 
positive  row,  a  promise  to  render  something 
unto  the  Lord,  This,  however,  cannot  be 
strictly  maintained,  because  the  Nazarite 
vow  was  neder,  and  that  was  essentially  a  vow 
of  abstinence.  To  say  that  the  vow  of  the 
Kazarite  was  of  a  positive  character  because 
he  had  to  let  his  hair  grow  "unto  the  Lord" 
is  a  mere  evasion.  It  is,  however,  probable 
that  neder,  when  it  occurs  (as  in  this  pas- 
sage) in  connection  with  issa/r,  does  take 
on  the  narrower  signification  of  a  positive 
vow.  Swear  an  oath  to  bind  his  soul  with 
a  bond.  Literally,  "to  bind  a  bond  upon 
his  soul."  1G)^,  a  bond,  which  occurs  only 
in  this  chapter,  is  considered  to  be  a  re- 
strictive obligation,  a  vow  of  abstinence.  It 
wonld  appear  that  the  issar  was  always 
nndertaken  upon  oath,  whereas  the  neder  (as 
in  the  case  of  the  Nazarite)  did  not  of  neces- 
sity require  it.  He  shall  not  break  his 
word.  This  was  the  general  principle  with 
respect  to  vows,  and,  as  here  laid  down,  it  was 
ia  accordance  with  the  universal  religious 
feeling  of  mankind.  Whatever  crimes  may 
have  claimed  the  sanction  of  this  sentiment, 
whatever  exceptions  and  safeguards  a  clearer 
revelation  and  a  better  knowledge  of  God 
may  have  established^  yet  the  principle  re- 
mained that  whatsoever  a  man  had  promised 
unto  the  Lord,  that  he  must  fulfil.  Iphi- 
genia  in  Aulis,  Jephthah's  daughter  in 
Grilead,  proclaim  to  what  horrid  extremities 
any  one  religious  principle,  unchecked  by 
other  co-ordinate  principles,  may  lead ;  but 
they  also  proclaim  how  deep  and  true  this 
religious  principle  must  have  been  which 
could  so  over-ride  the  natural  feelings  of  men 
not  cruel  nor  depraved. 

Ver.  8. — If  a  woman  vow  a  vow.  The 
fragmentary  nature  of  this  section  appears 
from  the  fact  that,  after  laying  down  the 
general  principle  of  the  sacredness  of  vows, 
it  proceeds  to  qualify'it  in  three  special  cases 
only  of  vows  made  by  women  under  authority. 
That  vows  made  by  boys  were  irreversible  is 
exceedingly  unlikely ;  and  indeed  it  is  ob- 
vious that  many  cases  must  have  occurred, 
neither  mentioned  here  nor  in  Levit.  xxvii., 
in  which  the  obligation  could  not  stand  abso- 
lute. In  her  father's  house  in  her  youth. 
Case  first,  of  a  girl  in  her  father's  house,  who 
had  no  proper^  of  her  own,  and  whose  per- 
sonal services  were  due  to  her  father. 


Ver.  6. — If  her  father  disallow  her.  It 
appears  from  the  previous  verse  that  the  dis- 
allowance must  be  spoken,  and  not  mental 
only.  If  the  vow  had  been  made  before 
witnesses,  no  doubt  the  father's  veto  mnst 
be  pronounced  before  witnesses  also. 

Ver.  6. — If  she  had  at  all  a  hnsband. 
Literally,  "if  being  she  be  to  an  husband." 
Septuagint,  iav  yivo/tivti  ylvqrai  avtpi. 
Case  second,  of  a  married  or  betrothed 
woman.  As  far  as  the  legal  status  of  the 
woman  was  concerned,  there  was  little  dif- 
ference under  Jewish  law  whether  she  were 
married  or  only  betrothed.  In  either  case 
she  was  accounted  as  belonging  to  her  hus- 
band, with  all  that  she  had  {at  Deut.  xxii, 
23,  24;  Matt.  i.  19,  20).  When  she  vowed. 
Rather,  "  and  her  vows  be  upon  her." 
Septuagint,  icai  at  evx"'  atiTijs  iv'  airy. 
The  vows  might  have  been  made  before  her 
betrothal,  and  not  disallowed  by  her  father ; 
yet  upon  her  coming  under  the  power  of  her 
husband  he  had  an  absolute  nght  to  dis- 
solve the  obligation  of  them  ;  otherwise  it  is 
evident  that  he  might  suffer  loss  through  an 
act  of  which  he  had  no  notice.  Or  nttered 
ought  out  of  her  lips.  Eather,  "  or  the  rash 
utterance  of  her  lips."  The  word  ND3D 
which  is  not  found  elsewhere  (cf.  Ps.  cvi.  33), 
seems  to  have  this  meaning.  Such  a  vow 
made  by  a  young  girl  as  would  be  disallowed 
by  her  husband  when  he  knew  of  it  would 
prestmiably  be  a  "  rash  utterance." 

Ver.  9. — Every  vow  of  a  widow,  and  of 
her  that  ia  divorced.  This  is  not  one  of  the 
cases  treated  of  in  this  section  (see  ver.  16), 
but  is  only  mentioned  in  order  to  point  out 
that  it  falls  under  the  general  principle  laid 
down  in  ver.  2. 

Ver.  10. — If  she  vowed  in  her  hnshand's 
house.  Case  third,  of  a  married  woman 
living  with  her  husband.  The  husband  had 
naturally  the  same  absolute  authority  to 
allow  or  disallow  all  such  vows  as  the  father 
had  in  the  case  of  his  unmarried  daughter. 
The  only  difference  is  that  the  responsibility 
of  the  husband  is  expressed  in  stronger  terms 
than  that  of  the  father,  because  in  the  nature 
of  things  the  husband  has  a  closer  interest 
in  and  control  over  the  proceedings  of  his 
wife  than  the  father  has  over  those  of  the 
daughter. 

Ver.  13.— Oath  to  afflict  the  aonl.  No 
doubt  by  fasting  or  by  other  kinds  of  abstin- 
ence. The  expression  is  especially  used  in 
connection  with  the  rigorous  fast  of  the  day 
of  atonement  (Levit.  ivi.  29 ;  Numb.  xxiz.  7 ; 
and  cf  Isa.  Iviii.  5 ;  1  Cor.  vii,  6). 

Ver.  15. — Then  he  shall  bear  her  iniquity, 
t.  «.  if  he  tacitly  allowed  the  vow  in  the  first 
instance,  and  afterwards  forbad  its  fulfilment, 
the  guilt  which  such  breach  of  promise  in- 
volved should  rest  upon  him.  For  the  naiDra 
and  expiation  of  such  guilt  see  on  Levit.  f. 


884  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oh.  Xxx.  1—16. 


HOMILETICa 

Vers.  1  — 16.  —  Vows  unto  the  Lord.  This  section,  althongh  fragmentary, 
yet  reveals  to  us  with  great  clearness  the  Divine  mind  concerning  one  important 
portion  of  practical  religion.  It  lays  down  directly  the  principle  that  vows  to  God 
were  lawful  and  binding.  It  lays  down  indirectly  the  limitation  (although  it  only 
applies  it  to  the  case  of  women  not  sui  juris)  that  no  vows  to  God  were  valid  with- 
out the  consent  of  the  lawful  guardian,  if  such  there  were.  It  implies  the  general 
rule  that  no  vows  are  binding  to  the  damage  of  any  who  are  not  parties  to  the  vow ; 
and  this  is  itself  a  part  of  the  yet  wider  principle  that  God  is  not  served  nor  honoured 
by  anything  which  involves  the  injury  or  dishonour  of  man.  In  applying  the  teach- 
ing of  this  chapter  there  is  indeed  the  serious  preliminary  difficulty  of  deciding 
whether  vows  are  lawful  at  all  under  the  Christian  dispensation.  Inasmuch  as  no 
direct  utterance  can  be  found  in  the  New  Testament  upon  the  subject,  it  can  only  be 
argued  upon  broad  principles  of  the  gospel,  and  will  probably  for  ever  continue  to 
be  decided  in  different  ways  by  difEerent  people.  It  will  be  truly  said  upon  one  side 
that  by  virtue  of  our  Christian  baptism  and  profession  our  whole  self  is  dedicate 
unto  God,  to  live  a  life  of  entire  holiness,  such  as  leaves  no  room  for  further  and 
self-imposed  limitations  and  restrictions.  On  the  other  side  it  will  be  truly  replied 
that  although  in  principle  all  that  we  have  and  are  is  "  not  our  own,"  but  "  bought 
with  a  price,"  and  only  held  in  trust  by  us  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of 
men,  yet  in  practice  there  are  many  difEerent  degrees  of  self-renunciation  between 
which  a  good  Christian  is  often  called  in  efEect  to  make  his  choice,  and  that  his  vow 
may  be  simply  his  answer  to  the  inward  voice  which  bids  him  (in  this  sense)  "go 
up  higher."  It  will  be  said,  again,  and  truly  said,  that  the  law  of  Christ  is  essentially 
a  law  of  liberty,  and  therefore  inconsistent  with  the  constraint  of  vows ;  that  as  soon 
afl  a  man  crosses  his  natural  will,  not  because  his  higher  will  deliberately  embi-aces 
pain  for  the  sake  of  God,  but  because  he  is  bound  by  a  vow,  his  service  ceases  to  be 
free  and  ceases  to  b«  acceptable.  On  the  other  side  it  will  be  said,  and  truly  said, 
that  just  because  we  are  under  the  law  of  liberty,  therefore  we  are  at  liberty  to  use 
whatever  helps  Christian  ezperience  finds  to  be  for  practical  advantage  in  the  hard 
conflict  with  self ;  the  law  of  liberty  will  no  more  strip  the  weakling  of  the  defens- 
ive armour  which  gives  him  confidence  than  compel  the  strong  man  to  hamper  him- 
self with  it.  Once  more,  it  will  be  said  that  the  Christian  service  is  •'  reasonable,"  i  «. 
one  which  continually  approves  itself  to  the  honest  intelligence  of  him  that  renders 
it ;  but  since  it  may  happen  to  any  to  have  his  convictions  altered  by  growing  know- 
ledge or  greater  experience,  it  is  not  fit  that  the  conduct  of  any  be  permanently  re- 
strained by  vows.  And  this  is  to  a  certain  extent  unanswerable.  No  vow  could 
oblige  a  Christian  to  act  contrary  to  his  matured  conviction^  of  what  was  really  best 
for  him,  and  so  for  God.  If,  «.  g.,  one  who  had  vowed  celibacy  came  to  feel  in  him- 
self the  truth  of  1  Cor.  vii.  9,  he  would  be  a  better  Christian  in  breaking  than  in 
keeping  his  vow ;  for  we  are  not  under  the  law,  which  rigorously  enforces  the  letter, 
but  under  the  Spirit,  who  loves  only  that  which  makes  for  true  holiness.  It  may, 
however,  be  truly  urged  that  while  no  vow  ought  to  be  held  absolutely  binding  upon 
a  conscience  which  repudiates  it,  yet  many  vows  may  be  taken  with  all  practical 
assurance  that  the  conscience  never  will. repudiate  them.  One  thing  of  course  is 
certain  ;  aU  vows  (at  least  of  abstinence)  stand  upon  the  same  footing  in  principle, 
however  various  an  aspect  they  may  wear  m  practice.  A  vow,  e.  g. ,  of  total  abstinence 
from  intoxicating  liquors  is  in  principle  exactly  as  defensible  or  as  indefensible  as  a 
vow  of  perpetual  celibacy ;  nor  can  an  attempt  to  defend  one  while  condemning  the 
other  be  absolved  from  the  charge  of  hypocrisy.  This  being  the  doubtful  state  of 
the  argument,  of  which  the  true  Christian  casuist  can  only  say,  "Let  every  man  be 
fully  persuaded  in  his  own  mind,"  it  remains  to  treat  of  vows  in  that  sense  in  which 
they  are  allowed  by  all,  viz.,  as  promises  made  by  the  soul  to  God,  whether  fortified 
or  not  by  some  outward  ceremonial,  whether  made  in  response  to  the  more  general 
persuasions  of  the  gospel,  or  the  more  secret  drawings  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Consider, 
therefore — 
I.  That  a  man  must  not  break  his  woed  unto  God.    If  a  man  is  obliged  in  hon- 


OH.  XXX.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  395 

our  (and  -wherever  practicable  in  law  too)  to  keep  his  promise  to  his  brother  man ;  If 
an  honest  man  (even  among  savages),  having  given  his  word  to  his  neighbour,  may 
not  disappoint  him,  though  it  were  to  his  own  hindrance  (Ps.  xv.  4)  ;  if  God  himself 
have  vouchsafed  to  make  promises  to  man  (and  with  an  oath  too — Heb.  vi.  17,  18), 
which  promises  he  for  his  part  will  most  surely  keep  and  perform,  how  much  more 
is  man  bound  to  keep  his  promise  made, to  God  ! 

II.  That  a  peomise  made  to  God  in  sickness  or  distress  may  not  be  departed 
FROM  IN  HEALTH  AND  PROSPERITY.  No  doubt  most  VOWS  Were  made  under  stress  of 
Bome  calamity  or  need,  as  Jacob's  (Gen.  xxviii.  20),  Hannah's  (1  Sam.  i.  11),  and 
others  (of.  Ps.  Ixvi.  13;  Ixxvi.  11).  Yet  how  often  do  men  treat  their  God  with 
Buch  indignity  I  (1  Cor.  x.  22). 

III.  That  a  resolotion  deliberately  formed  and  offered  unto  God  is  quite 

AS  SACRED  AS  THOUGH  MADE  WITH  AN  OATH.  For  an  Oath  is  on  the  part  of  God  a 
condescension  which  has  no  meaning  for  him  (Heb.  vi.  17),  on  the  part  of  man  a 
device  to  overawe  his  own  sinful  weakness,  but  it  adds  nothing  to  the  real  sacred- 
ness  of  the  vow.  How  many  vows  have  we  taken  upon  ourselves,  either  openly  or 
secretly  I  They  are  all  as  binding  on  us  as  though  we  had  imprecated  the  most 
frightful  penalties  upon  our  failure  to  observe  them.  The  punishment  of  Ananias 
and  Sapphira  was  intended  to  mark  the  extreme  malediction  of  such  as  secretly 
withhold  from  God  what  of  themselves  or  of  their  own  they  have  deliberately 
dedicated  to  his  service. 

IV.  That  no  promise  can  be  made  to  God  in  dkroqation  of  the  just  rights  of 
ANOTHER  O'ER  US.  God  can  never  be  served  with  that  upon  which  another  has  a 
rightful  claim,  nor  honoured  by  anything  which  involves  dishonour  of  another. 
Only  that  which  is  really  ours  to  give  can  we  give  unto  God.  If  it  be  unworthy 
to  offer  unto  the  Lord  of  that  which  doth  cost  us  nothing  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  24),  it  is 
unjust  to  ofEer  unto  the  Lord  of  that  which  doth  cost  another  something. 

V.  That  in  particular  a  daughter's  pbimakt  duty  is  to  her  parent,  a  wife's 
TO  her  husband.  Only  what  lies  beyond  the  sphere  of  their  legitimate  claims  can 
she  sacrifice  in  the  name  of  religion.  ■ 

VI.  That  the  "  rash  utterance  of  the  lips  "  is  not  held  binding  by  the  Lord. 
Since  he  utterly  rejects  any  service  which  is  not  truly  willing,  and  since  he  is 
infinitely  above  taking  advantage  of  the  folly  of  man,  it  is  mere  obstinacy,  not  re- 
ligion, which  leads  a  man  to  abide  by  what  he  has  ignorantly  and  rashly  said  that 
he  will  do. 

VII.  That  a  father  or  a  husband  mat  not  play  fast  and  loose  with  the 
eeligious  practices  of  those  dependent  upon  him,  neither  disallow  one  day 
WHAT  he  allowed  THE  DAY  BEFORE.  It  IS  given  to  them  to  exeroise  control  even 
in  religious  matters,  but  not  to  exercise  it  capriciously.  It  is  a  fearful  responsibility 
to  cross  the  devout  purposes  of  God's  servants  from  any  but  the  purest  motives,  and 
for  any  but  the  weightiest  reasons. 

VIII.  That  if  wb,  through  negligence  or  caprice,  disturb  the  spiritual  life, 
AND  hinder  the  heavenly  desires  of  those  dependent  on  us,  we  must  beak  their 
iniquity.  We  do  not  know  indeed  how  such  responsibility  will  be  apportioned  at 
the  day  of  judgment,  but  we  do  know  that  God  will  exact  vengeance  for  every  injury 
done  to  souls,  and  especially  for  injury  done  to  such  as  are  committed  to  our  care 
(Matt,  xviii.  6). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1,  ^.—The  solemn  obligation  of  the  vow.  I.  Notice  the  absence  of  any 
REFERENCE  TO  THE  SUBJECT  MATTER  OP  THE  VOW.  Moses  does  not  Bay  anything  as 
to  certain  vows  being  right  and  certain  others  being  wrong.  This  was  not  needed, 
and  would  only  have  taken  away  from  the  sharp  and  clear  announcement  that  a  vow 
once  made  was  not  to  be  lightly  esteemed.  Even  the  exemptions  from  obligation 
which  Moses  mentions  in  the  remainder  of  the  chapter  are  those  caused  not  by  any- 
thing unlawful  in  the  subject  matter  of  the  vow,  but  by  the  fact  that  it  proceeded 
from  one  who  was  not  a  eufSoiently  free  agent  to  make  a  vow.  It  was  quite  evident 
that  a  vow  must  not  contradict  any  commandment  of  God,  nor  infringe  any  right  of 


S96  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oh.  xxx.  1—14. 

other  men.    It  must  lie  within  the  proper  province  of  a  man's  own  free  willj  it  must 

concern  such  things  as  he  can  really  control.  This  was  what  gave  the  vow  its  virtue 
and  significance.  Certain  things  were  commanded,  with  respect  to  which  there  was 
no  choice  but  obedience ;  and  outside  of  these  there  was  still  a  large  field,  where  the 
,  Israelite  was  left  to  his  own  control.  What  use  he  would  make  of  this  freedom  was 
of  course  a  test  of  his  own  disposition.  That  he  must  keep  clearly  within  his  own 
freedom  was  a  thing  that  needed  no  insisting  upon. 

II.  Consider  the  necessity  there  was  for  impressinq  on  the  Israelites  the 
SOLEMN  obliqation  OP  THEIR  VOWS.  How  catm  the  Isratlite  to  make  a  vow  f  We 
must  recollect  that  in  those  days  there  was  a  general  and  practical  belief  in  the 
power  of  supernatural  beings  to  give  help  to  men.  The  Israelites,  only  too  often 
found  unbelievers  in  Jehovah,  were  not,  therefore,  wanting  in  religious  feeling.  When 
they  lost  faith  in  the  God  of  Israel,  the  lapse  was  not  into  atheism,  but  into  idolatry. 
And  thus  when  their  hearts  were  strongly  set  on  some  object,  not  only  did  they  put 
forth  the  effort  of  self  and  solicit  the  aid  of  others,  but  especially  the  aid  of  Jehovah. 
And  as  they  sought  the  aid  of  their  fellow-men  under  the  promise  of  a  recompense, 
80  they  Bought  the  aid  of  Jehovah  under  a  similar  promise.  Under  the  influence 
of  strong  desires  and  highly  eicited  feelings  all  sorts  of  vows  would  be  made  by 
the  Israelites,  and  some  of  them,  probably,  very  difiBcult  to  carry  out.  Doubtless 
there  were  Israelites  not  a  few  with  somewhat  of  Balak's  spirit  in  them.  They  felt 
how  real  was  the  power  of  Jehovah,  and,  being  as  little  acquainted  with  his  character 
as  Balak  was,  they  concluded  that  his  power  could  be  secured  on  the  promise  of 
some  sufficient  consideration  in  return.  Among  an  unspiritual  people  whose  minds 
were  filled  with  a  mixture  of  selfishness  and  superstition,  vows  would  take  the 
aspect  of  a  commercial  transaction.  So  much  indispensable  help  from  God,  and,  as 
the  price  of  it,  a  corresponding  return  from  man.  And  as  the  help  of  God  would  be 
felt  to  require  a  much  greater  return  than  the  help  of  man,  so  the  vow  would  under- 

'  take  something  beyond  the  ordinary  range  of  attainment.  May  we  not  conclude  that 
the  petition  connected  with  the  vow  was  oftentimes  answered,  and  that  God  for  his 
own  wise  purposes  did  give  people  the  desires  of  their  own  hearts,  even  as  he  did  to 
Hannah  ?  If  so,  we  see  at  once  the  difSculty  that  would  often  arise  in  fulfilling  the 
vow.  We  know  how  the  desire  of  a  man's  heart,  once  accomplished,  is  often  felt  to 
be  unworthy  of  the  effort  and  expenditure.  Thus  there  would  be  a  strong  temptation 
to  neglect  the  fulfilling  of  the  vow  if  it  could  be  safely  managed,  It  was  an  invisibU 
God  who  had  to  be  dealt  with  ;  and  ready  enough  as  the  Israelite  might  be  to  believe 
in  Jehovah  as  long  as  it  was  for  self -advantage,  the  faith  in  him  and  the  fear  of  him 
would  begin  to  wax  feeble  when  it  wag  a  question  of  meeting  what  had  proved  a 
profitless  engagement.  A  vow  to  an  idol  was  really  a  vow  to  be  paid  to  avaricious 
and  watcliful  priests.  A  promise  made  to  a  fellow-man  he  may  be  trusted  to  exact. 
But  what  is  a  vow  to  the  invisible  God ?  "I  may  neglect  it  with  impunity,"  is 
the  thought  in  the  Israelite's  heart  (Ps.  1.  21 ;  Ixxiii.  11).  But  the  impunity  was  a 
delusion.  God  had  marked  the  vow  only  too  carefully  ;  and  it  was  less  harm  for  a 
man  to  go  with  some  heavy  burden  and  great  hindrance  hanging  about  him  all  the 
days  of  his  life,  than  that  the  sanctity  of  the  vow  or  oath  should  be  slighted  in  the 
smallest  degree. 

III.  Consider  how  the  principles  that  underlie  this  injunction  are  to 
BE  carried  out  by  CHRISTIANS.  We  are  passed  into  an  age  when  vows  are  not 
commonly  made.  Most  of  those  whose  thoughts  are  filled  with  the  desires  of 
their  own  hearts  do  not  believe  in  the  power  of  God  to  help  them.  And  Christians 
ought  to  be  free  from  such  desires.  It  is  their  part  to  pray  the  prayer  of  the 
Collect  for  the  fourth  Sunday  after  Easter:  "Grant  unto  thy  people  that  they 
may  love  the  thing  which  thou  comraandest,  and  desire  that  which  thou  dost 
promise."  But  though  modern  Christians  may  not  have  the  same  inducements 
to  make  vows  as  ancient  Israelites,  still  there  are  certain  principles  and  duties 
underlying  this  injunction  of  Moses  which  deserve  our  careful  regard.  1.  Conr 
sider  well  the  great  projects  and  ruling  views  of  your  life.  Let  the  prayer  of  the 
above  Collect  be  uttered  on  every  Sunday  and  week-day  throughout  the  year. 
Enter  only  on  such  undertakings  as  not  merely  accord  with  God's  will,  but  spring 
from  it.    Nothing  really  accords  with  God's  will  save  what  springs  from  it    Th« 


OH.  sex.  l—U.}  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  M7 

sooner  we  discover  that  the  most  practicable  life  and  the  most  blessed  one  is  that  of 
being  not  our  own  masters,  but  what  the  apostles  learned  to  be,  servants  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  (Rom.  i.  1 ;  Pliilip.  i.  1 ;  James  i.  1 ;  2  Pet.  i.  1 ;  Rev.  i.  1),  the  better  it 
will  be  for  us.  We  shall  not  then  enter  upon  undertakings  which  we  lack  the  skill, 
the  resources,  and  perhaps  the  heart  to  finish.  This  very  injunction  of  Moses  is  a 
suggestion  of  the  difficulties  which  come  from  a  wrong  choice.  Under  the  power  of 
excitement  and  in  the  ignorance  of  inexperience  we  may  enter  into  engagements 
which  afterwards  become  the  burden  and  curse  of  life.  2.  Consider  ivherein  the  evil 
of_  a  broken  vow  really  consists.  Do  not  suppose  that  God  considers  it  worse  to 
violate  a  vow  or  an  oath  than  to  violate  any  otiier  promise.  Truth  for  the  sake  of 
truth  is  a  sacred  thing  in  the  eyes  of  God.  Who  can  doubt  that  in  his  sight  the 
affirmation,  now  happily  allowed  in  courts  of  justice,  is  as  binding  as  any  oath  what- 
soever ?  Not  but  what  a  solemn  appeal  to  tlie  universal  presence  and  all-seeing  eye 
of  Almighty  God,  if  made  voluntarily,  and  with  evident  conviction,  earnestness,  and 
sincerity  in  the  mode  of  expression,  is  of  great  service  in  pressing  home  the  truth  ■ 
Witness  the  force'of  such  an  appeal  in  the  writings  of  Paul.  The  evil  has  been  in 
forcing  the  oath  on  all  men  irrespective  of  their  disposition.  No  forced  oath  will 
make  the  liar  really  truthful ;  and  no  forced  oath  can  make  the  truthful  man  any- 
thing more  than  truthful.  Administering  oaths  to  a  man  of  veracity  is  like  holding 
a  candle  to  make  the  sun  shine.  As  has  been  truly  said,  the  compelled  oath  makes 
the  ignorant  and  superstitious  to  think  that  there  are  two  kinds  of  truth,  and  that  it 
is  harmless  to  say,  free  from  an  oath,  what  it  would  be  very  wicked  to  say  under  it. 
3.  Gonnder  what  deliberation  is  required  in  entering  on  the  obligations  of  the 
Christian  profession.  Here  are  promises  which  it  is  right  to  make ;  yet  they  must 
be  made  with  due  caution,  circumspection,  and  inquiry,  Christ  would  have  us  avoid 
with  equal  care  the  perils  of  haste  and  procrastination.  We  cannot  begin  too  soon 
seriously  to  consider  the  claims  of  God  upon  us,  but  we  are  warned  against  hastily 
plunging  into  obligations  which  before  long  may  be  altogether  too  much  for  our 
worldly  hearts.  It  is  only  too  evident  that  many  are  led  into  a  profession  of  religion, 
either  in  a  fit  of  excitement  which  cannot  be  sustained,  and  which,  indeed,  would  be 
of  no  use  if  it  could  be  sustained,  or  by  an  insufficient  consideration  of  all  that  a 
profession  of  religion  includes.  Our  Lord  stops  us  at  the  very  beginning  with  an 
earnest  entreaty  to  measure  well  what  we  are  about,  and  understand  exactly  what 
it  is  that  he  asks.  We  must  not  mistake  his  demands  and  claims,  and  put  some 
notion  of  our  own  in  place  of  them  (Matt.  vii.  21 — 29 ;  xvi.  24—26 ;  Luke  ix.  57, 
58 ;  xiv.  25,  35 ;  John  vi.  44).  4.  Consider  the  great  peril  of  being  unfaithful  to 
the  knowledge  of  what  is  right.  It  is  a  dreadful  thing  to  fall  away  from  truth  when 
it  is  done  in  the  light  of  knowledge,  and  in  spite  of  the  prickings  of  conscience.  A 
broken  promise,  whether  to  God  or  man,  broken  not  through  infirmity,  but  of  set 
and  selfish  purpose,  is  in  God's  eye  a  great  transgression.  No  doubt  in  many 
infractions  of  promise  there  are  complications  and  difficulties,  pros  and  cons,  which 
prevent  every  one  save  the  all-searching  God  himself  from  determining  the  real 
character  of  the  action.  We  need  not  make  estimates  of  particular  cases  unless  we 
are  compelled.  Let  us  keep  our  own  hearts  with  all  diligence,  and  labour  to  be  on 
the  side  of  self-denial  and  a  good  conscience  rather  than  on  that  of  carnal  inclinations. 
God  has  made  his  yea  and  amen  felt  in  Christ  Jesue.  So  may  Christ  Jesus  be  able 
to  make  his  yea  and  amen  felt  in  the  sincerity,  simplicity,  and  straightforwardness 
of  the  lives  of  his  people. — ^Y, 

Vers.  3 — 16. — The  head  of  the  household  honoured  and  cautioned.  The  command 
contained  in  this  section  ox  the  chapter  secures  a  double  result.  1.  By  specifying 
certain  exceptions  to  the  validity  of  the  vow,  it  makes  that  validity  all  the  more 
manifest  where  the  exceptions  do  not  obtain.  Stating  exceptions  to  a  rule  is  only 
another  way  of  stating  the  rule  itself.  2.  These  exceptions  relate  to  the  interests  of 
the  household,  to  the  preservation  of  its  integrity,  and,  to  this  end,  of  the  rights  and 
authority  of  the  person  wliom  God  has  placed  at  its  head.  Moreover,  that  which 
secures  the  right  of  the  father  and  the  husband  equally  secures  the  interests  of  the 
daughter  and  the  wife.    Consider — 

I.   WSAT   THIS  COMMAND  IMFLIID  WITH  BISFEOT   TO  THB  HSAD  OV  THl  HOUSEHOLD. 


398  ,  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  [oh.  xxx.  1— 1«. 

Let  UB  take  the  relation  of  the  father  and  daughter,  similar  things  being  true,  mutatis 
mutandis,  with  respect  to  the  husband  and  wife.    1.   This  command  honoured 
parental  authority.    God  had  laid  a  solemn  injunction  on  children  to  honour  father 
and  mother,  and  we  see  here  how  careful  he  was  to  honour  the  parental  relation 
himself.     He  puts  everything  in  the  shape  of  a  vow,  everything  which  the  daughter 
was  otherwise  free  to  choose,  under  the  father's  control.     He  requires  no  reason  to 
be  given ;  the  simple  veto  is  enough,  if  only  it  be  uttered  at  the  appointed  time. 
The  father  had  a  responsibility  which  the  daughter  had  not,  and  it  was  fitting  that 
God  should  give  the  father  all  possible  help  in  meeting  that  responsibility.    2.  This 
command  required  much  watchfulness  on  the  part  qf  the  father.    To  act  rightly  here 
demanded  the  whole  compass  of  paternal  duty.    The  father  was  not  allowed  to  say 
that  his  daughter's  vow  was  no  business  of  his.     He  himself  might  not  be  a  vowing 
sort  of  person,  and  therefore  under  no  temptation  to  neglect  a  vow  he  was  not  likely 
to  make.     But  even  if  indifferent  to  vows  himself,  he  was  bound  to  be  interested  in 
his  daughter's  welfare,  and  do  his  best  to  keep  her  from  future  difficulties.     Her 
limited  life  hid  many  difficulties  from  her  eyes.     It  was  not  for  a  fathfer  to  expose 
himself  in  later  days  to  reproach  from  the  lips  of  his  own  daughter.    It  was  not  for 
him  to  run  the  risk  of  hearing  her  say,  "  Why  did  not  your  larger  knowledge  and 
experience  shelter  me  from  difficulties  which  my  inexperience  could  not  possibly 
anticipate  ?  "    3.  This  command  required  much  consideration  on  the  part  of  the 
father.    He  must  not  let  the  vow  pass  without  notice,  and  when  he  noticed  it  must  be 
with  proper  consideration.    While  it  was  within  his  right  to  stop  the  vow,  he  might 
in  stopping  it  be  doing  a  very  unfatherly  thing,  a  thing  very  hurtful  to  the  religious 
life  of  his  daughter.     As  God  had  honoured  him  and  undertaken  to  help  him  in  his 
fatherly  relation,  he  must  honour  that  relation  himselt    That  relation  from  which 
God  expects  so  much  must  be  prepared  to  yield  much  in  the  way  of  care  and  con- 
sideration.   The  father  may  think  too  much  of  his  own  wishes,  too  little  of  his 
daughter's  needs,  and  too  little  of  the  will  of  God.     The  vow  of  the  daughter  might 
be  a  rightful,  helpful,  and  exemplary  one,  a  vow  of  the  Nazarite  indeed  (ch.  vi.  2). 
It  was  not  enough,  therefore,  for  the  father  to  fall  back  on  the  mere  assertion  of 
authority.     It  is  a  serious  thing  to  offend  one  of  the  little  ones — a  serious  thing  for 
any  one  to  do ;  but  how  unspeakably  serious  when  the  hand  which  casts  down  the 
stumbling-block  is  that  of  a  father  I    4.  This  command  required,  in  order  to  he  fully 
complied  with,  sympathy  with  the  voluntary  spirit  in  religion.    A  father  who  felt 
that  the  services  of  religion  consisted  chiefly  in  exact  external  conformity  with  certain 
rules  for  worship  and  conduct  would  be  very  likely  to  stop  his  daughter's  vow  as 
mere  whimsicality.     But  religion  must  go  beyond  obedience  to  verbal  commands ; 
it  must  aim  at  something  more  than  can  be  put  into  even  the  most  exact  and  expres- 
sive of  them.     Commands  are  nothing  more  than  finger-posts  ;  and  the  joys  of  hope 
and  preparation  during  the  journey  are  directed  towards  something  lying  beyond  the 
last  of  the  finger-posts.    The  father  who  would  act  rightly  by  all  possible  wishes  of 
his  children  must  be  one  who  comprehends  that  experience  of  John  :  "  We  love  him 
because  hejBrst  loved  us  "  (1  John  iv.  19).     He  must  be  one  who  feels  that  love  can 
never  be  satisfied  with  mere  beaten  tracks  and  conventional  grooves.    He  must  be 
such  a  one  as  appreciates  the  act  of  the  woman  who  poured  the  precious  ointment  on 
the  head  of  Jesus.     If  he  be  a  man  of  the  Judas  spirit,  grudging  what  he  reckons 
waste,  he  is  sure  to  go  wrong.     He  will  check  his  children  when  he  ought  to 
encourage  them,  and  encourage  when  he  ought  to  check.     If  God  opens  their  eyes 
he  will  do  his  best  to  close  them  again,  so  that  the  blind  father  may  go  on  leading 
the  blind  children,  till  at  last  both  fall  into  the  pit. 

II.  What  this  command  implied  with  resfeot  to  thb  daughter  and  the  wife. 
1.  Their  right  to  make  a  vow  was  itself  secured.  The  command  did  not  say  that 
daughter  and  wife  were  to  make  no  vow  at  all.  They  were  as  free  to  make  a  vow  as 
any  man  in  all  Israel ;  and  if  it  had  not  been  for  more  important  considerations 
connected  with  the  household,  they  would  also  have  been  free  to  keep  the  vow. 
God  would  have  us  to  understand  that  inferior  and  mutilated  duties  or  privileges  are 
no  necessary  consequence  of  a  subordinate  position.  2.  A  gentle  andpatient  sub- 
mission was  recommended  on  the  part  of  the  daughter  and  the  wife.  'Hie  right  to 
propoBe  the  vow  being  secured  to  every  woman,  it  was  no  faiilt  of  hers,  and  would 


CH.  XXXI.  1 — 54.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS. 


899 


be  counted  no  blame,  if  the  father  or  husband  cancelled  it.  The  Nazarite  vow  might 
be  thwarted  in  the  very  freshness  of  it,  but  the  spirit  of  zeal  which  produced  it 
needed  not  to  grow  languid.  We  cannot  be  hindered  in  the  attainment  of  any  good, 
save  by  our  own  negligence.  God  will  meet  us  amid  all  restraints  which  untoward 
circumstances  may  impose  upon  us.  The  claims  rising  out  of  natural  relations  and 
the  present  needs  of  human  society  are  imperative  while  they  last,  and  must  be 
respected.  But  they  will  not  last  for  ever.  "  In  the  resurrection  they  neither  marry 
nor  are  given  in  marriage  "  (Matt.  xxii.  30). — Y, 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 


EXTEKMINATION      OF      THE      MiDIANITES 

(vers.  1 — 54).  Ver.  1.  —  The  Lord  spake 
unto  Moses.  The  command  to  "vex  the 
Midianites,  and  smite  them,"  had  been  given 
before  (ch.  ixv.  17),  but  how  long  before  we 
cannot  tell.  Possibly  the  interval  had  been 
purposely  allowed  in  order  that  the  attack 
when  it  was  made  might  be  sudden  and  un- 
expected. From  the  fact  that  no  resistance 
would  seem  to  have  been  made  to  the  Israel- 
itish  detachment,  and  that  an  enormous 
amount  of  plunder  was  secured,  we  may  pro- 
bably condude  that  the  Midianites  had 
thought  all  danger  past. 

Yer.  2. — Avenge  the  children  of  Israel  of 
the  Midianites.  The  war  was  to  be  dis- 
tinctly one  of  vengeance  on  the  part  of 
IsraeL  On  the  grave  moral  question  which 
arises  out  of  this  war,  and  of  the  manner  in 
which  it  was  carried  on,  see  the  note  at  the 
end  of  the  chapter.  Afterward  shalt  thou 
be  gathered  unto  thy  people.  It  is  quite 
possible  that  Moses  himself  had  been  reluct- 
ant to  order  the  expedition  against  Midian, 
either  because  it  involved  so  much  blood- 
shed, or,  more  probably,  because  he  foresaw 
the  difficulty  which  actually  arose  about  the 
women  of  Midian.  If  so,  he  was  here  re- 
minded that  his  place  was  to  obey,  and  that 
his  work  on  earth  was  not  done  so  long  as 
the  Midianites  remained  unpunished. 

Yer.  3. — Avenge  the  Lord  of  Midian. 
God,  speaking  to  Moses,  had  commanded  a 
war  of  vengeance ;  Moses,  speaking  to  the 
people,  is  careful  to  command  a  war  of  re- 
ligious vengeance.  In  seducing  the  people 
<  f  the  Lord  the  Midianites  had  insulted  and 
injured  the  majesty  of  God  himself.  On  the 
question  why  Midian  only,  and  not  Moab 
also,  was  punished  see  on  ch.  xxv.  17.  It 
is  to  be  remembered  that,  however  hateful 
the  sins  of  licentiousness  and  idolatry  may 
be,  they  have  never  aroused  by  themselves 
the  exterminating  wrath  of  God.  Midian  was 
smitten  because  he  had  deUberately  used 
these  sins  as  weapons  wherewith  to  take  the 
life  of  Israel. 

Ver.  5. — There  were  delivered,  or  "le- 
vied." ^^plg^  Septuagiiit,  i^ripi^/iiiaav. 
The  Hebrew  word  ia  only  used  here  and  in 


ver.  16  (see  note  there),  and  in  these  two 

E laces  not  in  the  same  sense.     The  context, 
owever,  leaves  little  or  no  doubt  as  to  the 
meaning  which  it  must  bear. 

Yer.  6. —And  Fhiuehas  the  sonof  Eleazar. 
The  high  priest  himself  could  not  leave  the 
camp  and  the  sanctuary,  because  of  his 
duties,  and  because  of  the  risk  of  being 
defiled  (see  ver.  19);  but  his  son,  who  was 
already  marked  out  as  his  successor,  could  act 
as  his  representative  (see  on  ch.  xvi.  37).  In 
after  times  the  Messiah  Milchama  ("  Sacer- 
dos  unctus  ad  beUum,"  aUuded  to  in  Deut. 
XX.  2)  who  accompanied  the  army  to  the 
iield  was  a  recognised  member  of  the  Jewish 
hierarchy.  Phinehas  was  of  course  specially 
marked  out  by  his  zeal  for  the  present  duty, 
but  we  may  suppose  that  he  would  haite 
gone  in  any  case.  With  the  holy  instru- 
ments, and  the  trumpets.  Septuagint,  cat 
rd  aKivT)  ri  ayta,  Ka'i.ai  aaXiriyyic.  The 
word  "  instruments"  (v?)  is  the  same  morn 
usually  translated  "vessel,"  as  in  ch.  iii. 
31,  and  is  apparently  to  be  understood  of 
the  sacred  furniture  of  the  tabernacle.  It  is 
difficult  to  understand  what  "  holy  vessels  " 
could  have  accompanied  an  expedition  of  this 
sort,  unless  it  were  the  ark  itself.  The  Israel- 
ites were  accustomed  at  all  critical  times  to  be 
preceded  by  the  ark  (ch,  x.  S3  ;  Jush.  iii.  14  ; 
vi  8),  and  the  narrative  of  1  Sam.  iv.  3  sq. 
shows  plainly  that,  long  after  the  settlement 
at  Shiloh,  no  scruples  existed  against  bring- 
ing it  forth  against  the  foes  of  Israel  and  of 
God.  Indeed  there  is  a  resemblance  in  th« 
circumstances  between  that  case  and  this 
which  is  all  the  more  striking  because  of  the 
contrast  in  the  result.  Most  modern  com- 
mentators, unwilling  to  believe  that  the  ark 
left  the  camp  (but  of.  ch.  xiv.  44),  identify 
the  "holy  instruments"  with  "the  trum- 
pets ; "  this,  however,  is  plainly  to  do  violence 
to  the  grammar,  which  is  perfectly  simple, 
and  is  contrary  to  the  Septuagint  and  the 
Targums.  The  Targum  of  Palestine  para- 
phrases "  holy  instruments"  by  Urim  and 
Thummim ;  these,  however,  as  far  as  we  can 
gather,  seem  to  have  been  in  the  exclusive 
possession  of  the  high  priest. 

Ver.  8. — ^They  slew  the  kings  of  Midian, 
beside  the  rest  of  them  that  were  slain. 
This  is  more  accurately  rendered  by  the  Sep> 


400 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES, 


[cH.  XXXI.  1—54. 


tnagint,  roBj  PaatXilt  •  ,  atriKTUvav  Sfta 
roic  rpav^aTtatg  nvriov  t  "they  put  to 
death  (JIH)  the  kings,  in  addition  to  those 

who  fell  in  battle  "  (from  ??ln,  to  pierce,  or 
wound).  These  five  kings,  who  are  mentioned 
here  as  having  been  slain  in  cold  blood  after 
the  battle,  are  said  in  Josh.  xiii.  21  to  have 
been  vassals  ('3'p3)  of  the  Amoritish  king 
Sihon,  and  to  have  dwelt  "in  the  country." 
From  this  it  has  been  concluded  by  some 
thaf  the  Midianites  at  this  time  destroyed 
included  only  certain  tribes  which  had  settled 
down  within  the  territory  afterwards  as- 
signed to  Reuben,  and  had  become  tributary 
to  Sihon.  This  would  account  for  the  fact 
that  the  present  victory  was  so  easy  and  so 
complete,  and  also  for  the  otherwise  inex- 
plicable fact  that  the  Midianites  appear  again 
as  a  formidable  power  some  two  centuries 
later.  Znr,.  The  father  of  Cozbi  (oh.  xxv. 
15).  Balaam  also  .  .  they  slew  with  the 
sword.  Not  in  battle,  but,  as  the  context 
implies,  by  way  of  judicial  execution  (see  on 
ch.  xxiv.  25 ;  Josh.  xiii.  22). 

Ver.  10.— Their  goodly  eastlei.  Qrh'P. 
Septuagint,  iiravXEif.  This  word,  which 
occurs  only  here  and  in  Gen.  xxv.  16,  no 
doubt  signifies  the  pastoral  villages,  con- 
structed partly  of  nide  stone  walls,  partly  of 
goats-hair  cloth,  which  the  nomadic  tribes  of 
that  country  have  used  from  time  immemorial. 
Probably  these  were  the  proper  habitations 
of  the  Midianites  ;  the  "  cities  "  would  have 
belonged  to  the  previous  inhabitants  of  the 
land.  ,, 

Ver.  11.— The  spoil.  77fn.  Septuagint, 
r^j>  jrpovonriv.  The  booty  in  goods.  The 
prey.  nip?Bn.  Septuagint,  rd  aKv\a.  The 
booty  in  live-stock,  here  including  the  women 
and  children,  who  are  distinguished  as  "  cap- 
tives" ('3^)  in  the  next  verse. 

Ver.  14.'— Officers  of  the  host.  Literally, 
"inspectors."'  Septuagint,  roi£  iwuiitdnoit 
r^f  twdiieuiQ.  .  i 

Ver.  16.— To  commit  trespass.  7yp"lpp?. 
See  on  ver.  5.  The  word  IDD  seems  to  be 
used  here  much  as  the  English  word  "  levy  " 
is  used  in  such  a  phrase  as  "  levying  "  war 
against  a  person . 

Ver.  18. — Keep  alive  for  yourselves,  ^.». 
for  domestic  slaves  in  the  first  instance. 
Subsequently  no  doubt  many  of  them  became 
inferior  wives  of  their  masters,  or  were  mar- 
ried to  their  sons.  Infants  were  probably 
put  to  death  with  their  mothers. 

Ver.  19.— Do  ye  abide  without  the  camp. 
In  this  case  at  any  rate  the  law  of  ch.  xix. 
11  aq.  was  to  be  strictly  enforced.  And  your 
eaptives,  ».  «.  the  women  children  who  were 
■pored.  No  peculiar  rites  are  here  prescribed 
for  Om  noeption  of  these  children  of  idolaters 


into  the  holy  nation  with  which  they  were  to 
be  incorporated  beyond  the  usual  lustration 
with  the  water  of  separation.  In  after  timea 
they  would  have  been  baptized. 

Ver.  20.— Purify  all  your  raiment,  and 
all  that  is  made.   Literally,  "  every  vessel " 

(*??).  This  wag  in  accordance  with  ths 
principle  laid  down  in  ch.  xix,  that  every- 
thing which  had  come  into  contact  with  a 
corpse  needed  purifying. 

Ver.  21.— And  Eleazar  the  priest  said, 
.  .  .This  is  the  ordinance  of  the  law 
(iTlinn  Di^n,  "law-statute,"  as  inch.  xix.  2) 

which  the  Lord  commanded  Moses.  There 
ia  something  peculiar  in  this  expression  which 
points  to  the  probability,  either  that  this 
paragraph  (vers.  21 — 24)  was  added  after  the 
death  of  Moses,  or  that  "the  law"  was 
already  beginning,  even  in  the  lifetime  of 
Moses,  to  assume  the  position  which  it  after- 
wards held— that,  viz.,  of  a  fixed  code  to  be 
interpreted  and  applied  by  the  livingauthority 
of  the  priesthood.  This  is  the  earliest  in- 
stance of  the  high  priest  declaring  to  the 
people  what  the  Taw  of  God  as  delivered  to 
Moses  was,  and  then  applying  and  enlarging 
that  law  to  meet  the  present  circumstances. 
It  is  no  doubt  possible  that  Eleazar  referred 
the  matter  to  Moses,  but  it  would  seem  on 
the  face  of  the  narrative  that  he  spoke  on  his 
own  authority  as  high  priest.  When  we 
compare  the  ceremonial  of  the  later  Jews,  so 
precisely  and  minutely  ordered  for  every  con- 
ceivable contingency,  with  the  Mosaic  legis- 
lation itself,  it  is  evident  that  the  process  of 
authoritative  amplification  must  have  been 
going  on  from  the  first ;  but  it  is  certainly 
strange  to  find  that  process  begun  while 
Moses  himself  was  alive  and  active, 

Ver.  22. — The  brass.  Eather,  "copper." 
The  six  metals  here  mentioned  were  those 
commonly  known  to  the  ancients,  and  in 
particular  to  the  Egyptians  and  Phoenicians. 

Ver.  23. — Ye  shall  i make  it  go  through 
the  fire.  This  was  an  addition  to  the  general 
law  of  lustration  in  ch.  xix.  founded  on  the 
obvious  fact  that  water  does  not  cleanse 
metals,  while  fire  does.  The  spoils  of  the 
Midianites  required  purification,  not  only  ss 
being  tainted  with  death,  but  as  having  been 
heathen  property. 

Ver.  26. — Take  the  sum  of  the  prey.  No 
notice  is  taken  here  of  the  spoil  (see  on  ver. 
11),  but  only  of  the  captured  children  and 
cattle.  And  the  chief  fathers.  Perhaps 
nUS  (fathers)  stands  here  for  nbKTl*3 
(fathers'  houses).  So  the  Septuagint,  ol 
5p;^ovrec  rfiv  irorpifiv. 

Ver.  27.— Divide  the  prey  Into  two  parts. 
This  division  was  founded  roughly  upon  the 
equity  of  the  case ;  on  the  one  hand,  all  Israel 
had  suffered  from  Midian ;  on  the  otheTi 


OH.  XXXI.  1 — 64,] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBBES. 


401 


only  the  twelve  thonsand  had  risked  their 
lives  to  smite  Midian.  For  the  application 
of  a  like  principle  to  other  cases  see  Josh, 
zxii  8 ;  1  Sam.  zxx.  24 ;  2  Maco.  viii 
28,  8Q. 

Ver.  29. — An  heave  offering  nuto  the 
Lord.  Septuagint,  rde  avapx^S  Kwp/ow. 
The  Hebrew  word  D-11  (to  lift)  from  which 
terumoA  is  derived,  had  practically  lost 
its  literal  significance,  just  as  the  English 
Word  has  in  the  phrase  "to  lift  cattle;" 
hence  terumah  often  means  simply  that 
which  is  set  aside  as  an  offering.  No  doubt 
the  offering  levied  on  the  portion  of  the 
warriors  was  in  the  nature  of  tithe  for  the 
benefit  of  Eleazar  and  the  priests. 

Ver.  SO. — One  portion  of  fifty.  Two  per 
cent,  of  the  prey.  This  probably  corre- 
sponded very  closely  to  the  number  of  Le- 
vites  as  compared  with  the  twelve  tribes, 
and  would  tend  to  show  that  God  intended 
the  Levites  to  be  neither  better  nor  worse  off 
than  their  neighbours. 

Yer.  82.— The  booty,  being  the  rest  of 
the  prey.  Rather,  "  the  prey  (DippSH,  see 
on  ver.  11),  to  wit,  the  rest  of  the  booty " 
(tan,  as  in  ch.  liv.  3,  31).  Septuagint, 
TO  vXeovaofia  rrje  vpovonrje,  i.  e.  what  actu- 
ally remained  to  be  dividei  The  numbers 
given  are  obviously  round  numbers,  such  as 
the  Israelites  seem  always  to  have  employed 
in  enumeration.  The  immense  quantity  of 
cattle  captured  was  in  accordance  with  the 
habits  of  the  Midianites  in  the  days  of 
Gideon  (Judges  vi  5)  and  of  their  modem 
representatives  to-day. 

ver.  49. — There  lacketh  not  one  man  of 
ns.  The  ofScers  naturally  regarded  this  as  a 
very  wonderful  circumstance  ;  and  so  indeed 
it  was,  whether  Midian  made  any  resistance 
or  not.  It  was,  however,  in  strict  keeping 
with  the  promises  of  that  temporal  dispens- 
ation. It  would  have  been  no  satisfaction  to 
the  Israelite  who  fell  upon  the  threshold  of 
the  promised  land  to  know  that  victory  re- 
mained with  his  comrades.  His  was  not 
the  courage  of  modem  soldiers,  who  fling 


away  their  lives  in  blind  confidence  that 
some  advantage  will  accrue  thereby  to  the 
army  at  large  ;  rather,  he  fought  under  the 
conviction  that  to  each,  as  well  as  to  all,  life 
and  victory  were  pledged  upon  condition  of 
obedience  and  courage.  In  this  case  no  one 
was  found  unfaithful,  and  therefore  no  one 
was  allowed  to  fall 

Ver.  50. — ^What  every  man  hath  gotten. 
The  whole,  apparently,  of  their  booty  in 
golden  ornaments  was  given  up  as  a  thank 
offering,  and  in  addition  to  this  was  all  that 
the  soldiers  had  taken  and  kept.  The 
abundance  of  costly  ornaments  among  a 
race  of  nomads  living  in  squalid  tents  and 
hovels  may  excite  surprise ;  but  it  is  still  the  . 
case  (under  circumstances  far  lesS  favourable 
to  the  amassing  of  such  wealth)  among  the 
Bedawin  and  kindred  tribes  (see  also  on 
Judges  viii.  24—26).  Chains.  "TIS^S*?. 
Septuagint,  x^'J«i'vo.  Clasps  for  the  arm,  as 
in  2  Sam.  i.  10.  Tablets,  tp-13.  Probably 
golden  balls  or  beads  hung  round  the  neck 
(see  on  £xod.  xxrv.  22).  i  A  different  word 
is  used  in  Isa.  iii.  20. 

Yer,  52. — Sixteen  thonsand  seven  hundred 
and  fifty  shekels.  If  the  shekel  of  weight 
be  taken  as  '66  of  an  ounce,  the  offering  wiU 
'have  amounted  to  more  than  11,000  ounces 
of  gold,  worth  now  about  £40,000.  If, 
according  to  other  estimates,  the  golden 
shekel  was  worth  30s.,  the  value  of  the  offer- 
ing will  have  been  some  £25,000. 

Yer.  54. — Brought  it  into  the  tabernacle 
of  the  congregation.  It  is  not  said  what 
was  done  with  this  enormous  quantity  of 
gold,  which  must  have  been  a  cause  of 
anxiety  as  well  as  of  pride  to  the  priests. 
It  may  have  formed  a  fund  for  the  support 
of  the  tabernacle  services  during  the  long 
years  of  neglect  which  foUowed  the  con- 
quest, or  it  may  have  been  drawn  upon  for 
national  purposes.  A  memorial.  To  bring 
them  into  favourable  remembrance  with  the 
Lord.  For  this  sense  of  I'llST  (Septuagint, 
Hvtjiioavvov)  et  Ezod.  xxviii.  H,  29. 


NOTE  ON  THE  EXTERMINATION  OP  THE  MIDIANITEi 

The  grave  moral  difficulty  presented  by  the  treatment  of  their  enemies  by  the 
Israelites,  under  the  sanction  or  even  direct  command  of  God,  is  here  presented  in  its 
gravest  form.  It  will  be  best  first  to  state  the  proceedings  in  all  their  ugliness  •, 
then  to  reject  the  false  excuses  made  for  them ;  and  lastly,  to  justify  (if  possible)  the 
Divine  sanction  accorded  to  them. 

L  That  the  Midianites  had  injured  Israel  is  clear ;  as  also  that  they  had  done  so 

KUMBEBS.  O  P 


402  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oh.  xxxi.  1-64. 

deliberately,  craftily,  and  Buocesefully,  under  the  advice  of  Balaam.  They  had  so 
acted  as  i£  e.ff-  a  «iodern  nation  were  to  pour  its  opium  into  the  ports  of  a  dreaded 
neighbour  in  time  of  peace,  not  simply  for  the  sake  of  gain  (which  is  base  enough), 
but  with  deliberate  intent  to  ruin  the  morals  and  destroy  the  manhood  of  the  nation. 
Such  a  course  pf  action,  if  proved,  would  be  held  to  justify  any  reprisals  possible 
within  the  limits  of  legitimate  war ;  Christian  nations  have  avenged  far  less  weighty 
injuries  by  bloody  wars  in  this  very  century,  Midian,  therefore,  was  attacked  by  a 
detachment  of  the  Israelites,  and  for  some  reason  seems  to  have  been  unable  either 
to  fight  or  to  fly.  Thereupon  all  the  men  (f.  «.  all  who  bore  arms)  were  slain ;  the 
towns  and  hamlets  were  destroyed ;  the  women,  children,  and  cattle  driven  off  as 
booty.  So  far  the  Israelites  had  but  followed  the  ordinary  customs  of  war,  with  this 
great  exception  in  their  favour,  that  they  offered  (as  is  evident  from  the  narrative) 
no  violence,  to  the  women.  Upon  their  return  to  the  camp  Moses  was  greatly  dis- 
pleased at  the  fact  of  the  Midianitish  women  having  been  brought  in,  and  gave  orders 
that  all  the  male  children  and  all  the  women  who  were  not  virgins  were  to  be  slain. 
The  inspection  necessary  to  determine  the  latter  point  was  left  presumably  to  the 
soldiers.  The  Targum  of  Palestine  indeed  inserts  a  fable  concerning  some  miracul- 
ous, or  rather  magical,  test  which  was  used  to  decide  the  question  in  each  individual 
case.  But  this  is  simply  a  fable  invented'  to  avoid  a  disagreeable  conclusion  ;  both 
soldiers  and  captives  were  unclean,  and  were  kept  apart ;  and  the  narrative  clearly 
implies  that  there  was  no  communication  between  them  and  the  people  at  large  until 
long  after  the  slaughter  was  over.  To  put  the  matter  boldly,  we  have  to  face  the 
fact  that,  under  Moses'  directions,  12,000  soldiers  had  to  deal  with  perhaps  50,000 
women,  first  by  ascertaining  that  they  were  not  virgins,  and  then  by  killing  them  in 
cold  blood.  It  is  a  small  additional  horror  that  a  multitude  of  infants  must  have 
perished  directly  or  indirectly  with  their  mothers. 

II.  It  is  commonly  urged  in  vindication  of  this  massacre  that  the  war  was  God's 
war,  and  that  God  had  a  perfect  right  to  exterminate  a  most  guilty  people.  This  is 
true  in  a  sense.  If  God  had  been  pleased  to  visit  the  Midianites  with  pestilence, 
famine,  or  hordes  of  savages  worse  than  themselves,  no  one  would  have  charged  him 
with  injustice.  All  who  believe  in  an  over-ruling  Providence  believe  that  in  one 
way  or  other  God  has  provided  that  great  wickedness  in  a  nation  shall  be  greatly 
punished.  But  that  is  beside  the  question  altogether ;  the  difficulty  is,  not  that  the 
Midianites  were  exterminated,  but  that  they  were  exterminated  in  an  inhuman  man- 
ner by  the  Israelites.  If  they  had  been  so  many  swine  the  work  would  have  been 
revolting ;  being  men,  women,  and  children,  with  all  the  ineffaceable  beauty,  interest, 
and  hope  of  our  common  humanity  upon  them,  the  very  soul  sickens  to  think  upon 
the  cruel  details  of  their  slaughter.  An  ordinarily  good  man,  sharing  the  feelings 
which  do  honour  to  the  present  century,  would  certainly  have  flung  down  his  sword 
and  braved  all  wrath  human  or  Divine,  rather  than  go  on  with  so  hateful  a  work  ; 
and  there  is  not  surely  any  Christian  teacher  who  would  not  say  that  he  acted  quite 
rightly;  if  such  orders  proceeded  from  God's  undoubted  representative  to-day,  it 
would  be  necessary  deliberately  to  disobey  them. 

It  is  urged  again  that  the  question  at  issue  really  was,  "  whether  an  obscene  and 
debasing  idolatry  should  undermine  the  foundations  of  human  society,"  or  whether 
an  awful  judgment  should  at  once  stamp  out  the  sinners,  and  brand  the  sin  for  ever. 
But  no  such  question  was  at  issue.  There  were  obscene  and  debasing  idolatries  in 
abundance  round  about  Israel,  but  no  effort  was  made  to  exterminate  them ;  the 
Moabites  in  particular  seem  to  have  been  just  as  licentious  as  the  Midianites  at  this  time 
(see  oh.  xxv.  1—3),  and  certainly  were  quite  as  idolatrous,  and  yet  they  were  passeti 


CH.  iixi.  1—64.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  403 

by.  Indeed  the  argument  shows  an  entire  failure,  so  to  speak,  in  moral  perspective. 
Harlotry  and  idolatry  are  great  sins,  but  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  God  deals 
with  them  otherwise  than  he  does  with  other  sins.  It  was  no  part  of  the  Divine 
intention  concerning  Israel  that  he  should  go  about  as  a  kniglit-errant  avenging 
"  obscene  idolatries."  Many  a  nation  just  as  immoral  as  Midian  rose  to  greatness, 
and  displayed  some  valuable  virtues,  and  (it  is  to  be  presumed)  did  some  good  work 
in  God's  world  in  preparation  for  the  fulness  of  time.  Harlotry  and  idolatry  pre- 
vail to  a  frightful  extent  in  Great  Britain ;  but  any  attempt  to  pursue  them  with 
pains  and  penalties  would  be  scouted  by  the  conscience  of  the  nation  as  Pharisaical. 
The  fact  is  (and  it  is  so  obvious  that  it  ought  not  to  have  been  overlooked)  that 
Midian  was  overthrown,  not  because  he  was  given  over  to  an  "obscene  idolatry," 
wherein  he  was  probably  neither  much  better  nor  much  worse  than  his  neighbours  ; 
but  because  he  had  made  an  unprovoked,  crafty,  and  successful  attack  upon  God's 
people,  and  had  brought  thousands  of  them  to  a  shameful  death.  The  motive  which 
prompted  the  attack  upon  them  was  not  horror  of  their  sins,  nor  fear  of  their  con- 
tamination, but  vengeance ;  Midian  was  smitten  avowedly  "  to  avenge  the  children 
of  Israel"  (ver.  2)  who  had  fallen  through  Baal-peor,  and  at  the  same  time  "to 
avenge  the  Lord  "  (ver.  3),  who  had  been  obliged  to  slay  his  own  people. 

III.  The  true  justification  of  these  proceedings — which  we  should  now  call,  and 
justly  call,  atrocities — divides  itself  into  two  parts.  In  the  first  place,  we  have  to 
deal  only  with  the  fact  that  an  expedition  was  sent  by  Divine  command,  to  smite 
the  Midianites.  Now,  this  does  indeed  open  up  a  very  difficult  moral  question,  but 
it  does  not  involve  any  special  difSculty  of  its  own.  It  is  certain  that  wars  of  revenge 
were  freely  sanctioned  under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation  (see  on  Exod.  xvii.  14 — 
16  ;  1  Sam.  xv.  2,  3).  It  is  practically  conceded  that  they  are  permitted  by  the  New 
Testament  dispensation.  At  any  rate  Christian  nations  habitually  wage  wars  of 
revenge  even  against  half-armed  savages,  and  many  of  those  who  counsel  or  carry 
on  such  wars  are  men  of  really  religious  character.  It  is  possible  that  if  the  principles 
of  the  New  Testament  take  a  deeper  hold  upon  the  national  conscience,  all  such  wars 
will  be  regarded  as  crimes.  This  means  simply,  that  in  regard  to  war  the  moral 
sentiment  of  religious  people  has  changed,  and  is  changing  very  materially  from  age 
to  age.  Even  a  bad  man  will  shrink  from  doing  to-day  what  a  good  man  would 
have  done  without  the  least  scruple  some  centuries  ago ;  and  (if  the  world  last)  a 
bad  man  will  be  able  sincerely  to  denounce  some  centuries  hence  what  a  good  man 
can  bring  himself  to  do  with  a  clear  conscience  to-day.  Now  it  has  been  pointed 
out  again  and  again  that  when  God  assumed  the  Jews  to  be  his  peculiar  people,  he 
assumed  them  not  only  in  the  social  and  political  stage,  but  in  the  moral  stage  also, 
which  belonged  to  their  place  in  the  world  and  in  history.  Just  as  God  adopted,  as 
King  of  Israel,  the  social  and  political  ideas  which  then  prevailed,  and  made  the  best 
of  them ;  in  like  manner  he  adopted  the  moral  ideas  then  current,  and  made  the  best 
of  them,  so  restraining  them  in  one  direction,  and  so  enforcing  them  in  another,  and 
80  bringing  them  all  under  the  influence  of  religious  sanctions,  as  to  prepare  the  way 
for  the  bringing  in  of  a  higher  morality.  What  God  did  for  the  Jews  was  not  to 
teach  them  the  precepts  of  a  lofty  and  perfect  morality,  which  was  indeed  only 
possible  in  connection  with  the  revelation  of  his  Son,  but  to  teach  them  to  act  in 
all  things  from  religious  motives,  and  with  direct  reference  to  his  good  pleasure. 
Accordingly  God  himself,  especially  in  the  earlier  part  of  their  history  as  a  nation, 
undertook  to  guide  their  vengeance,  and  taught  them  to  look  upon  wars  of  vengeance 
(since  their  conscience  freely  sanctioned  them)  as  waged  fqr  his  honour  and  glory, 
not  their  owij.    If  this  seem  to  any  one  unworthy  of  the  Divine  Being,  let  him 


404  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS.  [oh.  xxxt  1— 54. 

consider  for  a  moment,  that  on  no  other  condition  was  the  Old  Testament  dispensation 
possible.  If  God  was  to  be  the  Head  of  a  nation  among  nations,  he  must  regulate 
all  its  affairs,  personal,  social,  and  national.  We  escape  the  difficulty,  and  wage  wars 
of  vengeance,  and  commit  other  acts  of  doubtful  morality,  without  compromising  our 
religion,  because  our  religion  is  strictly  personal,  and  our  wars  are  strictly  national. 
But  the  Old  Testament  dispensation  was  emphatically  temporal  and  national ;  all 
responsibility  for  all  public  acts  devolved  upon  the  King  of  Israel  himself.  It  was 
absolutely  necessary,  then,  either  that  God  should  reveal  Christian  morality  without 
Christ  (which  is  as  though  one  should  have  heat  without  the  sun,  or  a  poem  without 
a  poet)  ;  or, that  he  should  sanction  the  morality  then  current  in  its  best  form,  and 
teach  men  to  walk  bravely  and  devoutly  according  to  the  light  of  their  own  con- 
science. That  light  was  dim  enough  in  some  ways,  but  it  was  slowly  growing  clearer 
through  the  gradual  revelation  which  God  made  of  himself;  and  even  now -it  is 
growing  clearer,  and  still  while  religion  remains  fundamentally  the  same,  morality 
is  distinctly  advancing,  and  good  people  are  learning  to  abhor  to-day  what  they  did 
in  the  faith  and  fear  of  God  but  yesterday.  Take,  e.g.,  that  saying,  "Vengeance  is 
mine,  I  will  repay."  For  the  Jew  it  meant  that  in  waging  wars  of  vengeance  he 
fought  as  the  Lord's  soldier  and  not  as  in  a  private  quarrel.  For  the  Christian  of 
the  present  day  it  means  that  revenge  of  private  injuries  is  to  be  left  altogether  to 
the  just  judgment  of  the  last  day.  To  the  Christian  of  some  future  age  it  will  mean 
that  all  revenge  for  injuries  and  humiliations,  private  or  public,  individual  or  national, 
must  be  left  to  the  justice  of  him  who  ordereth  all  things  in  this  world  or  the  world 
to  come.  Each  has  a  different  standard  of  morality ;  yet  each,  even  in  doing  what 
another  will  abhor,  may  claim  the  Divine  sanction,  for  each  acts  truly  and  religiously 
apcording  to  his  lights. 

This  being  so,  it  is  only  necessary  further  to  point  out  that  the  slaying  of  all  tie 
men  whom  they  could  get  at  was  the  ordinary  custom  of  war  in  those  days,  when  no 
distinction  could  be  drawn  between  combatants  and  non-combatants.  The  practice 
of  war  in  this  respect  is  entirely  determined  by  the  sentiment  of  the  age,  and  is 
always  in  the  nature  of  a  compromise  between  the  desire  to  kill  and  the  desire  to 
spare.  As  these  two  desires  can  never  be  reconciled,  they  divide  the  field  between 
them  with  a  curious  inconsistency.  The  first  is  satisfied  by  the  ever-increasing 
destructiveness  of  war;  the  second  is  gratified  by  the  alleviations  which  strict 
discipline  and  skilled  assistance  can  procure  for  the  vanquished  and  the  wounded. 
Whether  ancient  or  modern  wars  really  left  the  larger  tale  of  misery  behind  them  is 
a  matter  of  great  doubt :  but  at  any  rate  the  custom  of  war  sanctioned  the  slaughter 
of  all  the  combatants,  i.  e.  of  all  the  men,  at  that  time ;  and  if  war  is  to  be  waged  nt 
all,  it  must  be  allowed  to  follow  the  ordinary  practice. 

In  the  second  place,  however,  we  have  to  deal  with  horrors  of  an  exceptional 
character,  in  the  subsequent  slaughter  of  the  women  and  boys.  Now  it  is  to  be 
observed  that  the  orders  for  this  slaughter  proceeded  from  Moses  alone.  According 
to  the  narrative  of  vers.  13  sq.,  Moses  went  out  of  the  camp,  and  on  perceiving  tlie 
state  of  the  case,  gave  instructions  at  once  while  his  anger  was  hot.  It  is  possible 
that  he  sought  for  Divine  guidance,  but  it  does  not  apjear  tl  at  le  did,  but  rather 
that  he  acted  upon  his  own  judgment,  and  under  the  ordinary  guidance  of  his  own 
conscience.  We  Iiave  not,  therefore,  to  face  the  difficulty  of  a  direct  command  from 
God,  but  only  the  difficulty  of  a  holy  man,  full  of  heavenly  wisdom,  having  ordered 
a  butchery  so  abhorrent  to  our  modern  feelings.  Let  it  then  in  all  fairness  be 
observed — 1.  That  Moses  was  not  responsible  for  the  presence  of  these  captives. 
They  ought  ej the j-  to  have  been  killed,  or  left  in  their  own  land;  it  was  either  the 


et.  XXXI.  1— 54.]  THB  BOOK  0?  tTttMBESS.  405 


cupidity  or  the  mistaken  pity  of  the  jsoldiers  which  hrought  them  there.  2.  That 
Moses  could  not  tolerate  their  presence  in  the  host.  It  seems  a  vile  thing  to  kill  a 
woman,  hut  it  was  the  women  mora  than  the  men  of  Midian  of  whom  they  had  just 
reason  to  be  afraid.  In  justice  to  the  men,  in  fairness  to  the  wives,  of  Israel,  it 
was  simply  impossible  to  let  them  loose  upon  the  camp.  Again,  it  seems  cowardly 
to  slay  a  helpless  child  ;  yet  to  suffer  a  generation  of  Midianites  to  grow  up  under 
the  roofs  of  Israel  would  have  been  madness  and  worse,  for  it  would  have  been  to 
court  a  great  and  perhaps  fatal  national  disaster,  for  the  sake  of  Israel  the  captive 
women  and  children  must  be  got  rid  of,  and  this  could  only  be  done  either  by 
slaughtering  the  women  and  boys,  or  by  taking  them  back  to  their  desolate'd  homes 
to  perish  of  hunger  and  disease.  Of  the  two  courses  Moses  certainly  chose  the  more 
merciful.  The  nation  was  exterminated ;  the  girls  only  were  spared  because  they 
were  harmless  then,  and  likely  to  remain  harmless ;  distributed  through  the  house- 
holds of  Israel,  without  parents  or  brothers  to  keep  alive  the  national  sentiment,  they 
would  rapidly  be  absorbed  in  the  people  of  the  Lord ;  within  a  few  weeks  these  girls 
of  Midian  would  be  happier,  and  certainly  their  future  prospects  would  be  brighter, 
than  if  they  had  remained  unmolested  at  home. 

The  charge,  therefore,  which  remains  against  Moses  is,  that  he  ordered  the  slaughter 
in  cold  blood  of  many  thousands  of  women  and  children,  not  unnecessarily  nor  wan- 
tonly, but  for  reasons  which  were  in  themselves  very  weighty.     It  is  of  course  an 
axiom  of  modem  times  that  we  do  not  wage  war  against  women  and  children.     But 
this,  while  partly  due  to  Christian  feeling,  is  partly  due  to  the  conviction  that  they 
are  not  formidable.     If  in  any  war  the  women  of  the  enemy  habitually  attempted  to 
poison,  and  often  did  poison,  our  soldiers,  they  would  probably  meet  with  scant 
mercy.     In  blockading  a  fortified  city  a  modern  army  deliberately  starves  to  death  a 
great  many  women  and  children ;  and  if  they  seek  to  escape  they  are  sent  back  to 
starve,  and  to  induce  the  garrison  to  surrender  by  the  spectacle  of  their  sufferings. 
If  this  is  justified  (as  no  doubt  it  is  if  war  is  to  be  prosecuted  at  all)  by  the  plea  of 
necessity,  Moses'  plea  of  necessity  must  be  heard  also.     He  deliberately  thought  it 
better  that  these  women  and  boys  should  be  slaughtered  than  that  the  future  of 
Israel  should  be  gravely  imperilled.     In  these  days,  indeed,  he  would  be  wrong  in 
coming  to  that  conclusion,  and  his  name  would  be  justly  branded  with  infamy.     It 
would  be  unquestionably  better  to  incur  any  losa,  rather  than  outrage  in  so  violent  a 
manner  the  Christian  sentiment  of  pity  and  tenderness  towards  the  young,  the  innocent, 
the  helpless ;  it  would  be  better  to  run  any  risk  than  to  brutalisa  the  soldiery  by  the 
execution  of  such  an  order.    So  slowly  do  sentiments  of  mercy  estaolish  themselves 
in  the  hearts  of  mankind,  and  so  unspeakably  valuable  are  they  when  established, 
that  he  would  be  a  traitor  against  humanity  and  against  God  who  should  on  any 
pretence  outrage  any  one  of  them.     But  there  was  no  such  sentiment  to  outrage  in 
the  time  of  Moses ;  none  thought  it  wrong  to  slay  captive  women  and  children  if 
any  necessity  demanded  their  lives.    It  was  an  axiom  of  war  that  a  captive  belonged 
absolutely  to  his  captor,  and  might  bo  put  to  death,  or  sold  as  a  slave,  or  held  to 
ransom,  as  pleased  him  best,  without  any  scruple  of  conscience.     Moses,  therefore 
sharing  as  he  certainly  did  the  sentiments  of  his  age,  was  morally  free  to  act  for  the 
best, without  any  thought  whether  it  was  cruel  or  not;  and  God  did  not  interfere 
with  his  decision  because  it  was  cruel,  any  more  than  he  did  with  the  similar  decision 
of  other  good  men  who  warred,  and  slew,  and  spared  not  before  the  coming  of  Christ, 
and  indeed  since  that  coming  too.     Finally,  if  the  method  of  separation  was  odious, 
it  was  still  the  only  way  possible  under  the  circumslanoes  of  separating  the  harmless 
from  the  harmful,  and  of  clearing  mercy  towards  the  captives  from  danger  to  the 


400  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oh.  xxxi.  1—54 

captors.  And  here  again  a  proceeding  could  be  sanctioned  without  sin  then  which 
perhaps  no  necessity  could  excuse  now,  because  the  sentiment  of  modesty  which  it 
would  violate  did  not  exist  then,  or  rather  did  not  exist  in  the  same  form. 

HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 54. — The  extermination  of  sinful  lusts.  The  religions  value  of  this 
chapter  for  Christian  people  must  be  based  upon  a  "  spiritual "  interpretation ; 
otherwise  it  can  but  excite  abhorrence,  and  can  only  serve  the  negative  purpose  of 
showing  by  contrast  with  that  darkness  how  fair  is  the  light  which  now  shineth. 
But  "all  these  things,"  says  St.  Paul,  writing  of  the  events  which  followed  the 
exodus  (1  Cor.  x.  11),  "  were  written  for  our  admonition  ;  "  and  "  all  Scripture  God- 
inspired  is  profitable"  for  some  directly  religious  purpose.  Those  who  reject  all 
"  spiritual "  application  (albeit  directly  sanctioned  by  apostolic  example — 1  Cor.  ix. 
10;  Gal.  iv.  24,  &c.)  must  in  honesty  deny  that  such  a  chapter  as  this  is  "profitable" 
for  anything  except  to  afEord  some  data  for  the  science  of  comparative  morality,  an 
object  valuable  in  itself,  but  certainly  not  worthy  of  Divine  inspiration.  If  there  be 
here  nothing  for  immortal  souls  beyond  the  details  of  a  horrid  slaughter  and  of  an 
enormous  booty,  it  might  better  be  omitted  at  once  from  the  Bible.  But  if  the  hosts 
of  Midian  represent  in  an  "  allegory  "  the  "  fleshly  lusts  which  war  against  the  soul," 
then  may  Samson's  riddle  be  found  true — "  Out  of  the  eater  came  forth  meat,  and 
out  of  the  strong  came  forth  sweetness  "  (Judges  xiv.  14)  ;  and  a  passage  which  has 
given  occasion  to  many  fierce  and  dangerous  invectives  against  religion  may  yield 
store  of  food  and  refreshment  for  the  souls  of  the  wise.  Having,  therefore,  this  clue 
in  our  hands  to  guide  us  through  these  dark  paths,  slippery  with  blood  of  slaughtered 
infants,  and  ringing  with  the  cries  of  frantic  women,  we  may  see  at  once  a  profound 
meaning  in  the  broad  and  apparently  unwarrantable  distinction  drawn  between  Moab 
and  Midian.  As  to  fleshly  sin,  there  was  nothing  to  choose  between  them ;  yet  Midian 
only  was  smitten,  because  he  alone  had  practised  with  design  against  the  life  of 
Israel.  Even  so  it  is  against  "  fleshly  lusts  which  war  against  the  soul,"  i.  e.  which 
are  prepared  and  used  by  a  malignant  will  to  alienate  the  soul  from  God,  and  so 
to  destroy  it — it  is  against  such  that  Christianity  denounces  bitter  and  implacable 
war.  Against  "fleshly  lusts,"  as  they  exist  among  the  heathen,  springing  out  of  the 
mere  wantonness  of  natural  life  untrained  to  any  higher  aim  than  present  enjoyment, 
Christianity  (rightly  understood)  has  no  vindictive  sternness.  It  may  look  with 
sadness  upon  a  melancholy  degradation ;  it  may  avoid  with  anxiety  a  most  perilous 
contamination ;  but  it  neither  condemns,  nor  seeks  to  repress,  save  by  the  gentle  force 
of  a  better  example  and  a  higher  teaching.    Consider,  therefore,  with  regard  to  Ihe 


I.  That  God  himself  pbbssed  on  the  wak  with  Midian  to  thb  bitter  bnd,  and 
that  although  there  did  not  seem  any  present  danger  to  Israel  from  that  quarter. 
Even  so  in  his  holy  word  God  ever  urges  us  to  wage  an  implacable  war  with  the  lusts 
of  the  flesh,  and  not  to  be  content  because  we  are  not  presently  assailed  by  them, 
but  to  exterminate  them  wholly.  Nothing  is  more  striking  than  the  urgency  and 
the  breadth  of  these  exhortations.  The  Scripture  assumes  that  all  classes  of  believers 
(however  respectable  in  outward  life  and  position)  have  need  to  strive  earnestly 
against  their  passions  (Gal.  v.  17 — 24 ;  Col.  lii.  6,  and  parallel  passages).  And  note 
that  subsequent  events  fully  justified  the  slaughter  then  made  of  Midian  (Judges  vi., 
vii.,  viii.).  We  have,  and  shall  have,  but  too  good  reason  to  know  that  fleshly  sins 
are  always  a  formidable  danger. 

II.  That  Moses  most  finish  the  DBSTRnorioN  of  Midian  ere  he  bb  called  to  his 
REST,  and  ere  Israel  may  cross  the  Jordan.  Even  so  the  moral  law,  the  wrath  of 
God  against  sin  declared  by  Moses,  must  remain  in  force  until  sin  be  destroyed  in  our 
mortal  members.  When  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  are  wholly  mortified,  then,  and  only 
then,  shall  there  be  "  no  law,"  but  only  grace  and  love  and  heaven  close  at  hand 
(Gal.  V,  23  ;  1  Tim.  i.  9,  &c.). 

III.  That  war  with  Midian  was  commanded  of  God  in  order  to  "  avenge  thb 

CHILDREN  OF  ISBAEL,"  BHT  OF  MOBBS  IN  ORDER  JO  "  AVENGE  THE  LORD."     Even  SO  has 


OA.  xtxt.  1—54.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEHS.  407 

God  commanded  us  to  strive  against  hurtful  lusts  because  they  "  drown  men  in  per- 
dition "  (1  Tim.  vi,  9),  and  have  caused  incalculable  loss  of  those  who  should  have 
had  inheritance  with  us ;  but  we  on  our  part  fight  against  these  sins  because  they 
dishonour  God,  and  destroy  the  souls  for  which  Christ  died.  And  both  these  motives 
are  in  efEect  one,  and  unite  to  make  our  warfare  a  holy  war,  albeit  a  war  of  vengeance, 
in  which  no  mercy  may  be  shown. 

IV.  That  the  war  with  Midian  was  distinctly  one  op  vengeance  fob  injueibs 
INFLICTED  ON  THEMSELVES  AND  ON  THE  LoRD.  Even  SO  in  the  strife  of  the  Christian 
against  carnal  sin  there  is  a  true  element  of  revenge,  and  abundant  room  for  holy 
indignation,  and  even  for  sharp  reprisals  ;  albeit  these  are  all  directed  against  that 
in  himself  which  is  hateful  to  a  man's  better  self  and  to  God  (1  Cor.  ix.  27 ;  2  Cor. 
vii.  11 ;  Rom.  viii.  13). 

V.  That  if  only  12,000  actually  went  to  the  war,  all  Israel  went  by  repre- 
BENTATION — 1000  FROM  BACH  TRIBE.  So  the  Conflict  against  sin  may  be  in  a  few  only 
conspicuous  and  acute,  yet  these  only  represent  what  is  going  on  secretly  more  or 
less  in  the  hearts  and  lives  of  Christian  people  generally.  The  stress  of  fight  may 
fall  on  some,  but  all  are  called  to  fight. 

VL  That  to  this  war  Israel  was  accompanied  by  the  priest  (Phinehas — see  on 

ch.  XXV.),  THE  SACRED  TRUMPETS,  AND,  AS  IT  SHOULD  SEEM,  THE  ARK  ITSELF.      Even  80 

the  Christian  warfare  against  sin  is  guided,  sanctified,  and  cheered  by  the  High 
Priest  himself  of  our  profession  (Heb.  ii.  18 ;  xii.  2 ;  Bev.  iii.  4,  5),  and  by  the 
stirring  tones  of  the  gospel,  and  by  the  glorious  mystery  of  the  incarnation  itself — 
God  with  us,  the  All-holy  tabernacled  in  our  flesh,  Christ  in  us,  the  hope  of -glory 
hereafter  and  the  sweet  constraint  unto  purity  now. 

VII.  That  all  the  men  of  Midian  were  slain,  together  with  their  kings. 
Even  so  it  is  the  destiny  of  the  Church  at  large,  and  maybe  our  individual  happiness, 
to  overthrow  and  destroy  all  hurtful  lusts,  however  strong  and  active,  which  are  in 
enmity  with  the  law  of  God.  So  also  their  princes,  "  the  world-rulers  of  this  dark- 
ness," shall  not  stand  before  us,  but  shall  perish  (1  Cor.  xv.  25 ;  Ephes.  v.  27 ;  vi.  12, 
&c.). 

VIII.  That  the  soldiers  erred  in  sparing  sdoh  as  seemed  weak  and  harmless, 
AlfD  might  be  safely  TURNED  TO  PROFIT.  The  women  were  in  fact  more  dangerous 
than  the  men ;  the  boys  would  become  as  dangerous  as  their  fathers.  Even  so  do 
we  err  in  setting  our  faces  strongly  against  certain  sins  which  are  accounted  dis- 
graceful, while  we  tolerate  others  because  they  seem  comparatively  harmless,  or  even 
profitable.  This  is  exactly  what  civilisation  does :  it  puts  down  very  thoroughly  the 
ruder  vices  of  mankind,  but  it  spares  the  softer  vices,  partly  because  it  feels  no 
repugnance  to  them,  partly  because  they  actually  make  for  wealth.  But  these  softer 
vices  are  even  more  fatal  to  morality,  because  more  insidious  and  more  fascinating ; 
and  these  sins  which  seem  to  add  to  the  general  wealth  are  preparing  a  disastrous 
future  for  the  nation.  The  moral  law  of  the  gospel  bids  us  wage  an  equal  war  with 
all  sins  without  exception,  and  takes  no  account  whether  they  are  ofEensive  or 
inoffensive,  hateful  or  pleasant,  to  the  natural  man,  to  public  opinion,  or  to  the 
sentiment  of  the  age. 

IX.  That  Moses  commanded  all  to  be  slain  except  the  young  girls,  who  by 
reason  of  their  youth  and  innocence  might  safely  be  distributed  through  thb 
households  of  Israel.  Even  so  all  passions  which  belong  to  the  lower  and  con- 
quered nature  of  man  must  be  "mortified"  and  exterminated,  except  such  as  can  be 
safely  and  thoroughly  absorbed  in  the  sanctified  life.  This  is  the  only  test.  _  What- 
ever natural  desires  can  be  taken  up  into  the  Christian  life  without  remaining  as  a 
foreign  element  (and  therefore  a  source  of  danger)  within  it  may  be  spared,  and 
ought  to  be  welcomed,  but  no  others.  All  the  rest  must  at  any  cost  be  got  rid 
of  (Matt.  six.  12 ;  Mark  ix.  43—49  ;  Rom.  viii.  13  ;  1  Cor.  ix.  27 ;  Ephes.  iv.  22 ; 
Col.  iii.  6). 

X.  That  all  the  rest  op  the  spoil  must  be  purified  either  by  fire  or  water, 
OR  both,  before  it  could  come  into  the  camf.  Even  so  whatever  is  to  be  brought 
over  (and  it  is  indeed  very  much)  from  the  natural  life  of  passion  into  the  sanctified 
life  of  grace  must  be  purged  by  the  cleansing  virtue  of  tlie  atonement  (the  water 
of  sefiaiation :  see  on  ch.  xix.),  and  by  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (see  on  Matt,  iii 


408  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  [cH.  xxxi.  1—64. 

11).  Nothing  whicli  has  been  contaminated  with  sin  can  be  turned  to  Christian  uses 
unless  it  is  first  sanctified  according  to  its  nature.  But,  subject  to  this  purifying,  all 
that  is  not  in  itself  sinful  may  be  adapted  to  Christian  ends,  and  used  by  Christian 
people. 

Consider  again,  with  respect  to  the  bootp  taken — 

I.  That  it  was  very  great,  and  greatly  enriched  the  people.  Even  so  there 
is  more  spiritual  gain  to  be  made  by  attacking  and  destroying  sins  than  by  anything 
else.  Churches  and  souls  would  never  need  to  complain  of  spiritual  poverty  if  they 
busied  themselves  in  waging  zealous  and  unsparing  war  against  the  sins  within  their 
own  reach,  within  themselves. 

II.  That  all  shared  in  thb  spoil,  but  those  that  warred  had  by  far  the  largbb 
'SHARE  individually.  Even  so  it  is  for  the  profit  and  edification  of  all  that  sing 
should  be  successfully  assailed  ;  but  those  who  bear  the  brunt  of  temptation  and 
strive  against  sin  even  "  unto  blood  "  have  by  far  the  greater  reward  in  themselves. 
Let  this  be  our  Christian  ambition,  to  earn  the  higher  prizes  of  "  him  that  overcometh  " 
(Mark  x.  29,  30 ;  1  Tim.  i.  18  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  4,  6 ;  Heb.  xii.  4). 

III.  That  amongst  the  spoil  there  were  a  multitude  of  human  beings,  and  these 
PROBABLY  THE  MOST  VALUABLE  PART  OF  IT.  Even  SO  in  the  Christian  warfare  against 
sin  there  are  a  multitude  of  souls  rescued  from  slavery,  and  these  of  priceless  worth, 
beyond  all  other  rewards  which  we  could  ask  or  think  of.  The  girls  of  Midian 
seemed  to  be  delivered  into  slavery  ;  they  were  in  fact  delivered  from  a  horrible 
slavery,  and  made  free  in  the  only  way  which  was  then  possible.  So  are  those  souls 
which  are  brought  into  the  service  and  strictness  of  Christ  made  free  by  the  truth 
(Luke  V.  10 ;  John  viii.  32,  34,  36  ;  2  Cor.  i.  14  ;  Philip,  iv.  1 ;  James  v.  20). 

IV.  That  the  Lord's  portion  and  the  portion  of  his  ministers  was  bxaotbd 
BEFORE  the  SPOIL  MIGHT  BB  APPROPRIATED.  Even  SO,  whatever  is  allowed  to  Christian 
use  which  has  belonged  to  a  sinful  world,  God  and  his  Church  have  a  first  claim  upon 
it.  It  is  only  through  the  sanctifying  influences  of  grace  that  Christian  people  can 
freely  and  safely  enjoy  the  many  comforts  and  luxuries  and  profits  which  else  they 
must  have  forsworn.  It  is  but  right  that  these  should  first  of  all  be  willingly  taxed 
for  the  glory  of  God  among  men,  and  for  the  support  of  aU  outward  ministries  of 
grace  (Luke  xi.  41). 

Consider  again,  with  regard  to  BalaanCs  death — 

I.  That  he  fell  at  last  where  he  had  no  reason  to  apprehend  dangeb.  Israel 
had  passed  by  these  tribes  of  Midian,  and  Balaam  no  doubt  believed  that  all  present 
danger  from  them  was  over.  Even  so  vengeance  overtakes  the  wicked  at  the  moment 
when  he  is  least  afraid,  and  when  justice  seems  to  have  forgotten  him. 

II.  That  he  pell  by  the  sword  of  Israel,  t.  e.  by  the  hand  of  those  who  had 
been  the  victims  of  HIS  guile.  Even  so  it  is  a  just  thing  with  God  that  evil  men 
and  seducers  should  receive  their  punishment  through  those  whom  they  have 
wronged. 

III.  That  Balaam,  the  enchanter  and  tempter  of  Israel,  fell  without  a 
struggle  when  the  princes  of  Midian  had  been  slain.  Even  bo  the  tempter  him- 
self, the  arch-enemy  of  souls,  will  (as  far  as  we  are  concerned)  come  utterly  to  an 
end  as  soon  as  we  have  overcome  the  allurements  to  sin  which  he  uses  against  us 
(Bom.  xvi.  20). 

Consider  again,  with  regard  to  the  offering  of  the  officers — 

I.  That  not  one  had  fallen  in  the  banks  of  Israel — a  thing  clearly  beyond  ex- 
pectation in  any  ordinary  expedition.  Even  so  there  is  no  reason  why  any  should 
fall  or  fail  in  the  warfare  against  fleshly  lusts.  For  the  promise  of  victory  is  net  to 
all  in  general,  or  to  the  Church  at  large  only,  but  to  each  soul  in  particular  that  will 
earnestly  strive.  And  victory  over  sin  implies  eternal  life  (Ezek.  xviii.  23 ;  Amoa 
ix.  9  ;  Micah  vii.  8  ;  Mai.  iii.  17 ;  1  Cor.  x.  18,  &c.). 

II.  That  the  officers  felt  that  this  immunity  was  due  to  the  special  pro- 
vidence of  God.  Even  so  that  we  escape  from  sin  and  death,  that  we  come  unhurt 
through  so  many  perils  to  the  soul,  is  not  of  our  strength,  but  of  God's  as^istancej 


OB.  XXXI.  1—64.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  409 

and  to  him  all  the  glory  is  due  (Isa.  xl.  29 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  9 ;  Philip.  It.  13 ;  2  Tim. 
iv.  17,  18,  &o.). 

III.  That  thbt  owed  a  gbbat  dkbt  of  gratitude  to  God  for  the  presbbvation 
OF  THOSB  who  HAD  BEEN  COMMITTED  TO  THEIR  CHARGE  (literally,  "in  their  hand"). 
Even  80  we  ought  to  feel  and  to  show  great  gratitude  to  God  for  the  spiritual  safety 
of  such  as  are  put  in  our  charge,  whether  as  children  or  otherwise.  According  to 
our  responsibility  for  them,  and  our  sorrow  if  they  were  lost,  so  should  be  our  thank- 
fulness if  the  good  hand  of  God  be  upon  them  to  keep  them  in  the  way  of  life  (Philip, 
i.  3 ;  1  Thess.  i.  2,  3,  &c.). 

IV.  That  they  showed  their  gratitude  bt  the  special  dedication  to  God's 

SERVICE  of  those  PRECIOUS  THINGS  WITH  WHICH  THAT   WARFARE  HAD  ENRICHED  THEM. 

Even  so  when  we  and  ours  come  unscathed  out  of  the  temptations  of  the  world  and 
of  the  flesh,  we  may  well  dedicate  to  God  in  some  special  way  all  the  costly  gifts  of 
knowledge,  of  sympathy,  of  spiritual  power  and  freedom  which  come  of  temptation 
and  trial  bravely  overcome. 

And  note  that  the  numbering  of  the  men  who  had  been  to  the  war,  and  the  offering 
of  the  golden  spoil,  may  be  interpreted  of  the  last  day.  1.  That  not  one  true 
soldier  of  Christ  shall  be  missing  then  (John  x.  28,  29  ;  Philip,  i.  6 ;  Rev.  vii.  3,  4 
compared  with  xiv,  1).  2.  That  all  the  precious  gifts  yielded  by  human  life  amid 
strife  and  danger  shall  be  brought  into  the  holy  city  of  God,  to  the  glory  of  God 
(Rev.  xxi.  24,  26).  3.  That  every  one  that  overcometh  shall  be  the  better  and  the 
richer  for  his  warfare  against  sin  (see  ver.  63). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 64. — The  lion  and  his  prey.  In  two  of  his  prophecies  Balaam  had 
been  compelled  to  speak  of  Israel  as  the  lion  (ch.  xxiii.  24 ;  xxiv.  9).  We  now 
behold,  in  the  destruction  of  Midian,  the  rousing  of  the  lion-spirit.  Something  of 
it  had  been  seen  already  in  the  conduct  of  Phinehas  (ch.  xxv.),  and  now  there  is  a 
manifestation  on  a  larger  scale  in  the  achievement  of  these  12,000  men. 

I.  The  COMPLETENESS  OF  THE  DESTRUCTION.  All  the  males  of  Midian  were  slain, 
and  the  five  kings  are  particularly  mentioned  as  being  among  them.  The  women 
and  their  little  ones  were  taken  captive.  The  whole  of  their  propertj'  was  turned 
into  spoil,  and  how  large  that  spoil  was  we  learn  from  the  latter  part  of  the  chapter. 
Their  cities  and  goodly  castles  were  all  burnt.  And  might  not  this  seem  destruction 
enough  ?  Apparently  not ;  for  we  read  that  Moses  was  wroth  because  the  women 
had  been  spared,  and  they,  as  well  as  all  the  males  of  the  little  ones,  had  to  be  added 
to  the  slain.  Thus  the  impression  left  upon  us,  and  evidently  intended  to  be  left, 
is  that  of  utter  and  merciless  extermination.  None  were  left  to  continue  the  race  of 
Midian. 

II.  The  inspiration  of  this  dreadful  blow  was  evidently  from  God.  It  was 
undertaken  at  bis  command,  and  not  only  so,  but  laid  on  Moses  as  his  last  great 
service  before  his  departure.   . 

"Old  ageliath  yet  hia  honour  and  his  toil ; 
Death  closes  all :  but  something  ere  the  end. 
Some  work  of  noble  note,  may  yet  be  done." 

Midian  did  not  lie  in  the  way  of  advancing  Israel,  as  did  the  hosts  of  Sihon  and  Og. 
In  one  sense  Israel  had  to  turn  out  of  its  way  in  order  to  inflict  this  blow.  We 
need  to  keep  distinctly  before  our  minds  that  God  gave  special  command  and 
made  special  preparation  for  it.  The  motive  of  this  act  is  not  to  be  found  in  the 
vindictive  spirit  of  a  half-savage  people.  The  wrongs  which,  by  natural  disposition, 
they  wauld  have  burned  to  avenge  were  not  such  as  those  inflicted  by  Midian.  In 
truth  there  is  no  occasion  either  for  blame  anywhere,  or  for  attempt  at  palliation. 
We  must  read  this  dreadful  record  in  a  spirit  of  humble  submission  to  the  authority 
of  God,  who  sees  need  for  temporal  destruction  where  we  may  fail  to  see  it. 

III.  That  this  blow  came  from  God  is  made  still  clearer  as  we  consider  how  his 
POWER  OAVB  THE  BLOW  ITS  EFFICACY.  Observe  how  small  a  part  of  the  whole  army 
tccu  required — about  a  fiftieth.    There  is  no  mention  of  a  selected  compaay  to  engage 


410  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS.  lotL  xxxi.  1—64. 

against  Sihon  and  Og,  but  now  this  small  force  is  enough  to  crush  the  whole  of 
Midian.  If  Israel  had  gone  forth  of  its  own  accord,  it  would  have  made  the  result 
as  sure  as  possible  by  taking  a  far  larger  force  than  actually  went.  But  where  God 
is  not  present  he  can  turn  mere  numbers  into  loss  rather  than  gain.  It  was  an 
occasion  for  the  excellency  of  the  Divine  power  to  be  manifested.  No  actual  leader 
is  mentioned.  Moses  sent  them  forth,  and  on  their  return  he  went  out  to  meet  them, 
but  they  evidently  lacked  what  inspiration  his  presence  and  counsel  might  give  them 
in  the  field.  Phinehas  went  with  them,  but  he  was  in  charge  of  the  holy  instruments 
and  trumpets.  We  are  made  to  feel  that  the  invisible  Jehovah  himself  was  leader, 
not  only  directing  the  attack,  but  also  providing  sufiBoient  defence ;  for  when  the 
officers  came  to  count  up  the  army  on  its  return,  they  were  able  to  say,  "There 
lacketh  not  one  man  of  us." 

IV.  The  eeason  for  this  dreadful  desteuction  is  found  in  the  peouliab 
INJURY  which  Midian  had  done  to  Israel  (ch.  xxv.  16 — 18).  It  must  needs  be 
that  offences  come,  but  woe  to  the  Midianites  through  whom  they  come  1  Although 
they  were  not  a  very  difficult  people  to  defeat  and  destroy  in  battle,  they  had  been 
very  powerful  to  tempt  Israel  into  idolatry.  A  thing  which  is  comparatively  easy  to 
deal  with  in  one  way  is  impossible  to  deal  with  in  another.  Israel  could  aimihilate 
Midian,  and  do  something  in  that  way  to  secure  safety,  but  there  was  no  chance 
of  safety  in  having  friendly  intercourse  with  Midian.  It  had ,  to  be  dealt  with  as  a 
people  saturated  with  the  infecting  corruptions  of  idolatry.  Everything  had  to  bend 
to  the  interests  of  Israel,, as  both  typifying  and  cradling  the  Church  of  the  future. 
For  the  sake  of  Israel  God  plagued  and  spoiled  the  tyrannous  Egyptians ;  for  the 
sake  of  Israel  he  made  one  whole  generation  of  its  own  people  to  perish  in  the  wil- 
derness. What  wonder  then  that  for  the  sake  of  Israel  he  utterly  destroyed  the 
Midianite  tempters  I  When  a  fire  is  extending  it  may  be  necessary  to  pull  down 
other  buildings  to  stop  it — many  buildings  perhaps,  as  Evelyn  tells  us  was  the  case 
in  arresting  the  great  fire  of  London.  There  is  something  very  significant  in  the 
following  sentence  from  his  diary: — "This  some  stout  seamen  proposed  early  enough 
to  have  saved  nearly  the  whole  city,  but  this  some  tenacious  and  avaricious  men, 
aldermen,  &c.,  would  not  permit,  because  their  houses  must  have  been  of  the  first." 
There  may  have  to  be  a  great  deal  of  temporal  destruction  to  make  sure  of  eternal 
salvation. — Y. 

Vers.  8, 16. — The  death  of  Balaam.  I.  How  clear  it  is  made  that  Balaam  did 
NOT  DIE  the  death  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS  I  He  was  slain  among  those  who  were  slain 
by  the  vengeance  of  God.  He  might,  of  course,  have  died  in  circumstances  more 
peaceful  and  less  indicative  of  his  wickedness,  and  yet  died  the  death  of  the  wicked 
all  the  same.  But  now  the  manner  of  his  end  is  left  in  no  doubt.  He  had  not  only 
suffered  himself  to  be  drawn  into  opposition  to  the  people  of  God,  he  had  not  only 
been  disobedient  to  God  himself,  but  it  seems  that  he  had  been  the  chief  provoking 
agent  in  bringing  destruction  on  a  portion  of  the  present  generation  of  Israel.  More- 
over, the  very  people  whom  he  thought  to  help  he  had  unconsciously  led  to  their 
own  ruin.  He  certainly  could  not  have  done  all  this  if  he  had  not  found  the 
materials  ready  to  hand — actual  idolatry  in  Midian,  and  the  spirit  of  luat  and  idolatry 
in  Israel.  But  it  was  he  who  saw  with  a  sort  of  Satanic  quickness  all  that  could  be 
done  with  the  material.  A  man  cannot  cause  an  explosion  unless  he  has  explosive 
substances  to  deal  with,  but  we  reckon  him  responsible  who  applies  the  exploding 
agent.  One  sinner  not  only  destroyeth  much  good,  but,  as  we  see  here,  produceth 
much  eviL  Wicked  men  should  learn  from  the  history  of  Balaam  that  they  may  do 
a  great  deal  more  harm  than  they  are  conscious  of.  How  much  better  it  is  to  be  on 
the  other  side,  striving  to  draw  men,  even  though  it  be  with  few  apparent  results, 
into  the  paths  of  purity,  self-denial,  and  love  1 

II.  From  the  character  of  Balaam  we  see  how  real  and  desperate  spiritual 
INSENSIBILITY  MAY  BE.  Rightly  Considered,  the  whole  conduct  of  Balaam  is  a  great 
deal  more  perplexing  than  is  the  speaking  of  his  ass.  There  we  have  to  do  just  with 
the  momentary  occupation  of  the  vocal  organs  of  a  brute  by  the  speech  of  a  human 
being.  For  a  moment  or  two  the  ass  was  honoured  beyond  its  natural  faculties. 
But  here  ia  a  man,  raised  above  other  men  in  many  respects,  acting  in  a  way  most 


ofl.  XXXI.  1—54.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS,  411 

humiliating  to  humanity.  Favoured  again  and  again  with  light  which  came  to  him 
in  different  ways,  he  remained  in  gross  darkness  with  respect  to  the  character  of  God 
as  a  whole.  He  saw  not  the  folly,  the  absurdity,  of  the  path  in  which  he  was 
treading.  l%e  conduct  of  Balaam  in  the  essential  principles  of  it  has  often  been 
rmeated,  and  is  being  repeated  still.  We  are  all  spiritually  blind  unless  God  be 
pleaBed  to  open  our  eyes.  Seeing  the  things  of  God  by  the  light  of  nature,  and 
judging  of  them  by  natural  reason,  we  come  to  some  strange  and  impotent  con- 
clusions. Balaam's  indiSerence  to  the  interferences  of  God  is  not  one  whit  more 
marvellous  than  the  unmoved,  matter-of-fact  way  in  which  we  can  hear  to  have  truths 
presented  to  our  minds  which,  if  they  concern  us  to  any  extent,  concern  us  more 
than  all  outward  circumstances  taken  together.  It  is  easy  to  say  as  one  reads  of 
Balaam,  "  What  a  fool !  what  an  enigma  1  what  a  bundle  of  contradictions  I  what 
a  mixture  in  his  life  of  unwilling  obedience  to  God  and  most  obstinate  persistence  in 
his  own  pathl"  Take  care  lest  it  be  said  to  one  thus  speaking,  "Thou  art  the  man." 
There  is  not  a  man  of  the  world  living  in  a  land  of  open  Bibles  but  whose  conduct 
might  be  so  described  as  to  appear  quite  as  perplexing  as  that  of  Balaam  here. 

III.  A  MAN  MAT  ENJOT  GEEAT  PRIVILEGES,  AND  YET  BE  RUINED  AT  LAST.      A  Seeing 

man  may  be  quite  safe  in  a  dangerous  path,  and  on  the  darkest  night,  with  a  little 
lamp,  if  it  is  enough  to  show  him  where  his  feet  are  to  be  placed.  But  a  blind  man 
will  fall  into  the  pit  by  noonday.  A  firmament  radiant  with  a  score  of  suns  would 
avail  nothing  to  such  a  one.  A  man  may  live  in  a  land  of  Bibles,  churches,  and 
every  conceivable  variety  of  gospel  ministrations,  and  yet  die,  after  a  long  contact 
with  all  these,  knowing  nothing  of  his  own  state  as  a  sinner,  or  of  the  power  of 
Christ  as  a  Saviour.  Another  man,  in  the  midst  of  Afiiea,  with  no  more  than  a  torn 
leaf  of  the  New  Testament,  might  come  to  know  the  one  thing  needful,  and  be 
efEectually  led  to  repentance,  faith,  salvation,  and  eternal  life.  Privileges,  as  we  call 
them,  are  nothing  in  themselves ;  all  depends  on  how  they  are  received.  It  was  the 
same  seed  that  was  sown  in  the  four  different  kinds  of  ground.  One  seed  sown  in 
the  good  ground  will  bring  forth  more  than  a  cartload  scattered  by  the  wayside. 

IV.  Balaam  knew  just  enough  of  the  tbuth  to  mislead  him,  not  enough  to 
LEAD  him  bight.  He  apprehended  the  real  power  of  Jehovah  without  apprehending 
his  character  as  a  whole.  He  had  made  the  discovery  that  if  Israel  fell  away  into 
the  worship  of  any  other  god,  it  would  be  very  severely  dealt  with.  Doubtless  he 
had  found  his  way  into  some  intercourse  with  the  Israelites,  and  been  made  acquainted 
with  their  past  history,  particularly  with  the  commandment  of  God  at  Sinai  against 
idolatry,  and  the  sufferings  which  came  upon  the  people  because  of  the  golden  calf. 
But  he  did  not  know  that  in  the  midst  of  the  most  faithless  and  apostate  of  genera- 
tions there  would  still  be  preserved  a  faithful  seed  ;  he  did  not  reckon  on  the 
energetic  and  efiBcacious  zeal  of  a  Phinehas.  And  thus  the  great  mischief  to  many 
arises  not  so  much  from  total  indifference  to  God  as  from  misleading  conceptions  of 
him.  It  is  only  too  easy  for  us  to  miss  the  full  view  which  a  sinner  ought  to  have 
of  God,  and  remain  all  our  lifetime  with  erroneous  and  most  limited  conceptions. 
Some  make  too  much  of  God's  anger  with  sin,  forgetting  his  love,  his  mercy,  his 
patience,  his  revelation  of  himself  as  a  Father ;  others  make  too  much  of  his  mercy, 
forgetting  his  unyielding  righteousness,  and  the  need  of  a  radical  change  in  man — a 
change  in  his  motives,  purposes,  sympathies,  and  delights.  Nothing  is  more  perilous 
than  to  see  so  much  of  one  side  of  the  Divine  character  as  not  to  see  the  rest.  We 
must  see  it  as  it  is  revealed  in  Scripture.  There  the  living  God  moves  before  us  in 
his  actions.  We  see  his  actions,  and  they  cannot  be  understood  unless  as  the 
harmonious  outflow  of  all  his  character. — ^Y. 

Vers.  25 — 47. — The  distribution  of  the  spoils.  I.  God  takes  the  distribution 
INTO  HIS  OWN  HANDS.  The  victory  was  his,  and  it  was  for  him  to  arrange  the  spoils 
as  might  best  serve  his  own  purposes.  It  was  the  only  effectual  way  of  blighting 
in  the  bud  all  discord  and  jealousy.  It  was  also  the  means  of  teaching  important 
lessons  to  all  in  the  community  who  were  willing  to  learn.  It  helped  to  manifest 
afresh  the  unity  of  Israel.  Those  who  had  gone  to  the  war  had  gone  as  repre- 
sentatives of  the  whole  of  Israel,  hence  it  was  for  the  whole  of  Israel  to  share  in  the 
spoil.    While  part  was  away,  avenging  the  Lord  of  Midian,  another  part  stayed  at 


412 


THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBEE8. 


[oh.  xta.  1—54. 


Tiome,  also  serving-  God  in  its  own  way,  and  looking  after  the  interests  of  those  who 
were  absent.  We  must  not  get  into  the  way  of  looking  at  one  part  of  the  com- 
munity as  more  necessary  than  another.  It  was  not  for  the  army  to  say,  "  What 
would  Israel  have  done  in  taking  vengeance  on  Midian  but  for  us?"  seeing  that 
God  had  made  it  plain  how  he  was  working  in  and  through  the  army.  Nor  was  it 
for  the  people  who  stayed  at  home  to  say,  "  What  right  have  twelve  thousand  men 
to  half  the  spoils  ?  "  The  twelve  thousand  were  not  looked  at  in  themselves ;  they 
stood  for  Israel  militant.  All  Israel  gained  a  real  blessing  by  this  expedition,  and 
the  chief  gain  to  them  was  in  so  far  as  they  were  efEectually  warned  against  the 
perils  of  idolatry.  Whatever  there  might  be  in  the  way  of  improved  perception  of 
truth  and  duty  and  the  Divine  character  was  far  more  than  all  the  spoil.  God 
did  not  send  them  against  Midian  for  the  sake  of  the  spoil,  but  for  the  sake  of 
vengeance. 

II.  The  special  tribute  to  the  Lbvites.  It  was  very  appropriate  that  this  should 
be  strictly  exacted,  after  all  the  service  which  Phinehas  had  rendered.  The  tribe  of 
Levi  had  done  its  part  in  a  way  which  could  not  be  mistaken.  Upon  this  great 
occasion,  when  so  much  had  to  be  distributed,  God  taught  the  lesson  that  distribu- 
tion should  be  made  according  to  the  needs  of  men.  The  Levites  had  need  not  only 
to  be  supported,  but  well  supported.  The  work  they  had  to  do,  in  the  reality,  the 
extent,  the  continuity,  and  the  minuteness  of  it,  had  been  lately  indicated  in  more 
ways  than  one.  Consider  all  the  Levitioal  service  that  was  involved  in  the  offerings 
mentioned  in  chs.  xxviii.  and  xxix.  It  was  becoming  more  and  more  clear  that 
Levi  must  be  set  apart  and  properly  maintained ;  for  thus  only  could  there  be  regu- 
larity and  efficiency  in  the  service  of  God. 

III.  Balaam's  ass  was  probably  amono  the  asses  that  week  taken  (ver.  34). 
It  is  pleasant  to  imagine  that  it  may  have  found  its  way  into  the  Lord's  tribute,  and 
thafthe  animal  which  had  so  long  borne  a  wicked  man  faithfully,  would  now  with 
equal  faithfulness  be  able  to  bear  perhaps  Eleazar  himself.  We  need  much  of  the 
spirit  of  obedience  to  God  to  use  rightly  that  vast  multitude  of  the  brute  creation 
which  God  has  put  under  our  control.  How  pitiable  to  see  the  horse  carefully 
trained  for  war,  and,  as  one  might  almost  think,  taught  to  cherish  feelings  which  by 
nature  are  alien  to  it !  May  we  not  well  wish  for  the  day  when  not  only  the  sword 
of  the  dragoon  shall  be  turned  to  the  ploughshare,  but  the  horse  on  which  he  rides 
shall  draw  that  share  along?  Think  how  the  horse  and  other  animals  are  degraded 
by  the  occasions  for  gambling  which  they  furnish.  Think  of  all  the  cruel  field-sports 
in  which  man  finds  such  pleasure.  When  he  leaves  the  pleasures  which  are  appro- 
priate to  his  nature,  what  a  tyrannous  and  hideous  monster  he  may  become  I  Man  in 
all  his  life  should  be  drawing  nearer  to  God,  and,  rising  higher  himself,  should  raise 
all  creation  with  him.  Whereas  he  is  drawn  downward,  and  in  his  willing  descent 
he  degrades  even  the  lower  creation. — Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXn. 


The  two  aitd  a  half  tribes  beyond 
Jordan  (vers.  1 — 42).  Ver.  1.  — The  children 
of  Benben  and  the  children  of  Oad.  Reuben 
and  Gad  had  both  been  camped  on  the  same 
(southern)  side  of  the  tabernacle,  but  had 
not  apparently  been  neighbours,  since  Simeon 
intervened  on  the  march  (see  on  ch.  ii.  10 — 
14).  Simeon,  however,  was  at  this  time  en- 
feebled and  disgraced,  and  was  not  likely  to 
assert  himself  in  any  way.  The  "  great 
multitude  of  cattle  "  belonging  to  the  two 
tribes  probably  point  to  pastoral  habits  of 
long  standing,  since  the  cattle  of  the  Amor- 
ites  and  Midianites  would  be  equally  divided 
among  all,    The  land  of  Jazer.    Jazer,  or 


Jaazer,  probably  stood  near  fhe  northern 
source  of  the  W&dy  HesbSn,  which  enters 
the  Jordan  not  far  &om  its  mouth.  The 
"land  of  Jazer''  would  seem  to  mean  the 
Mishor,  or  plateau,  of  Heshbon,  over  which 
the  Israelites  had  passed  on  their  way  to 
the  plains  of  Moab  (see  on  Deut.  iii.  10, 
"  all  the  cities  of  the  Mishor  ").  The  land 
of  Gilead.  Gilead  as  the  name  of  a  district 
only  previously  occurs  in  Gen.  ixxvii.  25. 
It  is  used  with  a  considerable  latitude  of 
meaning  in  this  and  the  following  books. 
In  its  widest  sense  it  stands  for  l£e  whole 
territory  to  the  east  of  Jordan  (see  on  vers. 
26,  29),  including  even  the  rugged,  volcanic 
district^  of  Bashan  (Deut.  xxxiv.  1 ;  1  Chron. 
r.  16) ;  but  more  proparly  it  denoted  tlu 


OH.  zxxn.  1 — 12,] 


THE  BOOK  07  NUMBEBS. 


413 


lands  on  both  sides  the  Jabbok,  from  the 
Wftdy  HesbSn  on  the  south,  to  the  Yermuk 
and  lake  of  Tiberias  on  the  nortli,  now  known 
as  the  provinces  of  Belka  and  Jebel  Ajlun. 
These  knds  are  by  no  means  uniformly  flat, 
as  the  name  "Mount  Gilead"  testifies,  but 
include  mountains  and  hills  covered  with  fine 
open  forests  of  oak  (cf.  2  Sam.  xviii.  8,  9)  as 
well  as  rolling  downs  and  treeless  plains. 
The  soil  is  almost  everywhere  of  great  fer- 
tility, and  the  water  supply,  although  very 
scanty  in  summer,  is  sufficient  if  carefully 
husbanded.  Even  now  these  provinces  pro- 
duce great  store  of  grain,  and  are  depastured 
by  vast  flocks  of  shoop.  In  Roman  times,  as 
the  innumerable  ruins  testify,  they  were  filled 
with  a  large  and  opulent  population.  Indeed 
there  could  be  no  comparison  in  point  of 
agricultural  iiud  pastoral  value  between  these 
open  and  fertile  lands  and  the  broken,  stony 
country  of  Southern  Palestine.  If  they  ever 
enjoy  again  the  blessing  of  a  strong  govern- 
ment and  continuous  peace  they  will  again 
jxistify  the  choice  of  Reuben  and  Gad.  A 
place  for  cattle.  D^pD  (Septuagint,  tottoc) 
is  used  here  in  the  broader  sense  of  district 
(cf.  Gen.  L  9),  and  ia  equivalent  to  Y^^  in 
ver.  4. 

Yer.  3. — Ataroth.  As  to  the  nine  places 
here  mentioned,  see  on  vers.  84 — 38.  They 
all  lie  to  the  south  of  Gilead,  properly  so 
called,  within  a  comparatively  short  distance 
of  the  route  by  which  the  main  body  of  the 
Israelites  had  advanced.  Probably  the  cattle 
which  followed  the  host  were  still  grazing 
under  guard  around  these  places,  and  it  was 
very  natural  that  tribes  which  had  hitherto 
lived  closely  crowded  together  should  not  at 
first  contemplate  spreading  themselves  very 
far  afield. 

Ver.  5. — Bring  as  not  over  Jordan.  The 
two  tribes  have  been  charged  on  the  strength 
of  these  words  with  "  shameless  selfishness," 
but  there  is  nothing  to  justify  such  an  accus- 
ation. If  they  thought  at  all  of  the  efiect 
of  their  request  upon  their  brethren,  it  is 
quite  likely  that  they  intended  to  do  them  a 
kindness  by  leaving  them  more  room  on  the 
other  side  Jordan ;  and  indeed  Canaan  proper 
was  all  too  strait  for  such  a  population. 
Whether  they  were  wise  in  wishing  to  stay  in 
the  wider  and  more  attractive  lands  which 
they  had  seen  is  another  matter.  They  knew 
that  the  God  of  Israel  had  designed  to  plant 
his  people  between  Jordan  and  the  sea,  and 
they  certainly  risked  a  partial  severance  from 
his  promises  and  his  protection  by  remaining 
where  they  did.  The  subsequent  history  of 
the  trans-Jordanio  tribes  is  a  melancholy 
commentary  on  the  real  unwisdom  of  their 
choice.  Yet  it  would  have  been  difficult  for 
them  to  know  that  they  were  wrong,  except 
by  an  instinct  of  faith  which  no  Israelites 
perhaps  at  that  time  possessed. 


Ver.  6. — Shall  your  brethren  go  to  war, 
and  shall  ye  sit  here!  Moses  had  good 
cause  to  feel  great  anxiety  about  the  entry 
into  Canaan  proper.  Once  already  the  faith 
and  courage  of  the  people  had  failed  them  on 
the  very  threshold  of  the  promised  land, 
and  a  slight  discouragement  might  bring 
about  a  similar  calamity.  Hence  he  spoke 
with  a  degree  of  sharpness  which  does  not 
appear  to  nave  been  deserved, 

Ver.  7. — Discourage.  The  verb  S^3,  trans- 
lated "discourage"  here  and  in  ver.  9,  is  of 
somewhat  doubtful  meaning.  The  Septua- 
gint renders  it  by  diaarpiipiii,  and  perhaps  the 
sense  is,  "Why  do  ye  draw  away  the  heart?" 
t.  e.  render  it  averse  from  going  over. 

Ver.  8. — Thus  did  your  fathers.  It  is 
impossible  not  to  see  that  this  mode  of  ad- 
di'ess  is  in  striking  contrast  to  that  used  in 
the  Book  of  Deuteronomy  (e.  g.  in  ch.  L  22, 
27  ;  V.  3,  23).  At  the  same  time  it  is  ob- 
viously the  more  natural,  and  the  more  in 
accordance  with  facts,  because  there  was  not 
a  man  left  of  all  those  who  had  rebelled  at 
Eadesh.  At  Sadesh-Bamea.  This  mode  of 
writing  the  name  forms  a  link  between  the 
closing  chapters  of  Numbers  (here  and  in 
ch,  xxxiv.  i)  and  the  two  following  books. 
In  Deuteronomy  it  occurs  four  times,  and 
"  Kadesh "  twice.  In  Joshua  "  Kadesh- 
Barnea"  occurs  exclusively.  In  the  later 
books  "  Kadesh"  only  is  used,  as  in  Genesis 
and  in  the  previous  chapters  of  Numbers. 
The  meaning  of  the  combination  is  uncertain, 
and  the  etymology  of  "  Barnea  "  altogether 
obscure.  It  may  be  an  old  name  attaching 
to  the  place  before  it  became  known  as  a 
sanctuary.  The  Septuagint  has  KaSiis  tov 
Bapvti  in  one  place,  as  though  it  were  the 
name  of  a  man. 

Ver.  9.  — When  they  went  np,  i.  «.  no 
doubt  the  spies,  although  the  word  is  not 
expressed.  Moses,  indeed,  in  the  heat  of  his 
displeasure,  seemed  to  charge  their  "fathers  " 
generally  with  the  wickedness  of  ten  men. 
No  further  proof  is  needed  to  show  that 
Moses  was  often  disposed '  to  speak  un- 
advisedly with  his  lips. 

Ver.  11. — That  came  up  out  of  Egypt, 
from  twenty  years  old  and  upward.  Here 
is  another  instance  of  the  haste  and  inac- 
curacy with  which  Moses  spoke.  The  Divine 
sentence  of  exclusion  had  been  pronounced 
upon  all  who  were  numbered  at  Sinai  as 
being  then  over  twenty  (ch.  xiv.  29). 

Ver.  12. — The  Kenezite.  See  on  chap. 
xiii.  6. 

Ver.  14, — An  increase  of  sinful  men. 
ni3"iri  is  rendered  by  the  Septuagint  aiv- 
rpififia,  which  properly  means  a  contusion 
or  fracture  ;  but  it  is  probably  equivalent  to 
"  brood,"  used  in  a  contemptuous  sense. 
The  strong  language  of  Moses  was  not  justi* 


414 


THE  BOOK  OF  NDMBEES. 


[oh.  XXXII,  1 — 42. 


fled  by  the  reality,  although  it  was  excused 
by  the  appearance,  of  the  case. 

Ver.  15.— He  will  yet  again  leave  them 
in  the  wilderness.  Properly  speaking,  Israel 
had  already  emerged  from  the  wilderness; 
but  until  th^  had  fairly  made  good  their 
possession  of  Canaan,  their  desert  wanderings 
could  not  be  considered  at  an  end. 

Ver.  16.— Sheep-folds.  JSV  rh"]}.  These 
were  rude  enclosures  built  of  loose  stones 
piled  on  one  another,  into  which  the  flocks 
were  driven  at  night  for  safety. 

Ver.  17. — We  ourselves  will  go  ready 
armed.    Rather,   "  we  will  equip  ourselves 

in  haste."  Wn  f^rij.  They  meant  that 
they  would  not  delay  the  forward  movement 
of  Israel,  but  would  hasten  to  erect  the 
necessary  buildings,  and  to  array  themselves 
for  war. 

Ter.  19. — On  yonder  side  Jordan.  p"1!? 
IDJ/D.  Soptuagint,  arb  tov  irlpav  ro5  'lop- 
iavov.  This  phrase  is  here  used  in  what  is 
apparently  its  more  natural  sense,  as  it  would 
be  used  by  one  dwelling  in  the  plains  of 
Moab  (see  on  ch.  zxii.  I,  and  on  next  verse). 

Or  forward.  i^^?C3-  Septuagint,  coi 
iiriKttva,  i.  e.  onwards  towards  the  west  and 
south  and  north,  as  the  tide  of  conquest 
might  flow.  Our  inheritance  is  fallen  to  us 
on  this  side  Jordan  eastward.  It  does  not 
appear  on  what  ground  they  spoke  so  con- 
fidently. They  do  not  seem  to  have  received 
any  Divine  intimation  that  their  lot  was  to 
be  on  the  east  of  Jordan,  but  rather  to  have 
been  guided  by  their  own  preference.  If  so, 
they  cannot  be  acquitted  of  a  certain  pre- 
sumptuous wilfulness  in  action,  and  of  a 
certain  want  of  honesty  in  speech.  The 
phrase  here  rendered  "on  this  side  Jordan" 
( f^'lln  15 -^)  '^ii'io*  ^^  distinguished  gram- 
matically from  that  which  bears  an  opposite 
signification  in  the  preceding  verse.  In  itself 
it  is  perfectly  ambiguous  without  some  quali- 
fying word  or  phrase,  and  it  is  very  difficult 
to  know  what  the  ordinary  use  of  it  was  in 
the  time  of  Moses.  In  later  ages,  no  doubt, 
it  came  to  mean  simply  the  trans-Jordanio 
territory,  or  Perjea,  without  reference  to  the 
position  of  the  speaker.  The  difficulty  here 
IS  to  decide  whether  the  expression,  as  further 
defined  by  "eastward,"  would  actually  have 
been  used  at  that  time  and  in  that  place,  or 
whether  the  expression  is  due  to  a  writer 
living  on  the  west  of  Jordan.  All  we  can 
say  is,  that  the  awkward  use  of  the  phrase  in 
two  opposite  meanings,  with  words  of  clearer 
definition  added,  points  more  or  less  strongly 
towards  a  probability  that  the  passage  as  it 
stands  was  written  or  revised  at  a  later  date. 
Ver.  20. — Before  the  lord.  Perhaps  in  a 
quasi-local  sense,  as  the  vanguard  of  the  host 


before  the  sacred  symbols  of  the  Lord's  pre- 
sence (see  on  ch.  X.  21,  and  Josh,  vl  9). 

But  since  the  same  expression  (Hjll*  'JQ?)  is 
twice  used  in  a  much  vaguer  sense  in  ver. 
22,  it  is  more  probable  that  it  only  means 
"in  the  Lord's  service,"  or  "beneath  his 
eye. " 

Ver.  23. — ^Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  yon 
out.  Or  rather,  "ye  will  know  your  sin  " 
(D3^KBn  -lyil)  "which  shaU  find  you  out" 
(for  Ny«5  cf.  Gen.  xliv.  16).  So  in  eflTect  the 
Septuagint:  yviiam&t  t^v  .afiapTiav  i/iSiv, 
orav  ifias  KaraXa^y  rd  koko..  When  they 
had  cause  to  rue  their  folly,  then  they  would 
recognise  their  sin. 

Ver.  26.— In  the  cities  of  Gilead.  The 
name  is  used  here  in  a  vague  sense  for  all 
the  central  and  southern  trans-Jordanio  dis- 
tricts. 

Ver.  28. — Moaes  commanded.  See  on  ch. 
xxxiv.  17,  18  ;  Josh.  i.  13  S.  ;  xxu.  1  If. 

Ver.  33. — And  unto  half  the  tribe  of 
Uanasseh.  As  no  mention  has  been  pre- 
viously made  of  this  tribe  in  this  connection, 
we  are  left  to  conjecture  why  it  should,  con- 
trary to  all  analogy,  have  been  divided  at  all, 
and  why  the  one  half  should  have  received 
the  remote  regions  of  Northern  GUead  and 
Bashan.  That  the  tribe  was  divided  at  all 
can  only  be  explained  by  the  pre-existence 
of  some  schism  in  its  ranks,  the  probable 
origin  and  nature  of  which  are  discussed  in 
the  notes  on  vers.  39,  41.  The  enormous 
increase  in  the  tribal  numbers  during  the 
wanderings  (see  on  ch.  xxvi.  34)  may  have 
made  the  division  more  advisable,  and  the 
adventurous  and  independent  character  of 
the  Machirites  may  have  rendered  it  almost 
a  necessity.  They  had  not  apparently  pre- 
ferred any  request  to  Moses,  but  since  the 
trans-Jordanic  territory  was  to  be  occupied, 
Moses  probably  prevented  a  grave  difficulty 
by  recognising  their  claim  to  the  conquests 
they  had  made. 

Ver.  34.— The  children  of  Oad  built,  «. «., 
no  doubt,  they  put  these  places  in  some 
habitable  and  defensible  state  of  repair  until 
they  should  return.  Sibon.  Now  DhibSn, 
four  miles  north  of  Amon.  It  is  called 
Dibon-gad  in  ch.  xxxiii  45,  46,  but  it  is 
doubtful  whether  there  is  any  allusion  to  its 
present  occupation,  since  "Gad"  was  s 
common  affix  in  the  languages  of  Canaan 
(cf.  Josh.  xi.  17).  Dibon  was  subsequently 
assigned  to  Keuben  (Josh.  xiii.  9),  but  was 
recovered  by  Moab,  and  became  one  of  his 
strongholds  (cf  Isa.  xv.  2  ;  Jer.  xlviii.  18, 
22).  The  Moabite  stone  was  found  here. 
Ataroth.  Now  Attarils,  seven  miles  from 
Dibon.  Aroer.  Not  the  Aroer  before  Rab- 
bath  (Josh.  xiii.  26),  but  the  Aroer  by  the 
brink  of  Amon  (Deut.  ii.  36  j  Josh.  xiii.  16)i 


OH.  xxxu.  1 — 42.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBa 


41« 


Ver.  35.  —  Atroth,  Shophan.  Rathor, 
"Atroth-Shopljan,"  another  Ataroth,  the 
Bite  of  which  is  unknown.  iTaazer.  See  on 
ver.  1.  Joghehah.  Now  perhaps  Jehoiha, 
to  the  north  of  Jaazer  (of.  Judges  viii.  11). 
All  these  places  were  only  temporarily  occu- 
pied by  the  Gadites,  and  fell  to  Reuben  in 
the  subsequent  division. 

Ter.  86. — Beth-nimrah  and  Beth-haran. 
Supposed  to  be  the  present  Nimriin  and 
Beit-haran  in  the  plains  of  Moab,  beside  the 
Jordan,  and  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood 
of  the  Israelitish  camp.  The  latter  would 
seem  to  have  fallen  subsequently  to  Reuben. 
Fenced  cities,  and  folds  for  sheep.  There 
should  be  no  stop  between  these  two  clauses. 
All  these  places  were  "  built "  for  the  double 
purpose  of  atfording  protection  to  the  families 
and  to  the  flocks  of  the  tribe. 

Ver.  87. — The  children  of  Reuben.  Reuben 
had,  at  the  time  of  the  last  census,  been 
greater  in  number  than  Gad,  and  had  been 
his  leader  on  the  march.  He  now  begins  to 
take  that  secondary  position  which  was 
always  to  be  his.  Of  the  towns  which  he 
now  occupied,  the  Moabites  recovered  many, 
while  the  most  important  of  all  (Heshbon) 
had  to  be  surrendered  to  the  Levites.  He 
was  indeed  compensated  with  the  southern 
settlements  of  the  Gadites  as  far  as  the  Wady 
HesbSn,  but  even  so  his  limits  were  very 
straitened  as  compared  with  those  of  Gad 
and  of  half  Manasseh.  Heshbon.  Of.  ch. 
xzi.  25.  In  Josh.  xxi.  39  ;  1  Chron.  vi.  81, 
Heshbon  is  spoken  of  as  belonging  to  Gad. 
This  can  only  be  explained  on  the  supposition 
that  the  temporary  settlements  of  the  two 
tribes  were  really  intermixed,  and  that 
Heshbon,  as  the  old  capital  of  that  region, 
was  jointly  occupied.  In  after  times  it, 
too,  together  with  Elealeh  and  Kirjathaim, 
Nebo,  Baal-meon,  and  Sibmah,  all  fell  into 
the  hands  of  Moab  (Isa.  xv.  2,  4 ;  xvi.  8  ; 
Jer.  xlviii.  22,  23). 

Ver.  38. — Baal-meon.  Called  Beon  in 
ver.  3,  Beth-meon  in  Jer.  xlviii.  23,  Beth- 
Baal-meon  in  Josh.  xiii.  17.  Their  names 
being  changed.  Dg^  nSp^D,  "  with  change 
of  name,"  dependent  on  the  verb  "built." 
The  Septuagint  has  iripiKiKvicKionivag  (Sym- 
machus,  n-Epircrci/xtv/icvaf),  apparently  read- 
ing "W  for  D.^,  but  without  authority.  It 
is  possible  that  the  Beon  of  ver.  3  may  be  an 
instance  of  this  attempt  to  change  names, 
many  of  which  were  connected  with  idolatry. 
The  attempt  failed,  but  both  the  attempt 
itself  and  its  failure  were  very  character- 
istic of  the  partial  and  feeble  hold  which 
Israel  had  on  this  territory.  Gave  other 
names  to  the  cities  which  they  builded. 
Literally,  "  they  called  by  names  the  names  • 
of  the  towns ; "  a,  round-about  expression 
correctly  paraphrased  by  the  A.  V.  | 


Ver.  39.— The  children  of  Machir.  The 
relation  of  the  Beni-Machir  t»  the  tribe  of 
Manasseh  is  obscure,  because  all  the  Manas- 
sites  were  descended  from  Machir.  In  the 
absence  of  any  direct  information,  we  can 
only  guess  at  the  nature  of  the  tie  which 
united  the  Beni-Machir  as  a  family,  and 
kept  them  distinct  from  the  other  Manassita 
families.  It  is  evident  from  their  history 
that  they  formed  a  sub-tribe  powerful  enough 
to  have  a  name  of  their  own  in  Israel  (cf.  ver. 
40  and  Judges  v.  14,  and  see  note  on  ver.  41). 
Went  to  Gilead.  This  would  seem  to  refer 
to  the  expedition  briefly  recorded  in  ch.  xxi. 
33.  It  is  mentioned  here  out  of  place,  in 
the  simple  historical  style  of  the  Pentateuch, 
because  the  gift  of  Gilead  to  Machir  grew 
out  of  its  conquest  by  Machir.  The  name 
GUead  is  again  used  in  a  very  vague  sense, 
for  the  territory  actually  allotted  to  Machir 
was  rather  in  Bashan  than  in  Gilead  proper. 

Ver.  40.— And  he  dwelt  therein.  This 
expression  does  not  necessarily  look  beyond 
the  lifetime  of  Moses,  although  it  would  be 
more  naturally  taken  as  doing  so.  In  ch. 
XX.  1  n^>  is  used  of  the  "  abiding  "  of  Israel 
at  Kadesh. 

Ver.  41. —  Jair  the*"  eon  of  Manasseh. 
This  hero  of  Manasseh  is  mentioned  here  for 
the  first  time  ;  in  Deut.  iii.  14  his  conquests 
are  somewhat  more  fully  described.  Hi3 
genealogy,  which  is  instructive  and  suggest- 
ive, is  given  here. 


Pbaraa 
Flnt  wife  —  EezroBl 


Joseph 

Hanaaseh 

UachlT 


Frlncei 

of 
Judah 


I — |— <l»i 
Begnb 

Jair    ' 


iQghter 


GUaad 


It  will  be  seen  that  Segnb,  the  father  of  Jair, 
was  a  Machirite  in  the  female  line  only. 
His  father  Hezron,  according  to  1  Chron.  iL 
21,  married  the  daughter  of  Manasseh  in  his 
old  age,  when  his  elder  sons  were  probably 
ali-eady  fathers  of  families.  It  may  probably 
be  conjectured  also  that  Manasseh,  who 
must  have  inherited  exceptional  wealth  (cf. 
Gen,  xlviiL  17),  and  had  but  one  grandson, 
left  a  large  portion  to  his  grand-daughter, 
the  young  wife  of  Hezron.  It  was  there- 
fore very  natural  that  Segub  should  have 
attached  himself  to  the  fortunes  of  his 
mother's  tribe.  Is  it  not  also  very  pro- 
bable that  Machir  had  other  daughters  (cf. 
Gen.  L  23),  who  also  inherited  urge  por- 
tions from  their  grandfather,  and  whose 
husbands  were  willing  enough  to  enter  into 
a  family  which  had  apparently  brighter  pros- 
pects than  any  others  I  If  so,  it  would 
account  at  once  for  the  existence  of  a  large 
family  of   MachiritoB  Qot  descended  fi;oiti 


416 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[OH.  mn.  1 — 11 


Oilead,  and  not  on  the  most  Mendly  terms 
■mth  the  rest  of  the  tribe.  It  is  quite  pos- 
sible that  many  of  the  more  adventurous 
spirits  amongst  the  tribe  of  Judah  joined 
themselves  to  a  family  whose  reputation  and 
exploits  they  might  naturally  claim  as  their 
own  (see  on  Josh.  zix.  84).  The  small  towns 
thereof,  or,  "their  villages."  Septuagint, 
rd(  iiravXcit  avrHv,  i.  e.  the  hamlets  of  the 
Amorites  who  dwelt  in  Argob  (Deut.  iii.  14), 
the  modem  district  of  el  Lejja,  on  the 
north-western  waters  of  the  Yermuk  or 
Hieromax.  And  called  them  Havoth-jair. 
"l^K*  Jl'in-  Septuagint,  rdj  S7rau\£ij  'laip, 
and  so  the  Targums.  The  word  ehoArvolh 
only  occurs  in  this  connection,  and  is  sup- 
posed by  some  to  be  the  plural  of  njO, 
"life."  There  does  not,  however,  seem  to 
be  anything  except  the  very  doubtful  analogy 
of  certain  German  names  in  favour  of  the 
rendering  "Jair's  lives."  It  is  more  likely 
the  corruption  of  some  more  ancieut  name. 
There  is  some  discrepancy  in  subsequent 
references  to  the  Chawoth-jair.  According 
to  1  Chron.  ii.  22,  Jair  had  twenty-three 
towns  in  Gilead  ;  from  Judges  x.  4  it  appears 
that  the  sons  of  the  later  Jair  had  thirty 
cities  "in  the  land  of  Gilead"  which  went 
under  the  name  of  Chavvoth-jair  ;  while  in 
Josh.  xiii.  30  "  all  the  Chavvoth-jair  which 
are  in  Bashan  "  are  reckoned  at  sixty.  The 
plausible,  though  not  whoUy  satisfactory, 
explanation  is,  that  the  conquests  of  Nobah 
came  to  be  subsequently  included  in  those 
of  his  more  famous  contemporary,  and  the 
Tague  name  of  Chawoth-jair  extended  to  all 


the  towns  in  that  part  of  Gilead,  and  of 
Bashan  too  (see  notes  on  the  passages 
cited), 

Yer.  42. — Nobah.  As  this  chieftain  is 
nowhere  else  named,  we  may  probably  con- 
clude that  he  was  one  of  the  companions  of 
Jair,  holding  a  position  more  or  less  subor- 
dinate to  him.  Eenath.  The  modem  Ee- 
naw&t,  on  the  .  western  slope  of  the  Jebel 
Haur&n,  the  most  easterly  point  ever  occu- 
pied by  the  Israelites.  It  is  apparently  the 
Kobah  mentioned  in  Judges  viii.  11,  but  it 
has  reverted  (Uke  so  many  others)  to  its  old 
name.  In  spite  of  the  uncertainties  which 
hang  over  the  conquest  of  this  north-eastern 
territory,  there  is  something  very  character- 
istic in  the  part  played  by  the  Machirite 
leaders.  That  ihey  acted  with  an  inde- 
pendent vigour  bordering  on  andacity,  that 
they  showed  great  personal  prowess,  and  had 
great  personal  authority  with  the  humbler 
members  of  their  &mily,  and  held  something 
like  the  position  of  feudal  superiors  among 
them,  is  evident  from  the  way  in  which  they 
are  spoken  of.  And  this  is  quite  in  keeping 
with  the  character  of  the  Manassites  in  after 
times.  The  "  governors  "  who  came  at  the 
call  of  Barak,  Gideon,  the  greatest  of  the 
warrior-judges,  and  probably  Jephthah  also 
("the  Gileadite"),  as  well  as  the  younger 
Jair,  maintained  the  warlike  and  impetuous 
character  of  their  race.  If  "Elijah  the 
Tishbite"  was  really  from  this  region  (al- 
though this  is  extremely  doubtful),  we  should 
tind  in  him  the  characteristic  daring  and 
self-reliance  of  Machir  transmuted  into  their 
spiritual  equivalents. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 42. — The  mistaken  choice.  In  thia  chapter  we  have,  spiritually,  th« 
choice  of  those  who  do  not  (on  the  one  hand)  wish  to.  sever  themselves  from  the 
people  of  God,  nor  to  desert  their  brethren,  but  who  are  (on  the  other  hand)  greatly 
disinclined  to  go  the  whole  length  to  which  the  word  of  God  would  lead  them,  and 
are  determined  to  abide  in  the  middle  gfround  between  the  Church  and  the  world. 
And  this  choice  is  set  before  us  both  on  its  worse  side,  in  that  it  is  at  once  pre- 
sumptuous and  foolish,  albeit  not  unnatural ;  and  on  its  better  side,  as  being  con- 
sistent with  a  large  measure  of  really  good  and  honest  principle.  The  whole  spiritual 
value  of  the  chapter  turns  upon  the  lesson  thus  taught.    Consider,  therefore— 

I.  That  the  children  of  Eeubbn  and  Gad  desired  to  stay  ton-side  of  Jobdak 
BECAUSE  IT  SUITED  THEM ;  i. «.  because -(1)  they  had  much  cattle,  (2)  for  which  the 
rolling  downs  and  plateaux  of  that  region  were  admirably  adapted,  whereas  (3)  it 
would  be  a  difiBcult  matter  to  transport  their  scattered  flocks  and  herds  across  the 
tangled  valley  and  deep  stream  of  Jordan,  and  (4)  the  straiter  limits  of  Canaan  pro- 
per seemed  unsuited  to  pastoral  wealth.  Even  so  a  multitude  of  Christians  hang 
back  from  going  all  lengths  with  Christ  because  (1)  they  have  much  wealth  of  this 
world,  (2)  for  the  enjoyment  of  which  a  manner  of  life  only  partially  limited  and 
restrained  by  strict  Christian  principle  is  on  the  face  of  it  very  suitable,  while  (3) 
there  is  a  manifest  difficulty  about  introducing  this  wealth  into  a  strictly  religious  life, 
and  (4)  an  evident  incongruity  between  the  requisite  attention  to  such  wealth  »nd 
the  restraints  and  demands  of  such  a  life. 


OH.  xxxn.  1—42.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES.  417 

II.  That  thisb  two  tribes  wkbb  dndotjbtedlt  intended,  like  the  rest,  to  find 
THEIR  inhebitanoe  IN  Oanaan  PROPER.  Por  this,  and  not  the  land  beyond  Jordan, 
was  the  land  which  the  Lord  had  sworn  to  give  to  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob ;  this  was 
the  land  of  the  seven  nations,  the  promised  land,  of  which  the  land  of  Jaazer  and 
Gilead  formed  no  integral  part,  but  only  as  it  were  a  vestibule,  an  outlier,  an  annexe. 
These  did  indeed  belong  to  the  Holy  Land,  but  were  distinctly  less  holy  than  the 
rest.  Even  so  it  is  the  wUl  of  God  that  all  Christiana  should  press  on  unto  perfec- 
tion, {.  e.  to  the  perfect  life  of  faith  and  duty  spoken  of  in  the  New  Testament.  This 
is  distinctly  what  God  hath  called  them  to,  for  it  is  to  this  that  he  hath  attached  his 
blessings  and  promises.  Nevertheless  there  is  in  practice  a  vast  tract  of  Christian 
liviiig  which  is  as  clearly  distinct  from  this  as  it  is  inferior  to  it ;  which  lies  outside 
of  it  in  the  strict  sense,  but  yet  in  a  wide  sense  is  certainly  united  to  it. 

in.  That  nature  itself  justified  the  Divine  wisdom  in  calling  the  people 
into  Canaan  proper.  For  this  Holy  Land  is  separated  from  all  other  lands  by  re- 
markable geographical  features,  especially  by  the  deep  cleft  of  Jordan  from  the 
children  of  the  east;  whereas  the, trans- Jordanic  territory  was  wholly  exposed  to  a 
multitude  of  heathen  and  hostile  neighbours  towards  the  east,  and  south,  and  north. 
Even  so  it  is  a  inatter  which  needs  no  discussion  that  a  strict  Christian  life  is  by  the 
very  laws  of  human  nature  fenced  from  innumerable  dangers  and  assaults  to  which 
a  half-and-half  religion  lies  completely  open.  Nothing  indeed  is  more  practically 
helpless,  or  at  least  more  utterly  unsafe,  than  the  Christian  life  of  a  half-converted 
man. 

IV.  That  the  history  of  Israel  supplies  a  melancholy  commentary  on  the 
unwisdom  of  their  choice.  The  very  places  mentioned  as  the  first  settlements  of 
Keuben  all  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Moabites,  with  some  of  those  of  Gad.  Amidst 
the  uncertainties  which  overhang  their  history  we  can  make  out  that  these  regions 
were  a  continual  battle-field,  never  attained  a  settled  prosperity,  and  were  finally 
conquered  before  the  rest.  Even  so  all  experience  sets  forth  the  sad  results  of  such 
a  life  as  is  a  compromise  between  the  claims  of  religion  and  of  the  world.  It  is 
always  and  of  necessity  the  first  to  go ;  the  powers  of  evil  strike  upon  it  first,  and 
with  the  greatest  strength.  In  the  day  of  temptation,  when  those  who  live  most 
near  to  God  can  hardly  stand,  what  chance  is  there  (humanly  speaking)  for  the  half- 
hearted and  half-converted  ? 

V.  That  the  choice  of  Reuben  and  Gad  was  after  all  very  natural.  Un- 
questionably the  open  lands  which  they  had  seen  were  then  (as  they  are  now)  much 
more  fertile  and  pleasant  than  the  stony  limestone  ridges  of  Southern  Palestine  ;  and 
the  deep,  sullen  stream  of  Jordan  was  a  formidable  obstacle.  Even  so  there  is  to  the 
natural  man  something  very  attractive  about  the  comparative  freedom  of  a  life  which 
claims  the  promises  of  Christ,  and  yet  is  not  altogether  constrained  by  his  demands. 
To  cross  the  gloomy-looking  gulf  of  an  entire  conversion,  and  to  be  cooped  within 
the  apparently  uninviting  limits  of  a  consecrated  life,  is  repugnant  to  much  that  exists 
in  all  of  us,  and  that  reigns  supreme  in  many  of  us. 

VI.  That  their  choice  really  showed  a  want  of  faith.  Por  they  knew  that 
God  had  attached  his  promises  to  the  land  beyond  Jordan,  and  they  knew  that 
the  ark  of  God  was  going  across,  and  that  the  chosen  site  of  God's  presence  would 
be  on  the  other  side,  yet  they  deliberately  risked  the  danger  of  being  (to  some  real 
extent)  separated  from  the  presence  and  promises  and  protection  of  their  Holy 
One.  Even  so  when  men  settle  down  in  a  half-and-half  Christianity,  it  is  because 
they  have  no  strong  faith  in  the  promises,  and  no  great  longing  for  the  presence  of 
God  ;  they  do  not  disbelieve  or  despise  these,  but  they  are  in  practice  less  con- 
cerned about  them  than  about  temporal  advantages. 

VII.  That  their  choice  also  showed  a  blindness  to  their  actual  dangers. 
Had  they  foreseen  the  swarms  of  enemies  to  whose  assaults  they  would  remain 
exposed,  and  realised  their  comparatively  defenceless  position,  they  would  surely 
have  petitioned  to  go  over  Jordan  too.  Even  so  men  remain  half  converted  with  a 
light  heart  because  they  under-estimate  their  danger,  and  over-estimate  their  strength. 
Conscious  that  they  intend  What  is  right,  they  are  content  to  abide  far  from  the  suc- 
cours of  Divine  grace,  at  once  more  exposed  to  temptation  and  less  able  to  resist  it 
than  more  earnest  Christians. 

NUMBERS.  K  K 


418  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS.  [ch.  xxxii.  1—42. 

VIII.  That  the  two  tribes  which  askbd,  and  thb  half  tribe  which  seems  to 

HATE  taken  without  ASKING,  OBTAINED  THEIR  INHERITANCE  WHERE   THEY  WISHED  TO 

HAVE  IT ;  and  they  were  not  cast  out  of  the  chosen  people,  nor  treated  with  disdain. 
Even  so  a  great  multitude  of  Christians  remain  distinctly  and  deliberately  below  the 
level  and  outside  the  pale  (so  to  speak)  of  the  true  Christian  life  as  portrayed  in 
the  Gospels  and  Epistles.  Their  life  and  conversation  is  in  fact  governed  half  by 
the  gospel,  and  half  by  the  precepts  and  fashions  of  the  world.  Yet  they  are 
Christians,  and,  however  great  their  danger  and  unsatisfactory  their  position,  they 
are  not  and  cannot  be  separated  from  the  Church  of  God. 

Consider  more  particularly,  as  to  the  petition  of  the  two  tribei — 

I.  That  it  was  partly  positive — "let  this  land  be  given  unto  thy  servants ; " 
PARTLY  negative — "  bring  us  not  over  this  Jordan."  Here  we  have  the  attraction  of 
a  life  of  apparent  freedom  and  enjoj'ment,  the  repulsion  of  a  concentrated  efEort,  and 
of  a  life  apparently  limited  and  uninteresting. 

II.  That  the  conqdests  already  made  might  seem  the  natural  conclusion 
OP  their  long  journeying  and  waiting.  "Why  should  they  go  further  and  perhaps 
fare  worse  ?  Here  we  have  the  secret  of  much  imperfect  religious  life.  Many  stop 
far  short  of  a  thorough-going  obedience  because  they  have  advanced  far  enough 
to  feel  themselves  safe  from  judgment,  and  at  rest  from  stings  of  conscience,  and 
inheritors  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;  and  they  have  no  mind  (because  they  see  no 
necessity)  to  go  any  further  in  the  onward  path. 

III.  That  the  two  tribes,  because  they  had  determined  to  remain  where 
they  were,  assumed  that  they  had  Divine  authority  to  do  so:  '! Our  inheritance 
is  fallen  to  us  on  this  side  Jordan."  Here  we  have- that  confidence  which  Christian 
people  constantly  express,  that  they  are  not  called  to  "go  on  unto  perfection."  Other 
people  have  their  own  vocation,  but  it  is  given  unto  them  to  lead  a  life  less  strict 
and  less  devout  because  business,  or  society,  or  their  own  disposition  requires  it,  i.  e. 
because  they  choose  to. 

Consider  again,  as  to  Moses'  treatment  of  their  petition — 

I.  That  he  judged  them  harshly  and  unfairly,  as  if  they  had  been  wilful 
rebels  against  God  and  cowardly  betrayers  of  their  brethren,  which  was  not 
at  all  the  case.  Even  so  those  who  have  the  interests  of  God's  kingdom  very  much 
at  heart  are  always  tempted  to  judge  too  harshly  those  who  show  a  want  of  earnest- 
ness and  of  forwardness,  and  to  oast  them  out  as  unprincipled ;  whereas  in  fact  there 
is  often  very  much  to  thank  God  for  in  their  character  and  conduct. 

II.  That  having  thus  put  himself  in  the  wrong,  he  could  not  take  up  the 
true  ground  of  remonstrance,  i.  e.  the  injury  they  would  entail  upon  themselves. 
Even  so  to  condemn  imperfect  Christians  altogether  is  to  prevent  any  effective  appeal 
to  their  own  highest  interests  and  truest  ambitions. 

III.  That  what  Moses  did  exact  was  an  assurance  that  they  would  not 
abandon  nor  weaken  their  brethren  pressing  on.  Even  so  we  have  a  right 
to  require  that  those  who  are  not  willing  themselves  to  go  all  lengths  with  Christ 
shall  at  least  not  hinder  nor  discourage  those  who  are  willing  and  are  trying.  Here 
is  the  crying  evil  and  sin  of  our  degenerate  Christianity,  that  it  not  only  falls  short 
of  the  gospel  standard,  but  practically  sets  up  a  standard  of  its  own,  and  utterly 
discourages  any  attempt  to  rise  above  it ;  and  this  is  certainly  that  wickedness 
against  God  and  man  which  Moses  mistakenly  charged  on  the  two  tribes. 

IV.  That  the  evident  policy  of  Moses  was  to  unite  the  tribes  which  re- 
mained beyond  Jordan  by  as  many  ties  as  possible  to  the  rest.  Even  so  it 
is  our  wisdom  to  unite  all  Christian  people,  especially  those  who  are  lukewarm,  in 
common  enterprises  for  good,  and  in  common  labours  for  the  Church,  so  that  they 
may  not  be  more  separated  from  one  another  than  is  unavoidable.    • 

Consider  again,  on  the  words,  "bring  us  not  over  this  Jordan" — 1.  That  "this 
Jordan  "  is  the  accepted  figure  of  the  narrow  stream  of  death,  which  divides  us  from 
the  promised  land  wherein  God  dwelleth.  2.  That  the  trans- Jordanic  territory 
represents  the  less  perfect  holiness  of  life  here  as  contrasted  with  the  more  perfect 
holiness  of  life  there.     3.  That  this  saying,  therefore,  represents  the  shrinking 


OH.  xxxii.  1—42.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBEBS.  419 

which  so  many  feel  from  that  death  which  is  the  gate  of  trne  Hfe,  and  their  desire 
to  remain  amid  the  familiar  and  congenial  scenes  of  this  world.  4.  That  this  saying, 
although  Tery  natural  (since  this  life  is  sweet,  and  death  awful,  and  the  land  beyond 
unknown),  is  certainly  due  to  a  want  of  faith  (since  the  kingdom  prepared  for  us  iff 
there,  not  here),  and  betrays  a  certain  presumption,  since  as  long  as  we  live  here  We 
are  in  danger  of  separation  from  God.  6.  That  we  justify  the  saying  on  the  ground 
that  life  here  is  holy  (as  indeed  it  is),  not  sufSciently  remembering  that  life  there 
is  holier,  and  that  we  are  only  here  on  the  march  with  a  view  to  crossing  Jordan 
and  reaching  the  true  rest.  6.  That  however  good  may  be  the  land.-on  this  side, 
"  Jerusalem,"  the  place  which  God  hath  chosen,  the  centre  of  Israel's  life  and  happi- 
ness, is  beyond  Jordan.    "Absent  from  the  body,"  "present  with  the  Lord." 

Consider  again,  on  the  words,  "  be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out " — 1.  That  it 
is  indeed  true,  as  the  heathen  witnessed  in  many  remarkable  ways.  "  Nemesis " 
is  a  fact.  2.  That  it  is  not  what  Moses  meant  to  say;  rather,  "Ye  will  recognise 
your  sin  when  it  overtakes  you."  3.  That  men  fail  to  recognise  their  sin  at  the 
time  ;  often,  that  it  is  a  sin  at  all ;  generally,  how  great  a  sin  it  is  in  deed.  4.  Then 
when  it  overtakes  them  in  its  consequences,  then  they  see  it  in  its  true  light.  The 
awfulness  of  sin  is  not  due  to  its  awful  consequences,  but  it  is  manifested  by 
them.  5.  That  the  particular  sin  against  which  Moses  warned  them  was  the  sin  of 
selfishly  deserting  their  brethren,  and  thereby  discouraging  and  enfeebling  them. 
And  this  is  a  sin  as  great  as  it  is  common,  the  disastrous  consequences  of  which  are 
most  sadly  evident. 

Consider  again,  with  respect  to  the  "  cities "  which  the  children  of  Reuben  and 
Gad  "built" — 

I.  That  at  the  time,  as  compared  with  the  tents  and  booths  op  the  wil- 
derness, THET  SEEMED  NO  DOUBT  TO  BE  IMPORTANT  AND  PERMANENT  SETTLEMENTS, 
BUT  THEY  PROVED  TO  BE  VERY  TEMPORARY.  Even  SO  there  is  nothing  fixed  or  abiding 
in  any  religious  life  short  of  that  perfect  life  unto  which  we  are  called.  It  is  not 
only  the  "  fashion  of  this  world,"  but  "the  fashion"  of  the  "religious  world,"  which 
passeth  away,  because  it  is  in  truth  only  partly  and  provisionally  Christian. 

II.  That  in  after  days  they  mostly  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  cruel  and 

IDOLATROUS  MOAB,  AND   RESUMED   THEIR   OLD   HEATHEN   NAMES.      EvCD  SO  a  manner  of 

life  which  is  not  distinctly  Christian,  albeit  lived  by  Christians,  is  for  ever  slipping 
back  into  practical  heathenism,  and  reverting  to  the  evil  and  sinful  conditions  from 
which  it  seemed  to  have  been  rescued. 

III.  That  the  curse  of  Reuben  (Gen.  xlix.  4)  beuan  now  to  be  fulfilled 

THROUGH   UNHAPPY   CIRCUMSTANCES  WHICH   WERE  YET   ENTIRELY  OF   HIS  OWN  SEEKINS. 

It  was  he  that  settled  himself  close  upon  the  frontier  of  Moab,  where  he  could  not 
have  peace  or  prosperity  for  any  length  of  time.  Even  so  that  incapacity  to  excel 
in  anything  which  seems  to  cling  to  some  Christian  people  like  a  curse  is  after  all 
due  to  their  own  precipitate  unwisdom  in  placing  themselves  at  a  permanent  dis- 
advantage for  the  sake  of  immediate  gain  or  ease. 

Consider  once  more,  with  respect  to  Machir — 

I.  That  they  seem  to  have  acted  independently  o*  Moses,  and  to  have 
TAKEN  THEIR  OWN  WAY.  Evcn  SO  there  are  those  in  the  Church  whose  great  natural 
abilities  and  singular  daring  lead  them  to  act  without  much  reference  to  the  law  of 
.Christ,  and  yet  it  is  not  easy  to  condemn  them,  or  to  refuse  their  aid. 

II.  That  they  did  little  good  to  themselves  by  conquests  so  remote,  but 
THEY  DID  MUCH  GOOD  IN  MANY  WAYS  TO  ISRAEL.  Even  SO  these  irregular  champions 
of  the  Church  gain  little  spiritual  profit  to  themselves,  but  they  are  often  the  means 
of  manifold  gain  unto  theii  brethren  at  large. 


■  Bt 


MO  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERa  [oh.  xxxu.  1-  4S. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  23. — "  Se  sure  pour  sin  will  find  you  ouV  These  words,  though  ultimately 
true  of  every  sin,  are  spoken  of  actions  which,  going  forth  from  us,  perform  their 
mischievous  errands,  but  will  come  home  again,  bringing  retribution  with  them.  The 
Eastern  proverb  is  true  of  crimes  as  well  as  curses:  "  Curses,  like  chickens,  always 
come  home  to  roost."  God  urges  this  truth  as  one  out  of  many  motives  for  strengthen- 
ing us  against  allurements  to  sin.  Sinners  indulge  vague  hopes  of  impunity ;  they 
act  as  though  they  said,  "The  Lord  shall  not  see,"  &c.  (Ps.  xoiv.  7).  But  they 
cannot  escape  from  sin.  Lapse  of  time  will  not  annihilate  sin ;  careful  concealment 
will  not  hide  it  up ;  mere  repentance  will  not  avert  all  its  consequences.  Nor  will 
death  screen  from  detection.     We  cannot  escape  from  our  sins — 

I.  By  lapse  of  time.  "  Sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  law.''  It  is  a  disturbing 
element,  like  a  poison  in  the  blood,  or  an  error  in  a  calculation  as  to  the  course  of  a 
ship.  It  is  useless  to  say,  "  Let  bygones  be  bygones  "  (cf.  Ps.  1.  21, 22  and  Eccles. 
viii.  1 1).  There  is  no  "  statute  of  limitations  "  in  regard  to  the  debt  of  sin.  Illustrations : 
— Lot  going  to  live  in  Sodom,  and  reaping  domestic  ruin  years  afterwards ;  Adoni-bezek 
(Judges  i.  6—7);  Saul's  "bloody  house"  (2  Sam.  xxi.  1). 

II.  Cakeptjl  concealment.  A  sin  may  appear  to  be  safely  buried  (like  a  murdered 
corpse),  and  grass  may  grow  on  the  grave  ;  but  a  resurrection  awaits  it.  No  im- 
munity, because  no  concealment  from  God.  In  the  law  of  Moses  certain  secret  sins 
are  mentioned  which,  through  the  ignorance  or  connivance  of  the  judges,  might 
escape  punishment  (Levit.  xvii.  10  ;  xx.  1 — 6,  &c.) ;  but  God  himself  threatens  to 
be  the  executioner.  Conscience  may  at  last  make  further  concealment  impossible. 
(Confessions  of  murderers.)  A  sinner  should  stand  in  awe  of  himself  and  dread  the 
spy  within  him.  Or  a  strange  combination  of  circumstances  may  bring  the  sin  to 
light  when  detection  seemed  almost  impossible.  Illustration : — Dr.  Doune  finding  a 
nail  in  a  skull  dug  up  in  his  churchyard.  Apply  Eccles.  x.  20  to  the  greater  danger 
of  sinning  against  God  (Job  xx.  27  ;  Eccles.  xii.  14). 

III.  By  repentance.  The  penitent  who  trusts  in  Christ  is  forgiven ;  but  a  sin 
when  committed  may  have  put  in  motion  a  series  of  temporal  results  from  which  no 
subsequent  repentance  may  be  able  wholly  to  deliver  us ;  e.  g.  habits  of  dissipation, 
or  single  acts  of  passion  or  of  falsehood.  Illustrations : — Jacob's  receiving  in  the 
course  of  his  life  "  the  fruit  of  his  doings"  after  having  wronged  Esau  and  deceived 
Isaac ;  David,  pardoned,  yet  followed  by  the  consequences  of  his  sin  (2  Sam.  xii. 
10 — 14).  Thus  God  would  make  us  wary  of  sin,  as  of  a  mad  dog,  or  a  poison  that 
may  lurk  long  in  the  system  (Matt.  vii.  2).     God's  caution  signals  against  sin. 

IV.  By  death.  After  death,  in  the  fullest  sense,  sin  must  find  the  transgressor 
out.  There  is  a  fearful  contrast  suggested  by  the  benediction  in  Rev.  xiv.  13 : 
"  Cursed  are  the  dead  that  die  in  their  sins  ;  for  they  have  no  rest  from  their  trans- 
gressions, but  their  guilt  follows  them."  Think  of  being  found  out  in  that  world 
where  the  prospect  is  of  "  eternal  sin  "  (Mark  iii.  29).  The  only  true  salvation  is 
from  sin  itself,  assured  to  us  through  repentance  and  faith  (Matt.  i.  21 ;  Titua  ii. 
14).— P. 

Vers.  1 — b. — A  bird  in  the  haiid  worth  two  in  the  hush.  This  common  proverb, 
so  limited  in  the  scope  of  its  application,  and  so  liable  to  be  misused  by  timid  and 
selfish  people,  is  clearly  illustrated  in  the  conduct  of  these  two  tribes.  Doubtless  it 
is  a  sound  principle  to  hold  a  small  certainty  rather  than  run  the  bare  chance  of  a 
large  possibility.  But  principles  are  nothing  unless  we  rightly  apply  them,  and  the 
<!liildren  of  Reuben  and  Gad  were  forsaking  the  most  certain  and  enduring  of  all 
precious  things,  and  leaning  to  their  own  frail  understanding.  It  is  a  poor  exchange 
to  leave  the  path  of  Divine  providence  for  that  of  purblind  human  prudence. 

Consider  herb  the  mistaken  practical  notions  by  which  Rehben  and  Gad 
were  led  into  this  request.  1.  An  exaggerated  estimate  of  the  importance  of 
temporal  possessions.  Reuben  and  Gad  had  a  great  multitude  of  cattle;  the  lands 
of  Jazer  and  Gilead  were  places  for  cattle;  and  so  the  way  is  straight  to  the  con- 
clusion that  these  lands  were  the  proper  habitation  of  these,  tribes.     It  is  the  man  of 


CH.  xxxu.  1—42.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBiSEB.  42t 

the  world's  view  that  tho  place  which  is  good  for  one's  property  must  be  good  foi 
oneself,  seeing  that  a  man's  abundance  is  in  the  things  he  possesses.  The  thought 
ol  the  cattle  so  filled  the  minds  of  the  two  tribes  that  they  could  give  no  weight 
whatever  to  any  other  consideration.  How  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches  eiiter 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  I  That  faith  which  is  the  substance  of  things  hope(J for  and 
the  evidence  of  things  not  seen  finds  no  room  to  grow  in  a  neart  choked  up  with  the 
care  of  this  world  and  the  deceitf  ulness  of  riches.  At  this  time,  indeed,  Reuben  and 
Gad  had  many  cattle,  but  it  by  no  means  followed  that  they  would  always  hiiva 
cattle.  Job  had  many  cattle,  but  in  a  few  hours  Sabeans  and  Chaldeans  swept 
them  all  away.  Consider  well  the  thoughts  that  filled  the  mind  of  Lot  (Gen.  xiii.  10), 
as  illustrating  the  foolish,  partial,  and  short-sighted  views  of  the  children  of  Eenben 
and  Gad.  The  Dead  Sea  was  no  great  distance  from  these  very  lands  of  Jazer  and 
Gilead.  2.  They  acted  on  the  presumption  that  a  man  is  himself  the  best  judge  of 
his  own  interests.  They  did  not  stop  to  consider  that  if  God  had  meant  this  territory 
for  them,  he  would  have  indicated  his  meaning  in  unmistakable  fashion.  He  had 
made  no  sign,  and  this  was  in  itself  a  proof  that  he  judged  their  true  home  to  be  on 
the  Canaan  side  of  Jordan.  It  is  the  highest  wisdom  of  man  to  wait,  in  simplirity 
and  humility,  on  the  indispensable  directions  of  the  All- Wise ;  even  as  the  mariner 
finds  his  position  by  looking  heavenward,  and  by  the  aid  of  the  compass  confidently 
finds  his  path  across  pathless  waters.  In  an  unfamiliar  place  you  can  gain  no  know- 
ledge of  the  points  of  the  compass  by  the  minutest  consideration  of  terrestrial 
circumstances,  but  get  a  glimpse  of  the  sun  and  know  the  time  of  day,  and  tho 
information  is  yours  at  once.  The  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God  in  this,  that 
they  never  mislead  us  ;  and  the  God  who  made  them  is  like  them  in  ministering  to 
the  needs  of  our  spirits.  We  cannot  do  without  him.  Instinct,  so  kind,  so  all-helpful 
to  the  brute,  does  little  or  nothing  for  us.  God  made  us  so  that  he  might  guide  us 
with  his  eye.  The  great  bulk  of  men  act  as  these  children  of  Beuben  and  Gad  acted. 
The  way  of  God,  with  all  its  real  advantages,  is  yet  so  unpromising  to  the  carnal  eye 
that  few  there  be  who  find  it.  3.  Especially  they  had  forgotten  that  the  purposes 
of  God  were  to  be  the  great  rule  of  life  to  them.  The  great  multitude  of  cattle  was 
not  theirs,  but  his.  If  they  had  made  this  proposition  with  a  sense  of  stewardship 
in  their  minds,  the  proposition  might  have  been  not  only  excusable,  but  laudable. 
But  the  sense  of  stewardship  was  the  very  furthest  of  all  feelings  from  their  hearts. 
It  is  a  late,  a  hard,  and  perhaps  always  an  imperfect  discovery,  that  a  man  only 
gains  his  right  position  when  he  manifests  the  glory  of  God.  The  earth  is  the 
Lord's  and  the  fulness  thereof.  These  people  had  not  risen  to  the  thought  of  Canaan 
as  being  the  very  best  land  simply  because  it  was  God's  choice.  Their  minds  were 
not  full  of  Canaan,  but  of  their  own  cattle.  A  great  deal  depends  on  our  conception 
of  heaven.  If  we  think  of  it  as  the  place  and  state  where  God  is  all  in  all,  where 
law  and  life  exactly  correspond,  and  Christ  is  glorified  in  the  perfection  of  all  his 
people,  then  heaven  is  begun  already.  Caleb  and  Joshua  had  been  waiting  forty 
years  for  the  promised  land,  yet  in  a  certain  sense  it  had  been  theirs  all  the  time. 
It  was  not  simple  habitation  that  made  Canaan  a  promised  land,  else  the  Canaanites 
would  have  been  as  blessed  as  the  true  Israel.  Rightful  possession,  honest  spiritual 
,  inheritance,  these  constituted  the  full  and  abiding  enjoyment  of  Canaan. — Y. 

Vers.  6 — 15. — A  thorough  exposure  of  a  selfish  proposition.  I.  Moses  appeals  to 
THE  SENSE  OF  SHAME.  '  They  had  been  one  nation  until  now.  The  sufEering  of  one 
tribe  had  been  the  sufEering  of  all.  They  had  marched  in  company  and  fought  in 
company ;  but  now,  when  Beuben  and  Gad  see  what  seems  the  main  chance,  they 
say,  "  We  have  found  what  we  want,  we  need  go  no  further."  Often  the  only  way  of 
treating  selfishness  is  to  make  it  thoroughly  ashamed  of  itself.  If  there  is  no  loving 
sympathy  in  the  heart  to  be  appealed  to,  we  must  do  our  best  by  appealing  to  a  sense 
of  decency ;  we  must  ask  the  selfish,  if  they  have  nothing  else  to  think  of,  to  think 
a  little  of  their  own  reputation.  It  was  a  very  humiliating  thing,  if  only  Reuben 
and  Gad  had  been  able  to  see  it,  that  Moses  here  made  no  appeal  to  high  motives. 
He  did  not  say,  "  Consider  well,  for  your  own  sakes,  what  you  propose  to  do  ;  con- 
•ider  whether  you  are  not  seeking  a  mere  present,  external,  paltry  gain,  and  paving 
the  way  for  a  tremendous  loss  hereafter."    He  might  bo  have  spoken,  but  what  would 


422  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oh.  xxxii.  1— 42> 

the  answer  have  been  ?  "  We  are  ready  to  take  the  risk  of  that."  And  so  he  leaves 
unasked  and  undetermined  the  whole  question  of  what  Eeuben  and  Gad's  own  interest 
might  be.  That  came  up  again  in  due  time,  as  it  was  bound  to  do  (Josh.  xxii.). 
But  there  was  a  question  bearing  on  the  welfare  of  Israel  which  could  not  be  post- 
poned, and  Moses  sets  it  before  the  two  tribes  in  a  very  direct  way,  neither  repress- 
ing his  just  indignation  nor  softening  his  language.  If  men  persist  in  taking  a  course 
which  is  hurtful  to  the  real  welfare  of  others,  they  must  be  whipped  out  of  it  by  the 
readiest  available  means.  There  are  only  too  many  in  the  world  who  will  do  anything 
they  can  get  others  submissively  to  tolerate.  Seemingly  having  no  conscience  of 
their  own  to  speak  of,  they  are  dependent  on  the  indignant,  unsparing  remonstrances 
of  others.  These  remonstrances  have  to  supply  the  place  of  conscience  as  best 
they  can. 

II.  He  points  out  a  pbobablb  peril  to  the  nation.  When  an  army  is  ad- 
vancing to  the  attack,  it  is  a  serious  thing  if  a  sixth  part  of  the  whole  shows  signs  of 
desertion  and  of  want  of  interest  in  the  desired  victory.  From  patriots  Eeuben  and 
Gad  had  sunk  all  at  once  into  mere  mercenaries.  They  had  gone  with  the  nation 
only  as  long  as  it  seemed  their  interest  to  go.  They  could,  without  the  slightest 
compunction,  leave  a  great  gap  in  the  order  of  the  camp  round  the  tabernacle.  They 
did  not  stop  to  consider  how  their  desertion  would  affect  the  arrangements  of  the 
whole  camp.  Lukewarm,  unspiritual,  and  self-indulgent  Christians — if  the  name  may 
be  allowed  where  such  qualities  prevail — little  think  of  the  continual  hindrances  and 
discouragements  they  bring  to  struggling  brethren.  The  Christian  life  is  hard  enough 
when  there  is  the  outside  world  to  contend  with,  but  how  peculiar  and  how  difficult 
to  surmount  are  the  perils  that  come  from  false  brethren  1  Note  how  Moses  bases 
his  fear  of  this  peril  on  an  actual  experience.  If  the  words  of  the  ten  craven-hearted 
spies  drove  the  whole  of  Israel  into  rebellion,  and  doomed  a  whole  generation  to  die 
in  the  wilderness,  then  how  great  a  danger  was  to  be  feared  from  the  desertion  of 
two  whole  tribes  I 

III.  He  plainly  fixes  the  risk  of  this  peril  and  the  eesponsibilitt  for  it 
UPON  Eeuben  and  Gad.  It  was  not  open  to  them  to  say,  "  All  these  gloomy  chances 
that  you  foreshadow  depend  on  the  other  tribes.  They  need  not  be  discouraged. 
Canaan  is  just  as  attractive  now  as  it  was  before.  Our  staying  herercan  really  make 
no  difEerence,"  It  is  both  cowardly  and  unavailing  to  try  and  escape  responsibility 
by  insisting  on  the  personal  responsibility  of  others.  It  is  of  no  use  to  say  that  we 
do  not  wish  others  to  look  on  us  as  leaders.  We  know  that  men  will  do  it  whether 
we  wish  it  or  not,  and  the  very  fact  of  this  knowledge  fixes  on  us  a  responsibility 
which  we  cannot  escape.  God  makes  use  of  this  very  disposition  to  follow  which  is 
found  in  human  nature  for  his  own  gracious  purposes.  Jesus  says,  "Follow  me." 
And  those  who  follow  him  find  that  some  at  least  become  followers  of  them.  If  the 
way  in  which  we  are  going  is  a  way  into  which  others  may  be  drawn  to  their  ruin, 
then  the  way  is  at  once  condemned.  No  amount  of  individual  prosperity,  pleasure, 
and  ease  can  compensate  the  destruction  of  others  who  have  perished  in  a  path  which 
they  never  would  have  entered  but  for  us.  Offences  must  needs  come,  but  the  caution 
and  the  appeal  remain :  "  Woe  be  to  him  through  whom  the  offence  comes."  Better 
for  every  beast  in  the  herds  to  perish  in  Jordan  than  for  the  obscurest  in  all  Israel  to 
be  prevented  from  getting  into  Canaan. — Y. 

Vers.  16 — 32. — The  final  arrangement.  L  Eeuben  and  Gad  do  not  resent  thb 
LANGUAGE  OF  MosES.  This  is  all  the  more  noticeable  because  the  language  is  so 
strong  and  humiliating.  They  seem  to  admit  that  his  reproaches,  his  warnings,  and 
his  predictions  had  been  only  too  clearly  justified  by  their  conduct.  Learn  from  this 
that  when  there  is  occasion  to  express  righteous  anger,  one  must  not  begin  to  take 
counsel  with  the  shallow  maxims  of  worldly  prudence.  There  is  need  in  the  service 
of  God  for  great  common  sense,  for  far  more  of  it  than  usually  finds  exercise,  but 
there  is  no  common  sense  where  courage,  straightforwardness,  and  the  manly  asser- 
tion of  all  Christian  principles  are  absent.  It  is  a  very  foolish  thing  to  use-strong 
language  just  by  way  of  liberating  the  effervescence  of  the  soul.  But  when  strong 
language  is  deserved  and  the  occasion  demands  the  utterance  of  it,  then  do  not  spare. 
Moses  miffht  have  said  to  himself,  "  This  is  a  very  ticklish  state  of  dffairs ;  if  I  do 


CH.  xxxn.  1—42.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  428 

not  humour  these  people  they  will  certainly  act  according  to  their  desire,  whether  1 
consent  or  not."  Some  leaders  and  so-called  skilful  managers  and  tacticians  would 
have  humoured  Reuben  and  Gad  at  such  a  crisis  as  this.  But  it  was  not  for  Moses 
to  humour  anybody,  or  trifle  with  men  who  were  trifling  with  God.  And  he  had 
his  immediate  reward.  "  They  came  near  unto  him"  (ver.  16).  You  can  see  them 
almost  cringing  before  Moses,  fawning  upon  him  in  their  eagerness  to  get  their  re- 
quests. His  eye  has  pierced  into  their  mean  hearts,  and  they  know  it.  They  have 
not  one  word  of  defence  to  offer,  not  one  protest  against  being  so  hardly  dealt  with. 
Learn  then  from  the  example  of  Moses  here,  and  of  Paul  on  more  than  one  occasion, 
how  to  speak  out  when  silence,  or,  what  is  worse,  delicate  picking  and  choosing 
of  words,  Involves  unfaithfulness  to  God.  We  must  never  be  coarse,  vindictive, 
abusive,  or  spiteful ;  but  if  we  have  a  genuine  concern  for  the  good  of  men  and  the 
glory  of  God,  he  will  put  as  it  were  his  own  word  into  our  lips,  so  controlling  lan- 
guage, tone,  and  features  that  it  will  be  what  his  word  always  is,  a  discerner  of  the 
thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart. 

II.  But  THonGH  they  do  not  eesbnt  the  eebuke  of  Moses,  they  hoid  to  theik 
ORIGINAL  PURPOSE.  So  Confident  are  they  that  they  call  this  much-coveted  land  their 
inheritance.  They  cannot  but  feel  the  probing  force  of  what  Moses  has  said,  but 
they  are  also  quick  to  notice  what  he  has  omitted  to  say.  If  they  had  put  their 
thoughts  into  speech  they  would  have  run  somewhat  like  this :  "  He  has  been  a 
shepherd  himself,  a  practical  man  in  flocks  and  herds,  and  of  course  he  knows  nicely 
that  these  lands  for  which  we  ask  are  just  the  place  for  our  cattle.  We  shall  hold 
to  our  choice,  though  it  may  involve  a  little  more  trouble  and  delay  than  we  could 
have  wished."  Even  when  men  are  made  to  smart  under  a  just,  unanswerable 
rebuke  they  keep  to  their  darling  projects.  They  do  not  believe  in  their  hearts, 
ei'en  though  Christ  says  it,  that  one  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon.  Reuben  and 
Gad  mean  to  try  the  experiment  of  living  east  of  Jordan,  and  yet  keeping  their  place 
in  the  unity  and  the  privileges  of  Israel. 

III.  They  propose  a  rash  and  difficult  compromise.  The  more  we  consider 
what  they  undertook  to  do,  the  more  also  we  see  their  short-sighted  policy.  Mark 
thdr  overweening  self-confidence.  They  cannot  risk  the  chance — which  was  indeed 
no  chance  at  all,  but  a  Divine  certainty — of  finding  suitable  pastures  in  Canaan,  but 
they  are  quite  willing  to  risk  their  families  and  flocks  in  fenced  cities  of  the  land 
they  had  chosen.  Yet  on  their  own  admission  fenced  cities  were  no  adequate 
security.  The  fighting  men  among  them  were  going  across  Jordan  to  help  in  con- 
quering a  land  where,  as  had  been  reported  to  their  fathers,  the  cities  were  walled 
and  very  great  (ch.  xiii.  28).  There  appears  in  their  resolution  a  curious  mixture  of 
reasonable  faith  and  rash  self-confidence.  They  have  learned  enough  to  assure  them 
that  Canaan  will  be  conquered,  and  they  are  quite  ready  to  believe  that  in  some  un- 
accountable way  their  own  dearest  possessions  will  also  be  safe.  Yet  they  did  not 
really  know  how  long  they  were  to  be  absent. .  It  seems  to  have  been  several  years 
before  they  were  allowed  to  return,  and  when  they  did  return  it  was  not  with  the 
unmingled  self-congratulations  which  might  have  been  expected.  He  who  would 
learn  how  disastrous  their  choice  turned  out  in  the  end  must  carefully  consider 
Josh.  xxii.  Most  assuredly,  whatever  Reuben  and  Gad  gained  in  pastures  they 
more  than  lost  in  their  permanent  isolation  from  their  brethren. — Y. 

Ver.  23. — The  eyes  of  the  sinner  opened  at  last.  "  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you 
out." 

I.  These  words  imply  the  possibility  of  sin  being  committed.  The  particular 
danger  in  this  instance  was  of  breaking  a  promise.  These  words  of  Moses  certainly 
imply  a  humiliating  estimate  of  the  persons  addressed,  but  it  must  be  admitted  that 
the  estimate  was  justified  by  past  experience.  Moses  cannot  quickly  accept  the 
promise,  for  he  knows  well  how  hastily  and  recklessly  it  is  made.  There  was  no 
occasion  to  cast  any  doubt  on  the  sincerity  of  their  words,  or  to  attribute  to  them  a 
deliberate  purpose  of  deception.  But  there  was  everything  in  impending  circum- 
stances to  lead  them  into  a  broken  promise.  The  promise  itself  was  hastily  made. 
It  was  made  not  for  its  own  sake,  but  under  a  kind  of  compulsion,  in  order  to  get 
hold  of  a  much-eoveted  possession.     The  fulfilment  of  it  was  beset,  as  Moses  well 


4t4  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [ca.  xxxii.  1—42 

knew,  with  difficult  conditions,  ever  tending  to  increase  in  difficulty.  Moses  himself 
would  not  be  with  them  across  the  Jordan,  and  when  he  had  vanished  from  the 
scene,  who  else  was  to  enforce  with  equal  energy  and  authority  the  promise  he  had 
extorted?  Moreover,  the  promise  had  been  made  on  behalf  of  a  heterogeneous  crowd. 
Some  of  the  better  sort  might  be  inclined  to  persevere  in  keeping  it;  others  might 
only  too  readily  make  it  an  excuse  that  their  leaders  had  promised  without  suffi- 
ciently consulting  them.  The  great  bulk  had  already  shown  themselves  to  be  steeped 
in  selfishness  ;  were  they  likely  then  to  stick  at  desertion,  if  only  it  could  be  managed 
with  safety?  It  is  a  needful  tiling,  even  though  it  be  a  painful  and  humiliating  one, 
to  assert,  as  Moses  did  here,  the  ivealcness  of  human  natnre.  When  we  form  purposes 
which  in  themselves  show  the  corruption  and  depravity  of  the  human  heart,  we  must 
not  complain  if  we  are  dealt  with  in  a  humiliating  fashion.  And  in  our  expectations 
from  others  we  must  ever  make  ready  to  meet  with  broken  promises.  Eecollecting 
our  own  iniirmities,  we  shall  not  be  surprised  at  the  many  and  sad  consequences 
which  come  from  the  infirmities  of  our  brethren.  We  should  never  feel  insulted 
when  any  one  gives  us  a  word  of  caution  against  effusive  and  extravagant  promises. 
He  is  the  wisest  Christian  who,  while  he  promises  least  in  the  hearing  of  his  fellow- 
men,  is  ever  striving  to  carry  out  in  practice,  and  to  its  fullest  extent,  all  that  his 
heart  would  lead  him  to  perform. 
II.   These  words  also  affibm  the  certainty  that  if  sin  is  committed  the 

SINNER  WILL  AT  LAST  BE   MADE   FULLY  CONSCIODS  OF  HIS   SIN.       There  WaS  mUch,  aS  WB 

have  seen,  to  lead  Reuben  and  Gad  to  break  their  promise.  In  addition  to  what  has 
already  been  mentioned,  there  was  this  as  a  possible  consideration — that  they  might 
be  able  to  break  the  promise  with  impunity.  Indeed,  from  this  solemn  warning  of 
Moses  we  may  infer  that  he  looked  upon  some  such  thought  as  likely  to  gain 
dominion  in  their  minds.  When  the  time  of  difficulty  and  sore  temptation  came 
they  might  argue  thus:  "If  we  do  return,  who  is  to  mark  our  return  or  hinder  it? 
The  other  tribes  (perhaps  hard  beset  in  their  conflict  with  the  Canaanites)  can  do 
nothing  against  us.  Moses  is  gone."  Thev  may  have  had  it  in  their  thoij"hts,  after 
making  the  promise,  that  it  would  be  enough  to  cross  the  river,  wish  their  brethren 
God-speed,  and  then  return.  "  They  will  understand  our  position,  and  not  be  so 
hard  on  us  as  Moses  is.  If  they  are  willing  that  we  should  just  go  across,  and  then 
return,  what  can  there  be  to  make  complaint  about  ?  "  But  Moses  evidently  meant 
them  to  keep  their  promise  to  the  full.  To  break  it  was  not  only  unbrotherly  and 
ungrateful  to  the  other  tribes  who  had  done  so  much  for  them  ;  it  was,  he  says  with 
great  emphasis,  a  sin  against  God,  and  in  due  time  it  would  come  back  to  them 
revealed  as  such,  with  all  its  dreadful  consequences.  1.  We  have  a  timely  warning 
to  those  who  are  entering  the  paths  of  sin.  As  it  is  true  that  God  would  have  those 
who  in  their  young  enthusiasm  and  devotion  propose  to  enter  his  service  to  consider 
well  what  it  is  that  he  asks,  so  it  is  equally  true  that  he  would  have  those  who  are 
beginning  a  life  of  sin  to  consider  well  what  the  end  will  be.  These  are  the  words 
of  an  old  and  long-observant  man,  one  who  had  lived  unusually  near  to  God.  They 
are  spoken  out  of  the  fulness  of  his  experience.  lie  had  seen  sin  revealed  in  all  its 
enormity,  and  punished  with  the  utmost  severity.  There  must  needs  be  in  this  world 
thousands  of  undetected  crimes,  thousands  of  accused  persons  acquitted  not  because 
they  are  innocent,  but  for  lack  of  legal  evidence..  These  failures  come  from  the 
infirmities  of  men  ;  but  be  sure  of  this,  that  they  are  failures  only  so  far  as  men  are 
concerned  ;  not  one  evil-doer  can  escape  God,  though  he  may  enjoy  the  pleasures  and 
immunities  of  sin  for  a  season.  Sin  may  seem  not  to  find  men  out  while  they  are 
here,  but  it  will  be  time  enough  by  and  by.  Men  must  not  despise  the  goodness 
and  forbearance  and  long-suffering  of  God  as  if  he  were  heedless  of  all  their  doings. 
The  dresser  of  the  vineyard  who  begged  another  year's  reprieve  for  the  fruitless  fig- 
tree  had  marked  its  fruitlessness  and  anticipated  its  doom  just  as  much  as  the  man 
who  owned  the  vineyard.  We  cannot  too  often  recollect  that  the  eye  of  God  is  on 
every  unprofitable  tree.  The  axe  is  laid  to  its  roots,  ready  for  use,  if  the  use  be 
compelled.  2.  We  have  here  a  great  comfort  and  stay  to  the  people  of  God.  The 
foolish,  wicked  man,  making  his  proud  and  careless  advances,  says, "  Doth  God  see?  " 
Our  answer,  made  not  so  much  to  him  as  to  our  own  hearts,  is,  "  God  does  see."  Ha 
gees  every  sinner  in  his  course,  his  doom,  and  the  opaiing  of  his  eyes  at  last.     How 


CH.  XXXII.  1—42.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  426 

many  there  are  in  the  world  whoro  we  feel  sure  to  be  wrong  !  We  cannot,  try  as  we 
may,  feel  anything  else ;  we  cannot  but  believe  them  to  be  villains  at  heart,  veneered 
and  varnished  up  with  a  show  of  religion  and  goodness  to  impose  on  the  simple- 
minded.  But  to  give  free  utterance  to  our  thoughts  would  be  counted  uncharitable 
and  oensoriouB,  and  assuming  to  be  better  than  other  men.  What  a  comfort  then  to 
feel  that  what  we  cannot  do  God  will  do  at  last  I  The  wolf  will  be  utterly  stripped 
of  all  his  sheep's  clothing,  after  all  his  gormandising  and  the  warm,  snug  life  he  has 
lived  so  long;  he  will  stand  revealed  in  his  true  character,  and  become  a  gaunt, 
starving  creature  with  all  his  opportunities  of  rapacity  gone.  "  Found  out  at  last " 
will  be  written  on  all  those  vain  pretenders  to  a  good  and  honourable  life  who  at 
present  fume  and  bluster  and  look  unspeakably  grieved  when  any  of  their  actions  are 
questioned  in  the  slightest  degree.  And  this,  recollect,  wilLbe  the  crown  of  nil  other 
discoveries,  that  the  sin  of  sinners  will  be  made  clear  and  unquestionable  in  fheir  own 
eyes.  3.  The  practical  lesson  for  you,  0  sinner,  is,  that  instead  of  waiting  for  sin  to 
find  you  out,  you  should  try  with  all  energy  and  expedition  to  find  sin  out.  Yon 
know  that  though  the  Scriptures  are  full  of  references  to  it,  there  are,  nevertheless, 
the  greatest  misapprehensions  with  respect  to  it.  What  a  terrible  thing  it  is  to  mock 
God  by  an  outward  and  conventional  confession  of  sin,  and  then  go  away  to  sin  as 
much  as  before  !  It  is  one  thing  to  join  the  customary  crowd  in  saying,  "  We  have 
sinned  ;  "  quite  another  to  have  an  individual,  searching,  agonising  experience  such 
as  we  find  in  Ps.  li.  Find  out  what  sin  is,  its  reality,  its  magnitude,  and  how  it 
stands  behind  all  secondary  causes  of  misery,  almost  as  a  great  first  cause.  Find  it 
out  as  dwelling  deep-seated  in  your  own  heart,  baneful  beyond  all  imagination, 
spoiling  the  present  life,  and  threatening  the  life  to  come. 

Before  passing  from  the  consideration  of  this  request  from  these  two  tribes,  it  is 
very  noticeable  that  they  kept  their  promise.  When  the  time  came  for  tliem  to 
return  to  Jazer  and  Gilead,  Joshua  spoke  to  them  in  a  very  compliuientary  way 
(Josh.  xxii.).  Did  this  fulfilment  show  that  the  word  of  Moses  had  been  constantly 
in  their  minds  ?  Possibly  his  word  had  weight  with  some,  but  in  all  probability  the 
miraculous  discovery  of  Achan's  guilt,  and  his  terrible  doom,  had  much  more  con- 
nection with  the  persistence  of  Heuben  and  Gad  in  keeping  their  promise.  They 
doubtless  saw  very  clearly  that  steady  and  patient  obedience  was  the  only  way  of 
escaping  something  like  Achan's  fate. — Y. 

Ver.  42. — Nobah — the  man  and  the  place.  This  proceeding  on  the  part  of  Nobah 
suggests  a  good  deal  of  speculation  as  to  the  character,  purposes,  and  actual  achieve- 
ments of  the  man.  Concerning  the  children  of  Reuben,  we  are  simply  told  in  general 
terms  that  they  gave  names  to  the  cities  they  builded  (ver.  38).  Jair,  the  son  of 
Manasseh,  gave  to  the  small  towns  of  Gilead  the  name  of  Havoth-Jair,  which  seems 
to  be  a  general  indication  of  them  as  being  the  property  of  Jair.  Then  in  the  last 
verse  of  the  chapter  we  come  to  a  kind  of  climax  as  we  read  that  Nobah  boldly 
called  by  his  own  name  the  district  he  had  gained.  What  did  he  mean  by  this? 
Perhaps  it  was/or  the  sake  of  a  fancied  security.  The  rigorous,  inexorable  demands 
of  Moses  were  going  to  take  him  away,  he  knew  not  how  long,  and  he  may  have 
reckoned  that  giving  his  name  to  his  property  before  he  went  would  be  an  excellent 
plan  to  guard  himself  against  covetous  and  unscrupulous  neighbours.  How  suspicious 
of  one  another  selfish  people  are  I  When  we  busy  ourselves  laying  up  treasures  on 
earth  instead  of  in  heaven,  we  have  to  use  all  sorts  of  schemes  and  devices  in  order 
to  gain  a  security  which  in  the  end  proves  to  be  no  security  at  all.  Or  Nobah  may 
have  been  a  man  full  of  personal  ambition.  David  tells  us,  in  strains  half-pitying, 
half-despising,  of  those  infatuated,  purse-proud  grandees  who  call  their  lands  after 
their  own  names  (Ps.  xlix.  11).  From  this  we  may  infer  that  Nobah  was  not  alone 
in  his  folly.  Very  possibly  the  name  took  root  and  lasted  for  generations ;  but  even 
supposing  it  did,  who  in  after  days  would  trouble  himself  concerning  the  man 
Nobah  ?  Calling  a  town  or  a  street  after  a  man  will  do  nothing  to  preserve  his 
memory  if  the  man  himself  has  been  nothing  more  than  a  plutocrat.  But  if  the 
man  himself,  by  deeds  and  character,  becomes  memorable  and  glorious,  then  his 
birth-place  and  dwelling-place,  however  mean  they  otherwise  may  be,  share  in  the 
glory  of  the  man.     How  many  obscure  hamlets  have  thus  become  dignified  m  history, 


426 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[cH.  xxxin.  1 — 49. 


and  chief  among  them  stand  Bethlehem,  the  little  one  among  the  thousands  nf  Judah, 
and  Nazareth,  the  mean,  eecluded  village  in  the  highlands  of  Galilee.  "  This  place, 
dearest  to  the  Christian  heart  of  all  on  earth  except  Jerusalem,  is  not  mentioned  in 
the  Old  Testament,  nor  even  by  JosephuB,  who  was  himself  on  every  side  of  it,  and 
names  the  villages  all  about  it,  but  seems  yet  totally  ignorant  of  its  existence." — Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 


Itineeart  op  the  wandehings  (vers. 
1 — 49).  Ver.  1. — These  are  the  journeys. 
The  Hebrew  word  ''Jfpp  is  rendered  aTaBfioi 
by  the  Septuagint,  which  means  "stages" 
or  "  stations."  It  is,  however,  quite  rightly 
translated  "journeys,"  for  it  is  the  act  of 
Betting  out  and  inarching  from  such  a  place 
to  such  another  which  the  word  properly 
denotes  (cf  Gen.  xiii.  3 ;  Deut.  z.  11). 

Ver.  2. — ^And  Moses  wrote  their  goings 
out  (NV-1D.  Septuagint,  airapatic)  accord- 
ing to  their  journeys  by  the  commandment 
of  the  lord.  The  latter  clause  (nin»  'S-!?5>) 
may  be  taken  as  equivalent  to  an  adjective 
qualifying  the  noun  "goings  out,"  signify. 
ing  only  that  their  marches  were  made  under 
the  orders  of  God  himself  It  is  more 
natural  to  read  it  with  the  verb  "  wrote  ; " 
and  in  that  case  we  have  a  direct  assertion 
that  Moses  wrote  this  list  of  marches  himself 
by  command  of  God,  doubtless  as  a  memorial 
not  only  of  historical  interest,  but  of  deep 
religious  significance,  as  showing  how  Israel 
had  been  led  by  him  who  is  Mthful  and 
true — faithful  in  keeping  his  promise,  true  in 
fulfilling  his  word  for  good  or  for  evil.  The 
direct  statement  that  Moses  wrote  this  list 
himself  is  strongly  corroborated  by  internal 
evidence,  and  has  been  accepted  as  substan- 
tially true  by  the  most  destructive  critics. 
No  conceivable  inducement  could  have  ex- 
isted to  invent  a  list  of  marches  which  only 
partially  corresponds  with  the  historical  ac- 
count, and  can  only  with  difBculty  be  recon- 
ciled with  it — a  list  which  contains  many 
names  nowhere  else  occurring,  and  having  no 
associations  for  the  later  Israelites.  Whether 
the  statement  thus  introduced  tells  in  favour 
of  the  Mosaic  authorship  (as  usually  accepted) 
of  the  rest  of  the  Book  is  a  very  different 
matter,  on  which  see  the  Introduction. 

Yer.  3. — They  departed  from  Barneses. 
Hebrew,  Raemses.  See  on  Exod.  i.  11  ;  xii. 
37.  The  brief  description  here  given  of  the 
departure  from  Egypt  touches  upon  every 
material  circumstance  as  related  at  large  in 
Exod.  xL,  xii.  In  the  sight  of  all  the 
Egyptians.  The  journey  was  begun  by 
night  (Exod.  xii.  42),  but  was  of  course  con- 
tinued on  the  following  day. 

Ver.  4. — Buried  all  their  first-born,  which 
the  Lord  had  smitten  amon^  them.    Liter- 


ally, "were  burying  (Septuagint,  liairrov) 
those  whom  the  Lord  had  smitteu  among 
them,  viz.,  all  the  first-bom."  The  fact  that 
the  Egyptians  were  so  universally  employed 
about  the  funeral  rites  of  their  first-bom — 
rites  to  which  they  paid  such  extreme  atten- 
tion— seems  to  be  mentioned  here  as  supply- 
ing one  reason  at  least  why  the  Israelites 
began  their  outward  march  without  oppos- 
ition. It  is  in  perfect  accordance  with  what 
we  know  of  the  Egyptians,  that  all  other 
passions  and  interests  should  give  place  for 
the  time  to  the  necessary  care  for  the  departed. 
Upon  their  gods  also  the  Lord  executed 
judgments.  See  on  Exod.  xii.  12,  and  cf. 
Isa.  xix.  1.  The  false  deities  of  Egypt, 
having  no  existence  except  in  the  imagin- 
ations of  men,  could  only  be  affected  within 
the  sphere  of  those  imaginations,  i.  e.  by  being 
made  contemptible  in  the  eyes  of  those  who 
feared  them. 

Ver.  6. — Etham.     See  on  Exod.  xiii.  20. 

Ver.  7.— Pi-hahiroth.  Hebrew,  "Hahi- 
roth,"  without  the  prefix.  See  on  Exod. 
xiv.  2. 

Ver.  8. — In  the  wilderness  of  Etham. 
This  is  called  the  wilderness  of  Shur  in 
Exod.  XV.  22,  nor  is  it  easy  to  explain  the 
occurrence  of  the  name  Etham  in  this  con- 
nection, for  the  Etham  mentioned  in  ver.  6 
lay  on  the  other  side  of  the  Red  Sea.  We  do 
not,  however,  know  what  physical  changes 
have  taken  place  since  that  time,  and  it  is 
quite  possible  that  at  Etham  there  may  have 
been  a  ford,  or  some  other  easy  means  of 
communication,  so  that  the  strip  of  desert 
along  the  opposite  shore  came  to  be  known 
as  the  wilderness  of  Etham. 

Ver.  9.— Elim.     See  on  Exod.  iv.  27. 

Ver.  10.— Encamped  by  the  Red  Sea. 
This  encampment,  like  those  at  Dophkah 
and  at  Alush  (ver.  13),  is  not  mentioned 
in  the  narrative  of  Exodus.  The  phrase- 
ology, however,  used  in  Exod.  xvi.  1;  xvii. 
1  leaves  abundant  room  for  intermediate 
halting-places,  at  which  it  is  to  be  presumed 
that  nothing  very  noteworthy  happened 
Nothing  whatever  is  known  of  these  three 
stations. 

Ver.  15. — The  wilderness  of  SinaL  See 
on  Exod.  xix.  1. 

Ver.  17. — Kibroth-hattaavah  .  .  Haze- 
roth.    See  on  ch.  xi.  34,  85. 

Ver.  18. — Bithmah.  Comparing  this  verse 
with  ch.  xii.  16  and  xiii.  26,  it  would  appear 


CH.  xxxm.  1—49.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


427 


as  if  Eithmah  were  the  station  "in  the 
wildernesa  of  Paran "  from  which  the  spies 
went  up,  and  to  which  they  returned — a 
station  subsequently  known  hy  the  name  of 
Kadesh.  There  are  two  difficulties  in  the 
way  of  this  identification.  In  the  first  place 
we  should  then  only  have  three  names  of 
stations  between  Sinai  and  the  southern 
border  of  Palestine,  on  what  is  at  least  eleven 
days'  journey.  This  ia,  however,  confessedly 
the  case  in  the  historical  narrative,  and  it  ad- 
mits of  explanation.  We  know  that  the  first 
journey  was  a  three  days'  journey  (ch.  x.  33), 
and  the  others  may  have  been  longer  still, 
through  a  country  which  presented  no  facili- 
ties for  encamping,  and  possessed  no  variety 
of  natural  features.  In  the  second  place, 
Eithmah  is  not  Kadesh,  and  cannot  be  con- 
nected with  Kadesh  except  through  a  doubt- 
ful identification  with"  the  Wady  Retem§.t  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Ain  Kudes  (see  note  at 
end  of  ch.  xiii.).  It  is,  however,  evident 
from  ch,  xii.  16,  as  compared  with  ch.  xiii. 
26,  that  Kadesh  was  not  the  name  originally 
given  to  the  encampment  "in  the  wilder- 
,  ness  of  Paran. "  It  seems  to  have  got  that 
name — perhaps  owing  to  some  popular  feeling 
with  respect  to  an  ancient  sanctuary,  per- 
haps owing  to  some  partial  shifting  of  the 
camp — during  the  absence  of  the  spies. 
Bithmah,  therefore,  may  well  have  been  the 
official  name  (so  to  speak)  originally  given  to 
the  encampment,  but  subsequently  super- 
seded by  the  more  famous  name  of  Kadesh ; 
this  would  explain  both  its  non-appearance  in 
the  narrative  of  Numbers,  and  its  appear- 
ance in  the  Itinerary  here. 

Ver.  19. — Eimmon-parez.  The  latter  part 
of  the  name  is  the  same  as  pa/rats  orperets, 
which  commonly  signifies  a  breaking  out  of 
Divine  anger.  This  place  may  possibly  have 
been  the  scene  of  the  events  related  in  chs. 
xvi.,  xvii.,  but  the  Targum  of  Palestine  con- 
nects them  with  Kehelathah. 

Ver.  20.— libnah.  Hebrew  nj^^C'white- 
ness")  may  perhaps  be  the  same  as  the 
Laban  (]y^,  "  white  ")  mentioned  in  Deut.  i. 
1 .  So  many  places,  however,  in  that  region 
are  distinguished  by  the  dazzling  whiteness 
of  their  limestone  cliflfs  that  the  identifica- 
tion is  quite  uncertain .  The  site  of  this,  as 
of  the  next  eight  stations,  is  indeed  utterly 
unknown ;  and  the  guesses  which  are  founded 
on  the  partial  and  probably  accidental  simi- 
larity of  some  modem  names  (themselves  dif- 
ferently pronounced  by  different  travellers) 
are  utterly  worthless.  Of  these  eight  names, 
Kehelathah  and  Makheloth  seem  to  be  de- 
rived from  7ni?,  "an  assembling,"  and  thus 
give  some  slight  support  to  the  supposition 
that  during  the  thirty-eight  years  the  people 
were  scattered  abroad,  and  only  assembled  I 


from  time  to  time  in  one  place.  Eissah  is 
variously  interpreted  "heap  of  ruins,"  or 
"dew;"  Shapher  means  "fair,"or  "splen- 
did ; "  Haradah,  or  Charadah,  is  "  terror,"  or 
"  trembling  "  (cf.  1  Sam.  xiv.  15) ;  Tahath  is 
a  "  going  down,"  or  "  depression ; "  Tarah  is 
"  turning,"  or  "  delay ;  "  Mithcah  signifies 
"  sweetness,"  and  may  be  compared  (in  an 
opposite  sense)  to  Marah. 

Ver.  30. — flashmonah.  This  is  possibly 
the  Heshmon  of  Josh.  xv.  27,  since  this  was 
one  of  the  "uttermost  cities  .  .  toward  the 
coast  of  Edom,  southward."  The  name, 
however  ("  fruitfulness "),  was  probably 
common  on  the  edge  of  the  desSrt.  Mose- 
roth.  This  is  simply  the  plural  form  of 
Moserah  ("  chastisement "),  and  is  no  doubt 
the  place  so  called  in  Dent.  z.  6  (see  note  at 
end  of  chapter). 

Ver.  31. — ^Beue-Jaakan.  The  fuU  name 
is  given  in  Deut.  x.  6  as  Beeroth-beni-Jaakan, 
"the  wells  of  the  children  of  Jaakan." 
Jaakan,  or  Akan,  was  a  grandson  of  Seir,  the 
legendary  tribe  father  of  the  Horites  of  Mount 
Seir  (Gen.  xxxvi.  20,  27  ;  1  Chron.  i.  42). 
The  wells  of  the  Beni-Jaakan  may  weU  have 
retained  their  name  long  after  their  original 
owners  had  been  dispossessed ;  or  a  remnant 
of  the  tribe  may  have  held  together  untU 
this  time. 

Ver.  32.— Hor-ha-gidgad.  The  MSS.  and 
Versions  are  divided  between  Chor  ("  cave  ") 
and  Hor  ("  summit,"  or  "  mountain").  Gid- 
gad  is  no  doubt  the  Gudgodah  of  Dent. 
X.  7. 

Ver.  33. — Jotbathah.  The  meaning  of 
this  name,  which  is  apparently  "  excellent," 
is  explained  by  the  note  in  Deut.  x.  7 
"  Jotbath,  a  land  of  rivers  of  waters."  It 
would  be  difficult  to  find  such  a  land  now  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  the  Arabah,  but  there 
are  still  running  streams  in  some  of  the 
wadys  which  open  into  the  Arabah  towards 
its  southern  end. 

Ver.  34. — Ebronah,  or  "Abronah,"'  a 
"beach,"  or  "passage,"  called  "the  Fords" 
by  the  Targum  of  Palestine.  It  is  conjec- 
tured that  it  lay  below  Ezion-geber,  just 
opposite  to  Elatn,  with  which  place  it  may 
have  been  connected  by  a  ford  at  low  tide, 
but  this  is  quite  uncertain. 

Ver.  35. — Ezion-gaber,  or  rather  "Etsion- 
geber,"  the  "giant's  backbone."  This  can 
hardly  be  other  than  the  place  mentioned  in 
1  Kings  ix.  26  ;  2  Chron.  viii.  17  as  the 
harbour  of  King  Solomon's  merchant  navy. 
At  this  later  date  it  was  at  the  head  of  the 
navigable  waters  of  the  Elanitio  Gulf,  but 
considerable  changes  have  taken  place  in  the 
shore  line  since  the  age  of  Solomon,  and  no 
doubt  similar  changes  took  place  before.  It 
was  known  to,  and  at  times  occupied  by,  the 
Egyptians,  and  the  wretched  village  which 
occupies  the  site  is  still  called  Aszium  by  the 


428 


THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS. 


[cH.  XXXIII,  1 — 49. 


Arffbs.  The  name  itself  would  seem  to  be 
due  to  some  peculiar  rock  formation — pro- 
bably the  serrated  crest  either  of  a  neigh- 
bouring mountain  or  of  a  half-snbmergad 
reef. 

Ver.  36. — The  wilderness  of  Zin,  which  is 
Eadesh.     See  on  eh.  zx.  1. 

Ver.  37.— Mount  Hor.     See  on  ch.  ix.  22. 

Ver.  38. — In  the  fortieth  year,  .  .  in  the 
first  day  of  the  fifth  month.  This  is  the 
only  place  where  the  date  of  Aaron's  death  is 
given.  It  is  in  strict  accordance  with  the 
Divine  intimation  that  Israel  was  to  wander 
forty  years  in  the  wilderness  (ch.  xiv.  33, 
Zi),  that  period  being  understood,  according 
to  the  usual  mercy  of  God,  which  shortens 
the  days  of  evil,  to  include  the  time  already 
spent  in  the  wilderness. 

Ver.  39. — An  hundred  and  twenty  and 
three  years  old.  He  had  been  eighty-three 
years  old  when  he  first  stood  before  Pharaoh, 
forty  years  before  (Exod.  vii.  7). 

Ver,  40. — And  king  Arad  .  .  heard  of 
the  coming.  See  on  ch.  xxi.  1.  The  intro- 
duction of  this  notice,  for  which  there  seems 
no  motive,  and  which  has  no  assignable  con- 
nection with  the  context,  is  extremely  per- 
plexing. It  is  not  simply  a  fragment  which 
has  slipped  in  by  what  we  call  accident  (like 
Deut.  X.  6,  7),  for  the  longer  statement  in 
ch.  xxi.  1 — 3  occupies  the  same  position  in 
the  historical  narrative  immediately  after  the 
death  of  Aaron.  It  is  dilficult  to  suppose 
that  Moses  wrote  this  verse  and  left  it  as  it 
stands  ;  it  would  rather  seem  as  if  a  later 
hand  had  begun  to  copy  out  a  statement 
from  some  earlier  document — in  which  it  had 
itself  perhaps  become  misplaced — and  had 
not  gone  on  with  it. 

Ver.  41.— ;Zalmonah.  This  place  is  not 
elsewhere  mentioned,  and  cannot  be  identi- 
fied. Either  this  or  Punon  may  be  the  en- 
campment where  the  brazen  serpent  was  set 
up  ;  according  to  the  Targum  of  Palestine  it 
was  the  latter. 

Ver.  42.  —  Punon.  Perhaps  connected 
with  the  Pinon  of  Gen.  xxxvi.  41.  The 
Septuagint  has  ^ivw,  and  it  is  identified  by 
Eusebius  and  Jerome  with  Phseno,  a  place 
between  Petra  and  Zoar  where  convicts  were 
sent  to  labour  in  the  mines.    Probably,  how- 


ever, the  march  of  the  IsracMtrs  Iny  further 
to  the  east,  inasmuch  as  they  scrupulously 
abstained  from  trespassing  upon  Edom. 

Ver.  44. — Oboth,  .  .  Ije-abarim.  See  on 
ch.  xxi.  11. 

Ver.  45. — Sibon-gad,  This  encampment 
may  have  been  the  same  as  that  previously 
called  by  the  name  of  Nahaliel  or  Bamoth 
(ch,  xxi.  19,  and  see  on  xxxiii.  84).  Several 
stages  are  here  passed  over  in  the  Itinerary. 
At  a  time  when  the  conquest  and  partial 
occupation  of  large  districts  was  going  on,  it 
would  be  hard  to  say  what  regular  stages 
were  made  by  the  host  as  such  (see  note  at 
end  of  chapter). 

Ver.  46.  —  Almon-diblathaim.  Probably 
the  same  as  the  Beth-diblathaim  mentioned 
in  Jer.  xlviii.  22  as  a  Moabitish  town  con- 
tiguous to  Dibon,  Nebo,  and  Kiijathaim. 
The  name,  which  signifies  "hiding-place  o' 
the  two  circles"  or  "cakes,"  was  doubtless 
due  either  to  some  local  legend,  or  more  pro- 
bably to  the  fanciful  interpretation  of  some 
peculiar  feature  in  the  landscape, 

Ver,  47,  —  The  mountains  of  Abarim, 
before  Nebo,  The  same  locality  is  called 
"the  top  of  Pisgah,  which  looketh  toward 
the  waste,"  in  eh.  xxi  20  (see  note  there, 
and  at  ch,  xxvii,  12),  Nebo  is  the  name  of  a 
town  here,  as  in  ch,  xxxii,  3,  38,  and  in  the 
later  books  ;  in  Deut.  (xxxii.  49 ;  xxxiv.  1) 
it  is  the  name  of  the  mountain,  here  included 
in  the  general  designation  Abarim. 

Ver.  48. — In  the  plains  of  Moab.  See  on 
ch.  xxii.  1. 

Ver.  49. — ^From  Beth-jesimoth  even  nnto 
Abel-shittim.  Beth-jesimoth,  "house  of 
the  wastes,"  must  have  been  very  near  the 
point  where  Jordan  empties  itself  into  the 
Dead  Sea,  on  the  verge  of  the  salt  desert 
which  bounds  that  sea  on  the  east.  It 
formed  the  boundary  of  Sihon's  kingdom 
at  the  south-west  comer.  Abel-shittim, 
"  meadow  of  acacias,"  is  better  known  by  the 
abbreviated  name  "  Shittim  "  (ch,  xxv.  1 ; 
Micah  vi,  5),  Its  exact  site  cannot  bo  re- 
covered, but  the  Talmud  states  that  it  was 
twelve  miles  north  of  the  Jordan  mouth. 
Probably  the  centre  of  the  camp  was  oppo- 
site to  the  great  forda,  and  the  road  leadmg 
to  Jerichoh 


CH.  xxxin.  1—49.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEES.  42? 


NOTE  ON  THE  TWO  LISTS  OP  STATIONS  BETWEEN  EOyPT  AND 

THE  JORDAN. 

There  can  be  no  question  that  the  chief  interest  of  the  Itinerary  here  given  is  due 
to  its  literary  character  as  a  document  containing  elements  at  least  of  extreme  and 
unquestioned  antiquity.  At  the  same  time  it  is  a  matter  of  soma  importance  to  com- 
pare it  with  the  history  as  given  at  large  in  Exodus  and  Numbers,  and  to  note  care- 
fully the  points  of  contact  and  divergence.  It  is  evident  at  first  sight  that  no  pains 
have  been  taken  to  make  the  two  lists  of  stages  agree,  each  list  containing  several 
names  which  the  other  lacks,  and  (in  some  cases)  each  having  a  name  of  its  own  for 
what  appe^s  to  be  the  same  place.  With  respect  to  the  latter  point,  the  explanation 
usually  given  seems  quite  natural  and  satisfactory :  the  names  were  in  many  cases 
given  by  the  Israelites  themselves,  and  in  others  were  derived  from  some  small  local 
peculiarity,  or  belonged  to  insignificant  hamlets,  so  that  the  same  encampment  may 
very  well  have  received  one  name  in  the  official  record  of  the  movements  of  the 
tabernacle,  and  retained  another  in  the  popular  recollection  of  the  march.  With 
respect  to  the  former  point,  it  may  fairly  be  argued  that  the  narrative  only  records  as 
a  rule  the  names  of  places  where  something  memorable  occurred,  and  indeed  doef 
not  always  mention  the  place  even  then,  while  the  Itinerary  is  simply  concerned  witu 
the  consecutive  encampments  as  such.  It  would  be  more  correct  to  say  that  the 
narrative  is  essentially  fragmentary,  and  does  not  purport  to  record  more  than  certain 
incidents  of  the  wanderings. 

We  have,  therefore,  no  difficulty  in  understanding  why  the  Itinerary  gives  ua  the 
names  of  three  stations  between  Egypt  and  Mount  Sinai  not  mentioned  in  Exodus. 
There  is  much  more  difficulty  with  the  ensuing  notices,  because  the  name  of  Kadesh 
only  occurs  once  in  the  list,  whereas  it  is  absolutely  necessary,  in  order  to  bring  the 
narrative  into  any  chronological  sequence,  to  assume  (what  the  narrative  itself  pretty 
clearly  intimates)  that  there  were  two  encampments  at  Kadesh,  separated  by  an 
interval  of  more  than  thirty-eight  years.  It  has  accordingly  been  v«ry  generally 
agreed  that  the  Rithmah  of  the  Itinerary  is  identical  with  the  nameless  station  "  in 
the  wilderness  of  Paran,"  afterwards  called  Kadesh  in  the  narrative.  This  is  of  cqurse 
an  assumption  which  has  only  probabilities  to  support  it,  but  it  maly  fairly  be  said 
that  there  is  nothing  against  it.  The  retem,  or  broom,  is  so  common  that  it  must 
have  given  a  name  to  many  different  spots — a  name  too  common,  and  possessing  too 
few  associations,  to  stand  its  ground  in  popular  remembrance  against  any  rival  name 
(see  note  on  ver.  18).  It  has  been  argued  by  some  that  the  whole  of  the  twenty-one 
stages  enumerated  in  vers.  16 — 35  were  made  on  the  one  journey  from  Sinai  to 
Kadesh  ;  and  as  far  as  the  mere  number  goes  there  is  nothing  jraprobable  in  the 
supposition  ;  the  ''  eleven  days "  of  Deut.  i.  2  are  no  doubt  the  days  of  ordinary 
travellers,  not  of  women  and  children,  flocks  and  herds.  It  is  true  that  the  supposition 
is  commonly  connected  with  a  theory  which  throws  the  whole  historical  narrative 
into'  confusion,  viz.,  that  Israel  spent  only  two  years  intead  of  forty  in  the  wilderness ; 
but  that  need  not  cause  its  rejection,  for  the  whole  thirty-eight  may  be  intercalated 
between  ver.  36  and  ver.  37  of  the  Itinerary,  and  we  could  explain  a  total  silence 
concerning  the  wanderings  of  those  years  better  than  we  can  the  mention  of  (only) 
seventeen  stations.  The  only  serious  diiEoulty  is  presented  by  the  name  Ezion-geber, 
which  it  is  very  difficult  not  to  identify  with  the  place  of  that  name,  so  well  known 
afterwards,  at  the  head  of  the  Elanitic  Gulf ;  for  it  is  impossible  to  find  the  last  stage 
towards  Kadesh  at  a  spot  as  near  to  Sinai  as  to  aiyr  of  the  supposed  sites  of  Kadesh. 


430  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEKS.  [oh.  xxxiii.  1—49. 

It  is  of  course  possible  that  more  than  one  place  was  known  as  the  "  giant's  back- 
bone ; "  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  fact  that  at  Moseroth  Israel  was  near  Mount  Hor, 
and  that  they  made  five  marches  thence  to  Ezion-geber,  is  quite  in  accordance  with 
the  site  usually  assigned  to  it.  It  must  remain,  therefore,  an  unsettled  point  as  to 
which  nothing  more  can  be  said  than  that  a  balance  of  probabilities  is  in  favour  of 
the  identification  of  Bithmah  with  the  first  encampment  at  Kadesh.  Proceeding  on 
this  assumption,  we  have  thereafter  eleven  names  of  statfons  concerning  which 
nothing  is  known,  and  nothing  can  be  with  any  profit  conjectured.  Then  come  four 
others  which  are  evilently  the  same  as  those  mentioned  in  Deut.  x.  6,  7.  That  this 
latter  passage  is  a  fragment  which  has  come  into  its  present  position  (humanly 
speaking)  by  some  accident  of  transcription  does  not  admit  of  serious  debate  ;  but 
it  is  evidently  a  fragment  of  some  ancient  document,  possibly  of  the  very  Itinerary 
of  which  we  have  only  an  abbreviation  here.  Comparing  the  two,  we  are  met  at  once 
with  the  difficulty  that  Aaron  is  said  to  have  died  and  been  buried  at  Moserah, 
whereas,  according  to  the  narrative  and  the  Itinerary,  he  died  on  Mount  Hor  during 
the  last  journey  from  Kadesh.  This  is  not  unnaturally  explained  by  assuming  that 
the  ofScial  name  of  the  encampment  under,  or  opposite  to.  Mount  Hor,  from  which 
Aaron  ascended  the  mountain  to  die,  was  Moserah  or  Moseroth,  and  that  the  Israelites 
were  twice  encamped  there — once  on  their  way  to  Ezion-geber  and  back  to  Kadesh, 
and  again  on  the  last  march  round  Edom,  to  which  the  fragment  in  Deut.  refers. 
There  remain,  however,  unexplained  the  singular  facts — 1.  That  the  station  where 
Aaron  died  is  called  Moserah  in  Deut.  x.  6,  whereas  it  is  called  Mount  Hor  not  only 
in  the  narrative,  but  in  the  Itinerary,  which  nevertheless  does  give  the  name  Moseroth 
to  this  very  station  when  occupied  on  a  previous  occasion.  2.  That  the  fragment 
gives  Bene-Jaakan,  Moseroth,  Gudgod,  and  Jotbath  as  stages  on  the  last  journey, 
whereas  the  Itinerary  gives  them  (the  order  of  the  first  two  being  inverted)  as  stages 
on  a  previous  journey,  and  gives  other  names  for  the  encampments  of  the  last  journey. 
There  is  no  doubt  room  for  all  four,  and  more  besides,  between  Mount  Hor  and  Oboth  ; 
but  it  cannot  be  denied  that  there  is  an  appearance  of  error  either  in  the  fragment  or 
in  the  Itinerary.  , 

A  further  objection  has  been  made  to  the  statement  that  Israel  marched  from 
Ezion-geber  to  Kadesh,  both  on  the  score  of  distance  and  of  the  apparent  absurdity 
of  returning  to  Kadesh  only  to  retrace  their  steps  once  more.  It  is  replied  (1)  that 
the  return  to  Kadesh  for  the  final  move  may  have  been  hurried,  and  no  regular  en- 
campment pitched  ;  (2)  that  when  Israel  returned  to  Kadesh  it  was  still  in  expectation 
of  entering  Canaan  "  by  the  way  of  the  spies,"  and  in  ignorancp  that  they  would 
have  to  treat  with  Edom  for  a  passage — much  more  that  they  would  have  to  come 
down  the  Arabah  once  again. 

Lastly,  with  respect  to  the  names  which  occur  after  Ije-abarim,  we  have  again  an 
almost  total  want  of  coincidence  with  this  peculiarity,  that  the  narrative  .gives  seven 
Uiimes  where  the  Itinerary  only  gives  three.  It  must,  however,  be  remembered  that 
the  whole  distance  from  the  brook  of  Arnon,  where  the  Israelites  crossed  it,  to  the 
Arboth  Moab  is  only  thirty  miles  in  a  straight  line.  Over  this  short  distance  it  is 
quite  likely  that  the  armies  of  Israel  moved  in  lines  more  or  less  parallel,  the  taber- 
nacle probably  only  shifting  its  place  as  the  general  advance  made  it  desirable.  That 
the  two  accounts  are  based  on  different  documents,  or  drawn  from  different  sources, 
is  likely  enough  ;  but  both  may  nevertheless  be  equally  correct.  If  (as  regards  the 
last  march)  one  record  wns  kept  by  Eleazar,  and  another  by  Joshua,  the  apparent 
disagreement  may  be  readily  explained. 


OH.  xxxiii.  1—49.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  4S1 


HOMILBTICS. 

Vers.  1 — 49. — The  jov/mey  home.  We  have  here  a  brief  summary  of  the  stages 
by  which  Israel  travelled  onwards  from  Egypt  to  Canaan ;  spiritually,  there- 
fore, we  have  an  epitome  of  the  Church's  progress,  or  of  the  progress  of  a  soiJ, 
through  this  world  to  the  world  to  come.  Hence  it  follows  that  all  the  lessons,  en- 
couragements, and  warnings  which  belong  to  these  forty  years  weave  themselves 
(ibout  this  Itinerary,  which  might  to  the  careless  eye  seem  a  bare  list  of  names. 
"  Per  has  (mansiones)  cnrrit  verus  Hebrseus,  qui  de  terrS  transire  festinat  ad  coelum," 
says  Jerome.  And  in  this  connection  it  can  hardly  be  an  accident  that  as  there  are 
forty-two  stations  in  this  list,  so  there  are  forty-two  generations  in  the  first  Grospel 
from  Abraham  (the  starting-point  of  the  faithful)  to  Christ  (in  whom  they  find  rest). 
And,  again,  it  may  be  more  than  a  coincidence  that  the  woman  in  the  Apocalypse 
who  represents  the  Church  militant  (Rev.  xii.)  was  in  the  wilderness  forty-two 
months.  In  all  three  cases  (as  certainly  in  the  last)  it  is  likely  that  the  number  forty- 
two  was  designedly  chosen  because  it  is  12  X  3f,  and  3J,  or  the  half  of  7,  is  the 
number  which  expresses  trial,  probation,  and  imperfection.     Consider,  therefore — 

I.  That  this  Itinbbaky  was  written  "  by  t.he  commandment  of  the  Lord,"  no 

DOUBT  as  a  memorial   UNTO   THE   CHILDREN  OF   ISRAEL   OF  THEIR  TRIALS   AND    OF    HIS 

FAITHFULNESS.  Even  SO  it  is  the  will  of  God  that  every  Church  and  every  soul 
should  keep  in  memory  the  stages  of  its  own  spiritual  progress,  for  these  are  full  of 
holy  memories  and  needful  lessons,  all  being  eloquent  of  our  own  insufficiency  and 
of  his  goodness.  No  one,  being  in  plenty  and  at  rest,  should  ever  forget  the  strait- 
nesB  and  the  trial  through  which  the  good  hand  of  God  hath  led  him. 

II.  That  the  two  ends  of  this  Itinerary  are  plainly  fixed,  the  one  in  the 

GLORIOUS  deliverance  FROM  EOYPT  "  AFTER  THE  PASSOVER,''  THE  OTHER  ON  THE  VERGE 

OF  Jordan  in  full  view  of  Canaan.  Even  so  all  spiritual  life  histories  begin  with 
the  redemption  from  bondage  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  end  with  the  sure 
hope  of  immortality  on  the  verge  of  the  river  of  death. 

IIL  That  the  intermediate  stages  are  to  a  great  extent  uncertain,  some 
quite  unknown,  and  others  matter  of  dispute.  Even  so,  while  we  know  whence 
all  Christian  progress  leads  men  at  the  first,  and  whither  it  brings  men  at  the  last, 
yet  the  intermediate  course  (sometimes  a  very  long  one)  is  for  the  most  part  strangely 
indiscernible,  its  points  of  contact  with  the  outer  world  having  little  meaning  or 
interest  save  for  the  travellers  themselves.  Just  as  maps  help  us  little  to  follow  the 
forty-two  stages,  so  do  religious  theories  give  us  small  assistance  in  tracing  the  actual 
course  of  a  soul  through  the  trials  and  perplexities  of  real  life. 

IV.  That  with  exception  of  the  beginning  and  the  end,  the  only  fixed  points 
in  the  Itinerary  are  Sinai,  BIadesh,  and  Hor — where  the  law  was  given,  where 
progress  was  resumed  after  long  drifting  to  and  fro,  where  Aaron  died.  Even 
so  there  are  in  the  history  of  most  souls  these  three  conspicuous  epochs  to  be  noted : 
(1)  where  the  obligation  to  obey  the  higher  law  of  God's  will  came  upon  them  ;  (2) 
where  after  much  drawing  back  and  consequent  failure  a  new  call  to  advance  was 
heard ;  (3)  where  the  old  outward  associations,  upon  which  they  had  all  along  leaned, 
failed  them,  and  yet  left  them  none  the  weaker. 

V.  That  the  few  notes  of  events  appended  to  certain  names  of  places  (Elim, 
Rephidim,  Hor)  seem  to  be  selected  arbitrarily.  Some  other  places  certainly  had, 
and  many  others  probably  had,  more  interesting  associations  for  the  Israelites. 
Even  so  it  is  not  only  or  chiefly  those  passages  which  attract  attention  and  secure 
comment  in  the  history  of  a  Church  or  of  a  .soul  which  are  of  deep  interest  and 
profound  importance  to  itself ;  names  and  facts  which  have  no  associations  for 
others  may  for  it  be  full  of  the  deepest  meaning. 

And  note  that  all  the  stations  named  in  this  list  have  their  own  signification  in 
the  Hebrew,  but  the  spiritual  teaching  founded  on  such  signification  is  too  •rbitraijr 
and  fanciful  to  be  leriously  dealt  with. 


432  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBBBS.  [oh.  xxxiii.  1—49. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 49. — The  joumeyings  of  the  Israelites.  Reading  through  this  record, 
which  looks,  on  the  first  appearance  of  it,  much  like  a  page  from  a  gazetteer,  we 
are  made  to  feel — 

I.  How  LITTLE  WE  SHOULD  KNOW  OF  THE  EXPERIENCES  OF  ISRAEL  IN  THEIE  WAN- 
DERINGS IF  \\'E  HAD  BEEN  TOLD  NO  MORE  THAN  THIS.  A  period  of  forty  years  has 
to  he  covered  ;  and  though  hy  one  kind  of  narration  it  takes  four  books,  full  of 
solemnity  and  (variety,  abounding  in  matters  of  stirring  interest,  and  often  going  into 
the  minutest  detail,  in  order  to  indicate  sufSciently  the  events  of  the  period,  yet  by 
another  kind  of  narration  the  period  can  be  comprised  in  forty-nine  short  verses. 
All  the  way  through  these  verses  it  is  assumed  that  a  particular  aspect  of  the  course 
of  Israel  is  being  presented,  and  that  a  full,  edifying,  and  satisfying  narrative  is  to 
be  sought  elsewhere.  Consider  what  great  omissions  there  are.  We  do  indeed  see 
something  of  the  manner  of  starting,  but  even  here  there  is  hardly  anything  to 
explain  how  Israel  came  to  leave  Egypt.  It  is  said  that  they  passed  through  the 
midst  of  the  sea,  but  nothing  is  said  of  the  wonderful  and  glorious  manner  in  which 
the  passage  was  effected.  There  is  nothing  of  all  the  law-giving  at  Sinai;  nothing 
of  the  tabernacle,  the  ark,  the  offerings,  and  the  priestly  ofiBce ;  nothing  of  the  great 
manna  mercies ;  nothing  even  of  the  cloud  and  trumpets,  though  they  had  so  much 
to  do  with  the  journeys ;  nothing  of  the  rebellion  which  was  the  great  cause  of  this 
long  wandering.  If  it  was  a  mere  record  of  places  we  could  better  understand  it,  but 
there  are  just  enough  of  additional  matters  introduced  to  perp'ex  us  as  to  why  some 
are  inserted  and  others  omitted.  How  clear  it  becomes,  in  the  light  of  an  artless 
record  like  this,  that  we  shall  err  if  we  allow  ourselves  to  look  too  constantly  on  the 
books  of  the  Old  Testament  as  being  the  literature,  the  classic  literature,  of  the 
Hebrews  1  That  they  are  literature  is  of  course  true,  but  it  is  so  small  a  part  of  the 
truth  concerning  them,  that  if  we  allow  it  to  become  too  prominent,  it  will  hide  nmch 
more  important  truth.  Moses  was  evidently  not  a  man  to  care  about  the  niceties 
and  elaborations  so  dear  to  fastidious  writers.  His  hands  were  too  full  of  guiding 
and  governing.  If  what  he  wrote  was  written  in  a  way  to  glorify  God,  that  was 
sufBcient.  We  find  in  the  Pentateuch  not  history,  but  the  rough,  yet  authentic  and 
unspeakably  precious,  materials  of  history.  A  man  with  the  requisite  interest  and 
knowledge  may  analyse,  select,  and  combine  these  materials  into  a  history  from  his 
own  point  of  view,  but  thanks  be  to  God  that  he  took  a  meek,  humble,  and  unselfish 
Moses,  who  had  no  views  of  his  own  to  assert,  and  who  thought  of  no  monumeatum 
cere  perennitis,  and  made  him  his  pen  to  write  something  a  great  deal  more  important 
than  the  history  of  any  nation,  namely,  the  dealings  of  God  with  his  own  typical 
people,  and  through  them  with  the  world  at  large. 

II.  Though  this  is  such  a  brief  and  apparently  artless  record,  little  more  than  a 
copy  of  names  from  a  map,  yet  how  much  it  would  tell  ds,  even  if  we  had  been 
TOLD  NO  MORE.  If  this  Were  but  the  sole  surviving  fragment  of  the  four  books,  it 
would  nevertheless  indicate  the  presence  of  God,  and  that  in  very  remarkable  ways. 
It  would  indicate  the  authority  of  Jehovah  over  Israel.  Moses  and  Aaron  are  spoken 
of  as  the  leaders  of  Israel  (ver.  1),  yet  only  leaders  under  God ;  for  Moses  wrote  this 
very  record  at  the  commandment  of  God  (ver.  2),  and  Aaron  went  up  into  Mount  Hor 
to  die  at  the  commandment  of  God  (ver.  38).  We  should  also  learn  something  of 
the  punitive  power  of  God.  We  should  feel  ourselves  in  the  presence  of  some  terrible 
sin,  some  terrible  suffering,  and  some  crowning  blow  which  had  come  upon  Egypt. 
We  should  learn  that  God  was  able  to  vindicate  his  majesty  and  glory  against  the 
arrogance  of  idolatry  (ver.  4).  We  should  learn  that  human  life  was  at  the  sovereign 
disposal  of  God,  for  he  controls  the  death  of  the  first-born  and  the  death  of  Aaron. 
And  from  what  we  thus  plainly  see  of  God's  presence  in  certain  places,  we  might 
infer  that  he  was  also  in  the  places  where  we  see  him  not.  We  might  infer  that  if 
he  was  in  the  midst  of  the  Israelites  when  they  left  Egypt,  and  in  their  midst  forty 
years  after,  then  he  must  have  been  with  them  all  the  time  between.  Thus,  though 
in  these  forty-nine  verses  we  are  told  iiotbiiig  whatever,  in  a  plain,  direct  way,  oj 
human  chara/Aer,  we  are  yet  brought  face  to  face  with  very  suggestive  intimations 


CH.  xxxai.  60  -xixiv.  29.]    THE  BOOK  OF  NDMBER8. 


433 


concerning  the  character  of  God.  From  the  human  point  of  view  the  record  is  indeed 
a  very  barren  one ;  but  this  only  helps  to  show  how  when  man  becomes  scarcely 
visible,  unless  as  a  mere  wanderer,  the  glory  of  God  shines  brilliantly  as  ever. 

III.  We  have  thus  tried  to  imagine  this  passage  as  being  the  sole  surviving  frag- 
ment of  the  four  books  which  deal  with  the  wanderings.  But  we  know  in  reality 
that  it  is  only  a  sort  of  appendix  to  the  record  of  notable  and  solemn  proceedings 
already  given.  It  may  even  seem  as  if  it  would  not  have  been  much  missed  if  it 
had  been  left  out.    As  we  think  over  it,  however,  we  become  conscious  that  A  distinct 

AND   PECULIAE   IMPRESSION  IS  BEING  PBODUCED  ON  OUR  MINDS.      Heading  through  the 

Book  of  Numbers,  we  wander  with  Israel  from  the  day  they  leave  Sinai  down  to  the 
day  they  enter  the  plains  of  Moab  by  Jordan  ;  and  now  in  this  passage  we  are  all  at 
once  lifted  as  it  were  into  an  exceeding  high  mountain,  and  get  a  bird's-eye  view 
of  the  wandering,  shifting  life  of  Israel  during  these  forty  years.  It  is  well  to  be 
brought  face  to  face  with  something  that  will  remind  us  of  the  shifting  character  of 
human  life.  Even  the  lives  that  seem  most  stationary,  as  far  as  local  circumstances 
are  concerned,  are  full  of  change.  It  is  not  because  a  man  is  born,  lives,  and  dies 
in  one  locality,  perhaps  even  in  one  house,  that  his  life  is  to  be  reckoned  a  settled 
one.  Wherever  we  are,  however  rooted  and  grounded  in  appearance,  we  see  one 
generation  going  and  another  coming,  ourselves  being  a  part  of  what  we  see.  Here, 
in  the  record  of  tnese  journeyings,  was  something  true /or  all  Israel;  Moses  and 
Aaron  were  brought  down  to  the  same  level  with  the  humblest  of  their  foUowerti. 
There  are  certain  necessary  outlines  of  change  in  the  course  of  every  human  being 
who  lives  to  the  allotted  term — birth,  unconscious  infancy,  the  common  influences  of 
childhood,  the  time  to  choose  a  temporal  occupation,  the  day  when  father  dies  and 
when  mother  dies,  the  dropping  away  of  kindred,  companions,  and  friends,  and  so 
on  till  death  comes  at  last.  There  is  so  much  of  life  lived  and  so  much  of  biography 
written  under  the  fascinating  glamour  of  mere  mundane  interests,  that  it  is  a  good 
thing  to  go  where,  along  with  God  himself,  we  may  look  down  on  the  changing 
scenes  of  earth  from  the  dwarfing  and  humbling  heights  of  eternity.  There  is  a  time 
to  listen  to  the  botanist  and  the  expert  in  vegetable  physiology,  while  they  discourse 
to  us  on  the  wonders  of  the  leaf ;  there  is  a  time  to  see  what  the  painter  can  do  with 
it,  and  what  the  poet  j  but  from  all  these  we  must  turn  at  last  to  God's  own  Isaiah, 
and  hear  him  drawing  out  the  great  final  lesson,  "  We  all  do  fade  as  a  leaf." — Y. 


EXPOSITION. 


The  olearanok,  the  boundaries,  and 

THE    ALLOTMENT    OF    OaNAAN    (ch.    XXxiii. 

60— xxxiv.  29).  Ver.  60.— And  the  Lord 
spake.  It  is  quite  obvious  that  a  new  sec- 
tion begins  here,  closely  connected,  not  with 
the  Itinerary  which  precedes  it,  but  with  the 
delimitation  which  follows.  The  formula 
which  introduces  the  present  command  is 
repeated  in  ch.  xxxv.  1,  and  again  in  the  last 
verse  of  ch.  xxxvi.,  thus  giving  a  character 
.  of  its  own  to  this  concluding  portion  of  the 
Book,  and  to  some  extent  isolating  it  from 
the  rest. 

Ver.  51.  —  When  ye  are  passed  over 
Jor<lan.  Previous  legislation  had  antici- 
pated the  time  when  they  should  have  come 
mto  their  own  land  (cf.  ch.  xv.  2  j  Levit. 
xxiii.  10),  but  now  the  crossing  of  the  river 
is  spoken  of  as  the  last  step  on  their  journey 
home. 

Ver.  52. — Te  shall  drive  out     The  He- 
brew word  (from  EHJ)  is  the  same  which  is 
translated  "dispossess"  in  the  next  verse. 
The  Septuagint  naa  in  both  cases  ctKoKdrf, 
^UMBKllS, 


supplying  (like  the  A.  V.)  the  word  "in- 
habitants" in  ver.  53.  The  Hebrew  word, 
however,  seems  to  have  much  the  same  sense 
as  the  English  phrase  "  clear  out,"  and  is, 
therefore,  equally  applied  to  the  land  and 
the  occupants  of  it.  No  doubt  it  implies 
extermination  as  a  necessary  condition  of  the 
clearance.  Their  pictures.  DJp'SE'O.  Sep- 
tuagint, TOf  (TroTTcdf  aiiTCiv  (their  outlooks, 
or  high  places).  The  Targums  of  Onkelos 
and  Palestine  have  "  the  houses  of  their 
worship ; "  the  Targum  of  Jerusalem  has 
"their  idols."  .■  The  same  word  occurs  in 
Levit.  xxvi.  1,  in  the  phrase  n'5?'0  t?!!?, 
which  is  usually  rendered  "a  stone  image," 
t. «.  a  stone  shaped  into  some  likeness  of 
man.  If  so,  D'BB'D  by  itself  has  probably 
the  same  meaning  ;  at  any  rate  it  can  hardly 
be  "  a  picture,"  nor  is  there  the  least  evi- 
dence that  the  art  of  painting  was  at  all 
practised  among  the  rude  tribes  of  Canaan. 
The  same  word,  maskith,  is  indeed  found  in 
E^ek.  viii.  12  in  connection  with  "gravings" 


434 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBBBa    [oH.  zxxfii.  60— jaxiv.  29. 


(from  pgn ;  of.  laa.  xxii.  16 ;  xlix.  16 
with  Ezek.  iv.  1 ;  xxiii.  14)  on  a  wall ;  but 
even  this  belonged  to  a  very  different  age. 

Their  molten  images.  DflbDD ''p!jV,  "im- 
ages cast  of  brass."  Septuagint,  rd  i'Siu\a 
T&  X'""'"''''  The  word  tselem  is  only  else- 
where used  in  the  Pentateuch  for  that  "  like- 
ness" which  is  reproduced  in  Divine  creation 
(Gen.  i.  26,  27 ;  ix.  6)  or  in  human  gener- 
ation (Gen.  V.  3) ;  in  the  later  books,  how- 
ever (especially  in  Daniel),  it  is  freely  used  for 
idols.  On  " massehdh"  see  on  Exod.  xxxii. 
4 ;  Isa.  zxx.  22.  Their  high  places.  DHiDIl. 
See  on  Levit,  xxvi. .  30.  The  Septuagint 
translates  Bamoth  in  both  places  by  arfiXai, 
and  of  course  it  was  not  the  high  places 
themselves,  which  were  simply  certain  pro- 
minent elevations,  but  the  monuments  (of 
whatever  kind)  which  superstition  had  erected 
upon  them,  which  were  to  be  plucked  down. 
AS  a  fact,  it  would  seem  that  the  Jews,  in- 
stead of  obeying  this  command,  appropri- 
ated the  Bamoth  to  their  own  religious  uses 
(cf .  1  Sam.  ix.  12  ;  1  Kings  iii.  2 ;  Ps.  bcxviii. 
53,  &C.).  The  natural  result  was,  as  in  all 
similar  cases,  that  not  only  the  Bamoth,  but 
very  many  of  the  superstitions  and  idolatries 
connected  with  them,  were  taken  over  into 
the  service  of  the  Lord. 

Ver.  53. — ^I  have  given  you  the  land. 
"The  earth  is  the  Lord's,"  and  no  one, 
therefore,  can  dispute  his  right  in  the  ab- 
stract to  evict  any  of  his  tenants  and  to  put 
others  in  possession.  But  while  the  whole 
earth  was  the  Lord's,  it  is  clear  that  he  as- 
sumed a  special  relation  towards  the  land  of 
Canaan,  as  to  which  he  chose  to  exercise 
directly  the  rights  and  duties  of  landlord 
(see  on  Dent.  xxii.  8  for  a  small  but  striking 
instance).  The  first  duty  of  a  landlord  is  to 
see  that  the  occupancy  of  his  property  is  not 
abused  for  illegal  or  immoral  ends  ;  and  this 
duty  excuses,  because  it  necessitates,  eviction 
under  certain  circumstances.  It  is  not, 
therefore,  necessary  to  argue  that  the  Canaan- 
ites  were  more  infamous  than  many  others  ; 
it  is  enough  to  remember  that  God  had  as- 
sumed towards  the  land  which  they  occupied 
(apparently  by  conquest)  a  relation  which 
did  not  allow  him  to  overlook  their  enormi- 
ties, as  he  might  those  of  other  nations  (see 
on  Exod.  xxiii.  23—83 ;  xxxiv.  11 — 17,  and 
cf.  Acts  xiv.  16;  xvii.  30).  It  was  (if  we 
like  to  put  it  so)  the  misfortune  of  the 
Canaanites  that  they  alone  of  "  all  nations  " 
could  not  be  suffered  to  "  walk  in  their  own 
ways,"  because  they  had  settled  in  a  land 
which  the  Lord  had  chosen  to  administer 
directly  as  his  own  earthly  kingdom. 

Ver.  54. — ^Te  shall  divide  the  land  by  lot. 
These  directions  are  repeated  in  substance 
from  ch.  xxvi.  53 — 66.  Every  man's  in- 
heritance,     ifot  only  the  tribe,   but  the 


family  and  the  household,  was  to  receive  its 
special  inhei-itanco  by  lot ;  no  doubt  in  such 
a  way  that  the  final  settlement  of  the  countiy 
would  correspond  with  the  blood  relation- 
ships of  the  settlers. 

Ver.  55.  —  If  ye  will  not  drive  out  the 
inhabitants.  As  was  in  fact  the  case  (Judges 
i. ).  The  warning  is  here  given  for  the  first 
time,  because  the  danger  was  now  near  at 
hand,  and  had  indeed  already  shoivn  itself  in 
the  matter  of  the  Midiauitish  women  and 
children.  Pricks  in  your  eyes,  and  thorns 
in  your  sides.  ITatural  symbols  of  dangerous 
annoyances.  Possibly  the  thickets  which 
fringe  the  Jordan  supplied  them  with  pre- 
sent examples.  In  Josh,  xxiii  13  we  have 
"scourges  in  your  sides,  and  thorns  in  your 
eyes,"  which  sounds  somewhat  more  arti- 
ficial. In  Judges  ii.  3,  where  this  warning 
is  quoted,  the  figure  is  not  expressed  at  all: 
"  they  shall  be  in  your  sides." 

Yer.  66. — I  shall  do  unto  you  as  I  thought 
to  do  unto  them,  i.  e.  I  shall  execute  by  other 
hands  upon  you  the  sentence  of  dispossession 
which  ye  shall  have  refused  to  execute  upon 
the  Canaanites.  The  threat  (although  in 
fact  fulfilled)  does  not  necessarily  involve 
any  prophecy,  since  to  settle  down  among 
the  remnants  of  the  heathen  was  a  course  of 
action  which  would  obviously  and  for  many 
reasons  commend  itself  to  the  Israelites. 
Indolence  and  cowardice  were  consulted  by 
such  a  policy  as  much  as  the  natural  feelings 
of  pity  towards  vanquished  and  apparently 
hannless  foes.  The  command  to  extirpate 
was  certainly  justified  in  this  ease  (if  it  could 
be  in  any)  by  the  unhappy  consequences  of 
its  neglect.  Israel  being  what  he  was,  and 
so  little  severed  in  anything  but  religion 
from  the  ancient  heathen,  his  only  chance  of 
future  happiness  lay  in  keeping  himself  from 
any  contact  with  them.  On  the  morality  of 
the  command  itself,  see  on  the  passages  re- 
ferred to,  and  on  the  slaughter  of  the  Midian- 
ites.  As  a  fact,  the  extirpation  3f  the  con- 
quered did  not  offend  the  moral  sense  of  the 
Jews  then  any  more  than  it  did  that  of  our 
heathen  Saxon  ancestors.  Where  both  races 
could  not  dwell  in  security,  it  was  a  matter  of 
course  that  the  weaker  was  destroyed.  Such 
a  command  was  therefore  justified  at  that 
time  by  the  end  to  be  attained,  because  it 
was  not  contraiy  to  the  moral  law  as  then 
revealed,  or  to  the  moral  sense  as  then 
educated.  Being  in  itself  a  lawful  proceed- 
ing, it  was  made  a  religious  proceeding,  and 
taken  out  of  the  category  of  selfish  violence 
by  being  made  a  direct  command  of  God. 

Ch.  zxxiv.  2. — Into  the  land  of  Canaan. 

Canaan  has  here  its  proper  signification  as 
the  land  (roughly  speaking)  between  Jordan 
and  the  sea  (so  m  ch.  xxxiL  82 ;  Josh.  zxii. 
11,  32).     Nor  is  there  any  clear  instance  of 


OH.  xxxin.  60— XXXIV.  29.]    THE  BOOK  OE'  NUMBERS. 


436 


■  its  including  the,  trans-Jordanic  territories. 
In  the  prophets  the  word  reverts  to  its  proper 
(etymological)  m eaning,  as  the  "flat  country  " 
along  the  Mediterranean  coast  (cf.  Isa.  ziz. 
18  ;  Zeph.  ii.  6  ;  Matt.  xy.  22).  This  is  the 
land  that  shall  fall  unto  yon.  These  words 
should  not  be  placed  in  a  parenthesis  ;  it  is 
a  simple  statement  in  the  tautological  style 
so  common  in  these  hooks.  With  the 
coasts  thereof,  or,  "  according  to  its  bound- 
aries," i.  e.  within  the  limits  which  nature 
and  the  Divine  decree  had  set  to  the  land  of 
Canaan. 

Yer.  3. — Then  your  south  auarteT.  Ra- 
ther, "and  your  south  side.  From  the 
wilderness  of  Zin  along  by  the  coast  of 
Edom.  This  general  preliminary  definition  of 
the  southern  frontier  marks  the  "wilderness 
of  Zin  "  as  its  chief  natural  feature,  and  as- 
serts that  this  wilderness  rested  "  upon  the 

sides  "  (^7^J?)  of  Edom.  The  wilderness  of 
Zin  can  scarcely  be  anything  else  than  the 
Wady  Murreh,  with  more  or  less  of  the  barren 
hills  which  rise  to  the  south  of  it,  for  this 
wady  undoubtedly  forms  the  natural  southern 
boundary  of  Canaan.  AH  travellers  agree 
both  as  to  the  remarkable  character  of  the  de- 
pression itself  and  as  to  the  contrast  between 
its  northern  and  southern  mountain  walls. 
To  the  south  lies  the  inhospitable  and  un- 
cultivatable  desert ;  to  the  north  the  often 
arid  and  treeless,  but  still  partially  green 
and  habitable,  plateau  of  Southern  Palestine. 
The  expression,  "on  the  sides  of  Edom,"  can 
only  mean  that  beyond  the  Wady  Murreh 
lay  territory  belonging  to  Edom,  the  Mount 
Seir  of  Deut.  L  2,  the  Seir  of  Deut.  L  44  ;  it 
does  not  seem  possible  that  Edom  proper, 
which  lay  to  the  east  of  the  ArabaJb,  and 
which  barely  marched  at  all  with  the  land  of 
Canaan,  should  be  intended  here  (see  on  Josh, 
zv.  1,  and  the  note  on  the  site  of  Kadesh). 
And  your  south  border.  This  begins  a 
fresh  paragraph,  in  which  the  southern 
boundary,  already  roughly  fixed,  is  described 
in  greater  detail.  Shall  be  the  utmost  coast 
of  the  salt  sea  eastward.  Rather,  "shall 
be  from  the  extremity  (ilVj?)?)  of  the  salt  sea 
eastward  "  (cf.  Josh.  xv.  2).  The  easternmost 
point  in  this  boundary  was  to  be  fixed  at  the 
lonthemmost  extremity  of  the  Salt  Sea. 

Ver.  4. — Shall  turn  from  the  south  to  the 
ascent  of  Akrabbim.    It  is  not  at  all  clear 

what  n^yiy?  -^i^P  ^^^  mean  in  this  sentence. 
The  A.  v.,  which  foUows  the  Septuagint  and 
the  Targums,  does  not  seem  to  give  any 
sense,  while  the  rendering,  "  to  the  south 
side  of  the  ascent,"  does  not  seem  gram- 
matically defensible.  Moreover,  it  is  quite 
uncertain  where  the  "ascent  of  Akrabbim," 
t.  e.  the  "  Scorpion -pass,"  or  "  Scorpion- 
atsiri,"  is  to  be  placed.     So^ie  travellers 


have  recognised  both  place  and  name  in  a 
precipitous  road  which  ascends  the  northern 
cliffs  towards  the  western  end  of  the  Wady 
Murreh,  and  which  the  Arabs  call  Nakb 
Eareb ;  others  would  make  the  ascent  to  be 
the  steep  pass  of  es  Sufah,  over  which  runs 
the  road  from  Fetra  to  Hebron ;  others,  again, 
identify  the  Scorpion-stairs  with  the  row  of 
white  cliffs  which  obliquely  cross  and  close 
in  the  Ghor,  some  miles  south  of  the  Salt  Sea, 
and  separate  it  from  the  higher  level  of  the 
Arabah.  Kone  of  these  identifications  are 
satisfactory,  although  the  first  and  last  have 
more  to  be  said  in  their  favour  than  the 
second.  Possibly  the  ascent  of  Akrabbim 
may  have  been  only  the  Wady  Eikreh,  along 
which  the  natural  frontier  would  run  from 
the  point  of  the  Salt  Sea  into  the  Wady 
Murreh.  Pass  on  to  Zin.  It  is  only  here 
and  in  Josh.  xv.  3  that  the  name  Zin  stands 
by  itself;  it  may  have  been  some  place  in 
the  broadest  part  of  the  Wady  Murreh  which 
gave  its  name  to  the  neighbouring  wilder- 
ness.   From  the  south  to  Eadesh-bamea. 

Here  again  we  have  the  expression  "?  3.J3P, 
of  which  we  do  not  know  the  exact  force. 
But  if  Kadesh  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
the  present  Ain  Kudes,  then  it  may  be 
understood  that  the  frontier,  after  reaching 
the  western  end  of  the  Wady  Murreh,  made 
a  <Ut<nir  to  the  south  so  as  to  include  Kadesh, 
as  a  place  of  peculiarly  sacred  memory  in  the 
annals  of  Israel.  It  is  indeed  very  difficult, 
with  this  description  of  the  southern  frontier 
of  Canaan  before  us,  to  believe  that  Kadesh 
was  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the 
Arabah,  where  many  commentators  place  it ; 
for  if  that  were  the  case,  then  the  boundaiy 
line  has  not  yet  made  any  progress  at  all 
towards  the  west,  and  the  only  points  given 
on  the  actual  southern  boundary  are  the  two 
unknown  places  which  follow.  Hazar-addar. 
In  Josh.  XV.  3  this  double  name  is  apparent^ 
divided  into  the  two  names  of  Hezron  and 
Addar,  but  possibly  the  latter  only  is  the 
place  intended  here.  A  Kar^aa  is  also 
mentioned  there,  which  is  equally  unknown 
with  the  rest. 

,  Ver.  5. — The  river  of  Egypt,  or  "  brook 
(pTO)  of  Egypt."  Septuagint,  x"/«'/°P<""' 
AlyvvTov.  It  was  a  winter  torrent  which 
drained  the  greater  part  of  the  western  half 
of  the  northern  desert  of  the  Sinaitic  penin- 
sula. It  was,  however,  only  in  its  lower 
course,  where  a  single  channel  receives  the 
intermittent  outflow  of  many  wadys,  that  it 
was  known  as  the  "brook  of  Egypt,"  be- 
cause it  formed  the  well-marked  boundary 
between  Egypt  and  Canaan  (cf.  2  Chron.  vii. 
8,  and  Isa.  xzvii.  12,  where  the  Septuagint 
has  i'u;  'PivoKopovpui/,  from  the  name  of 
the  frontier  fort,  Rhinocomra,  afterwards 
built  tl^^re).    So  &r  as  we  ate  able  to  folloTif 


436 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS,    [oh.  xxziu.  60— xxxiv. 


the  line  drawn  in  these  verses,  it  wonld 
appear  to  have  held  a  course  somewhat  to 
the  south  of  west  for  ahont  half  its  length, 
then  to  hare  made  a  southerly  deflection  to 
Kadesh,  and  from  thence  to  have  struck 
north-west  nntil  it  reached  the  sea,  almost  in 
the  same  latitude  as  the  point  from  which  it 
started. 

Ver.  6. — Ani  as  for  the  western  border. 
The  Hebrew  word  for  "west"  (D^)  is  simply 
that  for  "sea,"  because  the  Jews  in  their 
own  land  always  had  the  sea  on  their  west. 
Thus  the  verse  reads  literally,  "And  the  sea 
boundary  shall  be  to  yon  the  great  sea  and 
boundary ;  this  shall  be  to  you  the  sea  bound- 
ary." It  would  seem  very  unlikely  that  the 
Jews  familiarly  used  the  word  "yam"  for 
"  west "  after  a  residence  of  several  centuries 
in  a  country  where  the  sun  set  not  over  the 
■ea,  but  over  the  desert.  Ifothing  can  of 
course  be  jn-oved  from  the  use  of  the  word 
here,  but  it  cannot  be  overlooked  as  one 
small  indication  that  the  language  of  this 
passage  at  any  rate  is  the  language  of  an 
age  subsequent  to  the  conquest  of  Canaan 
(see  on  Ezod.  z.  19 ;  xxvi.  22,  and  ch.  ii. 
18)  The  line  of  coast  from  the  brook  of 
Egypt  to  the  Leontes  was  upwards  of  160 
miles  in  length. 

Ver.  7. — ^Ye  shall  point  out  for  you,  t.  e. 
ye  shall  observe  and  make  for,  in  tracing 
the  boundary.  Septuagint,  KaTa/UTpriaiTt 
,  .  irapd.  Mount  Hor.  !Kot  of  course  the 
Mount  Hor  on  which  Aaron  died,  but  another 
far  to  the  north,  probably  in  Lebanon.  The 
Hebrew  ^^^  ^^,  which  the  Septuagint  had 
rendered  'Qp  ri  opoc  in  ch.  xx.,  it  renders 
here  r6  opoc  <"&  opoc,  taking  ID  as  simply 
another  form  of  ^^,  as  it  probably  is.  Hor 
Ha-har  is  therefore  equivalent  to  the  English 
"  Mount  Mountain  ;"  and  just  as  there  are 
many  "Avon  rivers"  on  the  English  maps, 
so  there  were  probably  many  mountains 
locally  known  among  the  Jews  as  Hor  Ha- 
har.  We  do  not  know  what  peak  this  was, 
although  it  must  have  been  one  clearly  dis- 
tinguishable from  the  sea.  There  is,  how- 
ever, no  reason  whatever  for  supposing  (con- 
trary to  the  analogy  of  all  such  names,  and 
•f  the  other  Mount  Hor)  that  it  included  the 
whole  range  of  Lebanon  proper, 

Ver.  8. — ^From  Mount  Hor  ye  shall  point 
out  your  border  unto  the  entranoe  of  Ha- 
math.  Literally,  "from  Mount  Hor  point 
out  (IXrin,  as  in  the  previous  verse)  to  come 
to  Hamath,"  which  seems  to  mean,  "from 
Mount  Hor  strike  a  line  for  the  entrance  to 
Hamath."  The  real  difficulty  lies  in  the 
expression  JlDn  iOp,  which  the  Septuagint 
tendsTB  (iairopivoniviiv  j'lt  'E/idS,  "as  men 
enter  into  Hamath."  The  same  expression 
•Acnrs  in  ch.  ziii.  31,  and  is  siinilarly  ren- 


dered by  the  Septuagint.  A  comparison 
with  Judges  iii.  3  and  other  passages  will 
show  that  "I'bo  Chamath"  had  a  definite 
geographical  meaning  as  the  accepted  name 
of  a  locality  in  the  extreme  north  of  Canaan. 
When  we  come  to  inquire  where  "the  en- 
trance to  Hamath  "  was,  we  have  nothing  to 
guide  us  except  the  natural  features  of  the 
country.  Hamath  itself,  afterwards  Epi- 
phaneia  on  the  Orontes,  lay  far  beyond  the 
cxtiemest  range  of  Jewish  settlement ;  nOr 
does  it  appear  that  it  was  ever  conquered  by 
the  greatest  of  the  Jewish  kings.  The  Ha- 
math in  which  Solomon  built  store-cities 
(2  Chron.  viiL  4),  and  the  Hamath  which 
Jeroboam  II.  " recovered"  for  Israel  (2  Kings 
xiv.  28),  was  not  the  city,  but  the  kingdom 
(or  part  of  the  kingdom),  of  that  name. 
We  do  not  know  how  far  south  the  territory 
of  Hamath  may  have  extended,  but  it  is 
quite  likely  that  it  included  at  times  the 
whole  upper  valley  of  the  Leontes  (now  the 
Lit&ny).  The  "entrance  to  Hamath"  then 
must  be  looked  for  at  some  point,  distinctly 
marked  by  the  natural  features  of  the 
country,  where  the  traveller  from  Palestine 
would  enter  the  territory  of  Hamath.  This 
point  has  been  usually  fixed  at  the  pass 
through  which  the  Orontes  breaks  out  of  its 
upper  valley  between  Lebanon  and  anti- 
Lebanon  into  the  open  plain  of  Hamath. 
This  point,  however,  is  more  than  sixty  miles 
north  of  Damascus  (which  confessedly  never 
belonged  to  Israel),  and  nearly  a  hundred 
miles  north-north-west  from  Dan.  It  would 
require  some  amount  of  positive  evidence  to 
make  it  even  probable  that  the  whole  of  the 
long  and  narrow  valley  between  Lebanon 
and  anti-Lebanon,  widening  t  wards  the 
north,  and  separated  by  mountainous  and 
difficult  country  from  the  actual  settlements 
of  the  Jews,  was  yet  Divinely  designated  as 
part  of  their  inheritance.  No  such  positive 
evidence  exists,  and  therefore  we  are  per- 
fectly free  to  look  for  "the  entrance  to 
Hamath  "  much  further  to  the  south.  It  is 
evident  that  the  ordinary  road  ftom  the  land 
of  Canaan  or  from  the  cities  of  Phoenicia  to 
Hamath  must  have  struck  the  valley  of  the 
Leontes,  have  ascended  that  river  to  its 
sources,  and  crossed  the  watevshe  to  the 
upper  stream  of  Orontes.  The  whole  of  this 
road,  until  it  reached  the  pas  already 
spoken  of  leading  down  to  the  Emesa  ot 
after  days,  and  so  to  Hamath,  lay  through 
a  narrow  valley  of  which  the  nariowest  part 
is  at  the  southern  end  of  the  mod  rn  district 
of  el  Bokaa,  almost  in  a  straight  line  be- 
tween Sidon  and  Mount  Hermon.  Here  the 
two  ranges  approach  most  nearly  t  'the  bed 
of  the  Litany  (Leontes),  forming  a  natural 
gate  by  which  the  traveller  to  Hamat  must 
needs  have  entered  from  the  soutli.  Hei» 
then,  very  nearly  in  lat  83°  30',  we  may 


OH.  xxxm.  60— XXXIV.  29.]    THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


4»7 


feagonably  pifice  the  "  entrance  to  Hamath  " 
80  often  spoken  of,  and  so  escape  the  neces- 
iity  of  imagining  an  artificial  and  imprac- 
ticable frontier  for  the  northern  boundary 
of  the  promised  land.  Zedad.  Identified 
by  some  with  the  present  village  of  Sadad  or 
Sudad,  to  the  south-east  of  Emesa  (Hums) ; 
but  this  identification,  which  is  at  best  very 
problematic,  is  wholly  out  of  the  question  if 
the  argument  of  the  precedingnote  be  accepted. 
Ver.  9.— Ziphron.  A  town  called  Sibraim 
is  mentioned  by  Ezekiel  (xlvii.  16)  as  lying 
on  the  boundary  between  Damasciis  and 
Hamath,  and  there  is  a  modem  village  of 
Zifr&n  about  forty  miles  north-east  of  Da- 
mascus, but  there  is  no  probable  ground  for 
supposing  that  either  of  these  are  the  Ziphron 
of  this  verse.  Hazar-enan,  i.  e.  "  fountain 
court."  There  are  of  course  many  places  in 
and_  about  the  Lebanon  and  anti-Lebanon 
ranges  to  which  such  a  name  would  be  suit- 
able, but  we  have  no  means  of  identifying  it 
with  any  one  of  them.  It  must  be  confessed 
that  this  "north  border"  of  Israel  is  ex- 
tremely obscure,  because  we  are  not  told 
whence  it  started,  nor  can  we  fix,  except  by 
conjecture,  one  single  point  upon  it.  A 
certain  amount  of  light  is  thrown  upon  the 
subject  by  the  description  of  the  tribal 
boundaries  and  possessions  as  given  in  Josh. 
xix. ,  and  by  the  enumeration  of  places  left 
unconquered  in  Josh.  xiii.  and  Judges  iii. 
The  most  northerly  of  the  tribes  were  Asher 
and  Naphtali,  and  it  does  not  appear  that 
their  allotted  territory  extended  beyond  the 
lower  valley  of  the  Iieontes  where  it  makes 
its  sharp  turn  towards  the  west.  It  is  true 
that  a  portion  of  the  tribe  of  Dan  afterwards 
occupied  a  district  fiirther  north,  but  Dan- 
Laish  itself,  which  was  the  extreme  of  Jewish 
settlement  in  this  direction,  as  Beersheba  in 
the  other,  was  southward  of  Mount  Hermon. 
The  passage  in  Josh.  xiiL  4 — 6  does  indeed 
go  to  prove  that  the  Israelites  never  occupied 
all  their  intended  territory  in  this  direction, 
but  as  far  as  we  can  tell  the  line  of  promised 
conquest  did  not  extend  further  north  than 
Zidon  and  Mount  Hermon.  "AU  Lebanon 
toward  the  sunrising"  cannot  well  mean 
the  whole  range  from  south  to  north,  but  all 
the  mountain  country  lying  to  the  east  of 
Zidon.  One  other  passage  promises  to  throw 
additional  light  upon  the  question,  viz.,  the 
ideal  delimitation  of  the  Holy  Land  in  Ezek. 
xlvii.  ;  and  here  it  is  true  that  we  find  a 
northern  frontier  (vers.  15 — 17)  apparently 
fer  beyond  the  line  of  actual  settlement,  and 
yet  containing  two  names  at  least  (Zedad 
and  Hazar-enan)  which  appear  in  the  present 
list.  It  is,  however,  q_uite  uncertain  whether 
the  prophet  is  describmg  any  possible  bound- 
ary line  at  all,  or  whether  he  is  only  men- 
tioning (humanly  speaking  at  random)  certain 
points  m  the  for  north ;   his  very  object 


would  seem  to  be  to  picture  an  enlarged 
Canaan  extending  beyond  its  utmost  his- 
torical limits.  Even  if  it  should  be  thought 
that  these  passages  require  a  frontier  further 
to  the  north  than  the  one  advocated  abpve, 
it  will  yet  be  impossible  to  carry  it  to  the 
northern  end  of  the  valley  between  Lebanon 
and  anti-Lebanon,  For  in  that  case  the 
northern  frontier  will  not  he  a  northern 
frontier  at  all,  but  will  actually  descend 
from  the  "  entrance  of  Hamath  "  in  a  south- 
erly or  south-westerly  direction,  and  dis- 
tinctly form  part  of  the  eastern  boundary, 

Ver.  ll.-^Shepha?i  is  unknown.  Biblftli 
cannot  possibly  be  the  Eiblah  in  the  land  of 
Hamath  (Jer.  xxxix.  6),  now  apparently 
Ribleh  on  the  Orontes.  This  one  example 
wiU  serve  to  show  how  delusive  are  these 
identifications  with  modern  places.  Even  if 
Ribleh  represents  wn  ancient  Eiblah,  it  is 
not  t)ie  Eiblah  which  is  mentioned  here.  Oa 
the  east  side  of  Ain,  i.  e.  of  the  fountain. 
The  Targums  here  imply  that  this  Ain  was 
the  source  of  Jordan  below  Mount  Hermon, 
and  that  would  agree  extremely  well  with 
what  follows.  The  Septnagint  has  Im  wt/yae, 
and  there  is  in  fact  more  than  one  fountain 
from  which  this  head-water  of  Jordan  takes 
its  rise.  Immediately  before  the  Septuagint 
has  Bj)\a  where  we  read  Eiblah.  It  has 
been  supposed  that  the  word  was  originally 
'Ap(3i)Xa,  a  transliteration  of  "  Har-bel,"  the 
mountain  of  Bel  or  Baal,  identical  with  the 
Harbaal-Hermon  (our  Mount   Hermon)  of 

Judges  iii.  3.  The  Hebrew  H^^IH  being 
differently  pointed,  and  the  final  n  taken  as 
the  suffix  of  direction,  we  get  73~in  $  but 
this  is  extremely  precarious.  Shall  reach 
unto  the  side  of  the  sea  of  Chinnereth  east- 
ward. Literally,  "shall  strike  (nnp)  the 
shoulder  of  the  sea,"  &e.  The  line  does  not 
seem  to  have  descended  the  stream  from  its 
source,  but  to  have  kept  to  the  east,  and  so 
to  have  struck  the  lake  of  Galilee  at  its 
north-eastern  comer.  From  this  point  it 
simply  followed  the  water-way  down  to  the 
Salt  Sea.  The  lands  beyond  Jordan  were  not 
reckoned  as  within  the  sacred  limits. 

Ver.  15.  — On  this  side  Jordan  near 
Jericho.  Literally,  "  on  the  side  paStl?)  of 
the  Jordsm  of  Jericho,"  It  was  not  of  course 
true  that  the  territory  which  they  had  re- 
ceived lay  eastward  of  Jericho,  but  it  was 
thi  case  that  the  tribe  leaders  had  there 
asked  and  received  permission  to  occupy  that 
territory,  and  it  was  in  this  direction  that 
the  temporary  settlements  of  Eeuben  and 
Gad  lay,  perhaps  also  those  of  half  Manasseh. 

Ver.  17. — Eleazar  the  priest,  and  Joshua 
the  son  of  Nun.  As  the  ecclesiastical  and 
military  heads  respeotiTely  of  the  theocMC|' 
(se«  on  oh.  zxzii.  88). 


tHE  BOOK  OP  NUMflEES.    [oh.  fflCsni.  SO— XXXIV.  29. 


Ver.  18.  —  One  prince  of  every  tribe.. 
This  was  arranged  no  doubt  in  order  to 
insure  fairness  in  fixing  the  boundaries  be- 
tween the  tribes,  which  had  to  be  done  after 
the  situation  of  the  tribe  was  determined  by 
lot ;  the  further  subdivision  of  the  tribal 
tenitory  was  probably  left  to  be  managed  by 
the  chiefs  of  the  tribe  itself.  Of  these  tribe 
princes  (see  on  oh.  xiii.  1  ;  Josh.  xiv.  1), 
Caleb  is  the  only  one  whose  name  is  known 
to  us,  and  he  had  acted  in  a  somewhat  similar 
capacity  forty  years  before.  This  may  of 
itself  account  for  the  tribe  of  Judah  being 
named  first  in  the  list,  especially  as  Eeuben 
was  not  represented  ;  but  the  order  in  which 
the  other  names  follow  ia  certainly  remark- 


able. Taken  in  pairs  (Judah  and  Simeon, 
Manasseh  and  Ephraim,  &c.),  they  advance 
regularly  from  south  to  north,  according  to 
their  subsequent  position  on  the  map.  Dif- 
fering as  this  arrangement  does  so  maikedly 
from  any  previously  adopted,  it  is  impossible 
to  suppose  that  it  is  accidental.  We  must 
conclude  either  that  a  coincidence  so  ap- 
parently trivial  was  Divinely  prearranged,  or 
that  the  arrangement  of  the  names  is  due  to 
a  later  hand  than  that  of  Moses. 

Ver.  20.  —  Shemnel.  This  is  the  same 
name  as  SamueL'  Of  the  rest,  every  one 
except  the  last  occurs  elsewhere  in  the 
Old  Testament  as  the  name  of  some  other 
Israelit 


HOMILETICS. 

Ch.  xxziiL  60 — xxxiv.  29. — The  Holy  Land.  In  this  seclaon  we  have,  spiritually, 
ibe  promised  inheritance  of  the  saints,  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  with  the  conditions 
under  which  it  is  to  be  received  and  enjoyed.  No  one  can  overlook  the  corre- 
spondence (which  is  fundamental  and  far-reaching)  between  their  "holy  land  "  and 
ours;  between  that  "rest"  which  awaited  them  in  Canaan,  and  that  "rest"  into 
which  we  do  now  enter.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  the  spiritual  antitype  of  Canaan. 
But  that  kingdom  is  (practically  considered)  twofold :  it  is  heaven,  or  rather  rest  in 
heaven,  only  reached  by  crossing  the  stream  of  death ;  it  is  also  (and  in  the  Scripture 
much  more  often)  the  rest  of  the  new  life  in  Christ,  which  yet  is  neither  absolute  nor 
independent  of  our  continued  striving  against  sin  (of.  Matt.  v.  3,  "theirs  is  the  king- 
dom ; "  Luke  xvii.  21  6. ;  Rom.  xiv.  17  ;  Col.  iii.  3 ;  Heb.  iv.  3  a.).  To  this  latter 
aspect  (the  kingdom  as  a  spiritual  and  moral  state)  belong  the  lessons  of  this  section, 
for  the  most  part.     Consider,  therefore — 

I.  That  the  one  great  duty  of  Isbael  ih  taking  possession  op  his  own  land 
WAS  wholly  to  dispossess  the  natives,  as  being  enemies  of  God  and  of  his 
worship.  Even  so  the  one  condition  on  which  we  inherit  that  kingdom  which  (in 
its  present  aspect)  is  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  that  we  put 
to  death  the  deeds  of  the  flesh,  and  crucify  the  old  man,  and  wage  a  war  of  extermin- 
ation against  all  the  sinful  aifections  which  have  made  their  home  in  our  human 
life. 

II.  That  Israel  was  further  required  to  abolish  all  their  monuments  of 
idolatry,  however  pleasing  and  interesting.  Even  bo  all  the  devices  and  imagin- 
adons  of  the  natural  man,  however  attractive,  which  are  contrary  to  the  sole  worship 
and  service  of  the  living  God  must  be  wholly,  and  without  exception,  destroyed. 

III.  That  the  command  to  exterminate  seemed  hard,  and  was  ungrateful 
(no  doubt)  to  most  in  Israel.  Why  be  so  extreme  ?  Why  not  enough  to  conquer, 
without  extirpating?  Why  not  enough  to  possess  the  best  of  the  land,  without 
labouring  to  clear  all  the  corners  ?  What  harm  could  feeble  remnants  of  heathen 
do  ?  could  they  not  even  make  them  useful  ?  Even  so  it  seems  hard  that  Christian 
people  may  make  no  compromise  with,  a'nd  show  no  toleration  for,  what  is  sinful  and 
selfish  in  human  life.  Why  need  we  be  perfect?  Shall  nothing  be  allowed  to  the 
old  Adam  ?  May  we  never  be  content  ?  If  leading  on  the  whole  a  Christian  life,  why 
weary  ourselves  about  small  points  of  moral  excellence  ?  Many  things  not  exactly 
right  may  be  very  useful ;  may  they  not  be  turned  to  account? 

IV.  That  as  a  fact  the  command  to  extirpate  was  not  obeyed.  Many  were 
left  unmolested  out  of  indolence  and  cowardice  when  the  first  rush  of  conquest  was 
passed  ;  many  were  spared  out  of  unwillingness  to  go  to  extremes  with  them.  Even 
so  most  Christian  people  leave  considerable  portions  of  their  own  lives  (which  God 
hath  given  them  for  a  prey,  Jer.  xiv.  5)  under  the  dominion  of  passions,  emotions, 
motives  which  are  not  Christian.  They  overcome  the  tyrannies  of  sin,  but  leave  the 
renuiMits  of  sin  unsubdued ;  in  other  words,  the^  subdue  their  evil  passions  and 


OH.  xtxm.  60— XXXIV.  29.]    THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  438 

desires,  but  shrink  from  destroying  them.  £!.  g.,  how  few  have  their  temper  entirely 
under  control  1  Thus  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  never  truly  theirs,  because  of  the 
Bins  which  they  have  been  too  indolent  or  too  self-confident  to  dislodge. 

V.  That  as  a  fact  the  other  command  was  not  obeyed  wholly  ;  sometimes 

6BAVBN  IMAGES  WERE  SERVED,   SOMETIMES  HIGH   PLACES  TURNED  TO  THE  WORSHIP  OF 

THE  Lord,  to  the  great  detriment  and  danger  of  the  true  faith.  Even  so 
the  vain  devices  and  perverted  imaginations  of  the  natural  man  have  not  been  dis- 
carded by  the  servants  of  Christ  in  many  cases ;  too  often  they  have  been  either 
adopted  in  their  blank  disloyalty  to  Christ  (as,  e.  g.,  that  "  covetousness  which  is 
idolatry  "),  or  else  adapted  to  religious  ends  (as  many  forms  of  will-worship,  material 
and  mental)  to  the  detriment  of  that  singleness  of  eye  and  heart  which  God 
requires. 

VI.  That  the  remnants  op  the  heathen,  if  spared,  were  to  become  pricks 
and  thorns  (i.  e.  constant  and  dangerous  annoyances)  to  them,  and  would  vex 
THEM.  Even  so  if  we  leave  the  remnants  of  sin  in  the  new  life  which  God  has  given 
us  to  lead,  these  will  surely  become  a  continual  source  of  unhappiness  and  danger. 
Thie  is  why  most  Christians  are  more  or  less  restless,  dissatisfied,  uneven  in  temper, 
uncertain  in  behaviour,  having  little  "  peace  "  and  less  "  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  It 
is  simply  that  they  have  not  obeyed  the  call  to  make  a  clearance  of  old  bad  habits 
and  evil  tempers ;  do  not  recognise  the  sinfulness  of  little  sins  ;  think  it  does  not 
matter ;  will  not  take  the  trouble  necessary  to  hunt  them  down ;  have  learnt  by 
experience  to  tolerate  them.  No  more  than  this,  but  no  less.  They  can  never  be 
made  happy  save  through  patient,  prayerful  toil  to  root  the  remnants  of  sin  out  of 
their  hearts  and  lives. 

VII.  That  the  end  of  buck  unfaithfulness,  if  not  amended,  was  to  be  ex- 
patriation. Both  races  could  not  dwell  in  the  land ;  if  Israel  would  not  drive  out  the 
heathen,  he  must  be  driven  out  himself.  Even  so  if  Christian  people  will  not  labour 
by  grace  to  take  complete  possession  in.God's  name  of  their  own  lives,  the  end  will 
be  that  they  will  lose  them  altogether.  Either  grace  must  make  a  full  end  of  our 
sins,  or  our  sins  will  make  an  end  of  grace,  because  God  will  withdraw  it.  There 
may  not  be  any  wilful  toleration  of  moral  evil  in  ourselves,  nor  urging  of  excuses 
for  its  continuance. 

Consider  again,  with  respect  to  Canaan — 

I.  That  Israel  was  to  possess  it,  because  God  had  given  it  to  them  ;  it  was 
HIS,  and  he  chose  to  do  so  ;  no  such  title  was  ever  granted  to  any  people.  Even 
BO  we  are  to  take  possession  (by  patient  well-doing)  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  not 
because  it  can  be  earned,  but  because  God  hath  freely  given  it  to  us,  whom  he  hath 
chosen.  This  kingdom,  therefore,  whether  as  within  us  or  as  above  us,  is  ours  by  a 
most  absolute  and  indefeasible  title. 

II.  That  the  grant  of  Canaan  to  Israel  implied  all  necessary  succour  in  con- 
quering AND  OCCUPYING  IT,  else  had  the  name  of  God  been  disgraced.  Even  so  the 
fact  that  God  hath  given  to  us  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  pledge  positive  that  we 
shall  receive  strength  to  overcome  every  hindrance  and  obstacle,  if  wo  be  faithful. 

III.  That  the  division  of  the  land  was  so  ordered  that  equality  should  as 

FAR  as  possible  BE  PRESERVED,  AND  FAVOURITISM   MADE  IMPOSSIBLE.      Even   SO  God 

hath  so  ordered  his  kingdom  that  none  has  cause  to  envy  other,  and  none  can  com- 
plain of  partiality ;  since  all  shall  inherit  heaven  alike,  and  yet  heaven  itself  shall  be 
diverse  according  to  the  growth  of  each  in  grace  (cf.  Matt.  xx.  13 — 15  and  23  with 
Luke  xix.  16—19  and  Matt.  xxv.  21—23). 

IV.  That  the  Holy  Land  was  delimited  before  they  entered,  but  the  bound- 
aries ARE  to  a  CONSIDERABLE  EXTENT  UNKNOWN.  Bvcn  SO  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is 
defined  and  described  in  manifold  ways  in  the  word  of  God,  and  yet  it  is  hard  to 
know  how  far  it  extends,  and  where  the  boundary  runs  between  that  which  is  of 
nature  and  that  which  is  of  grace.  And  as  those  frontiers  could  only  be  traced  by 
such  as  were  locally  familiar  with  the  places  named,  so  the  extent  of  the  kingdom 
can  only  be  known  by  such  as  are  familiar  by  experience  with  every  part  of  it. 

V.  That  the  limits  marked  down  were  apparently  the  natural  limits  of 
Canaan,  without  ant  reservations  (such  as  Philistia,  Phoenicia,  &o.).    Even  §a 


440  tHE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS,    [oh.  abtm.  60-  xiXiv.  29. 

God  hath  given  to  us  to  possess  the  whole  life  of  man  which  may  be  lived  in  holi- 
ness, according  to  the  utmost  possible  expansion  of  our  human  nature  in  all  itl 
fulness. 

VI.  That  the  land  actually  occdpibd  by  Israel  was  both  larger  and  smaller 
THAN  THAT  DELIMITED ;  not  reaching  so  far  from  south  to  north,  yet  not  so  strait  from 
west  to  east.  Even  so  it  is  certain  that  Christian  life,  as  lived,  does  not  agree  with 
the  ideal  in  the  New  Testament.  It  does  not  reach  so  far,  not  attain  its  full  measure, 
in  one  way,  while  it  occupies  additional  space  in  another  way.  And  as  the  additional 
breadth  gained  by  the  trans-Jordanio  settlement,  while  not  commanded,  was  yet  (it 
seems)  allowed  of  God,  so  the  unexpected  developments  of  Christianity  (as  in  the 
way  of  civilisation,  with  its  varied  gifts),  although  quite  outside  anything  to  be 
gathered  from  the  New  Testament,  must  yet  be  held  allowed  of  God. 

VII.  That  Kadesh,  op  famous  memory,  was  specially  included  in  the  sou'ihebn 
FBONTIER.  Even  80  the  experiences  of  our  pilgrimage — the  "  sanctuaries  "  of  our 
trial  time — will  be  part  of  our  eternal  inheritance  ;  nothing  "  holy  "  will  be  lost 
to  us. 

VIII.  That  the  land  was  allotted  to  the  people  by  Eleazar  theib  priest  and 
Joshua  their  captain.  Even  so  our  inheritance  is  in  all  particulars  assigned  to  us 
by  him  who  is  at  once  the  High  Priest  of  our  profession  and  the  Captain  of  our 
salvation. 

IX.  That  together  with  them  there  acted  princes  prom  each  tribe,  that 
JUSTICE  might  be  MANIFESTLY  DONE  TO  ALL.  Even  SO  it  would  appear  that  in  the 
judgment  of  the  last  day  respect  will  be  had  even  to  human  ideas  of  justice ;  and, 
moreover,  that  in  some  way  not  yet  explained  men  will  themselves  act  as  assessors  in 
that  judgment  (see  1  Pet.  iv.  6,  where  rard  dvdfiovov  seems  to  mean  "  in  accordance 
with  human  ideas  [of  justice];"  and  1  Cor.  vi.  2,  3,  which  seems  clearly  to  refer  to 
the  final  judgment). 

And  note  that  the  order  of  the  tribes  as  here  given  is  very  different  from  any 
previous  list ;  for  two  are  absent,  and  the  precedence  of  the  rest  is  determined  after 
a  peculiar  law  by  their  subsequent  position  in  the  Holy  Land.  So  the  Divine  order 
in  which  Churches  or  individuals  stand  is  different  from  any  founded  on  earthly  or 
visible  considerations,  being  in  accordance  with  God's  foreknowledge  of  tlieir 
heavenly  place. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  60 — 56.— iVo  compromise  with  idolatry.  I.  The  command  given.  The 
Israelites  were  to  be  delivered  from  complicity  with  the  immoral  idolatry  of  Canaan 
by  such  extreme  measures  as  these.  1.  The  idolaters  were  to  be  utterly  driven  out, 
and  in  some  cases  exterminated.  On  no  account  were  covenants  to  be  made  with 
them  (Exod.  zxziv.  12 — 17).  2.  The  idols  were  to  be  broken  to  pieces;  even  the 
precious  metals  on  them  were  not  to  be  spared  (Exod.  xxiii.  24,  30 — 33 ;  Deut.  vii. 
26,  26).  3.  The  high  places,  groves,  altars,  pillars,  &c.  were  to  be  destroyed  (Exod. 
xxxiv.  13  ;  Deut.  xii.  2,3).  4.  Works  of  art,  "  pictures,"  &c.,  were  doomed  if  tainted 
by  idolatry.  6.  The  very  names  of  the  idols  were  to  be  consigned  to  oblivion,  and 
all  curious  antiquarian  inquiries  as  to  the  idolatries  of  the  land  were  discouraged 
(Deut.  xii.  3,  30,  31).  Our  missionaries  have  had  to  urge  similar  precepts  on  con- 
verts from  heathenism ;  e.  g.  in  Polynesia.  And  these  precepts  suggest  applications 
to  all  Christians  who  have  "  escaped  the  pollutions  of  the  world  "  and  its  spiritual 
idolatries,  but  who  are  still  surrounded  by  them.  No  "covenants"  are  to  be  made 
with  men  of  the  world  which  would  compromise  the  servants  of  Christ,  or  mar  their 
testimony  against  the  evil  deeds  of  the  world  (2  Cor.  vi.  14 ;  Ephes.  v.  11).  Apply  to 
marriages  with  the  ungodly,  and  to  other  close  alliances  of  interest.  Illustrate  from 
Jehoshaphat's  history  (2  Kings  viii.  18  ;  2  Chron.  xviii.  1 ;  xix.  2).  Even  things 
lawful  in  themselves  may  have  to  be  abandoned  ;  whether  money,  in  order  to  conquer 
''  covetousness,  which  is  idolatry  "  (illustrate  Mark  x.  21),  or  pleasures  which  may 
have  associations  of  evil  clinging  to  them  (1  Cor.  vi.  12),  or  even  past  helps  to 
devotion  —  e.g.  2  Kings  xviii.  4,  Popish  images,  &c.  To  look  back  with  strong 
desire  even  towards  things  elegant  and  attractive  in  themselves,  but  infected  to  us 
by  the  spirit  of  worldliness,  may  be  fatal  (Luke  xvii.  32  ;  2  Cor.  vi.  17).   The  Church 


m.  xtxsa.  W— xfflav.29]    TflE  BOOK  Ot  NtJMBERS.  441 

of  God  has  the  duty  of  possessing  the  whole  land,  "the  world"  (1  Cor.  iii.  22);  but 
to  do  this  they  must  "  dispossess  the  inhabitants,"  i.  e.  they  must  make  no  compromise 
with  the  spirit  of  the  men  of  the  world.  Worldliness  is  a  sjpirit  rather  than  a  course 
of  outward  conduct.     We  must  "use  the  world  as  not  abusing  it." 

II.  The  motives  uroed.  1.  The  peril  of  perpetual  unrest  (ver.  55).  Just  so  if 
Christians  seek  to  make  compromises  with  the  sins  and  idolatries  of  the  world  they 
are  called  to  overcome  (1  John  v.  4),  and  become  subject  to  its  maxims  and  fashions, 
there  can  be  no  true  rest.  The  joy  of  entire  obedience  can  never  be  known  (Ps.  xix. 
11).  Compromise  is  perpetual  conflict,  with  the  conviction  of  being  on  the  losing 
«de.  We  are  wounded  in  the  tenderest  part  ("  pricks  in  our  eyes  ")  and  vexed  in 
the  secret  chamber  of  conscience  ("  thorns  in  our  sides ").  2.  The  peril  of  being 
regarded  as  "  conformed  to  the  world,"  and  therefore  treated  as  "  enemies  of  God  " 
(ver.  56  ;  Ps.  cvi.  34 — 42 ;  Rom.  xii.  2  ;  Philip,  iii.  18,  19  ;  James  iv.  4  ;  2  Pet.  ii. 
20 — 22).  From  such  guilty  compromises  we  may  be  delivered  through  Christ — through 
his  atonement  (Gal.  i.  4),  intercession  (John  xvii.  15),  examp!e  (ibid,  xvi  33;  zvii. 
16),  and  Spirit  (Rom.  viii.  2  ;  1  Cor.  ii.  12).— P. 

Vers.  60 — ^66. — How  to  deal  with  the  Canaanites:  an  urgent  wamiTig.  It  is 
assumed  here  that  Israel  will-  conquer  the  Canaanites ;  probably  by  this  time  the 
people  had  grown  to  somewhat  of  confidence,  by  reason  of  their  recent  successes 
over  Sihon,  Og,  and  Midian.  But  it  was  a  thing  of  the  first  importance,  when  the 
victory  was  gained,  to  follow  it  up  in  the  right  way.  Victories  have  been  gained, 
and  then  worse  than  lost  by  want  of  wisdom  to  use  them  aright.  Here  we  have  a 
plain,  strict,  and  severe  command  concerning  the  very  first  thing  to  be  done  upon 
the  defeat  of  the  Canaanites.  They  themselves  were  to  be  driven  from  the  land,  and 
all  the  instruments  of  idolatry  utterly  destroyed.  The  need  of  this  command  will  be 
clearly  seen  if  we  consider — 

I.  The  great  object  which  was  before  the  mind  of  God  in  giving  the 
COMMAND.  This  is  alluded  to  in  ver.  64.  Canaan  was  ever  under  the  eye  of  God  as 
being  the  destined  inheritance  of  Israel ;  it  had  been  counted  as  such  even  from  the 
time  of  Abraham.  The  sadness  of  the  threat  against  Israel  in  the  day  of  its  apostasy 
lay  in  this,  that  it  was  a  threat  of  disinheriting  (ch.  xiv.  12).  And  that  which  had 
been  so  long  preparing  for  Israel,  which  even  while  the  Canaanites  were  dwelling  in 
it  had  been  under  the  peculiar  supervision  of  God,  was  become  at  last  an  inheritance 
of  great  value.  It  was  to  be  cultivated  to  the  full,  and  would  then  richly  repay  for 
all  the  cultivation.  Such  interest  did  God  show  in  giving  this  land  to  the  Israelites 
IB  all  its  fulness,  that  he  was  about  to  portion  it  by  lot.  Each  tribe  in  particular 
was  to  feel  that  the  place  of  its  habitation  had  been  chosen  by  God.  Hence  the  need 
of  leaving  no  precaution  unemployed  to  make  this  favoured  land  secure-  It  must 
be  guarded  from  every  kind  of  danger,  however  remote,  improbable,  and  practically 
innocuous  it  may  eeem.  If  Israel  lost  this  inheritance,  there  was  no  other  place  for 
it,  no  other  possession  on  which  it  could  advance  with  the  certainty  of  conquest  and, 
what  was  even  more  important,  with  the  consciousness  of  being  engaged  in  a  righteous 
cause.  In  Canaan,  as  long  as  it  kept  its  allegiance  to  God,  Israel  was  the  rightful 
possessor ;  but  everywhere  else  it  was  a  lawless,  unblessed  invader.  That  which  is 
of  ineisiimable  value,  and  which  once  gone  cannot  be  replaced,  must  first  of  all  be 
founded  in  security  and  surrounded  with  the  same.  "  If  the  foundations  be  destroyed, 
wlrnt  can  the  righteous  do?  "  (Ps.  xi.  3).  The  security  of  the  people  was  threatened 
by  all  that  threatened  the  honour  of  God.  And  it  was  a  distinct  dishonour  to  his 
name  to  allow  idolaters  to  remain  in  the  land  openly  to  practise  their  vicious  and 
degrading  rites.  Moreover,  there  was  every  chance  that  the  people  themselves  would 
be  subtly  and  gradually  drawn  to  idolatry.  Recollect  all  these  perils,  and  then  you 
will  see  good  reason  why  God  made  a  stringent  demand  for  such  a  sweeping  treat- 
ment of  the  Canaanites.  The  cause  of  a  world's  redemption  was  bound  up  with  the 
safety  of  Israel's  inheritance.  And  we  also  have  are  inheritance  (Matt.  xix.  29 ; 
XXV.  34 ;  Acts  xx.  32  ;  xxvi.  18  ;  Rora.  viii.  17  ;  Gal.  iii.  29  ;  Ephes.  i.  11, 14 ;  iii..6  ; 
1  Pet.  i.  4)  far  transcending  that  Canaan  which  was  so  much  in  the  eyes  of  the 
Israelites.  If  it  is  worth  anything  at  all,  it  is  worth  everything ;  worth  uU  the  self- 
deniiJ,  paneversnco  complete  aubmission  tc  God,  and  patient  wpjting  which  aw 


442  THE  BOOfi:  OF  NUMBERS,    [on   ixxiii.  50— xxxiv.  29 

necessary  for  the  attaining  of  it.  We  must  not  leave  unexpelled  from  our  life  or 
undestroyed  from  our  circumstances  anything  that  may  imperil  the  inheritance. 
Walk  with  no  companion,  engage  in  no  business,  cultivate  no  taste  or  recreation,  if 
there  be  in  them  the  slightest  chance  of  peril  to  the  inheritance.  It  is  a  glorious 
thing  to  conquer  temptation  in  actual  conflict,  but  it  is  better  still  so  to  watch  and 
pray  as  not  to  enter  into  temptation  at  all. 

II.  The  great  temptation  on  the  part  op  Israel  to  rest  satisfied  with 
AN  imperfect  conquest.  Not  of  course  that  Israel  thought  it  imperfect.  Israel 
was  anxious  in  its  own  way  to  have  the  conquest  and  possession  complete.  But  God 
alone  had  the  requisite  wisdom  and  foresight  to  direct  the  people  into  real  security. 
There  were  many  temptations  to  what  he  knew  was  a  premature  cessation  of  hostilities. 
The  Canaanites  would  in  due  time  make  attempts  at  compromises  and  partial  sur- 
renders, even  as  Pharaoh  had  made  like  attempts  when  his  people  were  smitten  by 
the  plagues.  There  was  the  temptation  that  came  from  the  weariness  of  long  waiting. 
A  complete  expulsion  involved  much  delay.  We  are  tempted  even  in  the  afEairs  of 
this  life  to  premature  conclusions  through  sheer  impatience.  We  want  to  pluck  the 
fruit  long  before  it  is  ripe.  Moreover,  the  Israelites,  many  of  them  at  least,  would 
wish  to  make  slaves  of  the  Canaanites.  They  were  not  entering  Canaan  with  the 
steward-feeling  in  their  hearts.  The  promise  was  sufSciently  fulfilled  in  their 
estimate  when  they  got  the  land  to  do  as  they  liked  with  it.  The  tribes  crossing 
Jordan  had  the  same  carnal  views  concerning  their  possession  ae  Eeuben  and  Gad 
concerning  the  land  which  they  had  chosen.  There  was  the  temptation  coming  from 
self-confidence ;  that  of  supposing  an  enemy  enfeebled  to  be  practically  the  same  as 
an  enemy  destroyed.  There  might  be  the  temptation  also  to  show  a  human,  ignorant, 
undisceming  pity,  as  contrasted  with  a  Divinely  wise  severity.  Such  utter  expulsion 
as  God  demanded  could  easily  be  made  to  look  unreasonable,  and  indeed  nothing 
better  than  sheer  tyranny.  It  takes  much  patient  inquiry  to  discover  that  what  may 
be  kind  on  the  surface  is  cruel  underneath  ;  kind  at  the  present,  cruel  in  the  future  ; 
kind  to  the  few,  cruel  to  the  many ;  kind  for  time,  utterly  ruinous  for  eternity. 
There  was  no  reasonable  pity  in  leaving  those  who  were  utterly  corrupt  to  become 
the  plentiful  sources  of  idolatrous  infection  to  the  people  of  Jehovah.  There  was 
also  the  temptation  that  came  from  a  very  imperfect  sympathy  with  the  purposes  of 
God.  During  their  wanderings  the  Israelites  had  shown  again  and  again  their  lack 
of  apprehension  and  appreciation  with  respect  to  Jehovah.  What  then  of  hearty 
aversion  from  idolatry  could  be  expected  when  its  subtle  perils  came  upon  them  ? 
Only  those  who  were  filled  with  an  abiding  sense  of  the  holiness  and  majesty  of 
God  could  estimate  the  dangers  of  idolatry  and  take  the  precautions  needful  to  guard 
against  them. 

III.  The  earnest  warning  in  which  God  specifies  the  results  op  negligence. 
1.  The  earlier  result  (ver.  65).  These  Canaanites,  however  fairly  they  speak,  and 
with  whatever  leniency  they  be  treated,  will  turn  out  pricks  and  thorns  in  the  end. 
"Those  which  ye  let  remain  of  them."  One,  even  though  he  be  a  child,  and  seem 
easily  moulded  to  other  ends,  may  be  the  cause  of  measureless  mischief.  A  little 
leaven  leavens  the  whole  lump.  Behold  how  great  a  mass  of  matter  a  tiny  flame 
will  kindle.  A  Canaanite,  a  real  Canaanite,  worshipping  his  idols,  must  be  a  bad 
man.  Just  as  a  true,  believing  connection  with  God  leads  into  all  purity  and  virtue, 
BO  a  grovelling  before  idols  makes  a  man  vicious ;  and  not  only  vicious,  but  the 
viciousness  is  upon  a  sort  of  principle  and  rule.  Those  who  change  the  glory  of  the 
incorruptible  God  into  an  image  made  like  to  corruptible  man,  and  birds,  and  four- 
footed  beasts,  and  creeping  things,  change  at  the  same  time  much  besides.  It  is  one 
of  the  unspeakable  miseries  of  idolatry  that  it  changes  vices  into  virtues,  and  idolaters 
do  the  most  wicked  things  for  conscience'  sake.  Hence  the  Canaanite  could  not  but 
hurt  the  Israelite  ;  it  was  his  very  nature  so  to  do.  He  might  undertake  allegiance 
and  amity,  but  by  the  very  necessity  of  the  case  he  must  prove  in  the  end  a  prick  in 
the  eye  and  a  thorn  in  the  side.  Therefore  let  Israel  uproot  with  a  timely  and 
unsparing  severity  all  that  would  end  in  pricks  and  thorns.  Study  the  nature  of 
things  in  their  germs.  Stop  evil  if  you  can  at  the  very  beginning.  Consider,  in 
connection  with  this  expulsion  of  the  Canaanites  and  the  dangers  of  idolatry,  the 
whol«  of  the  first  chapter  of  Romans.    2,  The  later  result  (ver,  66).    Leave  t]i« 


OB.  titnt.  5d-xixiv.  29.3    TfiS  BOOK  OP  NtJMSESS.  443 

Canaanites  unexpelled,  and  the  end  will  be  the  expukion  of  Israel.  "  To  him  that 
knoweth  to  do  good,  and  doeth  it  not,  to  him  it  is  sin  "  (James  iv.  17).  In  the  light 
of  this  threatening,  how  clearly  it  is  seen  that  what  made  the  Canaanites  so  ofiEensiva 
in  the  sight  of  God  was  their  idolatry  I  For  centuries  they  had  been  pursuing  their 
hideous  practices  in  that  very  land  where  a  holy  and  righteous  God  had  revealed 
himself  to  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  And  if  tlie  Israelites  by  a  disobedient  leni- 
ency fell  into  idolatry,  their  state  would  be  even  sadder  and  more  dishonourable  than 
that  of  Canaan,  because  the  fall  would  be  from  such  privileges.  Note  that  God 
placed  this  expulsion  of  the  Canaanites  as  a  work  of  obedience  for  the  people  to 
perform.  If  they  failed  in  obedience  he  would  not  by  some  miracle  expel  the 
Canaanites  himself.  "  As  I  thought  to  do  unto  them.'  The  land  in  itself  was  no 
more  than  any  other  land  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  It  was  the  people — the  holy 
people  of  God — who  sanctified  the  land,  and  not  the  land  the  people.  And  if  they 
disobeyed  God  in  the  presence  of  all  these  idols,  with  their  associated  abominations, 
then  the  holy  became  unholy,  and  the  Canaanites  might  as  well  stay  there  as  remove 
anywhere  else  (Prov.  viii.  20,  21 ;  xx.  21 ;  Eccles.  vii.  11 ;  Eev.  xxi  7). — ^Y. 

Vers.  1 — 15. — 7^e  Lord  appoints  boundaries  for  the  promised  land.    L  Consider 

THESE     BOTJNDAKIBS    ACCORDING    TO    THE    EXTENT    OP    WHAT    THEY    INCLUDED.        The 

territory  was  a  very  limited  one,  geographically  speaking.  The  promised  land,  in- 
tended to  typify  the  large  privileges  of  the  believer,  and  the  heavenly  and  everlasting 
inheritance,  was  not  a  continent,  nor  even  a  considerable  part  of  a  continent.  The 
Lord  would  teach  Israel,  and  through  them  all  his  people,  the  difEerence  between 
bigness  and  greatness,  between  quantity  and  quality,  between  mere  superficial  extent 
and  the  inexhaustible  wealth  that  comes  out  of  a  really  good  ground.  A  square  mile 
in  the  land  that  the  Lord  hath  blessed  is  better  than  all  the  sands  of  Sahara.  There 
was  no  legitimate  room  in  Israel  for  men  of  Alexander's  spirit,  weeping  because 
there  were  no  more  worlds  to  conquer.  The  scene  that  God  thus  mapped  out  was 
large  enough  to  give  impressive  and  beautiful  illustrations  of  his  ways,  and  to  bring 
peace,  prosperity,  and  happiness  worthy  of  bearing  such  names  to  all  who  received 
his  will  in  the  fulness  of  it.  Though  only  a  limited  territory,  it  was  for  that  reason 
all  the  more  compact ;  and  at  a  very  short  notice  the  whole  nation  could  gather  to 
any  point  for  purposes  of  worship  or  defence.  Outsiders,  who  did  not  know  how- 
blessed  was  the  nation  whose  God  was  the  Lord,  might  count  the  land  only  a  little 
one  among  the  thousands  of  the  whole  earth.  AH  depends  on  what  we  mean  when 
we  speak  of  the  lives  of  certain  people  as  limited,  poor,  narrow,  and  unprivileged. 
Such  words  may  only  reveal  our  ignorance,  our  erroneous  principles  of  judgment, 
and  not  the  real  state  of  affairs.  It  should  ever  be  part  of  the  brightest  radiance  of 
God's  glory  in  the  eyes  of  his  people  that  he  can  welcome  the  poor  and  the  lowly 
to  his  choicest  blessings  and  to  the  sweetest  pleasures  he  can  confer  upon  the  human 
heart.  Their  poverty  and  lowliness  do  not  unfit  them  for  these  things.  Paul,  who 
had  to  work  with  his  own  hands,  and  who  said  that  having  food  and  raiment  he  was 
therewith  content,  was  also  able  to  say,  "0  the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the 
wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God  1"  (Rom.  xi.  33).  No  lord  of  broad  acres  ne,  no 
partaker  of  luxurious  repose  among  intellectual  pleasures,  but  still  he  knew  of  the 
peace  that  passeth  all  understanding,  the  joy  that  is  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory, 
and  something  of  the  breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and  height  of  that  love  of 
Christ  which  passeth  knowledge.  We  had  neeil  be  very  sure  of  our  competency 
before  we  begin  to  pronounce  judgment  on  the  compass  and  depth  of  a  true  believer's 
life. 

II.  Consider  the  exactness  ov  these  boundaries.  The  country  was  carefully 
defined,  and  could  give  no  occasion  for  boundary  disputes.  And  all  Christians  have 
a  carefully-defined  life  marked  out  for  them.  Even  external  circumstances  are  more 
under  our  control  than  at  lirst  seems  to  be  the  case.  Many  such  circumstances 
indeed  we  cannot  control,  but  many  also  depend  on  the  spirit  in  which  we  regard 
the  will  of  God.  For  instance,  it  could  hardly  be  said  that  God  marked  out  their 
territory  for  Beuben  and  Gad.  For  his  own  wise  purposes  he  allowed  their  choice, 
but  it  was  no  true  choice  of  his.  If  we  have  only  a  thoroughly  trustful  spirit,  a 
■pint  of  stewardship  towards  God,  we  may  all  have  the  profit  and  comfort  of  feeling; 


444  THE  BOOK  OP  NUMBERS,    [ch.  xxxiii.  60— xxxiv.  29. 

that  we  are  working  within  the  channels  and  limits  that  he  would  choose  for  our  life. 
Social  station  makes  no  difference  in  this  respect.  The  path  of  a  pious  king  is  just 
as  strictly  fixed  as  that  of  the  humhlest  of  his  subjects.  The  farthest  planet  that 
circles  round  the  sun  has  its  path  just  as  much  marked  out  as  the  nearest  one,  though 
it  travels  a  far  longer  distance. 

III.  Consider  the  efficacy  these  boundaries  were  meant  to  have  in  the 
WAY  OF  EXCLUSION.  We  see  God  clearly  providing  one  necessary  part  in  the  means 
■^hereby  to  drive  out  and  dispossess  the  Canaanites.  He  fixed  the  line  beyond  which 
they  were  to  be  driven,  and  within  which  they  were  not  allowed  to  return  and  dwell. 
The  lines  between  the  Church  and  the  world  are  not  to  be  tampered  with  by  such  as 
value  all  that  is  most  precious  in  spiritual  possessions.  Let  the  world  have  its  own 
principles  and  assert  them  in  its  own  field  of  action  and  in  its  own  way.  Let  the 
men  of  the  world  act  as  men  of  the  world,  and  transmit  their  much-belauded  policy 
of  life  from  generation  to  generation  of  such  as  believe  in  their  principles.  They 
go  by  what  men  are  and  by  what  they  cynically  assume  men  must  be,  for  they 
do  devoutly  believe  the  fact  that  what  is  bom  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,  even  though 
they  can  make  nothing  of  Christ's  reference  to  the  fact.  But  let  us  ever  claim  and 
preserve  a  place,  and  earnestly  defend  it,  where  the  supercilious  egotism  of  worldly 
wisdom  shall  find  no  entrance.  Let  our  territory  be  fenced  round  with  "  Thus  saith 
the  Lord,"  and  let  us  watch  with  a  jealous  vigilance  the  slightest  encroachment  on 
it.  We  also  believe  that  what  is  bom  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,  and  that  we  must  go  by 
what  men  are  ;  but  then  we  regard  in  addition  what  men  ought  to  be,  and  recollect 
that  what  is  bom  of  the  spirit  is  spirit.  Blessed  is  he  who  feels  marked  out  in  his 
own  heart  the  boundary  which  Paul  specifies  when  he  says,  "The  flesh  lusteth 
against  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against  the  flesh  "  (Gal.  v.  17)  ;  Canaanite  against 
Israelite,  and  Israelite  against  Canaanite.  It  availed  a  man  nothing  to  live  within 
Israelite  borders  if  he  had  a  Canaanite  heart.  Of  old  idolaters  were  rigorously 
excluded  from  a  certain  well-marked  territory,  and  the  typical  significance  of  this 
is  that  idolatries  themselves  must  be  driven  out  of  the  regenerate  heart,  and  kept 
out  of  it  by  all  the  armour  of  righteousness  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left. 

IV.  Consider  the  special  significance  of  the  western  border  (ver.  6).  The 
great  sea  was  there,  the  open  pathway  of  nations,  the  sj'mhol,  and  to  a  large  extent 
the  avenue,  of  Israel's  connection  with  the  whole  world.  For  though  Israel  had 
destroyed  Amorite  and  Midianite,  and  was  laid  under  command  to  drive  out  the 
Canaanite,  yet  in  the  seed  of  Abraham  all  families  of  the  earth  were  to  be  blessed. 
From  Canaan  there  was  a  path  of  blessing  by  a  landward  way  to  many  lands  beside, 
but  by  sea  there  was  a  way  to  every  island  also.  Consider  the  place  in  respect  of 
Christian  privileges  and  influences  which  the  island  England  occupies  among  the 
nations.  The  seaward  aspect  of  Israel  suggests  to  us  the  blessings  that  we,  and 
indeed  many  peoples  beside,  have  gained  from  her.  Notice  also  the  elemmt  of 
reference  to  the  sea  which  this  seaward  boundary  of  Canaan  has  hrowght  into  the 
Scriptures.  The  Scriptures  were  written  by  men  who  felt  the  power  ot  the  ocean. 
Men  within  reach  of  the  sea  could  then  hear  the  whole  of  nature  praise  God.  They 
could  not  only  say,  "  Let  the  heavens  rejoice,  and  let  the  earth  be  glad,"  but  also, 
"  Let  the  sea  roar,  and  the  fulness  thereof"  (Ps.  xcvi.  11).     How  could  David  have 

fiven  Ps.  civ.  its  completeness  without  a  sight  of  the  sea  ?  And  thus  we  find 
[aggai  contrasting  the  great  elements,  first  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  then 
of  the  sea  and  the  dryland  (Hag.  ii.  6).  It  helped  David  to  think  of  the  omnipresence 
of  God,  as  he  imagined  himself  dwelling  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  sea,  and  feel- 
ing even  there  that  mighty  grasp  guarding  and  sustaining  him  (Ps.  cxxxix.  9,  10). 
And  it  served  also  to  remind  men  how  in  after  days  the  Lord  would  famish  all  the 
gods  of  the  earth,  and  men  would  worship  him,  every  one  from  his  place,  even  all 
the  isles  of  the  heathen  (Zeph.  ii.  11).  Truly  it  was  by  no  accident,  but  by  a  deep 
and  gracious  design,  that  tiie  land  of  promise  had  the  great  sea  for  one  of  its 
borders. — Y. 


OH.  xrcT.  1 — 34.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


m 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 


Thb  Levitioai  cities,  ahd  cities   op 

M5FTT0B,  AND  LAWS   AS  TO   HOMICIDE   (Ters. 

1 — 34).  Ver.  1. — ^And  the  lord  spake. 
Cf.  ch.  xxxiii.  50 ;  xxxvi.  13. 

Ver.  2. — That  they  give  nnto  the  levites 
.  .  .  cities  to  dwell  in.  This  legislation 
forms  the  natnral  sequel  and  complement  of 
the  Divine  decrees  ateady  promulgated  con- 
cerning the  Levites.  Separated  from  the 
rest  of  the  tribes  from  the  time  of  the  first 
census  (ch.  i.  49),  excluded  from  any  tribal 
inheritance  (ch.  xviii.  20),  but  endowed  with 
tithes  and  offerings  for  their  maintenance 
(ch.  xviii.  21,  &c.),  it  was  also  necessary 
that  they  should  be  provided  with  homes 
for  themselves  and  their  cattle.  They  might 
indeed  have  been  left  to  exist  as  they  could, 
and  where  they  could,  upon  the  provision 
made  for  them  in  the  law.  But,  on  the  one 
hand,  that  provision  was  itself  precarious, 
depending  as  it  did  upon  the  piety  and  good 
feeling  of  the  people  (which  must  often  have 
been  found  wanting :  cf  Neh.  xiii.  10  ;  MaL 
iii.  8,  9) ;  and,  on  the  other,  it  is  evident  that 
the  Levites  were  intended,  as  far  as  their 
family  and  social  life  was  concerned,  to  share 
the  ordinary  comforts  and  enjoyments  of 
Israelites.  Nothing  could  have  been  more 
foreign  to  the  Mosaic  ideal  than  a  ministry 
celibate,  ascetic,  and  detached  from  this 
world's  wealth,  such  as  readily  enough  sprang 
up  (whether  intended  or  not)  under  the 
teaching  of  the  gospel  (cf.  Luke  x.  4 ;  xii.  33 ; 
Acts  XX.  34,  35  ;  1  Cor.  vii  7,  25,  26 ;  ix.  18, 
27 ;  2  Cor.  vi  10 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  4).  Suburbs. 
The  Hebrew  word  tJ''JJI?  undoubtedly  means 
here  a  pasture,  or  a  paddock,  an  enclosed 
place  outside  the  town  into  which  the  cattle 
were  driven  by  day  to  feed.  It  is  possible 
that  the  A.  V.  may  nave  used  the  word  "  sub- 
urbs" in  that  sense.  To  keep  cattle  to 
some  extent  was  not  only  a  universal  cus- 
tom, but  was  weU-nigh  a  necessity  of  life  in 
that  age.  i 

Ver.  3.— For  their  cattle.  UPS?};!  J?, "  for 
their  great  cattle,"  i.  e.  oxen,  camels,  and 
any  other  beasts  of  draught  or  burden.  For 
their  goods.  "  For  their  possessions,"  which 
in  this  connection  would  mean  their  ordinary 
"live  stock,"  chiefly  sheep  and  goats;  the 

word  itself  (DB'O^?)  is  indeterminate.  For 
all  their  beasts.  Dri*n"7i7,  an  expression 
which  apparently  only  sums  up  what  has 
previously  been  mentioned. 

Ver.  5. — Te  shall  measure  from  withont 
the  city  (TV^  pPID  -  fSui  rrjt  iroXcioc)  .  .  . 
twp  thoofand  ptibit«.    These  (prectioqa  are 


very  obscure.  Some  have  held  that  the 
country  for  1000  cubits  beyond  the  walls  was 
reserved  for  pasture  (according  to  ver.  4), 
and  for  another  1000  cubits  for  fields  and 
vineyards,  so  that  the  Levitical  lands  ex- 
tended 2000  cubits  in  all  directions.  This 
is  reasonable  in  itself,  since  2000  cubits  is 
only  half  a  mile,  and  rather  more  than  a 
square  mile  of  land  would  not  seem  too  much 
for  pastures,  gardens,  &c.  for  a  town  with 
at  least  1000  inhabitants.  The  smallest  tribe 
territories  seem  to  have  comprised  some  300 
square  miles  of  country ;  and  if  we  take  the 
Levitical  towns  as  averaging  1000  cubits 
square,  their  forty-eight  cities  would  only 
give  them  seventy-three  square  miles  of 
territory.  There  is,  however,  no  notice  of 
anything  being  given  to  the  Levites  except 
their  "suburbs,  so  that  this  explanation 
must  be  at  best  very  doubtful.  Others  have 
argued  for  a  plan  according  to  which  each 
outer  boundary,  drawn  at  1000  cubits'  dis- 
tance from  the  Wall,  would  measure  2000 
cubits,  plus  the  length  of  the  town  wall ; 
but  this  ia  far  too  artificial,  and  could  only 
be  considered  possible  as  long  as  it  was  con- 
fined to  a  papei  sketch,  for  it  presupposes 
that  each  city  lay  four-square,  and  faced  the 
four  points  of  the  compass.  If  the  first 
explanation  be  untenable,  the  only  alterna- 
tive sufficiently  simple  and  natural  is  to 
suppose  that,  in  order  to  avoid  irregularities 
of  measurement,  each  outer  boundary  was  to 
be  drawn  at  an  approximate  distance  of  1000 
cubits  from  the  wall,  and  each  of  an  approx- 
imate length  of  2000  cubits ;  at  the  angles 
the  lines  would  have  to  be  joined  as  best 
they  might.  In  Levit.  xxv.  32 — 34  certain 
regulations  are  inserted  in  favour  of  the 
Levites.  Their  houses  might  be  redeemed 
at  any  time,  and  not  only  within  the  fuU 
year  allowed  to  others ;  moreover,  they 
returned  to  them  (contrary  to  the  general 
rule)  at  the  year  of  Jubilee.  Their  property 
in  the  "suburbs"  they  could  not  seU  at  all, 
for  it  was  inaKenable.  It  i»  difficult  to 
believe  that  these  regulations  were  really 
made  at  Mount  Sinai,  presupposing,  as  they 
do,  the  legislation  of  this  chapter ;  but  ii 
they  were  actually  made  at  this  time,  on  the 
eve  of  the  conquest,  it  is  easy  to  see  why- 
they  were  subsequently  inserted  in  the  chap- 
ter which  deals  generally  with  the  powers  of 
sale  and  redemption. 

Ver.  6. — And  among  the  cities.  Rather, 
"and  the  cities."  Dn^g  n^l— icai  rdj 
irdXtif.  The  construction  is  broken,  or 
rather  is  continuous  throughout  vers.  6 — 8, 
the  accusative  being  repeated.  Six  cities 
for  rsfuee.     See  below  on  ver.  11. 

Vey.   7.— forty  and  eight  cities.     Th» 


446 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[CH.  XXXV.  1—84 


Levites  numbered  nearly  50,000  souls  (see  on 
ch.  xxvi.  62),  so  that  eacli  Levitical  city 
would  have  an  average  population  of  about 
1000  to  start  with.  There  seems  no  suffi- 
cient reason  for  supposing  that  they  shared 
their  towns  with  men  of  the  surrounding 
tribe.  Even  if  the  provision  made  for  their 
habitation  was  excessive  at  first  (which  does 
not  appear),  yet  their  rate  of  increase  should 
have  been  exceptionally  high,  inasmuch  as 
they  were  not  liable  to  military  service.  It 
is  possible  that  mystical  reasons  led  to  the 
selection  of  the  number  forty-eight  (12  x  4, 
both  typical  of  universali^),  but  it  is 
at  least  equally  probable  that  it  was  de- 
termined By  the  actual  nnmbeis  of  the 
tribe. 

Yer.  8. — And  the  cities  which  ye  shall 
give  shall  be,  &c.  Eather,  "  And  as  to  the 
cities  which  ye  shall  give  from  the  possession 
of  the  children  of  Israel,  from  the  many  ye 
shall  multiply,  and  from  the  few  ye  shall 
decrease."  What  seems  to  be  a  general  rule 
of  proportionate  giving  is  laid  down  here, 
but  it  was  not  carried  out,  and  it  is  not  easy 
to  see  how  it  could  have  been.  From  the 
large  combined  territory  of  Judah  and 
Simeon  nine  cities  were  indeed  surrendered 
(Josh,  xxi.),  but  all  the  rest,  great  and  small, 
gave  up  four  apiece,  except  If  aphtali,  which 
gave  up  three  only.  As  the  territory  of 
Naphtali  was  apparently  large  in  proportion 
to  its  numbers,  this  was  probably  for  no 
other  reason  than  that  the  tribe  stood  last 
on  the  list.  Every  one.  Hebrew,  t5"{j!.  It 
was  in  fact  each  tribe  that  surrendered  so 
many  cities,  but  since  the  tribal  inheritance 
was  the  joint  property  of  all  the  tribesmen, 
every  man  felt  that  he  was  a  party  to  the 
gift.  ISo  doubt  it  was  the  Divine  intention 
to  foster  in  the  tribes  as  far  as  possible  this 
local  feeling  of  interest  and  property  in  the 
Levites  who  dwelt  among  them  (compare  the 
expression  "their  scribes  and  Pharisees"  in 
Lime  V.  30).  The  dispersion  of  the  Levites 
(however  mysteriously  connected  with  the 
prophecy  of  Gen.  xlix.  6 — 7)  was  obviously 
designed  to  form  a  bond  of  unity  for  all 
Israel  by  diffusing  the  knowledge  and  love 
of  the  national  religion,  and  by  keeping  up  a 
constant  communication  between  the  future 
capital  and  all  the  provinces.  According  to 
the  Divine  ideal  Israel  as  a  whole  was  "the 
election  "  (r/  iKXoyii)  from  all  the  earth,  the 
Levites  were  the  tKXoyri  of  Israel,  and  the 
priests  the  iKXoy?}  of  Levi.  The  priestly 
family  was  at  present  too  small  to  be  iniiu- 
ential,  but  the  LeviteS  were  numerous 
enough  to  have  leavened  the  whole  nation  if 
they  had  walked  worthy  of  their  calling. 
They  were  gathered  together  in  towns  of 
their  own,  partly  no  doubt  in  order  to  avoid 
disputes,  but  partly  that  they  might  have  » 


better  opportunity  of  setting  forth  the  tnw 
ideal  of  what  Jewish  life  should  be. 

Ver.  11. — ^Te  shall  appoint  yon  cities  to 
be  cities  of  refuge  for  yon.  God  had  already 
announced  that  he  would  appoint  a  place 
whither  one  guilty  of  unpremeditated  man- 
slaughter might  flee  for  safety  (Exod.  xxi 
13).  The  expression  there  used  does  not 
point  to  more  than  one  "place,"  but  it  is 
not  inconsistent  with  several  Probably  the 
right  of  sanctuary  has  been  recognised  from 
the  earliest  times  in  which  any  local  appropri- 
ation of  places  to  sacred  purposes  has  been 
made.  It  is  an  instinct  of  religion  to  look 
npon  one  who  has  escaped  into  a  sacred  en- 
closure as  being  under  the  personal  protection 
of  the  presiding  deity.  It  is  certain  that  the 
right  was  largely  recognised  in  Egypt,  where 
the  priestly  caste  was  so  powerful  and  am- 
bitious ;  and  this  is  no  doubt  the  reason 
(humanly  speaking)  for  the  promise  in 
Exod.  xxi.  13,  and  for  the  command  in  the 
following  verse.  Inasmuch  as  the  whole  of 
Canaan  was  the  Lord's,  any  places  within  it 
might  be  endowed  with  rights  of  sanctuary, 
but  it  was  obviously  suitable  that  they 
should  be  Levitical  cities ;  the  Divine  pre- 
rogative of  mercy  could  nowhere  b'e  better 
exercised,  nor  would  any  citizens  be  better 
qualified  to  pronounce  and  to  uphold  the 
rightful  decision  in  each  case. 

Ver.   12. — rrom  the  avenger.    Hebrew, 

?K).  Septuagint,  6  ayxtOT-ewaii/  to  al/ua. 
In  all  other  passages  (twelve  in  number) 
where  the  word  occurs  in  this  sense  it  is 
qualified  by  the  addition  "  of  blood."  Stand- 
ing by  itself,  it  is  everywhere  else  translated 
"kinsman,"  or  (more  properly)  "redeemer," 
and  is  constantly  applied  in  that  sense  to 
God  our  Saviour  (Job  xix.  26 ;  Isa.  bdiL  16 
&c).  The  two  ideas,  however,  which  seem 
to  us  so  distinct,  and  even  so  opposed, 
are  in  their  origin  one.  To  the  men  of 
the  primitive  age,  when  public  justice  was 
not,  and  when  might  was  right,  the  only 
protector  was  one  who  could  and  would 
avenge  them  of  their  wrongs,  and  by  avenging 
prevent  their  repetition.  This  champion  of 
the  injured  individual,  or  rather  family, — for 
rights  and  wrongs  were  thought  of  as  belong- 
ing to  families  rather  than  to  individuals, — 
was  their  goel,  who  had  their  peace,  their 
safety,  above  all,  their  honour,  in  his  charge. 
For  no  sentimente  spring  up  quicker,  and 
none  exercise  a  more  tyrannous  sway,  than 
the  sentiment  of  honour,  which  in  its  various 
and  often  strangely  distorted  forms  has 
always  perhaps  outweighed  all  other  con- 
siderations in  the  minds  of  men.  Now  the 
earliest  form  in  which  the  sentiment  of 
honour  asserted  itself  was  in  the  blood-feud. 
If  one  member  of  a  family  was  slain,  an  in- 
tolerable ihame  and    sense  of  contumely 


OH.  XXXV.  1—34.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


447 


rested  upon  the  family  until  blood  had  been 
arenged  by  blood,  until  "  satisfaction  "  had 
been  done  by  the  death  of  the  manslayer. 
He  who  freed  the  family  from  this  intolerable 
pain  and  humiliation — who  enabled  it  to 
hold  up  its  head,  and  to  breathe  freely  once 
more — was  the  goel ;  and  in  the  natural 
order  of  things  he  was  the  nearest  "kins- 
man" of  the  slain  who  could  and  would  take 
the  duty  upon  him.  To  these  natural  feel- 
ings was  added  in  many  cases  a  religious 
sentiment  which  regarded  homicide  as  a  sin 
against  the  higher  Powers  for  which  they 
too  demanded  the  blood  of  the  guilty.  Such 
was  the  feeling  among  the  Greeks,  and 
probably  among  the  Egyptians,  while  among 
the  Hebrews  it  could  plead  Divine  sanction, 
given  in  the  most  comprehensive  terms : 
"Your  blood  of  your  lives  wiU  I  require,  at 
the  hand  of  every  beast  will  I  .require  it ;  and 
at  the  hand  of  man ;  .  .  .  whoso  sheddeth 
man's  blood,  by  man  shall  his  blood  be  shed" 
(Gen.  ix.  5,  6).  The  moral  difficulties  of 
this  proclamation  need  not  here  be  con- 
sidered ;  it  is  enough  to  take  note  that  the 
Divine  law  itself  recognised  the  duty  as  well 
as  the  lawfulness  of  private  blood-revenge 
when  public  justice  could  not  be  depended 
on.  The  goel,  therefore,  was  not  merely 
the  natural  champion  of  his  family,  nor 
only  the  deliverer  who  satisfied  the  imperious 
demands  of  an  artificial  code  of  honour ;  he 
was  a  minister  of  God,  in  whose  patient 
efforts  to  hunt  down  his  victim  the  thirst 
for  vengeance  was  to  some  extent  at  least 
superseded  by,  or  rather  transmuted  into,  the 
longing  to  glorify  God  (compare  the  difficult 
case  of  Rev.  vi.  10).  It  was  not  merely 
human  feelings  of  great  reach  and  tenacity 
which  were  outraged  by  the  immunity  of  the 
manslayer ;  it  was  still  more  the  justice  of 
God  which  received  a  grievous  wound.  Just 
because,  however,  God  had  made  the  cause 
of  the  slain  man  his  own,  and  had  sanctioned 
the  avenging  mission  of  the  goel,  he  could 
therefore  regulate  the  course  of  vengeance  so 
as  to  make  it  run  as  even  as  possible  with 
true  justice.  It  was  not  indeed  possible  to 
distinguish  ab  initio  between  the  homicide 
which  deserved  and  that  which  did  not 
deserve  capital  punishment.  Such  distinc- 
tion, difficult  under  any  cirenmstances,  was 
impossible  when  vengeance  was  in  private 
hands.  But  while  the  goel  could  not  be 
restrained  from  immediate  pursuit  unhindered 
by  investigation  or  compunction  (lest  his 
whole  usefulness  be  paralysed),  the  manslayer 
might  have  opportunity  to  escape,  and  to  be 
sheltered  under  the  Divine  mercy  until  he 
could  establish  (if  that  were  possible)  his 
innocence.  No  better  instance  can  be  found 
of  the  way  in  which  the  King  of  Israel 
adapted  the  sentiments  and  institutions  of  a 
serai-barbarons   age,    added   to    them   the 


sanctions  of  religion,  and  so  modified  them 
as  to  secure  the  maximum  of  practical  good 
consistent  with  the  social  state  and  moral 
feelings  of  the  people.  No  doubt  many  an 
individual  was  overtaken  and  slain  by  the 
goel  who  did  not  deserve  to  die  according  to 
our  ideas;  but  where  perfection  was  unattain- 
able, this  error  was  far  less  dangerous  to  that 
age  than  the  opposite  error  of  diminishing  the 
sanctity  of  human  life  and  the  awfulness  of 
Divine  justice.  The  congregation.  Hebrew, 
iTiy.  This  word  is  used  frequently  from 
Exod.  xii.  3  to  the  end  of  this  chapter,  and 
again  in  Joshua  and  the  last  two  chapters  of 
Judges.  It  is  not  found  in  Deuteronomy, 
nor  often  in  the  later  books.  In  every  case 
apparently  eyddh  signifies  the  whole  nation 
as  gathered  together,  e.  g.  as  represented  by 
all  who  had  an  acknowledged  right  to  appear, 
for  of  course  600,000  men  could  not  gather 
together  in  any  one  place.  The  force  of  the 
word  may  be  understood  by  reference  to  its 
use  in  Judges ,  xx.  1 ;  zzi.  10,  13,  16. 
Another  word  (7i^\>)  is  also  used,  less  fre- 
quently in  Leviticus  and  Numbers,  but  more 
nequently  in  the  later  books,  for  the  general 
assembly  of  the  people  of  Israel.  No  dis- 
tinction of  meaning  can  be  drawn  between 
the  two  words,  and  it  cannot,  therefore,  be 
maintained  that  the  "  congregation  "  of  this 
verse  means  the  local  elders  of  Josh.  xx.  4. 
The  regulations  there  laid  down  are  not  in- 
consistent with  the  present  law,  but  are  quite 
independent  of  it.  They  refer  to  a  preliminary 
hearing  of  the  case  as  stated  by  the  fugitive 
alone  in  order  to  determine  his  right  to 
shelter  in  the  mean  time;  which  right,  if 
accorded,  was  without  prejudice  to  the  future 
judgment  of  the  "congregation"  on  the 
whole  facts  of  the  case  (see  below  on 
ver.  25). 

Ver.  13. — Six  cities.  See  on  Dent  xix. 
8,  9,  where  three  more  are  apparently  ordered 
to  be  set  aside  upon  a  certain  contingency. 

Yer.  14. — Ye  shall  give  three  cities  on 
this  side  Jordan.  According  to  Deut.  iv. 
41t— 43,  Moses  himself  severed  these  three 
cities,  Bezer  of  the  Reubenites,  Ramoth  of 
the  Gadites,  and  Golan  of  the  Manassltes. 
Those  verses,  however,  seem  to  be  an  evident 
interpolation  where  they  stand,  and  are 
hardly  consistent  with  previous  statements 
if  taken  literally.  It  is  tolerably  clear  that 
the  two  tribes  had  only  formed  temporaiy 
settlements  hitherto,  and  that  their  bound- 
aries were  not  defined  as  yet ;  also  that  the 
Levitical  cities  (to  which  the  cities  of  refuge 
were  to  belong)  were  not  separated  until  after 
the  conquest.  It  is  likely  that  Deut.  iv. 
41—43  is  a  fragment,  the  real  meaning  of 
which  is  that  Moses  ordered  the  severance  of 
three  cities  on  that  side  Jordan  as  cities  of 
refuge,  for  which  purposes  the  three  cities 
n;entioned  were  afterwards  selected. 


448 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[oh.  xzxv.  1 — 34. 


Yer.  16. — With  an  instrament  of  iron. 
There  is  no  reasonable  doubt  that  7*13  has 

V  I- 

hnre  (as  elsewhere)  its  proper  meaning  of 
iron.  The  expression  must  be  held  to  include 
both  weapons  and  other  instruments ;  the 
former  may  have  been  mostly  made  of  bronze, 
but  where  iron  is  used  at  all  it  is  sure  to  be 
employed  in  war. 

Ver.  17.— With  throwing  a  stone,  where- 
with he  may  die.  Literally,  "with  a  stone 
of  the  hand,  by  which  one  may  die,"  i.  e. 
a  stone  which  is  suitable  for  striking  or 
throwing,  and  apt  to  inflict  a  mortal  wound. 
Ver.  18. — A  hand  weapon  of  wood.  A 
club,  or  other  such  formidable  instrument. 

Ver.  19.— When  he  meeteth  him,  i.  e.  out- 
side a  city  of  refuge. 

Ver.  20.— Butif.  Kather,  "and if"  (DXJ). 
The  consideration  of  wilful  murder  is  con- 
tinued in  these  two  verses,  although  chiefly 
with  reference  to  the  motive.  It  is  to  be 
understood  that  the  deliberate  intent  was 
present  in  the  former  cases,  and  a  new  case 
IS  added,  viz.,  if  he  smite  him  with  his  fist 
with  fatal  consequences. 

-Ver.  22. — Without  enmity, .  .  .  without 
laying  of  wait.  These  expressions  seem 
intended  to  limit  mercy  to  cases  of  pure 
accident,  such  as  that  quoted  in  Deut.  xix.  5. 
Neither  provocation  nor  any  other  "  extenu- 
ating circumstances  "  are  taken  into  account, 
nor  what  we  now  speak  of  as  absence  of  pre- 
meditation. The  want  of  these  finer  dis- 
tinctions, as  well  as  the  short  and  simple 
list  of  fatal  injuries  given, ^how  the  rudeness 
of  the  age  for  which  these  regulations  were 
made. 

Ver.  25. — The  congregation  (iTlJI)  shall 
restore  him  to  the  city  of  his  refuge.  It  is 
perfectly  plain  from  this  (and  from  Josh.  xx. 
6)  that  the  general  assembly  of  all  Israel  was 
to  summon  both  homicide  and  avenger  before 
them  with  their  witnesses,  and,  if  they  found 
the  accused  innocent,  were  to  send  him  back 
under  safe  escort  to  the  city  in  which  he  had 
taken  refuge.  He  shall  abide  in  it  unto  the 
death  of  the  high  priest.  No  doubt  his 
family  might  join  him  in  his  exile,  and  his 
life  might  be  fairly  happy  as  well  as  safe 
within  certain  narrow  limits ;  but  under 
ordinary  circumstances  he  must  forfeit  much 
and  risk  more  by  his  enforced  absence  from 
home  and  land.  It  is  not  easy  to  see  why 
the  death  of  the  high  priest  should  have  set 
the  fugitive  free  from  the  law  of  vengeance, 
except  as  foreshadowing  the  death  of  Christ. 
No  similar  significance  is  anywhere  else  at- 
tributed to  the  death  of  the  high  priest ;  and 
it  was  rather  in  its  unbroken  continuance 
than  in  its  recurring  interruption  that  the 
priesthood  of  Aaron  typified  that  of  the 
^4^i|ier.    To  see  wiything  of  a  vicarioits  or 


satisfactory  character  in  the  death  of  the 
high  priest  seems  to  be  introducing  an 
element  quite  foreign  to  the  symbolism  of  the 
Old  Testament.  The  stress,  however,  which 
is  laid  upon  the  fact  of  his  decease  (cf.  ver, 
28),  and  the  solemn  notice  of  his  having  been 
anointed  with  the  holy  oil,  seem  to  point 
unmistakably  to  something  in  his  official  and 
consecrated  character  which  made  it  right 
that  the  rigour  of  the  law  should  die  with 
him.  What  the  JubUe  was  to  the  debtor  who 
had  lost  his  property,  that  the  death  of  the 
high  priest  was  to  the  homicide  who  had 
lost  his  liberty.  If  it  was  the  case,  as  com- 
monly believed,  that  all  blood  feuds  were 
absolutely  terminated  by  the  death  of  the 
high  priest,  might  this  not  be  because  the 
high  priest,  as  chief  minister  of  the  law  of 
God,  was  himself  the  goel  of  the  whole 
nation  ?  When  he  died  all  processes  of 
vengeance  lapsed,  because  they  had  really 
been  commenced  in  his  name. 

Ver.  26. — Without  the  border  of  the  city, 
i.e.  no  doubt  beyond  its  "suburbs." 

Ver.  30. — By  the  mouth  of  witnesses,  i.  e. 
of  two  at  least  (cf.  Deut.  xvii  6). 

Ver.  31. — Ye  shall  take  no  satisfaction 
for  the  life  of  a  murderer.  The  passion  for 
vengeance  is  both  bad  and  good,  and  is 
therefore  to  be  carefully  purified  and  re- 
strained ;  but  when  the  desire  for  vengeance 
can  be  appeased  by  a  money  payment,  it 
has  become  wholly  bad,  and  is  only  a  despic- 
able form  of  covetousness  which  insults  the 
justice  it  pretends  to  invoke.  Such  pay- 
ments or  "  ransoms  "  are  permitted  by  the 
Koran,  and  have  been  common  among  most 
semi-civilised  peoples,  notably  amongst  our 
old  English  ancestors. 

Ver.  32. — That  he  should  come  again  to 
dwell  in  the  land.  No  one  might  buy  ofl 
the  enmity  of  the  avenger  before  the  ap- 
pointed time,  for  that  would  give  an  unjust 
advantage  to  wealth,  and  would  make  the 
whole  matter  mercenary  and  vulgar. 

Ver.  33. — The  land  cannot  be  cleansed. 
Literally,  "  there  is  no  expiation  (1S3'.)  for 
the  land."  Septuagint,  oix  iiiXaaH^aiTai  r) 
y  5.  By  these  expressions  the  Lord  places  the 
sin  of  murder  in  its  true  light,  as  a  sin 
against  himself.  The  land,  his  land,  is  de- 
filed irith  the  blood  of  the  slain,  and  nothing 
can  do  away  with  the  giiilt  which  cleaves  to 
it  but  the  strict  execution  of  Divine  justice 
upon  the  murderer.  Money  might  satisfy 
the  relatives  of  the  slain,  but  cannot  satisfy 
his  Maker. 

Ver.  34. — For  I  the  lord  dwell  among 
the  children  of  Israel.  Therefore  the  mur- 
derer's hand  is  raised  against  me ;  the  blood 
of  the  slain  is  ever  before  ray  eyes,  its  cry  foi 
vengeance  ever  in  my  ears  (cf.  Gen.  iT.  10  j 
Matt,  jpciii.  36;  IUt.  rt  IQ), 


OH.  XXXV.  1— S4.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  449 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 3A.—Tlie  dwdling  of  the  faithful:  the  Redeemer:  the  tanctUy  of  life. 
There  are  in  this  chapter  three  things  closely  connected  historically,  and  therefore 
closely  consecutive  in  the  narrative,  but  distinct  in  their  spiritual  application.  We 
have,  therefore,  separately  to  consider — I.  Thb  provibion  which  God  makes  fob  his 

OWN,  AND  THEIB  DISPERBION ;   II.   TeB  BBrUQE   SET  BEFOBB  BIM   THAT   IS    QUILTT  07 

blood;    III.  The  banotitt  of  life. 

I,  In  the  regulations  made  for  the  habitation  of  the  Levites  and  their  cattle  we 
have  some  sort  of  precedent  for  religious  endowments ;  but  this  precedent  loses  all 
value  in  argument  when  we  consider  that  the  old  dispensation  was  essentially  tem- 
poral, which  ours  is  not ;  moreover,  the  Levites  do  nU  correspond  to  the  clergy, 
but  rather  to  the  inner  circle  of  the  faithful,  who  are  more  emphatically  Qie 
"  salt  of  the  earth."  Consider,  therefore,  as  to  the  habitation  of  the  Levites— 
1.  That  it  was  the  will  of  Ood  to  disperse  them,  as  widely  as  possible  throughout 
Israel — a  thing  which  might  have  been  looked  upon  as  a  punishment  to  them 
(Oen.  xlix.  7),  but  was  really  for  the  common  good.  Even  so  it  is  his  will  that 
his  own,  who  are  more  especially  his  own,  should  be  scattered  far  and  wide  among 
the  mass  of  imperfect  or  nominal  Christians ;  not  gathered  together  in  one  comer 
of  Christendom,  but  everywhere  found  as  the  few  among  the  many.  And  note  that 
this  is  the  very  law  of  "salt,"  which  must  be  scattered  and  diffused  to  exercise 
its  antiseptic  functions.  2.  That  the  Levites,  although  dispersed,  yet  lived  in  com- 
munities, and  this  no  doubt  that  they  might  set  forth  the  life  of  holiness  according 
to  the  law.  Even  so  there  is,  beside  the  law  of  dispersion,  a  counter-law  of  aggrega- 
tion for  "the  spiritual,"  which  makes  mightily  for  holiness.  For  Christianity  is  a 
life,  and  life  is  complex,  and  therefore  can  only  be  lived  by  many  who  agree.  There 
should  be  centres  of  high  religious  influence  everywhere,  but  those  centres  should  be 
strong.  3.  That  the  allotments  of  the  Levites,  though  sufficient,  were  far  from  being 
extensive,  on  any  understanding  of  the  text.  Even  so,  for  those  who  would  be  an 
example  to  Christ's  flock,  sufficiency  is  the  rule,  and  nothing  more  (1  Tim.  vi.  8). 
God  does  not  design  poverty  for  his  own  (Luke  xii.  31),  unless  voluntarily  embraced 
(ibid.  ver.  33),  but  assuredly  not  wealth  (ibid.  vi.  24).  4.  That  the  object  aimed  at 
%n  the  allotment  of  their  cities  was  to  give  each  tribe,  and  even  each  tribesman,  a  per- 
sonal and  local  interest  in  the  Levites.  Even  so  it  is  the  will  of  God  that  those  who 
specially  follow  after  him  should  be  identified  as  strongly  as  possible  with  thoae 
around  them,  in  order  that  these  may  love  and  reverence  them.  Every  Christian 
land  has  its  "  saints,"  by  whom  it  is  the  more  edified  in  that  it  feels  them  to  b« 
specially  its  own. 

Consider  also,  mystically---l.  TheU  the  Levitical  cities  numbered  forty-eighti  i.  e. 
12  X  4 — the  first  being'  the  symbol  of  the  universal  (apostolic — see  Rev.  xxi.  14) 
Church,  the  second  of  the  whole  earth  (Matt.  viii.  11 ;  Rev.  xxi.  13),  the  whole  signi- 
fying diffusion  throughout  the  world.  Even  so  the  religious  life  is  universal  in  all 
parts  of  the  Church  of  God,  even  in  those  which  seem  to  us  most  remote.  2.  That 
the  enclosures  round  the  Levitical  cities  measured  the  same  every  way— lay  foursquare 
as  far  as  possible.  Even  so  it  is  the  ideal  of  the  religious  life  that  it  be  not  one- 
sided, or  unequal,  but  attain  its  full  development  in  all  directions ;  if  not  it  must 
be  starved  to  some  extent. 

II.  The  law  of  refuge  from  the  goel  is  one  of  the  most  striking,  and  yet  difficult, 
of  the  f  oreshadowings  of  the  gospel.  It  is  complicated,  in  the  Spiritual  interpretation, 
by  the  fact  that  Christ  is  the  Victim  with  whose  blood  our  hands  are  stained,  and  our 
only  Refuge,  while  he  is  also  typified  as  Redeemer  by  the  goel,  and  as  Messiah 
by  the  anointed  priest.  Consider,  however — 1.  That  the  law  presupposed  and  pro- 
vided for  a  state  of  blood-guiltiness,  which  brought  after  it  the  sentence  of  death  (Gen. 
ix.  6).  Even  so  the  gospel  presupposes  that  all  have  sinned,  and  have  become  guilty 
of  the  death  of  Christ,  who  died  for  our  sins,  and  have  incurred  the  sentence  of 
eternal  death,  David  said,  "  Deliver  me  from  blood-guiltiness  "  (Ps.  li.  14),  but  he 
had  already  incurred  it  (2  Sara.  xii.  9) ;  and  so  have  we  (cf.  Heb.  vi.  6  ;  x.  29).  2. 
That  it  provided  for  such  blood'guiltiness  as  teas  unwittingly  incurred.  Even  so 
Christ's  excuse  for  us  is  that  we  "know  not  what  we  do"  (Luke  xxiii  24),  and  our 

NUMBERS.  Q  a 


460  THE  BOOK  OF  NDMBERa  [CH.  xxxT.  1—34 

hope  is  that  we  have  not  wilfully  and  deliberately  preferred  sin  as  such  (Acts  iiu  17 ; 
1  Tim.  i.  13).    3.  That  it  presupposed  that  the  avenger  was  on  foot  to  take  the  lih 
oftlie  manslayer.     Even  so  the  gospel  testifies  by^ts  very  o£Eers  of  mercy  that  the 
Divine  justice  is  surely  gone  forth  with  the  edict  of  death  against  every  soul  that 
hath  sinned,  and  that  it  is  a  mere  matter  of  time  when  that  justice  shall  overtake  the 
sinner  (Gen.  iii.  3 ;  Ezek.  xviii.  4 ;  Bom.  iii.  9, 19,  &c.).    4.  That  it  pleased  God  to 
open  a  door  of  safety  to  the  fugitive  mthout  staying  the  avenger.    For  the  mission  of 
the  goel  was  very  needful  for  that  age,  and  yet  it  was  the  will  of  God  to  spare  the 
unwitting  homicide.     Even  so  it  has  pleased  God  in  a  wonderful  manner  to  pro- 
vide a  refuge  for  the  sinner  without  compromising  the  Divine  justice.    The  wrath  of 
God  against  sin  and  the  necessary  punishment  of  sin  are  declared  by  the  very  means 
which  bring  salvation  to  the  sinner  (Eom.  iii.  26,  &c.).    6.  That  this  refuge  was  so 
distributed  in  six  cities,  three  on  each  side  Jordan,  that  it  was  everywhere  accessible. 
Even  so  the  sinner's  refuge  in  Jesus  Christ  is  everywhere  and  by  all  accessible, 
if  they  will  without  delay  flee  into  it  (Heb.  vi.  18,  &c.).     And  note  that  whereas 
almost  all  other  religious  privilege  and  promise  was  concentrated  at  Jerusalem,  tliis 
refuge  was  distributed  to  all  quarters  of  Jewish  settlement,  intimating  that  salvation 
in  Christ  is  attainable  wherever  men  call  upon  his  name  (Bom.  ix.  33,  &c.).     6.  That 
in  order  to  be  safe  the  manslayer  m/astfiee  to  the  city  of  refuge,  which  was  a  Levitical 
city  (not  a  solitary  post  or  a  mere  sanctuary),  and  tliere  must  take  up  his  abode 
among  the  LevUes.    Even  so  the  sinner  who  desires  to  escape  from  the  sentence  of 
Divine  justice  must  flee  for  refuge  unto  Christ  to  take  hold  on  his  merits  ;  but  in 
doing  so  he  does  ipso  facto  find  a  home  in  the  society  of  the  truly  faithful,  and  in 
that  society  he  will  abide.     The  life  of  one  that  is  escaped  from  wrath  is  not  a  soli- 
tary walk  with  God,  but  a  dwelling  in  a  populous  city  (Acts  ii.  42 ;  Col.  iii.  15 ; 
Heb.  xii.  22,  28 ;  of.  Ps.  xxxi.  21,  &c.).    7.  That  the  mandayer  must  never  stir 
(nttside  his  refuge  at  risk  of  his  life  ;  if  he  did,  the  goel  was  at  liberty  to  slay  him. 
Even  80  the  sinner  must  never  quit  his  refuge  in  Christ  for  one  hour,  lest  he  perish  ; 
neither  may  he  (which  is  part  of  the  same  thing)  withdraw  from  the  society  of  the 
faithful,  for  that  is  his  (outward)  protection.     At  whatever  risk  and  loss  o£  things 
temporal,  he  must  abide  under  the  shelter  of  the  atonement. 

Consider  again,  with  respect  to  the  death  of  the  high  priest,  and  the  staying  of 
blood-feuds — 1.  That  the  high  priest  typified  Christ,  not  in  that  he  died  by  virtue  of 
individual  mortality,  but  in  that  he  lived  by  virtue  of  official  immortality  (see  on  ch. 
XX.  28 ;  Heb.  vii.  24,  25)  ;  wherefore  it  is  contrary  to  the  whole  analogy  of  Scrip- 
ture to  attribute  any  pqwer  of  atonement  to  the  death  of  the  high  priest.  2.  That 
the  high  priest  was  not  only  the  mediator  and  intercessor  for  Israel,  but  was  also 
the  chief  minister  of  the  law  of  God,  and  therefore  the  avenger  oiE  all  iniquity 
against  Israel,  especially  of  all  blood-guiltiness ;  in  a  word,  he  represented  Divine 
justice  as  well  as  Divine  compassion,  3.  That  the  death  of  the  high  priest,  which 
set  the  escaped  manslayer  free  from  all  constraints  and  restrictions,  must  be  taken  to 
represent  the  passing  away  (as  far  as  we  are  concerned)  of  the  law  of  God  as  directed 
against  sin.  But  this  will  only  be  when  sin  itself  shall  have  wholly  ceased,  i.  e.  at 
the  resurrection  of  the  just ;  then,  and  only  then,  will  all  restraints,  all  constraints,  all 
necessities  for  sacrifice  and  renunciation,  all  penalties  for  forsaking  the  society  of  the 
faithful,  be  for  ever  aboUshed  as  no  longer  needful. 

Consider  also,  in  connection  with  this — 1.  That  the  word  goel  is  translated  avenger, 
kinsman,  and  redeemer ;  the  same  personage  sustaining  in  fact  all  these  characters, 
and  that  by  a  natural  law  due  to  the  circumstances  of  the  age.  2.  That  our  Lord  is 
unquestionably  our  Goel,  in  that  he  is  our  Kinsman,  who  has  made  himself  our  nearest 
blood  relation,  and  in  that  he  is  our  Bedeemer,  who  hath  redeemed  for  us  our  for- 
feited possession  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  3.  That  he  is  also  our  Goel  in  that  he 
is  in  readiness  to  avenge  as  Judge  all  wrongs  done  unto  the  temporal  or  spiritual  lives 
of  his  own.  This  is  indeed  little  considered,  but  is  certainly  true,  since  he  alone 
wields  all  power  in  heaven  and  in  earth  (see  Matt,  xxviii.  18;  Heb.  iv.  12,  13, 
where  the  "  Word  of  God  "  is  evidently  the  personal  Word ;  Luke  xviii,  7  ;  2  Tliess. 
i.  6 ;  Hev.  vi.  10  :  xix,  2,  &c.).  4.  That  the  work  and  office  of  Christ  as  Avenger 
and  Defisiider  of  his  own  will  ceatie  and  determine  with  the  final  end  of  all  wioked- 
ness,  and  then  he  will  be  Goel  no  longer  in  this  sense  (see  1  Cor.  xv.  24 — 28  compare^ 


m.  XXXV.  1-  34.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEKS.  451 

with  Rev.  vii.  17,  &o.).  And  this  change,  whereby  the  Avenger  will  be  wholly 
swallowed  up  in  the  Kinsman  and  Redeemer,  seems  to  be  symbolised  by  the  death 
of  the  high  priest  (see  above). 

III.  The  laws  of  manslaughter  here  declared  have  rather  a  moral  than  a  spiritual 
value.  The  one  thing  which  they  uphold  as  a  principle  is  the  sanctity  of  human  life, 
and  the  duty  of  inflicting  capital  punishment  for  murder,  as  laid  down  in  Gen.  iz. 
It  is  difBcult  to  see  that  this  duty  is  less  under  the  gospel,  because  the  bringing  in  of 
the  gospel  has  not  changed  the  fundamental  relations  of  man  to  his  Maker  as  based 
upon  creation  ;  rather  it  would  seem  to  have  added  to  the  sanctity  of  human  life  by 
adding  to  the  ties  which  knit  that  life  to  the  life  of  God  (cf.  Acts  iz.  4,  5 ;  1  Cor.  vi. 
IS  ;  2  Pet.  i.  4).  Whatever  may  be  held,  however,  as  touching  the  duties  of  civil 
governors,  we  may  consider — 1.  That  the  sin  against  God  involved  in  mnrder  is 
enormous,  and  this  guilt  is  incurred  by  every  one  that  hateth  his  brother  (1  John  iii. 
15).  2.  That  the  guilt  of  murder  lay  before  God  in  the  intention  to  kill,  wherefore 
marders  also  proceed  out  of  the  heart  (Mark  vii.  21).  3.  That  it  was  laid  upon  the 
congregation  to  show  by  prompt  and  righteous  procedure  that  they  had  no  sympathy 
with  the  murderer.  4.  That  in  the  absence  of  such  vindication  of  justice  the  land  was 
polluted  with  blood  in  the  eyes  of  God,  who  dwelt  therein.  6.  That  there  is  a  crime 
which  is  murder,  but  is  worse  than  any  killing  of  the  body, «.  e.  the  destroying  of  the 
soul  by  leading  it  into  sin.  6.  That  it  is  laid  upon  all  the  faithful  to  show  their 
horror  and  detestation  of  this  crime  by  their  treatment  of  seducers  and  tempters  (1 
Cor.  V.  11 ;  Ephes.  v.  11 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  21 ;  2  John  11).  7.  That  indulgence  and  sym- 
pathy extended  to  destroyers  of  souls  that  have  not  repented  brings  down  the  wrath 
of  God  upon  a  Church,  and  makes  it  hateful  in  his  eyes  (see  laa.  i.  21,  &c.).  8. 
That  this  sinful  indulgence  of  seducers  is  excused  by  human  considerations,  in 
forgetfulness  that  God  is  in  the  midst  of  his  people,  and  that  every  sin  so  lightly 
excused  or  ignored  stares  him  in  the  face  (2  Cor.  vi.  16  ;  Eev.  ii.  1).  9.  That  if  the 
blood  of  Abel  cried  to  him  from  the  ground,  and  if  the  land  of  Canaan  could  not  be 
cleansed  from  the  blood  of  its  slain,  how  much  more  will  he  be  moved  by  that 
destruction  of  immortal  souls  which  is 'wrought  by  the  wicked  lives  and  aolicitfitions 
of  bad  Christians  I 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  Levites  to  be  distributed  in  certain  cities  throughout  the  whole 
land.  Unlike  the  other  tribes,  the  Levites  were  to  have  no  inheritance  in  the  land. 
The  names  of  Judah,  Ephraim,  Manasseb,  Reuben  figure  on  the  map  of  Palestine, 
each  giving  name  to  a  province  or  county  of  its  own  ;  but  the  map  knows  no  tribe 
of  Levi.  The  Lord  was  the  inheritance  of  this  tribe.  For  their  subsistence  the 
Levites  were  to  depend  partly  on  the  tithe,  partly  on  certain  dues  and  perquisites, 
supplemented  by  the  free-will  offerings  of  uie  faithfuL  But  although  they  were 
landless,  it  was  never  the  Lord's  will  that  they  should  be  houseless.  A  vagabond 
ministry  could  not  have  failed  to  be  a  scandalous  ministry.  Accordingly,  tito  law 
here  provides  dwellings  for  the  sacred  tribe  in  forty-eight  Levitical  cities. 

I.  In  this  law  two  points  claiu  notice.  1.  That  the  forty-eight  cities,  althoogh 
denominated  "  Levitical  cities,"  were  not  devoted  exclusively  to  members  of^  this  trtoe. 
For  example,  Hebron,  which  was  perhaps  the  most  noted  of  the  forty-eight,  being 
the  city  of  refuge  for  what  was  afterwards  the  whole  kingdom  of  Judah,  formed 
part  of  the  inheritance  of  Caleb  the  Kenezite  (Josh.  ziv.  14).  Doubtless  many  families 
of  Judah  would  also  be  found  among  the  residents ;  for  the  city  belonged  to  Judah. 
What  the  Levites  obtained  was  not,  in  any  instance,  exclusive  possession  of  the  city, 
but  certain  booses  within  the  walls,  and  certain  pasture  grounds  ("  glebe  lands ") 
adjoining.  The  houses  and  glebes  thus  set  apart  became  the  inalienable  inheritance 
of  the  respective  Levitical  families.  They  were  as  strictly  entailed  as  the  lands  which 
constituted  the  patrimony  of  the  other  families  in  Israel.  If  at  any  time  they  were 
sold  for  debt,  they  reverted  to  the  family  at  the  Jubilee.  2.  The  Levitical  cities  were 
scattered  up  and  doim  the  whole  ccnmtry.  The  arrangement  was  a  remarkable  one. 
At  first  sight,  indeed,  it  looks  awkward  and  unnatural.  For  were  not  the  Levites  set 
apart  to  do  the  service  of  the  sane  luary  ?  Would  it  not  have  been  more  convenient  to 
^  902 


4S2  TAB  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS.  [oh.  xxxv.  1—34 

have  had  them  located  where  they  would  h»ve  heen  within  easy  reach  of  the  sanotuary  ? 
In  the  ideal  arrangement  sketched  in  Eiseki.l'a  vision,  the  Levitical  families  are  seen 
located  in  the  vicinity  of  Jerusalem.  The  circumstance  that  the  law  ordained  an 
arrangement  so  different  was  meant,  I  cannot  doubt,  to  suggest  to  the  Levites  that 
they  had  other  duties  to  discharge  in  Israel  besides  doing  the  service  of  the  sanctuary, 
It  was  the  will  of  Qod  that  they  should,  in  their  several  districts,  be  the  stated  teachers 
of  the  people  in  the  Divine  law  (Dent  xxziii.  10;  Mai.  ii.  4-— 8).  This  ofSce  and 
calling  of  the  Levites  being  so  honourable,  it  has  often  been  thought  strange  that 
their  dispersion  throughout  Israel  should  have  been  predicted  by  Jacob  as  a  curse 
upoi  the  tribe  for  their  father'8  sin  (Gen.  xliz.  7).  In  itself  it  was  honourable  ; 
nevertheless  the  words  of  the  patriarch  were  fulfilled  in  the  end.  When  the  ten 
tribes  revolted  from  the  house  of  David,  they  fell  away  also  from  the  sanctuary  ; 
and  the  Levites  dwelling  within  those  tribes  had  to  ohoose  between  forfeiting  their 
cities  or  being  cut  off  &om  the  sanctuaryi  In  either  case  they  found  how  bitter  it 
was  to  be  divided  in  Jacob  and  scattered  in  Israel. 

II.  What  hat  wb  lbabn  fboh  this  law?  1,  It  has  been  usual  to  see  in  the 
distribution  of  the  Levites  over  the  whole  land  a  type  and  prelude  of  the  arrangement 
vhieh,  in  Ghriitendwn,assign$  to  evm^  parish  aiM  every  congregation  its  ovm  pastor. 
The  apostles  "  ordained  eldere  in  every  city."  Ministers  of  the  gospel  are  not  to  be 
massed  together  in  the  great  cities,  but  to  be  scattered  everywhere,  so  that  no  family 
in  Ood's  Israel  may  be  beyond  reach  of  one  "at  whose  mouth  they  may  seek  the 
law."  Of  the  institutions  which  have  co-operated  to  make  society  what  it  is  in  the 
Christian  nations,  it  would  not  be  easy  to  name  one  which  has  been  more  influential 
for  good  than  this.  2.  The  arrangement  may  be  regarded  as  representing  the  principle 
accordtJiig  to  which  the  lot  qf  Ghridt  people  in  this  world  is  ordered.  The  faithful 
do  not  live  apart  from  other  men  in  towns  and  provinces  of  their  own.  Separation 
from  the  world,  in  this  literal  sense,  has  been  often  the  dream  of  Christian  reformers, 
and  not  seldom  have  societies  been  organised  for  the  purpose  of  realising  it.  But 
the  well-meant  schemes  have  in  every  case  failed.  They  were  bound  to  fail,  for  they 
ran  counter  to  our  Lord's  great  prayer  and  rule  i  "  I  pray  not  that  thou  shouldest 
take  them  out  of  the  world,  but  that  thou  shouldest  keep  them  from  the  evil "  (John 
xvii.  15).  Nor  is  the  reason  of  the  rule  doubtful.  Christ's  people  are  the  salt  of  the 
earth ;  and  salt,  to  do  its  work,  must  be  mingled  with  that  which  it  is  to  preserve. 
The  godly  must  be  content  to  have  ungodly  persons,  more  or  fewer,  for  neighboura 
•o  long  as  they  abide  in  this  world.  An  unmixed  '*  congregation  of  the  righteous  " 
belongs  to  the  felicities  of  the  world  to  come.  But  if  Christ's  people  are  like  th« 
Levites  in  regard  to  dispersion,  they  are  like  them  also  in  respect  to  the  {)rovision 
made  for  their  brotherly  communion.  As  the  Levites  dwelt  in  their  cities  with  other 
Levites,  so  Christians  are  to  be  gathered  into  Churches  for  mutual  comfort  and  for 
common  work.     "  We  believe  in  the  communion  of  saints." — B. 

Vera.  9—29. — The  maTulayer  and  the  cities  of  refuge.  The  law  of  sanctraary,  as 
it  is  here  laid  down,  never  fails  to  remind  the  devout  reader  of  the  refuge  which 
God's  mercy  has  provided  in  Christ  for  those  who,  by  their  sin,  have  exposed  them- 
selves to  the  Teneeance  of  the  law.  This  way  of  regarding  the  matter  can  be 
thoroughly  justified.  At  tha  aame  time  it  is  well  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  law  was 
framed,  in  tbe  first  instance,  for  a  humbler  purpose. 

I.  Thb  obdinanob  of  thb  citt  of  rbfuqb  considbbbd  as  a  fart  of  thb  Mosaio 
CRmiNAL  LAW.  In  primitive  and  barbarous  states  of  society  the  execution  of  venge- 
ance for  murder  was  devolved  by  ancient  custom  on  the  next  kinsman  of  the  murdered 
man.  The  goiS,,  the  redeemer  and  kinsman,  was  also  the  avenger  of  blood.  The 
custom  is  sufficiently  harsh  and  barbarous,  and  gives  rise  to  blood-feuds  and  untold 
miseries.  Yet,  for  the  states  of  society  in  which  it  originated,  it  cannot  be  dispensed 
with.  There  are  at  this  day  tribes  without  number,  especially  in  the  East,  in  which 
the  sanctity  of  human  life  is  guarded  onlv  by  fear  of  the  avenger  of  blood.  Accord- 
ingly, the  law  of  Moses  does  not  abolish  llie  custom ;  the  next  kinsman  was  still 
held  bound  to  take  vengeance  for  blood.  The  aim  of  the  Mosaic  jurisprudence  waa 
to  conserve  what  was  good  in  the  ancient  custom,  and  at  the  same  time  to  impose 
raob  a  check  upon  it  as  would  prevent  ita  abuse.    This  twofold  design  was  accom- 


CH.  XXXV,  1—34,]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERa  463 

plished  in  the  following  way:— 1.  Certatai  eitiet  were  made  sanctuary  eities  (E^od. 
xji.  13).  The  avenger  of  blood  might  pursue  the  manslayer  to  the  gate  of  the  city 
of  refuge ;  might  kill  him,  if  be  oould,  before  reaching  the  gate ;  but  at  the  gate 
be  had  to  halt  and  eheathe  his  aword.  2.  Although  the  gate  of  the  city  of  refuge 
was  open  to  every  manalayer,  tke  eity  did  «o<  tuffer  the  mlfvl  murderer  to  Umgh  at 
the  sword  of  justice.  It  gave  ijro  visional  protection  to  all,  but  only  to  save  them 
from  the  blind  and  indiscriminating  anger  of  the  avenger  of  blood.  The  refugees 
were  sheltered  only  till  they  bad  stood  a  regular  trial  (ver.  12).  If  it  should  be 
proved  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  congregation  that  the  accused  person  had  been 
guilty  of  murdei,  he  was  to  be  delivered  up  to  the  avenger  of  blood  to  be  killed.  8. 
If,  on  the  contrary,  it  should  be  found  that  the  manslayer  msant  no  harm,  that  it 
was  a  case  of  accidental  homicide,  the  city  of  refuge  was  to  afford  him  inviolable 
sanctuary.  The  law  did  not  (as  with  us)  suffer  him  to  go  home  free.  Accidental 
homicide  is  often  the  result  of  carelessness.  To  teach  men  not  to  trifle  with  the 
sanctity  of  life,  the  manalayer,  although  no  murderer,  bad  to  confine  himself  to  the 
city  of  his  refuge.     But  so  long  as  he  abode  within  its  walls  he  was  safe. 

II.  The  ordinance  of  the  citt  or  kbtogx  considered  ab  a  type.  That  it  had 
a  typical  reference  might  be  gathered  (were  there  nothing  else)  from  the  direction 
that  the  manslayer  was  to  continue  in  the  sanctuary  city  "  until  the  death  of  the 
high  priest ; "  a  meaningless  provision  if  the  statute  had  been  only  a  piece  of  criminal 
law.  Considered  as  a  type,  the  ordinance  represents — 1.  Our  condition  as  sinners. 
We  are  exposed  to  the  vengeance  of  Ood's  law,  and  the  stroke  may  fall  upon  us  at 
any  moment.  A  condition  in  which  there  can  be  no  solid  peace.  2.  What  Christ  is 
to  those  who  are  found  in  him.  He  is  their  High  Priest,  whose  life  is  the  security  for 
their  life  ;  who  "  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost,  seeing  he  ever  liveth  "  (Heb.  vii. 
25),  And  he  is  their  Hefug^,  insomuch  that  for  them  the  one  thing  needful  is  that 
they  be  found  in  him  (Rom.-  viii.  1,  38,  39  ;  Philip,  iii.  8,  9).  3.  How  we  may  obtain 
the  salvation  which  is  in  Christ.  It  is  by  fleeing  into  him  for  refuge  and  thereafter 
abiding  in  him  continually.  In  him  we  are  safe,  out  of  him  we  are  lost.  This  way 
of  salvation  is  such  as  renders  inexcusable  those  who  neglect  it.  The  cities  of  refuge 
were  so  distributed  that  no  manslayer  had  far  to  run  before  reaching  one.  There 
were  three  on  each  side  of  Jordan  ;  of  the  three,  in  each  case,  one  lay  near  the  north 
border,  one  near  the  south  border,  and  one  in  the  middle.  Every  city  was  the  natural 
centre  of  its  province  and  accessible  from  every  side.  They  were  so  situated  that  no 
fugitive  required  to  cross  either  a  river  or  a  mountain  chain  before  reaching  his  refuge. 
How  strikingly  is  all  this  realised  in  Christ  our  refuge  I — B. 

Vers.  30 — 34. —  Why  the  murderer  must  be  put  to  death.  This  passage  brings  np  a 
subject  not  often  discussed  in  the  pulpit.  Yet  it  surely  is  a  subject  which  comes 
home  to  the  business  of  us  all.  In  a  country  like  ours  the  administration  of  justice, 
the  execution  of  vengeance  on  evil-doers,  is  a  duty  in  which  every  one  has  to  bear  n 
part.  We  may  not  all  be  officers  of  justice,  but  we  must  all  act  as  informers,  or 
witnesses^  or  jurymen.  It  is  of  high  importance,  therefore,  that  every  member  of 
the  community  should  be  well  instructed  regarding  the  principles  which  lie  at  the 
foundation  of  the  criminal  law,  and,  in  particular,  should  know  why  and  on  what 
authority  the  community  lays  hold  upon  evil-doers  and  inflicts  on  them  the  punish- 
ment of  their  crimes. 

I.  Observe  the  ocxsasion  of  the  statute  here  delivered.  It  is  an  appendix  to  the 
law  regarding  the  cities  of  refuge.  That  law  was  designed  to  shield  the  involuntary 
homicide  from  the  avenger  of  blood.  The  intention  was  good ;  but  good  intentions 
do  not  always  prevent  dangerous  mistakes.  It  often  happens  that  good  men  in 
labouring  to  cast  out  one  evil  open  the  door  to  a  greater  evil,  A  follower  of  John 
Hoivard  may  bo  press  the  duty  of  humanity  towards  prisoners  as  to  deprive  the 
prison  of  its  deterrent  power.  8o  in  Israel  there  was  a  danger  that  the  care  taken 
to  restrain  the  avenger  of  blood  from  touching  the  involuntary  manslayer  might  have 
the  effect  of  deadening  the  public  sense  of  the  enormity  of  murder,  and  weakening 
men's  resentment  against  the  murderer.  The  design  of  the  statute  before  us  is  to 
prevent  so  mischievous  a  result. 

II.  What  then  are  the  pbo visions  of  the  btatoti?    1.  The  ancient  lawwkidi 


464  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEKS.  [cH.  XXxv.  1—34 

condemned  the  murderer  to  death  is  solemnly  reaffirmed  (ver.  30 ;  compare  with  vers. 
16 — 21  and  Gen.  vs..  6).  To  be  sure,  the  extreme  penalty  ought  not  to  be  executed 
without  extreme  circumspection.  The  unsupported  testimony  of  one  witness  is  not  to 
be  held  sufficient  to  sustain  a  charge  of  murder.  Nevertheless,  if  there  is  sufficient 
evidence,  the  sword  must  strike,  the  murderer  must  not  bo  suffered  to  go  free.  2.  The 
death  penalty  may  not  be  commuted  into  a  fine  (ver.  31).  In  regard  to  this  point 
the  Mosaic  law  differs  from  many,  perhaps  from  most  other  primitive  codes ;  for  they 
suffered  the  murderer  to  compound  with  the  kinsmen  of  his  victim  by  paying  a  fine  in 
cattle  or  in  money.  The  law  of  Moses  suffered  no  such  composition.  The  murderer 
must  be  put  to  death.  Even  the  restraint  to  which  the  law  subjected  the  involuntary 
manslayer  was  not  suffered  to  be  relaxed  by  a  money  payment.  In  all  cases  affecting 
the  sanctity  of  life  pecuniary  compositions  are  utterly  forbidden. 

III.  Thb  reason  of  this  statute  is  carefully  explained  (vers.  33,  34).  The  reason 
lies  in  these  three  principles: — 1.  "Blood  defileth  the  land"  (ef.  Ps.  cvi.  38).  That 
sin  defiles  the  sinner,  that  murder  especially  defiles  the  conscience  of  the  murderer— 
these  are  facts  patent  to  all.  It  is  not  so  often  observed  that  crime  perpetrated  in  a 
city  defiles  the  whole  city.  The  whole  community  has  a  share  in  the  guilt.  Hence 
the  remarkable  law  laid  down  in  Deut.  xxi.  1 — 9  for  the  expiation  of  an  uncertain 
murder.  2.  The  proper  expiation  of  murder  is  hy  the  death  of  the  murderer. 
"  The  land  cannot  oe  cleansed  of  the  blood  that  is  shed  therein  but  by  the  blood  of 
him  that  shed  it."  Justice  is  satisfied,  the  honour  of  the  law  vindicated,  when  the 
murderer  is  put  to  death,  and  not  otherwise.  To  accept  a  pecuniary  satisfaction  for 
blood  is  simply  to  pollute  the  land.  3.  In  this  whole  matter  the  paramount  con- 
sideration  ought  to  be  the  honour  of  God.  Murder  is  criminal  beyond  all  other 
offences,  because  it  is  the  defacement  of  the  image  of  God  in  man.  Murder  must 
not  go  imavenged,  because  it  defiles  the  land  before  God. — -Let  these  principles  be 
carefully  weighed.  They  set  in  a  clear  light  the  true  and  adequate  reason  for 
inflicting  punishment  on  evil-doers.  The  true  reason  is  neither  the  reformation  of 
the  criminal  (for  the  sword  must  strike  although  there  should  be  no  hope  of  reform- 
ation) nor  the  protection  of  society.  These  are  important  objects,  and  not  to  be 
overlooked  ;  but  the  proper  reason  of  punishment  is  the  vindication  of  righteousness, 
the  executing  of  vengeance  on  the  man  who  doeth  evil  (Rom.  xiii.  4). 

IV.  In  conclusion,  does  not  all  this  shed  welcome  light  on  the  atonement  of 
ODE  BLESSED  LoBD  ?  The  death  of  Christ  for  our  sins  accomplished  many  great  and 
precious  purposes.  It  was  an  affecting  proof  of  his  sympathy  with  us.  It  was  a 
revelation  of  the  Father's  love.  But  these  purposes  do  not  contain  the  proper  and 
adequate  reason  of  our  Lord's  sufferings.  He  died  for  our  sins.  It  was  necessary 
that  our  sins  should  be  cleansed,  that  expiation  or  atonement  should  be  made  for 
them.  (N.B.  It  is  the  same  Hebrew  word,  commonly  translated  atonement  else- 
where in  the  Old  Testament,  which  in  this  passage  is  translated  cleansing  in  the  text 
and  expiation  in  the  margin.)  They  might  have  been  expiated  in  our  blood.  But, 
blessed  be  God,  his  mercy  has  found  out  another  way.  By  a  blessed  exchange  Christ 
has  become  sin  for  us ;  he  has  borne  our  sins  and  made  atonement  for  them.  This 
was  the  end  of  his  sufferings — to  satisfy  the  justice  of  the  Father  for  our  sins,  so  that 
his  righteousness  might  not  be  dishonoured  although  we  should  go  free. — B. 

Vers,  9 — 34. — The  cities  of  refuge.  The  laws  in  regard  to  the  cities  of  refuge  and 
manslaughter  suggest  truths  on  the  following  subjects.     We  see  in  them — 

I.  A  toleration  of  what  God  neither  has  appointed  nob  approves.  The 
old  custom  of  blood-avenging  by  the  goel,  though  open  to  grave  abuses,  was  not 
altogether  proscribed.  The  laws  given  by  God  to  Moses  were  not  always  absolutely 
the  best,  though,  relatively  to  the  state  of  the  people,  the  best  they  could  endure. 
Other  illustrations  are  found  in  the  laws  relating  to  divorce,  polygamy,  and  slavery. 
These  examples  of  a  wise  conservatism  suggest  lessons  for  parents,  who  have  to 
"  overlook "  (Acts  xvii.  30)  the  times  of  ignorance  of  their  children,  and  for  mis- 
sionaries, who  may  have  for  a  time  to  tolerate  inevitable  evils  in  converts  whose 
consciences  are  not  yet  trained.  As  God  dealt  with  the  Jews  during  their  childhood 
ts  a  nation,  so  does  he  in  mercy  deal  with  his  sinful  children  during  their  education 
IB  this  life  (Ps.  six,  12 ;  cxzz.  3,  4). 


oa.  XXXV.  1—34.1  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS  46fi 

II.  An  education  by  means  of  the  customs  of  the  past.  God  tolerated  the 
old  custom,  but  not  in  its  entirety.  He  modified  it,  and  thus  carried  on  the  education 
of  the  nation.  On  the  one  hand,  the  cities  of  refuge  were  not  like  the  a»j/la  of  the 
Greeks  and  Romans,  for  wilful  murderers  were  led  forth  from  them  to  justice  (ver. 
30).  On  tlie  other  hand,  the  homicide  by  accident  was  safe  under  certain  conditions 
(vers.  12,  25 — 28).  So  too  now  God  discriminates  between  wilful  sins  (Heb.  x.  26 — 
31,  38,  39)  and  sins  of  ignorance  and  imprudence,  which  may  bring  after  them 
serious  disabilities,  but  do  not  doom  to  destruction. 

III.  A  PREFIGURATION  OF  SPIRITUAL  TRUTH  IN  THE  FUTURE.      The  citieS  of  refuge, 

if  not  strictly  a  type,  are  an  illustration  of  Christ,' the  sinner's  refuge.  The  rules 
prescribed  by  Jews  in  regard  to  the  road  being  kept  in  good  condition,  finger-posts 
being  provided,  &c.,  suggest  various  applications.  1.  The  cities  of  refuge  were  near 
every  portion  of  the  land,  and  Christ  is  within  reach  of  every  one  of  us.  2.  The 
way  was  to  be  made  plain ;  and  the  word  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel  is  plain,  so  that 
"  he  that  readeth  it  may  run  "  straight  to  the  refuge.  3.  Every  manslayer,  native  or 
foreign,  received  the  shelter  of  the  refuge ;  and  sinners  of  every  degree  of  guilt  an4 
every  nation  have  no  safety  except  in  Christ.  4.  Within  the  city,  and  "  in  Christ," 
there  is  no  condemnation.  6.  To  quit  the  refuge,  and  to  "go  away"  from  Christ,  is 
to  meet  destruction.  6.  A  murderer  had  but  the  appearance  of  safety  within  the 
city,  and  the  wilful  sinner  can  find  no  shelter  from  the  wrath  of  God  even  when 
professing  to  believe  in  Christ. — P 

Vers.  1 — 8. — God  provides  places  for  the  Levites  to  dwellin.  God  had  laid  upon 
the  tribe  of  Levi  many  and  onerous  services,  such  as  gave  full  occupation  for  their 
time  (ohs.  i.,  iii.,  i  v. ,  viii.,  xxviii.,  xxix. ) ;  he  had  also  made  abundant  provision  for  their 
support  in  the  matter  of  food  (ch.  xviii.) ;  it  remained  that  he  should  give  a  clear 
indication  of  where  they  were  to  find  a  place  .of  abode  in  Canaan.  If  their  particular 
place  of  settlement  was  important  to  the  other  tribes,  it  was  surely  of  peculiar 
importance  to  the  tribe  which  in  a  representative  aspect  stood  nearer  to  God  than 
any  of  the  rest.  Levi,  with  all  its  solemn  responsibilities,  would  assuredly  not  have 
been  tolerated  in  such  an  assertion  of  self-will  as  came  from  Reuben  and  Gad.  As 
we  examine  the  mode  of  settlement  indicated  in  this  passage,  we  perceive  how  God 
points  out  the  golden  mean  between  too  much  concentration  and  too  much  diffusion. 

I.  The  Levites  were  so  settled  as  to  avoid  the  great  evils  consequent  on 
UNDOK  concentration.  They  might  have  had  the  tabernacle  fixed  up  in  a  certain 
tribal  allotment  of  their  own,  and  then  what  would  have  happened?  Those  living 
at  a  distance  from  the  territory  of  Levi  would  have  been  debarred  from  many  privileges 
belonging  to  those  in  immediate  proximity.  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  He 
did  al  1  that  was  possible  to  put  every  tribe  in  Israel  in  a  position  of  religious  equality. 
The  proportion  of  land  and  the  proportion  of  Levitical  service  was  to  be  according 
to  the  needs  of  each  tribe.  1.  Thus,  by  a  judicious  diffusion,  the  unity  of  the  nation 
was  promoted.  Different  circumstances  require  different  means  for  the  same  end. 
While  the  Israelites  were  encamped  in  the  wilderness,  the  tribe  of  Levi  was  all 
together,  in  the  midst  of  the  camp,  and  immediately  around  the  tabernacle.  But 
when  the  Israelites  became  distributed  in  Canaan,  the  Levites  were  distributed  also, 
thus  acting  still  as  a  principle  of  unity,  although  in  a  different  way.  And  this  dis- 
tribution had  been  made  all  the  more  necessary  since  two  tribes  and  a  half  had  chosen 
to  dwell  on  the  east  of  Jordan.  That  the  Israelites  themselves  were  not  supremely 
conscious  of  the  need  of  unity  had  been  shown  only  too  clearly  by  the  conduct  of 
Reuben  and  Gad.  Much  more  was  wanted  than  to  lie  side  by  side  within  the  same 
borders.  A  mere  geographical  unity  was  a  mockery,  a  delusion,  and  a  snare.  2.  Thie 
judicious  diffusion  also  helped  in  promoting  the  knowledge  of  all  that  needed  to  be 
known  in  Israel.  The  Levites  were  privileged  to  become— and  the  privilege  was  a 
very  high  one — the  guides,  instructors,  counsellors,  and  monitors  of  the  people.  That 
which  God  had  made  known  to  Moses  needed  to  be  brought  down  very  patiently 
and  carefully  to  individual,  private,  daily  life.  The  Levites  had  ample  opportunities 
to  explain  the  commandments  of  God  and  the  significance  of  the  types,  the  rites  and 
ceremonies,  and  the  great  historic  commemorations.  And  as  the  history  of  Israel 
p'ew,  there  grew  with  it  opportunities  to  stimulate  and  warn  bv  pointing  out  th« 


466  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEBS.  [ch.  xxxv,  1-^4 

mingled  glory  and  sharne  of  the  nation's  career,  and  the  lessons  to  be  learnt  from 
conaidering  the  men  who  had  been  conspicuous  in  that  career  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  3). 
Hut  these  opportunities  of  instruction  only  came  because  God  had  sufficiently  dis- 
tributed the  instructors  throughout  the  land.  If  a  house  is  to  be  fully  lighted  up 
there  must  be  a  light  in  every  room.  Those  who  are  already  instructed  must  be 
where  they  can  firmly  lay  hold  of  the  ignorant,  for  the  ignorant  in  the  things  of 
God  need  not  only  to  be  instructed,  but  first  of  all  thoroughly  wakened  out  of  sleep. 
3.  This  diffusion  also  indicated  the  service  which  all  Israd  was  to  render  to  the 
world.  What  Levi  was  to  Israel,  that  Israel  was  to  become  to  all  mankind.  Levi 
was  diffused  through  the  whole  nation,  and  only  kept  its  individuality  as  a  tribe  in 
proportion  as  it  kept  its  fidelity  to  God.  Other  tribes  were  distinguished  by  their 
territory ;  Levi  by  being  specially  engaged  in  the  holy  service  of  the  tabernacle  and 
the  temple.  Thus  what  a  benefit  has  been  produced — more  real  perhaps  than  exactly 
appreciated— by  the  dispersion  of  Israel  among  all  nations  to  bear  their  own  peculiar, 
■olemn,  and  pathetic  testimony  to  Israel's  God,  and  to  the  historic  verity  of  the  Old 
Testament  1  Thus  also  does  God  make  his  own  gracious  and  coniprehensive  arrange- 
ments to  diffuse  believers  in  his  Son  throughout  the  world,  according  to  the  spiritual 
needs  of  the  world.  In  one  sense  they  are  rigorously  separated  from  the  world,  even 
08  Israel  was  by  the  hard  and  fast  lines  of  the  national  borders ;  in  another  sense 
they  are  meant  to  be  so  diffused  that  wherever  there  is  a  dark  place,  there  the  light 
of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  may  brightly  shine.  The  gospel  is  debtor  to  all  nations 
tnd  all  ranks,  to  both  sexes  and  to  all  ages.  We  find  the  true  Israelite  in  every 
■ociety  where  a  man  has  any  right  to  be  at  all ;  among  the  highest  and  the  lowest ;  in 
FarliamentB,  in  courts  of  justice,  in  commerce,  in  literature,  in  science,  and  in  art. 

II.  Carb  was  also  taken  in  the  settlement  of  the  Levites  that  the 
MECESSART  DIKFPSION  SHOULD  NOT  BE  PUSHED  TOO  FAR.  They  were  to  be  distributed 
through  all  Israel,  but  not  according  to  the  free  choice  of  the  individual  Levite. 
Forty-eight  cities,  with  sufBciont  accompanying  land,  were  set  apart  for  them.  Thus, 
by  fixing  a  limit  of  diffusion,  God  conferred  a  benefit  both  on  them  and  on  the  whole 
people.  Those  who  are  engaged  in  a  special  work  of  such  incalculable  importance 
tfi  the  work  of  the  Levites  was,  need  to  be  where  they  can  frequently  counsel,  com- 
fort, and  encourage  one  another.  It  was  not  good  for  tlie  Levites  to  be  alone.  To 
be  isolated  was  in  itself  a  sore  temptation.  And  though  the  work  of  God  is_  only 
truly  done  where  there  is  individual  consecration,  energy,  and  initiative,  yet  he  is  not 
a  wise  Christian  who  sets  lightly  by  the  advantage  he  gains  from  frequent  recourse 
to  those  hke-minded  with  himsel:^  A  certain  measure  of  coherence  among  the 
Levites  was  needed  for  a  healthy  and  profitable  state  of  the  official  life.  You  shall 
have  a  fire  blazing  brightly  in  the  grate,  and  if  you  leave  it  so  it  will  go  on  for  a 
long  time  giving  out  its  flame,  heat,  and  light  But  take  the  pieces  of  coal  and  range 
them  separately  on  the  hearth,  and  very  quickly  the  glowing  fragments  will  become 
a  dull  red  and  soon  die  out  altogether.  The  limits  which  God  fixes  are  wise  and 
loving  limits;  he  ever  keeps  us  from  all  the  dangers  of  extremes.  The  Levites 
were  neither  to  be  too  much  separated  from  the  people  nor  too  much  mingled  with 
them.^Y. 

Vers.  9—34. — The  cities  of  refuge.  We  in  our  modern  English  life  have  an 
experience  of  the  stability  of  social  order,  of  general  submission  to  a  national  law, 
and  of  confidence  in  the  strict  administration  of  justice,  wliioli  causes  this  provision 
for  the  cities  of  refuge  to  come  on  us  in  a  very  unexpected  way.  We  are  not 
unprepared  to  read  the  other  announcements  which  come  at  the  close  of  this  Book^— 
e,ff.  the  strict  injunction  to  expel  the  Canaanites,  the  allolmont  of  the  inheritance, 
and  the  Divine  marking  out  of  the  boundaries  of  the  land  ;  hut  this  appointment 
of  the  cities  of  refuge  is  like  a  great  light  suddenly  lighted  up  to  reveal  to  us  the 
peculiar  social  state  of  Israel. 

I.  We  are  brought  face  to  face  with  A  time  when  there  was  no  general  and 
BEOUHE  administration  of  justice.  God  had  to  make  provision  here  for  a  strong 
fueling  which  had  evidently  grown  up  through  many  centuries.  This  provision 
pointed  hack  to  those  unsocial  days  when  the  only  effectual  avengers  of  murdet 
wer«  tbe  kinamen  of  the  slain  oerson.    The  punishment  of  the  murderer  had  conif 


CH.  XXXV.  1— 34.J  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBBB8.  m 

to  be  regarded  as  a  familj  duty,  because  no  one  else  would  concern  hinoself  with  it. 
And  in  the  course  of  time  what  bad  begun  ?n  necessity  ended  in  a  conventional  sense 
of  honour,  and  of  the  obHgationa  of  kinship,  which  there  was  no  way  of  escaping. 
Private  revenge,  whatever  its  abuses,  whatever  the  dark  instigations  to  it  in  the 
heart  of  the  avenger,  was  in  a  certain  sense  imperatively  necessary  when  there  was 
no  eflScient  publio  tribunal  «f  justice.  Thus  we  see  how  much  of  the  barbaric 
element  still  remained  in  laraeL  It  ia  a  matter  of  common  agreement  among  us 
that  a  man  must  not  take  the  law  into  his  own  hands,  but  in  ancient  Israel  every 
man  seems  to  have  done  it  without  the  slightest  hesitation. 

II.  We  have  here  another  illustration  of  the  allowance  that  was  hade  roB 
HABDNESS  OF  HEART  ON  THE  PART  OF  IsBAEL.  When  tho  Pharisees  came  to  our 
Lord,  tempting  him  with  a  question  concerning  divorce,  he  replied,  "  Moses  because 
of  the  hardness  of  your  hearts  suffered  yon  to  put  away  your  wives  "  (Matt.  xix.  8). 
So  here  we  may  say  that  Moses,  because  of  the  hardness  of  heart  in  Israel,  provided 
these  cities  of  refuge.  It  was  no  manner  of  use  to  tell  the  god,  the  blood  avenger, 
not  to  pursue  the  manslayer.  If  he  had  neglected  to  do  so  he  would  have  rested 
under  heavy  reproach  all  the  days  of  his  ll£e.  Moses  knew  well  how  deeply  fixed 
was  this  institution  of  blood  revenge.  Had  he  not  himself,  in  his  patriotic  zeal, 
taken  the  law  into  his  own  hand  some  eighty  years  before,  ana  slain  the  Egyptian '} 
Ood  might  indeed  have  forbidden  this  blood  revenge  altogether,  but  the  command 
would  have  been  a  dead  letter.  He  did  a  more  efiScacious  thing  in  providing  these 
cities  of  refuge.  The  existence  of  them  was  incompatible  with  the  continuance  in 
undiminished  vigour  of  the  practice  of  blood  revenge.  By  appointing  them  God 
recognised  the  necessity  out  of  which  the  practice  had  arisen.  He  allowed  all  that 
might  be  good  and  conscientious  in  the  motive  of  the  avenger.  If  the  person 
pursued  were  really  guilty  of  wilful  murder,  he  could  not  escape;  the  city  of  refuge 
was  no  refuge  for  tiim.  The  line  between  murder  and  accidental  homicide  was  very 
plainly  drawn.  Under  such  a  system  as  Ood  had  established  in  Israel  he  could  not 
but  protect  the  unfortunate  man  who  was  fleeing  from  a  passionate,  unreasoning 
pursuer,  and  secure  for  him  a  fair  inquiry.  Everything  was  done  to  secure  the  best 
interests  of  all.  God  could  not  but  honour  his  own  solemn  and  exalted  command, 
"  Thou  Shalt  not  kill." 

III.  An  illustration  also  of  the  undesebved  calamities  which  uat  coue  upon  a 
MAN  IN  A  WOBLD  WHERE  SIN  REiQNS  EVEN  UNTO  DEATH,  One  man  slaying  another 
unwittingly  deserves  our  deepest  pity  and  sympathy.  We  have  heard  of  those  to 
whom  such  a  misfortune  had  come  having  to  walk  softly  all  the  days  of  their  life 
because  of  the  unintended  act.  They  could  not  get  it  out  of  their  minds.  Yet  here, 
in  addition  to  possible  grief  of  heart,  there  was  a  serious,  a  long,  perhaps  a  life-long, 
disadvantage.  The  homicide,  however  really  innocent  he  might  be,  had  to  flee  for 
his  life  and  stay  in  the  city  of  refuge  till  the  death  of  the  high  priest.  Thus  we  have 
another  proof  of  the  manifold  power  which  death  has  to  disturb  the  world.  These 
inconveniences  to  the  manslayer  could  not  all  at  once  be  removed.  We  live  in  a 
world  where  we  not  only  may  in  a  spirit  of  love  hear  one  another's  burdens,  bnt 
some  of  them  we  must  bear  as  a  matter  of  necessity.  The  unwitting  homicide  had 
to  bear  the  consequences  of  his  fellow-man  being  mortal.  Yet  at  the  same  time  we 
are  made  to  see  how  God  was  surely  advancing  to  break  the  power  of  death.  The 
lot  of  the  manslayer  was  greatly  mended  by  the  institution  of  these  cities  of  refuge. 
We  may  well  believe  that  in  the  course  of  time  their  character  became  so  recognised 
that  this  particular  obligation  of  the  goel  would  fall  into  disuse ;  the  nation  would 
come  to  accept  the  security,  the  superiority,  and  the  rightness  of  publio  justice. 

IV.  Consider  the  points  in  connection  with  the  institution  of  cities  of  refuge  which 

show  THE  RESPECT  FOR  HUMAN  LIFE  WHICH   GoD  WAS  SEEKING  TO  TEACH  THE  PEOPLE. 

The  path  of  Israel  from  Egypt  to  Canaan  had  indeed  been  marked  by  much  of 
violent  death.  The  overwhelming  of  Pharaoh's  ai-my,  all  the  sudden  visitations  of 
Divine  wrath  upon  Israel,  the  slajdng  in  battle  of  the  Amalekites,  Amorites,  and 
Midi anites— these  had  made  God  to  seem  as  if  he  were  continually  girt  with  the 
horrid  instruments  of  the  executioner.  But  for  all  these  acts,  dreadful  as  they  were, 
there  was  a  reason — a  Divine,  and  therefore  sufficient,  reason.  Whatever  was  done 
was  done  judicially.    If  the  circumstances  and  times  of  the  Israelites  are  taken  into 


4&8 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


[ca.  XXXV.  1—34. 


account,  sufficient  caase  will  appear  for  the  frequency  with  which  God  had  recourse 
to  violent  death  in  the  carrying  out  of  his  punitive  purposes.  Then,  with  respect  to 
murder,  it  was  the  feeling  of  file  time  that  a  murderer  must  not  be  suffered  to  live. 
Putting  the  murderer  to  death  was  the  only  effectual  way  in  those  semi-savage  times 
of  teaching  respect  for  life.  Respect  for  life  was  taught  to  the  avenger  by  putting 
the  city  of  refuge  between  him  and  the  unwitting  homicide.  Respect  for  life  was 
taught  also  by  the  inconvenience,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  to  which  the  homicide  was 
put.  It  was  taught  by  the  requiring  of  more  than  one  witness  to  establish  a  capital 
charge.  And  we  also  need  more  respect  ^or  human  life  than  we  often  show.  We 
should  not  take  it  so  recklessly  and  exultingly  in  war ;  we  should  not  take  it  under 
an  insufficient  plea  of  necessity  on  the  gallows.  Tliere  is  a  lamentable  way  of 
speaking  of  the  brutal  and  hardened  members  of  society,  the  class  from  which 
murderers  so  often  come,  as  if  they  were  little  better  than  vermin.  Many  seem  to 
think  that  it  is  a  matter  of  no  great  consequence  whether  a  man  be  hanged  or  not. 
True,  he  has  to  die  at  last ;  but  surely  there  is  a  great  difference  between  death  when 
it  comes  in  spite  of  the  attempts  of  physician  and  attendants  to  ward  it  off,  and  when 
it  comes  by  our  deliberate  infliction  of  it.  We  have  all  sorts  of  institutions  aiid 
instruments  to  defend  life  by  land  and  by  sea ;  we  have  one  hideous  instrument,  the 
gallows,  to  take  it  away.  And  as  we  see  God  advancing  men,  by  the  appointment 
of  these  cities  of  refuge,  from  the  "wild  justice  "  of  private  revenge  to  a  calm  reliance 
on  public  justice,  so  we  may  hope  that  the  spirit  of  love  and  the  spirit  of  Christ  will 
more  and  more  prevail  amongst  us,  till  at  last  the  gallows  will  be  banished,  if  not 
into  utter  oblivion,  at  all  events  into  antiquarian  obscurity. 

V.  Consider  how  these  cities  of  refuge  were  to  be  Levitical  cities.  It  was 
fitting  that  the  Lcvites  should  have  charge  of  these  cities,  since  the  Levites  belonged 
to  no  tribe  in  particular,  but  to  the  whole  nation.  They  were  removed  from  the 
temptation  which  would  otherwise  have  come,  if  the  city  of  refuge  had  belonged  to 
the  same  tribe  as  the  blood  avenger.  Dnless  the  city  of  refuge  was  made  really 
efficacious,  it  was  no  city  of  refuge  at  all.  Giving  Levi  the  charge  of  these  cities 
also  prevented  jealousies  between  tribes.  It  conferred  too  on  the  homicide  certain 
privileges  he  might  not  otherwise  have  had ;  he  gained  opportunities  of  Levitical 
instruction.  God  can  make  his  own  abiding  compensations  to  those  who  fall  into 
calamity  by  no  fault  of  their  own.  None  can  really  hurt  us  but  ourselves  in  that 
which  is  inward,  permanent,  and  of  real  importance. 

VI.  Consider  how  the  death  of  the  high  priest  affected  the  position  of  the 
UNWITTING  MANSLATER.  He  was  then  free  from  any  further  disability  and  need  of 
confinement.  The  death  of  the  high  priest  had  a  great  expiatory  effect.  According 
to  the  value  of  the  types,  he  was  holier  than  all  the  unblemished  beasts,  and  his 
death  counted  for  very  much  indeed  in  its  cleansing  efficacj'.  Thus  we  see,  by  this 
reference  to  the  death  of  the  high  priest,  how  God  regarded  his  own  honour  as  a  holy 
God.  Blood  defiled  the  land,  even  when  spilt  unwittingly,  and  nothing  less  than  the 
death  of  the  high  priest  could  cleanse  away  the  stain.  Nothing  less  could  do  it,  but 
this  did  it  quite  sufficiently. — Y 


EXPOSITION 


CHAPTER  XXXVl. 


Thk  harriage  of  heiresses  (vers.  1 — 
13).  Ver.  1.— The  chief  fathers.  The  (same 
phrase  in  more  correctly  translated  in  Exod. 
vi.  25  "heads  of  the  fathers."  It  is,  how- 
ever, probable  that  m3S5n  (fathers)  is  a  con- 
traction foi  r^3Nri"n'3  (fathers'  houses). 
The  fathers'  house  was  the  next  recognised 
and  familiar  division  below  the  tnishpachah 
(family).  Probably  the  fathers'  house  in- 
cluded originally  all  the  descendants  of  a 
liTing  ancestor,  who  formed  the  bond  of 


union  between  them  ;  but  this  union  no 
doubt  survived  in  many  cases  the  death  of 
the  common  ancestor,  whose  authority  would 
then  devolve  upon  the  oldest  efficient  member 
of  the  house.  The  families  of  the  children 
of  Oilead.  "The  mishpaehoth  of  the  Beni- 
Gilead"  certainly  did  not  include  the  Ma- 
chiritcs,  who  were  somewhat  sharply  dis- 
tinguished from  the  other  Manassites  (see 
above  on  ch.  xxvi.  29 ;  xxxii.  39  ff. ) ;  it  is 
even  doubtful  whether  they  included  the 
Gilcadites  proper,  who  took  their  name  (and 
perhaps  traced  their  descent)  from  Gilet.d, 
but  not  from  his  sons.     It  may  be  coa- 


CB.  XXXVL  1—14.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


469 


fidently  assumed  that  the  Machirites,  who 
had  received  an  extensive  and  remote  terri- 
tory beyond  Jordan,  had  nothing  whatever 
to  do  with  this  application.  It  was  the 
other  section  of  the  tribe,  the  mishpachoth 
of  the  six  sons  of  Gilead,  who  were  yet  to 
receive  inheritance  by  lot  in  Canaan  proper, 
to  whom  the  matter  appeared  bo  serious  that 
they  came  to  Moaes  about  it. 

Ver.  2.— My  lord.  ^I'lS-  The  singular 
form  is  constantly  nsed  in  Hebrew,  as  in 
other  languages,  together  with   the   plural 

Seisonal  pronoun  (see  at  Oen.  xxiii.  6).  The 
eference  now  paid  to  Moses  (et  ch.  xxxii. 
26,  27)  is  in  marked  contrast  to  the  treat- 
ment he  had  received  from  the  former  gener- 
ation. Only  Aaron  (and  that  nnder  the  in- 
fluence of  terror — Exod.  zzxii  22  ;  ch.  xii 
11)  and  Joshua  (ch.  xL  28)  had  addressed 
kim  as  Adoni  before. 

Ver.  S. — Wherennto  they  are  received. 
Literally,  as  in  the  margin,  "unto  whom 
(Dil^  referring  to  the  men  of  the  tribe)  they 
shall  be." 

Ver.  4.  —When  tile  jnbile  of  the  children  of 
Israel  shall  he.    It  is  remarkable  that  this  is 

the  only  reference  by  name  to  the  Jubile  (?3^'» 
jubetl;  not  jnbilee,  which  is  the  vulgar 
form  of  the  same  word  derived  from  the 
Latin  jubilceus)  to  be  found  in  the  Scrip- 
tures. Some  allusions  more  or  less  doubtful 
have  been  pointed  out  in  the  prophets,  but 
the  only  one  which  seems  incontrovertible  is 
in  Ezek.  ilvi.  17,  and  belongs  to  the  ideal 
rigime  of  that  vision.  Jeremiah's  right  of 
redemption  over  the  lands  of  his  family  was 
probably  due  to  the  fact  that  they  were 
priestly  lands  (Josh.  xxi.  18 ;  Jer.  i  1 ; 
xxxii.  7 — 9),  and  as  such  incapable  of  per- 
manent alienation.  It  is,  therefore,  doubt- 
ful whether  the  Jubile  was  ever  actually 
observed,  although  the  principle  upon  which 
it  rested,  the  equity  of  redemption  which  no 
Israelite  could  divest  himself  of,  was  un- 
doubtedly acknowledged  (see  notes  on  Levit. 
XXV.).  Then  shall  their  inheritance  be  put 
unto  the  inheritance  of  the  tribe  wherennto 
they  are  received.  It  is  again  remarkable 
that  the  one  explicit  reference  to  the  Jubile 
should  be  only  to  an  indirect  consequence  of 
its  practical  working.  The  Jubile  could  not 
really  transfer  the  property  of  the  heiress  to 
her  husband's  tribe,  but  it  would  in  effect 
confirm  that  transfer,  and  make  it  perma- 
nent. In  practice  no  property  would  be 
considered  to  have  finally  changed  hands 
nntU  the  year  of  Jubile,  when  an  extensive 
re-settlement  took  place,  and  when  all  titles 
not  successfully  challenged  would  be  con- 
sidered as  confirmed.  Since  the  title  of  the 
heiress's  children  could  not  be  challenged, 
and  since  any  intemediate  disposition  of  the  I 


land  must  then  determine,  the  Jnbile  would 
seem  to  effect  the  transfer  of  which  it  com- 
pelled the  recognition.  It  is,  however,  none 
the  less  strange  that  the  Manassites  shonld 
have  laid  such  stress  upon  the  practical  effects 
of  a  piece  of  legislation  which  had  never  yet 
come  into  use.  It  seems  to  point  to  the  con- 
clusion that  the  same  thing  had  been  custom  • 
ary  among  them  in  their  Egyptian  homes, 
and  that  they  were  acquainted,  at  least  by 
tradition,  with  its  actual  working. 

Ver.  5. — The  tribe  of  the  sons  of  Joseph. 
"The  tribe  {matieh)  of  the  Beni-Joseph. " 
There  were  two,  or  rather  in  effect  three, 
tribes  of  the  Beni-Joseph  ;  Moses  referred, 
of  course,  to  the  one  which  had  come  before 
him. 

Ver.  6. — Only  to  the  family  of  the  tribe 
of  their  father  shall  they  marry.  The 
direction  is  not  altogether  plain,  since  the 
tribe  (matteh)  contained  several  families 
{mishpachoik),  and  in  this  case  one  or  more 
of  the  families  were  widely  separated  from 
the  rest.  Probably  the  words  are  to  be  read, 
"  only  to  the  trilJe-family  of  their  father," 
i,  e.  only  into  that  mishpaehah  of  Manasseh 
to  which  their  father  had  belonged.  Prac- 
tically, therefore,  they  were  restricted  to 
the  family  of  the  Hepherites  (ch.  xxvi  82, 
83).  This  is  made  auuost  certain  when  we 
remember  that  the  territory  of  the  "family" 
was  to  be  apportioned  within  the  tribe  in  the 
same  way,  and  with  the  same  regard  to 
relationship,  as  the  territory  of  the  tribe 
within  the  nation  (see  on  ch.  xxxiii.  54). 

Ver.  7. — Every  one  .  .  shall  keep  him- 
self to  the  inheritance  of  the  tribe  of  his 
fathers.  This  was  to  be  the  general  rule 
which  governed  all  such  questions.  Every 
Israelite  had  his  own  share  in  the  inherit- 
ance of  his  tribe,  and  with  that  he  was  to  be 
content,  and  not  seek  to  intrude  on  other 
tribes.  Accordingly  the  decision  in  the 
case  of  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad  is  ex- 
tended to  all  similar  cases. 

Ver.  11. — Uahlah,  Ac  It  is  a  curious 
instance  of  the  inartificial  character  of  the 
sacred  records  that  these  five  names,  which 
have  not  the  least  interest  in  themselves, 
are  repeated  thrice  in  this  Book,  and  once  in 
Joshua  (xvii.  3).  It  is  evident  that  the  case 
made  a  deep  impression  upon  the  mind  of 
the  nation  at  the  time.  Their  father's 
brothers'  sons.  The  Hebrew  word  111  is 
always  translated  "  father's  brother,"  or 
"  uncle  ; "  and  that  seems  to  be  its  ordinary 
meaning,  although  in  Jer.  xxxii.  12  it  stands 
for  uncle's  son.  There  iano  reason  to  dei)art 
from  the  customary  reading  here.  Ko  doubt 
the  daughters  of  Zelophehad  acted  according 
to  the  spirit  as  well  as  the  letter  of  the  law, 
and  married  the  nearest  male  relatives  who 
were  open  to  their  choice.  The  Septuagint 
has  rote  ^tvi^iotc  abr&y. 


4S0 


THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS 


[CH  xxxvj.  1—13, 


V«r.  18. — ^The  oommandmenti.  rtVBfl. 
Tliis  U  one  of  the  words  which  recnr  so  con- 
tinually  in  Deuteronomy  and  in  Pa.  cxiz.  It 
is  found  four  times  in  ch.  zy.,  and  in  a  few 
other  passages  of  the  earlier  books,  including 
LeTlt.zxTii.84.  The  jndgmeatB.  D^tSSpiil. 
4.  similar  fonnola  is  found  at  the  conclusion 
of  Leviticus  (zzTi.  46),  where,  however,  "  the 
commandments  "  represents  a  different  word 
(D'ipnn),  and  a  third  term,    "the   laws" 

(n*I^FI[l),  is  added.  It  ia  difficult  to  say  con- 
fidently what  ia  included  under  the  "  these  " 
of  this  vene.  Comparing  it  with  ch.  zzziii. 
60,  it  would  seem  that  it  only  referred  to  the 
final  regulations  and  enactments  of  the  last 
four  chapters ;  but  as  we  haTe  no  reason  to 
believe  that  the  later  sections  of  the  Book 
are  arranged  in  any  methodical  order,  we 
cannot  limit  it«  acope  to  those,  or  deny  that 


it  may  include  the  laws  of  chs.  zzviii. — zzz. 
For  a  similar  reason  we  cannot  say  that  the 
use  of  this  concluding  formula  ezcludes  the 
possibility  of  further  large  additions  having 
been  subsequently  made  to  the  Divine  legis- 
lation in  the  same  place  and  by  the  same 
person,  as  recorded  m  the  Book  of  Deuter- 
onomy. All  we  can  sa^  is,  that  the  Book  of 
Numbers  knows  nothing  about  any  such 
additions,  and  concludes  in  such  sort  as  to 
make  it  a  matter  of  suqirise  that  such  ad- 
ditions are  afterwards  met  with.  The  con- 
tinuity, which  BO  clearly  binds  together  the 
main  bulk  of  the  four  books  of  Moses,  ends 
with  this  verse.  This  fact  does  not  of  course 
decide  any  question  which  arises  concerning 
the  fifth  book ;  it  merely  leaves  all  such 
questions  to  be  determined  on  their  own 
merits. 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver».  1—18. — The  sure  inheritance.  The  decision  here  recorded,  and  expanded 
into  a  general  law,  was  wholly  intended  to  preserve  to  each  tribe  and  each  family  its 
own  inheritance  in  the  land  of  promise  inviolate  and  undisturbed.  Spiritually  it  can 
hut  point  to  the  inheritance  "  incorruptible  and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away  " 
(1  Pet.  i.  4),  for  which  we  look.  That  there  was  any  special  intention  in  connection 
with  this  law  to  preserve  intact  the  inheritance  of  Judah,  or  that  it  has  any  bearing 
on  the  tribal  relationship  of  the  earthly  parents  of  the  Divine  child,  ia  extremely 
unlikely.  It  would  certainly  appear  that  Mary  had  no  patrimony,  even  if  she  had  no 
brothers.     Consider,  therefore — 

I.  That  the  object  of  the  Divine  legislation  was  by  all  means  to  peeservk 
TO  EACH  Israelite  his  full  inheritance  in  Canaan.  Even  so  the  final  end  of 
tlie  dispensation  of  the  gospel  is  that  every  one  of  the  elect  may  obtain  for  ever  thni 
fulness  of  joy  and  of  life  which  is  prepiired  for  him ;  to  this  end  all  things  are  made 
to  work  together. 

II.  That  in  order  to  secure  this,  not  only  the  individual  possession,  but 
also  the  joint  interest  of  each  in  the  territory  of  his  tribe  was  jealously 
GUARDED  from  INVASION.  Even  80  there  will,  no  doubt,  in  the  future  reward  he 
many  elements  of  common  as  well  as  of  individual  happiness,  and  some  of  these 
common  to  those  who  have  lived  and  suSered  together  as  members  of  the  same 
particular  Church  ;  these  also  will  be  preserved  inviolable.  Whatever  special  graces 
have  been  developed  in  the  common  Christianity  of  any  Church  will  doubtless  be 
reflected  in  the  immortal  state. 

III.  That  each  individual  was  to  keep  to  his  own  lot,  and  not  seek  after 
ANY  alien  inheritance.  Even  so  every  one  of  us  should  cultivate  the  grace  given 
him,  and  seek  the  reward  set  before  him,  not  coveting  the  gifts  which  belong  to 
others,  not  aspiring  to  the  glory  to  which  he  is  not  called. 

IV.  That  each  tbibe  was,  in  like  manner,  to  keep  to  its  own  inheritance, 
and  not  to  intrude  upon  its  neiqhboubs.  Even  so  the  different  branches  of 
Christ's  Church,  so  far  as  they  by  the  will  of  Qod  divide  the  field  between  them,  are 
strictly  forbidden  to  invade  one  another's  heritage. 

V.  That  this  was  secubbd  even  at  some  cost  of  liberty  of  choice  on  the 
fart  of  individuals.  Even  so  the  necessity  of  not  intruding  upon  the  portion  of 
others  must  and  does  involve  considerable  self-restraint,  and  tlie  sacrifice  perhaps  of 
cherished  desires,  on  the  part  of  individual  members  of  the  Church. 

And  note  that  this  case  so  carefully  recorded  appears  trivial,  and  unworthy  of 
the  space  it  occupies  in  Holy  Writ  Nevertheless,  it  was  not  trivial,  because  it 
iurolved  a  most  important  principle,  and  because  it  was  settled  by  an  act  of  perfect 


OH.  xxxvi.  1—13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBEUa  «1 

obedience.  And  note  again  that  the  operation  of  the  Jubile,  which  was  so 
graciously  designed  for  all  Israelites,  threatened  in  this  case  to  aggravate  an  evil, 
which,  however,  was  averted  by  Divine  provision.  There  may  be  cases  in  which 
even  the  grace  of  the  gospel  may  threaten  hardship  to  some ;  but  if  there  are,  God 
will  find  a  remedy. 

It  would  not  be  right  to  press  the  example  of  Zelophehad's  daughters  in  a  social 
sense,  but  we  may  draw  the  general  moral  lesson — 1.  That  if  any  have  exceptional 
opportunity  of  bestowing  advantage  on  others,  they  should  not  consult  their  own 
fancy  nor  make  an  arbitrary  choice,  but  be  guided  by  the  general  good  of  all.  2. 
That  none  should  put  themselves  forward  in  order  to  secure  ezception«l  advantage, 
bat  let  it  fall  t«  thoM  for  whom  God  haa  designed  itt 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX 

TO 

THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 


OHAFTEK  L 

rAoii 

Tke  Kumbering  of-God's  Peopl*        ...  2 

The  Numbering  of  the  People           ...  ii. 

God  commands  a  Censos  ...  .~.  4 
The  Men  of  Renown  who  managed  the 

Cenius               ...            ...            ...  5 

"  From  twenty  yean  old  and  upward  "  6 

God's  Army           ...            ...            ...  6 

The  Two  Numbering!  in  the  Wildemeas  6 

The  Servants  of  God            ...            ...  8 

The  Appointment  of  the  Levitas  to  be 

the  Sacred  Tribe  ...  .~  9 
"Differences  of  Adminifitrationa "   in 

the  Service  of  God            ...            ._  10 

Out  Position  in  the  Chorch  ...  11 
Bemarkable  Obedience         ^            .^11 

CHAPTEB  U. 
The  Camp  of  the  Saints       ^  ^13 

The  Master  at  Sinai            ...            ...  15 

God's  Tabernacle  in  the  midst  of  Israel's 

Tents  ...             ...            ...            ...  16 

The  Discipline  of  God's  Army            ...  16 

CHAPTEB  III. 
The  Servants  of  God,  and  the  Chorch 

of  the  First-bom               ...            ...  20 

The  Families  of  Levi  get  their  tevend 

Commissions      .„            _            ...  22 

"Strange  Fire"     ...            .„            ,-  23 

A  Mortal  Sin         ...            ...            ...  23 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Duties  of  the  Church  Militant  ...  27 
None  may  bear  the  Vessels  of  the  Lord 

but  Levites  at  their  best  ...             ...  28 

The  Lord  is  to  be  served  with  Fear    ...  29 

The  Perils  of  Distinguished  Service  ...  30 
The  Levites  and  the  Regulation  of  their 

PatiM ,.,            ,»            ,^            ■„  m 


CHAPTER  V. 

THBMB  FA«B 

The  Necessity  of  putting  away  Sin     ...  83 
The  Expulsion  and  Restoration  of  the 

Unclean              ...            ...            .„  83 

The  Public  Exclusion  of  the  Unclean  86 

Things  that  Defile                ...            ...  85 

No  Fraud  permitted  by  God               ...  87 

Conscience  Money ...            ...            _  87 

Confession  and  Restitution  ,„            _  88 

The  Sin  of  Adultery             „            ...  41 

The  Trial  of  Jealousy           ..            «.  42 

CHAPTER  VL 

Individual  Consecration  to  God          ._  it 

Separated  to  the  Service  of  God          ...  47 
The  Temporary  Vow  of  the  Nazarite 
symbolical  of  the  Lifelong  Vow  of 

the  Christian     ...            ...            ...  49 

The  Nazarite's  Vow              ...            .„  49 

The  Regulations  for  Observance  of  the 

Nazarite's  Vow  ...            ...            ...  SO 

The  Blessing  of  God  Almighty           ...  53 

The  Benediction    ...            ...            ...  64 

The  Priestly  Blessing           .„            .„  S5 

The  Benediction  through  the  Priests  66 

CHAPTEB  VII. 

Acceptable  Offerings            ...            ...  00 

The  Princes  and  their  Princely  Offering  61 

The  Free-will  Offering  of  the  Princes  62 

The  Universality  of  the  Sin  Offering  ...  83 

Intercourse  with  God           ...            ...  63 

The  Waggons  for  the  Levites             ._  64 

The  Shekel  of  the  Sanctuary              ._  64 

CHAPTER  VIIL 

The  Sacred  Lamps               ...            ...  a6 

The  Lamps  of  the  Sanctuary              _.  86 

Tbe  Dedication  Qf  the  Lcvitef           ..,  ^ 


INDEX. 


The  Separation  of  the  Levites ;  or  an 
Ordination  Service  in  the  Wilderness      70 

An  Offering  to  God,  needing  for  itself 
an  Atonement    ...  ...  m>      71 

OHAFTEB  IX. 

The  Paschal  Feast...  ...  ...      7* 

A  Communicant  in  Israel,  disabled  by 
some  Mischance  from  eating  the  Fass- 
0T«r  on  the  right  Day,  may  eat  it  a 
Mouth  after        ...  ...  ...       76 

The  Letter  and  the  Spirit  of  the  Law 
of  the  Passover  ...  ...  ...      76 

The  Beneficent  Aspect  of  the  Law  of 

Moses  towards  Foreigners  ...      77 

A  Needed  Reminder  ...  ■-      78 

A  Difficulty  removed  ...  ...      78 

Divine  Guidance    ...  ...  •..      80 

The  Guiding  Pillar  of  Cloud  and  Flame      80 
God's  Ceaseless  Providence  a  Motive  to 
Prompt  Obedience  ...  ...      82 

The  Cloud  upon  the  Tabernacle         ...      82 

CHAPTER  X. 

The  Sacrad  Trumpets  _  ...  84 

The  Silver  Trumpets  .-  •••  85 

The  Use  of  the  Trumpets     ...  ...  86 

The  Journey  Home  ...  ...  90 

The  Friendly  Invitation      ...  ...  98 

Hobab  Invited ;  or,  the  Church's  Call 

to  them  that  are  without...  ...  84 

Moses  and  Hobab  ...  ...  ...  96 

A  Right  Feeling  and  a  Christian  Invit- 
ation   ...  ...  ...  ...  96 

A  Fresh  Appeal     ...  ...  ...  97 

The  Heavenward  March      ...  ...  99 

The  Prayers  at  the  Moving  and  Resting 

tf  the  Ark         ...  ...  ...  101 

CHAPTER  XL 

'Wrsth  swaKed  and  Wrath  appeased  ...    lOS 

A  Summary  View  of  Sin  and  its 
Remedy  ...  ...  ...    105 

Mnrmuring,  Lusting,  and  Loathing  ...    105 

The  Sin  of  Concupiscence,  and  its 
Punishment       ...  ...  ...     118 

The  Seventy  Elders,  and  how  they  were 
fitted  for  their  High  Office  ...    117 

Eldad  and  Medad ;  or.  Irregular  Prophe- 
sying  ...  ...  ...  ...    119 

The  Complainers,  and  how  God  made 
Answer  to  their  Complaints  ...    190 


THEKI  wAam 
The  Disastrous  Consequences  of  the  Sin 

of  Discontent     ...            ...             ...  121 

The  Sin  of  Despondency  in  a  Servant  of 

God 122 

The  Communication  of  a  Spiritual  En- 
dowment           ...            „            ...  123 
Largeness  of  Heart               ...            ...  123 

The  Mixed  Multitude          ...            ...  124 

The  Expostulation  of  MoseS                ...  125 

The  Answer  of  God              ...            ...  126 

Self-wiU  Surfeited  and  Punished        ...  126 

Deeper  in  Unbelief               ...            _  127 

FooUsh  Advice  wisely  rejected          ...  128 

CHAPTER  XIL 

The  Contradiction  of  Sinners              _  ISS 

The  Sedition  of  Miriam  and  Aaron    ..  135 

The  Singular  Honour  of  Moses          ...  186 
God  the  Vindicator  of  his  Calumniated 

Servants             ...            ...            ...  138 

The  Lord  listening               ...            ..  138 

A  Hideous  Manifestation  of  Pride      .,.  139 

A  Distinguished  Example  of  Meekness  140 
The  Humbling  of  the  Proud  and  the 

Exaltation  of  the  Meek    ...            ,.  141 

CHAPTERS  XIII.,  XIV. 

The  Revolt  of  Israel             >..            ...  164 

The  Spies              ...            ».           m.  169 

The  Mission  of  the  Spies      .»            ...  161 

The  Search  and  the  Report ..            ...  162 

Conflicting  Counsels            ...            ...  162 

They  could  not  enter  in  because  of 

Unbelief             163 

Moses  standing  in  the  Breach,  or  ths 

Power  of  Intercessory  Prayer          ...  164 

The  Sin  and  Shame  of  Apostasy         ...  166 
With  God  on  our  Side  we  are  in  the 

Majority            ...           ...           ...  166 

Skilful  Intercession             ...            ...  167 

A  Priceless  Privilege  Offered,  Refused, 

Lost 167 

Fatal  Answers  to  Faithless  Prayers    ...  168 

A  Repentance  to  be  Repented  of        ...  168 

A  Vain  Proposition              ...           ...  169 

A  Mute  Appeal      ...            ...            ...  170 

Speiddng  Out :  a  Last  Appeal            ...  170 

The  Lord  breaks  Silence      ...            „.  171 

Moses'  View  of  the  Position                _  173 

The  Ultimate  Decision         ...            ...  173 

The  Promise  to  Caleb           ...            ...  176 

God's  Decision  repeated  as  •  Message  176 

A  Confession  contradicted  in  Action  ..  177 


IKDEX. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

iHsn  rxos 

Ordinances  of  Sacrifice         ...            .„  183 

Presumptuous  Sins  and  Sins  of  Ignore 

ance     ...            ...            .^           .„  186 

The  Impartiality  of  Ood      ._            ^  186 

Presumptuous  Sins              ...            ...  186 

God  giving  Laws  for  the  Distant  Future  187 
An  Offering  from  the  Dough :  Domestic 

Beligion             ...            ...            ...  187 

God  shows  Himself  Strict  and  yet  Con- 
siderate             ...            ...            ...  188 

The  Sabbath  of  God             ...            ...  190 

The  Doom  of  the  Presumptuous  illus- 
trated by  that  of  the  Sabbath-breaker  191 
The  Law  of  the  Sabbath :  a  Solemn 
Vindication        ...            ...            ...  193 

A  Distinguishing  Mark  of  the  Faithful  195 
The  Use  and  Abuse  of  Memorials      ...  196 
The  Fringes :  Ever-present  Reminders  196 
Ood  recalls  a  Great  Deed  and  the  Pur- 
pose of  it           ...            ...           ..  198 

CHAPTER  XVL 

The  true  and  only  Priesthood            ...  204 

Korah's  Rebellion 208,  210,  211 

Envy  and  its  Bitter  Fruits  ...            ...  212 

"  The  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh  "  213 

The  Destmctiyeiiess  of  Sin  ...            ...  213 

The  Rebellion  of  Korah.      The  Con- 
spirators and  their  Pretext             ...  2U 
The  Reply  of  Moses  to  Eoiah             ...  214 
Dathan,  Abiram,  and  Moses               ...  216 
The  Destruction  of  Kotah  and  his  Com- 
pany   ...            ...            ...            ...  217 

Tbe  Priestly  Atonement      ...            ...  220 

The  Priesthood  still  farther  Honoured 

and  Established               ...            ...  221 

CHAPTER  XVIL 

The  Sign  of  the  True  Priesthood  ...  223 

The  Budding  of  Aaron's  Rod  ...  225 

The  Two  Brethren  and  their  Rods  ...  225 

Aaron's  Rod  that  Budded    ...  ...  226 

CHAPTER  XVIIL 
Responsibilities  and  Privileges  of  God's 

Servants              ...            ...  ...  231 

The  Responsibility  of  Authority  ...  233 

God,  the  Best  Inheritance   ...  ...  283 

The  iniquity  of   the   Sanctuary  and 

Priesthood          ...            ...  ...  234 

Aaron  and  his  Helpers         ...  ^  235 

The  Provision  for  the  Priests  ..  237 

A  Covenant  of  Salt               ...  ...  238 


CHAPTER  XIX 

THEHK  rxai 

The  Remedy  of  Death  ...  ...    242 

Purge  me  with  Hyssop,  and  I  shall  be 

Clean   ...  ...  ...  ...     246 

Defilement  by  Contact  with  the  Dead  247 
The  Water   of   Purification,  and  its 

Lessons  ...  ...  ...    248 

Defilement  from  the  Dead   ...  ...    249 

CHAPTER  XX. 
Sorrows  and  Trials  of  the  Way  ...    259 

The  Sin  of  Moses  ...  ...  „,  268 

The  Death  of  Aaron  ...  ...  259 

The  great  Sin  of  Disobedience  even 

under  Palliating  Circumstances      ...  261 
The  Death  of  Aaron: — "Mercy  and 

Judgment"         ...  ...  ...  263 

The  Abiding  in  Eadesh  and  the  Death 

of  Miriam  ...  ...  ...  262 

The  Gift  of  Water  at  Meribah  .„  263 

The  Sin  of  Moses  and  Aaron  ...  264 

The  Claim  of  Kinship  rejected  _  266 

The  Death  of  Aaron  ...  „.  268 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

Victory  won,  and  followed  up  ...  271 

Sin  and  the  Saviour  ..  ...  273 

The  Discouragements  of  the  Way      ...  275 

The  Brazen  Serpent  as  a  Type  of  Christ  275 

A  hard  bit  of  the  Road        ...  ...  276 

Destruction  and  Salvation  through  the 

Serpent  ...  ...  ...  277 

Progress  and  Triumph  ...  ...  283 

A  Period  of  Unbroken  Progress  ...  285 

CHAPTER  XXn. 

The  Way  of  Balaam  ...  ...  294 

Balaam's  Greatness  and  Fall  ...  298 

Balaam,  an  Illustration  of  Systematic 

Resistance  of  Conscience  ...  ...  299 

The  Importunity  and  Impudence  of  the 

Tempt»r  ...  ...  ...  800 

On  Cruelty  to  Animals        »  ..'.  300 

Moab  takes  Alarm  ...  ...  301 

Balak's  Message  to  Balaam  ...  ...  302 

The  First  Visit  to  Balaam   ...  ...  303 

The  Second  Visit ...  305 

The  Angel,  the  Prophet,  and  the  Ass  306 

Balaam  and  Balak  meet  at  last  ..  309 

Balaam — the  Summons        ...  ...  310 

Balaam — the  Arrest  .„  ...  312 

CHAPTERS  XXIII.,  XXIV. 

Balaam  and  his  Prophecies  ...  ...  881 


INDEX 


THEME  PAGE 

The  Safety  of  all  who  enjoy  the  Blessing 

of  God 824 

The  Unchangeable  Faithfulness  of  God  S24 

The  First  Prophecy              ...            ...  825 

"Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  right- 
eous, and  let  my  last  end  be  like  his  I "  827 
The  Second  Prophecy           ...            ...  829 

The  Third  Prophecy            888 

Balaam — the  First  Parable  ...            ...  83S 

Balaam — the  Second  Parable              ...  836 

Balak  relinquishes  his  Project            ...  337 
The  Star  out  of  Jacob  and  the  Sceptre 

out  of  Israel       ...            ...            ...  888 

Balaam— the  Third  Parable ...            ...  840 

Balaam — the  Fourth  Parable              .„  841 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

Sin,  Zeal,  and  Atonement    ...           ...  847 

A  Terrible  Atonement          ...            ...  850 

Moab  finds  a  more  Effective 'Weapon...  861 
Zeal  for  God :  the  Result  and  Reward 

of  it 862 

CHAPTER  XXVL 

The  Final  Numbering  of  the  Elect    ...  867 
The  Lot  is  to  decide  where  eveiy  Tribe 

shall  receive  its  Inheritance            ...  869 

The  Second  Census               ...            ...  860 

A  Generation  gone                ...            ...  8&1 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 
The  Certainty  of  the  Promised  Inherit- 
ance    ...            ...            ...            ...  864 

The  Disabilities  of  Sex         ...            ...  866 

The  Man  who  Died  in  his  own  Sin     ...  867 
The  Outward  Failure  and  Inward  Vic- 
tory of  Moses      ...            ...            ...  869 

God's  Word  to  His  Dying  Servant     ...  872 
The   Appointment   of  Joshua   to  be 

Moses'  Successor               ...             ..  872 

The  Alleviations  of  Death    ...            ...  874 

The  Qualifications  for  the  Public  Service 

of  God               374 

Preparing  for  the  End         ...            ...  874 

The  Solicitude  of  Moses  for  the  Helpless 

Flock 876 

The  Solicitude  relieved  by  the  Appoint- 
ment of  Joshua  ...             ...            ...  878 

CHAPTERS  XXVIII.,  XXIX. 

The  Perfect  System  of  Sacrifice          ...  881 

The  Lessons  of  the  Daily  Burnt  Offering  384 

The  Daily  Offering              ...            ...  886 


The  Sabbath  Offering  ...  ...  887 

The  Offering  at  the  New  Moon  ...  iS'i 

The  Feast  at  the  Passover  Time         ...  888 

The  Feast  of  the  First-Fruits  ...  890 

A  Solemn  Fast  and  a  Joyous  Feast    ...  891 

The  Offerings  oftho  Seventh  Month  ...  891 

CHAPTER  XXX. 

Vows  unto  the  Lord  ...  ...  894 

The  solemn  Obligation  of  the  Vow    ...  395 
The  Head  of  the  Household  honoured 

and  cautioned    ...  ...  ...  S97 

CHAPTER  XXXL 

The  Extermination  of  Sinful  Lusts    ...  406 

The  Lion  and  his  Prey         ...  ...  40y 

The  Death  of  Balaam  ...  ...  410 

The  Distribution  of  the  Spoils  ...  411 

CHAPTER  XXXII. 

The  mistaken  Choice  ...  ...  416 

"  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out "  420 
A  Bird  in  the  Hand  worth  two  in  the 

Bush    ...  ...  ...  ...  42C 

A  thorough  Exposure  of  a  Selfish  Pro- 
position ...  ...  ...  421 

The  final  Arrangement         ...  .„  422 

The  Eyes  of  the  Sinner  opened  at  last  423 

Kobah — the  Man  and  the  Place         ._  426 

CHAPTERS  XXXIIL,  XXXIV. 

The  Journey  Home  ...  ...  43? 

The  Jonmeyings  of  the  Israelite!       ...  4,39 

The  Holy  Land     ...  ...  ...  438 

No  Compromise  with  Idolatry  ...  440 

How  to  deal  with  the  Canaanites  :  an 

Urgent  Warning  ...  ...  441 

The  Lord  appoints  Boundaries  for  the 

Promised  Land  ...  ...  ...  443 

CHAPTER  XXXV. 
The  Dwelling   of   the   Faithful:    the 

Redeemer :  the  Sanctity  of  Life     ...  449 
The  Levites  to  be  distributed  in  certain 

Cities  throughout  the  whole  Land  ...  461 

The  Manslayer  and  the  Cities  of  Refuge  462 

Why  the  Murderer  must  be  put  to  Death  463 

The  Cities  of  Refuge  ...  454,  456 

God  provides  Places  for  the  Levites  to 

dwell  in  ...  ...  ...  466 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 
The  sure  Inheritance 


480 


i.'i.  ■■'■''. .-I-  ■I-"' 

t  ■  I .    I  •  II  ■ '  ■ 
'*'■■"    '■■■■iii.j''- 

■Ui  I " 


