Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



i ftS-i- 110 



I 



HARVARD COLLEGE L1BR\RY 




r i\ u ivi I n E 

ijcof^c Sdidnanannjadison 

FUND 
FORTH! PURCHASE OF BOOKS ON 

Soa\LW£LFARE & Moral Philosophy 



OVEN IN HONOR OF HIS RytENTS.THEIR SMPUOTY 
SWCERirr AND FEARLESSNESS 




THE EUNYAN LIBRARY: 

FOB THE PUBLICATION AND KEFUBUCATION OF STANDABD WOBXS 

BY EMINENT BAPTIST AUTHORS. 
VOL. VII. 

THE EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS.— Vol. L 



THE 



EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS 



VOL. I. 



BY 



B. EVANS, D.]). 



LONDON: 
J. HEATON & SON, 21, WARWICK LANE, 

PATKRNOSTEK ROW. 

1862. 






harvarca 
university' 

.IBRARY 
Ef li«1942 







LOMDOH: 

PRINTaD BT J. HIATOS AMD BOH, 

WASWICK LAMC. 



TO MY 

MINISTERIAL BRETHREN, 

MEN OF SIMILAR DEVOTEDNESS AND OF KINDRED SPIRIT, 

AND OF EQUAL 

ATTACHMENT TO THE GREAT PRINCIPLES OP RELIGIOUS LIBERTY, 
WITH THOSE WHOSE HISTORY IS HERE RECORDED, 

THESE MEMORIALS 



OF THE 

ARE AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED BY THEIR FRIEND AND 

FELLOW LABOURER, 

B. EVANS. 



PREFACE. 



I DO not offer this volume as a history of the English 
Baptists. It aims at no such dignity. The time has 
not yet come for the production of such a work. 
Other materials have yet to be collected, and vast and 
varied stores of information have yet to be explored 
From the national archives, the Bishops' courts, the 
wiitings of their opponents, and the productions of 
their own pens, much new and very valuable informa- 
tion will be gleaned. Hitherto, very little has been 
done in this department. Previous writers in our 
history, either from ignorance or other causes, have 
made no research. Ivimey is only the bare copyist of 
Crosby, and adds scarcely a grain of information to 
the stock the latter had accumulated. Facilities for 
investigation have now increased. The labours of the 
Record Commission are laying open to the public the 
rich stores of llnportant historical materials which 
have lain unheeded for generations. It is matter of 
deep regret to the writer, that his distance fix)m 
London, and pastoral and public duties, have rendered 
it all but impossible for him to avail himself of these 
to any great extent. The present work is simply, 
therefore, offered as a small contribution to the eluci- 
dation of the history of the Baptista 



VIU PREFACK 

A brief sketch of the labours of my predecessors 
may not be out of place here, and will not be unin- 
teresting to many of my readers. 

The first attempt at a history of the denomination 
was made by Thomas Crosby. He was a deacon of 
the church in Goat Street, over which the excellent 
Benjamin Stinton presided, and kept a school in 
Southwark. His work is in four volmnes, and is now 
somewhat scarce. Materials for a similar work had 
been collected by his pacstor. These he placed in the 
hands of the celebrated historian of the Puritans. 
The unfair use, scarcely, indeed, the use at all, of the 
information by Mr. Neal, induced the author to write 
and issue his work. There is much valuable informa- 
tion of men and events, of one of the darkest and 
most humiliating periods of our national history, con- 
tained in this work. Crosby was probably conversant 
with some of the sufferers. His intimacy with the 
leading ministers in the metropolis was close. Keach 
and others had ministered to the church with which 
he was officially connected. From men, competent to 
speak^ he has told us much which, otherwise, would 
have been lost. To the future historian this writer's 
work will always be of value. 

Next in this field of denominational literature 
appeared Mr. A. Taylor. His work is in two volumes, 
and was issued more than half a century ago. It is 
avowedly a History of the English General Baptists. 
It contains a mass of important information in refer- 
ence to this increasing section of the body, especially 
of the New Connexion, formed principally by the late 
Dan Taylor. Many of Mr. Taylor's conclusions will be 
found more than vindicated, by the documents which 
will appear in this and the subsequent volume. 



preface: IX 

The History of the Ed^OA BkpdstB, hj the Bev. 
J. Ivimey, in four volumes, appeared in 1811 — 1830. 
The author was a laborious and useful minister, and 
for many years the suooessfhl pastor of the church in 
Eagle Street, London The eariy part of his woric 
suppUes us with only a few fragments of additional 
information, beyond what the pages of Crosby had 
already given It is fiur more copious in after periods, 
detailing public events in which Baptists took part 
with other bodies, and supplying us with sketches of 
biogi*aphy and of the history of individual churches, 
which can be found nowhere else. The work is 
remarkably heavy, whilst its extent places it beyond 
the reach of the vast mass of the community Its 
materials wiU be of great value to some future histo- 
rian of the later periods of Baptist history. 

In 1847, appeared a condensed History of the 
General Baptists of the New Connexion, by J. H. 
Wood, with a recommendatory preface by the late 
Rev. J. G. Pike. As its title indicates, the volume is 
devoted to one section of the body. There is a large 
mass of information, especially on the operations of 
the New Connexion since the close of Taylor's work. 
Mr. Wood designed his volume for popular use; and 
though it will not occupy the same position as its 
predecessor, yet it will be a good substitute, in the 
absence of this, to many readers. 

Of the admirable sketches of Mr. XJnderhill, in the 
various volumes of the Hansard KnoUys Society's 
publications, it would be worse than idle to speak. 
In reading them, one only regrets that he has not laid 
his brethren under larger obligations. Beyond these 
we have no independent works. Rippon's Registers, 
the Magazines, Histories of Associations, Circular 



X PREFACE. 

Letters, &c., supply epitpmes, &c. Other writers have 
not done us justice. The complaint has been uttered 
again and again. Crosby complained of Neal; Ivimey 
is equally loud against Messrs. Bogue and Bennett. 
Wales utters the same complaints stUL* 

This practice cannot be too strongly censured. Truth 
should be more precious than party. By Christian 
men, at least, her supremacy should be acknowledged. 
If they mangle or distort her fair form, to whom can 
she look for protection ? Only as she is honoured, wiU 
principle triumph; only as her sweet voice regulates 
our conduct, and her instruction moulds our character, 
will society be purified in its lowest depths, and the 
empire of light and love be extended. The age is one 
of loud and large professions of liberality; but it 
would be a more satisfactory sign of its genuineness, 
to see Christian men, on the points which divide them, 
contending for truth, and not for victory. Under 
the influence of such a spirit, discussion would be a 
blessing, and controversy would strengthen, rather 
. than impair, the outworks of Christianity. Earnestly 
does the writer pray for the gi'owth of this spirit; 
because, as its influence is felt, the spiritual life of 
Christ's true church will be vigorous and aggressive 
on the masses of depravity around it. 

The period of our history which this volmne covers 
is one of a transition state. Principles were working 
which have exerted a mighty influence on the Church 



* '*The Rev. Thomas Rees, of Beaufort, in his work. The History 
of Nonconformity in WcUea, is guilty of doing the Welsh Baptists a 
flagrant injustice. His conduct is unfair, unjust, and unworthy of 
any historian, if that historian does not wish the English reader to 
believe that the Nonconformists of Wales are the Independents." — 
The Welsh Baptists, by the Rev. T. Price. 



PREFACK XI 

and on the State. The different standpoints from 
which writers have viewed it, and the great actors in 
the struggle, have influenced the estimate which they 
have formed of the results. Impartiality is difficult. 
Writers near to the events are frequently most want- 
ing in this. Their sympathies with certain principles, 
their prejudices, and their ignorance, have often led to 
the omission of certain things, to the discolouring of 
others, and to conclusions which subsequent investi- 
gations have shown to be unfounded. No class of 
men have, probably, suffered more from this than those 
to whom this volume refers. I do not claim entire 
exemption from this imperfection. I have tried in 
every case to be impartial; but, perhaps, in some 
instances, I may have failed. Still, I trust that, not- 
withstanding my attachment to the principles of these 
persecuted ones, and my intense admiration of their 
moral heroism, in no instance have I acted unfairly 
towards their bitter and maUgnant foes. 

My aim, in this work, has been to present to the 
minds of my readers as graphic a sketch of the 
musixious foLders of ourUy a. possible. Their 
rise, — ^their principles and ecclesiastical polity, — ^their 
public and social life, — ^their sufferings,— and, finally, 
their triumphs,— wiU form prominent features in the 
picture. Only in part is this accomplished in the 
present volume. 

In preparing it, I have had constantly in view 
the interests of a large and important class of the 
denomination. Thousands of young men and maidens 
are growing up around us. Many are anxious for 
information and mental culture. Their means are 
limited. Large historical works they cannot purchase, 
nor have they time to read them if they could. To 



XU PREFACE. 

£miiliarize their miiuls with the moral heroism of our 
&thers, — ^to indoctrinate them with those deathless 
jMinciples which they were the first to promulgate, 
and to which the true church of Christ is now doing 
homage, — is a work of incalculable importance. Never 
was it more so. The conflicts of to-day clothe it with 
the deepest interest. Men of like principles and of 
kindred spirit are most fitted for the struggle. Their 
weapons are the keenest, and from their vantage 
ground can success only be secured. Only as the 
spirituality of Christ's church is exhibited, and a 
living union with the Saviour urged, as essential to 
its members, will truth triumph. Finer models of 
the true, the noble, the holy, and morally great, 
cannot be set before them. They were men of whom 
the world was not worthy. Should any one, therefore, 
find fault with the details which I have supplied on 
collateral matters, I point to this class, and urge its 
wants as my chief apology. 

The reader will see that I have used in the text, 
and equally so by a reference to the notes, a class of 
writers whose views on ecclesiastical polity are widely 
difierent from our own. No one more highly values 
the labours of my friends Dr. Price and Mr. Underbill, 
and others who had preceded them, than I. I have 
read them again and again with profit; and, no 
doubt, for many a thought I am indebted to their 
lucid pages. But, after all, I preferred my own inde- 
pendent inquiry: the reading of a class of writers 
who had no sympathy with the Anabaptists, and from 
their pages to draw ample materials for the present 
work. I could present a long list of authors read, 
many of whom have repaid the toil with only a small 
grain of material I will only add, that whilst this 



PREFACE. XUl 

<X)urse haa involved more labour, I have no regret 
now it is done. 

Upon some points I have ventured to differ from 
my predecessors, though sanctioned by Danvars, and a 
numerous class who have repeated fi^m him, or from 
one another. I have not done so hastily. When I 
have calmly examined their opinions, and found 
evidence against them, I have not hesitated for a 
moment in entering my dissent. Some may blame 
me for this as weakening our defences. I am content 
to bear it. Only that which is true is really of any 
worth. The value of our principles is not dependent 
upon the practices of the Early British Christian — 
Wickliff, or any other of the illustrious saints, who 
shed the light of Christ's truth, and the beauty of a 
holy life, on the ages of the past. To a higher source 
we can go. Whatever will not bear the severest 
scrutiny, let it be rejected. History should deal only 
with fact, not with theory. With evidence, not witii 
mere conjecture. Any other course will only be a 
source of weakness, and not of strength. Upon these 
convictions I have acted. It has been the rule to 
which I have sought to conform. About its results 
I am not careful. Consequences which necessarily 
follow great principles we should always welcome. 
The cherished opinions of some, and men for whose 
judgment I have great respect, may be disturbed by 
the facts and conclusions which I have recorded. All 
I ask is, that they will candidly examine, before they 
reject, the conclusions to which I have been led. 

It was originally intended to complete this work 
in one volume. The plan of it was constructed in 
harmony with this design. But I soon found this 
impossible. The new and valuable documents placed 



XIV PREFACK 

at my command^ some of which are given in the 
present volume, and others reserved for the next, 
which throw much light on churches and proceedings 
Jh connexion with our body, in the early periods of 
the reign of the first Charles, demanded an alteration. 
In addition to a valuable series of letters, giving much 
new and very valuable information on one of the 
obscurest, and yet interesting, periods of our history, 
the proceedings of our brethren in Holland, the Con- 
fession of Faith published by the remainder of John 
Smith's company, and known only to us by the frag- 
ments given by Robinson in his reply to it, ai*e given 
in the present volume. There is also an elaboi*ate 
work by the same author, on the subject of Baptism, 
in reply to Clifton, still in MS. It is too lengthy for 
publication in connexion with this imdertaking; but 
the former are too precious to be withheld. The 
Publishers must be exonerated from all blame. They 
have done all they could to prevent it. The respon- 
sibility is mine. I unhesitatingly avow it. If, after 
the volumes are published, my judgment in this matter 
is impeached, I will bow to the decision with as much 
dignity as I can. 

To my friend Professor MuUer, of Amsterdam, I am 
very, very deeply indebted. His profound scholarship 
and Christian courtesy excite my warmest admiration 
and command my esteem. The valuable documents, 
preserved under his care in the archives of the church 
at Amsterdam, by his ready kindness, were placed 
at my disposal; whilst with the deepest interest and 
imtiring patience he has examined other records for 
me, and thus thrown a flood of light on many obscure 
points on the state of our brethren in Holland. Some 
of these documents, both in the text and appendix. 



PBEFACK XV 

were in Latin, others in Dutch ; and when I failed to 
find a Dutch scholar in this countiy able to translate 
the language of the sixteenth century, Dr. MuUer 
kindly undertook and accomplished the task for me. 
His English I have not altered. If censure is uttered, 
I must calmly bear it. This simple statement will 
show the extent of my obligations; but no words 
caa express the warmth of my gratitude. 

I have only to add my deep regret, that with all 
my anxiety to present this volume as correct as 
possible, I find, when too late for alteration, several 
errors have crept into the text. The work, though 
laborious, has been a labour of love ; and it would be 
to the writer a source of unmingled thankfulness if, 
whilst his name is associated with these memorials of 
the great and the good, he could emulate their faith 
and rival their devotedness. 

B. EVANS. 

SCABBOROUGH, 

August 6th, 1862. 



CONTENTS. 



XVI I 



CONTENTS. 



Preface 



Introduction : 
Early Baptists 

Were the British Churches Baptist ? 
Austin's questions 

Baptist sufferers in Henry the Second's time 
Wickliffe — sentiments on Bajitism 
The Lollards .... 

Anabaptist — its misapplication 



PAOK 
Vll 



1 

2 
5 
10 
12 
14 
16 



CHAPTER i. 



THE TUDOR DYNASTY. 



State of the nation . 

Discovery of Printing 

Commerce 

The Papacy 

The spirit of Civil Liberty 

Accession of Henry the Seventh . 

His policy — favourable to the Church 

Persecution — ^the Lollards 



18 
18 
19 
19 
21 
21 
23 
23 



CHAPTER n. 

HENRY THE EIGHTH. 

State of Europe on Henry's Accession . 
His character and magnificence 
Causes which led to the Reformation . 
Low state of religion . ... 

b 



25 
25 
27 

27 



XVIU 



CONTENTS. 



Moral condition of the people 

(jrlimpse of the popular superstitions 

Wolsey — ^his influence with Henry 

Aspires to the Popedom 

Conflicting interests of parties in the State 

Baptists, i)ersecution of, by Wareham 

Henry head of the Church 

James Bainham suflers 

Anne Boleyn elevated to the throne 

Dutch Baptists — their suflerings . 

Elevation of Cranmer to the Primacy . 

Baptism — its varied Ceremonies 

The Pilgrimage of Grace 

Commissions to hunt for Anabaptists 

Elector of Hesse urges Henry to i)ersecute them 

Proclamations against them 

ExcUided from a general pardon 

Death of Cromwell 

Condition of the Anglican Church 



PAGE 

31 
32 
33 
37 
37 
41 
42 
43 
45 
46 
48 
48 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 



CHAPTER HL 



EDWABD THE SIXTH. 

The joy of the nation at Edward's birth . 

His Accession to the throne 

Parties in the State and the Church 

Urgent need of Reform 

Moral state of the People . 

Cranmcr's efforts .... 

The Prayer-Book on Bajitism 

M(hIc of Bajjtism .... 

Signiflcancy of Baptism 

Influence of Continental Reformers in England 

Extent of the Reformation 

RaptiKts iterscouttil .... 

( -oinnuHsion to Cranmer to seek them 

<.*alvin rxi'iU.'s iK^rsocution against them 

UidU*y*fi Km|uirics .... 

J<Kin of Kent ..... 



57 
58 
59 
60 
61 
63 
64 
65 
67 
67 
6S 
(»9 
69 
70 
71 
72 



CONTENTS. 



XIX 



Putts suffers at Colchester 
Baptists in Kent 

■ and Essex 

Hart and the Free-Willers 
Family of Love 
George Van Pare 
Giles Van Bellan . 
Death of Edward 



PAGE 

75 
76 

77 
79 
79 
80 
81 
82 



CHAPTER IV. 



MAfiY. 



Accession of Mary 
State of Parties 

of the Church 

Mary's early Character 

Influence of the Papacy 

Gardiner 

The Spanish Ambassador 

Cardinal Pole in England 

KeconciHation to Home 

The form of ditto 

Articles issued to the Bishops 

Creneral Apostacy 

Martyrs 

Enquiries about Dissidents 

Baptist Mart3rrs 

Robert Cooke . 

Smith and others . 

Discussion in Prison 

Philpot on Baptism 

Baptists in East Anglia 

Charge against them 

Bonner's complaints 

Growing* hatred to Rome 

Death of Gardiner 

Misery of the Queen 

Her death 

Death of Pole 



82 

84 

84 

86 

88 

88 

90 

91 

92 

93 

94 

95 

97 

98 

99 

102 

103 

108 

109 

109 

111 

114 

114 

115 

116 

119 

119 



XX 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER V. 



ELIZABETH. 



Hostility to Elizabeth . 
Her danger from Papal influence . 
True estimate of her reign 
State of the Churcli 

society .... 

the Universities '. 

The Reformation more political than religious 

Elizabeth's difficiilties 

Her policy .... 

Debate between Romanists and Protestants 

Defects of Elizabeth's Reform . 

Act of Uniformity .... 

Controversy about vestments . 

Influence of the Separatists from the Chunrh 

Destitution of ministers 

Moral state of the people . 

Rise of the Presbyterians 

Romanists 

Wide diffusion of Baptist principles 

The cause .... 

Anabaptists ordered to leave the country 

The minister of the Dutch Church 

Dutch Baptists sufler 

Their examinations 

Their complaints 

Apostacy of some . 

Fox's sympathy with them 

Their confession 

The order for their execution . 

Somers's account 

Perverted account by historians 

Spread of Anabaptists 

Hatred of Elizabeth to the Puritans 

Strengthened by the Ejiiscoftatt' 

Spread of Puritanism 

Personal character of ElizalH.'th 

State of religion 

C-losing scenes 

The Family of Love (not*») 



PAGE 

121 

121 

122 

123 

124 

126 

127 

131 

132 

133 

135 

138 

138 

141 

142 

143 

144 

146 

147 

149 

149 

150 

151 

152 

153 

155 

156 

157 

158 

159 

105 

m\ 
m\ 

167 
168 
169 
171 
172 
174 



CONTENTS. 



XXI 



CHAPTER VI. 



THE STUART DYNASTY. — JAMES THE FIRST. 



The Stuart Princes . 

Influence at work 

Accession of the King 

AU parties hopeful 

James's principles . 

Appeal of the Puritans . 

Hampton Court discussion 

James patronises the Episcopates 

Cause of this 

Bancroft raised to the Primacy 

The Puritans — ^their position 

Separatists in Holland . 

John Smith, Helwys, &c. . 

Smith's self-baptism, &c. 

History of it 

Action of the Dutch Baptists . 

Subsequent history of the English Baptists in Holland 

Helwys in England .... 

D'Ewes's testimony to the spread of our principles 

Leonard Busher — Plea for Eeligious Liberty . 

Pilgrim Fathers ..... 

Edward Wightman — his opinions 

Consigned to the secular power — ^martyrdom 

Close of James's reign .... 

Personal and social character 

Immoral state of his court 

His death and funeral . . . 



PAGE 

176 

176 

181 

182 

184 

186 

187 

191 

191 

192 

193 

196 

197 

198 

200 

203 

212 

217 

220 

221 

223 

232 

233 

234 

236 

236 

237 



APPENDICES. 

A. 
Kites and Ceremonies observed about Baptism . . 239 

The sentence against Joan of Kent, with the certificate made 

upon it ....... 242 



XXI 1 CONTENTS. 

a 

PAGE 

Examination of Giles Vanbeller .... 243 

D. 

Names of the English who confess their errors, &c. . . 244 

E, 
A short Confession of Faith, by John Smith and his friends . 245 

F, 

Confession of Faith, by John Smith . . . . 253 
Kichard Overton . . , 254 

O. 
Confession by the remainder of John Smith's company . . 257 

H. 
Letter of Henry Hart, &c . . . . . 272 



EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 



THE 



EAELY ENGLISH BAPTISTS 



INTRODUCTION. 

'^ The true origin of that sect which acquires the denomina- 
tion of Anabaptists by their administeriDg anew the rite of 
baptism to those who come oyer to their communion, . . . 
is hid in the remote depths of antiquity, and is, of conse- 
quence, extremely difficult to be ascertained."* No one 
conversant with the records of the past can doubt this. 
The whole facts of history place the truth beyond dis- 
pute. " I have seen enough to convince me that the present 
English dissenters, contending for the sufficiency of Scrip- 
ture, and for primitive Christian liberty to judge of its 
meaning, may be traced back in authentic manuscripts to 
the Nonconformists, to the Puritans, to the Lollards,- to the 
Yallenses, to the Albigenses, and, I suspect, through the 
Paulicians and others, to the apostles."t Dissidents from 
the popular church in the early ages, compelled to leave it 
from the growing corruption of its doctrines and morals, 
were found everywhere. Men of apostoKc life and doctrine 
contended for the simplicity of the church and the liberty 
of Christ's flock, in the midst of great danger. What the 
pen failed to do, the sword of the magistrate effiscted. The 

* Mosheim, voL iv., cent, xvi, chap, ill., p. 439. 

f Eobinsoa's Olaude, voL iL, p. 53. 

B 



2 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

Koyatiaiks, the Donatists, and others that followed them, are 
examplea. They contended for the independence of the 
church ; they exalted the divine Word as the only standard 
of fjBiith ; they maintained the essential purity of the church, 
and the necessity of a holy life springing from a renewed 
heart* Extinguished by the sword, not of the Spirit, 
— their churches broken and scattered, — affcer years of 
patient suffering from the dominant sect, the seed which 
they had scattered sprang up in other lands. Truth never 
dies. Its vitality is imperishable. In the wild wastes and 
feistnesses of Europe and Africa it grew. A succession of 
able and intrepid men taught the same great principles, in 
opposition to a corrupt and affluent State church, which 
distinguish modem English Nonconformists; and many of 
them taught those peculiar views of Christian ordinances 
which are special to us as Baptists. Beyond all doubt such 
views were inculcated by the Paulicians, the primitive Wal- 
denses, and their brethren. Over Europe they were scat- 
tered, and their converts were very numerous, t long before 
the Beformation shed its light on the darkness of Europe. 
But our design is to trace the history, not of Foreign, but 
of Early English Baptists. 

Were the ancient British Christians Baptists ? This 
question meets us on the threshold, and asks our attention 
for a time. Writers on both sides the Atlantic, claim for 
Wales the honour of retaining primitive ordinances and 
church polity beyond any other nation of Europe. Removed 



* That these early separatists taught doctrines now held by the 'Rnglish 
Baptists, might be made to appear by their own works and the statements 
of their adversaries. Long. Hist. Donatists. Lardner's Works, voL ilL 
Jones's Ch. Hist. Robinson's Hist, of BaptisnL 

t The reader will find much information on the former in Lardner, 
Jones, Bobinson*s Ecclesiastical Researches, and Mosheim. Dr. Allix says, 
** They, with the Manichees, were Anabaptists, or rejectors of infant bap- 
tism, and were, consequently, often reproached with that temL" — ^Rem. 
Ch. Pied., p. 138. Qrchaid's Hist. F, Baptists, kc 



INTRODUCTION. 3 

from the influence of Eome, the authority of the ambitious 
and worldly-minded Pontiffs who ruled in that city was not 
acknowledged in "Wales till about a.d. 600, and the grow- 
ing corruptions of the Western church had not penetrated 
the festnesses of that country. Some of our American 
brethren speak of the churches there as corresponding, up 
to the time of Austin's invasion, with our present polity. 
National Christianity was imknown, and everywhere the 
churches were based on Congregational principles, and union 
with them was the result of individual conviction, and was 
professed and secured by the immersion of the body in 
water. In other words, in a true and important sense they 
were Baptist churches. "We cannot speak with the same 
oonfldence. The fact is not so clear to us as to some, and we 
feel that there are elements of doubt about it, the solution 
of which we should be glad to And. It is not as to the 
mode of baptism. That is unquestioned.- "No man would 
risk his claim to accurate acquaintance even with English 
ki8t(»7, by denying that the ancient mode of baptism waa 
immersion. "Wales knew nothing else. Christendom knew 
nothing else. Trine immersion was,* probably, all but uni- 
versaL It is questionable if any other modes were recognized^ 
except in the case of the sick. Austin and his companions, 
beyond all doubt, practised immersion, t The question for 
settlement is not respecting mode, but simply this : Had the 
practice of infa/nt baptism at this time made its way into 
Wahs,^ or was it unknown amwngst these primitive disciples 
till the Roman missionary forced it on them by the sword 
of his murderous Saacons ? "We shall place the evidence 
in as clear a light as we can before our readers. It is only 



* From the writings of many Fathers, Bingham places this beyond all 
controversy. E. Ant. , vol. iv. , pp. 355—358, 360—362. " If a Bishop or a 
Presbyter use not three immersions in the mystery of baptism, but only 
one immersion unto the death of Christ, let him be deposed." — ^Apostolic 
Canons, 50 ; Ibid, viii., p. 65. 

t Bede, by Giles, pp. 112, 113, 115, 171, 277. 



4 EABLY EKGLISH BAPTISTS. 

as an historical &ct that we deal with it. Beyond this it is 
really of no moment.* 

The Saxon invasion of Britain was followed by cruelty 
and oppression. Religion suffered. Churches were demol- 
ished, and ministers slain. The worshippers of Wodin had 
no sympathy with the forms of faith which prevailed in the 
island. To the &stnesses and morasses of Wales many 
retired. Austin was sent by Gregory to convert the Saxons. 
Success crowned his efforts. Thousands, in various parts of 
the coimtry, nominally raised Christ to the place of their 
idols. They called themselves Christians ; but their know- 
ledge of the great truths of the religion of Jesus was very 
limited, and the influence of those trutlis on their life and 
character was as feeble. Elevated to the episcopacy, the am- 
bition of Austin took a wider flight, and he sought to bring 
the Cambro-Britons under his episcopal control, and to extent 
from them the acknowledgment of the spiritual supremacy 
of Rome. A meeting was convened, at which many British 
ministers attended. The discussion was long, and they did 
not comply with the exhortations or rebukes of the proud 
monk, but preferred their own traditions before all the 
churches in the world, t At another meeting, Austin pre- 
sented his'ciemands in the following form, consenting to 
allow their independence in other matters, if they would yield 
obedience in these : " To keep Easter at the due time ; to 



* That difference existed in the Irish church from the Saxon baptinn 
admits of no doubt. Vide Todd's Irish Church, pp. 97, 99. In letters 
from some Irish bishops to Lanhtmc, they ask the primate — If it was neces- 
sary to the salvation of infants that they should receive the eucharist as 
well as be baptized? So late as A.D. 1172, a Synod at Cashel directed 
"that infants be catechised before the door of the church, and baptized in 
the holy font in the bi^tismal churches." Ibid, pp. 100, 125. "The Britons 
were contrary to the whole world, and enemies to the Eoman custom." 
Usher's Eeligion of the Anct Irish, pp. 33, 34, 106, 109. UostiUty to 
Borne, p. 110. Thierry supplies us with abundant evidence to the same 
effect. Norman Conquest, vol L, pp. 64 — 69, 82 ; vol iii, p. 4. 

t Beds, by Giles, p. 92, 



ISTBODUCHQV. 5 

administer baptism, hy which we axe again bom to God,* 
according to the custom of the Holj Roman Apostolic 
Chnrch; and jointly with ns to preadbi the Word of God to 
the English nation. We will readily tderate all the other 
things yon do, though contrary to our costom.''t This 
sainted monster threatened them with war, and finally 
induced the Northumbrians to inyade their lands with fire 
and sword. Thousands ihen fell victims to priestly pride 
and the love of Bomish dominion. 

Now, it is on the fi>nn of the second of these propositions 
that the whole dispute turns. As it stands before us, we 
should have no difficulty in the matter; but we are stopped 
by the &ct, that the next writer who giyes a report modifies 
the statement of Bede. Fabian, in his Chronicle, states the 
proposition as fellows : *' That ye give Christendom to children.^ 
Eede, the fether of English ecclesiastical history, died in 735. 
Fabian, the merdiant and chronicler of his day, died in the 
year 1512. Now which of these is the true report ? We 
shall lay before our readers the best evidence we can collect, 
and allow them to form their own judgment. Of Fabian's 
Chronicle five editions have been published, viz., 1516, 1533, 
1542, 1549, and the last in 1811, imder the superintendence 
of Sir H. Ellis. In this edition the words agrse with Bede, 
^ct8 to the moffmer o/the Church of Borne ^ but Sir Henry tells 
us thsat this phrase is wanting in the editions of 1542 and 
1549. It is right to add, that the edition of 1549, which 
omits the clause, was professedly compared with the first, j; 



* The words of Bede are : *' lit mmisterium baptisandi, quo Beo renasci- 
iniir, juxta morem aanctss I&oTnaniR Ai)ostolic39 Ecdesiae, compleatis." 

t Bede, p. 82. 

X '* Because the last print of ^abian's Ohroiiicle was in- many places 
altered from the first copies, I have caused it to be compared with the 
first print of all, and set it further in all points according to the author's 
meaning." — The Frinter to the Header, Holinshed and Stowe in their 
Chronicle report the same as Bede. Grafton refers his reader to Fabian. 
Harding, earlier still, thus notices it i — 



6 EABLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. ^ 

But assuming the correctness of Bede, what did Austin 
mean 1 Only one of two things : either that they were ta 
baptize their children because Home did, or that they should 
baptize them in the same way. The latter is affirmed by 
Baxter, Wall, Murdock, and others : it is not the mode 
wMch Austin means, but the ceremonies which at that time 
had gathered around it Let Baxter speak : *'And who knows 
not thcU the Church of Home, cmd all its communionsy then 
called the Universal churchy used in baptism the white gar^ 
nienty milk cmd honey , as am, apostolical tradition ? " Only 
this interpretation can be put upon it, say they. It admits 
o no other. In opposition to this, D'Anvers, Davye, and 
Ivimey, in England, and several Cambro-Americans, main- 
tain that it refers exclusively to the baptism of children.' 
It woTild occupy too much space, and be too large a demand 
on the patience of our readers, to enter ftdly into the grounds 
of their widely-different opinions. We shall rather suggest 
some facts which are patent to both parties. It is manifest, 
then, that Austin- himself was not fully satisfied about the 
baptism of in&nts. About that of children he might; but 
his correspondence with Gregory makes it manifest that the 
former idea had not lost the feature of novelty. Look at 
these questions : " May a woman with child be baptized ? or 
how long after she is confined may she come into the church % 
Also, after how many days the in&nt bom may be baptized, 
lest he be prevented by death ? '** It must not be forgotten, 
either, that up to this time the baptism of children, though 

'* To converte and to teache the Saxons all, 

The English also, in Christian faith and treive, 
And baptize them ; througll Brytaine over all 
The pasche to keep, as Borne did then full dewe.** 

There is no allusion to this in the ** Brut, or Chronicles of the Kings of 
England," an early work, translated from the WeUh by the &ev. P. 
Boberts. London, 1811. Vide p. 178. Appendix tL, p. 317. 

* Bede, p. 52. Widely different on this subject are the opinions of the 
Fathers. Greg. Naz. tMnks that healthy children should wait for three 
yesaw.— Bingham, voL iv., p. 218-9. Hagenbach's Hist Doctrinei, voL L» 
p. 963. 



INTBODUCTION. 7 

in many parts prevalent, was purely voluntary. No canon 
had been passed by any Council of importance on this sub- 
ject. At a meeting — ^what ecclesiastical writers would call a 
Council, very likely — of seven Spanish bishops, A.D. 517, the 
subject was discussed. Bobinson says, ^That they agreed 
{not comma/nded) to baptize caledmvn&as only at Easter amd 
PerUecosty except in case of sickness. Also in case of infants^ 
if they were iM, amd would not such their mothers^ milk, if 
they were offered to them, to baptize them, even though it were 
the day Ihey were 5om."* Later still, it is obvious, &om a 
law of Charlemagne, that the baptism of infants was not 
regarded in the same light as by Bomanists in subsequent 
times. ' He enacted, a.d. 789, a law by which his Saxon sub- 
jects were obliged, on pavn of death, to be baptized; a/nd of 
heoAyy fines, to baptize thei/r children within the yea/r of their 
hvrth. 

Independently of these fects, which must not be overlooked 
in this inquiry, there are other considerations of some 
weight, but at which we can only hint at present. For 
example : Infant baptism^ at this period, was by no means 
universal It had not yet everywhere superseded that of 
believers. In the fifth century, Mabillon says, "Children 
were baptized at six years of ageJ' Catechumens still were 
found nearly in all countries where Christianity was recog- 
nised; whilst by most, we might probably be justified in 
afi^rming that by all, of the dissidents from Home, the bap- 
tism of infimts was rejected. The supposition, therefore, 
that the .British churches retained the primitive practice, 

* Before this time, baptism was regarded as essential to salvatioxL 
Pages could be filled by showing the exaggerated importance which the 
singular old gentlemen called the Fathers attached to this simple rite. 
One example shall suffice : " The pertinacious wickedness of the devil hath 
power up to the saving water, but that in baptism he loses all the poison 
of his wickedness. When, however, they come to the saving water, and 
to the sanctification of baptism, we ought to know and be confident that 
the devil is then overcome," &c. — Cyprian's Letters, p. 69. Vide Coun. at 
Carthage. Cyprian's Letters, Lib. of Fathers, p. 233. 



8 EABLY ENOUSH BAPTISTS. 

inyolves no violatioji of existing &cts or probabilities. May 
we not also regard this supposition as strengthened by tbi 
iactj that up to this time they had not recognised the xisun^ 
pation of the Koman Pontiff)* Bede more than warrants 
the conclusion, that on many points they differed vridetj 
from the church at Home ; and states positively, that when 
Austin asked them to relinquish their mode of keeping 
Easter, and adopt that of the West (the badge^ let it be 
remembered, of union with £ome), they absolut^y refbsed. 
Ko one can read the accounts of this Father of Eccleaiastieal 
history, and we have none else, without feeling that the 
pretensions and claims of this haughty monk were regarded 
by the sturdy Cambrians as an invasion of their independenoa 
In fragments of poems, written soon after, the hostility to 
!Rome is unmistakable. Old Thomas Fuller gives us this : — 

** Wo be to the priest nnbom, 
That will not cleanly weed his com. 

And preach his flock among. 
Wo be to that shepherd, I say, 
That will not watch his flock away, 
As to his pffice doth belong. 

''Wo be to him that doth not keep 
From Bomish wolves his sheep, 

With staff and weapon strong." 

From Sharon Turner we select another : — 

** I will not receive the Sacrament 
From the detestable monks. 
With their gowns upon their hannches ; 
May the Sacrament be administered to me 
by God himsell" 

The causes which contributed to shut out the influence of 
Borne from Wales till the time of Austin, are too obvious 
to be mentioned. The church was not yet lifeless. Forms 
had not yet destroyed the realities of spiritual life. In- 

* Thierry't Nozman Conquest, toL ilL, p. 4, fi. 



introduction; 9 

dividual freedom was not yet crashed by the iron rod of 
spiritual despotism. Its vitality was wounded, but not 
annihilated. Uniformity of worship, in rites and ceremonies, 
in doctrine and discipline, did not exist universally. Variety 
in all these prevailed, and was held to be compatible with 
the unity of the Spirit. The correspondence of Gregory 
with the missionary priest is valuable on this account, and 
places the matter very distinctly before us. " It pleasea me 
that if you have found anything, either in the Eoman or 
the Gallican or any other church, which may be more 
acceptable to Almighty God, you carefully make choice of 
the s^me." "Choose, therefore, from any church, those things 
that are pious, religious, and upright." The argument from 
uniformity against the Baptist view, utterly fails.* 

We offer these considerations, not in the spirit of par- 
tizanship, but with calmness and impartiality. The ques- 
tion cannot be decided with positivity. No evidence we 
think exists to warrant it. The utmost we can do is to 
reach the probable. From this point we have looked at it, 
and ventured to submit reasons which, to us, demolish much 
if not the wl^ole of the ground, on which Baxter, Wills, 
Wall, and others, have based their case. Our own judgment, 
in the main, is concurrent with that of our early writers, 
although we have arrived at it by a process somewhat 

* " As late as A.D. f 47 it was enjoined that the priests should take care 
to dischaiige tiie duty of apostolic commission in baptising according to 
lawful light ; and in the 11. Canon of Clovashoo, the priests are directed 
to study to perform this sacerdotal ministry in one and the same mode of 
haptising." Wilkins Consil, vol. i., p. 96. Benne on Fonts, p. 116. By a 
cazxon of Edgar, A.D. 960, every priest was instructed to perform baptism 
as soon as it was reqxdred of him ; and he was to give it in charge to his 
parish, that the baptism of an infant was not to be delayed beyond thirty- 
seven days. But by st law of Northumberland, A.D. 950, the chUd was to 
be baptised within nine days. — ^Wilkins Consil, voL i, p. 218. Apud 
Denne on Fonts, pp. 116-7. 

Hostility to Bome equally marked the Irish church. Examples of this 
will be found in Usher, and especially in Todd's Ancient Irish Church, 
pp. 84^ lOa-4, 13L 



10 EABLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

different to theirs. We think the preponderance of proba- 
bilities decidedly in &Your of the opinion that the British 
church at this time did not practise in&nt baptism.* 

The Anglo-Saxon church presents but very little on which 
the mind of an intelligent Christian can rest with satisfaction. 
The corruptions of Borne here foimd a rich soil, and 
they flourished with increased vigour. Its darkness was 
that of midnight, relieved only here and there by the feeble 
glimmer of some small star. Controversies about forms — 
multiplied ceremonies clothed with some undefined super- 
natural power — conflicts between the secular and spiritual 
powers — ^and the rapid decay of all spiritual life, prone the 
sad and prominent characteristics of this era.t No trace of 
the Baptist element appears till some generations after, 
under the government of the Norman dynasty. During 
the rdgn of the Second Henry we have a glimpse of it 
Historians of a certain stamp tell us that this was the first 
appearance of heresy in this kingdom. Not of hostility to 
Papal oppression, but to the doctrine of the Holy See. The 
seamless coat of the unity of the church till now had been 
untouched. The horrid crime which called forth the holy 
indignation of the church was perpetrated by Baptists. The 
fiu5ts of the case, as we gather them from the pages of their 
enemies, are these. From their language they were firom 
Holland. These "publican** heretics were about thirty, of 
both sexes. They pretended to visit this country on business^ 
They were rustic in their manners, and were headed by one 



^'The reader will find this matter fully discussed in the following 
works : D*Anver8*s Treatise on Baptism. Reply to Wills, Baxter, ko. 
Benedict's History of Baptists ; New York, 1848. 

+ The reader who would form an accurate opinion of the true spiritual 
character of the Anglo-Saxon church, must do more than familiariia 
himself with the pages of Lingard and Soame. Both were written for a 
special purpose, and leave untouched the ignorance, the superstition, and 
immorality, which everywhere prevailed. Let him master the old chroni- 
cles of the period, and his views will approximate nearer to the reality. 



INTEODUCnON. II 

• 

Grerbard, a man of some learning. The watchmen of the 
church soon detected their secret foes. Before a synod at 
Oxford the transgressors were called. Their leader replied 
to the questions of their judges, on behalf of the rest. He 
avowed their attachment to Christ, and that the doctrine of 
the apostles was their sole rule of faith. On the Trioity 
and incarnation they were sound, but they rejected baptism, 
the eucharist, and other dogmas of Home. Entreaty and 
menace alike fedled. To their opinions they adhered, and in 
reply to the threat of punishment as heretics, calmly replied : 
*' Blessed wre they that suffer in persecution for righteousness 
sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heavenJ* Compassion for 
their soids, and anxiety for the commonwealth which might 
be diseased by the contagion of their wicked example, 
induced the bishops to transfer them to the secular magis- 
trate as confirmed heretics. Upon this the king ordered 
them to be branded on the forehead and publicly whipped out 
of the town j strictly forbidding all persons either to enter- 
tain them or give them any manner of relief. They suffered 
the execution of this sentence very cheerfully, their ring- 
leader marching at the head of them, and singing, " Blessed 
are ye when men shcdl hate youV In short, the rigour of the 
sentence and the season were such (it being winter), that 
these poor wretches sunk under their punishment and were 
all despatched.* 

Doubtless these martyrs were Paulicians.t Under this 
name they appear as dissidents from the Greek church about 
the middle of the seventh century. Amidst persecutions, 
war, and sufferings, they spread over Europe. Doctrines, as 
usual, the most revolting, were attributed to them by their 
enemies. Home, at an early period, excelled in this. She 

* Collier's Ecclesiastical History, vol. i, pp. 347-8. 

i* " They called themselyes the true Catholic church, opposed to the 
•olrrupt and ruling establishment." They were also styled Publicans, but 
this was more particularly in the southern provinces of France. — ^Neander's 
life of Brainard, p. 338. 



12 EABLY ENGLISH BAPTISTB. 

laid no restraint on her fancy. She renounced her allegianoe 
to truth when dealing with her adversaries. Cleared from 
the calumnies of these men, their doctrines were far mcne 
evangelical than those of the corrupt church, and thdir liveo 
&r more holy than those of the recognized priesthood. Ko 
doubt the unbroken testimony of history justifies the state- 
ment of Dr. Allix : — " They were Anabaptists^ or rejectois 
of infant baptism, and were consequently often reproached 
with that name."* 

Was Wickliffe a Baptist? Many of our writers have 
claimed the illustrious reformer as one of a long list ai 
witnesses who through many ages have borne their testimony 
against the baptism of infants, and have stated tbat^ through 
the ministry of his poor priests, these opinions were widely 
difiused through this land.t We may be permitted to quote 
from an article of our own, our matured opinion on this qiie»> 
tion : '^ It is beyond all doubt that his opponents ohafged 
him with denying it. Walden, one of his most violent and 
unscrupulous opponents, again and again urges it; and 
subsequent writers, historians and others, repeat the state- 
ments of the monk, without, it is to be feared, examining 
the writings of the reformer. It is beyond all controvexsy 
that he rejected many of the superstitious notions which the 
Romish church had gathered aroimd the sacrament. Not 
only is it probable that he relinquished many of the absurdi- 
ties which distinguished the outward ceremony, but rejected 
it altogether as productive of those saving effects which 
Some attached to its valid administration. Of this there 
can be little doubt, as one of the charges against him, in the 
Council of 1396, was, that he affirmed in his writings that the 



* Bern. CIl Piedmont, p. 138. Gibbon has devoted a chapter to this 
feet; on the whole, fair and candid. The reader may consult also 
Robinson's Ecc. Besearches, Jones's Ecc. Hist., Orchard's F. Baptists, Dr. 
Lardner's work, toL iiL 8to. Ed. To these he may add Mosheim and 
Ifilner, on the sect 

f Vide ly Anvers, Ivimey, and othen. 



INTRODUCTION. 13 

cHildren of the righteoas might be saved without baptism. 
As held by the church, baptism was a saving ordinance. 
The damnation of all infants who died without it was 
certain.* Now the modification of these views would be 
ground sufficient on which his adversary would base his 
charges. Truth was not his aim. Any misrepresentation 
which would damage his adversary would be allowed. No 
men are less to be trusted than the monkish historians, 
when they speak of the character and doctrine of dissidents 
from Borne. 

"No doubt the sentiments of the reformer on some 
dogmas were Baptist, and I think it is more than probable 
that many of his followers were consistent, and rejected the 
baptism of infants ; but I know at present no document 
which warrants this conclusion in relation to Wickliffe 
himself. His Triologues, those on which his enemies rested 
their charges, certainly, as given by his latest biographer, 
supply no proof. The following may be taken as embodying 
his views on this ordinance at the time of their publica- 
tion: — ^OtKicoamU of the words of the hM chapter m 
MattheWy atir chwrch introduces believers who answer for the 
mfarU which has not yet arrived <xt years of discretiony <&c,f 
' ^or is it of moment whether tJie ba^ized be imTnersed once, 
or thnoe, or whether the vxxter be 'powred on the head ; huJt the 
ceremony must be performed according to the usage of the 
place, and is as legitimate one u)ay as another; for it is 
certain, tha€ bodily baptism or washing is of little avail, 
UTiless there goes with it the washing of the mind by the Holy 
Spirit from original or actual sin. For herein is a funded 
mental article of belief, ihM wlierever a man is duly baptized, 
baptism destroys whatever sin was fownd in the 7nom,^X 
Of children dying unbaptized, he says, — *7 Ihinh it probable 

• A writer in the Dublin Quarterly Reyiew affirms the absolute 
damnation of all infants dying unbaptized. 

t Triologue x., p. 156 (WickliflEe Society). % Ibid, pp. 156-7. 



14 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

thaJb Christ might, withovl any such waahingy gpirittuiSy 
baptize, and by consequence save, infamJts^* * When an. infidel 
baptizes a child, not supposing that baptism to be of any 
avail for his salvation, such a baptism we are not to regard 
as serviceable to the baptized. Tet we believe that where 
any old woman or despised person duly baptizes with water, 
God completes the baptism of the Spirit along with the 
words of the sacrament' " 

At the same time it is only right to add, that it is 
certain the Lollards, who had long preceded Wickliffe, and 
had diffused their opinions far and wide throughout this 
country, repudiated infant baptism. Walter Lollard had 
visited this country early in the fourteenth cenlMry ; a man 
of enlightened views, of inflexible courage, and impassioned 
eloquence; and he had widely extended the circle of his 
influence, t The followers of both soon united. The name 
of the latter marked the sectarians. In a few years after the 
death of Wicklifle, more than half the nation were imbued 
with the principles of the '* Bible Men**X East Anglia, 
Middlesex, Kent, Hereford, and the Midland Counties, were 
the chief places of their abode. The relations of England to 
Bpme, the state of the Papacy throughout Europe, had beoot 
fisivourable to their peace and prosperity. But the tide soon 
turned. The repression of Episcopal anger only made it 
more fearfiil. 

Arundel and Chicheley, successively Archbishops of Can- 
terbury, distinguished themselves in this service of blood. 
In their hands, the laws enacted against the Lollards were 

♦ Triologue xi, pp. 159-60 (Wickliffe Society). f Mosheim. 

X *'Soine of his followers," Knyghton testifies, "in a very short time 
became eloquent preachers, and very powerful disputants.** The monldih 
chronicles attribute this to the deviL '"The heretics and Lollards of 
Wickliffo's opinions were suffered to preach abroad so boldly, to gather 
conventicles unto them, to keep schools in men's houses, to write booka, 
compile treatises, and write ballads, to teach privately in angles and 
comers, as in woods, pastures, meadows, groves, and caves of the ground, 
&c*' Bales' Worki (Parker Society). 



- INTRODUCTION. 15 

by no means a dead letter. Multitudes were forced to recant 
or to expiate their crime at the stake.* Arundel employed 
twelve magistrates to search for information against them^ 
and got an Act passed forbidding the readi^g of the Scrip- 
tures, t The first who fell a prey to the malice of this 
prelate, and the first martyr in England, was Sautrey, sup- 
posed by some to have had Baptist views, but, we think, 
without clear proof of the fact. J The illustrious Cobham, 
who sealed his testimony with his blood, may again come 
Tinder our notice. The king thought heresy very dangerous, 
:and under the advice of his Episcopal councillors, he burnt 
more of the followers of Wicklifie than any, since the first 
of the Lancastrian kings. Yet the doctrine of this arch- 
heretic struck deeper root in the minds of the people. § 
Amongst them the prevalence of Baptist principles admits 
of no donbt. 

*• I have now before me," says Bobinson, ** a MS. register of Grey, 
Bishop of Ely, which proves that in the year 1457, there was, a 
congregation of this sort (Baptist) in this village, Chesterton, where 
I live, who privately assembled for divine worship and had preachers 
of their own, who taught them the very doctrine which we now preach. 
Six of them were accused of heresy before the tyrants of the district, 
and condemned to abjure heresy, and do penance half naked, with a 
faggot at their backs, and a taper in their, hands, in the pubUc 
market-place of Ely and Cambridge, and in the churchyard of Great 
Swaffham." — Claude's Essay, voL ii., p. 54. Dr. Eichard's Welsh 
Nonconformist Memorials, p. 436. 

* "Their necks were tied fast to a post with towels, and their hands 
holden, that they might not stir ; and so the hot iron was put to their 
•cheeks. It is not certain whether branded with L for Lollard, or H for 
heretic, or whether it was only a formless print of iron." — ^Fuller's Oh, 
Hist., p. 164. 

Bishop Longland, of Lincoln, enjoined, in 1521, that none of these 

|)ersecuted Christians " should hide their marks upon their cheek, neither 

with hat, cap, hood, kerchief, napkin, or otherwise, nor shall suffer their 

beards to grow past fourteen days." — ^Foxe, p. 766. Aptid Soame's Befpr., 

voL i, p. 169. 

+ Parliamentary History, vol. i, pp. 323-4. 

X Crosby and others. § Forster*s Essays, 1. Plantagenet et Tudor, 2. 



16 EABLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

Walsingham, referring to the examination of some of 
these men, says, '^ That they would by no means biing an 
infant to the church to be baptized by the parish priest, 
because, in their opinion, the Holy Trinity would be pro- 
feuaed by the sinfulness of such a ministry, and the dead be 
in a worse condition by being put into the priest's hands."* 

The Lollards' tower, with its rings and chains of iron, 
stands still, as the monument of the bitter hostility of their 
mitred tyrants, and the fidelity to their tenets of these noble 
and holy men. 

Before entering on the history, the reader may be detained 
by a sentence or two on another topic. Historians of a 
certain class, and partisan writers, have been fond of desig- 
nating us as '^Anabaptists," and gathering around us all 
those elements of social disorder and fearful profligacy which. 
the scenes of Munster, and the mad vagaries of Stork «nd 
his brethren, ever suggest.t Hard have they laboured to 
identify us with these men. We are not careful to answer 
them in this matter. The men that shrunk not from the 
severe privations of the jail, and the more terrible punish- 
ment of the stake, were not afifected much by a name. It 
answered the purpose of their adversaries for a time; bat 
they were blind to the logical consequences of their own 
position. They forgot, in the ftdness of their malice, the 
retribution to which they were exposing themselves. To 
trace the sad events which resulted from the efforts to 
secure social freedom, to the doctrines that the individual 

* Walsingham, aptui Collier, voL i., p. 619. Other evidence nuiy be 
Men in Crosby, voL i., pp. 19-24. 

t Robertson, ch. v., book v. On the other side, consult BobinMo't 
Ecc. Res., ch. xiv., p. 535. It is no part of onr plan to enter on this 
■abject, or it would not be difficult to prove how prejudice on the one 
band, and ignorance on the other, have warped the judgmoit of moet of 
our popular historians. Mr. Underbill intimated, some years ago, Yom 
intention to give to the world his researches on this subject. As yet that 
promise is um^eemed. Its fulfilment would rectify many of our popular 
writen on theae eventa. 



INTRODUCTION. 17 

consciousness of God's claim on man's affections, and that 
the Christian profession is onlj made hj an immersion of 
the individual in water, "in the name of the Father, of 
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost," is only to lay open their 
own system to the most crushing retort. It were just as easy 
to demonstrate that the world has been the vast theatre 
on which Psedobaptists have perpetrated crimes at which 
humanity judders, and over which piety and virtue must 
weep, as that the Anabaptists, as a body, were found steeped 
in crime, and revelling in lust.* The term, always one of 
reproach, is now scarcely ever used, except by a few remaining 
types of the condensed bigotry and ignorance of the past. The 
error in which it originated, and the injustice on which it was 
based, are passing away. In no sense was it ever applicable 
to our Fathers. No individuals would more strongly con- 
demn Anabaptism than the persons to whom the charge was 
applied. They never advocated the repetition of baptism. 
Such a practice they would have repudiated. The sprinkling 
of infistnts they never recognised as Christian baptism. It 
not only violated their vital principles in relation to the in- 
dividual, but not less their views of the scripturalness of the 
mode. With equal justice might the charge of Anabaptism 
be applied to Cyprian and his African brethren, to Dionysius 
and his brethren in Egypt, to Novatian at Carthage, and 
Kovatns at Bome, and the churches they founded ; whilst 
Donatus and his followers, Arius and his followers, all re- 
jected the baptism of those who have since been designated 
Catholics, and r^arded their churches as habitations of 
impurity^ and. invariably baptized all who came from them, — 
not 88 a repetition of baptism, but from the conviction that 
their previous baptism wanted some essential element. The 
morality of some of these dissidents was more rigid than 
that of the £a.voured sects, yet they invariably inculcated 

* Hemy the Eighth " charges the commotions and revolts in Germany 
upon Luthei's docfoines, and that he had been the occasion of a great 
deal of rapine and disorder in the world.''— Collier, voL it, p. 2L 





18 EABLT ENGLISH BAimSTS. 

"one Lord, one faith^ one baptism."* The task wooM 
be easy of accomplishment to show, tiiat, on the prinoiplef 
involyed in the application of this term, nearljr all tiie 
puritj and truth in the world, for generations, was foond in 
the community of Anabaptists. Dr. Wall, with a candoif 
which distinguishes him from many of his brethren, felt tltf 
impropriety of this appellation, and used the term Anil- 
p8ddobapti8ts.t 

Upon the narrative itself we now enter. Our startiiig- 
point will be the Tudor dynasty; and, passing on to the moife 
eventM periods of British history, we shall dose with the 
final expulsion of the Stuarts from the throne of ^bm» 
realms. 



CHAPTER I. 

THE TUDOR DYNASTY. 

The era which marked the accession to the throne of 
England of the descendant of the Welshman, was one pi«g^ 
nant with the most important consequences. Causes were 
operating which, in their ultimate issues, not only affected 
the social, the rdigious, and the commercial life of En^^and, 
but more or less the condition of the civilized world. On 
some of these causes, we shall be pardoned i^ for a momeiit» 
we detain tiie reader^s attention. 

The discoveiy of the art of printing placed within tlie 
hands of the people a power, the influence of whidi k 
even yet augmenting. It gave a mighty impulse to the 
awakened mind of Europe, which led to the study of those 
great masterpieces of thought, which had lain entombed 

* Qyprian'i LeMer. Bobinson't ffiet of Btpikm, ch. aaodr. 
t Hlitoiyof InfuttB^itiim. 



THE TUDOB DTKA8TY. 19 

amidst the dust and n^lect of the cloister for ages. Kefined 
taste, mental cnlture, marked improvement in artistic effort 
and scientific inquiry, were the result. Dante, Petrarch, Boc-^ 
caccio, had thrown the splendour of their genius over Italy, 
and its radiance had illumined other lands. In every way 
humanity was benefited by the discovery of printing. Dog- 
matism, especially, was smitten in its high places, and free 
inquiry was everywhere encouraged. 

The spirit of commerce had opened new regions to the 
rivalry and enterprise of Europe, — r^ons clothed with all 
the attractions with which the most romantic ardour could 
invest them. Columbus had centred in himself the hopes 
of thousands.* The envied of multitudes, the daring spirits 
of the age sought to emulate him. Everywhere the influence 
of his movement was felt. From every seaboard adven- 
turers started in the search of unknown lands and exhaust- 
less wealth. The effect of this on mind, liberty, and social 
life, need not be indicated. 

A series of events had contributed, for generations, to 
invest the Papacy with spiritual supremacy. The iron 
sceptre of Christ's vicar had broken in pieces every opposing 
power. Secure tuder his triple crown, emancipated from all 
fear of rebellion against his vicariate, the insolence of the 
successor of the Galilean fisherman was unbounded, and 
*^ ihe servofnt of the servants of God " exclaimed, ^' Thtm shaU 
trample on Me Uon a/nd ihe adder ^ as he placed his foot on 
the neck of kings, f But in the day of his mightiest prowess 
there were signs of weakness. The conflicts of the civil and 
spiritual powers had been frequent. The soil of England 
had witnessed many a struggle. The blood of martyred 
millions was crying for vengeance; and reason and truth 
were shocked at the cruelties which were inflicted on men^ 

* On the sabject of the yisit of ibis great man to England, the reader 
may eonsdLt Sharon Tnxnez's Henry YIII, and Washington Irving's life 

of Oolumbns. ^ Eanke's History of the Popes. 



20 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

fex more honest and holy than the very best of their perse- 
cutors. Virtue could find no resting-place "within the palace 
of the Vatican.* 

*' Long had the Pope proclaimed himself to the world 
Half man, half God ; 
Now, by God's blessing, we are enabled to see him 
Half man, half Satan." 

Alexander had left a memory far more execrable than 
that of Nero or Caligula. The enormous wickedness of his 
son, Caesar Borgia, stamps his pontificate with unmixed 
infemy.t His successor was Julian the Second. This Vicar 
of the Prince of Peace was the most warlike Pontiff who 
had worn the tiara. The booming of cannon, the ring of the 
war cry, and the groans of the dying, appear to have been 
more melodious in his ears than the all but ravishing music 
of the Lateran. Turbulent, plotting, ambitious of power 
and dominion, Europe was ever agitated by his malignant 
genius, t Immorality, moreover, afflicted the whole body. 
From the conclave down to the humblest monastery, vice 
flourished. Arrogance, wealth, the love of power, every- 
where seen, had operated on the public mind, and extorted 
from Europe a long and loud cry ** for a reformation in the 
head and members." For generations, hostility to Home had 
been growing. The noble, the moral, the enlightened, had 
denounced her.§ Only by the Inquisition and the stake, by 
massacre and carnage, had she repelled their attacks. The 
efforts of Luther were only the utterance of the past ; the 



* Vide Epifl. of Petrarch. He calls Home ** a school of error, a temple 
of heresy ; once Borne, now Babylon, the fallen and wicked, tiie hell of 
the living.*' 

t Yilliers on the Influence of the Beformation, kc. 

X Bankers History of the Popes, chap. iL 

S The reader will find abundant proof of this in Bosetti's interesting 

Tolumes on the Anti-papal Spirit which preceded the Beformation, roL L, 

chap. L, iL, &C. Spottiswood gives a melancholy account of the church 

of Scotland, lib. ii, pp. SMO, 



THE TUDOR DYNASTY. 21 

weapons with which he smote, with such terrific power, the 
very centre of Catholic unity, were forged by the martyred 
host which had fallen in the conflict. 

The spirit of civil liberty was shedding her light over a 
wider circle, and putting forth higher claims, and calmly 
but firmly asking for broader privileges. Feudalism was 
losing its hold on the nations, and the peoples of Europe 
were rapidly improving their political condition. Society was 
struggling, like some great giant bound in fetters, to eman- 
cipate itself from those restraints which civil and spiritual 
despotism unitedly had imposed upon it. In no country 
was this struggle, probably, more marked than in England, 
and no people were more disposed to realise to the full extent 
the influence resulting from it. The recollection of these 
things is essential to the correct understanding of the great 
and rapid changes which marked the close of the fifteenth, 
and the greater portion of the sixteenth, century. The 
events which transpired during these periods, which shed 
such glory on the world, and opened to humanity at large 
long-hidden sources of happiness, were only the harvest of 
those seeds which the persecuted had sown, — the liberty and 
the purity which they had died to secure to us. 

Amidst the groans of the wounded, and the struggles of 
the dying, the diadem was placed on the head of the first of 
the Tudors; and on the field of Bosworth, Henry was hailed 
by the mailed warriors as monarch of England.* From early 
youth his life had been tried, and his character formed, by a 
discipline by no means uncommon in those days to the class 
to which he belonged. Upon the whole, his mind had been 
well cultivated; and one of his eulogists tells us that he 
was master of several languages. The circumstances of his 
^arly life woidd more than warrant this opinion. Uniting in 
himself, by marriage, the rival claims of York and Lancaster, 
he finally succeeded in consolidating a policy, from which 

* Lord Bacon's Henry Vil., p. 1. London, 1622. 



22 EABLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

sprang results which ultimately changed the condition of 
the whole island.* Up to this period two classes appear 
to have held the throne in subjection, and ever and anon to 
have retarded the prosperity of the nation by their straggles 
for supremacy in the State. The great feudal barons, and 
the church, were the chief sources of power. Royalty was 
often a mere puppet in their hands; whilst the wealth and 
numerous retainers of both were a source of frequent, if not 
perpetual, oppression to the commonwealth, t Henxy wisely 
sought to curb the power of both, j: In all the plots which 
disturbed his reign some of them were engaged. Aroond 
the pretenders to his throne, churchmen threw their influ- 
ence. The ecclesiastical body was very corrupt. The inferior 
clergy were almost lawless, till, by an enactment in A.D. 1497, 
he authorized the bishops to punish them ^'by such imprison- 
ment as they should think expedient.'*§ Intelligent piety 
was unknown, except in the few dissidents scattered here 

* ** His direct male line ceased in Queen Elizabeth, but the descendantf 
of his daughter Margaret succeeded in the Stuarts. The superior 
Brunswick line, which has given a stability to our civil and religioas 
liberties, &c., is also, through her, a branch of Henry^s descendants."-' 
Sharon Tumer*s Middle Ages, voL iv., p. 165. 

f Turner's Middle Ages, voL iv., p. 149. Grafton, Leland, and oihen, 
supply ample materials illustrative of these statements. The income of 
these nobles would range from £6,000 to £7,000 per annum. Wheat wm 
worth from la. 6d. to 28, the quarter. Lambs were worth Is., fat sheem 
3«. id. , and fat oxen would only realize £1 'Ss. Sd. These figures, multiplied 
by twelve, will give the reader their value in our present money. — 
IYoude*8 History, voL i, chap. L 

t Grafton says, *'He used this rigour only, as he said hinuelf, to 
bring low and abate the high stomachs of the wild people nourished and 
brought up in seditious factions and civil rebellion,'* kc. 

§ " So much reverence was attributed to the holy orders, that although 
a priest had committed high treason against his sovereign lord, and to all 
other offenders in murder, rape, or theft, yet the life was given, and the 
punishment of death relaxed." Ihiring this reign, a petition was pre> 
■ented by the gentlemen and farmers of Carnarvonshire, accusing the 
clergy of systematic seduction of their wives and daughters. Grmftoo, 
p. 931. The privilege of sanctuary was greatly reformed by Henry. 



THK TUDOB DYKASTY. 23 

and there, who worshipped the Saviour in the solitude of 
the woods, or hy stealth in some obscure place, for fear of 
the spies <^ the mitred lords. That profligacy of the worst 
kind flourished in the monasteries, and was indulged by 
the priests, admits of no doubt. It would be difficult for 
language to exaggerate the enormity of their crimes. The 
evidence of this is overwhelming. 

The wise and cautious policy of Henry grappled with 
these evils. Under the control of law both these powerful 
elements were brought ; and by the marriage of his children 
he laid the foundation, though unwittingly, first of the 
Heformation, and then of the accession of the Stuarts to 
the throne of these realms. Royalty from his reign became 
a reality, and not a form. 

Partly, perhaps, to gratify the clergy, whose influence he 
had weakened, and whose immoralities he tried to check, he 
allowed their hostility to the godly to display itself Of the 
sentiments held by many of their victims we have no dis- 
tinct record. With the opinions of Lollardism they were 
tainted, there is no doubt. How far they rejected the 
baptism of in&nts, so common at this time, the evidence is 
not so certain. It is not improbable that some of them may 
have been foreign Baptists, who fled from their continental 
enemies. The first victim was a poor old woman, who was, 
A.D. 1494, burnt at the stake. Two years later, the church 
was gratified by the spectacle of many Lollards bearing 
^Btggots at St. Paul's Cross, whilst they listened to the edify- 
ing exhortations of some fiery zealot.* In a.d. 1498, public 
curiosity was gratified by the exhibition of twelve of this 

* ''The Lollards, after abjuration, were forced to wear the fashion of a 
fa^^ot, wrought in thread or painted, on their left sleeves, all the days of 
their lives : it being death to put on their cloaks without that cognizance. 
And, indeed, to poor people it was true, — ^put it off, and be burned ; keep 
it on, and be starved : seeing none generally would set them on work 
that carried that badge about them.''— Fuller's Church History, book v., 
p. 165. 



24c EABLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

class ; and a few years later, the prior of a monasteiy, and 
five others, were doomed to the same humiliating peiiano& 
These cruelties were enacted in the metropolis; and though 
we have but little information, no doubt provincial . «id 
would bum with as bright and steady a flame at Norwidi, 
Lincoln, and York, as it did at Fulham and Lambeth. 

"We are now approaching a period when history throws a 
clearer and steadier light on the subject of our inquiries; 
and, guided by her records, we may trace, with nmniftfailrftMA 
distinctness, the action and principles of our fore&thers. 



CHAPTEE IL 

HENKY THE EIGHTH. 

No monarch had ever ascended the throne of England 
with such promise as Henry. Young, cultivated, and en- 
dowed with many of those social and mental qualities which 
inspire the most sanguine with brighter hopes, and give 
confidence to the most cautious and prudent, his advent to 
the throne was hailed with rapture. The heart of the 
nation thrilled with ecstacy. He was, to some extent, the 
embodiment of the spirit of the age. Chivalrous, fond of 
gorgeous splendours, indulging in all the martial and manly 
exercises which distinguished his era, yet free, and throwing 
around him a gladsome influence, all concurred in laying at 
the feet of the young and ambitious monarch the most glow- 
ing tribute of their admiration.* Educated for the church, 



* Details will be found in Fabian, pp. 629—535. Turner's Henry VIIL, 
ch. i. **Thi8 most serene king is not only very expert in arms and of 
great valour and most excellent in personal endowments, but is likewise 
■o gifted and adorned with mental accomplishments of every sort, that 
we believe him to have few equals in the world. He speaks "Kwgliaii^ 



HENBT THE EIGHTH. 25 

and conversant with theological doctrines, the episcopate 
counted on his £Eiyours, whilst the politician and the warrior 
anticipated the fullest opportunity for displaying their pecu- 
liar prowess. Everything around him was favourable to 
the development of the peculiarities of his nature, and the 
gratification of his desires. The heir of both Hoses, no 
competitor for the throne was feared, and he had only to 
consolidate his empire, and augment the nation's glory. The 
state of Europe too was singularly felicitous. It is an 
interesting &ct, that on the thrones of the three great 
monarchies young men were seated, — Charles of Grermany, 
Spain, and the New "World ; Francis of France ; and our 
Henry. These men had much in common. They were all 
endowed with great mental qualities, well trained and disci- 
plined according to the spirit of the age, and glowed with 
intense desire for distinction in all those things which mon- 
archs so dearly love. They enjoyed, too, the full affections of 
the church. Their courtiers and nobles sympathised with their 
masters and emulated their display ; their people, delighting 
in shows and martial grandeur, thought, in common with 
their chie&, that the greatness and glory of a nation were 
the savage war spirit by which it was animated, and the 
physical prowess of its people. To this the history of the 
past scarcely furnishes a parallel.* 

The accumulations of his father supplied Henry with an 
ample treasure from which he could gratify his love of dis- 
play, and he opened his reign with a magnificent coronation. 
His marriage of his deceased brother's wife, Catherine of 
Spain, after a solemn repudiation of the lawfulness of 

French, Latin; nnderstands Italian well; plays almost on every instra« 
ment ; sings, and composes fairly : is prudent and sage, and free from 
every vice." So wrote the Venetian Amhassador. 

* Froude presents us with a truthful and graphic picture of the social 
condition of the various classes in England at this time, voL L, ch. L 
Tomer's Henry Yin., vol. i Latimer gives us many interesting glimpses 
of social life. Vide Sermons (Parker Society). 



26 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

the ccMitract, was idldmately the cause of evmits whkk 
hftve gathered around hmt the most conflicting ofMoimu. 
The pages of the nltra-Protestaat history aie fall of light and 
brilliancy; he is the central figure, sconnd which are gathered 
the great and the good of that age : whilst the T^T»i^i>^ 
dothes him with all those attribates whitoh are r^mkm to 
our moral sense, and makes him pass befoi:e ns as a find 
incarnate. Both extremes need modifying. Ko doubt oir* 
comstances influenced his conduct and prompted his actions 
Truth must trace up the cause of his conduct in the diToxea 
exclusiyely to Bomish influence. The doubt, and piolest 
against the marriage, were almost forced by the liSgato 
of England. A French bishop awakened the doubt hf 
asking about the Intimacy of Mary, and Wolsey himailf 
had instituted inquiries before Henry had troubled his own 
conscience.* We have no cause, in reality there is naoB, 
to attribute to him the selfish and brutaHsed natniv to 
which one class would trace all the actions of his life; 
nor, on the other, can we admit the encomiums of his 
eulogists without considerable allowance. The Tudor 
dynasty was essentially iron-willed, and fond of power. 
In Henry, both these features were exemplified. A modem 
writer, whose recent researches and broad sympathies with 
liberty have illumined many a dark page of our hiatcny, 
speaks of the family ^'as strong-willed, but able to pot a 
restraint on their passions. Their tyranny fully indulged 

* The reader will find this placed in a clear light by Tomer, mod later 
fliill by Froude, voL i, ch. ii "Of this trouble I only may thank yoo^ 
my Lord Cardinal of York," said Catherine ; '* for because I have wondered 
at your high pride and vain glory, and abhor your voluptuous lifo, and 
little regard your presumptuous power and tyranny, therefore of malicd 
^ou have kindled this fire, and set this matter abroad, and in especial for 
the great malice you bare to my nephew, the Emperor." Hall, p. 798. 
Bishop Godwyn*s Annals of Henry VUL , p. lOL Tyndale says he did thia 
through his tool, the Bishop of Lincoln, confessor to the King. Li another 
place he says, that the Emperor affirms that Wolsey did this, beeanse 
he would not aid him in his efforts for the triple crown. TyndalePs Wofla, 
ToL L, pp. 4G3, 465-6. 



HENBY THE EIGHTH. 27 

in the court, but watched and conciliated the people. 
Henry the Eighth spumed, renounced, and utterly cast 
off the Pope's authority, without too suddenly revolting 
the people's usages and habits : to arrive at blessed results 
by ways that a better man might have held to be accursed ; 
to persecute with an equal hand the Romanist and Lutheran ; 
to send the Protestant to the stake for resisting Popery, 
and the Roman Catholic to the scaffold for not admitting 
him to be Pope.'* * 

To unfold the causes which produced the Reformation, — 
causes which had been working before either Henry or 
Catherine was bom, — to mark the influence which that 
great event exerted on this nation and Europe at large, is 
not the object of this volume, t Yet a glance at the condition 
of the church cannot be withheld, withoufc manifold injustice 
to the subject, as well as to the reader. 

It is saying but little, that at this era evangelical religion 
was low. Effects never exist apart from causes; and as 
the ministry was a mass of ignorance and superstition, no 
one has a right to expect grapes from thorns, or figs from 
thistles. The people never rise in moral excellence and 
social virtues higher than their teachers. The religious 
state of a community can never be accurately gathered from 
the page of history. To other sources we must repair; 
and from writers equally honest, but of a widely dif- 
ferent class, we must gather the materials absolutely ne- 
cessary for such a work. "We shall be forgiven if we 
select frx)m other pens a few facts and illustrations. The 
people relied "on the merit of their own works toward their 
justification, such as pilgrimages to images, kneeling, kiss- 
ing, and cursing of them, as well as many other hypocritical 
works in their store of religion ; there being marts or mar- 
kets of merits, frdl of holy relics, images, shrines, and works 

* Forstei's Essajs : Plantagenet et Tudor, p. 222. 
f Vide ymien's Influence of the Bef onuatioiL 



28 EARLY EKGUSH BAPTISTS. 

of supererogation, ready to be sold; and all things they had 
were called holy: holy cowls, holy girdles, holy pardons^ 
holy beads, holy shoes, holy rules." * " They were greatty 
seduced by certain famous and notorious images, as by onr 
Lady of "Walsingham, our Lady of Ipswich, St. Thomas of 
Canterbury, t St. Anne of Buxton, the Rood of Grace. . . . 
To these they made vows and pilgrimages, thinking that 
God would hear their prayers in that place rather than in 
another place. They kissed their feet devoutly, and to 
these they offered candles, and images of wax, rings, beada^ 
gold, and silver abundantly. And because they that tanghk 
them had thereby great commodity, i they maintained the 
same with feigned miracles and erroneous doctrines, f^t^r^hing 
the people that God would hear their prayers made befoie 
these images rather than in another place.** § ^'Sometime8|" 
says Cranmer, *Hhe people would run from their seats to the 
altar, and from altar to altar, and from sacring (as they 
call it) to sacring, peeping, toating, || and gazing at that 
thing which the priest held up in Ids hand." IT SometimeB 
the shout was heard to the priest, " Hold up, hold up !** 
and one would say to the other, " This day I ha/ve seen mjf 
Maker; and I cam/not he quiet, eoccept I see my Maker once a 
day," ** Rough, racy, good old Fatlier Latimer, gives us 
many glimpses of the dark and gloomy superstition en- 
throned everywhere in the kingdom, ft The moral and 

* Homily of Good Works. Apud Todd's Cranmer, voL ii, pp. 14, 15. 

+ Todd*s Illustrations of the Lives of Chaucer and Grower supply us 
with some curious information about the worship of this saint. Tbe 
reader may also consult Hume, voL vL, p. 181., ed. 1796. 

X Gains. § Cranmer*s Catechism, Todd*s Cranmer, vol iL, p. 50. '* We 
will have the Sacrament hung over the high altar, and there to be wor- 
shipped as it was wont to be ; and they which will not thereto consent, 
we will have them die like heretics against the holy Catholic faith.** 
— Petition of the Devonshire Rebels, art iv. 

II Ganng about. ^ The elevation of the host. 

♦• Todd, ToL iL, p. 319. ft Vide his Sermons (Pfcrker Society). 



HENBT THE EIGHTH. 29 

intellectual condition of the clergy can scarcely be described. 
Their power over the masses was complete. The destiny of 
the people for both worlds was in their hands. "With their 
influence they encircled them from the cradle to the grave. 
Claiming to be the vicegerents or the representatives of the 
Holy One, their lives were a perpetual exposition of the hypo- 
crisy which marked them. Decency was thrown aside, and 
morality unknown. Brothels were kept in London for the 
especial use of the priesthood. The confessional was abused, 
and profligacy was all but universal. The punishment for 
their flagitious crimes was trifling. Five paternosters, a few 
aves or credos, with the present of a waxlight to some altar, 
would cleanse the sinner from his pollution.* Tyndale's 
description of this class is abundantly sustained by other 
writers of that age : " The priests of the country be imleamed, 
as Grod knoweth. There are a full ignorant sort, which have 
seen no more Latin than that they read in their portessest 
and missals, which yet many of them can scarcely read, 
except it be AU)erttts de Secretis Mulierum, in which yet, 
though they be never so lowly learned, they pore day and 
night, and make notes therein, and all to teach midwives, 
as they say ; and Linwode, a book of constitutions, to 
gather together mortmains, oflerings, customs, and other 
pillage, which they call not theirs but God's part, and the 
duty of holy church, to discharge their consciences withaL" J 



* FicfeFroude's History, voL i, pp. 178-9. "Moreover, besides daily cor- 
rapting other men's wives, and open whoredom, nnto what abominations, 
too filthy to be spoken of, hath their voluntary chastity led them !" Tyn- 
dale, vol L, pp. 38-39. Also, Simon Fish, in 1531, said to the government : 
" Tie the holy idle thieves to the cart, to be whipped, naked, till they 
fall to labour, that they by their importunate begging take not away the 
alms that the good charitable people would give unto us sore, impotent, 
miserable people, your bed men." — ^Fox, voL iv., p. 664. Froude, vol. i, 
p. 47. + The Breviary. 

X Works of Tyndale and Frith, by the Rev. T. Russell, M.A., voL i., 
p. 3. "In the rural districts the cleigy were universally ignorant, idle, 
fllothfol, superstitious, proud, and vicious; preaching very seldom, and 



30 EARLY ENGLISH BAFITSTS. 

Beferring to the same class, Latimer says : '' Ever sinoe tlie 
prelates were made lords and nobles, th^r plough standeth, 
there is no work done. They hawke, they hunt, th^ card, 
they dice, they pastime in their prelacies with gallant gentle- 
men, with their dancing minions, and with Mieir fresh com- 
panions, so that ploughing is set aside ; and by the lordiiig 
and loitering, preaching and ploughing is clean gone."* 
" They are so troubled with lordly living, they be so placed in 
palaces, couched in courts, ruffling in their rents, i{ar\mig in 
their dominions, burdened with embassages, pampering of 
their paunches, like a monk that maketh a jubilee : muncli- 
ing in their mangers, and moiling in their gay manors and 
mansions, and so troubled with loitering in their lordahipi^ 
that they cannot attend. They are otherwise oocapied: 
some in the king's matter, some are ambassadors, some of 
the privy council, some to fximish the courts, some are loidi 
of parliament, and some are presidents and controUen of 
the mint." t '^ I hear that some of these men wear velvet 
shoes and velvet slippers; such fellows are more fit to 
dance the morris-dance than to be admitted to preach."^ 
Like clouds of locusts, the friars penetrated every nook and 
comer of the land, obtruding their dirty bodies and their 
shameless &ces into every fiimily. To these cormorasii 
nothing came amiss. Their bag was open for a bushel of 
wheat, or malt, or rye : a piece of cheese, a side of bacon, 
or a good cut of beef Old Chaucer has painted these 
locusts of his age with great accuracy. The Wife of Bath 
is the reporter : — 

•* For now the grete charites and prayers 
Of limitaotui, and other holy freres : 
That serchen every land and every streme, 
Am thicklie as motes in the sonne beame ; 

teaching the people fables and legends, rather than the true and wlu^ 
some word of Qod." — ^Bnmef b Histoiy of the Reformation, toL L, p. SL 

* Vide Sermons (Beligions Traei Sooisty), p. 40. 

t iW (Psrker Society), p. 87. X IM (Ftoker Society), p. 280. 



HENBT THE EIGHTH. 31 

Blessing halles, chambers, kichenes, and bonres, 

Oitees and buighs, castles highe, and towers, 

Thropes * and bemes, shepenes and diavies. 

This maketh that ther ben no faeries : 

For abat as wont to walken was an elf, 

Thflr wrfketh now the limiton himself, 

In unduinele. and in mor neningee. 

And saith his matins and his holy thinges. 

As he goeth in his limitations." f 

To fonn accurate conceptions of the moral state of the 
people is all but impossible. By no effort can we throw the 
mind back so as fully to realize the past. It is less difficult 
with the secular than with the moraL The reasons are so 
-obvious that we need not detail them. The data on which we 
can rest our conclusions are necessarily limited. Ignorance, 
superstition, and immorality, however, are features which 
stand out with prominency. The implicit obedience which the 
people rendered to their spiritual guides necessarily produced 
these results. Doubts, the freedom of inquiry, are requisite 
to spiritual life and moral power. limit the range, raise up 
barriers beyond which no thought shall go, and you retard 
the progress of truth, and imperil the highest interests of 
society. At no time were these evils more rife. The spiritual 
power was supreme, and hostility to it was death. % Above 
all law the priesthood placed themselves. As &thers had a 
right to control and punish their childi*en, so these spiritual 
Others could deal with the laity. - Emperor and monarch 
must bow to their will { 

Occasionally we get a glimpse of the popular religion of 

• Villages. + Wife of Bath, v. 6447-59. 

t ** The very prelates are now so sore changed, that if they smell that 
<me of their flock do bnt once long or desire for the true knowledge of 
Christ, they will filay him, bnming him with fire most crueUy."— I^dale, 
▼oL L, p. 229. 

** There is not the poorest desolate widow, bat with his fair flattery 
he wSl so deceiTe her, that he will be snre either of money or umiL'' 
— Frith's Wnot, Works of Tyndale and Frith, toL iii, p. 275. 

§ Bomet, YoL i., pp. 12—17. 



32^ EABLY ENGLISH BAFTIfiTrS. 

this era, like the following, though we can scarcely credit 
the representation, so perfectly destitute is it of anything 
which is consistent with the immaculate purity and dignify 
of the Great Supreme, and of the most obvious necessities 
of man's moral nature. Tyndale thus describes many of the 
ceremonies in which religion consisted, and for which more 
or less money was paid : — 

'* Christenings, churchings, banns, weddings; offerings at wed- 
dings, offerings at buryings, offerings to images, offerings of wax and 
lights, which come to their damage ; besides the superstitioiiB wiate 
of wax in tapers throughout the land. These brotherhoods and ptr^ 
doners, ^ what get they by confession ? Yea ! and many enjoia 
penances, to give a certain (sum) for to have so many m^Jiii^ nid, 
and desire to provide a chaplain themselves. Soul masses, dirges,' 
month minds,' peace minds, all souls' days, and trentals.* l%e 
mother chtirch and high altar must have something in every testa- 
ment. Offerings at priests' first masses. No man is professed, of 
whatsoever reUgion it be, but he must bring something. The hal- 
lowing, or, rather, conforming of churches, chapels, altars, super- 
altars, chalice, vestments, and bells. Then book, bell, candlestick, 
organ, chalice, vestments, copes, altar-clothes, surplices, towels, 
basins, ewers, sheep, censors, and all manner of ornaments, must be 
found them freely, they will not give a mite thereunto. Last of all, 
what swarms of begging friars there are ! The parson shareth, tha 
vicar shareth, the parish priest pulleth, the friar scrapeth, and tha 
pardoner ])areth ; we lack but a butcher to pull off the skin." * 

**The people are thoroughly brought in behef," says the same 
writer, "that the deed in itself, without any further respect, saveth 
them : if they be so long at church ; or say so many paternosters ; 
or read so much in a tongue which they understand not ; or go so 
much on a pilgrimage ; and take so much jNiin ; or fast such a super- 
stitious fast ; or observe such a superstitious observance, neither 
profitable to himself nor to his neighbours, but done by a good 

(1) A seller of pardons. (2) A hjrmn in the Bomish service, beginning 
** Dirige grestot meot.** (3) Days when the soul was had in special re- 
membrance. (4) A service of thirty masses. 

* Works, voL i, p. 270. The language of religion was unknown to the 
people. ** They pray in Latin, they christen in Latin, they bless in Latin, 
they grant absolations in Latin ; only curse they in the English tongue.** 
Pfidj voL i., p. 905. 



HOniT TBB EIOHTK. 3S 



intent, say they, to please God wtthaL Tea, to kiss the pax thej 
think it a meritorions deed, when before their neighbours.' 



M* 



Keligion with the mass of the people, then, was a mere 
form. Multiplied cerem<mie8 had scarcely left a trace of 
the Divine originaL Taught to regard the priesthood as 
the representatives of Christ, and crushed with the most 
fearful power, their obedience was implicit, though the 
tyranny exercised over them was without a parallel in the 
world's histoiy. To submit to penances, to wear hair-shirts, 
to go barefoot and with head uncovered, to repeat vows the 
meaning of which they knew not, to &st on bread and 
water — some once, some twice a week, some all the week ; 
some for one, two, or even ten years; and to lie in filth; 
to go on pilgrimage and visit the memorials of saints, and 
expend their resources on the church : this was their £dth. 
Or, if these sacrifices were too great, others could be pur- 
chased to do all the work for them which religion demanded. 
The moral state of the people imder such teaching was 
almost beyond conception. Ignorance, vice, and immorality 
of the worst kind, reigned all but universally.t 

" The soul of religion, however, had died out of it for 
many generations before the Reformation. Faith had sunk 
into superstition; duty had died into routine." J 

Wolsey, for years the leading counsellor of the king, and 
the most iofluential man in the nation,* was a genuine type 
of the dignified clergy <^ bis day. Low in his origin, he 
rose to an eminence which cast into the shade all his rivals. 
We state the former fact, respecting his origin, not from any 
sympathy with those who look on it as a blot Birth and 
wealth are accidents men cannot control. There is no virtue 
in being bom to a coronet, or to the possession of vast estates. 
To conquOT circumstances, and to make the elements of 
adversity minister to your elevation, is true greatness. 

* Tjmdale, voL i, p. 312. f Vide l^dale, voL it, p. 413; also p. 415. 

X Fnmde, voL ii, p. 408. 
D 



34 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

They only are true men, who leave the impress of their 
own genius or moral power on the ranks of society below 
which they were bom. Other features marked Wolsey, than 
his being a butcher's son. His first parishioners gazed at 
their pastor as he sat in the stocks for drunkenness. Pro- 
perty belonging to the Bishop of Lincoln he appropriated 
to his own use; whilst the powerlessness of his vow of 
celibacy was manifest in living proo& to miiltitade&* 
Brought into contact with the youthful monarch by mere 
accident, by his servile arts and his more loose morality ha 
ministered to his master's gratification, and daily rose in the 
estimation of the pleasure-loving king.t His progress 
rapid. To the highest pinnacle in Church and State 
ambition carried him. Swayed only by one ever-present 
and all-absorbing motive, he hesitated at no means, and was 
deterred by no moral principle, in the gratification of his 
insatiate love of power, t Archbishop, chancellor, and cazdi- 



* "Wolsey had a son and daughter, by the daughter of a man of tiM 
name of Lark. The daughter was a nun at Shaftesbuiy — ^what became 
of the son is uncertain."— Galt*s Life, p. 181. Vide Articles of Impeach' 
ment. Vide Campbell's lives of the Chancellors, voL i, pp. 439--445^ 
449. Respecting his magnificence, vide pp. 455 — 457, 459. Burnet aaji 
that ''later on in life he had an infamous disease," vol L, p. 8. 

■f "Every age," said he, "of man had its seasons and delights agreeable. 
They did not do well that would force the king to act an old man before 
his time — ^youth being utterly averse from wrinkled society. .... TJntfl 
the time came, he should enjoy the present, and not by hearkening to 
othersi' needless persuasions, any way interrupt the course of that felicity 
which the largeness of his dominions could easily afford him to." — God- 
wyn's Annals of Henry VLLL, p. 29. In this tone did this teacher of 
morality discipline his patron, even offering to free him from the caret 
of the council table, by reporting to him the chief points of discussion. — 
Ibid, p. 29. 

:|: The ambition of this unprincipled priest was boundless. Nothing 
could impede his gratification. Upon all law he would trample, over all 
ranks he would pass. By his insatiable thirst for power, he shed toBia 
of the noblest blood in the realm. Charles said, when referring to tha 
death of the Duke of Buckingham, that **the butcher' 9 dog had k&M 
the faireet hart in England^** jcc— Godwyn's Annals of Heniy Y ILL, ^ 47. 
His ^ipearance is thus described by a cotemporary poet i— 



HENBT THE EIGHTH. 35 

nal^ all but royalty centred is him.* Mingling with emperors 
and monarchsy his state was little inferior to theirs ; and 
the enormous wealth which he drew from his multiplied 
offices and ecclesiastical dignities, not only enabled him to 
gratify this love of display, but to subordinate almost every 
element of civil and religious power to his own sordid 
interest Bishop Godwyn remarks, that except the Bishops 
of Rome, all Europe never saw a more potent prelate. It 
is doubtful if the bishop's language admits even of this 
qualification. His splendour was quite imperial ''His 
retinue consisted of near about a thousand persons, among 
which was one earl^ commonly nine barons, many knights 
and gentlemen, and officers belonging to his house above four 
hundred — ^besides their servants^ which far exceeded the for- 
mer number. His chapel was served by a dean, a sub-dean, 
a chanter, thirty-five singers (sixteen of whom were clergy). 
Tn addition to these were sixteen chaplains of the most 

*^ A great carl he is, and fat ; 
Wearing on his head a red hat. 
Procured with angels' subsidy ; 

''And, as they say, in time of rain 
Four of his gentlemen are fain 
To hold o'er it a canopy. 

" Besides this, to tell them more news, 
He hath a pair of costly shoes. 
Which seldom touch the ground : 

" They are so goady and curious. 
All of gold and stones precious, 
Costing many a thousand pound. 

" And who did for these shoes pay ? 
Truly, many a rich abbay. 
To be eased of his visitations." 

— Oalt's Life of Wolsey, p. 168. 

* He was Archbishop of York, Bishop of Winchester and of Bath, and 
Abbot of St. Alban's. The income from such pluralities was enormous. 
That of the Archbishopric of Canterbury alone was estimated at £6,000 
per annum. Multiply this by twelve, and the reader will then have its 
value according to our present standard.— Froude, voL i, pp. 35, 88. 



36 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

learned in the kingdom, with two cross-bearers and as maaj 
pillar-bearers/' &;(x* Only the diadem and the triple crown 
were above him.t To the latter he aspired more than onoe^ 
and he thought the dazzling bauble was just within hk 
reach. He bribed largely, through his agents, in order to 
neutralize hostility to his claim. | The moral state of tlte 
conclaye and court of Eome was very low. " I should si^; 
myself (and I have said it often before), that your majet^ 
may have the whole college at your devotion, for ever, if 
you will spend 20,000 ducats amongst the leading cardinally 
in pensions and benefices. Give one of them a thocuniidy 
and these 2,000 or 3,000, and you will find the mon^ well 
laid out to your advantage." § In the twelfth centaiy tii0 
same corruption prevailed. " Our lord the Pope, indeed, is 
a holy and righteous man, and his abbot, as I am told by 
many, does his best to imitate him; but their neoes&dtks are 
so great, and the dishonesty and cupidity of the Romans are 
so standing, that the Pope, sometimes under his prerogative, 
and by dispensation, obtains what may benefit the state, 
but cannot benefit religion." || ^' I will not apply to those 
Koman robbers, for they do nothing but plunder the needy 
without compunction." IF 

We have seen that revenge for his disappointment at the 

* Godwjm's Annals, p. 113. 
+ ** For pride, coyetoiuness, and ambition, he excelled all othen, as 
you shall hear after.** . . . '* When he was once a perfect ***H''**^ 
he looked then above all estates, so that all men almost hated him and 
disdained him." ... "In other presence he would lye and si^ 
untruth, and was double both in speech and meaning : he would promisa 
much and perform little. He was vicious of his body, and gave the 
cleigyevil example. The authority of this cardinal set the deigy ia 
such a pride that they disdained all men," kc, &c.— HaU, pp. 507, 5S3, 
774. London, 1809. 

It Oalt, p. 379; Bomety voL i, p. 19. 
§ Letter from the Spanish Ambassador at Rome to Charles Y., Angort 
6th, 1529. —The Pilgrim. Apud Append., p. 84. 

H John of Salisbury. 
t QiWs Life of Becket» voL iL, pp. 18» 157, 171, 20L 



UBNAT THE EIGHTH. 37 

loss of the Papacy prompted Wolsey to suggest thoughts to 
Henry which led to the overthrow of the Papal authority in 
this country, and which, in the end, exhibited him crushed 
by the power which he had created, forsaken of the king 
whom he had served, and hated by all the other grades of 
society below him.* With the spirit of Wokey the inferior 
grades of the clergy were animated. Around him they 
moved, as the centre of their hopes and fears ; whilst the 
worldliness and insensibility to high moral principle which 
ever marked him, found its reflex in the vices and immo- 
ralities which rioted in monastic establishments and in the 
homes of the priesthood. ^' The whole head was sick, cmd 
the whole heart fainV^ 

One of the necessary results which sprang from this re- 
ligious movement — a movement which had long been fore- 
shadowed, which would have transpired in spite of Henry, 
which the cardinal saw, and, striving to arrest its progress, 
was crushed beneath its powert-was the conflicting prin- 

* l^dale says that **when his hat was brought to Westminster, it 
was set cm a cupboard, and taken about, so that the greatest duke in the 
land must make courtesy thereto ; yea, and to his empty seat." — ^The 
Practice of Prelates, voL i, p. 484. Cavendish says that '*he was the 
haughtiest man that lived.'' — ^Life, voL iL, p. 126. 

\ Froude, voL i., chap. 2. We gather the progress of this conflict 
from the letters of the French Ambassador, from which we give an 
extract or two : — 

'* The bishops have had a grand struggle. Part desired to retain the 
mass complete, part to make a new service. The majority were with 
the conservatives, who have carried the day. The king, as the leader of 
this party, said all which ought to have been said. He maintained that 
the holy sacrament ought to be believed and adored, and to be honoured 
with the ceremonies observed in the church from immemorial time. Evil 
speaking, therefore, against the sacraments is prohibited under pain of 
death ; and priests are forbidden to marry.'' (MaUlac to Francis I. 1599.) 
— ^Fronde's Pilgrim, p. 128. 

In another letter, Maillac says that "the king's declaration about the 
sacrament has given wide pleasure and satisfaction. The people in 
^neral are inclined to the old religion, and only a few bishops support 
the new opinions. These bishops are in a bad humour," &c. (Maillac 
to the Constable. Jime, 1539.)— J&i(2, p. 128. 



28 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

of supererogation, ready to be sold; and all things they had 
were called holy: holy cowls, holy girdles, holy pardons, 
holy beads, holy shoes, holy rules." • " They were greatly 
seduced by certain famous and notorious images, as by our 
Lady of Walsingham, our Lady of Ipswich, St. Thomas of 
Canterbury, t St. Anne of Buxton, the Hood of Grace. . . . 
To these they made vows and pilgrimages, thinking that 
God would hear their prayers in that place rather than in 
another place. They kissed their feet devoutly, and to 
these they offered candles, and images of wax, rings, beads, 
gold, and silver abundantly. And because they that taught 
them had thereby great commodity, J they maintained the 
same with feigned miracles and erroneous doctrines, teaching 
the people that God would hear their prayers made before 
these images rather than in another place.** § "Sometimee," 
says Cranmer, *'the people would run from their seats to the 
altar, and from altar to altar, and from sacring (as they 
call it) to sacring, peeping, toating, || and gazing at that 
thing which the priest held up in his hand." IF Sometimes 
the shout was heard to the priest, " Hold up, hold up !" 
and one would say to the other, " This day I have seen n^ 
Maker; and I ca/nnot be quiet, eoccept I see my Maker once a 
day,^^ ** Eough, racy, good old Fatlier Latimer, gives us 
many glimpses of the dark and gloomy superstition en- 
throned everywhere in the kingdom, ft The moral and 

* Homily of Good Works. Apud Todd's Cranmer, voL iL, pp. 14, 15. 

t Todd*s Illustrations of the Lives of Chaucer and Grower supply vi 
with some curious information about the worship of this saint. TIm 
reader may also consult Hume, voL vi, p. 181., ed. 1796. 

X Gains. § Cranmer*s Catechism, Todd*s Cranmer, vol iL, p. 50. ** We 
will have the Sacrament hung over the high altar, and there to bo wor- 
shipped as it was wont to be ; and they which will not thereto consent, 
we will have them die like heretics against the holy Catholic fioth.'* 
— Petition of the Devonshire Rebels, art. iv. 

II Gazing about. ^ The elevation of the host. 

♦♦ Todd, voL iL, p. 319. ft Vide his Sermons (Parker Society). 



HENBT THE EIGHTH. 29 

intellectual condition of the clergy can scarcely be described. 
Their power over the masses was complete. The destiny of 
the people for both worlds was in their hands. With their 
influence they encircled them from the cradle to the grave. 
Claiming to be the vicegerents or the representatives of the 
Holy One, their lives were a perpetual exposition of the hypo- 
crisy which marked them. Decency was thrown aside, and 
morality imknown. Brothels were kept in London for the 
especial use of the priesthood. The confessional was abused, 
and profligacy was all but universal. The punishment for 
their flagitious crimes was trifling. Five paternosters, a few 
aves or credos, with the present of a waxlight to some altar, 
would cleanse the sinner from his pollution.* Tyndale's 
description of this class is abundantly sustained by other 
writers of that age : " The priests of the country be unlearned, 
as God knoweth. There are a full ignorant sort, which have 
seen no more Latin than that they read in their portessest 
and missals, which yet many of them can scarcely read, 
except it be Albertua de Secretia Mulierumy in which yet, 
though they be never so lowly learned, they pore day and 
night, and make notes therein, and all to teach midwives, 
as they say ; and Linwode, a book of constitutions, to 
gather together mortmains, offerings, customs, and other 
pillage, which they call not theirs but God's part, and the 
duty of holy church, to discharge their consciences withaL" J 



* Vide Fronde's History, voL i, pp. 178-9. "Moreover, besides daily cor- 
rupting other men's wives, and open whoredom, unto what abominations, 
too filthy to be spoken of, hath their voluntary chastity led them !" Tyn- 
dale, vol i., pp. 38-^. Also, Simon Fish, in 1531, said to the government : 
** Tie the holy idle thieves to the cart, to be whipped, naked, till they 
fall to labour, that they by their importimate begging take not away the 
alms that the good charitable people would give unto us sore, impotent, 
miserable people, your bed men." — ^Fox, voL iv., p. 664. Froude, vol. i., 
p. 47. t The Breviary. 

t Works of Tyndale and Frith, by the Rev. T. Russell, M.A., voL L, 
p. 3. "In the rural districts the clei^gy were universally ignorant, idle, 
slothful, superstitious, proud, and vicious; preaching very seldom, and 



30 EARLY ENGLISH BAmSTS. 

Beferring to the same class, Latimer says : '^ 'Eygt sinoe the 
prelates were made lords and nobles, thdr plough standeth, 
there is no work done. They hawke, they hunt, th^ caid, 
they dice, they pastime in their prelacies with gallant gentle- 
men, with their dancing minions, and with Hieir fresh com- 
panions, so that ploughing is set aside ; and by the lording 
and loitering, preaching and ploughing is deau gone."* 
<< They are so troubled with lordly living, they be so plaoed in 
palaces, couched in courts, ruffling in their rents, dancing in 
their dominions, burdened with embassages, pampering of 
their paunches, like a monk that maketh a jululee : mimek- 
ing in their mangers, and moiling in their gay manors and 
mansions, and so troubled with loitering in their lordships 
that they cannot attend. They are otherwise oooapied: 
some in the king's matter, some are ambassadors, some of 
the privy coimcil, some to furnish the courts, some are loidi 
of parliament, and some are presidents and contaroUen of 
the mint." t '^ I hear that some of these men wear yehtl 
shoes and velvet slippers; such fellows are mora fit to 
dance the morris-dance than to be admitted to preach." ( 
Like clouds of locusts, the Mars penetrated eveiy nook and 
comer of the land, obtruding their dirty bodies and their 
shameless &ces into every &mily. To these cormoranis 
nothing came amiss. Their bag was open for a boshd of 
wheat, or malt, or rye : a piece of cheese, a side of baociif 
or a good cut of beef Old Chaucer has painted these 
locusts of his age with great accuracy. The Wife of Bath 
is the reporter : — 

" For now the grete charites and prayers 
Of hmituoas, and other holy freres : 
That serchen every land and eveiy streme, 
As thicklie as motee in the lonne beame ; 

teaching the people fables and logends, rather than the tme and whole- 
tome word of Qod." — ^Bnmet^i Hiftoiy of the Bfoformation, toL L, p. SL 
* Vide Sermons (Beligioiis IVaoi SodetyX P' ^• 
t TMci (FSifcer Sodety), p. 07. X Knd (Fszker Society), p. 280. 



HBNRT THE KIGBTH. 31 

Bleesing halles, chambers, kichenee, and boures, 

Citees and burghs, castles highe, and towers, 

Thropes * and hemes, shepenes and diavies. 

This maketh that ther ben no faeries : 

For ahet as wont to walken was an elf, 

Ther w&eth now the limiton himself, 

In imdmneles and in mor neninges. 

And saith his matins and his holy thinges. 

As he goeth in his limitations." t 

To form accurate conceptions of the moral state of the 
people is all but impossible By no effort can we throw the 
mind back so as fully to realize the past. It is less difficult 
with the secular than with the moral The reasons are so 
obvious that we need not detail them. The data on which we 
can rest our conclusions are necessarily limited. Ignorance, 
superstition, and immorality, however, are features which 
stand out with prominency. The implicit obedience which the 
people rendered to their spiritual guides necessarily produced 
these results. Doubts, the freedom of inquiry, are requisite 
to spiritual life and moral power. Limit the range, raise up 
barriers beyond which no thought shall go, and you retard 
the progress of truth, and imperil the highest interests of 
society. At no time were these evils more rife. The spiritual 
power was supreme, and hostility to it was death. X Above 
all law the priesthood placed themselves. As fitthers had a 
right to control and punish their children, so these spiritual 
fathers could deal with the laity. Emperor and monarch 
must bow to their will. ^ 

Occasionally we get a glimpse of the popular religion of 

♦ Villages. t Wife of Bath, v. 6447-59. 

Z ** The very prelates are now so sore changed, that if they smell that 
<iiie of their flock do bat once long or desire for the true knowledge of 
Christ, they will tday him, burning him with fire most cruelly." — ^Tyndale, 
ToL L, p. 229. 

*' Thesre is not the poorest desolate widow, hat with his fair flattery 
he win so deceive her, that he win be sore either of money or meaL'' 
— Filth's Ifirror, "Works of Tyndale and Frith, vol. iiL, p. 275. 

§ Bnznet, yoL i., pp. 12—17. 



32 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

this era, like the following, though we can scarcely credit 
the representation, so perfectly destitute is it of anything 
which is consistent with the immaculate purity and dignity 
of the Great Supreme, and of the most obyious necessities 
of man's moral nature. Tyndale thus describes many of the 
ceremonies in which religion consisted, and for which more 
or less money was paid : — 

'* Christenings, churchings, banns, weddings; offerings at wed- 
dings, offerings at buryings, offerings to images, offerings of wax and 
lights, which come to their damage ; besides the superstitious wute 
of wax in tapers throughout the land. These brotherhoods and par- 
doners, ^ what get they by confession? Yea! and many enjoia 
penances, to give a certain (sum) for to have so many inaflBfia said, 
and desire to provide a chaplain themselves. Soul masses, dirges,' 
month minds,' peace minds, all souls* days, and trentals.'* l%e 
mother church and high altar must have something in every testa- 
ment. Offerings at priests' first masses. No man is professed, ct 
whatsoever religion it be, but he must bring something. The hal- 
lowing, or, rather, conforming of churches, chapels, altars, super- 
altars, chalice, vestments, and bells. Then book, bell, candlestidc, 
organ, chalice, vestments, copes, altar-clothes, surplices, toweb; 
basins, ewers, sheep, censors, and all manner of ornaments, must be 
found them freely, they will not give a mite thereunto. Last of all, 
what swarms of begging friars there arc ! The parson shareth, the 
vicar shareth, the parish priest pulleth, the friar scrapeth, and the 
pardoner pareth ; we lack but a butcher to pull off the skin." * 

**The people are thoroughly brought in behef," says the same 
writer, "that the deed in itself, without any further respect, saveCh 
them : if they be so long at church ; or say so many patemoeien ; 
or read so much in a tongue which they understand not ; or go so 
much on a pilgrimage ; and take so much pain ; or fast such a super- 
stitious fast; or observe such a superstitious observance, neither 
profitable to himself nor to his neighbours, but done by a good 



(1) A seller of pardons. (2) A hymn in the Romish service, beginnii^ 
** Dirige grestos meos.** (3) Days when the soul was had in special re- 
membrance. (4) A service of thirty masses. 

* Works, vol. i, p. 270. The language of religion was unknown to the 
people. ** They pray in Latin, they christen in Latin, they bless in Latin, 
they grant absolutions in Latin ; only curse they in the 1^'"glish tongue. ** 
Ibid, voL i, p. 905. 



HOniT TBB EIOHTK. 3S 



intent, say they, to please God withal Tea, to kiss the pax they 
think it a meritorious deed, when before their neighbonra." * 

Keligion with the mass of the people, then, was a mere 
form. Multiplied ceremonies had scarcely left a trace of 
the Divine original Taught to regard the priesthood as 
the representatives of Christ, and crashed with the most 
fearful power, their obedience was implicit, though the 
tyranny exercised over them was without a parallel in the 
world's history. To submit to penances, to wear hair-shirts, 
to go barefoot and with head uncovered, to repeat vows the 
meaning of which they knew not, to fast on bread and 
water — some once, some twice a week, some all the week; 
some for one, two, or even ten years; and to lie in filth; 
to go on pilgrimage and visit the memorials of saints, and 
expend their resources on the church : this was their £dth. 
Or, if these sacrifices were too great, others could be pur- 
chased to do all the work for them which religion demanded. 
The moral state of the people under such teaching was 
almost beyond conception. Ignorance, vice, and immorality 
of the worst kind, reigned all but universally.t 

" The soul of religion, however, had died out of it for 
many generations before the Eeformation. Faith had sunk 
into superstition; duty had died into routine." J 

Wolsey, for years the leading counsellor of the king, and 
the most influential man in the nation,* was a genuine type 
of the dignified clergy of bis day. Low in his origin, he 
rose to an eminence which cast into the shade all his rivals. 
We state the former fact, respecting his origin, not from any 
sympathy with those who look on it as a blot Birth and 
wealth are accidents men cannot control. There is no virtue 
in being bom to a coronet, or to the possession of vast estates. 
To conquOT circumstances, and to make the elements of 
adversity minister to your elevation, is true greatness. 

* l^yndale, vol i, p. 312. f Ficlel^dale, voL il, p. 413; also p. 415. 

t Fronde, vol. ii., p. 408. 

D 



34 EABLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

They only are true men, who leave the impress of their 
own genius or moral power on the ranks of society below 
which they were bom. Other features marked Wolsey, than 
his being a butcher's son. His first parishioners gazed at 
their pastor as he sat in the stocks for drunkenness. Pro- 
perty belonging to the Bishop of Lincoln he appropriated 
to his own use; whilst the powerlessness of his vow of 
celibacy was manifest in living proo& to moltitadea* 
Brought into contact with the youthful monarch by mefo 
accident, by his servile arts and his more loose morshliij he 
ministered to his master's gratification, and daily rose in the 
estimation of the pleasure-loving king.t His progress was 
rapid. To the highest pinnacle in Church and State his 
ambition carried him. Swayed only by one ever-present 
and all-absorbing motive, he hesitated at no means, and 
deterred by no moral principle, in the gratification of 
insatiate love of power, t Archbishop, chancellor, and cazdi- 



* "Wolsey had a son and daughter, by the daughter of a man of the 
name of Lark. The daughter was a mm at Shafteshuiy — ^what became 
of the son is uncertain." — Galt*s Life, p. 181. Vide Articles of Loipeacfa- 
ment. Vide Campbell's lives of the Chancellors, voL i, pp. 439—445^ 
449. Respecting his magnificence, vide pp. 455 — 457, 459. Bomet aaji 
that *' later on in life he had an infamous disease," vol i, p. 8. 

t '* Every age," said he, " of man had its seasons and delights agreeable. 
They did not do well that would force the king to act an old man before 
his time— youth being utterly averse from wrinkled society. .... TJntfl 
the time came, he should enjoy the present, and not by hearkening to 
others' needless persuasions, any way interrupt the course of that felicity 
which the largeness of his dominions could easily afford him to.*' — God- 
wyn's Annals of Henry VLLL, p. 29. In this tone did this teacher of 
morality discipline his patron, even offering to free him from the caret 
of the council table, by reporting to him the chief points of discusaioiL — 
Ibid, p. 29. 

X The ambition of this unprincipled priest was boundless. Kothii^ 
could impede his gratification. Upon all law he would trample, over aO 
ranks he would pass. By his insatiable thirst for power, he shed toiiM 
of the noblest blood in the realm. Charles said, when referring to Um 
death of the Duke of Buckingham, that **the butcher^i dog had kOkd 
thefairett hart in England,** jcc— Oodwyn's Annals of Heniy YILL, ^ 47. 
His appeannoe is thus described by a cotemponury poet i-— 



HENBT THE EIGHTH. 35 

nal^ all but royalty centred in him.* Mingling with emperors 
and monarchsy his state was little inferior to theirs ; and 
the enormous wealth which he drew from his multiplied 
offices and ecclesiastical dignities, not only enabled him to 
gratify this love of display, but to subordinate almost every 
element of civil and religious power to his own sordid 
interest Bishop Grodwyn remarks, that except the Bishops 
of Rome, all Europe never saw a more potent prelate. It 
is doubtful if the bishop's language admits even of this 
qualification. His splendour was quite imperial ''His 
xetinue consisted of near about a thousand persons^ among 
which was one earl, commonly nine barons, many knights 
«nd gentlemen, and officers belonging to his house above four 
hundred — ^besides their servants, which far exceeded the for- 
mer number. His chapel was served by a deau, a sub-dean, 
a chanter, thirty-five singers (sixteen of whom were clergy). 
' In addition to these were sixteen chaplains of the most 

** A great carl he is, and fat ; 
Wearing on his head a red hat. 
Procured with angels' subsidy ; 

''And, as they say, in time of rain 
Four of his gentlemen are fain 
To hold o'er it a canopy. 

" Besides this, to tell them more news, 
He hath a pair of costly shoes. 
Which seldom touch the groimd : 

" They are so goady and curious. 
All of gold and stones precious, 
Costing many a thousand pound. 

" And who did for these shoes pay? 
Truly, many a rich abbay, 
To be eased of his visitations." 

—Gait's Life of Wolsey, p. 168. 

* He was Archbishop of York, Bishop of Winchester and of Bath, and 
Abbot of St. Alban's. The income from such pluralities was enormous. 
That of the Archbishopric of Canterbury alone was estimated at £6,000 
per annum. Multiply this by twelve, and the reader will then have its 
value accordisg to our present standwrd.— Froude, vol. i, pp. 35, 88. 



36 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

learned in the kingdom, with two cross-bearers and as manj 
pillar-bearers/' &;(x* Only the diadem and the triple croim 
were above him-f To the latter he aspired more than onoe^ 
and he thought the dazzling bauble was just within hk 
reach. He biibed largely, through his agents, in order to 
neutralize hostility to his claim. :{: The moral state of the 
conclave and court of Eome was very low. " I ahould mj, 
myself (and I have said it often before), that your miyestjr 
may have the whole college at your devotion, for ever, if 
you will spend 20,000 ducats amongst the leading fraHimlfi 
in pensions and benefices. Give one of them a thoanmd, 
and these 2,000 or 3,000, and you will find the xnon^ mU 
laid out to your advantage." § In the twelfth centaiy tii0 
same corruption prevailed. " Our lord the Pope, indeed, is 
a holy and righteous man, and his abbot, as I am told by 
many, does his best to imitate him; but their neoessitaes are 
so great, and the dishonesty and cupidity of the KomaiiB are 
so standing, that the Pope, sometimes under his prerogatLve, 
and by dispensation, obtains what may benefit the state, 
but cannot benefit religion." || <' I will not apply to those 
Boman robbers, for they do nothing but plunder the needy 
without compunction." IF 

We have seen that revenge for his disappointment at the 



* Oodwyn*B Annals, p. 113. 
f " For pride, covetonsness, and ambition, he excelled all otheit, as 
you shall hear after." . . . ** When he was once a perfect cardinaL 
he looked then above all estates, so that all men almost hated him and 
disdained him." ... **In other presence he would lye and si^ 
untruth, and was double both in speech and meaning : he would pitnnisa 
much and perform little. He was vicious of his body, and gave the 
cleigy evil example. The authority of this cardinal set the cleigy ia 
such a pride that they disdained all men," &c., &c. — HaU, pp. 507, 58S| 
774. London, 1809. 

X Gait, p. 379; Bomety voL i, p. 19. 
§ Letter from the Spanish Ambassador at Rome to Charles Y., Angwt 
6ih, 1529.— The Pilgrim. Apud Append., p. 84. 

U John of Salisbury. 
t QiWs Life of Becket, voL IL, pp. 18» 157, 171, SOL 



HEKBT THE EIGHTH. 37 

loss of the Papacy prompted Wolsey to suggest thoughts to 
Henry which led to the overthrow of the Papal authority in 
this country, and which, in the end, exhibited him crushed 
by the power which he had created, forsaken of the king 
whom he had served, and hated by all the other grades of 
society below him.* With the spirit of Wokey the inferior 
grades of the clergy were animated. Around him they 
moved, as the centre of their hopes and fears ; whilst the 
Tirorldliness and insensibility to high moral principle which 
ever marked him, found its reflex in the vices and immo- 
ralities which rioted in monastic establishments and in the 
homes of the priesthood. ^' The whoh head was sick, cmd 
the whole heart famV^ 

One of the necessary results which sprang from this re- 
ligious movement — ^a movement which had long been fore- 
shadowed, which would have transpired in spite of Henry, 
which the cardinal saw, and, striving to arrest its progress, 
was crushed beneath its powert — was the conflicting prin- 

* Tyndale says that ''when his hat was brought to Westmmster, it 
was set cm a cupboard, and taken about, so that the greatest duke in the 
land must make courtesy thereto ; yea, and to his empty seat." — ^The 
Practice of Prelates, voL i, p. 484. Cavendish says that ''he was the 
haughtiest man that lived." — life, voL ii, p. 126. 

i* Froude, vol. i., chap. 2. We gather the progress of this conflict 
from the letters of the French Ambassador, from which we give an 
extract or two : — 

"The bishops have had a grand struggle. Part desired to retain the 
mass complete, part to make a new service. The majority were with 
the conservatives, who have carried the day. The king, as the leader of 
this party, said all which ought to have been said. He maintained that 
the holy sacrament ought to be believed and adored, and to be honoured 
with the ceremonies observed in the church from immemorial time. Evil 
speaking, therefore, against the sacraments is prohibited und^r pain of 
death ; and priests are forbidden to marry." (MaiUac to Francis I. 1599. ) 
— ^Fronde's Pilgrim, p. 128. 

Xn anotiier letter, Maillac says that "the king's declaration about the 
sacrament has given wide pleasure and satisfaction. The people in 
general are inclined to the old religion, and only a few bishops support 
the new opinions. These bishops are in a bad humour," &c. (Maillac 
to the Constable. Jime, 1539.)— J&i(2, p. 128. 



38 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

ciples and parties it brought into opposition. It opeiied 
the prison-house of mind^ and gave liberty to thongiii 
Borne had its partizans — numerous, active, stem; men 
blind to every defect in the sensuous and superstitions finrns 
of the old faith; men who, from passion, self-interestyor 
sincerity, believed all the claims which the Vatican put 
forth to spiritual supremacy as the representative of .dunt 
on earth, and who thought all means lawful to sustain ifo 
pretensions, and life a trifling sacrifice to lay on its alter: 
Above aU human law, and responsible only to Cktd, thej 
dung to the old system, and battled long for its integrity.* 
In antagonism to these was another parly, less nnmecon^ 
perhaps, but living and acting under the protection of tlit 



(CI 



' The Lords about the Council, and the greater part of the people^ wn 
•with him" [the king]. (Ohastelleon to the Bishop of Paris. ) — Ibid, p, 60^ 
noteB. 

« Things are now at a pass when either Cromwell's party or the 
Bishop of Winchester's party must fall ; and although both are in la^jk 
favour and authority with the king their master, fortune win moil 
probably turn in favour of Cromwell. The Dean of the Chapel, the 
Bishop of Winchester's best friend, is struck down ; the Archbishop ol 
Canterbury, his greatest adversary, has been deputed to preach in the 
bishop's place at St. Paul's, and has begun to argue against his doctriMi 
in the same pulpit where the bishop preached in Lent. . . . Anoikor 
doctor, named Latimer, who last year surrendered his see rather then 
subscribe to the Six Articles, is recalled, and will shortly be replaced on 
the bench. . . . The state of religion continues most unfortunate. 
The bishops are divided, and hate one another. The people know not 
what to believe ; for those who are inclined to the reformed views are 
called heretics — those who adhere to the old faith are charged with 
papistry." (Maillac to the Constable. June 17, 1540.}— Ibid, p. 143. 

**The Bishop of Chichester and the Dean of the Chapel Royal bare 
been arrested on a charge of high treason, &c. The rest of the hiskops 
are in terror. They are afraid that they abo may be made oat gnittj ; 
and their fate will be certain. The religious strife has become so btttCTt 
that each party will destroy their antagonists if they can. There wHl be 
prisoners enough between them by and by." (Maillac to Francis L Jnne 
Ist, 1540.)— /6m/, p. 143. 

* '* For who can doubt," said Becket, " that Christ's priesU are the 
fathers and masters of kings, and princes, and all the faithful?" — Giles's 
Life of Becket, voL L, p. 336. 



HENBY THE EIGHTH. 39 

royal authority. Their views of Ohristian doctrine had been 
considerably modified — ^their hostility to the Papal power 
was unmiKed. Aiming to reform the church, they abolished 
many forms of superstition which for ages had gathered 
round the great verities of the Gospel, and had impaired, if 
not quite destroyed, their vital energies. Their minds were 
largely imbued with the spirit and teaching of Moses. Every- 
thing was viewed by them through a Jewish medium. Things 
that differed they confounded, and the beauty and simplicity 
of the Qospel were lost amidst the splendour of the sanctuary. 
Participating in this, in common with the first class, their 
pretensions to priestly power were not lower, and they 
enforced them with a power and earnestness which evinced 
that their claim to alliance with the Aaronic order was not 
a form, but a terrible reality. 

^' There was a third party in the country — ^the only one 
which, in a true high sense, was of importance at all, and 
for the sake of which, little as it appeared^ the whole work 
was to be done :— composed at that time merely of poor 
men, — ^poor cobblers, weavers, carpenters, trade apprentices, 
and himible artizans, — men of low birth and low estate, 
who might have been seen at night stealing along the lanes 
and alleys of London, carrying with them some precious 
load of books, which it was death to possess, and giving 
their lives gladly, if it must be so, for brief tenure of so 
dear a treasure." * 

In this latter class, regarded by both the other parties 
with deadly hatred, as disturbers of public order ; as men who 
ventured to think for themselves on the most vital matters, 
and to express their opinions as they had opportunity ; men, 
the triumph of whose convictions would involve in utter ruin 
the religious theories of the old and the new form of eccle- 
siastical order ; men who, drawing their inspirations from 
the fountain of Eternal Truth, held the sacred volume as 

* Froude, voL i., p. 152. 



40 EARLY ENGLISH BAFKISTS. 

dear as life; — amongst these we shall have to trace the fiwi- 
steps of our Withers. 

It is difficult for us to realize their oonditioii, or the 
moral courage which was requisite to sustain them. ¥tom 
the Chancellor down to the merest parish constable^ an oatk 
had been taken to hxmt them to the death. Wolsej* and 
his colleagues had a keen scent for heresy, and pursued ii 
with a vigour which success only augmented. Spies met 
the dissident at all points. In the solitude of the woodi^ 
in the obscurity of some dark narrow alley in the dtjy or ii 
the quiet of the home circle, these wretches obtruded theok* 
selves. Like wild beasts, the people were hunted from 
covert to another. Day and night the fear of detection 
upon them« ^ .Escape at one time only increased the ooi^ 
viction of their danger. 

Their end was ever before them. Amidst the joys and 
endearments of their homes, they knew that the infbniMr 
might step in at any moment, and that then the prison, the 
rack, or the stake would await them.t They were men; 
men of tender sympathies and lofby principles; men of noble 
daring and holy aspirations for their country and the world; 
God's heroes, whose life was a daily martyrdom. Many of 
them we can only trace by the edicts of the council or the 
convocation of the clergy, as we gaze with rapture on their 
manly and Christian steadfastness in the presence of the 
haughty prelate, or their heroic fortitude at the martyr's 
stake. Beyond tins we have no record. The pen of history 
has preserved none. Their names are embalmed amongst 
those who have willingly sacrificed their life for the world's 
freedom. There is their sole record. 



* Justice to the Cardinal demandii from us the acknowledgment, thai 
More, Longland, and others of the episcopal bench, had a sreater 
thirst for Protestant blood than Wolsey. 

t In the country any unknown face was challenged and examined ; if 
the account given was insufficient, he was brought before the justice. — 
Fronde, vol. L, p. 36. 



HENBY THE EIGHTH. 41 

Proceedings in the Court of Wareham^ at»Knoll, A.D. 1511, 
give a glimpse of some who taught " that the ictcrcunent of 
baptism amd cm^wwaiion ie not neoeasa/ry nor profitable for 
rnoffCs 8ouV^ * Crosby regards these as Baptists. We think 
the evidence is not complete. There were ten altogether — 
six men and four women. They were residents at Tender- 
den. Their &ith embraced some ten articles, differing from 
that of the mitred prelate. They are points of dissidence in 
which all Baptists would agree, and such as we know were 
held by them in other times. In the histories of the He- 
formation fuller details are given jt it is enough for us to 
say that the prelate succeeded in terrifyins^ them and others 
to a renunciation of their supposed errors, and bound them 
by an oath, not only to this, but degraded them to the 
betrayal of their brethren. Some were condemned to 
carry &§^ts and leave them at the church door; others, to 
go barefoot, with a lighted taper in their hands; others, to 
lay an offering on the high altar when mass was said, j: In 
this way the ministers of truth sought to repress error. 
Their efforts were powerless. 

In 1628 a similar process was carried on against seven 
individuals, who had probably fled from the demon of per- 
secution in the Netherlands. The usual course was adopted. 
ImpricKmments, and blandishments, and threats, overcame 
the constancy of five. They recanted, and bore the £s^got 
in the usual way. Woman's nature triumphed. Stowe tells 
us that (me woman and a man sealed their testimony with 
their blood, and, in the presence of a multitude, were burnt 
in Smithfield.§ 

In 1530, Wareham, anxious for the spiritual well-being 

• Collier, voL ii, p. 2. + Vide Burnet, Collier, Crosby, &c. 

X Collier, voL ii, p. 2. Bumet adds, — "And to wear the badge of a 
faggot in flames on their clothes during their lives, or till they were 
diBpensed with for it," yoL L, p. 27. 

§ Chron., p. 576. IXAnyers, p. 306. Strange that he should mention 
these as coming in with Anne of Cleves ! 



42 EABLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

of the nation^ issaed an elaborate address, in wliich he aayi: 
^' Many books in the English tongue, containing manj detest- 
able errors and damnable opinions, are printed in oountrifli 
beyond the seas, to be brought into divers towns and sundij 
of this his realm in England, and sown abroad in the SNiie^ 
to the great decay of our faith and the perilofos oormptiot 
of the people, unless speedy remedy were briefly provided,' 
&c. Then the works and doctrines are specified. 'From '^The 
Sun of Scripture"* we quote the following on baptism:^ 
''The water in the font has no more virtue in it iluuitlie 
water of the river : the baptism lies not in hallowed water, 
or in any other outward thing, but in the fidth only. TI10 
water of baptism is nothing but a sign, that we must be 
under the standard of the cross." Collier snpplieB miiA 
more. 

Invested with the full powers of supreme head of the 
church, his claims to spiritual supremacy recognized by the 
legislature and by the clergy, Henry manifested his anzietj 
for the souls of his people by warning them of errors^ and 
by denunciations of those who propagated them. *^For- 
(Mnmch" says one of his proclamations, "a« divers and 
tundray strangersy of the sects cmd false optnions of the 
Arwhaptists and S(u^amvefrdarianSy\ being UUely come into 
this realme, wJiere they lurhe secretely in divers eomen and 
placesy minding crafiely amd suhiiUy to provoke and aftV ike 
king's loving subjects to their errors and opinions^ ke. Fall 
of holy indignation, he denounces ''their wicked and abomi- 
nable errors," and enjoins their departure from the oonntiy 
within eight days. 

The martyr spirit never quails before such agency. Its 
voice &lls powerless on the ears of such men. In the "comers 
and lurking-places," in the alleys and lanes of the city, they 

* Collier, vol. ii, pp. 49, 50. We tliink it more than proUaUe that 
at leaat thin work was of Baptist paternity. 

t The followers of Zwingle. 



HENRY THE EiaHTH. 43 

remained. Stronger denunciations were hurled against them. 
The public were warned of many strangers, baptized in 
in&ucy, but who, despising the holy sacraments, had been 
rebaptized, and were spreading their damnable heresies 
throughout the land, to the fearful injury of holy chuixsh, 
and the great annoyance of its spiritual chief Exile or 
death were the terms. Twelve days were granted to the 
moral lepers to seek refuge in other lands. If dragged 
j&om their hiding-places after that, death would be the 
consequence.* 

An Englishman now claims our sympathy. James Bain- 
ham, a barrister of the Middle Temple, and styled by Crosby 
a knight, appears on the stage. His matrimonial con- 
nexion had excited the suspicions of the sleepless guardians 
of the faith. His wife was the widow of Simon Eish, the 
author of "The Beggar's Petition." t That he was con- 
nected with the Christian brethren appears probable; and 
Fox assures us that he repudiated the baptism of in&nts. j: 
To be suspected, however, was enough. He was called before 
the ecclesiastical tribunal. Dissent from the leading doctrines 
of the church was the crime of which he was guilty. Befusing 

• * Wilkms, vol. iii., p. 779. Tracts on Liberty of Conscience, vot 1, 
p. 88 (Introduction). 

*f* The following is an extract from it : — ** Tina is the great scab, why 
they will not let the New Testament go abroad in your mother tongue, 
lest men should spy that their cloaked hypocrisy do translate thus fast 
your kingdom into their hands : that they are cruel, imclean, immerciful, 
and hypocrites : that they seek not the honour of Christ, but their own.'^ 
— ^The Beggar's Petition against Papacy, presented to Henry VUUL, 1538 ; 
Harlean Miscellany, yoL ii, p. 539. 

:|: " Likewise, touching the sacrament of baptism, his words were these : 
*Tba,t as many as repent and do on them Christ, shall be saved ; that is, 
as many as dye concerning sin shall live by faith with Christ. Therefore, 
it is not we tiiat live after that, but Christ in us. And so, whether we 
live or dye, we are Christ's by adoption ; and not by the water only, but 
by water and faith, that is, by keeping the promise made. For ye are 
kept by grace and faith, saith St. Paul, and that not of yourselves, for it 
.is the gift of God.*"— Fox, vol. ii., p. 246. 



44 EABLY ENGLISH BAFTISTS. 

to recant, he was, with his wife, committed to priaoiL Sir 
Thomas More, who had succeeded Wolsey in the Ghanonyi 
was more learned and had more culture than the great hig^ 
priest, but he had more cruelty. By his orders, the priaooor 
was stretched on the rack, and tortured with seyerity. Ot 
the 17th of February he was carried before the liord BSshop 
of London. Suffering from his torture, his spirit £Euled lam, 
and he abjured his errors. Fearful as the rack may be^ it 
is feeble compared with the pangs of conscious guilt, ffii 
misery was unutterable. The following Sunday, the ooa- 
gregation which had assembled in the church of Si. Augus- 
tine, was startled during the service. A man rose in 
their midst, pale from recent suffering, holding in bii 
hand a copy of the New Testament, and with tears flowing 
down his cheeks, confessed his crime in denying Qod in a 
moment of weakness. ^' If," said he, ^ I should not reiim 
to the truth, this Word of Qod would damn me body sal 
soul, at the day of judgment" He urged the people io 
fidelity, declaring that he would not feel such a hell agun 
for all the world's good. 

The die was now cast On endless ruin he was now 
bent Spiritually dead, it was the loftiest exercise of mercy 
on the part of the spirituality to save him. What mattered 
a moment's torture of the body, even the roasting of it 
at the stake, if the soul could be saved from everlasting 
burning? This doctrine soothed the conscience, whilst it 
inflamed the zeal, of the spiritual man. We now find Bain- 
ham manacled and in the stocks, in the coal-cellar at Fulham, 
the residence of his lordship of London. The chill winds 
of March, and the damp and gloom of his prison, only 
augmented his zeal. The bishop failing, the chancellor 
would try his hand. Before him many a criminal bad 
quailed. Will Bainham tremble ? Of the power of More's 
persuasive eloquence we have no record. Of other aigu- 
meuts the martyrologists give us some report In his 
house at Chelsea the confessor was kept, and for two nighU 



HENBT THE EIGHTH. 45 

was listened to a post and whipped. The lash drew blood, 
but it produced no conviction. A week at Fulham was 
again tried; then the Tower for a fortnight, where the gaoler 
attempted, but ineffectually, to flog the heresy from him. 
A month later sentence was pronounced. The charity of 
the church was exhausted; and, at the close of the month 
of Apn], Smithfield witnessed the blazing &ggots which 
consumed the hero, and the crowd listened to his last words. 
Thus died one of the noble army of martyrs.* 

The elevation of Queen Anne to the throne was an event 
of some importance. The men of the new learning held it 
to be pregnant with everything which could contribute to the 
success of the Reformation : on the other hand, the Roman- 
ists denounced it everywhere, and the clergy sought by their 
inflammatory appeals to excite the people against it.t The 
power of the pulpit then was no insignificant thing. The 
character of this princess is still an unsolved problem in our 
annals. The pages of Saunders, and his copyists since, 
whilst they invest her with the most bewitching influence 
over the monarch, portray her as the embodiment of moral 
and physical repuMveness; on the other hand, her advocates 
see no fault in her.:^ ^ ^^ ^ ^^ niay, one thing admits 
of no dispute : her influence over Henry was powerful. 
The beauty of her person, the liveliness of her wit, and her 
quenchless hatred to the Pope, enabled her to check the spirit 
of persecution. During the tide of her prosperity, the war 
of words went on, but the spirit of cruelty was held in check. 
But though she shielded others, the weight of royal and 
episcopal wrath still fell heavily on our forefathers. England 
had been an asylum for the persecuted brethren in the Low 

* Pax, voL iv., pp. 702—705. A shorter account is given by Biimet, 
vol. i. : Fronde, voL iL, pp. 85 — 87. Crosby has six lines, voL L, p. 31. 

i* Burnet, voL L, p. 127. 

X Vide an elaborate examination of her character, in Froude, vol. ii, 
diap. U. In justice to her memory, it should be read with other 
acconnts (Burnet, toL i, p. 188). 



46 EARLY ENGLISH BAJPTISTB. 

Countries. Again and again reference is made to then 
Datch Anabaptists. During this period, twenty of these 
quiet and industrious men were secured. They were bfonglit 
before the bishops' council The accusation wsa, their 
denying of Christ's humanity, &c. This was a Gonunon 
charge. The views held by the Netherland BaptistB ob 
this matter are before the reader. Ten of these henk 
men held fEist to their profession; and the remainder, 
seduced by the promises, or terrified by the threats, of the 
bishops, submitted to the usual degradation of those who 
recanted* 

The old chronicler, Stowe, gives us the following detail^ 
A.D. 1535 ; — 

<*The 25th day of May, were — ^in St. Paul's church, LondiMi— 
examined, nineteen men and six women, bom in Holland, wh/m 
opinions were — first, that in Christ is not two natures, God and una ; 
secondly, that Christ took neither flesh nor blood of the Virgin Maiy; 
thirdly, that children bom of infidels may be saved ; f oorthl j, thflt 
baptism of children is of none effect ; fifthly, that the sacrameot ol 
Christ's body is but bread only; sixthly, that he who after baptioa 
sinneth wittingly, sinneth deadly, and cannot be saved. Fonrfeeei 
of them were condemned ; a man and woman were burnt in Smitli- 
field ; the other twelve of them were sent to other towns, there to 
be burnt." 

It is more than probable that old Father Latimer refen 
to some of them, in one of his sermons. He not only 
records the facts, but the noble spirit of the men : — 

*'I should have told you here of a certain sect of heretics, thit 



♦ "Wall's History of Infant Baptism, p. 423; Crosby, voL i, p. 3L 1%0 
attitude of the emperor and the Pope abroad, and the influence of the 
clergy at home, alarmed the people. It is thus described :—*'Tli0 
common people, foreseeing these inconveniences, are so violent a^^ainii 
the queen, that they say a thousand shameful things of her, and of aJl 
who have supported her in her intrigues. On them is cast the odium of 
all the calamities anticipated from the war." (lyintevelle to M. da 
Turbes, October, 1534.)— The Pilgrim, note B., p. 101.— The same writer 
insinuates that the king's ** regard for the queen is less than it was, and 
diminishes every day. He has a new fancy, as you are aware." — JbitL 



HEN&Y THE EIGHTH. 47 

jEipake against their order and doctrine ; they will have no magistrates 
nor judges on the earth.* Here I have to tell you what I heard of 
late, by the relations of a credible person and a worshipfol man, of 
a town in this reahn of England that hath about 500 of heretics of 
this erroneous opinion in it" [Anabaptists are mentioned in the 
margin], t '* The Anabaptists that were burnt here, in divers towns 
of England (as I have heard of credible men, I saw them not myself), 
met their death even intrepid, as you will say ; without any fear in 
the world. Well, let them go. There was, in the old times, another 
kind of poisoned heretics, that were called Donatists; and those 
heretics went to their execution as they should have gone to some 
jolly recreation or banquet." t 

We cannot deny ourselves the gratification of adding to 
this a sentence or two from a writer whose pages we never 
read but with advantage : — 

'* The details are gone— their names are gone. Poor Hollanders 
they were, and that is aU. Scarcely the fact seemed worth the 
mention, so shortly is it told in a passing paragraph. For them no 
Europe was agitated, no courts were ordered into mourning, no Papal 
hearts trembled with indignation. At their death the world looked 
on complacent, indifferent, or exulting. Yet here, too, out of 
twenty-five poor men and women were -found fourteen who by no 
terror of stake or torture could be tempted to say they believed what 
they did not believe. History for them has no word of praise ; yet 
they, too, were not giving their blood in vain. Their lives might 
have been as useless as the lives of most of us. In their deaths they 
assisted to pay the purchase-money for England's freedom." § 

The progress of dissent from the old faith, and the spread 
of baptistical opinions, are indicated unmistakably at this 
time. II Cranmer, on the death of Wareham, had been 
raised to the primacy. Much more moderate than his 
predecessor, but more anxious for a thorough reformation 

* Latimer more than once brings this charge against them ; one which 
has no foundation in fact. 

f Sermons, p. 151 (Parker Society, vol. v). J Ibid, p. 60. 

§ Froude, voL ii., p. 365. 

II John Frith, one of the choice spirits of the age, found time, amidst 
the solitude of his wretched confinement, to write against them. 



48 EABLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

in the church than Wareham or Henry, the spirit of ikb 
churchman was strong in him. Under his president ikft 
Convocation met in 1536. It was an important gatherii^ 
The struggle was long and fierce. Canterbury and ToA 
headed different Mictions, and around their standiidi 
bishops, doctors, and mitred abbots, gathered as interai 
or principle prompted. !Passing over various matten vat 
connected with our subject, and which may be found in ikb 
ordinary histories indicated below,* we select the utienuM 
of these holy men on the subject of baptism, and its betOBg 
on our brethren : — 

** That the sacrament of haptism was instituted and ozdiDMd ii 
the New Testament hy our Lord and Saviour Christ, as a Aim 
necessaiy for the attaining of everlasting life, according to ikift 
saying of Christ, Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aguA et Spiriim Saatb, 
non potest irUrare in regnum ccelorum. 

*^Item : That it is ofifered unto all men, as well infants as anA m 
have the use of reason, that by baptism they shall have the ■^ nnir^^ 
of sins, and the grace and favour of God ; according to tiiat sayiag i( 
St. John, Qui crediderit et haptizaius fu/erit, mIvus est, 

"Item: That the promise of grace and everlasting life, wha/k 
promise is adjoined unto the sacrament of baptism, pertaineth boI 
only imto such as have the use of reason, but also to such, to in&oti^ 
innocents, and children, and that they ought, therefore, and mart 
needs be baptized ; and that by the sacrament of bapUsm they is 
also obtain remission of their sins, the grace and favour of God, sal 
be made thereby the very sons and children of God ; inasmsck as 
infants and children, dying in their infancy, shall undoubtedly be 
saved thereby, or else not. 

"Item: That infants must needs be christened, because thej bi 
bom in original sin ; which sin must needs be remitted, which osnsol 
be done but by the sacrament of baptism, whereby they receive ths 
Holy Ghost, which exerciseth his grace and efficacy in them, sal 
cleanseth and purgeth them from sin, by his most secret virtue sad 
operations. 

"Item: That children or men, once baptised, cannot (nor oo^^ 
ever be ba|)tized again. 



* Fuller, Collier, Burnet, &c. Not leH than aixtj errors are me ntioaed 
by the latter, as submitted to the Conyocation by some herts j hontar. 



HENRY THE EIGHTH. 49 

**Item: That they ought to repute and take all the Anabaptists' 
and the Pelagian opinions, contrary to these premises, and every 
other man's opinions, agreeable to the said Anabaptist or the Pela- 
gian opinions in their behalf, for detestable heresies, and utterly to 
be condemned. 

^*Item: That men or children having the use of reason, willing 
and desirous to be baptized, shall, by virtue of that holy sacrament, 
obtain the grace of the remission of all their sins, if they shall come 
thereunto perfectly and truly repentant and contrite of all their sins 
before committed, and also perfectly and constantly confessing and 
believing all the articles of our faith, according as it was mentioned 
in the articles before ; or else not. And finally, to all, they shall 
also have firm credence and trust in the promise of God, adjoined to 
the said sacrament : that is to say, that in and by this sacrament 
which they shall receive. Clod the Father giveth unto them, for His 
Son Jesus Christ's sake, remission of all their sins, and the grace 
of the Holy Ghost, whereby they be newly regenerated, and made 
ate very children of Gk>d, according to the saying of Christ, and 
His apostle St. Peter, Penitentiam agite, et haptizatvr unuaquisque 
vesirum, in nomme Jew, Cfhristi in remisaionem peccatorum, et accipietia 
donum Spiritus Sancti; and, according to the saying of St. Paul, ad 
Titum, 3, jVb» ex opentma Justitice quce fecimus nos, aed aecundum 
guxim irdaericoTdiamj acdvoa noa fedt, per lavacrum regenerationia et 
renovcUkmia Spiritua SancU, quern effudit in noa optUentd per Jeaum 
Cfhriatum ServcUarem noatrum, ut juaUficaH iUiua ffratia hoeredea effi- 
demur, jvata apem vitcB cetemce,^^* 

These dogmas of baptismal regeneration, subversive alike 
of Christ's teaching and of intelligent piety^ would be 
r^^arded as detestable heresies^ and utterly condemned, by 
all holding the views of the Anabaptists. ^ 

Henry had stood unmoved before the most hostile of his 
foes. Pope and Csesar, as they uttered their threats of inva- 
sion, only caused a deeper frown to gathe:^ around his massive 
Ihk>w. In vain did his Holiness hurl the greater excom* 
mxmication, and, rising in all his strength, seek to smite by 
one blow the detested heretic to the ground; it only called 
into stronger play all the elements of his Tudor nature, 
and widened the gulf which lay between them. Difficulties 

■ 

* Hie whole of the articles are given by Burnet, voL L (Addenda), 
p. 283; Collier, v6t 1, p. 123. 

E 



50 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

never made Henry quail. He was firm when others hmr 
tated; bold when others treinbled; anij never shrunk firoa 
an encounter with any foe.* Hitherto the Keformation Had 
made gradual progress. Steadily it had marched onwardi^ 
securing a deeper hold on the minds of the commimitj. 
Untouched by the thunders of the Vatican and the wika rf 
her adherents, it was gathering around it the intelligenoe of 
the nation, and exerting an influence over a circle whidi 
was widening daily. It awaited one fiery trial more. Tka 
hour was now come. Lincoln and the northern coontMi 
soon poured forth their bands. Now came ''the Pilgrimage rf 
Graced The clerical element pervaded it.t Abbots, moiik% 
and village priests, raised the war cry. The destmction d 
heresy, the overthrow of the detested Cromwell, and tlia 
restoration of the monastery and the shrine, were the avowed 
ends of this holy war. The struggle was fearfuL Tlie 
barons and churchmen of the north headed the hortilB 
forces; the commanders of the royal troops were doabk- 
fcd ; and in many parts of the country thousands wen 
waiting for the issue of the first fight. The king and hii 
minister were equal to the crisis. They rolled back the 
tide of rebellion, and secured an all but bloodless victoij. 
Into details we cannot enter. To do so would overstep 
the boimdaries of our design. Against the reformed doe- 
trines, and those of the Anabaptists in particular, the "Pil- 
grims of Grace** breathed the fiercest hatred Their fini 
proposition, in the list of grievances they presented to 
Henry, was this ; — 

"Touching our faith, we have the heresies of Lnther, WickliffB^ 



* The following, from More, is rather a significant view of the irriUbk 
temper of the monarch :— " Howbeit, son Boper, I may tell them I hat* 
no cause to be proud thereof ; for if my head would win him (Henry) a 
castle in France, it should not fail to go." — Butler's Memoirs of En^iik 
Catholics, vol. i., p. 62. 

t There were ten thousand priests in the Rebellion, in 1536, "wli» 
never ceased to stir them on to their work, and to tell them what graii 
things they would achieve." (Letter to the Queen Regent at BnuMk.) 
—Collier, p. 113. 



HENBY THE EIGHTH. 51 

Hnss, MelancUum, CEooIampadius, Bucer's Confessio Gennanica, 
Apologia Melancthonis, the works of Tyndale, of Barnes, of Marskal, 
Baakal, St. G^emuuo, and such other heresies of Anabaptists, clearly 
-within this reahn, to be annihilated and destroyed.'' * 

The year 1538 opens a new chapter. Henry's compliance 
*with the request of the northern rebels was exact in relation 
to the Anabaptists. He was powerless in reference to the 
other parts. A commission of inquiry was issued. Cran- 
mer^ Stokesley, Sampson, and others, were empowered to 
hunt out these men. Their authority was plenary. To the 
fire all the books of the accused were to be consigned : the 
penitent were to be restored to the embraces of their affec- 
tionate mother; but the obstinate, the men of faith and high- 
toned principle, must be transferred to the secular power, 
as the executioner of the churchs will.t Bishops might 
declare men worthy of death, but their tender natures 
forbade their executing their own decrees. Diligently the 
secular power executed the task given to it Two Dutch 
Anabaptists — a man and a woman — in the course of a 
month, paid the penalty of their faith Beyond this bare 
fact we know nothing. To them truth was precious, and 
life was willingly sacrificed as the highest homage they 
could offer to it. f Nor was this all. The spirit of per- 
secution was everywhere rampant. None of the early re- 
formers were free from its influence. The cry for vengeance 
on the Anabaptists rose not only from the rebels, but the 
Elector of Hesse about this time threw the weight of his in- 
fluence into the already deep and ittpid current To Henry 
he addressed the most exciting appeals. His malignity is 



* Fronde, yoL iii, pp. 156-7. The whole of this remarkable document 
38 given from the MS. in the Bolls' House. 

f Fuller, voL ii, p. 152; Burnet, vol. iii, p. 159. Vide Tracts on 
liberty of Conscience, voL i., pp. 87—90 (Introduction). 

$ Todd's Cranmer, voL ii pp. 256-7. On the former page we have a 
specimen of the ignorant and frantic abuse so frequently lavished on our 
brethren. 



52 EABLY ES^GIJSH BAPHSIS. 

obvions ; the dangers which snrroimded these ctmfesaon ftr 
Cbruft are not less so. We can onljr quote a sentence here 
and there from the iniqnitons prodaction of the Elector:— 
'' There are no rulers in Germany, whether thej be IVtinsts 
or professors of the doctrines of the €r08pel, that do adSa 
these men if thej do come into their h<tti H<^ All met 
punish them quickly. We ujse a just moderation, wluA 
God requireth of all good rulers." Then he tells Heniy har 
some are corrected hj these means, and are led home ag*^ 
But, '' If any do stubbornly defend the ungodly and wicked 
errors of that sect, yielding nothing to such as can and d» 
teach them truly, these are kept a good space in prison, and 
sometimes sore punished there; yet in such sort are they 
handled, that death is long deferred, for hope of amend- 
ment : and as long as any hope is, &your is diowed to li& 
If there be no hope left, then the obstinate are put to 
death.** Urging the king to make a difference between tlw 
Lutherans, who ^^mislike the abuses of the Bishop of Rome's 
baggage, and those that be Anabaptists,** he says: — ^^In 
many parts of Germany, where the Gospel is not preached, 
cruelty is exercised upon both sorts without discretion. 
The magistrates which obey the Bishop of Rome (wheretf 
severity is to be used against the Anabaptists), they shy 
good men utterly alien from their opinions. But your 
Majesty will put a difference great enough between theie 
two sorts, and secure Christ's glory on the one side, and 
save innocent blood on the other.*' * The tender mercies 
of the wicked are always cruel The appeal was not in 
vain. Immediately proclamations were issued, denouncing 
the ilangerous tenets of the Anabaptists, condemning their 
books, and threatening very heavy punishment on those 
who circulated them. Many of their tracts were printed 
abroad, and very widely circulated in this country. Ever 
ready to co-operate, the Commons passed an act of grace 

• Froude, vol ill, p. 337, 338. 



HENBY THE EIGHTH. 53 

about the same time, covering almost every delinquency, 
but from which the Anabaptists were excluded. 

Bacy old Fuller tells us, that on the marriage of Henry 
with Anne of Gleves '^ Dutchmen flockt faster than formerly 
luito this England. Many of them had active souls, so that 
whilst their hands were busied about their manu£eu;tories, 
their heads were also beating about points of divinity. 
Sereof they had many rude notions, too ignorant to manage 
them themselves, and too proud to crave the direction of 
others. Their minds had a hy-atreaan of activity more than 
what sufficed to drive on their vocation, and this waste of 
their sovh they employed in needless speculations, and soon 
after began to broach their strange opinions, being branded 
with the general name of Anabaptists. These Anabaptists 
for the main are but DonoUists new dipt^^ * 

Early in 1539 Henry tried to lessen the prevailing errors. 
In spite of his efforts, and the rigour of the civil and spiritual 
power§, dissenters from his theological dogmas increased. 
In February, he teUs us, in a proclamation issued by him, 
that ''of late certain Anabaptists and Sacramentarians, 
coming out of outward parts unto this realm, have, by 
divers and many perverse and crafty means, seduced 
many simple jpersons of the king's subjects, which, as his 
highness trusteth, npw be sorry for their offences, and 
minding fully to return again to the Catholic church." 
"like a loving parent" he weeps over them, deplores 
their wanderings, promises the most ample forgiveness 
on their repentance ] but if any fall, or continue in their 
'' detestable and damnable opinions,** then the full vengeance 
of the law will fall on them, t 

* FuUer's Chxirch History, b. v., p. 229. Vide Stowe's Chron., p. 576. 
''nteir morality was ligid, their exterior simple ; they disdained riches, 
or affected to do so ; and their austere demeanour impressed the multi- 
tade with reverence, at the same time that their doctrine seduced them." 
— J. G. Hess's Life of Zuingle, p. 221. 

i* Wilkins Corr., voL iii, p. 843. Tracts on Liberty of Conscience, 
TdL i> p. 91. 



54 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

Again the lion growled, and the detested heretics woe 
exposed to his fury. A general pardon was proclaimed oq 
the 5th of July, 1540, but these exceptions marked it:— 
"These heresies and erroneous opinions hereafter ensuing: 
that infants ought not to be baptized, and if they be bap- 
tized, they ought to be re-baptized when they come to 
lawful age; that it is not lawful for a GhristiaQ man to 
bear office or rule in the commonwealth; that no man's 
laws ought to be obeyed ; that it is not lawful for a Christian 
man to take an oath before any judge ; that Christ took no 
bodily substance of our blessed lady; that sinnera after 
baptism cannot be restored by repentance," &c.* Some of 
these monstrous errors are loved as precious truths Ij 
thousands in our day. They leave us in no doubt as to the 
character of the individuals who held them in the time 
of Henry. Their opinions on magistracy, oaths, the ha- 
manity of the Saviour, are the common property of the 
early Baptists. The former have given rise to the notion 
that they were hostile to all governments, as such • that 
if their opinions prevailed, anarchy and confusion would 
be universal. t The conclusion was monstrous. It is not 
difficult to conceive that men whose minds were imbued 
with intelligent notions of the purity, the spirituality, and 
the lofly tendency of Christianity, and who contrasted these 



♦ 32nd Henry VIII., c. 49 (Froude, vol. iii., p. 501). The Pmich 
ambassador, in April of this year, thus writes :— "The see of Rome ud 
the institutions of the monks were the sole points on which diffeRoeei 
were left remaining; and as to the monks, there is not one in all ^^ g T***^ 
who is not now dressed as a secular priest. But in matters of doctrine, 
the orders then taken have been ill o})sor%'cd. The statute has been ia- 
fringed by the Analmptists and the Germanizcrs. . . . Ten or twehe 
London citizens and fifteen or twenty forcipmers have been arrested. The 
latter are chiefly Flemish Analiaptists." (Maillac to Francis I. ; April 1€^ 
1640.)— The Pilgrim, pp. 139, 140. 

t I am surprised that so acute an observer, and generally so fair and 
liberal an investigator, as Mr. Froude, should fall into the vulgar emtr, 
and charge these innocent people, against whom a single act <»f trMxtn 
never brought, with such aims.— See his third volume, p. 389 (NoteX 



HENBY THE EIGHTH. 55 

with the wretched character of the governments of Europe, 
should arrive at the conclusion that no good man could fill 
office in the commonwealtL Beyond this we know of no 
evidence to criminate them. 

Age and growing infirmities by no means calmed the 
temper of Henry. Cromwell, one of the greatest men of his 
age, was removed. His death was everywhere hailed by the 
enemies of England with joy. " The news is more than giute- 
ful td me," said Francis I. "It is such as I give most hearty 
thanks for to Almighty God, who has been my brother's 
perpetual friend."* Cromweirs noble aim was the freedom 
of his country, and the destruction of her spiritual bondage. 
Under the shadow of his all but limitless authority, many 
dissidents found mercy, t His removal threw back the 
[Reformation for a time, and Anglo-Catholic influence be- 
came paramount. Opposition to his spiritual, was as dis- 
tasteful to Henry as treason against his temporal autho- 
rity. Unconquerable in his aversion to all sectaries, yet 
many acts during his eventful reign had contributed to 
their increase and augmented their power : { — the liberation 

* Francis I. to Maillac; 1540.— -The Pilgrim, by Froude, p. 146. 
. i* ''Cromwell has lent himself to the Lutherans, and has abused his 
authority to show fayonr to the teachers of false opinions, and to oppress 

and hinder their opponents He said he hoped to put down 

altogether the old preachers, and to have none but the new.** (Maillac to 
Francis I. ; June 10th, 1540.)— The PUgrim, p. 144. 

" Lord Cromwell's party appeared the strongest : a few days since he 
was able to arrest the Bishop of Chichester and the Dean of the ChapeL 
But the party have now fallen in the fall of the Lord Cromwell himself ; 
there remains of them only the Archbishop of Canterbury, whose mouth 
for the future will be closed, and the Lord Admiral, who has long learnt 
to trim his sails to the wind. Against them are the Duke of Norfolk and 
all the rest." (Maillac to the Constable; June 10th, 1540.) — Ibid, p. 145. 

X Sir Thomas More anticipated some of these results : — *' And yet, son 
Soper, I pray that some of us, high as we seem to sit on the mountain, 
treading heretics under feet like ants, live not to see the day that we 
would gladly be at league and composition with them, to let them have 
their churches quietly to themselves, so that they would be contented to 
let us have ours quietly to ourselves." — ^Butler's Memorials of English 
Catholics, voL i., p. 62. 



56 EABLY ENGLISH BAPTIfiTTS. 

of the Divine Word from the bondage in which for oei^ 
turies it had been held;* the destruction of the monasterieik 
those sinks of corruption ;f the influence permitted to Crom- 
well, Cranmer, and their colleagues^ in removing fromtiM 
churches a variety of objects which only gendered 8ape^ 
stition, and gave to the crafty and unprincipled spiritnaliij 
a power which was destructive to all morality; and tli0 
wider circulation of the simple but sublime veritiaB of 
Christ's holy Gospel, — ^all, in various w&jb, contributed to 
this result. The influence of Queen Catherine Parr, and the 
threatening attitude of the Papal power, had in one waj 
worked well, by preparing the public mind for a calmff 
examination of the higher truths, as well as for a simpler 
form of worship. The Anglican church, at the death of 
Henry, was but little reformed. ''The Six Articles ** eoi- 
bodied nearly all the essential elements of the old Bsdth. Tho 
Papal supremacy, and some of the evils incident to it^ wave 
thrown off; but the core of the evil was left untouched. J 



* Vide Anderson's Annals of the English Bible, — a work which if «■ 
honour to our body. 

f For the opinion of Cardinal Pole on the moral state of these hooM 
of iU fame, vide Madden's Life of La Savanarola. We give an exteaci ^' 
** Another abvse to he corrected is in the religious orders, manp 0$ idbidk 
Ka/oe become so defiled that their example has become a acaadal to th* 
laity, and noxious to the latter. We think all conventual orders ihoald 
be abolished ; not however to inflict injury on any, but to prohibit the 
reception of any novices, so that, without injury to tlie existing oiden, 
they shall be suppressed, and good and religious men may be substitotsd 
for them. Now, we think it would be best if all youths who are Boi 
professed should be sent away from these monasteries." [The Cardinsli 
Pole and Caraffa signed this report.] 

^ " He has been forced to arrest many changes which were in progress 
before his last parliament. To satisfy this country, and to silence the 
Christian powers, he has restored all the old opinions and constitutions, 
lave the authority of the See of Rome and the orders of the monks and 
nuns; while two bishops, who were the chief promoters of the new 
opinions, have been deprived of their sees, and if they will save their 
lives, they must make the best of the time of grace which is allowed 



EDWABD THE SIXTH. 57 

Other generations, and other conflicts, must come and go, 
before ''soul liberty/' even as a theory, shall be recog- 
nised; and others, longer stiU, before it shall be realized 
as a fact 



CHAPTER III. 

EDWABD THE SIXTH. 

The birth of Edward was hailed by the nation with 
raptures. Many a perplexing (j[uestion was now settled. 
The evils of a disputed succession were at least suspended, if 
not quite annihilated. Latimer, in his own way, embodied 
the gladsome feelings of thousands: — ''There is no less 
rejoicing for the birth of our prince, whom we have hun- 
gered for so long, than there was, I trow, inter vicinos, at 
the birth of John the Baptist. God give us grace to yield 
due thanks to our Lord God, the God of England ! For 
verily he hath showed himself the God of England, or 
rather an English God, if we will consider and ponder his 
proceedings with us. He hath overcome our illness with his 
exceeding goodness, so that we are now more compelled to 
serve him and promote his word, if the devil of aU devils 
be not in us. We have now the staff of various sects, and. 
the stay of vain expectations. Let us all pray for his 
preservation." 

A nation's hopes, for a nation's welfiare in every sense, 
hung on the life of this infant. Extreme caution watched 
over him. None were allowed to approach his cradle but 
his authorized attendants. His food was tasted, and his 
clothes washed only by trusty servants. Night and morning 



them, and relinquish their errors." (Mavillac to Francis L ; July 13th, 
1539.)— The Pilgrim, p. 130. (Note F.) 



58 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

high officers of state watched whilst the rojal babe 
washed and dressed ; and all the avenues of approach to hist 
wei-e guarded with sleepless solicitude.* There was a needs- 
be for all this. Not only did Henry intensely desire a son 
to perpetuate his race; but powerful parties in. the state 
had the greatest interest in his death. The sickly chiU 
gathered around him the hopes and the fears of the men 
who had smitten the spiritual head of Christendom with • 
force from which it has never recovered, and disturbed the 
faith and social state of the whole of Europe. 

The accession of Edward to the vacant throne was in 
January, 1567. His youth, f his amiability, his cultivated 
taste, j: and apparent devotion, inspired the heart of the 
nation with the most powerful emotions. Hope predomi- 
nated ; and a bright vista of peace and prosperity opened to 
the eyes of the people. To trace the political intrigues of 
this short reign, — the rising of the commonalty, partly, if 
not entirely, from the crushing oppression and grasping 
selfishness of the higher classes § — the wars in which the 
nation was involved — and the fall of the Protector — would 
conduct us over a field far too wide to be compatible with 
the limits of this work. To other topics our attention must 
be confined. 

The conflict of principles, which had somewhat subsided 
during the closing period of Henry's life, was now recom- 
menced with new vigour. Both parties put forth strenuous 
efforts. Cranmer, high in official rank, was recognized as 



* Froude, vol. iv. f He was only ten years of age. 

X His knowledge of French, Latin, and Greek, appears to liave been 
considerable. Strype's Life of Chcke, one of his tutors, supplies mach 
information. Burnet has published, in his second volume, some of tht 
literary remains of the young king, and also his journal. 

§ Latimer, Gilpin, and Lever supply us with overwhelming eWdence. 
Strype's Memorials, and his Life of Cranmer, may l)e consulted. Turner 
and Froude have crowded their pages with the most painful proofs. Ths 
religious element is unfolded in the pages of the lattai: more than in thoM 
of the former. 



EDWABD THE SIXTH. 59 

the leader of the progressionists; whilst Gardiner, the 
Bishop of "Winchester, wielded the conservative power. 
In many respects the two men were unlike. In all the 
prominent attributes of their character, the contrast was 
great. "With mental powers inferior to none of his con- 
temporaries, the bishop had been trained to all the arts of 
diplomacy from his youth, and in all the cimning of the 
profession he had made rapid progress. The archbishop was 
no courtier. His early life had been spent in comparative 
scholastic seclusion, and he had little fitness for the stormy 
period on which his lot was cast. Honesty, the love of the 
truth, and anxiety for l^e nation's welfare, ever marked 
him.* The skill of both parties was admirable. "With 
sleepless vigilance they watched every movement, and with 
consummate art tried to foil each other. Upon many points 
their agreement was perfect Gardiner, Bonner, and Tun- 
stall repudiated with as much distinctness the supremacy of 
the Pope, as Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer. The former 
pleaded not for a return to Rome, only that things should 
remain as Henry had left them;t whilst the others pleaded 
for a more extensive and thorough reform. One party was 
satisfied with the mere semblance of spiritual life — the 
forms and ceremonies which still remained were dear to 
them ; the other was anxious to make the church, as far as 
they knew, a living power, and to remove from it every- 
thinsT which would weaken its influence or narrow the 



* Strype's Memorials of Granmer. 

+ Gfirdiner, Tonstal, Bonner, and other bishops, took an oath "never 
to consent that the Bishop of Rome should exercise or have any manner 
of authority, or jurisdiction, or power within this realm, or any other of 
the king^s dominions ; but that he would resist the same, at all times, to 
the utmost of his power ; but that, from henceforth, he would accept and 
repute the king's majesty to be the only supreme head of the Church of 
England ; and that to the utmost of his power he would observe all acts 
and statutes, made and to be made, for the extirpation of the Bishop of 
Borne and his authority, and for the corroboration of the king's supremacy, 
against all persons whatsoever." — ^The Oath of Bonner. 



60 EABLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

circle of its operations. The old and the new life of Tgnglftml 
were brought thus into collision. 

Henry had composed the council of nearly equal numben 
of each party ; though, dreading the restless, the intrigoinf 
spirit of Gardiner, and well knowing his bitter hostility to 
Cranmer, he had left him no share in the goyemmentw Still 
the sympathies and the convictions of the youthful monaxch 
were yielded up to Cranmer. Somerset also threw the whole 
weight of his authority around him and his Mends. Only for 
a short time could the issue be doubtful. The transfer fini 
of Gardiner, then Bonner, and finally Tunstall and oUmRi 
from their episcopal palaces to the gloom and seclusion of 
the Tower, and the elevation of Ridley and other friends of 
the archbishop to the vacant thrones, show at onoe tin 
magnitude of their power and the extent of their triumpL 

T]ie spirit of reform was needed. Only here and tiiero 
a branch had been cut off the great upas-tree. CormptioB 
and vice were everywhere prevalent. Into all circles thej 
had penetrated.* Moral principle was feeble in the extrema 
Gain, not the Grospel, was the spirit which influenced soma 
The want of preachers was severely felt Calvin, in t 
letter to Cranmer, says ''that a parcel of slowbellies were 
nourished from the revenue of the church, to sing vespen 
in an unknown tongue." " The great ones, in the minority 
of the king, took their opportunity to fly on the spoils of 
the church and charitable donations, little regarding anj- 
thing else than to enrich themselves. Very vicious and 
dissolute they were in their lives, as the soberer sort* in 
those days complained." f The great chiefs appropriated 
the ecclesiastical revenues to their own use. % Many of the 



* Vide Froude, vol. v., chap. 26; Latinier'fl SermoDS ; Turner, vuL iiL 
(Modem History, cbap. 8). 

t Memorials of Cranmer, voL iL, p. ICl. 

t "It may seem strange,'* says Burnet, "that the Earl of Hertford 
had six good prebends offered him, two of them being afterwards con- 
verted into a deanery and treasurership. But it was ordinary at thai 



EDWABD T&B SIXTH. 61 

worst features of the old superstitions remained, and the 
mass of the people were shrouded in darkness, and watched 
with a sullen countenance the removal of many of those 
objects which had been enthroned in their affections from 
their earliest youth.* If the reader could, by an easy 
fiction of the imagination, throw back his mind to the 
time of this monarch, he would probably see, in many 
a church, "the minister kiss the Lord's table; wash his 
fingers at any time in the communion; wiping his eyes 
with the pater or sudery, or crossing his head with the 
paters j shifting of the book from one place to another; 
laying down and licking the chalice of the communion; 
holding up his fingers, hands, or thumbs, joined towards his 
temple; breathing upon the bread or chalice; shewing the 
sacrament openly before distribution of the communion; 
ringing or sacrying bells; or setting any light upon the 
Lord's board at any time." t 

time. Tlie Lord Cromwell had been Dean of Wells; and many other 
secular men had these ecclesiastical benefices without cure conferred on 
them.'*— History of the Reformation, voL ii, p. 8 (edit. 1683). Vide 
StiTpe's Cranmer; Turner, yoL iL, p. 234; Soame's Reformation, yoL ir. 

* Edward himself gives an affecting view of the moral and social con- 
dition of the people: — **The country people generally loyed all those 
shrines, processions, and assemblies, as things of diversion ; and judged 
it a dull business only to come to church for divine worship and the 
liearing of sermons ; therefore, they were much delighted with the gaiety 
and cheerfulness of these rites.'* — Bumefs History of the Reformation, 
■vi^ iL, p. 59. 

1* Articles put forth by the King (Bumefs Reformation, voL ii. Appen- 
dix, p. 166; Instructions to Bishop Ridley, p. 205). In various forms 
many of these errors were exposed. Poems, moralities, ballads, were all 
employed by the men of progress. The following is a sample : — 

» ** Holy pardons, holy boads, " Holy days, holy fastings, 

Holy saints, holy images. Holy twitchings, holy tastings. 

With holy, holy blood. Holy visions and sights ; 

Holy stocks, holy stones. Holy wax, holy lead. 

Holy chests, holy bones. Holy water, holy bread. 

Yea, and holy, holy wood. To drive away sprites." 

— Hawldn's Origin of the English Drama. Apud Todd's Cranmer, voL L, 
p. 330. 



62 EABLT ENGLISH BJlFTISTS. 

Ignorant of religion^ insensible to the spiritual wants of 
the people^ grasping only at the wealth of the churchy the 
patrons, the council, and even " the gospeiers,'" entered into 
cures, or had three or four served by half-famished ignofant 
monks, — men, from their lives and vicious habits, totalljr mififc 
for the ministry. Some placed their stewards in the pulpit^ 
others induced their huntsmen and gamekeepers to doff their 
forest green and adorn themselves with clerical attire.* The 
influence of all this was disastrous in the extreme. Sodetj 
was agitated. The nation, from one cause or another, was 
heaving with deep feeling, and gave unmistakable indications 
of anger. Lever has embodied these in one of his indignant 
outbursts of holy passion: — "You maintain your chaplain 
to take pluralities, and your other servants take more offioei 
than they can discharge. Fie, fie ; for shame ! Ye imagine 
there is a parish priest's curate which doeS'the parson's *du^. 
Yea^ forsooth, he ministereth God's sacraments, he sayeth 
the service, he readeth the homilies. The rude lobs of the 
country, too simple to paint a lie, speak truly as they find 
it, and say, ^ He ministereth the sacraments, he slubbereth 
the service, he cannot read the homilies.* " t 

Hooper, in a letter to his friend BuUinger, thus describes 
the religious condition of the nation : — "As far as true 
religion is concerned, idokUry is nowhere in greater vigour. 
Our king has destroyed the Pope, but not Popery; he has 

* Bucer to Bishop Hooper, in Strype's Cranmer. Collier has gifvn 
the substance of this, toL iL, p. 294. Fronde, toL v. 

t Strype*s Memorials, toL iii. Bacon gives a darker picture. Fidr 
Works (Parker Society), p. 415. An extract Ib given in Strype's Crmnmer, 
YoL i., p. 421. "Edward, in 1547, issued articles and injunctions to 
certain divines, for a visitation of the various dioceses. In these it is 
ordered * that all dignified cloz^gy should preach personally twice a year,^ 
and * that all bishops should preach four times a year in their dioceses, 
unless they had a reasonable excuse for the omission.' "' — Burners History 
of the Reformation, voL ii., pp. 28, 29. In Ireland it was still worM. 
St. L^^r informed the Council, in 1549, that '* there had been but one 
■ermon made in the country for three years, and that by the Bishop of 
Meath.''-Froude, voL L, p. 419 (Note). 



EDWABD THE SIXTH. 63 

expelled all the monks and nuns, and pulled down their 
monasteries; he has caused all their possessions to be 
tramped into his exchequer ; and yet they are bound, frail 
female sex, by the kiug^s command, to perpetual chastity. 
England has at this time 10,000 nuns, not one of whom is 
allowed to marry. The impious mass, the most shamefiil 
celibacy of the clergy, the invocation of saints, auiicular 
confession, superstitious abstineuce from meats, and pur- 
gatory, were never held hy the people in greaier :e8teem them 
(U the present momenL" * 

"We will only add another sentence or two on this matter, 
chiefly because they will enable the reader to understand the 
facility with which, in the next reign, the "old faith" re- 
sumed its empire over the nations. The writer is Cecil, 
now appearing on the political theatre ; — " The majority of 
our people will be with our adversaries ; and it is reasonable 
to think that, although so long as all is quiet the crown can 
maintain tranquillity, should war break out, they will listen 
rather to what they consider the voice of God calling on 
them to restore Popery, than to the voice of the king calling 
on them to obey. The great body of the peers, some of the 
council, all of the bishops except three or four, almost all 
the judges and lawyers, almost all the justices of the peace, 
the priests and vicars, will be on the same side; and the 
commons are in such a state of irritation, that they will rise 
at a word." t 

Steadily did the archbishop and his colleagues seek to 
lessen the number and magnitude of these evils. To secure 
the spread of sound doctrines, and partly on account of the 
ignorance of the priesthood, a number of homilies were 
prepared, to be read to the peopla Visitors were appointed 



♦ Letters of the Bishops (Parker Society), vol. i, p. 36. 

+ Proude, vol. v., p. 304. Dr. Lingard says that eleven-twelfths of the 
people were in favour of the old faith. He bases his estimates on a state- 
ment of Paget's to the Protector (voL vii., p. 81). 



64 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

to inspect the churches in every parish, to remoye any objedi 
of superstition^ and diminish the senseless cereinonie& Li^ 
will be thrown on the state of the church hy the following 
practices which were to be abolished : — " Casting holj water 
on the beds, on images, and other dead things; or bettriog 
about holy bread, or St. John's Gospel ; or keeping of piiyato 
holy days — as bakers, brewers, smiths, shoemakers^ and 
others do ; or ringing of holy bells, or blessing with the hnlty 
candle, to the intent to be discharged of the burden of an, 
or to drive away devils, or put away dreams or fikntanea" * 
Later on, the new English Prayer Book, sanctioned fay the 
senate, was issued ; and articles of faith — after many triab 
of strength in the convocation and both houses — ^were giTW 
to the nation, with the hope that uniformity of faith and 
practice would be secured, t It was vain. Nature repu- 
diates uniformity. Her beauties everywhere spring inm 
her boundless variety. In morals, minds are not cast m 
one mould. The consciousness of responsibility predudM 
anything like uniformity. Essential unity religion will 
ever secure. Beyond this, her range is entirely free and 
limitless. 

The teaching of King Edward's Prayer Book on baptism is 
too instructive to be overlooked. The devil was exorcised to 
go out and enter no more into the baptized. The child (if 
not weak) was thrice dipped, then anointed, and a chrism, 
or white coat, put upon it. " Then the priest shall take the 
childe in his handcs, and aske the name ; and, namy ng the 
childe, shall dyppe it in the water thrice. Fyrst dypping 
the right syde; second, the left syde; the thirde time dyp- 
ping the face- toward the font; so it be wisely and discretelj 
done ; saying, I baptize, &c. And if the childe be weake, it 
shall suffice to powre upon it, saying the foresade wordea** 
In the public baptism a cross was made on the child's 

* Buxnet, Fuller, and Strype give this communon. 
t Collier preienta ub with a long aoconnt of tliem (voL IL, book !▼.) 



SDWAaD THE SIXTH. 65 

fovisiheskd and bieasfc^ the devil was exorcised to go out of 
him, and enter no more into him. After the triime immer* 
s|pn, he w«<s anointedy and a chrism5 or white ooat, put upon 
him.* It may interrupt the narrative for a moment — ^more 
se, perhaps^ if we made it a note — ^but the reader may be 
pleaised with, the following, as an illustration of the prac- 
tice of the churchy and the opinions of leading nxen. The 
S§uru|n I^jwgy was re$)ubli9hed in 1541. The whde is 
too loi^ forv insertion here. We borrow the following from 

Collier: — 

< ' Ths Tms FOB Baptizino. 

"Upon Saturday, Easter-even, is hallowed the font, whkh is as it 
ware vestigium, or a remembrance of baptism, that was used in the 
primitiye church ; at which time, and Pentecost, there was used in 
the church two solemn baptizings, and much concourse of people 
came unto the same. 

'"The first was at Easter, because the mystery of baptism a^^ees 
well to the time. For like as Christ died and was buried, aud rose 
iigain the third day, so by putting into the water is signified our 
death to sin, and the immersion betokens our burying and morti- 
fication to the same ; and the rising again out of the water declares 
us to be risen to a new life, according to the doctrine of St. Paul 
(Rom. vi). 

''Anjd the second solemn baptizing, i. e., at Pentecost, was because 
tlmt then is celebrated the feast of the Holy Ghost, which is the 
worker of that spiritual regeneration we have in baptisn^ And 
therefore the church uses to hallow the font also at that time." f 

* Collier, voLii, p. .256. The autlior gives an aTniiBing autkonty for 

this, and also for praying for the dead, from Tertullian : — " If you demand 

a text of Scripture for these usages, you wiU find none. The practice 

stands on a bottom of tradition ; 'tis confirmed by custom, and one genera- 

tioii.f<^]lo?p^ it .upon t];Le credit of that which went before.'* The candid 

ever acknowledge this. The following lies before us : — " lu my book of 

tradition I said and affirmed, that Christ and his apostles taught and left 

to the church many things, without writing, which wennist both believe 

st^dj^a^y and also fulfil obediently, under pain of damnation ever to 

endure." Amongst other instai^ces, this author mentions : — " The hallpw- 

ing 0^ water in the font, the thrice dipping of the child in the water at the 

chzistening, the putting on of the chrism, the consecration of the oil^ the 

anointing of the christened children," &c. — ^Dr. Smith, Memorials of Cran- 

mer, voLil,p. 329. . „ .... ^^n. i .. nnn 

' "^ f Searum lAtwcgyf CoUier, voL u., p. 196. 

F 



66 EABLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

We select now part of the ceremony, omitting the ezpfak- 
nation : — 

"When the child is brought, the minister beginneth to make t 
cross upon the forehead of the child that is offered to be baptised. 
Then he maketh another cross upon the breast. Prayer la thei 
offered for the removal of all blindness of heart, and to make his 
apt to receive grace given him in baptism. Hallowed salt ia tbet 
put into his mouth, to signify the Spirit's real salt, which is the 
word of God. Then the minister makes the sign of the cross on tlie 
child's forehead, adjuring the devil to depart. After this is read tlie 
Gospel of Matthew yix. Then the minister putteth his finger into 
his mouth, daubs with spittle the nosCf thurles, and ears of bim that 
shall be baptized. After an exhortation to the sponsors, the pnett 
makes the sign of the cross in the right hand of the infant. Takiuig 
it by this holy hand, he bids it enter into the church, there to be 
admitted as one of Christ's flock. Approaching the font, the ""»* 
of the child is asked. Then follow these questions to the godfathoi 
and godmothers, as representatives of the child. — Forsakest thoa the 
devil? Ans. I forsake him, — All his works? Ans. I foraaht them, 
— And all his pomps and vanities? Ans. I forsake them, — Satisfied 
with these, the minister then anoints the child with holy oil upoa 
the breast and betwixt the shoulders. Questions to ascertain the 
orthodoxy of the child are then propoimded. Then follows another 
series: for example, to the child the minister says, — What askeet 
thou? Ans. Baptism, — Wilt thou be baptized? Ans. / wUl — 
Satisfied with these sage replies, then the minister calls the child by 
name, baptizes it in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Gho^ 
(putting it into the water of the font and taking it out again, or 
else Inuring water ui)on the infant). Then, after his baptism, he if 
anointed with holy chrism on the head ; after that he is clothed in 
a white vesture, significant of his freedom from the captivitj- of the 
devil; and, finally, this superstition is closed by the minister phu.'ing 
in the infant's right hand a lighted candle." * 

Tyndale thus refers to the feeling of the jieople about this : 
— ** If aught bo left out, or if the child bo not altogether 
dipt in the water, or if, because the child is sick, the ]>rii's)t 
dare not plunge him into the water, ])ut jxmrs water on hii 
head, — how tremble they ! how quake they ! * How siiy ye, 
Sir Jolui,' say they, * is this child christened enougli \ hath 



♦ CoUier, voL ii, pp. 192, 193.— Note A 



EDWARD THE SIXTH. 67 

it his ftill Christendom 1 ' They believe, verily, that the child 
is not christened." * " In the Prayer Book of Edward VI., 
the priest, looking upon the children, was required to say, 
* I command thee, nnclean spirit, in the name of the Father, 
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, that thou come out, and 
depart from this infiint,'" &c.t "After a fewe things re- 
hearsed, he taketh the child and dippeth it in, but warily 
and discretely, as it is in the book ; upon whose forehead 
also he shall make a crosse," &c. J Frith, in his Treatise on 
Baptism, says : — " The signification of baptism is described 
by Paul, in vi. of the Romans ; that, as we are plunged bodily 
into the water, even so we are dead and buried with Christ 
from sin; and as we are lifted again out of the water, even 
so are we risen with Christ from our sins, that we might 
hereafter walk in a new conversation of life. So that these 
things — ^that is, to be plunged into the water, and lift up 
again — do signify and represent the whole pith and effect of 
baptism, — ^that is, the mortification of our old Adam, and 
the rising up of our new man." § 

The influence of the continental Reformers on the Refor- 
mation must not be overlooked. From the distance they had 
watched the early struggle with intense interest. Henry 
never loved or hated like other men. Luther treated him 
as an ordinary man, when combating for the truth, and 
inflicted blows on the chivalric knight of Rome which made 
him reel more than once. The pride of the monarch was 
wounded, and the influence of the German Reformers was 
never very powerful with him. It was not so now, in the 
period over which we are travelling. Cranmer appears to 
have consulted them on nearly all occasions ; and the corres- 
pondence of the great German Reformer with Somerset and 

* Obedience of a Christian Man, vol. i., p. 310. 

+ Vide Hans L'Estrange (Dinis A^er), p. 243. Apud Zurich Liturgy 
(note), p. 178. t Troubles at Frankfort (Petherham reprint), p. 32. 

§ "Works of Tyndale and Frith, vol. iii., p. 289. On the opposite page 
he refers to the opinions of the Baptists. 



68 EABLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

others was not unfrequent. More than this : theological chain 
in both universities were occupied by some of the most emi- 
nent disciples of this illustrious man. Peter Martyr, Bacer, 
and Fagihus, threw their influence over these seats of lean- 
ing, and, from the professor*s chair, sought to mould iltt 
rising theological mind of England with their own views of 
doctrine and polity. The influence of this was soon peixxp- 
tible. The archbishop and his intimate colleagues changed 
their opinions, and from a Lutheran tendency tihe Calviniu 
element became more apparent. At this period, too, another 
individual appears, who occupies no subordinate place on the 
page of history. Fiery, impassioned, of indomitable coarage^ 
and imbued with the love of the truth, John Knox was t 
fitting instrument for the advancement of the great worit 
With the concurrence of the Council and Cranmer, the 
Scottish reformer was engaged. For ten years he devoted 
himself to itinerant labours. Berwick, Newcastle, and the 
northern parts, were the chosen fields for his culture. Sacoev 
was the result, though the Bishop of Durham checked his 
career in every way he could. Higher honoui*s awaited Him. 
First, a church in the metropolis ; and then, the Protector 
offered to confer upon him the see of Rochester, f 

Amidst difficulties of no common kind, Cmnmer and hi* 
co-workers advanced the Reformation so far, in its doctrines 
and polity, that the Anglican church, with certain modifi- 
cations and additions, became what it is at present. They 
left it far below tlie ideal which existed in their own mind : 
tolerating much, confessedly, which ha.s no sanction in the 
word of God, and the existence of which only impairs the 
moral beauty of that church, weakens its efficiency, and 
rendei-s it of necessity, to minds who recognize and implicidv 
bow to the supreme authority of Christ, a constant source 
of dissent and divisions. 



* C<>llier, vtIL ii., p. 304. 

t Macric's Life of Knox, chap. ill. Select Works of the Kefonncr, 
irith Life, p. 13. 



EDWARD THE SIXTH. 69 

The violent persecntions to which the Baptists were every- 
where exposed on the Continent, both in Catholic and 
Protestant countries, induced many of them to take refuge 
in this country. Life was precious. They fondly hoped that 
ih quietness and peace they might worship God. Their zeal 
did not slumber. Their tenets were industriously dissemi- 
nated, and many converts were made to their views of Chris- 
tian truth. The highest character was given to these persons, 
by men religiously opposed to them. To most of our readers 
the following will be new: — "In general, Anabaptism re- 
quired that those who came over to it should be possessed of 
the strict heroic morals of the early Christians, the same con- 
tempt for the world and its pleasures and pains, and even 
its outward forms. By baptism a renunciation was made of 
the devil, the world, and the flesh ; and a vow taken to do 
nothing but the will of God. Any wilful sin of an Ana- 
baptist would not be pardoned, and entailed on its perpe- 
trator hopeless expulsion from the community, and loss of 
the grace of God. It was exactly on this account that the 
heresy was so dangerous, for the greater part of its adherents 
could appeal to the sanctity of their mode of life." * 

But their enemies were sleepless. The mild and gentle 
Cranmer, Ridley, and others, felt as much, nay, more horror- 
struck at an Anabaptist heretic than at a dozen Papal ad- 
vocates. Few, if indeed any, suffered but from this detested 
sect, t In the spring of 1549 a report was laid before the 
Council, charging them with the usual errors of the sect. 
Commissioners, consisting of Cranmer and six other prelates, 
and divines of a lower order, with various distinguished 
laymen, among whom the names of Cecil and Sir Thomas 
Smith are found, were appointed, f They were to try to 

* l>r. Hase (Neue Propheten). Apttd Madden, Phantasmata, voL ii., 
pp. 439-440. + Vaughan's Revolutions of English Hist., vol. iii., p. 393. 

"X. "An Ecclesiastical Commission in the beginning of this year was 
issued out for the examination of the Anabaptists and Arians, that began 
now to spring up apace and show themselves more openly." — Strype*s 
Life of Sir Thomas Smith, p. 37. 



70 EAKLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

reclaim them, to enjoin them penance, and to give them 
absolution; or, if they were obstinate, to excommmiicste 
them, and deliver them over to the secular power, to be 
dealt with in the usual way. * 

A singular statement appears in Stiype, — an accusaidoii 
not unfrequent in subsequent writers; it is as follows:— 
" Whereupon were sent two of their emissaries (Romanists) 
from Rotterdam unto England, who were to pretend them- 
selves Anabaptists, and preaching against baptizing in&ntB, 
and preach up rebaptizing and a fifth monarchy upon eartL 
And besides this, one D. G., authorized by their learned 
men (the Council of Trent), despatched a letter, written in 
May, 1549, from Delf in Holland, to two bishops, whereof 
Winchester was one, signifying the coming of these pie- 
tended Anabaptists, and that they should receive them, and 
cherish them, and take their parts, if they should chance to 
receive any checks; teUing them, that it was left to them 
to assist in this cause; and to some others, whom the^ 
knew to be well affected to the Mother Church." t 

In another form, which indeed would always be welcome^ 
the influence of their principles was opposed. That they 
were widely spread admits of no doubt. The acti\'ity of 
their opponents makes this manifest. Either just before^ 
or following in the wake of the state-paid himters of heresy, 
appeared, ^'A short Introdv^tioii for to Warn all Chn^ian 
People against the Pestiferous Errors of the Common Sect af 
Anabaptists.^* This professes to be a translation from some 
compilations of Calvin, and it is printed by Day. J If the 
Reformer had been content with wielding his pen against 
them, his character would have stood before us with more 
brightness and beauty. To him may ]>e traced much of the 



* T(Hl<r8 Crannier, vol. iL, p. 14fi. Collier gives the commissi* m, 
vol. ii. (Intro.), p. 12. Bacon, the martyr, condemns "the wicked imd 
ungodly opinions of the Anabaptists. ''—Todd's Cranmer, voL ii., p. 351. 
t Strype's Cranmer, voL i., pp. 21)9, 300. 
t Vide Todd's Cranmer, voL iL, p. 146. 



EDWABD THE SIXTH. 71 

fierce hostility which our brethren had to encounter. His 
appeals sustained, if they did not beget, the demon of perse- 
cution in the minds of the Council and the Court. The spirit 
of Antichrist never showed itself more intolerant than in 
the following: — "These all together do deserve to be well 
ptmished by the sword, seeing they do conspire against the 
king, and agaiost Crod, who had set him in the royal seat.* 
It will be said that we must tolerate our neighbour's weak- 
ness, that great changes are not easily to be borne. That were 
to be suffered in worldly affairs, where it is lawful for the 
one to give place to the others, and to give over his right, 
thereby to redeem peace ; but it is not like in the spiritual 
rule of Christ, — ^there we have nothing to do but to obey 

God Thefts, fightings, extortions, are strictly 

punished, because that men thereby are offended; and the 
meantime whoredoms, adulteries, and drunkenness, axe suf- 
fered as things lawful, or of very little importance. That 
the honour of God be mindful ever to you, punish the crime 
whereof men are not wont to make any great matter." 

Ridley, who filled the episcopal throne of the metropolitan 
city, was not a whit behind his brethren in efforts for the 
suppression of this sect. In his first visitation, we believe, 
early in June, questions were issued on various matters 
relating to the religious state of his diocese and the conduct 
of his clergy. Amongst them we may note the following : — 
"Whether Anabaptists or any other sects held conventicles, 
preached heterodoxies, or administered the sacraments in a 
different manner from the public Establishment ? Whether 
baptism was administered contrary to the public Establish- 
ment, with respect either to time or language? Whether 
in&nt baptism was impugned?" t 

These efforts were successful. To escape was all but 
impossible. Kent supplied the first victim. There is reason 

* " He advised that Anabaptists and reactionists should be alike put 
to death."— Fronde, voL v., p. 99. 

t Collier, voL iL, p. 304. 



72 EABLT ENGLISH BilFTISTS. 

for believing that in this district of 'the iioahtty, and ft 
J!ast Anglia, Anabaptists were numerotis. The evidence 4 
this will be supplied presently. Joan* Bouoh^, or JoA 
df Kent, was one of the few who suffered nuatjrMk 
•during the reign of the youthful monardh. The inftmi- 
tion about this noble-minded woman is Only scanty al 
tradition identifies her with the town of iESythomey lAA 
a small congregation of Baptists there, f Her life wii 
holy, her connections respectable, and her devotednen it 
the truth of a marked kind. She was intimate wit^ wm 
of the religious leaders of the court of Henry, and was ii 
intimate friend of Ann Askew, j: To the circulation d 
Tyndale's New Testament and religious books she gufe 
much time. The heresy with which she was charged ww 
one commonly alleged against the sect at that time. BunMft 
says that '^she denied that Christ was truly incarnate ef the 
Yirgin, whose flesh, being sinful, He could take none of il| 
but the Word, by the consent of the inward ixtan in the 
Virgin, took flesh of her : these were her words. "§ We hue 
adverted to this matter before. || It will again claim the 
reader's attention under a subsequent reign. Upon this 
"subtle fancy concerning the incarnation," IF a grave and 
learned theologian disputed with her, but without effect. The 
trial was again made, but with similar results. Sentence was 
then passed upon her ; and, as an obstinate heretic, she wis 
consigned to the ci^^l power. Tlie church never sheda 
blood. The butcheiy is always left to the state. In her 



* Joan Knell, alias Butcher, often Joan Van Kent, was Komt in Snitk* 
fiekL — HS. in the archives of the Mennonite Church, AmstenlMD. 

t Private information. Ashford is mentioned in HiRtoria Der Beroeiioi 
van Engelandt, p. 2. 

• X Vide Anderson's Ladies of the Reformation : Vaughau*8 Revolutiooi 
of English History, voL iii., p. 394 ; Bumct*s History ol the Kefonnatioa^ 
voL ii., p. 110. 

§ ** A iM>or frantic woman, more fit for Bcdhini than a stake.*' Just as 
true of D. Noal, the uttcrer of this, as of Joan Boucher. — History of 
the Puritans, voL ii., Edward's reifpi. 

II Vide p. S4. % Vaughan, voL iii, p. 394. 



"wretched prisoh she cohtintted fbr ilioiltlis. Amongst bthei^, 
ifihe was tdsited by Mr. HutclimBon and T?hoitias Lefver, who 
'JiOTight to bring her opinions irrto hstrmdny with the received 
'doctrine. In t&ply to an argument of the former, she placed 
b^Ond all refa^onable doiibt her faith in the perfect huiiiati- 
1^ of Jedus. " I deny not Christ is Mary's seed," she said, 
**dT the Woman's s^ed; nor I deny Him not to be a maCn. 
-Btit Mary had two seeds — one seed of her Mth, and another 
'fiOed of her fiesh atid in her body. There is a natural iand a 
'^jorporeal seed, and there is a spiritnal and an heavenly s^ed, 
^ We may gather of St. John, when he saith, ' The seed of 
God rtnuumdh in Atm, and he cannot sin.' And Christ ik 
li^ seed; but He is become man of the seed of her faith 
and belief-^of spiritual Seed, not of natural seed; for her 
%eed was sinfial, as the seed and flesh of others." * Before 
-fehe fiery trial, fi,tiother attempt was made. Their lordships 
/Of Lofidon and Ely called her before them. It was the 
«^ay before her exectition. Ridley used all his eloquence 
With -Joan. The attempt was vain. Her confidence in the 
•feruth of her opinions was unshaken. "It was not long ago,*' 
fiaid the heroic woman, "since you burnt Ann Askew for t 
f»eo6 of bread, yet came yourself to believe the doctrine for 
^hich you burnt her;f and now you will bum me for a 
]Meee of flesh, And in the end you will believe this also." :|: 
To throw the satrction of religion around the final sCette, 
9iBho|) Scoi^y was employed to preach, and then Joan stlb- 
^^ttefd to the last trial of her faith, and added another to 
Hie list of the Smithfield martyrs. 

Burnet says that Edward manifested extreme reitictance 
1^ sign Joab's death Warrant, arid that the archbishop was 
^employed to remove his scruples. "He argued ftom the 
lA# <rf Moses, by which blasphemers were to be stohed. He 

* Marfcyrology, voL i., p. 350. 

i" Ann was martyred for rejecting transubstantiation. Granmer, 
Bidley, and others, had, before this, repudiated the same. 

X ^rype's Memorials, voL iii 



74 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

told the king he made a great difference between errors a 
other points of divinity and those which were diiecUf 
against the Apostles' Creed; that there were impietiei 
against God, which a prince, as God's deputy, ought to 
punish, as the king's deputies were obliged to punish ofTenoei 
against the king's person." Neither the principles nor the 
logic of Cranmer satisfied the king; and the narrator adds 
that he signed his name with tears, and told bis spiritml 
instructor that if it was wrong he should ajiswer for it to 
God. The friends and the enemies of the archbishop hxn 
expended much energy on this. The former have laboured 
to shield his memory from the guilt of this atrocious act 
Judging from the evidence before us, we think that thef 
have been successful. Few, if any, religionists of that ag^ 
except the despised sect which felt the consequences of theie 
Antichristian sentiments, would have objected to these jnin- 
ciples. The dogma was received as a truth, bjr univeml 
Christendom, that it was the duty of the state to puniali 
error. It is not on this ground, however, that the vindicft- 
tion of Cranmer can be placed. It is on others widely dif- 
ferent. Edward's journal gives no intimation of the soena 
The record is as follows : — " May the 2nd. — Joan Boucher, 
otherwise called Joan of Kent, was burnt for holding that 
Christ was not incarnate of the Virgin Mary; being con- 
demned the year before, but kept in hope of convendoD. 
And on the 30th of April, the Bishop of London and the 
Bishop of Ely were to persuade her, but she withstood 
them, and reviled the preacher at her death." * No tears 
are shed here. No indication can be gathered from this of 
a troubled conscience. Yet the oi)poi'tunity was fitting for 
a statement of the same, if it had ever transpired. Besidei 
all this, it is certain that Cranmer was not present at the 
Council when the Lord Chancellor was ordered to make out 
the writ for consigning Joan to the fiames. The memory of 

■ P 

* Burnet, voL iL (Appendix.) 



EDWAKD THE SIXTH. 75 

the archbishop has enough to bear, without imposing upon 
it what in point of fiict has no existence.* 

In the examination of Philpot, the following occurs in 
relation to this victim of episcopal brutality : — " Biche : All 
heretics do boast of the Spirit of God, and every one would 
have a church by himself as Joan of Kent and the Ana- 
baptists. I had myself Joan of Kent a fortnight in my 
house, after the writ was out for her to be burnt, when my 
liord of Canterbury and Bishop Ridley resorted almost daily 
to her. But she was so high in the spirit, that they could 
do nothing with her for all their learning; but she went 
wilfully unto the fire, was burnt, and so do you now. 
Philpot : As for Joan of Kent, she was a vain woman (I 
knew her well), and a heretic indeed, well worthy to be 
burnt, because she stood against one of the manifest articles 
of our faith, contrary to the Scripture." t There is also an 
allusion to Joan in the examination of Thomas Hawkes. 
We quote it : — " Chidsey : Ye die boldly, because ye would 
glory in your death, as Joan Boucher did. Hawkea : What 
Joan Boucher did, I have nothing to do withal; but I would 
my part might be to-morrow." J 

" The day ajEter this woman's condemnation, was one 
Putts, a tanner, of Colchester, brought before the king's 
commissioners. He was either of her opinion (Joan of 
Kent's), or an Anabaptist. For these commissioners were 
appointed to sit upon inquiry after these sectaries chiefly. 
But Putts recanted, and bore a fagot at St. ifaul's Cross, 
and after that at Colchester." § 

To Kent we must again conduct our readers for a short 
time. We have intimated before that it was fruitful in the 
detested Anabaptistical error. "I was sent," says Fox, "from 

* Vide Todd's Life of Cranmer; Vaughan, vol. iii, p. 395. Todd's 
Defence of Oramner, pp. 93, 94. 

+ Philpofs Works (Parker Society), p. 55. 
X Fox, a^pvd Maitland*s Essays on the Reformation, p. 507. — ^Note B. 
§ Strype's Memorials of the Beformation, voL i, part 1, p. 336. 



76 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

the Council to my lord of Winchester (Gardiner), to exhort 
him to receive also the true confession of justificitioB. 
And because he was very refractorious, I said to hiOi 
'Why, my lord, what make you so great a matter hereml 
You see many Anabaptists rise up against the sacrament of 
the altar; I pray you, my lord, be diligent in confomiding 
of them.' For at that time my lord of Winchester and I 
had to do with two Anabaptists in Kent. In this aentt 
I willed my lord to be stiff in the defence of the Sacramento 
against the detestable errors of the Anabaptists," &a* Other 
evidence presents itself. Knox had thrown the whole weight 
of his influence into the reform movement. Into the spirit 
of Geneva he had not yet been immersed. Nor did " bli^ 
prelacy" appear so baleful to him. His sympathies were strong 
with the doctrine and polity of the Anglicans; and his aid 
had been solicited in the revision of the Prayer Book. Thit 
high preferment had been offered him, admits of no doubt 
His biographers suppose the Council proposed to form a nev 
bishopric at Newcastle ; but a letter from Northumberland 
to Cecil mentions Kochester as the place. One of his reasons 
for this appointment will interest our readers : — " I would 
to God it might please the king to appoint Mr. Knocks to 
the office of Rochester bishopric; which, for three purpoaeS) 
would do well. The first, he would not only be a whetstone, 
to quicken and sharpen the Bishop of Canterbury, whereof 
he hath need; but also he would be a great confounder of 
the Anabaptists lately springing up in Kent." We need not 
give his other reasons ; and only add his entreaty to Cecil : 
— "Herein I pray you desire my Lord Chamberlain and 
Mr. Vice-Chamberlain to help towards this good act, both 
for God's service and the king's." t From what cause this 
singular reason did not prevail with the Reformei-s, we know 
not Other letters from the earl manifestly indicate that 
his respect for Knox had undergone a considerable mixlifi- 



• Fox. Ridley's Worka (Parker Society), pp. 264, !»•>. 
t Macrie*B Life of Knox, Note D., p. 354. 



EDWABD THE SIXTH. 77 

cation. At a later period he dipped his pen in gall, and 
wrote in extreme bitterness against the Baptists. * In this 
work he warns his countrymen against their approach, and 
tjie pernicious influence of their doctrines. 

"Sectaries appeared now in Essex and Kent, sheltering 
themselves under the profession of the Gospel, of whom 
complaint was made to the Council These were the first 
tliat made separation from the reformed Church of England, 
having gathered congregations of their own. The congre- 
gation in Essex was mentioi;xed to be at Booking ; that in 
Kent at Feversham, as I have from an old register. From 
whence I also collect, that they held the opinions of the 
Anabaptists and Palagians; that there were contributions 
made among them for the better maintaining of their con- 
gregations j that the members of the congregations in Kent 
went over to the congregation in Essex, to instruct and to 
join with them; and that they had their meetings in Kent 
in divers places besides Feversham. The names of the chiefs 
of these sectaries in Kent were, Henry Hart, Cole of 
Eeversham, George Brobridge, Humphrey Middleton (who 
were their teachers, as it seems), William Greneland, John 
Gray, William Forstal, Edmund Morris, Laurence Bamsey, 
Thomas Broke, Boger Linsey, Bichard Dimeslake, Clarke, 
Nicoles Yong, John Plumer of Lenehame, and Cole of 
Maidstone. Their teachers and divers of these were taken 
up, and found sureties for their appearance, and at length 
brought into the Ecclesiastical Court, when they were 
examined in forty-six articles or more. Many of those 
befor^named being deposed upon the said articles, confessed 
them to be some sayings and tenets amongst them : * That 
the doctrine of predestination was meeter for devils than 
for Christian men ; that children were not bom in original 
sin,' which were Cole's assertions. These that follow were 

* A notice of his work will appear in another part of this volume; 
we content otuselyes here by referring the reader to MAcrie's Life, 
pp. 119, 120. 



Y8 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

taught by Hart : * That there was no man so chosen bat 
that he might damn himself; neither any man so reproliate 
but that he might keep Grod's commands, and be saved; 
that St. Paul might have damned himself, if he listed,'" Ac* 

We gather a little more information of these men in 
another work of this writer. "In January 27th,'* sajs 
Strype, " a nimiber of persons, a sort of Anabaptists, about 
sixty, met in a house on a Sunday, in the parish of Bockin^ 
in Essex, where arose among them a great dispute, * Whethff 
it were necessary to stand or kneel, bare-headed or covered, 
at prayers ? And they concluded the ceremony not to be 
material, but that the heart before God was reqtiired, and 
nothing else.' Such other like warm disputes there we» 
about Scripture. There were, likewise, such assemblies now 
in Kent. These were looked upon as dangerous to CharGh 
and State ; and two of the company were therefore com- 
mitted to the Marshallsea, and orders were sent to apprehend 
the rest."t 

Of Hart} and his companions we know but little. There 
is a letter of his now lying before us, to which we shall 
have occasion to refer again. Hart and his brethren sought 
the propagation of their religious views amongst their fellow- 
prisoners. Bradford, if not other confessors, engaged in the 
conflict. § Stry[)e has preserved two letters, no doubt from 
parties more or less interested in it. One is, "A piou.s letter 

* Strype's Memorials of Reformers. Oxford: vol. i, l)ook i., pp. .W, 
370. Strype*8 Life of Parker, vol. i., pp. 54, r^. Vide voL iii., p. -113. 

t Memorials of Cranmer, vol. i., p. 337. Poor StrjriM) knew nothing 
of the anxiety of a tender conscience to know tlie will of G«k1. He had 
been taught to swallow wliolesale tlie cix^eds and formularies of other*, auil 
thought he could afford to sneer at tlie solicitude of others to l)c right. 

ij: He was the jmncipal of tlie Free WilhrA Miiiy vm they were termed 
hy the IVedestinators. Tliis man drew up thirieon .articles t^) Ik? iihM«>r\'ed 
among his company; and there came none into their hrotherhmiil, i-\copt 
they wei*e sworn. - Stryi>e*s R Memorials (Mary), c. 'i^. 

§ Bradford's "Works (lleligious Tract Society), j). 45. ** He w:w the chiof 
laaintainer of man's free will, and enemy to God's free grace."— Lelteni 
of the Martyrs. 



EDWABD THE SIXTH. 79 

against complying with the idolatrous worship in Queen 
Mary's days, by a Free Will Man." The other is, "A letter 
to a congregation of Free Willers, by one that had been of 
that persuasion, but came off, and now a prisoner for reli- 
gion." We quote a sentence from it : " And although I 
thought I should lose many friends, yet it hath pleased God 
to raise up many friends for me. And I thank God that 
they, whom I thought would have been mine enemies, are 
become my friends in the truth j as in sample by our 
brethren Ledlay and Cole, and such like."* 

These matters will claim attention in another part of our 
work. 

To stamp the character and principles of these troublers 
of the commonwealth, the legislature, in closing its session 
in 1551, exempted the Baptists from the pardon which was 
granted to those who had taken a part in the late rebellion. 
Dissent from the dogmas of the church was a crime of 
deeper dye than rebellion against the state. 

In 1552 a letter from the Council ordered Cranmer to 
examine a new sect lately sprung up in this country. Inform- 
ation had been lodged against them by some of those reptiles 
who are ever creeping into houses and insinuating them- 
selves into the confidence of the simple-minded. Cranmer 
was at home in the work. The examination of this new 
sect was one of the businesses the archbishop was employed 
in while he was in his retirement at his house near Canter- 
bury. Strype says : — "What this sect was, appeareth not. 
It may be they were of the Family of Love, or David George 
sect, who made himself sometime Christ and sometime the 
Holy Ghost." t He favours us, in another work, with a 

* Strype's E. Memorials, voL vii. A Catalogue of Originals, p. 172. 

■f Strype's Memorials of Cranmer, vol. i., p. 421. Todd says that 
Henry Nicholas, the founder of the Family of Love, is represented by 
Rogers as making his followers disclaim the doctrines of the Anabaptists. 
Vide his Displaying of the Secte of the Family of Love. — ^Life of Cran- 
mer, voL ii., p. 351. — No doubt of this. That they were Baptists is often 
affirmed, but without the shadow of proof. 



80 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

somewhat different account. "A comTnisaicwi wa^ 
this year, dated October, to the Archbishop of Cantertnay 
and the Bishop of London, and other worshipful pecHHMi ii 
Kent, to make inquiry after sundry heresies lately apriBg 
up ; and for the examination and punishment of erroneom 
opinions, as it seem, of the Anabaptists and Arii^w^ of 
which sort some now, notwithstanding former soiveritk^ 
showed their heads."* 

One of the last acts in this painful drama was now to bi 
performed. The victim was a Dutchman, of the nanu of 
George Yan Parcf He practised as a surgeon, axkd wm a 
man of unblemished character. The names of the conuBM- 
sioners before whom he appc^ared ought to be preserved in 
this record. We select a few. Archbishop Cruuner, Biibop 
Bidley, Miles Coverdale, &c. Before these ghostly lonU 
the foreigner pleaded, through the medium of an interpxete 
The charge, as reported by his enemiesy was, '^ Thai Qod tbi 
Father is only God, and that Christ is not very Crod is not 
heresy. And being asked, through an interpreter, whetlier 
he would abjure the said ojiinions, he answered, ^NoT^J 
Unmoved by the threats of liis merciless persocntoxB, and 
strong in the moral consciousness of the truth which be 
professed, he prepared for the fiery trial '*He sufierad 
with great constancy of mind, and kissed the stake aiid 
£&gots that were to bum liim. Of this Piire I find a Paput 
wrote, saying, that he was a man of a most wonderful stricv 
life; that he used not to cat above once in two days; and 
before he did eat, would lie sometimes in liis devotioiis 
pi-ostrnte on tlie ground." § 



• Str^^Hi'H E. Mciiioriiils, Edward VI., b. ii., c. xv. 

t Vaughaii calls hiiu PariH, vol. iii., p. l^&i. 

X Wc had doubts al>out Ids ^Vrian teudcucicH ; )>ut luncc \^Titijig the 
aliovc, wc gather the following HtatcmeiitH from MSS. which have juA 
rcachcil us from Amsterdam: — **Auuo 1551, the 24th of April, Jovis Vaa 
PavU, one Dutchman, was burnt in Smithfield : was one Arian.** 

9 Burnet, voL ii, part L, p. 232; part iL, p. 239 (Oxford edition). 



SDWikBD THE SIXTH. 81 

Archdeacon Todd says a full account of the opinions held 
by this class may be found in the proceedings against Giles 
Wesi Bellan, another Dutchman, who abjured them about 
tbis time. His recantation has not been published. From a 
copy now before us we select the following : — 

" I bave diy»:«e aad sundry ^mes affirmed, said, taught, defended, 
and holden, in the parish of Worksop, of the said diocese, that there 
is no priest bat God only; and that no j»riest hath power to conse- 
crate the very body of Christ, as he was here reigning on earth, for 
the apostles had no power to consecrate the body of Christ ; and that 
no priest had power to take away man's sin. 

^*Iiem: That the Sacrament of the altar is but bread, except ilL 
be received by faith, and in the name of Jesus. Item: That Ooa 
doth not dwell in temples or churches made by man's hands, but in 

^a faithful " man to God. Item: That no man can make any 

water holier than €rod makes it; therefore, the water in the font, 
nor the holy water in the chiux^h, is holier than the water in the 
liver; for the water in the river is as holy as ^e water in iike fcH^ts, 
if a man be baptized in it, and the words of baptism be spoken over 

him. Item: That every * man may baptize in water as well as 

a priest. Item: That no bishop can make no ground holier th^ 
another. That no man is bound to fast. That no man ought to keep«i 
any holy day but ih.e Sunday. That prayer made to saints is of no 
value. That no man ought to go on pilgrimage. That a man may 
be confessed of another man as well as of a priest. That there is no 
purgatory."* 

The feeling excited by these cruelties told with fearful 
effect on the bishops. In the discussion of a bill for 
enforcing ecclesiastical laws, in 1567, it is said, **A11 the 
bishops joined in a complaint to the Lords, that they were 
much despised by the common people; that vice and dis- 
order much aboimded ; and that they durst not punish any 
sin^ by reason that some late proclamations had almost 
totally deprived them of any jurisdiction, so that they could 
not oblige any person to appear before them, or observe the 
order of the church."t 



ifit) A woid we cannot make out. {b) The aftme wotdafi before. 

* Note C. 
+ ParL History, voL 1, p. 591. 

G 



82 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

The power whicli these men had so shamefolly abonl 
was soon to be taken away. The death of the young 
monarch soon followed; and though plans had been fonnri 
for the exclusion of the rightful heir to the throne and tk 
election of Lady Jane Grey, yet the rapid and soooesrfd 
efforts of Mary to secure her rights, exposed them not onlf 
to the yindictiveness of the professors of the old &itt 
when restored to power, but to the penalties of tieaaoi 
against the state. The fabric which they raised by th« 
hand of cruelty, and cemented by the blood of harmless and 
truth-loving men, was soon to crumble to dust The meMon 
'which they had meted out to others would be meted out to 
them again. Justice seldom sleeps in the presence of wroi^ 
The cry of suffering innocence was heard; and, by a deatk 
similar to that of their victims, were many of the leading 
inquisitors removed from the world. But the narrative of 
these events will claim our attention in another chapter. 



CHAPTER IV. 

MARY. 

No doubt Mary*s accession to the throne was welcomed 
by the majority of the nation.* The plot for her exclusion 
and the enthronement of Jane exploded at once, and placed 
the innocent and the guilty alike at her mercy. There 
were causes which contributed to her success. Into a full 
detail of these we cannot enter. The merest outline muit 



* " I have seen the mott sudden clumge that could have been beliered 
among mankind; and I think that Heaven alone haa conducted the wurk* 
and caused such innumerable people to be moved to the greatest affectiim 
which has ever been seen amongst subjects." "About 35,000 or 40,000 
men, foot and horse, armed at her devotion.'* — Nosillet, apud Turner, 
vol. iiL, p. 379. 



MART. 83 

suffice for the present. We have already seen that more than 
three-fourths of the population were attached to the Komish 
— ^perhaps more correctly the Anglican, in contradistinction 
to the ultra-Protestant — ^faith, though opposed, unmistakably, 
to the Papal supremacy.* Their king, in his will, had re- 
cognised the claim of the daughter of Catherine ; and both 
houses of the legislature had most deliberately owned it. 
Northumberland, petted by the Keformers, the '^ Joshua "t 
of his time, under the mask of the loftiest pretensions to 
sanctity, was without moral principle. His tyranny and 
selfishness, and that of his creatures, had concentrated the 
hatred of the community on him. His plotting against 
Somerset — a weaker, but fer better man, — and finally the Pro- 
tector's death in violation of justice, had never been forgiven; 
whilst the supposed poisoning of the lamented Edward had 
filled to overflowing the cup of public indignation. Keform, 
too, had been carried on in a spirit which had awakened the 
hostility of thousands. Force, not suasion ; punishment, 
not love ; imprisonment, not the recognition of the rights of 
conscience, — ^had been the weapons with which these mis- 
taken Reformers had worked. Scenes which were a disgrace 
to morality had been exhibited. One spiritual tyranny, 
clothed with all the sacredness of antiquity, and sanctioned 
by the public religious sentiments of the civilized world, had 
been thrown off, only to give place to another which vio- 
lated the moral training of many, and robbed them of sources 
of daily pleasure and gain. Vicious, selfish, hypocritical 
men, under the guise of piety, had made a perfect onslaught 
on all holy things. Holy roods, holy images, holy vessels, 
holy bread and water, holy candles,^ holy beads, had been 

* The Pope felt ** that she had obtained her throne by the favour of 
those who, for the most part, hated to death the Holy See,** 

f So called by Sandys, afterward Archbishop of York. 

X Father Latimer, in his own way, explains the use of these : — "Now 
there was an old cousin of mine, which, after the man was dead, gave me 
a wax candle in my hand, and commanded me to make certain + + + over 



84 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

swept away; and above all, the wealth of the ohurch bid 
been seized to gratify their ambition and their lost ftr 
power.* Thousands of wretched monks were wanderen. 
Thousands, who had been allowed to fill vacant cures, p^ 
tained the fullest sympathy with their early religions tnia- 
ing. Over a wide circle their power extended. It cooH 
not be otherwise. No religious movement which is not 
the result of individual consciousness, can be genuine. 
Politicians, for their own worldly interest^ may force the 
outward man; civil power may compel an external obe 
dience, — but they leave the heart untouched, (^ermainr, 
Scotland, and England, are standing proofs of the mism 



him that was dead ; for she thought the devil should run away hy uA 
by. So I took the caudle, but I could not + him, as she would hsvt 
me to do, for I had never seen it before. Now she, perceiving that I 
could not do it, with a great anger took the candle out of my hanL 
saying," &c. — Sermons, vol. i., p. 543. 

* Complaints of the spoliation of the church by the lay lonls, tai 
the povci-ty of the church dignitaries, meet you everywhere. It may W 
so. Large jwrtions of i)roperty had )>een abstracted from ecclesiiafiicJ 
affluence. 'Hieir wretchedness may })e gathered from an itom or l*" 
from tlio records of the spoil which his enemies canioil away fnpm tht 
castles at Battersea and CuwcmkI, palatial residences oi Holgato, the Arch- 
bishop of York. * ' From Battersea they canied 4:30() in gohl ; in s})ocialliM 
and good debts, £400 more ; in plate gilt and parcels gilt, 1,000 ounces: i 
mitre of fine gold, with two pendants, set al>out the sides and nindit with 
very fine diamonds, Ha])phircs, and liailists, luid all the plain witli xftj 
good stones and pearls, and the ]>endants in like manner, weighing l^ 
ounces ; six or seven groat rings of fine g<dd, with st<mes in them. wh»Tc»( 
were three fine Idue toniuoisc and a diamond ; a seri>ent*s tongue, Kt ifi 
a standanl of silver, gilt and graven; the An^hbLshop^s seal, in silmr; 
his signet; an old anticiuo, in gold. Fi-om CawiMxl and other pUce*. 
£900 ; two mitres ; in jdate and parcel gilt, 770 ounces ; gilt plate. 1.137 
ounces; one bn>ken + of silver gilt, weighing forty-six ounces.** SulwLoi- 
tials, as well as the ornamental, were carried away. ** 2,r»()0 shiv|\ Irt) 
beasts, 200 tjuarters of wlicat, 500 of malt, sixty of tNitrt, and five ttr m& 
tons of wine." (Str}Tx:'s Cranmer, vol ii., pp. 8, 0.) Tliesc aiv I'lilv * 
few of the goiKl things of this life which were foun«l in th«* ston-s i.f thr 
Archlnshop. Yet Cranmer, in a note t4i Cecil, says, ** If I knew -f 
any bishop who was covet<iUB, I would surely adimmish him. but I ku •« 
none ; but all Ixjggared, except it be one, and lie I deem will my he u 
not very rich.** —Ibid, voL il, p. 405. 



MABY. 85 

and failure of moral changes efifected by such instrumentality. 
Difficult we know it is to fonn anything like an accurate 
conception of the state of the rural mind at this time. The 
data from which we could draw our conclusions are very 
limited. But it must not be forgotten, that thought and 
intelligence had more power and play in the great hives of 
industry and conmierce than in the sparsely populated dis- 
tricts of the country. The cities and great towns were the 
Reformers' strongholds. * 

To the rustic mind there was a charm about the old form 
of worship. It appealed to the senses, if it did not affect 
the mind. The eye and the ear were gratified, as the one 
gazed on the splendours of art and decorative effect in the 
awfiil mysteries of the altar, and the other drank in the 
rolling notes of the organ or the plaintive strains of the 
officiating staff of priests, although the heart might be im- 
mersed in all its moral pollution. Compared with the bald- 
ness of the new, the auxiliaries of the old faith were most 
telling. Besides, Mary had pledged her word that there should 
be no changes. The ecclesiastical polity, the doctrinal formu- 
laries of her father's reign, were to be the great standards of 
the national faith. She herself had consented to them. The 
imprisoned bishops, likely to wield the most powerful in- 
fluence under her reign, had worked them out from the 
mass of corruption with which they had been surrounded. 
Hence, Protestants were as loud in their welcome as 
Catholics. The reason is here: both had confidence in 
the sincerity of the queen; both hoped that their claims 
would be respected. Toleration had been promised. These 

* "In London alone there were 15,000 French, Flemish, and German 
refagees, most of them headstrong and ungovernable enthnsiasta" — 
Froude, vol. vi., p. 43. Many of them, we have no doubt, were Flemish 
Baptists — men who believed truth to be a reality, and could afford to 
keep a conscience, at the risk of everything else. 

" The city of London is a whirlpool and sink of all evil humours, where 
Uiey be bred, and from thence spread into all parts of the world." — QtO' 
diner. Fox, book i, Mary's Reign. 



86 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

expectations were well grounded; whilst the mass of ilM 
people were ready to hail any change which would gratify 
their senses or improve their social state. Heaven, too, wu 
regarded as deeply interested in this conflict. Prodigki 
of no common order were interpreted in Mary's &vonr.* 
Let the reader give but ordinary weight to these con- 
current circumstances, and the &<;ility with which the 
eldest bom of Henry ascended the thi*one will be no longer 
a mystery. 

" The path of honour, of comfort, and o( national pesce 
and prosperity, was never more straight and perceptiblA— 
never more easy and certain to any sovereign, than that 
which opened before Mary."+ The past in her histoiy 
warranted, to some extent, if not entirely, the confidence of 
the nation. Her conduct during the reigns of her &ther 
and brother, though firm, and unfolding many of the Tndor 
elements of her nature, had given no ground, even to con- 
jecture, that the fearful scenes which marked her short and 
unhappy reign could by any possibility transpire. Amiable, 
cultivating in her retirement an acquaintance with the 
noblest productions of past ages, conscientious in the highest 
degree, j: and standing out as a lonely royal and suffering 
maiden, she enlisted the sympathies of the people, and war- 
ranted the hope that her rule would be marked by a wise 
and tolerant policy, and be followed by all the elements of 
prosperity and national wealth. Besides, for a time, the 
promise she had so distinctly given to her East-Anglican 
snp])orters remained intact. Whilst doubt and uncertainty 



• Froude, vol. vi., chap. 1. "Therefore, no marvel why OtA fought 
against them, seeing they were hypocrites, and under the cltrnk of tlM 
Gospel would have deharred the queen's highness of her rights ; hut G«i 
would not so cloak them." — Bradford's Works, p. 324. 

t Turner, voL iii., p. 395. 

t "My soul is 0(Hrs," she said to her hrother; "my faith I will n*A 
change ; my opinions I will not dissemldc. I therefore desire your high- 
ness rather t<« take my life than to restrain me from hearing maM.**— 
Softme'i Befonnation, toL iii., p. 615. 



ICABT. 87 

as to certain final issues — whilst dangers, more or less, 
marked her pathway, she not only did not violate her word, 
but breathed the spirit of conciliation; and though she 
would indulge her own religious convictions, and devoutly 
conform to the rites and ceremonies of her own flaith, still 
no embargo should be laid on the consciences of others. 
More than thi^L The rabid zeal of her co-religionists speed- 
ily manifested itself. In more places than one, the mass, in 
violation of the law, was publicly celebrated. At Paul's 
Cross, a canon of the metropolitan church so aroused the 
indignation of his audience by his intemperate eulogies on 
the hated Bonner and the dogmas of the old faith, that, but 
for the protection of Bradford, his life would have been 
sacrificed by the excited multitude.* Against these un- 
timely and unexpected outbreaks, the lord mayor complained 
to the queen. The calm was ruffled, and the deep wide sea 
was agitated, and it might be lashed into terrific fury. ''Go 
tell them," was the reply to his lordship, "in the best words 
the mayor and recorder can devise, that albeit her grace's 
conscience is stayed in matters of religion, yet she meaneth 
graciously not to compel and constrain other men's con- 
sciences, otherwise than God shall put in their hearts a 
persuasion of the truth that she is in, through the opening 
of his word xmto them by godly, virtuous, and learned 
preachers." 

The better qualities of her nature were speedily eradi- 
cated. Into all the arts of duplicity she was very soon 

* A spectator of the scene thus describes the excitement : — "Others, 
more excited than the rest, began to climb up the pulpit, to pull him 
down. Such an uproar began, such shouting at the sermon, such casting 
np of caps, that a bystander, who kept a journal of the events of the day, 
affirmed that the people seemed to be mad, and much mischief would 
have been done if the mayor and his brethren had not been present." — 
Life and Defence of Bonner, p. 156. Collier, voL iL, p. S45. Mary was 
present at this scene, accompanied by sixty guards, besides the attend- 
ants of the nobles who accompanied her. — ^Howard's Lady Jane Grey, 
pp. 303, 304. 



88 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

indoctrinated ; and her progress was rapid. Before she hii 
been three weeks on the throne^ she had received a secMl 
messenger from the Yatican, and had opened a oomspotA' 
kioe with the Pope.* She stands before us, in the ptgeof 
' history, as a fearful, and^ indeed, terrific example of the powv 
of superstition and priestly tyranny to convert a natoR 
which might have unfolded all the elements of moral and 
political greatness, into one which the Moral Cfovemor of 
the Universe — ^happily for man, at £u> distant periods- 
sends as the ministers of justice to correct nations ftr 
Iheir transgressions. True it is, the seeds of her end 
tyranny were there — deep hidden in her nature ; but bs 
youth, and the first acts of her reign, gave the proaam 
of a different harvest Like the vast primeval fin-ests d 
the New World, which have beneath the wide-spreadiDg 
roots of their magnificent ti^es the seeds of other fomi 
of vegetable life: till the former are removed, the latter 
cannot vegetate. 

Liberated from the Tower, restored to his see, and in- 
vested with the highest legal, and probably at this time tbe 
highest political authority in the kingdom, Crardiner soon 
made his influence felt in every department of the stata^ 
Ambitio\is, vindictive, regardless in a gi'eat measQie of 
high-toned moral principle, he was "in wit crafty and 
subtle ; towards his sui>eriors flattering and fair-spoken ; to 
his inferiors fierce; against his equals stout and envious.' 
Thoroughly familiar, from early and long practice, wid 
every di2>lomatic art, more than with theologiail scieuoe^ 
he was one of those men, by no means rare in his age, who 



* Vide Fnwde, vol. vi., p. 83. 

t ** WinchcHicr hIiowb already, in the r>i»iiiioii of many, that lie will mrt 
be loss arrogiiut and violent in the a<lnuniMtrution of affaini than uthen 
who have hatl tliis authority ; and we nmy 8cc that he htm forguttct 
nothin({, in liis Hevcn yean' prinon, of liis acciwlonictl niauuor.** (Tht 
French Ainliawuulor to hig Court. )— Turner, vol. iii., p. 381. 

**GanHner," Haid Mary, "was olwlinate, and would liiiten t«^ no one ; 
■he herself wus helplean and misemble."— Fruude, voL vi., p. 221. 



MABY. 89 

regarded the possession of power as more than jtistifying 
ihe means by which their boundless lust of dominion was 
gratified. Extremes centred in the bishop. There was much 
that was noble and commanding, blended with a reptile 
mieanness which stamps his character with features which, 
as a whole, are ever repulsive. * 

To men of the chancellor's spirit revenge was sweet ; to 
l^umph over a foe his highest glory ; to gaze on his suffer- 
ings, and to aid in augmenting them, was no very limited 
source of enjoyment. 

Gardiner had felt the power of Cranmer and his reform- 
ing brethren during the former reign. In his conflict with 
the archbishop his overthrow was signal. Deprived of his 
bishopric, stripped of all his authority, he had cherished in 
the solitude of his cell the spirit of revenge. His hour was 
now come; and in the agony and blood of his martyred foes 
the plenitude of his vengeance was satisfied. Nor. was this 
all. The bishop, in the fulness of his zeal, during the reign 
of Henry, had published a work in defence of the monarch. 
It now supplied his opponents with strong defensive armour. 
They galled the apostate prelate with arrows snatched from 
his quiver. His work against the Papal supremacy, and his 

* The following is Bishop Ponet's description of him :— "The doctor 
lutth a smart colour, hanging look, frowning brows, eyes an inch within 
his head, a nose hooked like a buzzard's ; nostrils like a horse, ever snufi&ng 
in the wind; a sparrow mouth, great paws like the devil, talons on his 
feet like the grife, two inches longer than the natural toes, and so tied 
Wi& sinews that he cannot abide to be touched." Fonet hated Gardiner. 
— -Frottde, voL vi, pp. 106, 197," 295, 395. 

Lloyd says, "His reservedness was such, that he never did what he 
aimed at, never aimed at what he intended, never intended what he said, 
dad never said what he thought ; whereby he carried it so, that others 
ahomld do hi? business when they opposed it, and should undermine theirs 
when he seemed to promote it. A man that was to be traced like the 
fax, and read, like Hebrew, backward. If you would know what he did, 
jcna. nrost observe what he did not ; that, whilst intending one thing, he 
professed to aim at the very opposite; that he never intended what he 
madt and never said what he intended.*'— Lodge's Illustrations, vol. L, 
p. 126. 



90 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

ready concurrence in the divorce, had been republished. It 
was considered the best defence of the king^s divorce, and 
the most unanswerable attack on the Pope's sapremacj, 
which had hitherto appeared. To this work a prefiice had 
been written by Bonner.* Again and again his own senti- 
ments were quoted by the prisoners at his bar, and the pro- 
tection of his opinion was invoked by thousands of disaidenii 
from Popery. Renegades always feel this deeply.f To 
trample on their own principles in the madness of their 
rage, to heap insult and calumny on those who retain tham, 
is the highest proof they can give of the sincerity of their 
conversion and the reality of their faith. To rescae their 
discarded opinions from neglect, to lay them in all their 
breadth and importance before the nation, to show thai 
interest, not principle— selfishness, not the love of the trath, 
may £Edrly be recognized as the cause of the change, ii, 
beyond all dispute, the deadliest blow which can be inflicted 
on an opponent. This was the doom of the unhappy chan- 
cellor. His holy anger could only be quenched in the blood 
of his enemies. 

Far less public for a time, though not less potent, was the 
infliience of another councillor. Renard, the ambassador 
from Spain, was early admitted to the confidence of Maiy. 
He was a thorough diplomatist. The end with him alwajri 
justified the means. Spanish interests were paramount with 
him. At these he ever aimed. The supremacy of the 



* The Life and Defence of Bishop Bonner, by a Tractarian Britiih 
Critic. London, 1842. A work of great interest and equal cleameai. 

** Gardiner's spite was at this time much impelled by the reprinting ol 
his book on True Obedience, which was done at Strasburg, and sent onr. 
In it he called King Henrjr's marriage with Queen Catherine incestiioa% 
and had justified his divorce, and his second marriage with his ^moil 
godly and virtuous wife. Queen Anne.*** — Burnet. 

t He had thus spoken also : ** The king's majesty hath, by the inspin- 
tlon of the Holy Ghost, componed all matter of religion, which uniformity, 
I pray God, it may in that, and all other things, be extended unto vs.**— 
Address to the University of Cambridge, in Strype's Ecclesiastical 
rials, voL vi Apud 243. 



ICABT. 91 

queen's uncle in the English Council was the end of his 
mission. Moral restraint was unknown when these were to 
be secured.* The union of the two crowns was the triumph 
of his skill. Mary was &scinated by this unprincipled minister. 
In the solitude of midnight, and in the loneliness of the 
royal closet, he poured his insidious advice into her willing 
ear. Gradually her whole heart was laid open before him. 
IntenseTy hating the reformed doctrines, feeling that nothing 
but the entire destruction of its abettors would give security 
to his master's policy, he urged the death of the unfortimate 
Lady Jane Grey and her friends. And only the dread of a 
nation's rising prevented his infatuated mistress from listen- 
ing to his pernicious counsels, and offering her sister as a 
victim to his malignant nature, t His was a dark spirit of 
evil, rejoicing only in the agony and suffering of his fellow 
inen.j: 

The influence of these two men, till the arrival of Pole, 
was all-powerful; yet, in many respects, their line of policy 
"was divergent, and the ends they sought to secure very 



* The emperor and his clerical advisers had promised to prevent Mary 
either from attempting innovations in religion without their consent, or 
manying against the approbation of her subjects. Mary herself had 
authorised Benard to assure the Council that she had no thought of 
marrying a stranger. And yet Turner says, — " On the 30th of October 
Mary sent for the Spanish ambassador by night, and in the seclusion of 
her own room, prostrate on her knees before the most sacred object of 
her faith, and after repeating the Vent Creator, she solemnly vowed to 
him that none other than Philip would she take for her husband. I take 
the substance of this from Benard's despatch.'' — ^Turner, vol. iii., p. 392. 
Duplicity marked her character from the first. 

+ ""With Elizabeth," he said to Cfharles, "there will be religious revo- 
lution. The clergy will be put down, the Catholics persecuted, and there 
will be such revenge for the present proceedings as the world has never 
seen.'' — (Benard to the Emperor.) Apvd Froude, vol. vi., p. 355. 

t "If England should be ruled by such a councillor, woe, woe, to 
England ! for then it would come to ruin and destruction ; and them that 
favour Gk)d's "Word would be in worse case than those that were in the 
time of Sodom and Gomorrah." — Sir P. Hoby to Cecil. Burleigh State 
Papers, voL L Apvd Froude, voL v., p. 488. Hoby in this case was 
all but prophetic. 



92 EAItLT EKGUSH BAPTISTS. 

opposita One in their intense hatred to the reformed,-* 
hesitating at no means to annihilate the Mends of the nev 
doctrine, — yet the one was the Spaniard, seeking to subor- 
dinate England to the politics of Spain; the other tlic 
Englishman, not less anxious for the independence and 
greatness of his country, and the union of the qnem witii 
an English noble. Renard triumphed, and Philip wm 
declared king. 

For the political events which led to the sacrifice of Ladj 
Jane Grey upon the scaffold,* — for the various means on- 
ployed for the restoration of the old faith and the supremuy 
of the Papal power, — ^for the history of the rebellion exdtod 
by the intended marriage with Philip, and the hostility of 
the people to the restoration of the ancient rites, — ^for tin 
account of the martyrdom of some of the best, the noblflrt» 
and the most enlightened of England's sons at that time, 
and the suffering and the misery which followed, we mart 
refer our readers to other sources of information. Oars if 
not a history of Mary's reign. It is not a martyrologj. 
Only to these can we refer so far as it may place before our 
readers the design of this volume. 

The first year of her reign had not closed before the 
reconciliation to Home was com])lete, and the Cardinal 
Legate invested with full power. The joy of the PomanistB 
was full.t The prospects of an heir to the throne made 
them all but delirious. She was another Mary favoured 
of heaven, to give birth to another son who shoidd save 
the church. Gratitude was demanded for all this. Mary 
and her Council were ready. S])anish gold liad done 



* Vide Howard'H Life of Lady Jane Grey. 

t **Then you might have fieen th<me which had been liishopn, who had 
been diHphiced by the young King Edwaird and liii late father Ilenryi 
coming in great joy and magnifi(^noe alM>ut the town, mounte<l au niukl 
and little p<>mpou« horsea, dreaseil in great gowns of block camlet, ov« 
which were beautiful surplicet, their heada covered with aatin h<»odi 
like thfwe worn liy the monks, being joyous on account of the queea'i 
victory."— Howard's Lady Jane Grey, p. 302. 



MART. 93 

much,* and the promise of imdistnrbed possession of church 
lands more, with her councillors and senate. The past pre- 
sented them with precedents. The times of Moses, the Judges, . 
and the Kings, were ^11 of examples which they might imi- 
tate. Agreements, and great national festivities, were marked 
by sacrifice. That with Borne demanded one. Completeness 
without it would be wanting. Their sincerity would be 
questioned if the land, once more restored to the unity of 
the church, was not cleansed from the hated and polluting 
presence of the heretics. The Cardinal Legate demanded it. 
** Bring forth," said he, "fruits meet for repentance. Here 
is another point that you must show worthy of a repentant 
mind : that whereas you have sore offended God by giving 
fiftvour to heretics, now transfer your favotlr under such 
.manner, that if you can count them by any means unto 
the unity of the church, then do it, for it is a great work 
of mercy. But if ye cannot, and ye suffer or favour them, 
there cannot be a work of greater cruelty against the com- 
monwealth than to nourish or favour any such. For be ye 
assured, there is no kind of men so pernicious to the com- 
monwealth as they be ; there are no thieves, no murderers, 
no adulterers, nt>r no kind of treason, to be compared to 
theirs, who, as it were, undermining the chief foundations 
of all commonwealth, which is religion, maketh an entry to 
all kinds of vice in the most heinous manner."+ To the 
senate, as it knelt before the proud priest, he had given 



* Qardiner "suggested that without great remittances of money to 
gain the principal nobility and leading men, the next parliament would 
be as troublesome as the last.'' £400,000 was employed in this business. 
— Vide Ck)llier, vol. ii., p. 353. "Upon Tuesday, the 2nd of October, 
.there came to the Tower in 20 cartes made for the show, accompanied 
-with cestain Spaniards of the king's guard, iv. xx. xrii. little chests, of a 
yeard loxkg and iiii. inches broad, of silver, which will make by estimation 
L. thousand pound." — ^The Chronicle of Queens Jane and Mary, p. S3 
(Camden Society), ^towe makes it 27 chests. Fox says it was matted 
about with mats, &c. 

f rk^ri^inal Pole's Address to the Citizens of London. — ^Appendix to 
Strype's Ecclesiastical Memorials. 



94 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

similar advice. Philip and Mary responded to tEe call It 
was a glorious work. The merits would be enormous. The 
Divine favour would rest on the land. A son would be 
given, and the power of His Holiness consolidated in Um 
nation. In Bonner, an officiating high-priest was fbuni 
His qualifications were of the highest order. Others of the 
episcopal bench were ready to aid in the pleasant woi^; 
while subordinate Levites, in almost countless nomben^ 
were ready to discharge the inferior duties in this great 
national holocaust. But caution was necessary. The de- 
ments of danger existed. Eebellion had already threatened 
Mary's existence. The old forms of faith were preferred, no 
doubt, by the mass of the people, but not the Papal 
supremacy.* 

Early in her reign articles were sent to the bishops to 
aid them in their godly work. One or two will illustnte 
their design :— 

**Item: That every bishop, and all other persona nfonwaiH, do 
dihgeatly travel + for the repression of heresies and notable 
especially in the clergy, duly correcting and punishing the same. 



* **Yet they did not (the parliament) gladly hear of the aboUahiig 
specially of that law, that gave the title of the supremacy of the ckarA 
in the realm to the crown ; suspecting that to be an introduction to tht 
Pope's authority into the realm, which they cannot gladly hear <tf ; aad 
for this cause cannot gladly hear of my legation in the Pope's nana 
Whereupon her Grace, in the same letter, doth exhort me to stay my 
voyage imtil a more opportune time ; and asketh my coimsel, in case tht 
lower house make resistance in renouncing the title of supremacy, what 
her Grace were best to do, and what way she had best to take." (CardiBal 
Pole.) — Memorials of Cranmer, vol. ii., 414. 

Anxious that our readers should have full evidence on this point, we 
select a sentence or two from an appeal to the Council by the priaootfi 
for the Gospel : — "So that there was not one parish in all England thai 
ever desired again to have the Romish superstition and vain aerricei, 
which is now by the popish, proud, covetous, clergy placed again, in cob* 
tempt not only of God, aU heaven, and all the Hi>ly Ghost'a letaona ii 
the ble8se<l Bible ; but also against the honour of tlie said two moat nobk 
kings, against your own country, fore-agreement, and against all th« 
godly consciousness within this realm of England and elsewhere, "^/did, 
voL iL, p. 442. f Labour. 



HART. 95 

**Item: That every bishop, and all other persons aforesaid, do 
likewise travel for the condemning and repressing of corrupt and 
haughty opinions, unlawful books, ballads, and other pernicious and 
hurtful devices, engendering hatred amongst the people and discord 
amongst the same. And the schoolmasters, preachers, and teachers, 
do exercise and use their offices and duties, without teaching, preach- 
ing, or setting forth any evil and corrupt doctrine ; and that doing 
the contrary, they may be by the bishop and his said officers punished 
and removed. 

"Item: That by the bishop of the diocese an uniform doctrine be 
set forth by homilies, or otherwise, for the good instruction of all 
people; and that the said bishop, and other persons aforesaid, do 
compel the parishioners to come to their several churches, and there 
devoutly to hear divine service, as of reason they ought." * 

The chief magistrate of the metropolis was a fittiDg 
instrument for this work. His name was BlackwalL In 
obedience to the mandate of the queen, he issued his orders 
to the several 'Wfcrds, commanding them to assemble ''all 
and every the said householders, that both in their own 
persons, and also their wives, children, and servants^ being 
of the age of twelve years and upwards, and every of them, 
do at all and every tim& and times henceforth, and namely 
at the holy time of Easter now approaching, honestly, 
quietly, and catholickly, use and behave themselves like 
good and faithful Christian people," &c. They are then to 
see that the admonitions of Bonner '* to all parsons, vicars, 
and curates" are executed; "that they and every of them 
do truly, without delay, advertize you of the names and 
surnames of all and every person and persons, that they or 
any of them can or may at any time hereafter know, per- 
ceive, or understand to transgress or offend in any point or 
article concerning the premises, at their utmost peril." f 

To facilitate her ends, and to check the Protestant heresy, 
Mary laid the pulpit under an interdict. Little need there 
was for such a step in relation to her friends. Romanists 
never liked it. Letters were sent to the bishops, command- 

* Fox (Madden's edition), Mary's reign, book L, p. 22. t Ibid^ p. 22, 



96 EARLY ENQLISH BAPTISTS. 

ing them not to Buffer any person in their dioces^ citiier 
priest or deacon, or otherwise distinguished, to preach or 
expound the Scriptures openly in any church, chapel, or 
other place, without special liceuse fi-om the qaeeiL Bf 
this exercise of regal power she hoped to arrest the progrw 
of the Eeformation. Vain hope ! The rising tide is not 
thrown back by barriers of sand.* 

We have seen already that vast multitudes of the peopk^ 
some from self-interest, others from fear, and various odwr 
motives, had outwardly conformed to the jiew order of thii^ 
during Edward's reign.t Upon this class the measuiWB of 
the government, and the zeal of the episcopate in carrriii^ 
them out, told with speedy effect Many of the clei^ thit 
were forward men under King Edward, now, by the terror 
of the times, recanted and subscribed. ''And these were of 
two sorts. Some out of weakness did it, but persjisted do! 
in it, but, as soon as they could, revoked their subscriptioM 
and recantations ; and after their release and escape oat d 
prison made a sorrowful confession in public of their falL''^ 
Others conformed, soothing their cdHsciences with the delu- 
sion "that their bodies might be there so long ats their 
spirits did not consent." § Bradford, in one of his letters, 
says "that not the tenth pei-son abode in Goir.s ways; 
and that the more did part stakes with the Pa]>idt tuid 
Protestant, tkc. For they j)retended Popery outwardly, 
going to mass with the Papists, and tarrying with them 
personally at their antichristian and idolatroas .sor\ice; 

• Vide Collier, voL ii., p. 34.5; Records, j*. 68. 

t **The U80 of the old religion is forbidden by law/* naid {"agit u^ 
Somerset, **and the uhc of the new i8 not yet ]>rinUMl ; priutotl in the 
stomachs of nearly eleven out of every twelve purtn of the reuliii ; wM 
countenance noe\'er men nuiko outwardly t4i pleano tlinw in whom xhtj 
see the power resteth." July, ir>4l>. —StryiHj's Et'cle. MemoriuU. .4pw' 
Soame*8 History of the Kefoniiution, voL iii., p. IVJI. 

t Strype's Cnuinicr, vol. ii., p. 88. Jewel and othen lielnngeii ti» 
this class. 

§ Strype's Cranmer, vol. ii, p. 00. 



MABY. 97 

bnt with their hearts they said, and with their spirits they 
served the Lord."* Many fled to the continent, and found 
refnge amongst the various religious communities in Switzer- 
land, Holland, &c.t 

It would give additional interest to our narrative, we feel 
persuaded, to narrate the suflerings and martyrdom of those 
illustrious servants of our common Lord — Bradford, Philpot, 
Saunders, Bidley, Hooper, Latimer, Cranmer, and others; 
but our space forbids this. They were victims upon whom 
Sonner and Gardiner soon laid their hands. Their zeal was 
kindled by their deadly hatred to the men, and they rested 
not till the martyr's fire had removed them from their path. 
Crardiner "thought no argument would operate so strongly as 
penalties, and that the terror of fire and faggots, in some cases, 
were the best methods of conviction;" that when people 
were incorrigible, they ought to be capitally punished."^ 
The pages of Fox are rich in details. In this glorious cloud 
of witnesses some of our fathei*s are found. The extent of 
their sufferings we cannot accurately estimate. The martyr- 
ologist is not suflSciently explicit. Internal evidence would 
justify the conclusion that they were far more than his posi- 
tive and clear statements warrant Intense as the hatred 
to the Eeformers was, it did not diminish in intensity 
when it hunted Anabaptists from their seclusion. Nowhere 
were they safe. Spies everywhere haunted their steps. 
**For now a man can go to no place, but malicious busy- 
bodies curiously search out his deeds, mark his words, and if 
he agree not with them in despising God's Word, then will 
they spitefully and hatefully cavil against him and it^ calling 



♦ "Works, p. 106 (Religious Tract Society). " They never came to the 
Gk)8pel but for commodity and gain's sake, and even for gain they leave 
Ik."— P. 326. 

f Vide The Troubles at Frankfort (Petherham ed. ; London, A.D. 1846). 
Collier states that about 12,000 of the clergy were turned out of their 
livings for being married. — See vol. iL, p. 366. 

t GoUier, voL iL, p. 378. 

H 



98 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

it error and heresy, and the professors thereof heretics tnd 
schismatics; and with other odious and spiteful names^ •■ 
traitors aad not the Queen's friends."* 

Amidst other means for supressing the heretics, an order 
was issued to the justices of Norfolk, May the 27th. We 
select a few sentences from it to show its spirit. They were^ 
" I. To divide themselves into several districtions. IL T« 
assist such preachers as should be sent. III. To lay speciil 
weight for teachers of heresies, and procurers of secret 
meetings to that purpose. Y. To procure one or more o£ 
every parish, secretly instructed, to give information of the 
behaviour of the inhabitants. YI. To charge the constaUe^ 
and four or more Catholic inhabitants of every parish, to 
give account of idle vagabonds and suspected persons, and 
the retainers of such persons. To observe hue and cry; and 
to look after the watches in every parish.'' f These mai 
were willing tools of the royal tyrants. Men were btie 
enough, though sworn to judge with equity, to examine the 
accused on secret information, and without the knowledge 
of their accusers. Norfolk had many individuals who 
thought they were doing God service, by hunting ike 
hei*etics from their hiding places. 

In articles concerning archdeacons, issued this year, oocun 
the following : — " Whether there be any that will not suffer 
the priest to dip the child three times in the font, being yet 
strong and able to abide and suffer it in the judgment and 
opinion of disci^eet and expert persons, but will needs have 
the child in the clothes, and only be sprinkled with a &v 
drops of water V'X 

In I55i, Pole ordered a visitation to be held throughoat 
the whole country. A book was to be kept, in which iha 
names of conformists were to be entered, and the separatists 



* Norfolk Petition to the Queen. Fox, book ii 

f Strype*! Cnnmer, voL iL pp. 03-94. 

X CoDkr, ▼ol- ii (BMordi, p. 87.) 



ICABT. 99 

were to be reported, and proceeded against with the utmost 
severity of the law."* 

Kent supj^ed a large number of Christian heroes. Many 
of them, no donbt, were Baptists. It is clear from Fox, 
that many dissidents from the State Church resided here, 
and met in sepaiute congregations ; aud the principles they 
held, though imperfectly stated by the martyrologist, are 
decidedly Anabaptistical. Of their existence in the former 
reign we have already placed evidence before our readers. 
Oranmer and his brethren did not convert them. Persecu- 
tion never extinguished them. Their influence had grown. 
About the following there can be no doubt ; — In Maidstone 
resided John Denby, described as a gentleman, and John 
Newman, by trade a peuterer, the progenitor of him of 
Oriel Collie, Oxford, and now a brother of the Oratory.t 
"Visiting some friends in Essex, liot unlikely some of their 
Baptbt brethren, they were accosted by a bitter persecutor, 
who was returning from an auto-da-fcj either at Kaleigh or 
Hochford. "Even as I saw them, I suspected them; and 
then I did examine and search them, and found about them 
certain letters, which I have sent you, and also a certain 
writing in paper what their faith was. And they confessed 
to me that they had forsaken and fled out of their country 
for religion's sake." They had visited other countries. The 
papers found on Denby were simply certain notes collected 
and gathered out of the Scriptures, with a confession of his 
&ith touching the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood. 
Fox has given this simple and Scriptural confession. It 
would secure Denby's condemnation. It is more than probable 
that it was prepared for the satisfaction of some perplexed 
one. Its clearness and simplicity admirably fitted it for 
0uch an end. 

* Vide Froude, vol. vi, p. 314. 
i" " I am sure that the opinions of John Newman, who was burnt, on 
transnbstantiation, are further from the doctrine of the Church of Borne, 
and, I must say, more intelligible, than the opinions of Oriel John Kew- 
man, lately published." — ^Life of Bonner, p. 273. 



100 £ARLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

To the palace of Bonner we now transfer our readen 
"With Denby and Newman we find one Patrick Packingham 
arraigned before his Lordship. Upon their confession they 
were examined ; the bishop " objecting also unto them cer- 
tain other articles of his own : to which they all answered 
in efiect one thing, although Denby answered more lai^j 
than the others, and^ therefore, I tjionght his answer suffi- 
cient to lay down as containing the substance of all the 
rest."* From his examination by Bonner it will be enough, 
from the eleven articles which were objected against him, to 
select the seventh : — " That the said Demby haHi believed, 
and doth believe, that the christening of children, as it ie nom 
used in the Church of England, is not good, nor allotoable jy 
Gods Word, but against it ; likewise confirming of childreHf 
giving of orders, saying of matins and even-song, anoindug 
of persons, making of holy bread and holy vxUer, toith tkt 
rest of the church^ His reply to this was as follows :— 
'<To the seventh article I answer, that as touching the 
christening, the sacrament of baptism, which is the christen- 
ing of children, it is altered and changed; for St. John 
used nothing but the preaching of the Word and water, is 
it doth appear when Christ required to be baptized of him, 
and others also, who came to John to be baptized of him, 
as it appeareth in Matthew iiL, Mark L, Luke ilL, and 
Acts L The chamberlain said, *See, here is water; what 
doth hinder me to be baptized ? ' It appeareth here that 
Philip had preached unto him ; for he said, * Here is water.' 
We do not read that he asked for any cream, oil, or spittle, 
or conjured water, or conjured wax, no croysom, or salt, for 
it seemeth that Philip had preached no such things unto 
him; for he would as well have asked for them a« for water; 
and the water was not conjured, but even as it was before. 
Also Acts X. : * Then answered Peter, Can any man forbid 
water, that these should not be baptized 1 * Acti* xvi. : 
•And Paul and Silas preached unto him the Word of the 

* FojL Mary'i reign, book ii 



MART. 101 

Lord, and to all that were in bis house ; and &e took them 
the same hour of the night, and washed ^heir wounds ; and 
so was he baptized, and all them of his household strait- 
way;' where you see nothing but preaching the Word and 
water." 

Denby was finally condemned, and burnt at TJxbridge on 
the 8th of August. In the midst of his sufferings he gave 
utterance to the joy of his soul in a Psalm. Eox tells us 
that the " cruel Dr. Story commanded one of the tormentors 
to throw a &ggot at him, wherewith being so hurt that his 
face bled, he lefb singing, and clapt both his hands upon his 
&ce. ' Truly,' quoth Dr. Story to him that hurled the fag- 
got^ ' thou hast marred a good old song.'* Only momentary 
was this effect. Stretching his hands abroad, and whilst 
the flames were licking off the skin and flesh, he burst into 
another song, and then resigned his soul into the hands of 
Crod, through Jesus Christ." t 

The examination of Newman follows, and also his con- 
fession of faith. In the former, the usual points in discus- 
sion are urged on his attention, whilst the latter is a clear 
and manly exhibition of the great Christian verities. On 
transubstantiation, Fox gives us, in a separate form, four of 
his arguments. We quote the last : — "When remembrance is 
of a thing, there is imported the absence thereof. Rememr 
brance of Christ's body is in the Sacrament, — * Do this in 
remembrance of me;' ergo^ Christ's body then is imported 
to be absent." 

** Packingham was charged by Bonner for his behaviour 
in the bishop's chapel, who at the mass time, then standing, 
would not pull off his cap, which was taken for a heinous 
offence. Packingham being much persuaded by Bonner to 
recant^ protested in these words to the bishop : ^ That the 

* " An earwig was singing a Psalm at the stake at Uxbridge ; but I cut 
liim abort; for I threw a faggot in his face and. a bush of thorns at his 
leet." — Soame's Beformation, vol. iv., p. 660. Strype's Annals, vol. 1, 

P-llS- t Fox, book ii 



103 EABLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

chnrch 'whid? he believed was no Catholic church, but 
the church of Satan, and, therefore, he would never tan 
to it.' ''* Packiugham suffered on the 28th of the ttme 
month, and in the same town, as Denbj; and Newman 
was bnmt at Saffron Walden on the last day of the bum 
month. 

Later in the same year, another large contribution to the 
noble army of martyrs was supplied by our brethren. W« 
are indebted to Fox for the information. He mentionB the 
martyrdom of ten persons in the year 1555. Their namei 
merit a transference to our pages. We give them in the 
order in which they occur in the pages of the Mar^ 

ol^gy: — 

Elbth. Warne. William Haul 

George Tankerfuld. Thos. Letis. 

RoBT. Smith. Geoboe King. 

Stephen Habwood. John Wade. 

Thos. Fust. Joan Lashwood. 

Reference again and again is made to Bow churchyard^ u 
a place where these early Nonconformists were accostomed 
to meet. Fox is not clear as to the whole, but certainly 
Elizth. Wame, whose husband had already passed to the 
martyr*s liome, was apprehended on the firet of Janaarv, int 
house in Bow churchyard, as they were gathered together 
in prayer. Most, if not all of them, were resident in the 
city or its neighbourhood. A letter from the commi-ssioner * 
consigned these *' Sacramentarians" to the tender mercies of 
Bonner. His lordship was never slow in the discharge of 
these pleasurable duties. Smith appears to have been a man 
of influence, if not a teacher. He was acquainted with 
Denby,t and was probably a fellow labourer with him. 
The examinations were long and fre<|ucnt Smith's was the 



♦ Fox, book ii., pp. 278-280. 

1* " "We were baited by my lonVs band of serrantii almost all the ilay, 
until our keeper, seeing their misorder, shut us all up in a handsionM 
chamber, while my lord went into his synagogue to condemn Mr. D^nby 
and John Newman." — ^B. Smith. 



MABY. 103 

most protracted, or at least it is reported at greater length by 
Fox. It is fall of noble sentiments, and discovers a spirit of 
genuine moral heroism. The bishop and his colleagues are 
like children in the hands of a giant.* The whole would fill 
many pages of this volume, if given in full. Only a portion 
can be selected, in part illustrative of his Baptismal views, 
and the holy confidence in the truth of Grod which supported* 
him in the fiery conflict. The colloquy on the former will 
not be uninteresting to our readers : — t 

**B<mner. — ^Why is God's order changed in baptism? In what 
point do lis differ from the word of God ? 

** Smith, — In hallowing your water; in conjuring of the scenes; 
in baptiziiig children with anointing and spitting in their mouths, 
mingled with salt ; and many other lewd ceremonies, of which not 
one point ia able to be proved by God's order. 

** Bonner, — By the mass! this is the most unshamefaced heretic 
that ever I heard speak ! 

** Smith, — ^Well sworn, my lord; ye keep a good watch. 

** Bonner, — Well, Mr. Controller, ye catch me at my words; but I 
wOl watch thee as well, I warrant thee. 

"By my troth, my lord, said Sir John Mordant, I never heard the 
like in all my life. But I pray you, my lord, mark well his answer 
for baptism. He disalloweth therein holy ointment, salt, and such 
ether laudable ceremonies, which no Christian man will deny. 

** Smith, — That is a shameful blasx)hemy against Christ, so to use 
any mingle-mangle in baptizing of young infants. 

** Bonner, — Ihdievey I teU thee, i^t if they die before they he hap- 
Uzed, they he damned, 

"Smith, — Ye shall never be saved by that belief. But I pray you, 
my lord, show me, are we saved by water or by Christ? 

** Bonner, — By both. 

** Smith, — Then the water died for our sins; and so must ye say, 
that the water hath life, and it being our servant, and created for us, 
is our Saviour. This, my lord, is a good doctrine, is it not? 

* ^' He was smart and quick in conversation, and fervent in religion, 
wherein he was confirmed by the preaching of Mr. Turner, Canon of 
Windsor, and others." — Strype's Life of Sir T. Smith, p. 51. 

i* "Thou art weary of painting, and hast studied divinity, and so hast 
fallen, through thy departing from thy vocation, into heresy, said Bonner 
to & Smith, a yeoman of the guard at Windsor." — ^Life of Bonner, p. 266; 



104 EARLY ENOUSH BAPTISTS. 

**B(mner, — ^Why, how understandest thou the Scripturee? 'Eimepk 
a man is bom of water,* &c, &c. And again, 'Suffer (saith cor 
Saviour) these children to come unto me :' and if thou wilt not waSet 
them to be baptized after this laudable order, then thou hindereit 
them to come imto Christ. 

"Smith. — When ye allege St. John, * Except a man be bom,' &&, 
and will thereby prove the water to save, and so the deed or work ta 
put away sins, I will send you to St. Paul, which asketh of the Gal- 
'atians, * Whether they received the Spirit by the deeds of the law, or 
by the preaching of faith,' and then concludeth that the Holy Ghoit 
accompanieth the preaching of faith, and with the Word entereth into 
the heart So now if baptism preach to me the washing in the blood, 
80 doth the Holy Ghost accompany it, and it is unto me as a preacher 
and not a Saviour. And when you say I hinder the children from 
coming to Christ, it is manifest by our Saviour's words that jt 
hinder them to come, that will not suffer them to come unto him 
without the necessity of water. For he saith, 'Sjaffer them to coma 
unto mcy^ and not unto water; and, therefore, if ye condemn them, jt 
condemn both the merit and the words of Christ. For our Saviour 
saith, * Except ye turn, and become as children, ye cannot enter into 
the kingdom of Cod.' And so brought I out many other examplei^ 
to make manifest that Christ hath cleansed original sin, bringiog 
examples out of the Scriptures for the same. 

** Bonner, — Then thou makest the water of non-effect; then put 
away the water. 

** Smith. — *It is not,' saith St. Peter, *the washing away the filth 
of the flesh, but in that a good conscience conscnteth unto God.' 
And to prove that water only bringeth not the Holy Ghost, it if 
written in the eighth of the Acts, that Simon received water, but 
would have received the Holy Ghost for money. Also that the Holj 
Ghost hath come before baptism: it is written that John had the 
Holy Ghost in his mother's womb. Cornelius, Paul, and the ^ueea 
Candacc's servant, with many others, receiveil the Holy Ghost before 
baptism. Yea, and although your generation have set at naught 
the Word of God, and, like swine, have tumeil his words upside 
down, yet must his church keep the same order which he left them, 
which bis church dare not break; and to judge children damned that 
be not baptized, it is wicked. 

** Mordant,— By our lady, sir, but I believe that if any child die 
without water, he is damned. 

*' Bonner,— Ye&^ and so do I, and all Catholic men, good Mordant 

"-S'mi^— Well, my lord, such Catholic, such salvation."* 



* «« 



He calls the oyl, salt, kc, used in biq[itiim, blaspbemiet, and deaita 



MART. 105 

On the spiritual character of Christ's church, Smith's views 
were also expressed, notwithstanding he was fully conscious 
of the danger to which the avowal would expose him. "I 
believe," said he, in reply to his wily examiner, " that there 
is one Catholic church or faithful congregation, which, as 
the apostle saith, is built upon the prophets and apostles, 
Christ being the head comer-stone; which in all her words 
and works maintaineth the Word, and bringeth the same for 
her authority, and without doth nothing, nor ought to do ; of 
which I am a&aid I am by grace a member." Equally dis- 
tinct and manly is the following : " I told you whereon the 
true church is built^ and 1 affirm that in England to be the 
true congregation of God, and also in omnem terra/m; as it is 
written, ' Their sound is gone forth into all lands ;' and this 
is the afficted and persecuted church which ye cease not to 
imprison, slay, and kill And in Corinth was not all the 
congregations of God, but a number of those holy and elect 
people of God 1 For neither Paul nor Peter were present at 
Corinth when they wrote, and yet were they of the church 
of €k>d, as many thousands more which also communicate in 
that Holy Spirit" 

Daring his imprisonment, he not only sought to confirm his 
companions in suffering in Christ's truth, but his pen was not 
idle. Fox has given us several of his letters and pastoral effu- 
sions. Those to his wife are full of tenderness. Addressing 
his brethren, he said, "Mistrust not God ; be of good comfort; 
rejoice in the Lord ; hold fast your faith, and continue to the 
end. Deny the world, and take up your cross, and follow him 
who is your leader, and is gone before. If you suffer with him 
yon shall reign with him. What way can you glorify the 
name of our heavenly Father better than by suffering death 
for his Son's sake ? What a spectacle shall it be to the world, 

tiie necesflity of -water baptism to children. Fox overlooks these failings 
and mistakes, and gives him commendation without abatement; which 
nndisiixigiiished r^;ard is by no means serviceable to the reader/' — CoUier, 
▼oL ii, p. 38L * 



106 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

to behold so goodly a fellowship as jou servants of God, in 
so just a quarrel as the Gospel of Christ is, with so pure t 
conscience, so strong a faith, and so lively a hope, to offer 
yourselves to suffer so cruel torments at the hands of Goifi 
enemies, and so to end your days in peace, to receive in thi 
resurrection of the righteous life everlasting." 

''Robert Smith, to all the faithful servants of ChnA, 
exhorting them to be strong under persecution," is a poet- 
ical effusion. Whatever defects the reader may discern in 
the loftiness and beauty of the muse, he will find none in 
the subject of her notes : — 

'* Content thyself -with V&tience, 
With Christ to bare the cross of pain. 
Which can and will thee recompence 
A thousand-fold with joys again. 

Let nothing cause thy heart to quail, — 
Launch out thy boat, hale up thy sail, — 

Put from the shore ; 
And be thou sure thou shalt attain 
Unto the port that shall remain 

For evermore." 

His noble spirit triumphed over the terrors of death. 
TJxbridge was the place of martyrdom. The 8th of August 
was the day of sacrifice. At the stake, and from the midst 
of the fire, he addressed the people. His zeal only expired 
with life. Half burnt, and all black with fire, clustered 
together as in a lump like a black coal, all men thinking 
him for dead, suddenly he rose up right before the peo|ile^ 
lifting up the stumps of his arms, and clapping the same 
together, and declaring a rejoicing heart unto them. And 
so bending down again, and hanging over the fire, slept in 
the Lord, and ended this mortal life."* 

Short but interesting accounts are given by Fox of Smiths 
companions also. Elizth. Wame was burnt at Stratford; 
Tankerfield, at St. Alban's ; Harwood and Fust were bumt> 



* In some editions of Fox there is an engraving of thcar moral hcro«k 
holding, evidently, a meeting for worship in the prison. Smith is in %ht 
act of teaching. The sacred volume is before him. 



MABT. 107 

one at Stratford, the other at Ware; W. Hale at Bamet. The 
remainder, from their suffering in Lollards Tower, fell sick 
and died. Heretics have no right to the burial of Chris- 
tians. Their dead bodies were cast into the open fields, and 
in the darkness of midnight interred by some of the faithful.* 
The imprisonment and sufferings of these heroic men in 
their gloomy prisons, instead of quenching their love of the 
truth, rather intensified it. Mor6 and more solicitous they 
became to know the mind of their Lord. No part of it was 
insignificant. No means within their reach were neglected, 
which would realize this end. In their intei-courae with 
each other, as well as from the " lively oracles," they sought 
instruction, and the interchange of thought. As we have 
already seen. Predestination, Grace, Liberty, — the Calvinian 
and Pelagian views of truth, — had been discussed. The 
Anabaptists were not indifferent to the discussion. Against 
^eir views most of the leading prisoners protested. Their 
whole influence was wielded against them. The baptismal 
question was rife, and Philpot employed his pen in defence 
of the ceremony on which State churches are based; and 
from which, if he had calmly traced effects to their cause, the 
whole of the cruel sufferings to which he and his fellow 
prisoners were exposed had sprung. We solect the following 
from a letter which this confessedly eminent sei-vant of Christ 
addressed to a fellow prisoner, who if not a Baptist, had 
most seriooB dodbts about infant baptism. The following 
Bhows him to be a dissident, and probably he was one of the 
SLent or Essex brethren : — " Hitherto I have showed you," 
says Philpot, " (good brother), my judgment generally of 
that you stand in doubt and dissent from others, to which 
I wish you, as mine own heart, to be conformable, and then, 
donbtleBS, you cannot err, but boldly may be glad in your 
troubleB, and triumph at the hour of your death, that you 
shall die in the church of God, a faithful martyr, and 
receive the crown of eternal glory." 

* Vide Fox. Mary's reign, book ii. 



108 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

The ignorance of Philpot and the spirit of the martyr are 
alike unfolded in the following. Gentleness, and even 
sanctified meekness, were aroused by the hated principles of 
the Anabaptist heretics. "Aurentius, one of the Arian 
sect, with his adherents, was one of the first that denied the 
baptism of children, and next after him, Pelagias, the heretic, 
and some others that were in St. Bernard's time, as it doth 
appear by his writings, aiUl in our days the Anabaptists, an 
inordinate kind of men, stirred up by Hie devU to the destruc- 
tion of the GospeV* 

We will only add a sample of the reasoning of this holy 
man. It must have excited the pity, if not the contempt^ of 
all intelligent Baptists. 

"Now will I prove, with manifold arguments, that children 
ought to be baptized, and that the apostles of Christ did 
baptize children. The Lord commanded his apostles to 
baptize all nations: therefore all children ought to be 
baptized, for they are comprehended under this word, all 
nations. 

"Further, when Grod doth account among the faithful, 
they are faithful, for it was said to Peter, * That thing which 
God hath purified, thou shalt not say to be common or 
unclean.' But God doth repute children among the faithful 
Urgo, they be faithful, except we had rather to resist God, 
and seem stronger and wiser than he. 

"And without doubt, the apostles baptized those which 
Christ commanded; but he commanded the faithful to be 
baptiz^ed, among which infants be reckoned; the apostles 
then baptized infants." 

We need add no more. It was a mercy for the martyr 
that godliaess and logic are not identical.* 

Smith was not the only Anabaptist in the court at 
Windsor. Strype gives an account of another, and the 



* Works of Philpot (Parker Society). Fox records the whole letter. 
VoL ii A.D. 1555, p. 606. 



MART. 109 

opinions Leld by him. Though not in exact chronological 
order, our readers will not object to it : — 

" The Aiia]>aptists of these days were generally infected also with 
Pelagianism and other heresies ; they were also very confident and 
disputatious. One of this sort was now crept into the court, namely, 
Robert Cooke. He was a person of very courteous, fair deportment, 
of some learning, and particularly well-skilled in music. When 
Parkhurst (he that afterwards was Bishop of Norwich) was preacher 
to Queen Katharin Par, at the court, he was keeper of the wine cellar. 
Here he came acquainted with the said Parkhurst, and also with 
Coverdale and Dr. Turner, and other learned men, in their atten- 
dances at the court. This man, besides that he was against the bap- 
tism of infants, denied original sin, and concerning the Lord's Supper 
he disx)ersed divers odd things. The said Dr. Turner wrote a book 
against him, in which he confuted his opinion of original sin. He 
often created trouble to Parkhurst and Coverdale, about these contro- 
versies, so that they were tired with him ; for he was a man full of 
words. When Jewel, and other learned men, his friends, came some- 
times to court to visit Parkhurst, Cooke would presently begin a dis- 
pute with them, and would never make an end. This man seems to 
have been among the exiles under Queen Mary, and became then 
known to the learned Budulph Gaulter, of Zuric; who afterwards, 
in his correspondence with the said Parkhurst, then Bishop of Nor- 
wich, enquired after him ; which was in the year 1573. He was then 
alive, and still in the court, being one of the gentlemen of the queen's 
chapeL And for his opinions, which he stUl retained, had sometime 
before been like to have been discharged of his place. But he made 
a recantation, and so continued still in his room at the chapeL"* 

East Anglia was rich in confeRsors and martyrs to the faith 
of Jesus. On one occasion, whilst Hopton, Bishop of Nor- 
wich, was engaged in his work of extirpation, at Ipswich, 
Dunning, his chancellor, ran up to the ecclesiastical tribunal 
to announce to his lordship the glad tidings that a number 
of heretics had just aiTived. Baxford and Lanham, and 
what Fox calls the cloth county, had supplied this corps of 
the sacrificial hosts. It was maddening to hear them, the 
chancellor declared. There were among them many heretics 
and Anabaptist8.t 



* Ecdenastical Memorials, voL ii, p. 71. f Fox, Book ii., p. 545. 



110 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

Two years later wo get another fact or two from the 
pages of the veuerable martyrologist. He mentions the exa- 
minations of three men and two women, by Bonner, on 
March 6th, 1557. The proceedings of the bishop varied 
very little. A string of questions was always ready. It 
embraced the true church, the sacrament, the real presence, 
&>c. It is evident, from the charges brought against them, 
that they were not only Nonconformists, but that the chief 
of them had taught in some part of the city and diocese ci 
London, "that the faith, religion, and ecclesiastical service 
here observed and kept, as it is in the realm of England, is 
not a true and a laudable faith, religion," &c. 

These depai*tures from the State religion embraced thirteen 
distinct articles. It is only necessary to select one : — 

" 8 Item. Thou hast thought, <fec., that the fashion and 
manner of christening of infants is not agreeable to €rod*8 
Word, and that none can be effectually baptized, and 
thereby saved, except he have years of discretion to believe 
himself, and so willingly accept or refuse baptism at his 
pleasure." 

Their answers to these charges are given by Fox, appa- 
rently in his own words, and not theirs. In one case, three 
of them are grouped together, and in general terms deniiHL 
The eighth is one of these. The threats of the bishop 
availed not. Their confidence in the truth which tiiey had 
professed was unshaken, and in April of the siime year 
another fiery spectacle was exhibited in Smithfield, to the 
multitude which crowded that open space.* 

For no crime did these men suffer. Against them no 
charge of rebellion, conspiracy, or disloyalty, was ever urgtnL 
Their secret meetings had no hostile design against their 
cruel oppressors. They stand before us untainted by any 
civil crimes. Their bitterest foes are silent on these matters. 
They are "fanatics," detested, the enemies of the clmrch; 

* Vide Fox, book iii, pp. 67(^7. 



MABT. Ill 

bheir principles are subversive of all ecclesiastical rule, and 
the fruits of Satanic influence; their destruction would be a 
blessing to the church and the nation, — phrases like these, 
and opinions kindred to them, may be found in abundance; 
but even Bonner and his harpies never allege other charges. 
They were disloyal to EK)me, but not to England's queen. 
They claimed the right to think and judge for themselves on 
die great matters of the present and the future life. From 
this circle they excluded all influence. Monarchs, popes, 
councils, bishops, were not allowed to speak. Only One voice 
was heard, only One authority was recognized. To catch 
the voice of Jesus, to bow implicitly and reverently to his 
authority, was the great business of their life. Boldly they 
avowed this. Collision with Rome was inevitable. With the 
spiiitual despot they grappled. Against his usurped power 
they swore eternal hostility, and by their teachiug and 
patience in death they inoculated the public mind with 
the only true principles of civil and spiritual freedom. To 
this comparatively small and hidden spring we must trace 
back the deep and expanding stream of freedom which we 
now enjoy. 

Heresy was easily tested. Bonner and his companions in 
blood had no difficulty. Their scent was keen, and their 
means ample and varied for the detection of heretical pravity. 

Fox, referring to certain charges against some persons, 
says, " What their articles and answer were, I need not 
here recite, seeing all they in the time of queen Mary com- 
monly suffered for one manner of cause, that is, for holding 
against the seven Sacraments, against the reality of Christ 
being in his Supper, for speaking against the Church of 
Borne, and determination of the same against images set up 
and worshipped in the church, for not coming to church," &c. 

Rising in importance and magnitude above all other dog- 
mas, were tlve Sacrament of the Mass and the unity of the 
Bomish Church. Against these dogmas the Beformers ex- 
hausted their strength, and Gardiner and his friends stood 



112 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

forth in their defence. " The said Damley hath believed, and 
doth believe, that the mass now used in this realm of EugLind^ 
is naught, and full of idolatry and evil, and plain against God*i 
"Word, and therefore, he, the said Darnley, hath not heard i% 
nor "will hear it." * " I do believe, that the mass now used 
in this realm of England, is naught, and abominable idolatry 
and blasphemy against God's holy Word ; for he, in his holy 
Supper, instituted the sacrament of bread and wine, to be 
eaten together in remembrance of his death, till he come, 
and not to have them worshipped, and made an idol of 
them. ... I pray, what do you call kneeling dowiiy 
holding up the hands, knocking of the breast, putting off the 
cap, and making curtsey, and other kind of superstition f 
You would make men to be so blind as to think that this is 
so worshipping.^t Assent to these dogmas of the Romanist 
would cover a multitude of sins. Attendance at the masB 
secured a toleration for innumerable iniquities. No moral 
excellence, no virtue, no social rank, no mental culture, could 
shield the possessor from the vengeance of the church, if 
this absurd and revolting dogma were denied. In the one 
case, it changed vice into virtue ; in the other, it converted 
the loftiest virtues into vices so repulsive and so dangerous to 
social order and the salvation of souls, that to scent out a 
heretic was a virtue, but to condemn him to the stake was 
an act the most benignant to man, and the most acceptable 
to the God of peace and love. 

The holy anger of the Episcopate being kindled, the 
subordinates emulated their superiors in vindictiveneaa^ 
and exhausted all the means within their reach to gratify it 
But excesses sooner or later produce a rebound. The first 
intimation of the restoration of the Papal su]>rt'uiacy 
excited tumults. Every fresh step deepened the hatre<i of 
the people. The sufferings and patience of the martyrs 

* Ariicles objected by Bonner against Damley, Ace— Fox, vdL iL 

t Ibid, 



MABY. 113 

augmented it. No art waa neglected to weaken this. Every 
means were employed to blacken the character of the Protes- 
tants. The restraintB of moral principles were thrown 
aside, and the pulpit became the vehicle for the grossest 
-violation of tmtL '' And so, my lord," said Gratwick^ in 
his examination by Gardiner, "yon standing there in the 
pulpit, in the meantime sednced your tongue to slander us 
poor prisoners, being then present in iron-bands, burdening 
US with the sect of Arians, and with the sect of Herodians, 
and with the sect of Anabaptists, and with the sect of Sac- 
lamentarians, and with the sect of Pelagians."* Thousands 
gathered round the fiery pile. It is computed that not less 
than 20,000 gazed on the execution of thirteen persons at 
Stratford, t Indignation, rage, execrations against the ruling 
powers — admiration, veneration, for the patient sufferers, be- 
came the feeling of many. Of the deep hatred of the citizens 
of the metropolis to the triimiphs of the *' bloody Bonner" and 
his colleagues over inspired innocence and moral excellency, 
Pole complains in his address to the citizens : — "But where- 
fore Cometh this, then, that when any heretic shall go to 

* Vide Fox, book iii, p. 580. 

f Stiype^s Eco. Memorials, voL iii, p. 494. Br. MaitlanA (a) labours 
hud to prove the mildness of this bishop, and to wash away the 
filthy calumnies which till now have been heaped upon him. The follow- 
ing oocnrs in a letter to some friends on his restoration. It was written 
the day after he heard of it. ** By this sentence, my usurper, Br. Bidley, 
is utterly repulsed :' so that I would ye did order all things at Kid- 
meily and Bushley at your pleasure, not suffering Sheepshead or Ships- 
lide to be any meddler there, or to sell or cany anything away from 
tiienoe ; and, I trust, at your coming up now at the parliament, I shall so 
handle both the said Sheepshead and the other Galveshead, that they 
■hall perceive their sweets shall not be without sour sauce." — ^Letter from 
Bonner. Burnet's Beformation, voL ii., p. 248. The cardinal was far 
less severe than the bishop. The latter complains that the former had 
been angry at his proceedings, and asks his advice as to the way in which 
he should deal with the heretics. 

(a) Essays on Subjects Connected with the Beformation, by S. B. Mait- 
land, D.D.— Essay xx. The Boctor admits that 119 were burnt by 
Bonner's orders.— P. 5, 75-80. 



114 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

exeeuticm, be shall kick no comfertmgof yoa aiMl encoan^ 
ment to die in hia perverse <)pmions, given l>y ihose that 
come out of joar bouse, ^wbiNi be shall be put in prison, 
be sbaO. bave more <;beTisbittg: wbat sign is tbisT*^ 

Tbe same feet is indicated by Gardiner: — "For the last 
day when thou wast before me, upon Sunday, in Bt. Maxy 
Overy's Ohurdi, thou there r^Hx>ve8t my sennon, and 
badst a thousand by thee, at least, to bid Ood strei^[1JMn 
thee," &c. 

Bonner, in a letter to Pole, complains of tbe attention of 
tbe populace to twenty-two heretics, and says that ''Tiny 
would come no way but through Obeapside, oo that iJiey 
were brought to my house inih about a thousand persons — 
which thing I took very s^trange, and spake to Sir John 
Grassam, tibese being with me, to tell the mayor and the 
^imfis that this thing was not well suffered in the city. 
These naughty heretics, all the way they came through 
Obeapside, both exhorted the peo|de to their part, and had 
much comfort from the promiscuous multitudc^f Earlier 
on tbe Lords of the Council had written to the Earl of 
Shrewsbury as follows : — " Whereas, we have been lately 
informed that certain lewd persons, to the number of 
si}( or seven in a company, . . . have wandered about 
these north parts, and represented certain plays and inter- 
ludes, containing very naughty and seditious matter, touch- 
ing the king and queen's majesties, and the state of the 
realm, and to the slander of Christ's true and Catholic 
religion, contrary to all good order, and to the nn^ifiy^ 
contempt of Almighty God, and dangerous example to 
others,** <SM5.t 

Deeper and broader these sympathies becamcL Evay 
fresh victim augmented the hatred to Home. We get a 

* Strype's Ecc. Memorials, voL vii., p. 355. CcU. 

t Fox, vol ii 
X Lodge's Illustrations, voL i, pp. 2G0-1. 



HASY. 115 

glimpee of this ^m a speaker in the next reign : — '^And as 
for the dealings in Qneen Mary's days, they much misliked 
them; oaUing the bishops bloodsackers, and bade "fie" on 
these tormentors that delighted in nothing else but in the 
death of innocents; that threatened the whole realm with 
their £re and fiiggots ; murderers ; that they were worse than 
Oaii^hos, worse than Judas, worse than the traitors that 
put to cleathy" i^c* The oonl^rast between the sufferers and 
tiie persecutors told with uncommon effect on the public 
mind. Repression was impossible. The government put 
forth all its power to effect itf Orders in Council were 
issued to the civic authorities, c(Hnmanding them to keep 
the «p{xraitioes and the younger members of their &milies 
at home during the procession of the heretics to Smithiield. 
The bishc^ warned, threatened; many imprisoned the sym- 
pathizers, tat in vain. Romanism received shocks which 
prepared the nation during the next reign for its easy and 
fioal overthrow. 

Tbxt Mary, under the influence of Spanish and Italian 
advisers, sanctioned, nay, stimulated, these proceedings, can 
admit of no doubt. Apologies are vain. They violate the 
plainest historic truth. The removal of Oardiner,j: who 

* Speech of Jolm AtkiiuKm on the Supremacy Act. Parliamentary 
Histoiy, voL L, p. 691. 

+ The lord mayor received a letter from the queen and Council early in 
January, 1556, commanding him *Ho give snibstantial orders, that when 
any be delivered to be bound, there be a good number of officers and 
others appointed to be at the executions ; who may be charged to appre- 
hend, and to commit to ward, all such as shall comfort, aid, or praise 
those that are executed. And to charge all householders not to suffer any 
of their servants to be abroad then, other than such as they will answer 
for.'* — Strype's Ecc. Memorials, voL iii., p. 470. Apud Soame's Eeforma- 
tion, vol iv., p. 555. 

X Ckurdiner died on the 12th of Kovember, 1555. On the IGth of 
October, Bidley and Latimer were cormnitted to the flames. On the day 
of their death, or three days after, Grardiner is said to have anxiously- 
expected the news of their execution, and to have rejoiced, before he died, 
that the reconciliation with Rome was strengthened by this additional 
splendid sacrifice. That day 'Hhe dart of death struck hi^ body, and the 



116 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

though hating with intense hatred the Protestant leaders, 
yet was by no means favourable to Spain, gave full play to 
the spirit of persecution. His death is thus mentioned by a 
contemporary : — " My Lord of Winchester, whose soul God 
pardon, is departed; and his bowels were buried at St. Maiy 
Overy's, Southwark, but his body, as the saying is, shall be 
carried to Winchester, to be buried there. What time ha 
departed is not yet certainly known, but most men say he 
died on Tuesday, at night, being the 12th day of this instant 
(1555), about two o'clock after midnight, at Westminster, 
and was brought in his barge thence to Southwark."* 

Deep, intense, religious convictions swayed the mind of 
Mary. No duty was so binding — ^no obligation so solemn— 
as the purging of the land from the presence and pollution of 
heretical pravity. So thoroughly was this unhappy woman 
prostrated by the power of superstition, that, when Tniaf ^lring 
disease for fertility, she said, "that she could never be happily 
brought to bed, nor succeed well in any other of her affidrs, 
unless she caused all the heretics she had in prison to be 
burnt, without sparing so much as one."t 

But all this was in vain. Disappointment and vexation 
only resulted from her course. JJpon her perjured and 
bloody proceedings, heaven's deej^est, darkest frown appeared 
to rest. She had violated her word to her i)eoi>le, she had 
corrupted her nobles and counsellors with gold, and risked 
civil war for the match with the heir of Charles, and soon 
found that the sombre mind of Philip regarded her with 



excruciating pains he endured were longer in duration, and possibly not 
altogether less intense in their agony, than those of liis brotlier bishops at 
the stake." " Do not open that gap," said the wretched, wealthy, sacceas- 
ful persecutor, to one who spoke to him of the justification of the sinner 
by the blood of Jesus. " He found no comfort in that doctrine, and no 
words of faith, or hope, or confidence, are reported of his l)ed of death."— 
Life of Bonner, p. 288. Fox, vol. ii. Soame makes no allusion to it 

* Letter to Lord Shrewsbury. Lodge's Illustrations of English Hiv 
tory, voL i., p. 258. 

t Memorials of Cranmer, voL ii., p. 165. 



HART. 117 

perfect indifference,* and that he exhausted his affections, or 
rather gratified his passions, with others, f Her nights were 
spent in sorrow and her days in gloom. With broken repose, 
from the night's visions which haunted her, she pictured to 
her superstitious mind a thousand horrors. In her agony of 
disappointment, she offered fresh hecatombs of human victims 
to appease the wrath of the holy ones. But peace came not. 
In the splendid, varied, and imposing ceremonies of the 
church, relief was now sought. The Episcopate exhausted 
its resources. Processions were planned, which she dignified 
with her pi'esence. Bishops in gilt slippers and splendid 
robes, with banners flying and priests chanting, with sermons 
and masses, intermingled with fasts and sharp penances, and 
all the various religious services which marked her favourite 
church, occupied no inconsidei^able portion of her time. Still 
relief came not. The promised heir came not. Philip was 
still a truant, and wandered far away from her. Disaster 
abroad and discontent at home preyed upon her spirit, and 
gradually consumed her life. The Virgin and all the saints 
were angry. Her hatred to the detested heretics was not 
sufficiently intensified. Many still lived. The efforts of the 
bishops in town and country had not yet freed the land from 
these pollutions. Peace with heaven was incompatible with 
their toleration ; and, encouraged and sustained by her Papist 



* Philip had entreated his father to give him a wife younger than him- 
self, and not eleven years older. — Vide Strickland's Queens of England, 
voL v., p. 318. 

1* Henry of France, in a letter to his ambassador, thus expresses his opinion 
of the match between Philip and Mary . — "The unfortunate queen will 
leam the truth at last. She will wake too late, in misery and remorse, to 
know that she has filled the realm with bipod for an object which, when 
she has gained it, will bring nothing but affliction to herself or to her 
people.** — ^Froude, voL vi. p. 229. We will only add that, if any one wishes 
to see the craft of the politician, the power of superstition, hypocrisy in 
cruelty, intensified to the highest degree, let him study the character of 
Philip and Granville, in the pages of Motley. The sketch of Prescott is 
that of a master, but it wants the fulness, the shade, the Rembrandt 
touches of Motley. — Vide The Rise of the Dutch Republic. 



118^ EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

counsellors, she inflicted afresh her indignation on the Non- 
conformists of the land.* 

Happily for humanity, her reign was short Diseaae, the 
desertion of her husband, threatened insurrection at home,.1iie 
fear of invasion from abroad, with the absorbing consciouaneaB 
that by thousands her memory would be execrated, and that 
her life was not safe, filled her mind with torturing anxiety, 
and rendered her "latter days very unhappy. Thousanda 
suffered the loss of all that was dear to them. Frcxn all the 
circles of social life the victims of her heartless cruelty had 
been snatched, but chiefly from the lower walks of societj. 
Old men and maidens, the matron and the child, the trades- 
man from his shop, the mechanic from his bench, and the 
husbandman from the field, had swelled the number d 
sufferers. But revolting to all the sensibilities of our Datme, 
and detestable, as these cruelties were, there were redeeming 
elements. Popery stood before the nation in all its onveikd 
loathsomeness, and in ii^ hostility to every right view of the 
character of the God of truth and love. Admit the plea <rf 
Mary's apologists. Grant, and we are prepared to concede 
the fact, that from disease, superstition, and slighted passion, 
her mind was not always sane. You do not diminish the 
difficulty. The spirit of the Papacy must be visited with a 
heavier curse. Sane or insane, never was a governor so 
entirely in the hands of her spiritual advisers, Gardiner 
and the Spaniards, then Pole and his Italians, swayed her 
mind on all ecclesiastical matters. The supreme power was 
in their hands. Bonner and his colleagues, bloodthirsty and 
vindictive as they were, only executed the behests of thes^ 
men. A word from the cardinal would have quenched the 
martyrs fire, and opened the dungeons to the multitudes 
who perished in these living tombs fix>m want and disease, 
engendered by their confinement. But the legate knew 

* It was reported that hIio had Rpoken of herself aa a virgin nent from 
Okxi to ride and tame the people of England. — Stryj^e's Cranmer. Soame, 
voL iv., p. 81. 



MART. 11:9 

nothing <^ such toknoice. He was impelled by the 
Gonsciousxieis of a saertd ckitj. Hefetics were &,t wofm 
than thieves and mi»deren. The latter only afieoted the 
pxttsent and the tempesal : the former were destmctive to all 
that was vital to the spiritual and the eternal. The history 
of the pal^t, the teaching of the theologians, the decisions of 
councils^ all influenced by the Holy Ghost, , taught this 
prince of the church that the extirpation of the heretics was 
a sacred duty. Success in England would invest him with a 
glory &r more bright than the triple crown. 

Both Mary and Pole lay on the bed of death at the same 
time,* both, too, with the conviction, that, after all the 
cruelty they had inflicted, and the blood they had shed in 
restoring and building up the old Mth^ in a few months, 
it was more than probable, the edifice would crumble to 
diiat, and. their memory would be loaded with execration 
in. the country and on the spot where their dark deed» 
had been. perpetrated.t Justice is sometimes slow, but 
always sure.. Her verdict may not come with haste, but 
^en. uttered it. is irrevocable. So here. Her pen, whilst 
mcording. the martyrdom of 288 victims, j: not for dis- 
loyally to the civil ruler, but for the assertion of man's 

* Mazy died on the 17th of November, 1558, deserted by her whole 
oomrt.:— Miss Strickland, voL v., p. 443. Pole died a few hours later. 

i* ^Dijpjag, to be spared a second exile, and the wretchedness of seeing 
wlbh hi* eyes the dissolution of the phantom-fabric which he had giyen 
the labours of his life to build."— Froude, voL vi, p. 526. 

X /1555 — 71 \ making 288. — ^Besides those -who died of famine in 
^^^ 1 1566— 89' I sundi^r prisons. — Strype*s Ecc. Memorials, voL vii., p. 
^^"'^ VlNW— 88 {419. Maitland, from Fox, gives a list of martyrs 
^1668^-40'^ amounting to 739.— Essays, p. 582. Lord Buighley 
layv. :*-" In the time of Queen- Jklary, there were, by imprisonment, tor-- 
inent^ famine and fire, of men, women, maidens, and children, almost the 
mmber of 400, and of that number above twenty that were archbishops, 
"kaatopB, and principal- prelates or officers in the church, lamentably 
destroyed; of women above sixty, and of' children above forty; and amongfHr 
the women some great with child, out of whose bodies the child, by fire, 
-iTBB expelled idive,'' ftc. — ^Execution of Justice in England. Apud Soame's 
Bfllcmnation, toL it., p. 588. 



120 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

inalienable rights, his liberty to think, and to worship God 
according to the teachings of the Divine word, has written 
a sentence which succeeding generations will never revoke. 
History will ever inscribe on her monument, " The Bloodt 
Queen Mary." 



CHAPTER V. 

ELIZABETH. 

Just as some traveller, benighted in some distant land, 
fearful of danger every moment, would hail the dawn of 
the morning with gladsome feelings, as he discovered the 
|)athway along which he could journey without exposure to 
peril, so did the nation regard the removal of Mary and the 
accession of Elizabeth to the throne. Amidst the execrations 
of thousands, and the deepening dissatisfaction of a much 
greater number, the spirit of the infatuated Mary passed 
to the tribunal of One, whose loving servants she had offered 
as a "burnt sacrifice" to His Majesty. Either truly or not, 
hitherto her name has been associated with deeds of cruelty 
and blood, and the transactions of her reign have been 
regarded as violating all the principles of law, humanity, 
and religion. 

On Elizabeth the hopes and fears of both parties in the 
state now centred. Intensely hated by her sister, who 
could never love the child of her mother^s detested ri\*al, her 
life was in constant danger. This was no secret In all the 
courts of Europe the feeling was known. Nothing was 
neglected which could by any means implicate her in the 
various plots which marked her sister's unhappy rule. Bribes 
were offered to the unprincipled. Life was promised to 
imprisoned rebels, if only they would implicate the royal 



ELIZABETH. 121 

Hiaiden in their lawless enterprises. If Mary's power, and 
that of her most trosted advisers, had been equal to their 
will, the claim of Elizabeth as the heir apparent to the crown 
wonld have been cut off Depriving her of liberty for a time, 
her steps tracked and her movements watched by some veiled 
villain, she was subjected to the most humiliating state, and 
compelled, at the risk of the most fearful peril, to violate her 
conscience, and outwardly conform to the rifces of the Romish 
&ith. Mary exhausted her vindictiveness on this favourite 
of the people. 

Gardiner and Renard, the governors of the queen, as we 
have already seen, till Pole bowed her to his will, felt that 
the death of Elizabeth was essential to the success of their 
enterprise, and to the stability of the restored authority of 
the Holy See. Again and again they urged it on their not 
nnwilling mistress.* This fact is placed beyond the region 
of doubt Every art which cunning could employ, every 
motive which policy could suggest, every reason which 
selfishness, combined with the most powerful superstition, 
eould supply, were laid before their mistress. They secured 
her warmest sympathies. No sisterly affection restrained 
her blind devotion to her spiritual guides. Her hand was 
ready to inflict the fetal blow, but a power, invisible but 
supreme, held her back, and saved the maiden from the 
Imtcher's knife. 

In the eyes of the increasing number of Elizabeth's 
jtdmirers, hers was a charmed life.t Her enemies had not 

* Bishop Gardiner remarked, "that as long as Elizabeth lived there 
was no hope of the kingdom being tranquillized ; and if any one went to 
work soundly as he did, things wonld go on better.'' " It was of the 
utmost consequence/* said the Spaniard, *Hhat the trial and execution of 
the criminals, and especially of Courtney and the lady Elizabeth, should 
take place before the arrival of his highness the prince of Spain." — 
Tytler's Edward and Mary, vol. ii., p. 365. Strickland's Queens of 
England, voL v., p. 372. Turner supplies abundant proof of the truth of 
ihe text, voL iii, pp. 376--77. 

t '*Commendone had perceived and understood that the sister, both 



1L12 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

done these deeds in a comer. Heaven was her pcotectioiL 
As months rolled over, many of the young, the- acdent, the 
liberty-loving of England's noblest blood, — l^oosands o£ 
England's bold yeomen, and the commereial classes — nov 
rising as a power in the state — were ready to shed ^eir blood 
and risk all that is dear to m^i, in her defenca The natuw't 
ktve, the nation's sympathies, became the body-guard of the 
insulted and injured princess^ and compiled evesi Philip to 
warn his crisatures against the invincible power. • 

The reign of Elizabeth forms a proud era in our nation'* 
h^itory. It is the ^^ golden," the Augustan age of the nation's 
literature; commerce, science, and religion shed their light 
and beautiful charms upon it Poets, statesmen, historiauBy 
have exhausted their genius in eulogy and narrative. Wa 
would not detract an atom from its glcary. Still we think 
the true estimate of the character of the queen and her reign 
has yet to be formed. Kor have the times yet come for 
this. The magic influence of those events which so largely 
contributed to: the material splendour of her era, still hidea 
her enormous moral obliquity, and the crushing spiritual 
despotism which she exercised on those men whose lofty 
principles and unfdnching integrity laid the foundationi 
o£ our liberties. Higher, and still higher, the moral tone of 
the historian must rise, — deeper and stronger must be his 
appreciation of those men who braved her fiercest wrath 
rather than sacrifice their allegiance to God, — with a steadier 
hand must he imveil the surpliced tyrants who filled ths 
Episcopate, — before he can portray the character and reign 
of the Virgin Queen as truth will one day demand. 

To trace the political movements of this age, to unfold the 
plots which marked it, — ^the growth of the commerce, the 
material prosperity of the nation, during the reign of this 



heretical and schismatical, who had been substituted for tbc present quees 
by her father, was then in the heart and mouth of every one." — Tum«r 
gives the original of this, voL iii., p. 403. 



mooarch^ and the triumpk of her arms over her yarioiis and 
ttu^eroua foeB, — ia not compatible with our design. We 
hftve tadeal with loftier principles, — to unfold their working 
in laj^ng the foundation of a moral change which laughed 
to scexn thte iittpmioas wrath of the sovereign^ and treated 
wxtb oontem|Hii the more rabid rage of the Episcopate, and 
the efforts of which have from year to year been afecting 
ibfi character and policy of this great empire. Principles 
t|» which we may trace up, with a distinctness which silences 
oentroveisy, and witk a clearness which excludes all doubt, 
nU that is great and distinotiye of us as a nation. To under- 
stand the character of the Early Baptists aright, a glance at 
Ekoane <^ them becomes imperatlye. 

It is very difficult to form anything like a correct estimate 
of the moral state of the church, still more of that of the 
mass of the: community. Pole had tried to check the pre- 
wuling^ eomtpticois, and to pare down those things which 
heretofore had. done yiol^ace to ordinarily virtuous ndnds. 
8ut the? eyil was deep-seated. Crentle means could only 
Umsib the sur&oe— they &iled in reaching the core; 

*' The monks were put into all the small benefices in the 
king^s giffc. Sa that the greatest part of the clergy were: 
aucb afi.had. been formerly monk» and friars; very ignoranlr 
£h* most part, and generally addicted to their former super- 
stiiion, though, otherwise men that would comply with any- 
tbing rather than forfeit their livings."* 

They luxuriated in their power, and aided in every way 
to deepen the hold of superstition on the mindis of the 
pe((^]e. The great hives of industry and commerce were, to 
some extent, exceptions. There other influences operated. 
Mind was there &r from stagnant. Through these channda 
voices from the continent were heard, wakening to efforts 
and oicouraging the faithful. By Christian merchants, 
the Bible and other books were smuggled, — ^yes ! that 

* Bumef B Befonnation, vol. ii. Preface. 



124 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

is the only word which can be nsed truthfully, — into 
the country.* But in the rural districts of the nation the 
influence of Rome was supreme. Virtue never lises above 
the standard with which men are familiar. Moral excel- 
lence never can flourish when the only element of its 
nutriment is withdrawn. Some of the exiles write in 
strong language. 

" Turn thine eyes," says one, " to thy counsel, England ; 
how fierce tygers, how cruel wolves, how ravening beares, 
how lecherous goats, how wilie foxes, or to speak plainly 
without figure, what perjured traitors, to God and thee! 
What murderei-s, what oppressors of the poor, what volup- 
tuous Sardanapales, what adulterers, how vile flatterers, shalt 
thou finde amonge them ! It were a small &ult, and a veiy 
peccadillo in them, to dissemble the truth of religion. They 
rail on it, they toss it with scofi& and mocks, they bloodily 
and tyrannically persecute it. It might be winked at if they 
took bribes only to oppress the cause of a few poor men : they 
take bribes to betray the cause of the whole realm. It 
might be passed over with silence if they had murdered but 
one man apiece : the blood of innumerable saints crieth up 
to heaven against them, and the groanings of many thousands 
of oppressed are heard everywhere. It might, perchance, be 
pardoned if they spent but some weeks in pleasure ; they 
wallow continually in vile voluptuousness and wanton dalli- 
ance, or waste all their unhappie daios in beastlie delites; 
neither can change of women, nor women only, satisfie their 
filthie, abominable desires."t "For what idolatry, what 
pride, what covetousness, what cruelty, what lechery, what 
sodomity, was ever heard of in any ages, that they have not 
far exceeded ? Thou canst not name a biahop, but thou 

* " It is said that there are diverse evil books cast by night into the 
city, conveyed from beyond the seas ; but I have not seen any of these 
yet." — Lwlge, vol. i., p. 260. 

tTraheron's Warning to England. Apud Maitlanil's Essays, pp. 
136-7. 



ELIZABETH. 125 

shalt see his tongue swollen with blasphemy, his fingers 
dripping with the blood of innocents, his body shattered 
with most filthy villainy; and the rest of thy Egyptian 
shaulings strive which shall pass others farthest in all kinds 
of beastly abomination."* Bale gives us rather a curious 
glimpse of some of the social habits of the age : — '^ My 
lord bishop hath a sum of money of the priests for doing his 
part so welL My lord abbot and master doctor have had 
pheasants, plovers, and partridges, pigs, geese, and capon, for 
disputing their matters so valiantly. Master jmrson hath 
been commended for scolding, and Sir Saunder Smell Smock 
(one given to love women), one parish priest for bearing 
&]se witness."t 

The seats of learning, — Oxford, and not less the sister 
university,— were the strongholds of Papal influence. Into 
all offices, Pole and his colleagues had ]3laced men of like 
spirit with themselves. On the young mind of England, 
or the future hereditary and elective statesmen of the nation, 
and the rising ministry, they sought to stamp their own 
image, and to control their thoughts and moral training. 
Success in one was realized. Oxford has always been not^ 
for its leaning that way. '* Our universities are so depressed 
and ruined, that at Oxford there are scarcely two individuals 
who think with us ; and even they are so dejected and broken 
in spirit that they can do nothing. That despicable friar, Soto, 
and another Spanish monk, I know not who, have so torn up 
by the roots all that P. Martyr had planted, that they have 
reduced the vineyard of the Lord into a wildeme8s."t 

* Traheron's Warning to England, p. 84. 

t Bale's Image of the Two Churches (Parker Society), p. 395. "I do 
not know who this Paul was,*' said the cruel Nix, Bishop of Norwich, 
"but sure I am his writings smell of the faggot." — ^Life of ^nner, p. 38. 

'*I am content with my breviary and pontifical,'* said the enlightened 
Bishop of Dunkeld, " and know neither the Old or New Testament, and 
yet thou seest I have come on indifferently well."— Tytler's Scotland, voL 
T., p. 225. 

X Jewel. Zurich Letters (Parker Society). Letter zxxiii. 



126 EABLT EliraUSH BAPTISTS. 

Strype gives us a fioller account of tlus.* He tells us ^lat 
Onnaneto, one of Pole's creatures, displaced ev^ry heretic 
-and all suspected of heresy, and ^ced over it Peter Scto, a 
Dominican, who had been confessor to Charles Y., and «%lit 
others of the same order, who restored the solid scbolastR 
Uieology, and abolished the affected elegance oi words with 
tHiich the heretics were enchanting their hearers. Soto 
41 Spaniard, and Gkircsa, another of his countrymen, was 
professor of theology at Oxford. Gardiner fully synpatiuMi 
with these men, and thought that lectures on the old 
Magistrum Scientiarnm were much prefembte to ^bmo 
Hebrew lectures which had been ^ven by their ptede- 
cessors.t 

Nor was the devotion of the students on the banks «f the 
Cam less papal. Perhaps the following may \ie as mxA 
rhetoric as fact; still it is suggestive : — *^ The most revereid 
father in Christ, Cardinal Pole," said ihe Public Omtor, <m 
i^e occasion of the Commission vi^ting that seat of leamiag, 
January 11th, 1557, '^ legate, who had restored (^pfreated 
religion, supported the views of this country, brought back 
from exile our lares, — ^he, I say, that English Pole, and our 
town mostly, was the author of our visitation, from wheae 
excellent visitor many blessings have i*edounded to all parts 
of his country." { 

The labours of the godly bishops ceased not. Within 
five weeks of Mary's death, five persons were immolated on 
the burning pile. Necessity alone checked theuL Their 
power was broken, not their will. The accession of the new 
monarch filled them with the most conflicting anxiety, and 
the reception of Bonner excited ih^ worst fears of the 
hierarchy. 

No sooner was Elizabeth quietly seated on the throne, than 
she threw off the disguise which, to say the least, bad veiled 

* Vide Annals, vol. i., p. 195. 
t Vide Turner, voL iii, p. 462. ^ Fox's Mary. 



ELIZABimS. 127 

ker coodttct more or less during part of ber edster's rogn,* 
aad soiagkt to efifeot another of tiiose revolutions which, 
ae our readera have marked, followed «ach oth^ through the 
wliole of i^ Tador dynasty. In Henry's time, we have seen 
the state religion, at the bidding of Hie sovereign, assume 
aiffiply an anti-F^pal aspect, and its^daims enforced by exile 
or death. Duiing the reign of his youthful successor, at the 
command of his Council, the Papal aspect changes, and a 
IVotefltant phase now challenges the conscientious regards 
of ih» nation. '' The young Josiah" dies, and his sister, by 
her ro3ral wUl, in vk>lation, too, of h^ sacred promise, 
denounces the leading teachers of her brother's religion as 
WGTse than the most abandoned of their fellow-men, the 
diBstroyers of souls, and bums them as an offering to the Pa^ 
power,t and \A6a her people that they must give up their 
religions convictions and bie reconciled to a church which 
tliej had been taught to consider the very seat and throne of 
Anti<^rist, on pain of burning here and of eternal damnsr 
tun hereafter. I The iiurbulent,§ and happily for the nation, 
fibort reiga <^ this devotee to the Yicar of Christ, was 
Ic^o^red by a young and reputed Yirgin Queen ; and she 
lanieB her mandate, as sole arbitress of all spiritual matters, 
ihot ker subjects up to such a day might remain in the 

_j I - I i»ii ■ -ir -iir -.-- .^.-. ..^ - -■-■_^ _ ^ II- 

* fibs heard dmne leirice after the EoxniBh religion, and was often 
confessed, jet at the rigorous solicitation of Cardinal Pole^ professed her- 
self for fear of death, a Koman Catholic. — So says Camden's Life of 
Bizabeth, p. 9. The reader will find more proof in Turner, y(^ liL, pp. 

+ Strickland's Queens of England, voL v., pp. 305-5. 

j; " This day was performed the confirmation of the alliance between 
&B Bope and this king," said .the French ambassador, ** by a public and 
■tlnrna sacrifice oi a preaching doctor, named Bogevus, who has been 
Imnit alive for being a Lutheran." "All heretics, who hold or teach 
<iiherwise than the Roman Church believes and holds, damnantur et 
anathematizantur." — Cardinal Pole. 

I The same writer says, "She travehi with 1500 horse, as a guard to 
p r o te ct her." "She has twenty-five or thirty g»itlemen to sleep in the 
ball of the ]|»eienee, near her apartment. Twice every night they make 
their rounds and visit all the palace." 



128 EABLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

Antichristian Chnrcli of Rome, but ever after that time, on 
pain of her imperial displeasure, they must mould thor 
religious convictions according to her will, through the teach- 
ing of those whom she, as female head of the church, might 
place over them as their religious guides.* 

The rapidity and cruelty of these changes is not the onlj 
thing which strikes us. There are principles underlying 
them, of the greatest and profoundest kind, principles which 
clothe the chief actors in these startling revolutions with 
the most aggravated impiety, or exhibit them as profoundly 
ignorant of the great laws of our moral nature, as well 
as of the spirituality and majestic simplicity of the religion 
of the Son of God. We must not in these matters confound 
things which differ, nor allow the prejudices, to use a very mild 
phrase, of writers of a certain class, to blind us to the nature 
of things. Only in a very modified and inferior sense moft 
we regard these as religious movements. There was as much 
of the political as the spiritual element in them. Perhaps 
more of the spirit of earth than of heaven. The sovereign 
found in existence, on his advent to power, a great, wealthy, 
compact, influential hierarchy, the growth of ages, often the 
rival of the imperial power, which on all political grounds 
it was thought desirable he should subordinate to his will 
Ages had taught that one was essential to the other. The 
full and safe development of the one was very dependent 
on the other. The contract expressed or understood was, 
"Throw your influence," said the seculai* power, '^ around 



* *' Indeed, the Church of England hath the advantage of us, and, a* I 
suppose, of all the churches in the world, for monstrous speedy growth 
and increase ; for from that of a synagogue of Satan, consisting of Popish 
idolaters, and cruel murderers of the saints, it grew from top to toe into 
a true and entire body of Christ, of a sudden, and before the greatest 
part of it so much as heard the Gkwpel preached in any measure for their 
conversion." — Robinson, vol. ii, pp. 65, 66, 318, and 319. 

** This profane multitude, without any profession of faith and repent- 
ance, were forced and compelled by human authority, in the beginning of 
Queen EUzabeth's reign, to be members of their church.'* — J. Canne't 
Necessity of Separation. 



KLIZABSTH. 129 

the monarchy, and the exclusive right to teach religion and 
punish conscience shall be yours; and the rich and ample 
emoluments, which fear or superstition will surrender, shall 
be your reward." How any intelligent mind, with any 
apprehension or right conceptions of the nature of the reli* 
gion of Jesus, and with the Sacred Oracles in his hand, — ^the 
only authority to which we should implicitly bow, — should 
recognize these sectarian, not national, movements, in any 
other light, is one of those profound moral mysteries of this 
life which we cannot solve. In this last case, as we shall 
pnsentLy see, the change was marked by an amount of 
individual and social suffering which has scarcely a parallel 
in the world's history, and which cmky lost its power of con- 
tinaed mischief by the presence and growing power of those 
principles for which so many victims, during Elizabeth's reign, 
taffeied either at the stake, on the tree, or in the priscm.* 

The dumge now was one of no small magnitude, and its 
accomplishment was marked by extraordinary difficulties. 
It touched so many interests purely selfish, and it involved 
ooiuiequences which perilled the throne of Elizabeth, and 
ertti her life. The worst passions of human nature would 
fae stinvd to their very depth. Beyond all comparison, 
teligiooB strife, in its intenseness, exceeds every other strife. 
Only a mind animated by a love of the truth which 
Botfadng could impair, or influenced by a lust of power 
which could bear no co-ordinate authority within the same 
toaho, could dare it. We have no deep impression that 
the former was a very potent agent ; the latter, we think, 
was more so. Elizabeth had witnessed the power of the 
prienthood over the late sovereign, its annihilation of all 
iiBteiiy affection, the suffering which the recognition of a 

* ''Mmoh has* been said of the excellence of the foim of worship by 
tiieiB ettdbluhed; but little, alas! of moral or reiigioas merit can be 
apvarded by tlu rerdict of impartial history to the motives or the coiidiMi 
cf ike hfirane of Protestaarfeism, in a transaction so momenifconB and so 
memorable. " — ^Miss Aikins's EUzabeth, vol. i., p. 320. 

K 



130 EABLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

foreign potentate within the realm, ^^ speaking like a lamb," 
but over-topping the imperial authority, had inflicted on 
the people. Above all, her own exposure to death, and 
the cunning and deadly hate of Gkirdiner and his associateB 
against her, could not be forgotten. With such experience 
of the spiritual powers, it excites no surprise that EUzabeiii, 
and her trusted counsellors, should be anxious to subordinate 
the Church to the State, as in Henry and Edward*s timea 

Within her own realm numerous and powerful elements 
of danger existed. Her treasury was exhausted. The nation 
was at war with France. Scotland was in no pleasant mood, 
its sovereign proclaiming Elizabeth as illegitimate and an 
usurper of the crown, and giving signs of a determination to 
expel her. Ireland was under a chronic disease, relieving itself 
now and then by a rebellion, and was at present very strong in 
its blind attachment to Eome. Much of the spiritual power d 
the kingdom was against her. Bishops and priests had given 
signal proofs of their attachment to the old faith; and the 
fear of punishment, if any change took place, made them natu- 
rally cling closer to it; the majority of her counsellors were 
men of the same class ; while no doubt can be entertained 
that the majority of the people, certainly in the northern 
counties and in the iniral districts, preferred the show^y and 
sensuous form of the old religion. Beyond, '*the BLshop 
of Rome will be incensed," said Cecil; "he will excommoni- 
cate the queen, interdict the realm, and give it a prey to all 
princes who will enter upon it, and stir them up to it by all 
manner of means."* The extirpation of heresy was a glori- 
ous work. The great CathoUc powei's of Euroi)e felt it to be 
so; and "all means," as Cecil says, "would be used to incite 
them to put down the Islanders, and maintain the Pa|ial 



* " Tliere be not in all this country," said Sadlier later on, ** ten gentle- 
men that doiavour and allow of her majesty's proceetlings in the cauM.* «'f 
religion ; and the common i)eople be ignorant, full of HuperBtitii>n. and 
altogether blinded with the ohl Popish doctrine," &c., &c. — State IViftt-rs, 
vol. ii., p. 56. Edinbro', 1809. 



ELIZABETH. 131 

power." Francis the First marked the latter part of his 
reign by entire subserviency to the pri^thood.* The all- 
powerfal Quises religiously and politically detested Elizabeth, 
and sought to combine Eoman Christendom in a deadly war 
against the Protestant faith.t Such were some of the evils 
which stood before the queen as she entered upon her work4 
Persecution, at least in the horrid form in which it 
appeared during the late reign, ceased at once. Light was 
poured into the gloomy cells of the gate-houses, the coal- 
cellars, and other dungeons ; and many confessors were per- 
mitted to revisit their desolate homes and suffering families. § 
From all places of trust and influence the zealots of Eome 
were gradually removed. The ^^unishment of fine and 
imprisonment was suspended over them. Plied with these 
telling arguments, no pardon was to be granted without 
entire submission and conformity to the sovereign's will.|| 
Men of known attachment to Protestant principles were 
called to fill subordinate, but still important, places in varioiis 



• Burnet, voL ii., who gives Cecil's able letter on the difficulties. Cecil, 
we fear, had no principle. He had passed through all the religious changes 
of hjB time. 

"The names of all them tliat dweUcth in the parish of Umbleton ("VVim- 
bleton) that were confessed and received the Sacrament of the altar : — my 
master Sir "W. Cecil, and my Lady Mildred his wife." — ^Tytler*s Edward 
and Hary, voL ii., p. 435. 1556. 

f "We desire that all heresies should be extirpated from oui' kingdom, 
and the heretics, and those who instruct them.'* — Edict of France, May 
18Ui,1533. 

X "That the Pope, the emi^erors, and the kings of Spain and France, 
dioiild band together to reduce again the most part of Europe to the 
Eaman Catholic religion ; and to pursue and punish with fire and sword 
aU heretics that would not willingly condescend to the same." — Melville's 
Memoirs, pp. 76-7. Turner, vol. iii., p. 541, where more evidence will be 

foond. 

§ Collier, vol. ii., pp. 410-11. Soame, vol. iv., p. 606. 

H "The premunire must be played upon them ; and when once they are 
in misericordia, they are not to bo pardoned without entire su(»mission and 
conformity ; and by hampering them well, and x)ressing the laws close, her 
majestjr's occasion for money may be somewhat supplied." — Collier, voL 
il, p. 414. Soame, vol. iv., p. Oil. 



132 EABLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

parts of the country. The return • of the exiles, who had 
fled before the burning zeal of Mary, greatly augmented the 
swelling tide of popular indignation against the old &itL 
Many of them were men of rich and varied cultui^. More 
valuable still, at this crisis, than even their profound eniditioiiy 
was their power as ministers of God's Word.* It was their 
forte. Practice had given them a power their advocates had 
&,iled to secure. These and other signs awakened suspicions 
and alarm in some, and kindled hope in the minds of otheni 
Both parties felt that the conflict would be severe and final 
The pulpit echoed with the war cry. Upon all the points 
of difference between the two churches, both parties 
exhausted their bitterest local and patriotic resources. Pas- 
sions were inflamed and prejudice excited. The Papist, on 
principle, from interest and fear, hated the Protestant, as a 
man infamous, detested of God, as a moral pestilence in ereiy 
circle in which he was found : the Protestant, as a matter of 
duty, declared exterminating war against the Papist as a limb 
of Antichrist, an idolater, one whose toleration as a religion- 
ist was inconsistent with the well-being of the commonwealth 
and the salvation of men. Society was shaken to its centre 
by these combatants. Against the Philistines, men who had 
hidden themselves in caves and dens came out to give them 
battle, in the name of the Lord of Hosts. The civil power 
interi)osed to calm the tumult. All preaching for a time 
was suspended, till the mind of the country could be ex- 
pressed through its constituted representatives in the senatie 
of the nation, t 

An Act was passed for restoring the supremacy to the 
crown. Its provisions arc worthy the attention of the 
reader. It provides that all "such juinsdiction, privileges, 
superiority and pre-eniinence, spiritual and ecclesiastical, a* 



* Tlicy were men of greut anil iliverHified exiHjrieucc, of practical lubiu, 
of euergy aud zeal, aiul above all, of fervent aud exalted piety." — 
Marsdon'B Early IhiriiaUH, p. }(x 

+ Collier, voL ii., p. 411. 8iryiH3*H Ann., vol. i., pp. 58-9. 



ELIZABETH. 133 

by any spiritual or ecclesiastical power or authority hath 
heretofore been, or may lawfully be, exercised or used, for 
the visitation of the ecclesiastical state and persons, and for 
reformation, order and correction of the same; and of all 
manner of errors, heresies, schisms, abuses, offences, con- 
tempts, and enormities, shall for ever, by authority of this 
present Parliament, be united and annexed to the imperial 
crown of this realm."* 

By this act of the senate the authority of the Pope was 
thrown off, and the independence of the English Church 
clearly defined. Subsequently most of the persecuting laws 
vere abolished, and others for the security of the throne passed. 

Policy, if not fairness, prompted Elizabeth to proceed with 
ctiution. A disputation on important points of difference 
between the Papists and the Reformed was proposed. In the 
abbey church of Westminster the combatants were to engage. 
Heath of York was authorized to select the champions on the 
one side : the choicest of the returned exiles were nominated 
for the other. The discussion fixed the attention of multi- 
tudes. The members of the Privy Council, most of the nobility 
and the courtiers, with many of the Lower House, crowded 
ike venerable structure. Over this august assembly, and on 
an occasion so mighty, the Lord Chief Justice Bacon presided. 
Like many others, this proved abortive. Expectations so 
raised were only disappointed. The Homanists, on some plea 
of informality, withdrew from the hopeless contest. Victory, 
not truth, is too often the object of public disputations. 

The points for discussion were, — the service in the English 
tongue, the authority of every church to set aside or modify 
ceremonies, and the doctrines of the mass. The latter was 
abolished for the administration of the Lord's Supper in both 
kinds; and the use of Edward the Sixth's second Prayer 
Book, with some modifications, was authorised, t Images 



* Collier, vol. ii., p. 420. 
i* The extent to which alterations were made may be seen in Collin, 
voL iL Baooirds, Izzviii 



134 EARLY EKGLISH BAPTISTS. 

were removed from the churches, and many of the objects 
of idolatrous worship were speedily committed to the flamea.* 
Subsequently the articles were reduced to their present 
number. + 

Partial as these changes were, they touched some members 
of the old faith. Not a few of these dignitaries had rejected 
the authority of the Pope before, in one or other of the 
former reigns, and in that of Mary had again sworn obedi- 
ence to him as the head of the universal church ; but coercion 
or shame interposed now. One of their own friends gives 
the following as the result : — '' Fourteen bishops, besides 
three bishops elect, the abbot of Westminster, four prion, 
twelve deacons, fourteen archdeacons, sixty canons, not so 
few as 100 priests of good preferment, fifteen heads of col- 
leges, and about twenty proctors." J More than 10,000 
parishes existed at this time in the kingdom, so that only 
about 243 out of the great body of the spiritual men refused 
to submit to the change. The vacancies were filled up, 
chiefly from the men who had been in exile for the truth's 
sake during the reign of Mary. 

The principle which influenced Elizabeth in remodelling 
the English Church, was to give as little annoyance to her 
Romish subjects as possible. § Opposed on many grounds 



* Camden's Elizabeth, pp. 30-1. 

•f* In Elizabeth's Prayer Book the following occurs on baptism : — "Thai 
the priest shall take the child in his hands, and ask the name ; and naming 
the child, shall dip it in the water, so it be discreetly and warily doue^'^kc. 
— Liturgical Service of Elizabeth, p. 203 (Parker Society). 

t *^lu one of the volumes of the Cotton Library (which volume aeemeth 
once to have belonged to Camden), the whole number of the deprived 
ecclesiastics is digested in this catalogue: bishops, 14; deans, 13; arch- 
deacons, 14 ; heads of colleges, 15 ; prebendaries, 50 ; rectors of churchet, 
80; abbots, priors, &c., 6; — in all, 192." — Strype's Ann., voL i., p. lOd. 

§ "Though connected, by her position, with the doctrines of the 
Reformation, Elizabeth had, in common with the Catliolic clergy, a 
strong taste for pomp and authority. Her first regulations in regard to 
religious matters were consequently of such a character that most of the 
Catholics felt no repugnance to attend the divine worship with which the 



ELIZABETH. 13d 

as she was^ politically as well as religiously, to the Papal 
authority, she yet loved the magnificence of the Komish 
Ohurch. It accorded with her taste and gratified her love 
of display. Many of the gorgeous accessories to this wor- 
ship were left untouched by her. "It was with great 
difficulty, and not without a protestation from the bishops, 
that her majesty consented to have so many monuments of 
idolatry removed out of churches : but she would not part with 
her altar or crucifix out of her own chapel. The gentlemen 
and children appeared there in their surplices, and the priests 
in their copes ; the altar was furnished with rich plate, with 
two gilt candlesticks, with lighted candles, and a massive 
crucifix in the midst; the service was sung, not only with 
the sound of organ, but with the artificial music of comets, 
saokbuts, &c., on solemn festivals. The ceremonies observed 
by the Elnights of the Garter, in their adoration towards the 
altar, which had been abolished by King Edward, and 
renewed by Queen Mary, had been retained. In short, the 
service of the queen's chapel, and in sundry cathedrals, was 
so splendid and showy, that foreigners could not distinguish 
it from Boman, except that it was performed in the English 
tongna By this method most of the Popish laity were 
deceived into conformity, and came regularly to church for 
nine or ten years, till the Pope, being out of all hopes of an 
acoommodation, forbade them, by excommunicating the queen 
and laying the kingdom under an interdict."* Her majesty 
must always approach God as a queen, and not as a poor 

Befoarmen were satisfied; and the establishment of the Anglican Church, 
wbic^ was entrusted to the hands of the existing clergy, met with very 
HtUe resistance, and at the same time very little encouragement, from the 
general body of ecclesiastics. Religion continued to be regarded by a 
great many i>er8ons as a mere political matter." — Guizof s life, &c., of 
fiOuJopeaie, pp. 14, 15. 

* Keal, YoL L, p. 95 : "The doctrine is everywhere most pure; but 
as to oeremonieB and maskings, there is a little too much foolery. That 
nlTer cross of ill-omened origin still maintains its place in the queen's 
ehapeL Wretched me I This thing will be drawn into a precedent." 



136 EARLY KHOUSH BAPTISTS. 

ftinna:. With the same end, as indicated abore, she would 
have the clause in the Litany, to be delivered from ike 
Bishop of Home, and all hie detestable enamUHeSy expunged.* 
We will only add, that she completed her work of rafiuna- 
ing, for the present, by a l^iidatiye enactment whkk 
entailed an amount of misery on thousands of the holiest, 
noblest, and most loyal of her subjects, which is almoil 
without a parallel; and presented the hierarchy in a ligkt 
which, the more the truth and power of Christ are spread, 
will expose it to the scorn and condemnation of the viie 
and good, as a spiritual tyranny which no well r^okted 
commonwealth should ever tolerata The Act of UniformiAj 
was passed in 1559, June 24:th. It aimed at a hopeless tt^ 
It insisted on all minds conforming to her majesty's religiooi 
notions, and conforming to her splendid pageantry in Chn»- 
tian worship, on pain of her imperial displeasure ; and, worse 
stiQ, though that was bad enough, of that of a higher and 
holier authority. No language is too strong in denonnciiig 
the folly, — ^yea, the madness, the rery aggravated widced- 
ness, — of these attempts. They involve an invasion of tlie 
rights of our moral nature; a daring rebellion against the 
authority of the Son of God. 

From another source we gather that "there is yet • 
general prohibition of preaching; and still a crucifix on the 
altar at court, with lights burning before it. Though by the 
queen's order, images are removed out of the churches all 
over the kingdom ; yet the people rejoice to see that this i* 

Jewel (Zurich Letters), p. 55. **And yet is sche that now reignetli omx 
thame, neither gude Protei)tant nor yet resolute Papist, let the worU 
judge Quhilk is the third." — J. Knox. Macrie, p. 255. 

* In the Litany of Henry VIII., and after in those of Edward, tliif 
prayer was inserted : *^From the tyranny and all the detestable enomuHm 
of the Bishop of Rome." Elizabeth would have it expunged. The aacra* 
mental bread was made round, like the wafer of the Romanist. A table 
was also placetl where the altar formerly stood, and many of the oU 
festivals retained in the church, &c. Vide Ward's Reformation, canto ii. 
pp. 283-4. Note Heylin. p. 203. Soame, voL iii. kc. 



ELIZABETH. 137 

■till kept in the queen's chapel. Three bishops officiate at 
ihe altar; one as priest, another as deacon, and a third as 
sob-deacon, all in rich copes before the idol ; and there is 
lacrament without sermon. Injunctions are sent to preachers 
not to use freedom in reproving vice."* 

It is not compatible with the design of these pages even 
to glance at some of those events which agitated Elizabeth's 
government, but which invest her reign with all its material 
brilliancy. We cannot now dwell on the conspiracy of the 
Piope and the Catholic States of Europe to assassinate Eliza- 
beth, and uproot the Protestant faith ;t on the Northern 
lebellion, for the restoration of the Papal power; J or on the 
armada of the sombre-minded Philip, and its providential 
defeat; whilst the bitter hostility of the bishops to holy, 
conscientious men, will claim attention hereafter: but on 
another topic we must touch, as bearing powerfully on early 
Baptist history. 

The Act of Uniformity brought into fiill play some of those 

• BoTuet, iii., p. 292. Congregational Magazine, 1840, p. 89. "After 
I had written this, lo I good news was brought me, namely, that the 
oradfix and candlesticks in the queen's chapel are broken in pieces, and, 
M game one has brought word, reduced to ashes.'' — ^Parkhurst, Bishop of 
Korwich. Zurich Letters, p. 122, Aug., 1562. "I wrote you word that 
Ihe Christmas candles and candlesticks had been removed from the 
gmen's chapel ; but they were shortly after brought back again, to the 
great grief of the godly."— i&«i, April 26th, 1563. 

1* The reader will find ample details of this in Turner, vol. iv. 

X That this was purely a religious rebellion admits of no doubt. The 
Bowei MS. supplies a lai^ amount of information. We give an extract : 
*'The xoaas of the people were in favour of the old superstition. There 
vaa no part of the British empire where the first pale and struggling ray 
flf the Befbrmation broke with more vermilion lustre." ^* All the gentle- 
men, Mbve a few in the East-Biding of York, remained neuter in the con- 
teat; but either their sons and heirs, or second sons, are with the rebels.'* 
^'Bihlea and Prayer Books were everywhere burnt, and altars and the 
VMi everywhere restored." " With tears and entreaties the Countess of 
Westmoreland induced her reluctant husband to enter on the war." — 
MflODOODals of the Bebellion of 1596, from the Bowes MS., pp. 10, 41, 
76, 252, 261. London, Nichols and Son, 1840. 



138 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

great and everliving principles, the existence of which we 
have already indicated; which, whilst they have checked the 
pride and persecuting power of the hierarchy, have kept the 
holy fire burning on the church's altars, and contributed 
beyond anything else to the moral and social greatness of the 
nation. The great Puritan controversy forms one of thoae 
grand national epochs, the results of which are endless. It 
stands before us in all its commanding majesty, curbing 
tyranny in the State and the Church, and opening a thousand 
channels through which the most benignant influences can 
flow to elevate the commonwealth. Its ability to benefit is 
not impaired. Over a wider and still wider circle it is rnnl- 
tipljdng its triumphs. Every year presents us with freA 
proo& of its vitalizing energy in this and in other lands. 
To overlook this would be a sin against the truth, and an 
injury to our readers. 

For more than thirty years the battle about copes, sur- 
plices, &c., raged. It had mainly to do with "the cero- 
monial of religion, not with the purity of its doctrine, but 
with its external fabric." Priestly vestments, the cross in 
baptism, the use of the ring in maniage, baptism by women, 
kneeling or sitting at the Supper, the use of organ music in 
divine services, pluralities, and the wealth and display of the 
bishops,* — these were the great subjects of controversy. 
Upon religious dogmas, the nature of the sacraments, and 



* In an age of state and pageantry, Archbuhop Parker exhi))iied a 
model of almost regal magnificence. Whitgift, shortly afterwards rmiied 
to the primacy on the deatU of Grindal, surpassed even Parker in stateli- 
ness. It is recorded of him by one of his biographers, that he trarelled 
with a retinue of a hundred servants, including forty gentlemen with 
chains of gold. And that nothing might be wanting, he kept a good 
armoury for the exercise of military discipline, and a fair stable of hones, 
insomuch that he was able at all times to equip both horse and foot, 
and frequently mustered a hundred of the former and fifty of the Utter, 
his own servants trained and moimted. No wonder that prelacy, with its 
pomp and pride, was the favourite mark of the keen shafts of the Pari- 
tans. — Marsden, p. 86. Certainly the church was very militant at thit 
time, and its chiefs needed this protection. 



ELIZABETH. 139 

the constitatioii of the church, opinions were uniform.* Into 
the grounds of these objections we enter not. The Puritans 
regard these things '^ as masks of the heart," '' rags of Anti- 
christ," " the gear of the apostate church.'' In similar robes 
'^the massing priests" performed their idolatrous services. 
They were Jewish in their origin, and marred the simplicity 
of Chiistian worship. " If we are bound," said one, " ta 
wear Popish apparel when commanded, we may be obliged to 
have shaven crowns, and to use oil and cream and spittle, 
with all the rest of the Papistical additions to the ordinances 
of Christ." Again and again theii* removal was implored. 
Against their imposition the plea of conscience was heard. 
The queen, the prelates, the senate, the lord treasurer, were 
memorialized, but in vain. The loyalty of the Puritans 'was 
tmimpeached j their attachment to the church, as constituted, 
strong. But the episcopate was immovable. Parker, once 
an exile, then meek and gentle, after a doubtful consecration 
now reigned at Lambeth. His government, sustained by 
Aylmer, another exile, but now renegade to his former 
principles, was exceedingly severe. Elizabeth, sustained and 
incited by her spiritual advisers, was inexorable. Her 
imperious Tudor temper could brook no opposition. She 
was jealous of her spiritual, as of her tempoml power, t 
Bamet says : " Men opposed to the improvements suggested 
by the leading Puritans, demonstrated to her that these new 
models would certainly bring with them a great abatement 
of her prerogative; since if the concern of religion came 
Into popular hands, there would be a power set up distinct 
from hers^ over which she could have no authority. This 
ihe perceived well, and therefore resolved to maintain the 
ancient government in the church; but by this means it 
became a matter of interest, and so those differences which 

* Marsden, c. viii 
i* *' She was bo proud of her ecclesiastical power that she condemned 
the CommonB for ordering a public fast without her authority." — Lord 
CunpbeirB Chief Justices, voL i., p. 186. 



140 EABLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

might have been more easily reconciled before grew more 
into formal factions."* Or, as one of the most illnstrioos 
of living writers records : "To allow churches with contniy 
roles and ceremonies (said Elizabeth), were nothing eke 
but to sow discord out of religion ; to distract good mmLS 
minds, to cherish factious men's humours, to disturb religum 
and commonwealth, and mingle divine and human thinj^ 
which were a thing indeed evil ; to our own subjectB hurtfol, 
and to themselves to whom it is granted neither greadj 
commodious, nor yet at all safe."+ 

Jewel, one of the best, as certainly he was one of the 
ablest of the brotherhood, thus complains to his Swia 
correspondent : '^ The bishops are a great hindrance to u ; 
for being, as you know, among the nobility and leading men 
in the Upper House, and having none there on onr side to 
expose their artifices or confute their falsehoods, they reiga 
as sole monarchs in the midst of ignorant and weak men, 
and easily overreach our little party. The queen, mean- 
while, though she openly favours our cause, yet is wonder- 
fully afraid of allowing any innovations; this is owing, 
partly, to her own friends, by whose advice everything is 
carried on," &c.t 

Upon two results arising from this unholy and impolitic 
conduct of Elizabeth and her bishops, we would detain the 
reader's attention for a moment. The injury it inflicted on 
the State Church was irreparable. Sooner or later this 
result always follows. Facts place this beyond all doubu 
We select two classes. The first we gather from the confi- 
dential utterances of private friendships. Most of the 
exiles who had been elevated to dignified positions in the 



* Burnet, vol. ii., preface. '*The queen valued her eccl 
supremacy more than any part of her prerogative. Next to tlie sucoeMion 
to the crown, it was the point she could leaat endure to be touched."— 
Hallam's Con. History, vol. i., p. 2.53. 

t Motley's Dutch Republic, voL i., p. 26. 
X Jewel. Zurich LetterB, p. 10. 



EUZABETH. 141 

chnrch, kept up an intiinate correspondence with Bollinger, 
Granlter, and others. 

Bishop Cox, whose spirit was chafed by the Puritan con- 
troversy, says in a letter to R Gaulter, in no very respectful 
tone, that ^' many obstinately refuse to enter our churches, 
either to baptize their children, or to partake of the Lord's 
Supper, or to hear sermons. They are entirely separated 
both from us and from those good brethren of ours : they 
seek bye-paths; they establish a private religion, and assem- 
ble in private houses, and there perform their sacred rites, 
as the Donatists of old, and the Anabaptists now," <S^* 
" Many of the parishes,'' writes Lever, " have no clergymen, 
and some dioceses are without a bishop. And out of the 
very small number who administer the sacrament throughout 
tills great country, there is hardly one in a hundred who is 
both able and willing to preach the Word of God, but all 
persons are obliged to read what is prescribed in books, "t 

From another source we gather fresh proofe. Bishop 
Sandys, writing of his metropolitan city, says, "The city 
(tiondon) will never be quiet tiU these authors of sedition, 
who are now esteemed as gods, as Field, Wilcox, Cartwright, 
and others be hx removed from the city. The people resort 
vnto them, as in Popery they were wont to run on pilgrim- 
age. If these idols, who are honoured as saints, and greatly 
enriohed with gifts^ were removed from hence, their honour 
would fall into the dust ; they would be taken for blocks, as 
they be. There be some aldermen and some wealthy citizens 
who give them great and stout countenance, and persuade 



* Zurich Letters, p. 237. 
+ Lever to Bollinger. Zurich Letters (Parker Society). Letter Ixxxv. 
"Let it be remembered that there existed few books of divinity in 
English ; that all books were, comparatively to the value of money, far 
dearer than at present; that the majority of the clergy were nearly 
illiterate, and many of them addicted to drunkenness and low vices; 
above all, that they had no means of supplying their deficiencies by 
preaching the discourses of others." — ^HaJlam's Con. History, vol. IL, 
p. 200, note. 



142 EABLT ENGLISH BAFTISTS. 

what they cau, that others may do the like. A sharp letter 
from her majesty would cut the courage of these men."* 

" Our (bishops') estimation is weak ; our authority is less ; 
so that we are become contemptible in the eyes of the baser 
sort of the people. How or by what means^ or who is in the 
fault, I will not dispute, but leave to the Searcher of aU 
hearts to judge."t 

The influence on the people was deplorable. We take one 
illustration from opposite parts of the empire. In a petition 
to parliament from Cornwall, the inhabitants say : " We 
have about 160 churches, the greatest part of which are 
supplied by men who are guilty of the grossest sins; some 
fornicators, some adulterers, some felons, bearing the marks 
in their hands for the said offence; some drunkards, game- 
sters on the Sabbath day," &c, " There were HO, scarcely 
Any of whom could preach a sermon, and most of whom 
were pluralists and non-residents."t 

Ministerial destitution in Suffolk in 1567 is thus de- 
scribed in a letter to the primate, asking for the restoration 
of Mr. Lawrance to his ministry. Tlie petitioners say "there 
is not one preacher within a circuit of twenty miles, in 
which circuit he was wont to preach. "§ "It appears from an 
impartial survey of all the counties in England, that there 
were only 2,000 preachers to sei-ve nearly 10,000 parishes, 
only 416 ministers in the county of Norfolk, and 457 in the 
Lincoln, who could not ]>reach," <fec.|| Yet Aylmer and his 



* Letter to Burghley, CongregationiJ Mivgiizine, 1840, p. 222. 

t Ibidy p. 225. Other instances from Parker occur on p. 155. " I am 
hated like a dog, and even called the oj)pressor of the children i>f God.*' 
—Ibid, i>. 370. 

X Brooke's l\iritan8, vol. i., Introduction, p. 41. 

§ Ibidy vol. i. p. 237. 

!| Ibid J vol. i., i>. 49. Neal, and even Marstlen, 8Uj>ply the most iNiiufuI 
facts on these jK)ints. The latter says, "Many then^ an* that hear not a 
sermon in seven yeai-s ; I might say in seventeen." Only two ]»ivai*hor» 
were found in Uic whole diocese of Bangor. In Cornwall, Neal teUs 115, 



ELIZABETH. 143 

brethren persecuted godly and well-qualified ministerH, and 
ejected them from their livings, because they could not wear 
a certain garment, <kc., in their ministry. 

Only one other instance. The Lords of the Privy Council, 
in a letter of rebuke to Whitgift and Aylmer, say, " That 
they had lately received information that great numbers of 
zealous and learned preachers were suspended &om their 
cures : that there was no preaching, prayer, nor sacraments 
in vacant places; that in some cases, the persons appointed 
to succeed them had neither good learning nor good name, 
but were drunkards and of filthy life;* and that, in other 
places, a great number of persons occupying cures were 
notoriously unfit; some for lack of learning, and others 
charged with enormous. crimes; as drunkenness, filthiness of 
life, gaming at cards, and haunting of alehouses, against 
whom they heard of no proceedings," &c.t 

That the moral state of the people was low, admits of no 
doubt. Hitherto the glorious Reformation had shed but 
little light on them. We catch a glimpse of their state in 
some injunctions issued by Grindal in 1570. "We select the 
following fix)m them : — " That no pedlar shall be admitted 
to sell his wares in the church porch in divine service ; that 
parish clerks shall be able to read ; that no lord of misrule, 
or summer lords and ladies, or any disguised persons, or 
morris-dancers, or others, shall come irreverently into the 
church, or play any unseemly parts with scofis, jests, wanton 
gestures, or ribald talk, in the time of divine service."f 

The other great results touched the interests of the non- 
there was not a single preacher capable of preaching a sermon. Oxford 
had three, but they were all chief men amongst the Puritans. — Vide 
Manden, pp. 100-1. 

* "In the diocese of Bangor it was usual for the clergy, some years 
after Elizabeth's accession, to pay the bishop for a license to keep a con- 
cubine.'' — Hallam, vol. i., p. 176. 

+ Strype's Whitgift, pp. 165-6. Congregational Magazine, 1840, p. 525. 
Vide Letter from KnoUys to Burghley. — Ibid, pp. 734-5. 

X Biog. Britt., voL vii., Sup., p. 73. Brooke, vol. L, p. 256. 



144 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

conforming body. Multitudes were forbidden to preach, and 
were exposed to suffering in every form. The great martyr- 
ologist passed his old age in poverty and shame. He complaiDi 
even of want of clothes. His words to Dr. Humphreys aie 
touching : '^ I still wear the same clothes, and remain in the 
same sordid condition, that England received me in when I 
first came home from Germany ; nor do I change my ddgnb 
or order, which is that of the mendicant; or, if you will, of 
the friar preacher."* Coverdale, the venerable translator of 
the Bible, and formerly Bishop of Exeter, was brought witk 
sorrow to the grave. Sampson, Lever, and others, the eqmb 
of Parker in mental power and scholarly attainments, in all 
the elements of moral greatness his superiors, suffered greatly. 
Littleness was enthroned in high places, and wielding a 
power, the accident of its position, sought to make the great 
and the noble conform to its tyrannical wilL A dark and 
painful history is that of the treatment of these holy men. 
The intercourse of the exiles with the Swiss and Crerouui 
reformers has been indicated before. We have, in part, 
noticed its influence, but its frill power only now begim to 
unfold itself. From the externals in Christian worship the 
Puritans now aimed at a more radical change, and sought a 
more distinctive alteration in the constitution of the national 
church. The pomp of the bishops, their cioielty in pereecn- 
tions, the hatred of the people, the teaching and influence 
of Knox and his brethren in Scotland, forced the quesdon 
on public attention : Are bisho})s necessary to the church of 
Christ 1 Under various forms it presented itself : Are not 
all Christian ministei's on an equality ] Does not the New 
Testament warrant tliis ? Is not all the evidence which 
the primitive church supplies, in its fiivour? Is not the 
practice of all other Protestant churches in favour of thhi f 
Or, if there be anything exceptional to this, is it anytliing 
more than that which accident or moral worth would 



* Neal, voL iL, chap. iv. 



EUZABBTB. 145 

sopplyl Cranmer, and manj of tho eaiij reformers in 
Edward's tiine, follj agreed with the Bwiss pastors as to the 
oonrtitation of the church. 

The elem«iLts of Presbyterianisni were wrapt in these 
guisea. Their advocacy followed. Cartwright, the most 
ftible and sturdy champion, early demanded 'Hhat bishops,. 
pcHstv, aad deacons ought to be reduced to the apostolical 
imititixtiGitt (meaning that bishops, sua a third order in the 
ekuToh, £dK>uld be abolished), and that presbyters only should 
Famain to preach the Word of God and pray : and deacons 
be employed in taking care of the poor. That every church 
on^ht to be governed by its ministers and presbyters; 
ihait no man ooght to solicit, or be a candidate for, the min- 
istzy ; and that ministers ought to be openly and fairly chosen 
hf the peopla"* The alterations involved here were vital 
Qartwright would overthrow Prelacy, and fix instead of it 
the Presbyterian power.f Around these grave questions the 
ofaampions exhausted their great powers. Long and angry 
was the contest between Whitgifb on the one side, and 
Qartwrigbt on the other. The discussion was exhaustive. 
Old Thomas Fuller remarks "that if Cartwright had the 
better of his adversary in learning, Whitgift had more 
power to back his argument ; and by this he not only kept 
the field, but gained the victory." Just so; no one can 
study the controversy impartially without rising up with 
the couriction that truth was on the one side and the civil 
power on the other. J Grod's Word sustained the one, the 



* Karsdezi, pp. 76-7. In a letter from Hooper to Bullinger, he says 
that " the archbishop of Canterbury, the bishops of Rochester, Ely, St. 
David's, Lincoln, and Bath, were sincerely bent on advanciDg the purity 
of doetrine, agreeing in all things with the Helvetic Church." Cranmer 
avowed h^ conviction that " bishops and presbyters had but one <^ce in 
Ae beginning of Chris<^s religion." He proposed to establish church 
oosrte-and synods, like those afterwards introduced by Knox into Scot- 
land. — Vide a large body of evidence in Chrichton's edition of Elnoz. 

-f« ''In 1572 a Presbyterian church was formed, and a meeting-house 
erected at Wandsworth, in January." — Marsden, p. 61. 

t ** Tlie queen was for laying hold of aU opportunities to froL'g^T^'^R^ ^ 

L 



146 BABLY EirGLISH BAPTISTS. 

imperious will of the monarch was the shield of proiectioii 
for the other.* Cartwright^ Fields and Wilcox, though they 
had not the clear conceptions of the true constitation ci 
Christ's church which the despised Anabaptists held, yet 
were noble explorers in the field of truth, and haYO kid 
posterity under a vast debt of obligation. Much as we 
admire these spiritual heroes, it has its limits ; and we can- 
not dismiss them without a word more on the matters for 
which they contended. Neal says, *' Both parties agreed too 
well in asserting the necessity of uniformity of public wor- 
ship, and of calling in the sword of the magistrate for the 
support and defence of the several principles, which they 
made an ill use of in their turns, as they could grasp the 
power into their hands. The standard of uniformity, acooid- 
ing to the bishops, was the queen's supremacy and the 
law of the land ; according to the Puritans, the decrees of 
provincial and national synods, allowed and enforced by the 
civil magistrate ; but neither party were for admitting that 
liberty of conscience and freedom of profession which is 
every man's right, as far as is consistent with the peace of 
the government he lives under." t 

But other men appeared with clearer views and wider 
aims. The question naturally arose, Can the tree be good, 
the fruit of which was so essentially bitter and destructive ? 

number of conscientious men, whom, she would often say, she hated wu>re 
than the Papists." — Neal, voL i, ch. v. 

**A sharpe letter from her magesty," said his lordship of London, 
*' would cut the courage of these men. Good my lord, for the love yon 
bear to the church of Christ, resist the timiultuous enterprises of these 
new-fangled fellows." — Ibid, voL i., ch. v. 

* Sandys, another exile in Mary's time, says, **The matter is merely 
temporal, fittest for temporal men to deal with. It is not convenient thai 
men of my calling deal with matters of conscience, and to send men to 
the Tower and torture. As your lordship well remembered, in your last 
letter to me, we should rather be feeders than punishers."— Letter to 
Burghley, Congregational Magazine, 1840, p. 225. Quite right, though, 
for a successor of the apostles to excite others to send men to the Tower 
«iid torture ! f Neal's Elizabeth, voL L, p. 147. Apud Hallam. 



ELIZABETH. 147 

The BaptiHtB had always beea Separatisto. Their views of 
the nature of Christ's church were now embraced by others. 
Robert Browu enunciated the piinciplcs of Congregationalism, 
from the pulpit and the press. Brown was a minister of the 
State Church, and a relative of Cecil. For some years he 
laboured to difiuse his newly -discovered principles ; — they 
spreadj disciples increased; but after long and sevei-e suffer- 
ing, he died in comparative obscurity, a minister of the 
church upon which he had flung every malediction, and 
whose very foundation he had laboured to upturn. The 
Church of England and her ministers Le held to be unchris- 
tian ; its discipline was Popish, and its ordinances and aacra- 
m.ents invalid. Sepanitioa was to be entire. Truth cannot 
perish. These great principles are more potent, after the 
test of centuries, than ever. Barrow, Greenwood, and 
others, men of the loftiest principles and of heroic spirit, 
embraced and preached them. Their homage t« these 
verities was entire; their love to them quenchless; whilst 
a life of auflfering and the martyi-'s death, proclaimed the in- 
tenaenees of Episcopal hate and dread of freedom of thought 
and the rights of conscience. But their histoiy is not within 
the design of this work.* It is qidte time the attention of 
the reader was fixed on other mett* and their doings. 

Kot only the existence, but the wide spread of Baptist 
principles, during the reign of the "royal Tudor lioness," ia 
acknowledged on all hands. One of the latest, and we are 
bound to say, one of the calmest and most candid writers 
on the Puritanic history, says; "Bat the Anabaptists were 
the moat numerous, and for some time by far the most 
formidable, opponents of the church. They are said to 
have existed in England since the early days of the Lollards, 
but their chief strength was more abroad," Jtc.t "You 
must not be grieved, my Gaulter," wrote Bishop Cox, "that 
sectaries are showing themselves to be mischievous and 

■ The reader ia referred to Naal, Brooke, and Fletcher'a hiatoriea. 
t Maraden, p, 144. 



i 



148 EABLY EKaUSH BAPTISTS. 

wicked interpreters of yonr most just opinion. For it can- 
not be otherwise but that tares must grow in the Lord's 
field, and that in no small quantity. Of this kind are the 
Anabaptists, Donatists, Aiians, Papists, and all the good- 
for-nothing tribe of Sectaries."* Approximation to some of 
their distinctive principles was growing, but love to the pro- 
fessors of them existed not. The writer already quoted truth- 
fully says : "In the judgment of the cliurch party, and of not 
a few of the Puritans, Anabaptists were heretics of the wont 
kind, and those who denied the necessity or validity of infimt 
baptism, however orthodox on other points, are constantly 
classed by writers of that period, with Donatists, infidels, 
and atheists," &c.f This is true : eminently so with some of 
the bishops. Aylmer's malice was intense. The following 
more than justifies the opinion: — "The Anabaptists, with 
infinite other swarms of Satanistes, do you think that every 
pulpit may wyll be hable to aunswer them 1 I pray €rod 
there may be many that can."j; "And in these latter daies, 
the old festered sores newly broke out, as the Anabaptists^ 
the free-willers, or rather the forward-willers, with infinite 
other swarms of God's enemies. These 'vgglie monsters,* 
*brodes of the de\'virs brotherhood.'" § 

In Dr. Parkers letter declining the Archbishopric of 
Canterbury, the following occura : "They say that the reahn 
is full of Anabaptists, Arians, libertines, free will men, iVc, 
against whom I only thought ministers should have need t4> 
fight in unity of doctrine." || 

Jewel, in his coiTespondence wdth the Swiss divines, 
utters tlie same complaint: "We found, at the beginning 
of the reign of Eliaibeth, large and inauspicious crojs of 
Arians, Anabaptists, and other pests, whicli, T know not 



* Bishop Cox to Gaulter, 1575. Zurich Loiters, 'iJCi. 

t Marsden, p. (JT). " I am not an Aiiahaptist, thank (.J«k1," i»:ii«l (Ireru- 
wootl, — Brooke's Puiitans, vol. ii., p. .%. 

Z BiHhop Aylmor's Ilarborough f<»r Faithful Suhjects. Maitland, p. 'Jl^V 
§ Ibid, p. 205. II Bumet'H Reformation, vol. ii., p. ;V59. 



ELJZABCrH. 149 

how, but as musihrooms spriBg up in the night and in dark- 
ness, so these sprung up in that darkness and unhappy 
night of the Marian times. These, I am informed, and hope 
it is the fact, have retreated before the light of pure doc- 
teranes, like owls at the light of the sun, and are nowhere to 
be found."* 

Two causes may account for the number o£ our brethren 
in this country at this tima Protection had been given to 
Dutch and French refugees. Churches had be^i given to 
ihewi in which divine worship, according to their own views, 
oould be conducted. The state of the Netherlands supplies 
Another cause. England appeared the land of freedom under 
the rule of the Protestant queen, and the liberty granted to 
others many hoped to find here, partial liberty of conscience. 
These hopes were only t^nporary. No rest could be found 
fyr their weary spirits. The animus of the government soon 
manifested itself t Burghley, KnoUeys, Leicester, and others, 
thcew the shield of their protection around the Puritans and 
Brownists, and frequently employed their "great powers in 
ifihedking the fury of the bishops, delivering their victims 
from their iron grasp. But whoever found mercy, the Bap- 
tists had none. As we have seen, detested by all, obnoxious 
to the government, and hated by all religionists, they were 
^'hunted like a pad^dge on the mountains." 

In the fourth year of her reign a proclamation was issued 
by the queen, commanding '^ the Anabaptists and such like 
h/^i^ics, which had flocked to the coast towns of England, 
£com the parts beyond the seas, under colour of shunning 
persecution, and had spread the poison of their sects in 
England, to depart the realm within twenty days, whether 
they were natural-born people of the land or foreigners, 

* Zurich Letters, 92. 
"Y Elizabeth said, " That it was not with safety, honour, and credit, to 
permit diversity of opinion in a kingdom where none but she and her 
Cjooncil governed.'' — Foxes and Firebrands, part iii. Apud Sitrype's 
Assals, vol. L, p. 128. 



150 EABLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

upon pain of ynprisonment and loss of goods."* Many were 
forced to wander in other lands, and probably fell victims to 
the persecuting power. Collier says^ ^' Several secured thon- 
selves with their Protestancy, and joined the French and 
Dutch congregations, both in London and the coast town& 
And here, by venting some of their dotages, they occasioned 
such warm contentions that P. Martyr found it necessary to 
interpose his interest for bringing them to more temper." 
An example of these ''warm commotions'' is given us by 
Strype : '' In the year 1560 one of their ministers, of the 
Dutch Church, Austin Friars, namely, HamstediuSi was 
convened before the said bishop (Grindal), judicially, for 
favouring some Dutch Anabaptists that desired to be received 
into his church, and had supplicated the bishop to be ad- 
mitted. He had asserted in their behalf concerning that 
heresy of theirs (viz., that Christ took not his flesh of the 
Virgin Mary, but brought it from heaven), that the doctrine 
of the incarnation of Christ, and his partaking of our nature^ 
was not a foundation (t.6., a fundamental doctrine), but a 
circumstance only of the foundation ; and that children and 
distracted persons were saved without faitL But the bishop 
required him to renounce these and other like errors; which 
he refused to do, and continuing obstinate in them, was 
excommunicated by the bishop, and so was declared next 
Sunday in the Dutch Church.'' The annalist adds : '' Soon 
afber Hamstedius retired beyond the sea. And in the year 
1564 there happened again an earnest contention in the 
church, concerning baptizing infants, which was finally re- 
ferred to the Bishop of London, their superintendent, to 
decide."t 



* Camden's Elizabeth, p. 47 : "Some of these were German AnalMptisiCr 
and others propagated opinions of a very dangerous tendency ; and thos 
misbelief gains ground, and some of the ignorant natives were miserably 
misled.'* — Collier, voL iL, p. 471. 

f Annals, vol. i, p. 176. In another rolome he gires an aocoant, 
extending over several pages, of a disturbance in the same church, by out 



ELIZA.BETH. 151 

The year 1575 was marked hy one of those eveuts which 
stamp the character of thia reign with many of its dark 
spots. Maciotoah says: — "This was the £rst blood spilt by 
Elizabeth for religion, after a reign of fourteen years; and 
it forma, in the eye of posterity, & dark spot upon 
emment, hitherto distinguished, beyond that of any other 
European community, by a i-eligious administration which, 
if not unstained, was bloodless."* True, it witnessed tha 
martyrdom of servanta of Chi-iat; it was blood-shedding by 
the firea of Smithfield. We have but an imperfect narrative 
at command, but from the Tarious sources within our reaab 
we shall give as much completeness to it as we can. 

It was the morning of Easter-day, a season of joy and 
festivity, at this time, to the whole church, when some of 
the bishop's creatures discovered a body of Flemish Bap- 
tists, who had assembled iu a house in Aldgate, to com- 
memorate the triumph of their risen Lord. Their number 
is variously reported, but the best authority gives thirty.^ 
They were hurried to prison. Grindal at this time filled the 
raetropolitan chair. He was one of the esiles, and bad 
tasted the bitterness of persecution under the former reign. 
- Into his court the prisoners were conducted. Hin lordship 
was aided in this Christian atlair by " Master Joris, James 
de Koninck, John de Rode-Maker, two members of the 
Council, and a French clergyman. We were placed before 
these lords and their servants, who propounded four ques- 
tiooB to ns, to which we were to give either an affirmative 
or negative." The questions which were put by these 
inquisitora were the following : — " 1. Whether Christ did 



Telsius. He calli him Bumetimi 
of ooutse ui Anabaptist. Ha « 
beth.— Wirf, vuL a, c ixiiv. 
from Dutch MS3. Thes 



I au eothuaiiut, at othera a. madman, and, 
I] finally banished the kingdom by £Uai- 
Strype profeaaea to ilraw hja acconnta 
at, and yet unpubiiahad. 



4 



ir publication ie much to he desired. 

• Hiatoiy of England, voL jii, p. 170. 
t Collier, Fuller, and Wall only give twenty-BBTen. 



152 EABLY XSrOUSS BAPTISTS. 

Bot assume his flesh from the body of Mary) We replied 
that he is the Sou of the living God. 2. Whether infiati 
ehoald not be baptized ? We cannot imderstand matters so^ 
i(sr we read nothing of it in the Scriptures. 3. Whether k 
was lawful for a Christian to attend to or discharge tlit 
duties of a magistrate's officer ? We rej^ed that our con- 
science would not suffer us to do so ; but we eonnder ike 
tnagistraci/ <m a minister of God for the protection of the ser- 
rants of God. 4. Whether a Christian was allowed to taice 
an oath 1 We again replied, our conscience would not evoi 
allow us to do so, for Christ said, ' Let your oommunicataons 
be yea, yea, and nay, nay.' We then kept silent. The bishop 
said that our misdeeds were very gross, and we could not 
inherit the kingdom of God. Oh, Lord.! avenge not The 
bishop then remanded us to prison. A young brother, who 
was first interrogated, boldly confessed the truth; and oi 
that account was sorely accused, and led to Westminster, 
where he was imprisoned by himself This caused us mack 
grief" From the same document we get a further glimpse 
of the proceeding. During this first interview, as one of the 
prisoners appeared to take the lead in the conversation, the 
judges said : — " * This is the caj>tain ; you shall no longer 
scatter your baneful seed in our country ; ' and tliey secured 
him immediately. The bishop then showed them a letter, 
and said to them in a very surly tone, that the court 
had agi*eed that all the sti-angers should subscribe the 
above four questions. The one that would do so should 
be at perfect liberty in the country ; but all who should 
refuse should be punished with death ; ' therefore, you may 
now choose.' This cruel and unchristian ordinance alarmed 
some, so that on account of the weakness of the fiesh, five 
of them fell from the truth, and refused to offer their 
bodies for the name of Christ." During the intervid between 
their first and second examinations, means were em[)li)yed to 
seduce them from the truth. Master Jovit* visited them in 
prison. In the name of his episcopal chief, lie promLkxi 



ELIZABETH. 153 

them freedom from bonds on condition that they would join 
the church. The voice of the tempter was powerless. Their 
attax)hment to the faith* was unwavering. It was on the 
maming of another great festival, when the church com- 
memorates the e&sion of the Divine Spirit, that these con- 
fessors were again led from their prisons before the lords. 
They were chained two and two like the worst malefactors of 
the land. The narrative is brief and touching : — ** When we 
were brought before them they presented the same four 
<)iie8tions, urging us to subscribe them ; but we told them 
ih&t we would abide by the Word of the Lord.^ We were 
then remanded vto prison, fettered as before : the women 
were confined at Newgate, together with a young brother, 
but they were all released and transported. The young 
man, however, was tied to a cart and scourged, and after- 
■wards whipped out of town. We were in the midst of 
thieves and male&ctors. These the bishop and a preacher 
worried, lest they might be corrupted by us and deceived." 

We have a clear view of the charges brought against them 
and the nature of their replies, in one or two letters written 
by the martyrs during their imprisonment :— 

"We poor and despised strangers, who are persecuted for the 
testimony of Jesus, desire that Grod may grant all mankind peace, so 
that they may live together in all godliness, to the praise of the Lord 
and to the advancement of their souls* salvation. Since so many, 
both by writing and verbal statements, do us great injustice, accusing 
and charging lies upon us, I am constrained to present our belief very 
summarily. 

•* They do not speak to us, and do not in a mild manner inquire of 
«8 what our religious views are, as the Scriptures teach, but they 
apeak, ail manner of evil of us, so that they may increase our miseries 
and sufferings ; and besides, they have no compassion either on our 
distressed wives or helpless children. We had to forsake our friends, 
our country, and our possessions, on account of tyranny, and fled as 
lambs from a wolf, only because of the pure evangelical truth of 
Christ, and not for uproar or faction's sake, like those of Munster, 
whose views are an abomination, of which we have been slanderously 
aocuaed. 

** Who would like to be persecuted in a strange country, when he 



154 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

is already wretched and poor? Therefore, says Christ, ' Whitaoever 
ye would that men should do unto you, do ye eyen so to than ; this 
is the law and the prophets.' Oh, that they would thus treat ni ! 
How soon persecutions would cease ! Christ and his followers never 
persecuted any one, but, on the contrary, taught that we should 'kyre 
those who hate us, and pray for those who despitefnily use us, thrt 
we may be the children of our Father in heayen, who lets his sob 
shine over the righteous and the wicked. 

"We seek no salvation in our works, as it is reported we do, but m 
hope to be saved alone through the merits of our Lord Jesus Christ 
Nor do we boast that we are without sin, but we always confess cm- 
selves sinnerd before God. But we have to refrain from voluntary siis 
if we would be saved, such as adultery, fornication, sorcery, seditioa, 
bloodshed, cursing and swearing, lying and cheating, pride and 
drunkenness, hatred, envy : these are the sins which the Scriptuns 
declare, who do them shsJl not inherit the kingdom of GUmL 

" They also say, we refuse to hear the Word of God, becanse we do 
not go to hear the preaching of the church. To this charge we wooU 
say, that why we do not hear the preacher, is, that the Word of God 
constrains us so to do ; because they are people not fit to attend to ths 
sacred callings of a Gospel preacher; for Paul teaches Timothy, and 
says : — 'The things which thou hast heard of me, among many wit- 
nesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to 
teach others; because if a man undertakes to teach or repiove 
another, he must be blameless himself.' Now if the preachers were 
such as the apostles required, we should cheerfully hear them, — m 
would be the first and the last in the church. 

*'We are also accused of not being subject to the magLstrstes, 
because we do not baptize our infants. To this we reply, we desire 
to submit to the magistracy, in all things not contrary to the Word 
of God. That we do not sufler our children to be baptized by 
the priests, is not done out of temerity, but we do it out of fear to 
God, for Christ commands believers to be baptized; for Christ's 
apostles did not baptize infants, but adults only, and those on their 
faith and confession of their sins. ... If it had been the will 
of God that infants should be baptized, he would have commanded it 
to be done. Christ would have been baptized in his infancy, as well 
as circumcised ; but as it is not the will of God, therefore did he teach 
them difierently, and received baptism differently himself. 

** But they have stretched considerably in bringing charges against 
us, saying there are many thousands of us. Our belief has not bees 
so generally embraced ; we are not treated so kindly as to induce the 
crowd to adopt our views. True, here and there you may find some 



ELIZABETH. 

secludEd tamily, like the lily among the therns,— as the apple-tree 
amoDg the trees of the wooda, bricging forth good fruit.'" 

These are noble words, and wortby of the martyr's apirit 
Of these thirty, five recanted, five were impriaoned, and the 
renaamder were banished fi-om the country.t The narrative 
from which we gather these facts, saya : — " Instead ■ 
honouring the five apost^tea, they were scandalized and 
exposed at St. Paul'a Cross, and were branded aa having 
been deceived, and had to confess that it was the truth ; and 
then to enter hail that they would unite themselves to the 
German Church, and then become brethren," Crosby has 
preserved the form of renunciation which was imposed t 
these weak brethren. The document is curions, and we fear 
no censure in transferring it to our pages ; — 

" Whcreaa, we being seduced by the devil, the spirit o! error, and 
by false teachers, have fallen into those uiost damnable and detest- 
able errors:— that Ohriat took not flesh of the Virgin Mary; that the 
iof anta of the faittiful ought not to be baptized ; that a Christian man 
may not be a magistrate, or bear the aword and ofEoe of authority ; and 
that it is not lawful for a Chmtiau man to take aa oath. Now, hy 
the grace of God, and hy the assistance of good and learned ministerB 
of Cbriat'a church, I uoderstaud the same to be most damnable and 
detestable heresies : and do tak. God, before his church, mercy for my 
aaid former errors, and du forsake, recant, and renounce them ; and I 
abjure, from the bottom of my heart, protesting I certainly believe 
the contrary. And further, I confess that the whole doctrine estab- 
liahed and published in the Church of England, and also that aa 
received in the Dutch Church, in London, is found true and according 
to God's Word : whcreunto in all things I submit myself, and will 
be most gladly a member of the said Dutch Church, from henceforth 
ntterly abandoning and forsaking all and every Auabaptiaticat 

Poor men 1 But life is sweet ! This scene, more humili- 
ating to those who imposed it than to the unfortunate ones 
BO prominent in it, took ]>lace in the Dutch Church, Austin 

* Beferencea to Origen, Luther, and others, in support of these riem, 
ore omitted here. 

t Crosby states four. t Collier, voL iL, p. 549. 



156 EABLY EVGIJSH BAPTISTS. 

Friars, in the presence of De Laune, one of the ministers of 
that community.* 

The condition of the incarcerated excited much sympathy. 
Even those who dissented from their reUgions views greatij 
-compassionated their state. Petitions and a confession of tiieir 
faith were hdd before the imperious monarch. Fox, who 
had recorded with touching interest and graphic poww the 
martyrology of the past, in a Latin letter pleaded with the 
queen on their behalf. But all was in vain. Submission or 
death was the alternative. t Fox's letter is a noble specimea 
of enlightened piety. We give a sentence or two. This act 
of brotherly kindness should be .embalmed in every Baptiit 
memorial of this age : — 

*^ I understand there are some here in England, though not KngiiA, 
but come here from Holland, I suppose both men and women, who, 
having been tried according to law, publicly declared their repentance, 
are happily reclaimed. Many others are condemned to exile ; a rigbt 
sentence, in my opinion. But I hear there is one or two of these who 
are appointed to the most severe punishment, viz., burning, except 
your clemency forbid. Now in this one affair I conceive there are 
two things to be considered; the one is the wickeduessof their em^ri, 
the other the sharpness of their punishment. As to the t*mn»» 
indeed, no man of sense can deny that they are most absurd ; and 1 
wonder that such monstrous opinions could come into the mind of aoy 
Christian ; but such is the state of human weakness, if we are left 
ever so little awhile destitute of the Divine life, whither is it we do 
not fall ? and we have good reason to give God thanks on this account, 
that I hear not of any Englishman that is inclined to this madneaa. 
As to these fanatical sects, therefore, it is certain they are by do 
means to be countenanced in a commonwealth, but, in my opinion, 
ought to be suppressed by projKjr correction. But to roast alive the 



* Crosby, vol. i., p. 69. 

*t" " She wjvs of a proud and imperious spirit, and u«uully carrie<l things 
with a very high hand, expecting all to bow ti) her will and pleAiiun. 
Her own clergy felt it. On one occasion. Dr. Nowell, the D«jui «•! 
St. Paul's and one of her chaplains, s|)oke less reverently <»f the cn*«. 
in a sermon he was preaching before her, when, from the rl.tset window, 
her voice was heard, forbidding liis uug(Mlly digressiouH, and i*oniniaiUtliD^ 
him to return to his text." — Vide Haylin's Reformation, p. 124, E«i 1670. 
Brooke, voL i., p. 208. 



EuzABimr. 157 

bodies of poor wretches that ofiPend rather through blindness of 
judgment than perverseness of will, in fire and flames, raging with 
pitch and brimstone, is a hard-hearted thing, and more agreeable to 
the practice of Romanists than the customs of the Gospeller. . . . 
Wherefore, if I may be so bold with the majesty of so great a 
princess, I humbly beg of your royal highness, for the sake of Christ, 
who was consecrated to suffer for the lives of many, this fayour at 
my Inquest, which even the Divine clemency would engage you to, 
that if it may be — and what cannot your authority do in these cases? 
— Hheee miserable wretches may be spared ; at least, that a stop may be 
pat to the horror by changing their punishment into some other kind. 
. . . This one thing I most earnestly beg, that the piles and 
fiames Of Smithfield, so long ago extinguished by your happy govern- 
meat^ may not more be revived." 

Warmly did these sufferers for Christ feel the kindness of 
the venerable man. Their gratitude was ardent .; and in a 
letter, from which we extract a sentence or two, they gave 
utterance in language, which if we had no other evidence, 
wonld give them a high place in our Christian regards, 
as they deserved. After recognizing his personal kindness 
and his efforts on their behalf with the queen, and noticing 
the advice of some to give up their peculiar views, they 
say : — 

•* We confess that the flesh of Christ is not a phantasm, or ethereal, 
but true human flesh, like unto us in all things, sin excepted ; that he 
is the true seed of the woman, the son of David, and the fruit of the 
body of Mary. Finally, we believe all which the Holy Scriptures 
furtJier testify concerning him, and we place our salvation, whether 
in our life or our death, not in our own works or holiness, but alone 
in Job death and resurrection. If men would only be content with 
OoMj and not wish to constrain us to confess that Christ assumed his 
humanity from the flesh of Mary, which we can neither comprehend 
or believe, because the word humanity is not expressed in the Scripture. 
Henoe it is inferred against us that we teach that Christ is not very 
man, and in general that we deny our salvation; whereas on tne con- 
tmy, the inference should be even as charity teaches us. That when 
we say tiiat Christ had flesh, as truly as our first jiarent Adam had 
before the fall, even as we at the same time confess that ho is a true 
and our Saviour, we make specific confession of this in express 
But if you say that you discover little or no difference 
between your faith and ours, except in the phrase, * humanity of the 



158 EABLY SH6LISH BAPTISTS. 

-woman' (wesen des weibes), and that we oiig^ not obfltuuifedy to 
xeject it on this account, our reply on the other hand ii, that we 
oT^^t not to be constrained thereto by violence, bnt our weaknea ia 
this part ought to be borne with, inasmuch as we are not otherwin 
convinced in our conscience, and would commit a great ain 
God, if we would speak contrary to the testimony of our 
Wherefore, if we are delivered to death (the contraiy of which wi 
hope from her majesty's clemency), we testify before God that we de 
not die for this or that article (which we would wUlin^y acospt if 
they could only convince us with solid aigoments) bat for c o ms ci tfi i re 
sake ; for, if we would act contrary thereto, even if we did rij^ yet 
we would do amiss, and bear testimony against ouiaelvei^ iHiich yon, 
by your learning, are better able to understand than we commnii sad 
illiterate people. Finally, we are men, and what ia farther, nnleened 
men, who are liable to err. Hence, we are willing to aabmit to the 
instruction of all those who are able to prove tons, by the ScriptBrei^ 
something that is better ; but that men should constrain ns with &tt 
and sword, appears to us to be vain, and to militate against reason 
for it is possible to constrain us, throu^^ fear of death, to spesk 
differently from what we understand ; but that we should 
differently from our belief, you are well aware is an im] 



Two of these, Yon Byler and Yon Straatam, after much 
suffering in their dreary prison, were liberated ; Kernels* 
another of the martyrs, died in prison. Pieters and Ter- 
woort finished their course in Smithfield, and thus ** became 
the proto-martyrs under the reign of ElizabetL** 

llie following is a copy of the writ issued by the queen 
for the execution of these men : — 

**Elizabkth, by the grace of God, Queen of England, France, 
and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, unto our rtghteoasly 
and right well-beloved Councillor, Sir Nich. Bacon, kni^t. 
Lord Keeper of our great Seal of England, greeting : — 
'* When the Reverend Fathers in God, Edwin, Bishop of London, 
Edmund, Bishop of Rochester, and our right trusty and well-beloved 
Sir W. Cordell, knight, Master of the Rolls, Roger Manhood, and 
Robert Mounson, two of the Justices of our Common Pleas, with 
other CommiBsioners sufficiently authorised by our Commission, under 
our great Seal of England, have travelled upon the examination, hear- 
ing, and determination of John Pieters and Heniy Terwoort, betuj^ 
Flemings bom, and now living in this our realm, concerning their 
false opinions, and sects of Anabaptists, holden and averred by them. 



ELIZABETH. 159 

wherein they have, before the said Kevereod Father, and others, 
said Commission era, maintaiaed their said most perilous !ind daager- 
oua opiuions, for the wbich they are by definite sentHttcea, declared 
by the said Keverend Father, the Bishop of London, with the consent 
of others, our said ConujiissionerB. justly adjudged and declared to be 
Iieretics ; and therefore, as corruiit members, to be cut off from the 
Test of the Sock of Christ, lest they should infect others professing 
the trae Christian faith, and are by tbem left under the sentence of 
the grent escommunication, to be by our secalar power and authority 
punished as heretics, as by the sigailicavit of the said Reverend Father 
in God, the Bishop of London, with the assent of our said Commii- 
■ioners, remaining in oar Court of Chancery, more at large appeareth; 
and although the said Anabaptists have, since the said sentence pro- 
nounced against them, been often and very charitably travelled with, 
as well by the miiuBters of the Dutch Church in the city of Londoa, 
as by other godly and learned men, to dissuade, revolie, and remove 
them from their Aoabaptistical and heretical opinions, yet they arro- 
gontly and wilfully persist and continue in the same. 

' ' We, therefore, according to our regal functions and office, vindica- 
titlg the execution of justice in this behalf, and to give example to 
others, lest they should attempt the like hereafter, hare determined, 
by the assent of our Council, to will and require you, the said hoti 
£eeper, immediately on the receipt hereof, to award and make out out 
writ of eiecution, according to the tenor in these presents ensuing, 
and these our letters signed with our hand shall be your sufficient 
warrant for the same."* 

Long as this narrative is, we cannot even now close it 
without appending to it a beautiful letter, written by one of 
their countrymen to his mother, thea resident at Ghent. 
Both appear to have been members of the Dutch Church. 
Besides, it contains additional particulars of great iaterest. 

"Beioved Mother, — This has reference to the pecuMar circum- 
stances attending the execution of the Anabaptists, though I have 
not abe least doubt but you have already received from others much 
information relative thereto, even as it is with extreme relnctance 
that I write upou a subject of which you cannot even think, witboat 
emotions of the deepest distress. But, as you desire, and it-is probable 
that I am better acquainted with the circumstances than the generality 
of people, inasmuch as I have had frequent intercourse with them, at 

" Collier, voL ii., p. 15. 



,1 1 



160 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

hsve received information from all of them ; so I cannot forbear gifiag 
sach an account of it as accords with the extent of my informatioi 
in reference to the matter. In connection with which I send you a 
eopy of their confession, on account of which some died, and otiieB 
are retained in pnson ; and a petition was presented by them to hat 
Majesty, but which was not accepted by her. 

'*It happened on Easter, the 3rd of April, A.D. 1575, that thiity 
Anabaptists of both sexes had assembled together in a hoiiee nev 
Alligator, on the road leading to Spiegelzhof, for the purpose of 
mutual exhortation and XH*ayer ; but being detected by the nei^bovn 
they were nearly all taken then to prison, by so small a gHard that 
some could easily have e8cax)6d, if they could have felt liberty of 
conscience to do so. Having fallen into the hands of the nragistFMy, 
they were conducted to the house of the Bishop of London, in onkr 
to be examined by him concerning their faith, which examination 
had to be conducted through the mediimi of a German and a Frendi 
preacher, because the bishop did not understand the language. 

*' Their confession of faith was Scriptural, and drawn ap in svcb a 
manner that I would be free to subscribe to every tenet, with the 
exception of the article concerning oaths, in which they pnblidy 
confessed their belief that men should ' Swear not at alL* 

"The bishop, not satisfied with this confession, presenteil Ibar 
articles to be subscribed, with the provision that if any remained 
obstinate, they should be burned alive; adding that such charge 
was imposed upon him by the court. 

"These articles were the same as those which have been mentioned 
before. 

"They rei)lied that they were conscientious in regard to thfse 
matters, and maintained the principles set forth in their first pn»f fu- 
sion ; so they were reconducted to prison. But on their way thithvr. 
ten or twelve of them made their escai)e, as they were aware of the 
danger to which they were exposed, and i>erceived the line opiMirtunity 
of escai)e that presented itself, the guard consisted of but one or tw«» 
individuals. The whole of tliem, however, in the eoun*e <»f two ».r 
three days, returned to the prison, partly in order to a<'(iuit their lail. 
who were bound in the sum of one hundred pountU*, and |iartly 
because the l)isliop, as a man of honour, ])roniise»l with an <>ath that 
he would SQJb them all at liberty in the course of iive »»r nix ilays, if 
they would return; but if not, the ri'st should n-iniin in pris^iu tdl 
( 'andleniass. Immediately after this, live <»f the men wt^re fonvert«.-<l 
(through much disputation with these Netherhunlei's, who iK-Iongeti ^^ 
the cliureh) l)efore they were condemned as heretics, nevertheK'ss, they 
were phiced upon a rostrum in St. Paul's ehun.'hyanl, in a larjr 




ELIZABETH. 161 



ibly of aome thousaads of EDglisbmcn, and a bundle of faggobi 
was laid u[xm each one's shotilder, aa a, sign. Omt tbej deBerred to be 
bnFDt; in addition to which, they inflicted man; other injuries s 
much ignominy upon them, though the bishop had promised that 
would Bet them at liberty without any iccumhranceB if they would 
only aign llt£ four arlides; bat the event proved to the eontraty. 
This transpired on the 26th at May, A.D. 1675. In the course o£ a 
few days, the bishop perceiving that the rest would Qot apostatize 
from their faith, sentenced them all to death, in the ecclesiaBtioil 
court-room, in St. Paul's Chorch (aa was customary witi the Papis- 
tical bishops during Queen Mary's reign, who were wont to condemn 
the Cluiatianli to death), ^nd deliver them into the hands of the civil 
judge ; then they bound the women hand to hajid, and conducted 
them to Newgate,— the prison for capital convicts, — together with 
one of the men, which was considered the youngest and moat innocent 
among them ; but the rest of the men wore conducted to their old 
episcopal prison, for which reason it was Bup]>08ed that the women 
would be executed Srst, even as penons catnu daily to threaten them, 
and to present death to them, unless they would apostatize. Hence 
they suffered great anguish and temptation for five or aijc days, suppo- 
sing every day that they would be burnt, — nay, on the very day that 
the sentence of their banishment came from the court, foe the bailifC 
came with his servants at ten in the cvoning into the prison to take an 
inventory o£ all their property, informing them, in addition, that they 
^ould prepare for death the neict day. This he did in order to see 
whether any of them would apostatize through fear ; but perceiving 
that they all remained steadfast, he informed them that it was the 
queen's pleasure to be gracious to them, and merely to banish them 
from the country, and have the young man whipped behind a cart. 
Accordingly, in the conreo of five or six days, about fourteen women 
were conveyed from the prison, which is situated in the space between 
8t. Martin's Church and St. Catherine's, to the ship, by the apparitors; 
but the young man was whipjied behind a cart, which moved on 
before him. Thus they were all banished from the country, on pain 
of imprisonment, and reside for the present in Holland and Zealand. A 
few days after, the five men that remained in the bishop's prison, were 
likewise sentenced to death bj the bishop, and conveyed to Newgate, 
where one of them died of wretchedness and of a load of chains, and 
the rest were apprehensive that they would Inflict extreme punish- 
nient upou them, because they had exercised so miu;h severity towards 
the women. They were also informed that the queen and her whole 
Conncil were so highly offended at them that no person would venture 
to present a petition tor them, since an evil report arose that they 



I 



162 EABLT XSrOXlSfi BAPTISTS. 

dfisied God aad Christ, and rejected all govemmeBt, and all r o q i rt t 
for the magffitrates and civil power, as ungodly and unchristiM. 
Therefore they sent a petition to her majesty, together with their 
confession concerning the four articles, which had been presented to 
them ; a copy of which I send enclosed. Bat she was so exasperated 
at them that she refused to accept it, but severely reprimanded the 
Staats who presented it to her, as they informed those wiio handed i& 
l^e petition to them. When they perceived this they delivered the 
articles, together with the petition, which was somewhat altered, te 
Lord Bodley [or Bnrghley], who having laid the matter before the 
■bishop, answered Idiem on the succeeding day, that he was very much 
distressed on their account; but there was no hope of favour miles 
they would sign the articles and abjure their heresy. In the meantoM^ 
the bishop issued certain articles in her majerty's name, one of whi^ 
was that a Christian magistrate may with propriety pmuBh obstiiiste 
lieretics with the sword ; and comnianded all strangers to sign it, m 
otherwise give sufficient security to appear, at the pleasure of the 
bishop, before him and the queen, to imdergo a circumstaatisl 
examination, and be pimished according to their deserts. So almost 
■all the foreigners, induced by fear more than any other oonsidentiQB, 
-signed it, with the exception of some, who ch(»e rather to incur the 
danger, than, by their signing, to improve of the putting to death <tf 
poor people ; the issue, however, is yet unknown. Soon after, ocdai 
were issued from the court to the sheriff or bailiff of London, to 
execute the two oldest, according to their sentence : one of them, Jan 
Pieters, was a poor man, upwards of fifty years olil, and had nine 
children. His first wife was previously burnt at Ghent, in Fiandefs, 
on account of her religion ; and he married a second wife, whose tint 
husband had likewise been burnt at Ghent for his religious iirinciples. 
But these two had fled into England on account of ixirsecution, on 
supposition that they could live there and enjoy liberty of conscience 
without being exposed to any danger, which circumstance he rt'pre- 
sented to the bishop, and desired the favour of removing from the 
country with his wife and children ; but he could not o1>tain it. The 
other, called Henry Terwoort, was a handsome and res]iectable man, 
about twenty-six years old ; a goldsmith by trade, and had been 
married eight or ten weeks before he was ai>preheu(led. 

**The German and French preachers not succeeding, in much dis- 
putation, to induce these men to sign the articles, but having much 
rather confirmed them in their opinion, by the cruel and unchristian 
conduct of those who boast of the Gospel and Christian faith, 
although many English and Cirermans petitioned in their favour; y«t 
on the 22nd of July, at six oVlock, A.M., they were miserably banit 



ELIZABETH. 163 

to ashfis, at the aame stake, without having been strangled, and 
witiiout powder, according to the custom at Smithfield, where they 
used to bum tiie people who professed our religion. 

" This was done the Friday succeeding the Tuesday on which the 
stake had been erected. I have no doubt but the queen ajssented to 
this measure with reluctance ; but she was persuaded to it by certain 
Papists, or other perverse men and eaemies of the truth, of whom 
there are many here, who asserted that the Anabaptists, with whose 
religion this people are unacquainted, did not only deny God and 
Christ, and overthrow the salvation of the soul, but also that they 
rejected all worldly policy, laws, and government, and incited the 
people to mutiny and sedition, because they taught that the magistracy 
is ungodly and imchristian ; for which reason, no doubt, she was 
chiefly exasperated at them, so that she would not accept their 
petition. 

« The Lord forgive those who were authors and abettors in this 
matter, and so misrepresented these poor people to her majesty, as 
you may judge from their confession, which they signed near me, 
with th^r own hand ; for, though I do not assent to the whole, and am 
assured tiiat they are under a mistake in regard to the article concern- 
ing the original conception of Christ and the origin of his flesh, yet 
MS they made a Christian confession in express terms, and often con- 
fessed orally, in my ju^sence, that Christ is very God and very man, 
like onto us in flesh and blood, and in all other respects, sin excepted, 
80 be it far from' me to acknowledge that they were guilty of death ; 
nay, I would much rather acknowledge them as brethren, and have 
not the least doubt of their salvation, if they only feared the Lord, 
«nd walked before him with a good conscience. 

"Touching tibie two young men who still remain, they continue 
firm and steadfast, and are in daily expectation of the same punish- 
ment. Luke and I endeavoured, if possible, to get them out of 
prison four days after the execution of the others ; we even prevailed 
cm them, through much conversation, to sign the confession (a copy of 
which I send you), in the hope that the bishop would be satisfied with 
it. Having read it, he found it good throughout ; but he will not 
receive them into favour unless they sign the first four articles with- 
out contradiction, and join the Dutch Church, which they are deter- 
mined not to do, even if they perfectly agree with us in doctrine ; 
flince thereby they would condemn the two that had been executed, 
and aU the rest of their comrades who died or still live in the same 
faith, and would confess that they had beeu seduced by the devil, the 
spirit of lies and error, to this damnable heresy, of which they declare 
i^t they are by no means convinced in their own consciences, but' 



164 EABLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

that they are much more assured of xheir salvatioii in Chiist, the 
very God and very man ; they would, therefore, as they say, pfOToke 
God in the highest if they would speak contrary to the testimony of 
their own conscience. Hence we know of nothing else than they wiQ 
have to suffer the same punishment that was endured by their partnen, 
the more especially as they attempted to break ont of prison, having 
filed off an iron bar of the window, for which cause they are kept 
more closely in bonds than at any former time, and may consider 
themselves fortunate if an early and preferable death should release 
them from the great distress and misery of the prison, for they lie 
s^arate from each other, so that they cannot afford each other any 
consolation, and no one dare to converse with them, on the pain of 
immediate imprisonment. 

'* Here, dear mother, you have a distressing history from first to last, 
of these imprisoned, converted, proscribed, and executed Anabaptists, 
concerning which, I am likewise aware, that it appears to you very 
strange and incredible, and that you are very much distressed that 
those who formerly suffered persecution should now persecute other, 
people on account of their religion, constraining the consciences of 
others with fire and sword, whereas they formerly taught, and iHiick 
is the plain truth, that it is the province of no man to lord it over the 
consciences of others ; and that faith is a special gift of God, and ii 
not implanted in men by any human power, but by the Word of God 
and the illumination of the Holy Spirit. So I say, that I am well 
aware that the affair has been the cause of extreme distress to yon 
and all the compassionate, as I also hope that it will not be a cause 
of offence to you, and occasion you to doubt the true faith ; and 
remember, as it is the truth, that some of the pious and learned, as 
well English as foreigners, who are here, did not approve nor assent 
to it. I would write more diffusely upon this subject if time woold 
permit. But I will now conclude, and I pray the Lord to strengthen 
you, together with all who fear Grod and love the truth, confirming 
you in aJl virtue and godliness, to the salvation of your soula. — Amen. 

" Your obedient son, 

"Jacques de Somkrs."* 

We give two examples of the manner in which these facts 
are presented by our historians : — 

Strype says : ** I find two Anabaptists were burnt in 

* "We are indebted to Beue<lict for most of tho particulars in this nam- 
tivo. He has borrowed them from **The MartjT*8 Mirror,** a work we hare 
in vain tried to procure. —History of the Baptistfl. New York, IWK 



ELIZABETH. 165 

SmitMeld not long aftei:*(July 22nd), namely, John Wiel 
Macker, and Hendrick Terwoort (who it seems had recanted 
before^ if it were the same), after that they had been sixteen 
weeks in prison. The Privy Council would not spare them, 
notwithstanding the earnest intercessions of the Dutch con- 
gr^ations^ for divers mighty reasons laid before them. But 
the chief causes of their execution were, because they would 
Bot own them for Christian magistrates, and had been 
banished a year before."* 

Miss Aikin says : " Two of these unhappy men, how- 
ever, repented of the disingenuous acts into which human 
frailty had betrayed them, and returning to the open pro- 
fession of their opinious, were burnt at Smithfield." Obvi- 
pusly a mistakct 

It is difficult to say which feeling most predominates in 
the mind of an intelligent Christian, — pity, contempt, or 
indignation, at the perusal of such comment as the follow- 
ing, by one of our church writers: "But though Queen 
Elizabeth constantly called him Father Fox; yet herein was 
she no dutiful dcmghter, giving him a flat denial. Indeed, 
damnable were their impieties, and she was necessitated 
to this severity, who having punished some traitors, if not 
spuming these blasphemers, the world would condemn her 
SB being more earnest in asserting her own safety than God's 
honour. Hereupon the writ De hceretico coTnUxu/rendo (which 
lor seventeen years had hung only up in terrorem), was now 
taken down and put in execution, and the two Anabaptists, 
burnt in Smithfield, died in great horror, with crying and 
Toaring."t What a specimen of the power of prejudice to 
blind the mind, and to blunt the sympathies of our nature ! 
Only think of the character of that religion which hails the 
roasting of men alive, for harmless speculation in the faith, 

iU9 an acceptable vindication of the honour of the God of love ! 

*- 

* Axmids, ToL iL, part L, p. 664. He professes to have the latter from 
JDatch MSS. t Elizabeth, voL ii p. 43. 

X Fuller's Church History, cent, xvi, p. 101 Crosby, voL !., p. 74. 



166 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

The errors were not extirpated. *rhr^ years later another 
hunt for the heretics was ordered. Alva's persecution in 
the Netherlands had forced manj unto this island. The 
primate and his suifragan were ordered to undertake this 
work. The character and religion of every foreigner in the 
kingdom were to be investigated. Into every parish a 
visitor was to enter, whose special work it was to writ« the 
name of every stranger in a register, together with their 
country, quality, and circumstances. Beyond this they were 
to extend their inquisitions. Inquiry was to be made into 
the probable motives of their coming over, the manner of 
their behaviour, and what church they frequented. Sus- 
pected ones were to be reported to the justices of the peace, 
that they might be brought for trial and punishment. This 
was necessary, says the writer, " for the Dutch Anabaptists 
held private conventicles in London^ and perverted a grest 
many."* 

In 1569 the same fact is admitted by Dr. Some in his 
reply to Barrow, &c. He affirms that " there were several 
Anabaptisiical conventicles in London and other places.** 
They were not Dutchmen, certainly not exclusively so, for 
he says that " some persons of these sentiments have been 
bred at our universities/'f 

The hostility of Elizabeth to the dissidents was undimin- 
ished. ** Of toleration, of the rights of conscience, she had 
as little feeling or understanding as any prince or polemic 
of her age. Her establishment was formed thronghout in 
the spirit of compromise and political expediency. She took 
no pains to ascertain, either by assembling of a national 
synod, or by the submission of the articles to free discussion 
in Parliament, whether or not they were likely to Ikj agree- 

* Collier, voL ii., p. 517. 
"t* Ivimey*8 History of the Baptists, vol. i., p. 109. We nfnnnt find a copy 
of Dr. Some's work either in the British Museum or the Red Cniss (ftiret 
Library. Some of the statementfl of this writer (as given in Ivimey) will 
appear in another section of this work. 



Me to tke opimooa of Htb majority : it sufficed that she 
bad decreed tkeir ree^ition; aini she prepa?ed, by means of 
penal statutes, strictly executed^ to pirevent tlie jxropagation 
of any doctrine,' or the observance of any Ate, capable of 
interfering witk the exact uniformity in religion then re* 
girded a& essential to the peace and stability of any well 
ccwstituied stata"* Age and growing infirmities shed no 
sofbening influence on her proud spirit. The primate, by 
QfFeiy art in his power, fed this flame. With the queen's 
koBtility to tibie Puritans of every class, Whitgilt had the 
fbUest sympathy, t To the Anabaptists his hatred was 
intense. At all times it breaks out.j: Some says, that 
^ with a view of obviating objections to the prineijdes of min- 
iBterSy a brief declaration of belief in some leading articles 
was drawn up in Latin, for their subscription. This container 
an assent to the fandamentals of the Christian religion^ and 
a diselaimer of Bomish and Anabaptistical errors."§ ^ 

* Hias Aikin's Eluftbetli, vol i., pp. 319, 32a 

1* '* Whitgtft^ at Ida first coining to the See, had instmeiiong fnmi the 
qiieen to hold a strait rein, to press the discipline of his church, and 
recover his province to uniformity. This method agreed with the arch- 
Mt^op^B sentiments, and was probably suggested by himself.** — Collier. 

'''This mso (Whil^gift) was thorough in all he did, especially if souIb 
wore to be snared^ or persons of real piety to be pimished. He seemed 
to take a malicious delight in bending the laws over to the side of perse- 
cution; and when no law existed which could be thus used, he either 
aade &[ soaght to procure one. He was probably more feared and 
di tea t od than any man of his day.** — ^Fletch^s History of Independency, 
ToL ii> p. 145, 

X The archbishop^s views on baptism are thus expressed : — " If I had a 
ekfld dying without baptism, I should be doubtM of its salvation.** — 
Btookei, voL L, pw 26& 

"Though I do not affirm,** he also says, ''that children dying without 
biqytlsm will certainly be lost, yet, because I should fear and doubt the 
safety of their state, I would have them baptized by a woman rather 
HbtJo. not at alL" — Examination of Travers. Brooke, vol ii., p. 319. 

§ BfiformatioaD, voL iv., p. 717. A Bomish writer charges Elizabeth, 
in an infamous work published in 1538, with making the country a place 
of refuge for Atheists, Anabaptists, heretics, and rebels of all nations. 
The substance €)f this tract is in Lingard, vol ziii., p. 535. Kote B B. 



168 EABLY ENGLISH BAFTIST& 

It is difficult to ascertain -with accuracy the extent to 
which these opinions prevailed. That they were widelj 
difiused admits of no doubt. It has been affirmed bj some, 
and those, too,%ot of Puritanic principles, that ^'the Church 
of England party, — ^that is, the party adverse to any spedes 
of ecclesiastical change, — ^was the least numerous of the 
three (parties) during this reign." Hallam, in a note, saya^ 
"The following observation will confirm (which may 
startle some readers) that the Puritans, or at least those 
who rather favoured them, had a majority among the 
Protestant gentry in the queen's days. It is agreed on all 
hands, and is quite manifest, that they predominate in the 
House of Commons. But that House was composed, as it 
has ever been, of the principal landed proprietors, and as 
much represented the general wish of the community when 
it demanded a further reform in religious matters, as on any 
other Bubject. One would imagine, by the manner in which 
some express themselves, that the discontented were a small 
&,ction, who, by some unaccountable means, in despite of 
the government and the nation, formed a majority of the 
Parliament under Elizabeth and her two successors." * 

Of the prosperity of the kingdom under Elizabeth's govern- 
ment, there can be no doubt. To better hands than those of 
her ministers, the destinies of a great nation could not be 
entrusted. Many and grievous as were the civil disabilities 
under which society groaned ; despotic and violent as she 
ever was; thoroughly politic, t.e., knowing no other rule of 
action but self-interest in all her dealings with others; 
trampling on all right in her dealings with some of the most 
learned and moral of her subjects; yet in all the material 
elements of prosperity, and the humanizing influence of 
literature, science, and commerce, her reign had never been 
surpassed. To her country's well-being, according to her 
view of what would contribute to it, she was unquestionably 

* CoDBtitutional Histoiy, toL L, p. 189 (Note). 



1G9 

devoted. On all these groanda she merits the glowing and 
unbroken eulogy which succeeding ages have awarded her. 
Beyond this truth cannot go. On other grounds the present 
generation can give her no praise. The imposing splendour 
of the sensual blinded her contemporaries to the violation of 
truth and high moral principles, on which too many of her 
public measures were haBed. The haziness is past, and we 
of the present can look at her conduct in a clearer light, and 
analyze it with more calmness. 

No one, with right conceptions of the nature of true 
religion, can become familiar with the personal character of 
this princess without great pain. The head of the church, 
the great reformer of the religion of the state, claiming the 
right to dictate to her subjects what they should believe and 
how they should express their lioraage to and dependence ' 
on God, and inflicting the severest punishment upon them 
for disobedience; yet, the more we know of the hidden 
springs of hev actions, and the character of her doings, 
the more the conviction is forced on the mind, that her 
ignorance of its pure and vitalizing power was profound. 
Bishops praised her "as the good and godly queen," and 
the holy incense of Episcopal worship was never wanting to 
sustain her vanity, and blind her to her real state; but she 
could "swear like a trooper," and, to say the least.^perhapB 
stem truth would demand a more decided verdict,^could 
violate all those decencies which miest female nature with 
its sweetest charm. The hypocn^v of Leicester, one of her 
chief favourites, wa.'i as deep as his conduct was loathsome. 
Quoting the sacred volume like a divine, nnnghng with the 
Puritan leaders, and ever and anon throwmg around them 
the shield of his high protection, m private hfe he was luia- 
riating in every sensual gratification.* The court of Mary 

• "The queeo," said CecLl, "wag ruahing on to deatruction. Sbe had 
naile Lon] R. Dudley master of ber govcmmeut and of her own penoo. 
Only the fear of France and Mnry Stuart prevented the dethrooement of 
EUsaheth." — Tide FraEer's Msgaiine, The article ia startling from itl 
revelationg. The date, unfortunately, has taeiv Uualaii. 



1 



i 



170 EABLT EN6LXBH BAPTISTS. 

would compare with that of her virgiii sister with greai 
advantage.* Make all possible allowance for the social ooik- 
dition of society in those days, and enough will remain to 
justify the decision. Her court was by no means of a hig^ 
order. Yice was not very sharply rebuked, and many of 
her ^Yourites were men of the most {Hrofligate habiti^t 
''Elizabeth, we have no doubt whatever^ ran hersdf into 
great danger ; she indulged in most unbecoming and almost 
degrading familiarities ; she went to the very verge of yirtue, 
but th^e is no positive evidence that she ever actually over- 
stepped tibie lina" Beferring to her connexion with Hatton, 
the same writer says: ''It proves that Elizabeth's paasioQ 
for Hatton had carried her to lengths quite unbecoming her 
position : it does not positively prove that it had carxied 
her to the extreinest length of all. Our own notion of the 
relation between them is, she did certainly 'descend veiy 
much in her sex as a woman;' and perhaps 'frailties^* not 
used in the technical sense, might not be too strong aa 
expression. StiU this testimony is quite expHcit enough to 
hinder us from pronouncing a positive judgment in her 
fiivour, though individually we certainly incline to that side 
of the balance, and they are almost damaging enough to con- 
vert our verdict of 'not guilty,* into one of 'not proven.'*** 
" Elizabeth was coarse and savage in her personal tastes^ 
we should almost think beyond the standard of her timfl^ 
though from her capacity she might be fairly expected to 

* " It was a place in which, according to Faust, * all enormities reigaad 
in the highest degree.* * The only discontent I have is to live where there 
is so little godliness and exercise of religion, so dissolute munnetv and 
corrupt conversation generally.' " — ^Bireh, roL i, pp. 25, 39. Apud Idxifft^ 
voL viiL, p. 501. (Note.) 

t *'No married man could hope to retain her favour if he lived on 
terms of afifection with his wife."— Strickland's Queens of EngUnd. 

t Quarterly Review, June 1854, -pp. 240->l, 3. Letters given Uy Sir N. 
H. Nicholas, in his Life of the Chancellor, express the feelings of Ibt 
most impassioned lover, if not something more. Dr. H. Cami>bcll, in his 
'* Case of Mary Queen of Scots, and Elizabeth," has ruked up, with * 
malicious pleasure, all the scandal about the latter. — Vid* CamdMw 
Lixigard, Froude, SfericklaBd, &o., &a 



ELIZABETH. 171 

have risen above it" Of her swearing we have apoken 
The degrading vice was habitual. It frequently accompanied 
her infliction of personal chastisement on her maids of 
honour." From her royal lips the oath would come, before 
the Tudor spirit prompted hur to spit upon her courtiers, 
or to box the ears of the gallant Essex. In bull-baiting 
and bear-baiting she delighted. The latter was one of her 
&vonrite pastimes. On one occasion, going to hear a sermon 
at St Mary's, Spital, she was followed by two white bears 
in a cart, that at the close of her devotions they might bo 
ready to contribnte to her more congenial gratification. + 

" Many good people who are scandalized at the Latin p!ft3'B 
at Westminster, will be surprised that in the pious days of 
England, in the glorious morning of the Reformation, in 
'great Elizabeth's golden time,' under kings and queens that 
were the nuraing fathers and mothera, the public acting of 
plays alionld be, not the permitted recreation, but the com- 
pnlaory employment of children devoted to sing the praise* 
of God, — of p!ays too, the best of which children may noir 
only read in a ' family' edition, aome of whose titles a 
modern father would scruple to pronounce before a woman 
or ft child. "J 

Of the religious state of the kingdom, one of the most 
candid writers on this period of our religions history says : 
"Towards the coniluaion of her reign, the example of the 
coTirt of Elizabeth was Secidedly irreligious, and the con- 
tagion spread rapidly among the common people.''^ On the 

• " Tlio quoeQ hath o£ late used the fair Mta, Bridge with words and 
blows of aDgor."— Sidney FapetB. Apud Strickland, lol. rii., p. 197. 

-f She delighted in those brutal sports which msjked her enL Bear- 
bnlting formsd a pruminent feature in many of the fastiiitieB wliidi greeted 
hei in those ™it8 to tiie nobility Tvliicb her pennrionmesa or her policy 
induced her to pay. She liftd her own master of the faoarB and dogs, and 
H. Coleridge tells ua that a farthing a day was the salary attached to this 
otRce. Men of distinction and wealth freqnentlj held it. — Note oa 
fiitnduction to the Flays of Maaaltiger, p, 3Z Goiiot's Shakspeara. 

J Coleridge'e Maasinger, p. 36. Vide Guisof s Shakspaace, p. 63, 

S Marsden, p. 239. " How cometh it to pass that the Guounon peo[iI» J 



172 EABLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

other hand, of those whom she and her surpliced flatterers 
had sought, by every form of oppression, to extirpate, he 
says, '^ But after all, the preponderance of real piety lay, we 
suspect^ at the close of the reign of Elizabeth, amongst 
those who were roughly classed as Puritans. So much con- 
stancy in suffering, a zeal as fervent, domestic habits, by the 
confession of their bitterest enemies, so pure and blameless, 
religious duties properly discharged in the ieuce of scorn and 
the instant dread of punishment, can in justice be r^arded 
only as the marks of a piety sincere and deeply seated."* 
This witness is true. They were the best, the most laborious, 
and conscientious of her clergy, t 

The closing scenes which marked the last days of this 
mighty queen are most affecting. We can scarcely realitt 
them without the profoundest sorrow. The graphic pen oi Sir 
J. Harrington thus describes her in October, 1601: — "Her 
taste for dress was gone; she had not changed her clothes 
for many days. Nothing could please her; she was the tor- 
ment of the ladies who waited on her person. She stamped 
with her feet, and swore violently at the objects of her 
anger. For her protection she had ordered a sword to be 
placed by her table, which she often took in her hand, and 
thrust with violence into the tapestry of her chamber." 

Another writer says, " The queen kept her bed for fifteen 
days, besides the three she sat upon a stool ; and one day, 
being pulled up by force, she obstinately stood upon her 
feet for fifteen hours. When she was near her end, the 
Council sent to her the Archbishop of Canterbury and other 

in the country universally come so seldom to common prayer and di^'ine 
service ; and when they do come, be many times so vainly occupied there, 
or at least do not there as they should do, but for want of this discipline !" 
— The Lord Keeper's Speech, 1572. ParL Histoiy, voL i., p. 774. 

* Marsden, pp. 244-5. 
f *'Then it came to pass, and very much, it must be admitted, from 
their own extravagance, that the Puritans were regarded in the court of 
Elizabeth, not as men of scrupulous minds, but as a party ill affected to 
the state." — ^Marsden, p. 59. 



ELIZABETH. 173 

prelates, at the sight of whom she was nmch ( 
cholericlj rating them, 'bidding them be packing, saving she 
was no atheist, bnt she knew full well they were but hedge- 
priesta.'"" Her kinamaji, Sir R. Carey, informs us "that 
aboiit six at night she made signs for the Archbishop of 
Canterbury iiud her chaplaiu to come near." After she had 
been examined by his grace as to the grounds of her feith, 
" he began to pray, and aU that were by did answer him. 
After he had continued long iii pi-ayer, the old man's knees 
were weary : he blessed her, and rae&nt to rise and leave 
her. The queen made a sign with her hand. My sister 
Sccoope, knowing ber meaning, told the bishop the queen. 
desired he would pray stilL He did so for a long half hour 
after, and then thought to leave her. She made, a second 
time, a sign for the archbishop to continue in prayer. He 
did so for half an hour more, with earnest cries to God for 
her Boid's health, which he uttered with that fervency of 
spirit that the queen, to all our sight, much rejoiced 
thereat."t Exhausted by these efforts, she sank into a, deep 
sleep, from which she never awoke. Thus died " Elizabeth, 
by the grace of God, Queen of England, France, and Ire- 
land ; defender of the true, ancient Catholic faith ; most 
worthy Empress from the Arcade isles to the mountains of 
the Pyrenees.'' * 

* Strickland, vol vii., pp. 294-296. 
+ Morris, who lad been. iropriBoned wrongfully tor proposing a. Bill to 
remedy doma ecclesiaatical evils, thus indignantlj, in a letter to Bnrghley, 
writes : " I had thought that the judge ecolesiiiiStical, hoing chaigsd in tha 
great Council of the realm, to the diahononr of Ood sod of lier majesty, 
of violatian and pervertion of Inw and public joatice, and wrong done unto 
the liberties and freedom of all her majeflty'H anhjecta, by their eitorted 
oathn, wrongful impriaonment, lawless subscriptions, and unjust absoln- 
(iona, would rather have sought mosna to be clsared of this niighty 
Hccuaation, than to ahroud themaelvea onder the suppressing of the 
complaint, and bluu 
BMory, vol. : 

" ■ than light, bacauBO tbflir deeds are eviL" 
i Quarterly Review, Januiuy, 1854, p. 249. 



174 EABLY ENGLISH BAFTISTa 

THE PAMILY OF LOVK 

Since the note on page 79 was printed, we have obtained 
additional information about the founder of this sect. We 
are indebted to Professor Miiller, of Amsterdam^ for these 
details. ^^ In the montli of August, 1536, the great astemUy 
of Anabaptists was held at Bockholt, in Weet^^bialia, whereii 
the different directions (tendencies) among the defendefs of 
Teleio baptism, were manifested and came to light, and 
were revealed to the conference. It was the grand crisia 
Some of the most violent who had escaped finom the £dl of 
Mimster, but had learnt nothing by that £di, ran as bands 
of pilgrims through the country, with Jan WiUemaz at their 
head; they were the Anabaptist veri-nominis; others, more 
calm and sedate, wanting a chie^ wandered or rambled as 
sheep who had no pastor, till they persuaded Menno, ia 
December, 1536, or January, 1537, to place himself at thdtr 
head. This is the origin of Doopsgezinden, or Teleio-haptisU| 
in the !N'etherlands. A third party consisted of them who 
were less violent than the first in practice, but in theory a» 
much fanatic, whom David George (Jovis) proceeded to win 
for himself, when he had (in November, 1536) his first vision, 
or pretended to have, from which time dates a total change 
in his life." 

" Hendrik Niclas (or Niclaasson), in accordance with the 
numerous testimonies of history, began his preaching not 
before 1540, i,e., four years after the severing of the Ana- 
baptists and the Doop ; and I may therefore state, with an 
able historian of our denomination, that he teas not a 
Doopsgezinden, nor an adherent of Menno. He was, in nuinv 
respects, a follower of David Jovis, — not as this imm was 
in the first period of his life (1536), but in the latter. Afler 
the removal of David Jovis to Basle, H. Niclas Ix'camc the 
leader of his followers in the Netherlands, who had luya- 
rated tJieinaelvea angrily from Menno; and it may be that 
some few Doopsgezinden joined him perhaps at Einbden. 



ELIZABETH. 175 

Then these must have been banished persons, who were 
attracted and seduced by his boasting of the Love. Be- 
sides, H. Kiclas did not disapprove of the taking of an 
oath, from the beginning down to our age considered and 
practised among us as interdicted by the word of Christy a 
tenet which was always, and is now-a-days, respected even 
by the constitution and the law of the Netherlands. We 
agree Jierein with your church to admit of nothing as an 
article of fiiiUi, or of duty in the worship of God, which is 
not practised by apostolic precept or approved example." 

His views on bi^tism, we may add, are invested in all but 
impef&etrable mystery. The following is from a work called, 
^ The U fright CkrisUcm FoM, of the C(mvmmiion of SomUb 
<if the FiimHy of Lom, wherem cUso the upright Christianas 
BapHsm is testifM a/nd oonfessed,^^ In the eighth article 
of this tract will be found the following words : — 

"The upright believers, who follow Christ in death and 
Hfe^ are baptized in the living waters of the Holy Ghost by 
Christ, and superfused superabundantly with &dl clearness 
of God." 

^ We confess that all who are not founded in this upright 
ikidi of Christ, and are not baptized in the name of the 
Father, in the name of the Son, and in the name of the 
Holy Ghost, are not true Christians; and that, likewise, all 
who^ without that upright Mth and baptism, boast to be 
Cfhiistians, are fiilse Christians. Therefore, nobody may 
boast to be a Christian, who, in the upright faith, has not 
received the true token of Christianity, viz., the true bap- 
tism in the name of the Father, and of the Scm, and of the 
Holy Ghost, or who carries not, essentially, their names in 
himself. Otherwise he will be found &,lse and lying in the 
day of love of the righteous judgment before all l^e saints 
of God, who are comprised in the communion."'^ 

* Letter of Professor MiUler. There is a life of David George, by Mr. 
Oramer, minister of the Mennonite church at Middlebtirg. Additional 
infonnatioa on this sect will be found in the volume of tracts on Liberty 
of OonBdence; Appendix, B. K. Society. 



176 EASLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 



CHAPTER VI. 

THE STUABT DYNASTY. — JAMES THE FIRST. 

With a new race of prinoes, a new, and in manj iift- 
poitant respects, very different era opened on this England 
of ours. The Tudor spirit had expended itsel£ The imperial 
majesty of the last, and incomparably the greatest^ of the 
race, found no resemblance in the feeble and pedantic cha- 
racter of her successor. Events of the most disastrous kind, 
and others unfolding the loftiest and purest principle8» 
marked this reign. National honour was never so debased; 
civil and spiritual tyranny ruled with an iron sceptre; law, 
both human and divine, was sacrificed to profligate ambitioQ 
and the lust of power; yet, in the very depths of oar 
national degradation, men were found with the love of 
liberty so quenchless that they vindicated the rights of 
humanity, and threw before the world such views of politi- 
cal and moral science as have commanded the homage of the 
wise and good till the present day. 

The seeds of these great changes had been sown during 
the latter periods of the former dynasty. The great religioos 
movement, — the awakened mind, — the spread of religions 
tinith, — the wide diffusion of the Sacred Scriptures, — the 
influence of commerce, and other causes, demanded, and ci 
necessity produced them. Elizabeth's strong arm was too 
feeble to roll back the deepening and swelling torreDt of 
national progress. She frowned, stormed, and threatened, 
either in |)erson or by the lijw of her lord keepers, but her 
faithful Commons spoke, tremblingly at first, but louder and 
more firmly the voice of the rising genius of British liberty 
was heard in the utterances of the Wentworths, the Morride*. 
the Sti'icklands, and others. The seeds of constitutional 



THE STUABT DYNASTY. 177 

and religions freedom were sown; the harvest, during the 
reign of the Stuarts, was abundant.* 

No careful and candid reader of our history at this period 
can be ignorant of the fact, or insensible to the influence it 
exerted, that popular liberty carried on a long and triumph- 
ant struggle with despotic and arbitrary power. James's 
kingcrafb was his boast. His son was animated by the same 
delusion. The divine right of monarchs to do wrong, — to 
oppress their people, — was a doctrine ardently cherished by 
them. 

No despots of the past ever put forth mx)re blasphemous 
pretensions. The Senate was doomed, at Whitehall, where 
they had been summoned, to listen to these words : — 
"Kings are justly called gods, for that they exercise a 
manner or resemblance of divine power upon the earth; 
for if you will consider the attributes of God, you shall see 
how they agree in the person of a king. God hath power 
to create or destroy, to make or immake at his pleasure; 
to give life or send death; to judge all, and be judged 
nor accoimtable to none ; to raise low things, and to 
make high things low at his pleasure ; and to God both soul 
and body are due. And the like power have kings. They 
make and unmake their subjects; they have power of raising 
and casting down ; of life and death ; judges over all their 
subjects and in aU causes ; and yet accountable to none but 
€k>d only. They have power to exalt low things and abase 
high things, and make of their subjects like men at chess, 
a pawn to take a bishop or a knight, and to cry up or down 
any of their subjects as they do their money. And to the 
king is due both the affections of the soul and the services 

* Bef erring to a vindication of its privileges by the House of Commons, 
in 1571, lingard says, "This victory was owing to that tone of mind 
which religious enthusiasm always imparts. It formed a new era in the 
history of the House of Commons. The members learned to cherish their 
privileges, to think more highly of their own importance, to resist with 
greater confidence the arbitrary pretensions of the crown." — ^History of 
England, vol v., p. 318. 4to. 



178 EABLT SKGUSH BAPTISTS. 

of the body of his sabjects."* To such lofty claims were the 
true msmhood of England, at this time, doomed to listai ! 

To his kingcraft the monarch still clung. Age, and re- 
peated defeats, brought no wisdom to his councils; and in 
1621 he thus insulted the patriotism of England in a letter 
to the Commons: — ''These are, therefore, to command 
you to make known," he said in a letter to the Speaker, to 
be read to the assembled Commons of England, ''in our 
name, unto the House, that none therein shall presuiM 
henceforth to meddle with anything concerning our goYem- 
ment, or deep matters of state; and, namely, not to detl 
with our dearest son's match with the daughter of Spain, 
nor to touch the honour of that king, or any other our 
friends and confederates; and, also, not to meddle with 
any man's particulars which have their due motives in oor 
ordinary courts of justica . . . You shall resolve, then, 
in our name, that we think ourselves very free and able to 
punish and warn misdemeanants in parliament, as well 
during their sitting as after; which we mean not to spare 
hereafter, upon any occasion of any man^s insolent beha- 
viour there, that shall be ministered unto us. — From New- 
market, December 3rd, 1621."t 

His successors clung to the pleasing delusion. But con- 
stitutional liberty advanced. Long and fierce was the con- 
test. Step by step the Eliots, the Hampdens, the Pyma, 
and others of the noble band of patriots who have shed 
lustre on the British name, advanced in spite of bribes, 



* Works, pp. 529, 531. He issued a proclamation forbidding his rab- 
jects, from the highest to the lowest, fnmi speaking of sUite atfuir». «»r 
discussing the conduct of any of the princes in alliance with him. — AikiD'i 
Life of James, vol. ii., p. 195. 

t Ibid J vol. ii., pp. 281-2. " I heard that the Lonl G)ke, amongut othfr 
offensive speeches, should say to his majesty that his highnt-!*!! wo.-* ilf- 
fended by the laws. At which saying, with other 8poeohe« then n-n**! * y 
the Lonl Coke, his majesty was verj' much ofTende<l, and told him \.<^ 
spake foolishly, and said that he was not by his laws, Imt by lltni." 
Letter to tlie Earl of Shrewsbury, 1608. Lodge, voL iii., p. iiSO. 



THE STUART DYNASTY. 179 

intimklation, and royal frowns, till the death of Charles 
proclaimed the overthrow of despotic, of irresponsible power. 
Later on, the expulsion of James from a throne which he 
had degraded, and a nation whose liberties he had betrayed, 
proclaimed the fact that nations were not made for kings, 
but kings for the people. 

Parallel with this was the great and glorious stmggle for 
rdiigious freedom. The progress of the one may always be 
measured by the advancement of the other. On the side of 
civil despotism a State Church is generally found. In this 
case it was so. The flattery of the hierarchy was fulsome in 
the extreme. Beyond all other men, it encouraged these 
unhappy princes in their headlong career. The past shows 
US that a dominant, wealthy, and insolent church is a fearful 
national curse. That it is a violation of all right, and of 
necessity has the will, if not the power, to oppress any 
dissident from its dogmas, or the form of its worship. True 
statesmanship will always regard and treat it as such. Many 
of Elizabeth's most sage counsellors felt this. Burghley, 
Knollis, Walsingham, Leicester, and others, protected many 
of the persecuted from the crushing fury of the bishops. 
The successive defeats of the dissidents augmented the inso- 
lence of the spiritual princes of the church. The divine 
right of Episcopacy, broached by Bancroft, was hailed by his 
brethren. Parker and his brethren had flogged with whips ; 
now the hierarchy used scorpions. "With these lofty preten- 
sions, the corruption of Christian doctrine proceeded. 

Laud's influence was disastrous in the extreme. He 
centered the suspicion of the nation on his proceedings, 
and awakened the fear of the wise and good. The free- 
dom of thought would have been repressed.* A striking 
instance of this is seen in James's dealing with the great 



* ** The clergy liad begun by advancing that the king's authority was 
sufficient to reform what was amiss in any of his own courts ; all jurisdic- 
tions, spiritual and temporal, being annexed to his crown." — Hallam, 
voL i., p. 324. 



180 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

Seldon. Referring to a confutation of his History of Tythes, 
he said, " If you, or any of your friends, shall write against 
this confutation, I will throw you into prison."* Difference 
of opinion would have entailed the loss of all that is dear to 
man in his social and civil relations. Upon the ruins of the 
nation's dignity he would have based the authority of the 
church. The senate became a theological schooL The most 
important doctrines, — the Calvinist and Arminian theories, 
— the tendencies of the high-church principle, — are ever 
mingled up with " the great remonstrance," and " petitions 
for the redress of grievances." The Commons felt that the 
triumph of Laud would be the destruction of those liberties 
for which they had so long and so earnestly striven. The 
prostration of the church was the necessary effect. Bj its 
degrading flattery to civil despotism, — by the unholy dei)end- 
ence it placed on the will of kings, — ^by the readiness ^ith 
which it lent all its power to rivet the chains of slavery on 
the neck of the people, — it was identified by the popular 
will as the supporter, if not the originator, of all that was 
oppressive in kingly government, and the fall of the mon- 
archy was the overthrow of the power of the church. The>«* 
elements, and others which the historian of this era not id's, 
essentially distinguished the Stuart d}^la.sty. No perio*! ••!' 
the modern history of this nation is so fraught with natiomil 
debasement and disaster, as well as with that which givt-s 
us brighter proofs of the nation's power, and the unsullit'^l 
dignity of true Englishmen. With a race of princes the mo^t 
worthless, we have a race of patriots whose names will excite 
the veneration of the wise and good in all ages : with a raof 
of statesmen ever ready to sacrifice right to the will of a 
monarch, we have, in the speeches, the writings, and act> «»t' 
others, the soundest principles of political science : with a rait* 
of bishops, captivated only with the sensual and the formal, 
who delighted more in compelling the observance of senseless 
trifles than in the proclamation of Christian virtue or tli«* 



* Aikin's James I., vol. i., p. 131. 



JAMES THE FIRST. 181 

moral impFovement of the people, we have divines whose 
writings will be a ceaseless spring at which the faithful, 
throughout all time, will quench their thirst for the know- 
ledge of the Lord. Beyond all doubt, the dynasty of this 
unhappy family was one of extremes, during which the con- 
flict of great principles wrought that change which ultimately 
placed the Dutchman on the throne, and laid a solid basis 
for our constitutional freedom. 

The accession of James to the English throne was un- 
disputed.* There were no competitors to excite alarm in his 
pathway. The claims of all who had disturbed the minds of 
his predecessors now centered in him. His proclamation, by 
Cecil and the Council, was immediate. The information 
reached the Scottish king in his capital. He was transported 
at the tidings. No possessor of the English throne had greater 
power or wider dominion than the founder of the House of 
Stuart. The three kingdoms bowed to his authority, and 
he felt that he had within his reach the means he had long 
coveted, of gratifying his ambition, and indulging those 
visions of royal magnificence which had long been floating 
before him.t His journey to the metropolis of his new 
dominion was by easy stages, and it was quite an ovation. 
He was marching to " the land of promise," and everywhere 
the greetings of his people were hearty and loud. Addressing 

— ■ ■ — -■ ■ ■ ■ . - - — 

* James was bom in the Castle of Edinburgh, 1566. Of the mode of 
hig baptism there can be no doubt. "At convenient time you are to pre- 
sent her the font of gold, which we send with you. You may pleasantly 
say that it was made as soon as we heard of the prince's birth, and then 
it was big enough for him ; but now he, being grown, is too big for it. 
Therefore it may be better used for the next child, provided that it be 
christened before it outgrow the font." — ^Keith, p. 357. Turner, voL iv., 
p. 86 (Note). 

James also refers to "the font wherein I was christened." — Works. 
London, 1616. Of Prince Henry's baptism the reader will find a lengthy 
account in a volume of Tracts illustrative of Traditional History of Scot- 
land. Edinburgh, 1836. 

+ Lingard, vol. vi., p. 3. 4to. 



182 EARLY CNOLISH BAPTISTS. 

Ills first parliament^ he thus alludes to it : — ^' Shall I ever, 
nay, can I ev4t be able, or rather so unable in memory as to 
forget your unexpected readiness and alacrity, your ever 
memorable resolution, and your most wonderful conjunction 
and harmony of your hearts, in declaring and embracing me 
as your undoubted and lawful king and governor 1 Or shall 
it ever be blotted out of my mind how, at my first entiy 
into this kingdom, the people of all sorts rid and ran, naj, 
rather flew to meet me; — ^their eyes flaming nothing but 
sparkles of affection, their mouths and tongues uttering 
nothing but sounds of joy; their hands, feet, and all the 
rest of their members, in their gestures, discovering a pas- 
sionate longing and earnestness to meet and embrace their 
new sovereign 1 "* 

The hopes and fears of the great religious parties gathered 
around the new chief of the nation. There were grounds 
on which all were warranted to expect the fskvoor of the 
monarch. Ex)manists recalled the devotedness and suffenng 
of his mother for the old £a.ith, and the sympathy whi<^ 
the Scottish king had, not unfrequently, manifested with 
it;t and though, probably, despairing of the restoration of 
their church to its former supremacy and glory, yet they 
very naturally expected a modification of the sharp laws 
under which they had suffered during the former reign. 

The Nonconformists, and even the Separatists, on the other 
hand, were sanguine that not only would their claims be 
heard by a sympathizing judge, but that large and important 
concessions would be made to their just and Scriptural de- 
mauds. The ground on which these hopes were based was 
broad and solid. The discipline of Geneva had been enthroned 
in the northern kingdom, by the successful efforts of Knox 
and his brethren. James had been nurtured in ife. All bis 



* Pari. History, vol. i., p. 977. James's speech to his Parliament, 
i* He even solicited the Pope to confer a cardinal*s hat on Drommoiiiiv 
Bishop of Vaison. — Aikin's James I., voL L, p. 33. Lingard, voL ix., 
p. 439. (Note.) 



JAMES THE FIRST. 183 

poUic actB were associated with it. The English Episcopate, 
and the oooatitution of the church, had been coQdemaed hy 
lim in the severest language, and on his own kirk he had 
hviahed tho warmest expressions of affection. They had not 
itn^tteD, that " with head uncovered and hands uplifted to 
lieaven, he had protested that their Pi'esbyterian Church was 
the purest in the world ; that the English service was but 
tin eTiI said mass in English ; and that except the adoi-ation 
of the host, it wanted nothing o/' tho mass itself."* The 
diurch had more reason for alarm. Hope and fear would 
mingle in the minds of the prelates at the prospect of the 
dwnge which the growing infirmities of Elizabeth assured 
tbem could not be distant. The succession of a Presbyt«riaa 
monarch to a queen devotwl to the most splendid Episcopacy 
in the world, was an event which might be disastrous. But 
wise men swayed the destinies of the church at this crisis, 
though not invested with spiritual power. Another religious 
rcrvolntion would be fearfiil. The contending elements were 
more varied and powerful now than before, and there was 
no master niind to grasp and control them. The sympathies 
of the leading statesmen at tliis time, from naany causes, 
would be in favour of the hierarchy. "Whitgtfl, too, was 
alert. His emissaries had visited the monarch. Of the 
devotedness of the prelates to his interest he was fiiUy 
assured; and if the royal word was of any worth, thmr 
feafe were allayed by the assurance of James, tliat without 
their counsel and consent he would make no alteration in 
ibe ecclesiastical condition of the kingdom. The bishops 
bad promised him an obsequiousness to which he had been 
little accustomed, and il zeal to enhance his prerogative 
which they afterwards too well displayed. + 

Old Thomas Fuller, in his quaint, but racy stylo, thus 
describes the conflict: — "And now it is strange with what 

' In 1590, before his FatliaineDt. — Morsden, p. 249. 
t Halliini'a Histary, p. 297. 



184 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

assiduity and diligence the two potent parties, the defenden 
of Episcopacy and Presbyteryy with equal hopes of saocesB, 
made (besides particular and private addresses) public and 
visible application to King James I. ; the first to contmoe, 
the latter to restore, or rather to set up their goyemment 
So that whilst each side was jealous his rival should get the 
start by early stirring, and rise first in the king's favour, 
such was their vigilance that neither may seem to go to 
bed ; incessantly diligent, both before and since the queen's 
death, in despatching posts and messages into Scotland, to 
advance their several designs," &c.* 

Such was the condition of religious parties when the first 
of the Stuarts came to take possession of his long-coveted 
crown. The character of James presents us with a singalir 
mixture of contrarieties. A glance at it is requisite to oar 
design. The present has reversed the decisions of the past 
^' The Solomon of his age'' is now regarded as only, in the 
language of a contemporary, "the wisest fool in ChnBten- 
dom."t Extremes seem to have centered in him. With the 
loftiest pretensions to political wisdom, his simplicity was 
extreme. J Boasting of his unbounded authority, he was 
governed by a succession of the most unpriiicipleii and 
worthless men. With a style of the most imposing regalitv 
there were associated vices of the lowest and most degrading 
kind. Gi*ave at times, yet volatile; im^^etuous, yet patient; 
studious, yet frivolous; — in a word, so varied and changing 
as to justify the conflicting opinions which the pen of hist«»ry 
has recorded both of the man and the king. His duplicity 
was unbounded. " Early trained to dissimulation, by the 
time he was sixteen his mastery in this despicable art w:is 
entire. No motive had power to influence liim which lUd 

* Church History, book ix., p. 5. Vide Biuhop GtNKluiau*ii Court *4 
James I., vol. i., p. 28. (Note.) 

t Sir P. "Warwick's Memoirs, p. 3. (Note.) 
t "Sagacity that often wore the appearance of conHummutc wimlom. >*{ 
folly scarcely distinguishable from that of au iiliut."— Manuleu, p. 247. 



JAHES THE FIRST. 185 

not touch bis personal gratification or selfish interest Lost 
to all filial affection, the sufferings of his misguided and 
unfortunate mother were lost upon him." * Of the extent 
to which this despicable vice was cultivated by James, we 
can have no more striking instance than his treatment of 
his all-powerful &ivourite, upon whose worthless head he 
had showered the highest honours : — " The Earl of Somer- 
set never parted from him (James) with more seeming affec- 
tion than at this time, when he knew Somerset should never 
see him more. . . The Earl, when he kissed his hand, 
the king hung about his neck, slubbering his cheeks, saying, 
' For Crod's sake, when shall I see thee again ? On my soul, 
I shall neither eat nor sleep until you come again.' The 
Earl told him on Monday (this being on Friday). 'For 
God's sake let me,' said the king ; * shall I — shall 1 1 ' then 
lolled about his neck. ' Then, for God's sake, give thy lady 
this kiss for me.' The Earl had scarcely entered his coach 
before the monarch said, * I shall never see his face mora"'t 
His extravagance was boundless. "Already," says Cecil, 
*'our sovereign spends ^100,000 yearly in his house, which 
was wont to be but £50, 000." J • Coming from a country 
where money was scarce, he had no conception of its value, 
and he squandered away the treasure of the kingdom with 
the most lavish hands on many of his needy countrymen 

* lingard, voL viii., p. 214. ^*But liis opiBion is, that it cannot stand 
with his honour that he be a consenter to take his mother's life ; but he 
18 content how strictly she be kept, and all her old knavish servants 
hanged, chiefly they who be in hand." — ^The Master of Grey (James's 
Ambassador, 1586), Goodman, voL L, p. 129. 

+ CoTirt and Character of James L Secret History of James L, vol. L, 
pp. 411-12. 

Tytler says, " He was influenced by favourites through life." He was 
" an early adept in diplomatic hypocrisy." " The king was known to be 
BO great a dissembler that few trusted his professions." — History of 
Scotland, vol. viii., pp. 133, 203, 245, 333. "James, however, was all his 
life rather a bold liar than a good dissembler." — Hallam, voL i., p. 297. 

X Cecil to Lord Shrewsbury, September, 1603. Lodge's Illustrations, 
voL iiL, p. 34. 



186 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

who followed him,* and the worthleas fitYoarites who ruled 
him according to their will.t ** Such were the crowds tbtt 
followed his majesty of the former, that the Privy Council 
issued orders to prevent the emigration of his northern sub- 
jects to the newly-acquired English Goshen." { His wsntB 
were always great, and his recklessness often brought hiA 
into collision with his Commons, and led him to the adop- 
tion of means for raising of money which laid the foond*- 
tion of the ruin of his son, and the disasters which more or 
less marked his family. Bribery was shameless, and the sale 
of all offices was notorious. § 

This rough outline of the character of the king is requi- 
site to our design. Ignorant of it, the facts which our 
subsequent narrative will embody would lose much of tkor 
interest. 

At an early period the Puritans laid their claims beibn 
the Presbyterian monarch. Their grievances were embodied 
in a petition. It was called the Millionary one, from the 
number of subscribers to it. || Their demands were moderata 
At no time could they have been conceded with a better 

* "This vast treasure was bestowed on the needy Scots, who, like 
horse-leeches, sucked the exchequer dry ; so that honour and offices were 
set to sale to fill the Scots' purses and empty the kingdom's treasurer- 
Sir E. Payton's Catastrophe of the House of Stuart. Secret History of 
James I., vol. ii., p. 343. 

+ " His favourite Scot, who from a lowly position was raised to the 
highest honour. His tyranny for a season was complete. Offices aboat 
the court were sold to the highest bidder : no plunder of the public wm 
obtaiiied without purchase ; and the king's titles were bought and suU, 
whilst no seclusion could resist the intrusion of his potent influence.**— 
Thomson's Life of Yillicrs, Duke of Buckingham, voL L, p. 91. 

X Osborne's Traditional Memorials of James I. Secret History of the 
Court of James I., vol. i., p. 143. 

§ " Every inferior department which was not filled by their relations 
or dependents, was sold without scruple to the highest bidder." — Lingard, 
YoL ix., p. 151. Vide note also. Proof of this abounds in Lodg«*s 
Illustrations, vol. iiL 

U "It was subscribed by 825 ministers, from twenty-five counties.**— 
Hallam, voL L, p. 2%. 



JAME9 THE FIRST. 137 

grace. "Many of these have since been wrung, by a necessity 
they CDold not resist, fi'om churchmen of aucceediDg days; 
some, in a far better spirit, Lave been cheerlulty conceded 
in. oar own time, by chnrchmen as well-afiected, as learned, 
and as pious as the most unyielding of their forefathers."* 
We need not recapitulate their claims. We have mentioned 
them, before. They asked for nothing which was incon- 
aiBtent with the existence of the e.stabliahed hierarchy. 

Policy demanded that some regard should be paid to their 
modest request, A confereoce was proposed. Some of the 
most eminent of the nonconforming clergy should meet with 
^e bishops, and in a Christian and fraternal spirit confer, 
under the presidency of the kiug, on the various points in 
dispute. Hampton Court was selected aa the place for this 
celebrated ecclesiastical gathering. The project was suited 
to the tastes of the king. It would give the royal theologian, 
who had been trained in all the dialectics of the schools in 
his northern states, an opportunity of exhibiting his skill in 
the discusGionj wliilst his fairness, in trying to hold the bal- 
ance between the contending parties, and to bring them 
into a more fraternal union, would be manifest to his people. 
But it was one of the first pieces of kingcraft with which 
be sought to betray and impose on his people. A more 
gljUTDg and shameful piece of hypocrisy waa never pi-actised 
in the worst days of Romish tyi-anny. Four Puritans and 
eighteen churchmen, with the king at their head, met on the 
I4th of January, 1603. The archbishops of both provinces, 
eight bbhopa, seven deans, and two others, formed the 
clerical party. On the other side were Dr. Reynolds, Dr. 
Sparkes, Mr. Knewstuba, and Mr. Chaderton. Everything, 
after the first day's proceediugs, waa a mere sham. Prac- 
tically, the monarch and his ecclesiastical etas' had settled 
tiie matter before the representatives of the dissenting 
brethren had uttered a word in conference, "During the 



* MaiBden, p, 2BL 



188 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

first day," says a candid writer, " the Puritans were not 
present, being expressly excluded by his majesty's commancU. 
Yet in their absence the questions were discussed, andj in 
Jact, decided, on which they were most anodoua to obtain a 
hearing. The king opened the proceedings with a speech, in 
which he expressed his satisfaction that he was in the pre- 
sence of grave, learned, and reverend men; not as before, 
elsewhere, a king without state, without honour; where 
beardless boys braved him to his face. He said he was 
averse to any innovations; at the same time, should any- 
thing be found to need redress, he wished it to be done, 
though as quietly as possible, and without any visible alter- 
ation ; a remark which he several times repeated ; and on 
this account he had called in the bishops by themselves.*** 
Over three days this farce was extended. The arguments 
of the Puritans were heard only with contempt and inso- 
lence. Truth was with them, but the union of royal and 
episcopal interest triumphed over them for a season. We 
cannot narrate the proceedings of this synod. Our readers 
will find ample details of them in the authors indicated 
below. + We can only give one sample of the way in wliich 
the royal theologian dealt with questions which were 
shaking the church to its centre. Dr. Reynolds had been 
pleading for the restoration of the prophesyings, as Grindal 
and other dignitaries of the church had recommended. For 
the benefit of the church, and the more eflScieut discharge 
of clerical duty, he also advocated provincial synods, under 
the presidency of the bishops. **The king," says Bishop Bar- 
low, "was stirred at this ; yet, which was admirable in him, 
without passion or show, thinking that they aimed at a 
Scotch Presbytery, which he Siiid agreed with monarchy a.s 
God and the devil. * Then Jack and Tom, and Will and 
Dick shall meet, and, at their pleasure, censui*e me and my 
Council, and all our proceedings : then Will shall stand up 



* Marsden, p. 257. f Marsden, Price, Neal, Brooks, Fletcher, kc. 



JAMES THE FIRST. 189 

and say, " It must be thus ; " then Dick shall reply, and say 
"Nay, marry, but we .will have it thus;" and here I must 
once reiterate my former speech, Ze roy «' cmsera^ " &c.* 
Looking at Dr.* Reynolds, the royal hypocrite said, " Well, 
doctor, have you anything else to say 1" Br, Reynolds. 
" No more, if it please your majesty." — The King, " If this 
be all your party hath to say, I will make them conform 
themselves, or else I will harry them out of the land, or else 
do worse." " The jeers and pleasantries of Jeffries, on the 
judgment seat, were scarcely more unfeeling."f From the 
character of the monarch, as already delineated, our readers 
will feel no surprise at his treatment of these Christian 
men. But what shall we say of the bishops ? They were 
the anointed of the Lord; the successors of apostolic men; 
yet the profound learning of Eeynolds, the holy character 
of his colleagues, the moral worth and transparent sincerity 
of their and the doctor's motives, ouglit to have called forth 
manifestations of the most exalted tenderness and sympathy. 
But littleness, under the mask of lofty pretensions, in the 
flush of triumph, never feels thus. His Grace of Canterbury, 
in the fulness of his joy, exclaimed, " that, undoubtedly, his 
Majesty spake by the especial assistance of Grod*s Spirit." 
The Bishop of London, on his knees, protested "that his 
lieart melted within him, as, he doubted not, did the hearts 
of the whole company, with joy, and made haste to acknow- 
ledge to Almighty God, his singular mercy in giving us such 
a king, as since Christ's time the like had not been seen." 
So writes the episcopal historian of this celebrated confer- 
ence. Well might a subsequent member of the same church, 
compelled by the force of truth, say, in reference to this, 
** that the scene that followed was one of the most humili- 
ating upon the page of English history." " The Puritans 
had been unfairly treated, browbeaten, jeered at, silenced." J 

♦ Collier, voL ii., p. 681. t Marsden, p. 262. 

X Ibid, pp. 266-7. Welwood's Memoirs, p. 21. Mosheim's Ecclesiastical 
Histoiy, vol. v., p. 386. 



190 EABLT ISSGlASn BAPTISTS. 

We will only add a sentence or two from one of the most 
able of modem historians, but by no means one partial to 
the character of the Puritans. "His measures towards the 
Nonconformist party had evidently been resolved upon before 
he summoned a few of their divines to the fsonous confer- 
ence at Hampton Court. In the account that we read of 
this meeting, we are alternately struck with wonder at tke 
indecent and partial behaviour of the king, and at the abject 
baseness of the bishops, mixed, according to the custom of 
servile natures, with insolence towards their opponent*." • 

The spirit of the monarch manifested itself, in relation 
to religion, in the proclamation for his first parliament 
After various directions, he says : — " Next, and above afl 
things, considering that one of the main pillars of this 
estate is the preservation of unity in the profession of 
sincere religion of Almighty God, we do also admonish 
that there be great care taken to avoid the choice of anj 
persons, either noted for their superstitious blindness one 
way, or for their turbulent humour other ways, becan^e 
their disorderly and unquiet spirits will disturb all the dis- 
creet and modest proceedings in that greatest and gravi-st 
Council, "t 

His hatred to the Puritans was intense. In a letter, 
supposed to be addressed to the Earl of Dunbar, his 
treasurer in Scotland, be says : " And so farewell fix»m my 
wilderness, which I had rather live in (as God shall juil^t* 
me), like an hermit in his forest, than be a king over such a 
people as the pack of Puritans are that overrule the Lower 
House."t 

James held "no bishop, no king," for as i-eal an article iu 
the mystery of monarchy, as they did "no ceremouy, no 
bishop," in that of the hierarchy. § 



* Hallam's Constitutional History, vol. L , p. 2*.)7. 

t Parliamentary History, vol. i., p. lHi8. 
X Hallam's Constitutional History, vol. i., p, ;<0K. 
§ Court of James I. Secret History, voL i., p. 175. 



JAMES THE FIBST. 191 

It is not very difficult to account for this. The pUancy- 
of the Episcopate, and the imposing splendour of its cere- 
jQQionie^ were in perfect harmony with James's notion of his 
regal state, and deepened his disUke to the naked platform 
of Geneva and the republican notions of its advocates, to a 
^eat extent, no doubt. He believed the bishops ''were 
useful instruments to turn a limited monarchy into absolute 
dominion, and subjects into slaves, the design in the world 
he minded most.'* Upon men like James this would operate 
■with invincible power. We have a glance at it in his address 
to Dr. Reynolds. The Jack and Tom, the Will and Dick, 
the beardless boys. censuring him and his Council, were not 
fancies, but stem realities. The experience of the past sug- 
gested this. The Presbyterian power had checked him in his 
northern states. The struggle between his despotic authority 
and the liberal tendencies of the reformed clergy had been 
long and fierce. No monarch in Christendom had been 
more roughly handled by his spiritual teachers. Humbled by 
stem advocates of freedom, preached at in public assemblies, 
the worst terms of reproach applied to his majesty, deprived 
of liberty for months, his experience of the Presbyterian 
government was destitute of every element of pleasure. 
** Admit that our king be a Christian king," said John Ross, 
in a sermon, in 1594, "yit, but amen de ment, he is a 
reprobate king. Of all the men in this nation, the king 
himself is the maist fynest, and maist dissembling hypo- 
crite." "All kings," said David Black, two years later, 
"were children of the devil; but that in Scotland the head 
of the court was Satan himself" James's vocabulary of 
abuse was not scanty. " Loanes, smaikes, snivelling knaves," 
were terms often applied by the royal lips to these holy 
men. He " frequently declared that he never looked upon 
himself to be more than King of Scotland in name, till 
he came to be King of England; but now, he said, one 
kingdom would help him to govern the other, or he had 
studied kingcraft to very little purpose from his cradle to 



192 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

that time."* These facts will throw much light on the 
ecclesiastical proceedings during his reign, both in relation 
to doctrine and the constitution of the church, to which we 
must now ask the attention of our readers. 

Whitgiftjf who had died soon after the Hampton Court 
conference, was succeeded in the primacy by the Bishop of 
London. Bancroft was a man after the king's own heart 
A not unfriendly pen thus truthfully describes him :— 
" Bancroft was a man of vehement zeal, but of the most 
grasping avarice, as appears by an epigrammatic epitaph on 
his death, in Arthur Wilson : — 

* Here lies His Grace, in cold earth clad. 
Who died with want of what he had.' " 

We find a characteristic trait of this Bishop of London, in 
this conference (Hampton Court). Ellesmere, Lord Chan- 
cellor, observed, that livings rather want learned men, 
than learned men livings, many in the universities pining 
for want of places : " I wish, therefore, that some may have 
single coats (one living) before others have doublets (plurili- 
ties) ; and this method I have observed in bestowing the 
king's benefices." Bancroft replied, "I commend your mem- 
orable care that way; but a doublet is necessary in oM 



* We are indebted for these extracts to Buckle's History of C'inliza- 
tion, &c., vol. ii., chap, iii,, p. 253; chap, iv., pp. 2G1-2. His yni^i art- 
crowded with similar examples. 

"f Wigginton says, "The archbishop hath treated me more like a Turk 
or a dof/ than a man or a minister of Jesus Christ." Another Ihiritan -•{ 
that day says, as quoted })y JJiiucroft, "Of all the bbihops that ever w. n.» 
in the see of the Archbishop of Canterbuiy, there was m«ver any tlid «-» 
much hurt to the cliurch of God as he hath done. No bish«»p that »*\ci 
had such an aspiring and ambitious mind as lie; no, not Cunlinal W.-l*. \. 
None so pnmd as he; no, not Stephen Gardiner of Winchester. Ni»i.»' ■«•» 
tyrannical as be ; no, not Bonner. . . . He sits ujxm his rM^^inj;-«'t«»"l, 
whicli may truly be called the chair of jK'stilence. His mouth i'^ full ••( 
cursing against (nul and his saints. His fii't are swift tt» >htd M-"-!. 
Tliere is none of God's children but had as lieve see a serpent as hkv*. 
him." — Hanbury's Mem., vol. i., i>. »J8. 



JAMES THE FIBST. 193 

weather." Thus an avaricious bishop could turn off, by a 
miserable jest, the open avowal of his love of pluralities.* 

With the knowledge of the king's feeling towards the 
Puritans, the hierarchy entered on their work. The royal 
head of the church had agreed to interpose the shield of his 
protection against any attack on the Episcopate, while the 
spiritual lords had bound themselves to support the prero- 
gative of the king. This understanding was early arrived at^ 
and the ends aimed at were steadily pursued by both. Hallam 
has correctly said : " The real aim of the clergy in thus enor- 
mously enhancing the pretensions of the crown, was to gain 
its sanction and support for their own. Schemes of ecclesias- 
tical jurisdiction, hardly less extensive than had -warmed the 
imagination of Becket, now floated before the eyes of his 
successor, Bancroft. He had fallen, indeed, upon evil days, 
and perfect independence of the temporal magistrate could 
no longer be attempted; but he acted upon the refined 
policy of making the royal supremacy over the church, 
which he was obliged to acknowledge and professed to 
exaggerate, the very instrument of its dependence u])on the 
law. The favourite object of the bishops in this age was to 
render these ecclesiastical jurisdictions, no part of which 
had been curtailed in our hasty reformation, as unrestrained 
as possible by the courts of law."t 

In 1604, the first convocation after the accession of James 
was held. It has become memorable for its work. Bancroft 
presided, though only then Bishop of London, and the spirit 
of the dominant sect revealed itself. We cannot narrate all 
its proceedings. Suffice it to say, that the doctrine which had 
been propounded by Bancroft, so gratifying to Episcopal 
pride, that the bishops governed the church and the inferior 
clergy, jwe divino, by a right derived from God alone, was 
affirmed. To deny the Church of England to be a true 



* lyisraeli's Miscellaneous Literature, p. 331. 
+ Constitutional History, vol. i., p. 323. 



194 EABtT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

church j to say that its worship was erroneous, or any part 
repugnant to Holy Scriptures, or that any of its ceremooMB 
were superstitious; to deny the authority of archlHsbops, 
bishops, deacons, or to separate from the communion of 
the church, and form separate assemblies, was to expose the 
parties to excommunication. Bancroft and his brethrm ev- 
ried out these decisions with no gent^ hand. The best <^ ike 
clergy, finding no prospect of relief, were compelled to qidt 
the church; some wasted their lives in prison, others eocvpoi 
to foreign lands. Everything was done which the monai^ 
and his spiritual advisers could do to crush ont the spirit 
of Puritanism from the city and parochial churches, aad 
their success must have exerted an all-powerftil inftuenee 
on the morals of society. It could not be otherwisa Hw 
policy of James and his minions could only be realised by 
exposing to scorn the teaching and saintly character of the 
Puritan ministers. The truthful pen of Lucy Hutohiiisoii 
gives us some glimpses of the social and moral life of Tg»*g*«Mi 
at this time, while it presents us with the outline of tiie 
true" Puritan character during the same trying period. "At 
court these were hated (the godly ministers), disgraced, and 
reviled, and in scorn had the name of Puritans fixed upon 
them. And now the ready way to preferment there was to 
declare an opposition to the power of godliness under that 
name : so that these pulpits might justly be called tht- 
sconier's chair; those sermons only pleasing that flattered 
them in their vices, and told the })oor king that he was 
Solomon, that his sloth and cowardice, by wliich he betrayed 
the cause of God and the honour of the nation, was 
gospel meekness and peaceableness, for which they raided 
him above heaven, while he lay wallowing like a swine in 
the mire of his lust." Tn lower circles, " if any, out of merr 
morality and civil honesty, discountenanced the abomination^* 
of those days, he was a Puritan, however he conformed to 
the superstitious worship : if any showed fevour to any 
godly, honest person, kept their company, relieved them in 



JAUES THE nitST. 195^ ] 

want, ca" protected them against violent or unjust oppresBon^ 
he was a Pti/riUat : if any geutleoLati in his county main- ' 
tained the gooil tawe of tlie kiid, or stood up for amj pubUo ' 
interest, for good ordei' ov government, lie was a Pwriian : 
in ahort, all that ci-oased the views of the needy courtiers, tlie 
proud, encroaching priests, the thievish projectors, the lewd 
nobility and gentiy ; whoever was zealous for God's glory w 
worship, could not eadure blaaphemonij oaths, ribald conver- 
H&tion, profane scoffs, Sabbath breach, derision of the Word 
rf God, and tha like ; whoever could endure a sciiuoii, 
modest habit, or conversation, or anything good, all theae 
■wore Furitama : and if Puritans, then enemies to the king and 
hie goTemment, seditious, factious hypocrites, ambitious dia- 
ttirbera of the public peace, and filially, the pe«t of the king- , 
dom : such false logic did tlie children of darkness use to argue ' 
with against the hated children of light, whom they branded 
besides as illiterate, morose, melancholy, discontented, crazed 
sort of men, not fit for human convoraatiou : as Buch they 
made them not only the sport of the pulpit, which was i 
become but a solemn sort of stage, but every stage, eveiy 
table, and every pupyict play, belched forth profane 
apon them ; diiinkardR made them their songs ; all fiddlers | 
and mimics learned to abuse them, as finding it the mogt I 
gainful way of fooling."* We will only add irom another J 
source the fallowing :— "The vicious mnltitudes called idl 1 
Puritans thai were strict and serious in a holy life, though 
ever so conformable; so that the same name in a bishop's 
month signified a Nonconformist, and iu an ignorant j 



* Memoiii' iif Cnlonel Hutchin8"n, pp. 37, 28. " Tha genaraliiy of 
gentry rif tie haul eooii leomeil the conrt taaJiioD. and every great honSB 1 
iu the oomrtrr became «■ stj of uneleanneas." 

MaoBulsy, referring to the hubits of the PimtBiia, with the hand of k 
maHtar iketches Eunne of their leiuiing tisitK, There in an element of 
truth in Lie dsqcription, hut imly a moiety. "Ttwsaasin to hung garland* | 
on a Uaypole, to drink a friend'* health, to fly u liuwk, to hunt a i 
to play at nheuii, tn wear lorelocka, tu put staich into il ruS, to touch tlw I 
viifinnla, t» read tbo ' Fairy Queen.""-— Hiitory, vol. i,, p. 81. 



196 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTI8T8. 

drunkard's mouth, a godly obedient Christian. Now the 
ignorant rabble hearing that the bishops were against the 
Puritans, were the more embolden against all those which 
they gave the name to, and their rage against the godly was 
the more increased; and they cried up the bishops, partly 
because they were against the Puritans, and partly because 
they were earnest for that way of worship which they found 
most suitable to their ignorance, cai*eles8uess, and formality; 
and thus the interest of the diocesans, and of the pro- 
fane and ignorant sort of people, was unhappily twisted 
together."* 

The glory of the hierarchy was the curse of the spiritual 
life of the church. The Calvinian element, which had still 
marked its teaching so late as Whitgifb, and which, in an 
eminent degree, distinguished the Puritans, gradually, indeed 
rapidly, gave way to the Arminian, long before the dose of 
James's reign, f Macaulay has truly said : *' Opinions which, 
at the accession of James, no clergyman could have avowed 
without imminent risk of being stript of his gown, were 
now the best title to preferment. A divine of that ;ige, 
who was asked by a simple country gentleman what the 
Arminians held, answered, with us much tinith as wit, that 
they held all the best bishoprics and deaneries in England. "J 
James had denounced Arminius. To tlie 8y no<l of Dort 
he had sent some English divines to aid the Dutch in their 
opposition to his teaching ; yet, under the skme mouarch. 
the views of the Dutch heretic were patronized, and shtxl 
a withering influence upon the religion of the nation. 



* Baxter's Life, &c., hy Calamy, p. 48. 
t " Aiininianisni crei)t in, to the corruption of Hound iliK-trinen, till -i 
lenj^h they had tlie impudence to forbid the preaihing of thi»se jnvat .^ud 
necessary truths ct>uceming the decrees of (Jwl." — Mrs. Hutchiu^ou's L:fr 
of her Husband, p. 27. Bohn's Standard Libnay. 

X History of England, vol. i., i>p. 79, 188. 

"We know King James's round answer when some tL8ke<l him whciv- 
foro he preferred not good men to bishoprics? *The devil an hi»Of>t 
m&u/ says he, * will accept them.' " — Hanbury, voL ii, p. 2^'J, 



JAMES THE FIBST. 197 

Montague, Mainwaring, Sibthorpe, and Laud, names which 
will pass under review again, were the chief instruments in 
effecting this doctrinal change. The country was alarmed. 
The senate was alarmed. Arminianism and Popery were 
twins. The one always followed the other; and neither 
were compatible with the liberties of the nation. Again 
and again the House remonstrated with the thoughtless 
monarch on the progress of the error. Again and again 
the Senate House rung with the thundera of some zealous 
Puritan, as in glowing language he condemned the foe of 
British freedom. The records of parliament are full of 
them : — " I desire that we may consider the increase of 
Arminianigm an error that maketh the Grace of God lackey 
it after the will of man : that maketh the sheep to keep the 
shepherd : and makes mortal seed of an immortal God. I 
desire that we may look into the very belly and bowels of 
this Trojan horse, to see if there be not in it men ready to 
open the gates of Komish tyranny and Spanish monarchy : 
for an Arminian is the spawn of a Papist; and if there 
come the warmth of court favour upon him, you shall see 
him turned into one of those frogs of the bottomless pit: 
and if you mark it well you will see an Arminian reaching 
out his hand to a Papist; a Papist to a Jesuit; a Jesuit 
gives one hand to the Pope and the other to the King of 
Spain," &c.* Mainwaring had been compelled to appear before 
the Commons and ask pardon for his doctrine. The House 
felt that the purity of Christian truth as well as the pro- 
tection of liberty were in their keeping. The senate was the 
conservator of both. In the spirit of indignant remonstrance 
the following was added about Mainwaring: — "Yet was this 
man also immediately after our rising (when he was cen- 
sured and obliged to ask pardon) released from his imprison- 
ment, reported to have the honour to kiss the king's hand ; 
obtained his pardon in folio; was preferred to a rich living ; 



Speech of Mr. Bouse, 1628. Parliamentary History, voL ii., pp. 444-5. 



198 EAELY ENGLTSH BAPTISTS. 

and, if some say true, cherislied assured hopes of dignity in 
tlie church. If these be steps to church preferment, God be 
merciM to those churches which shall fall under the goyem- 
ment and feeding of such a clergy," <fec.* The fact is true, 
ftotcL whatever cause it may arise, that the pulpit was proB> 
trated to the very worst of purposes. The contrast between 
this period and the era of the Beformation was very titriking. 
The rugged boldness of Latimer and his brethren is wanting. 
" From the pulpit,'* says one, "came all our ftiture missions, 
Ood not being served there as he ought. The court sermons 
informing his majesty he might, as Christ's vicegerent, com- 
mand all, and that the people, if they denied him supplement, 
or inquired after the disposal of it, were preeamptnous 
people unto the ark of the state; not to be done under 
the severest curse," &c.t The doctrines of passive obedieDce 
and non-resistance were more frequently heard than those 
of Paul. Bishop Groodman tells us that ''these flatterers 
proceeded further, .that if princes should intend to destroy 
their subjects, yet their subjects were bound to obey them : 
yea, farther, if they should destroy all religion, and labour 
as much as possible to bring in atheism, yet their subjects 
had no other way to resist them but with their prayers and 
tears to God," &c.J ** Yesterday Dr. Buckeridge preached 
before the king, and proved by Scripture and history, with 
many excellent examples, the supremacy of the king, and 
that in all ages the authority of the kings govenieil lUid 
ruled all presbyters and clergy. At this sermon wort* all the 
Puritans of Scotland that were here."§ 

The connexion between correct Christian doctrine and a 
holy life is closer than some suppose. The one will ever 



* Speech of Sir R. Gro«venor, 1628. Ibid, pp. 470-1. 

t Secret History of James L, vol. i., p. lOa. 

X Annals of James I., vol., i., p. 268. Vide Robinson's Claude, voL ii., 
notes, for various examples. 

§ Lodge, voL ilL, p. 18<). Letter to the Earl of Shrewsbury, ."Vp- 
tember 24th, 1606. 



JJMEU THE FIBST. 19B 

produce the other. Many of the dei^, both of tha higher 
bud lower order, were Mcamples of this. It is said that the 
notorious Bishop of Lincolu, "■when any one preached (before 
the kiog) who was remarkable for his piety, desirous of with- 
drawing ilie king's attention from ti'uthB ho did itot wish to 
have his majesty reminded of, would, in the sermon-time, 
«itertain the king with a merry tale, which the king would 
laugh at, and tell those neai' him that he could not hear the 
preacher for the old bishop, prefixing an epithet expletive 
of the character of these merry tales."* The character of 
Williams, first Bishop of Iiincolu, and afterwarda raised to 
the Archiepiscopal See of York, ia thus delineated : — "In 
Bacon's place comes Williams, a man on purpose brought in, 
ftt £rst to serve turns, but in this place to do that which 
none of the laity could be found bad enough to undertake ; 
whei'eupon this observation was made, that first no layman 
oonld be found so dishonest as a clei^gyinan."+ 



* Keauet'K Hiatory of England, vol. ii, p. 729. lyiBraBli'ij Modoni 
Litaniture, p. 331. Of the samo bishop the fnllowing ia reuorded:— 
"AsdrevB, Bishop of Wincheater, imd Neil of Ely, -were prenont with 
James, aooa after the ComtiKiDa bod refuaed Mm aupplies in 1621, whso 
tlie monarch aaked them olourl ' if he might out levy mooej upon hia 
■objectB when he wantad it, without applying to paj-liamantal' 'Qod 
forbid,' aaid Ely, ' you might not I for yon. are the breath of our nostril*." 
' Veil, nO' lord,' aaid Jamea to Andrewa, ' and what say yon T' ' Sir,' aud 
Winclieater, 'I am not skillad in parliaujeDtary caaes.' 'No pat-offa,' 
■aid the king, 'anawerme presently.' 'I think, then,' said Andrews^ 'that 
it ia lawful for yon to take my brother Neil's money, for he offets it.' " — 
Aikm'BJaiamL,roL ii., p. 271. 

t Court of Jamea I. SeerBt History, voL L, p. 449. Hackett, in hi« 
Life of Williams, mentinns au iaataace of baseneaa and treachery which 
miut alwaya stamp his chaiaotor with infamy. He snys that in an 
interview with Buckinghajn, "his gruee had the Liahop's conaent, with 
a letter aaking that he would be bia grace's faithful aervunt iu the next 
■BBDon of parliament, and was ulluwed to hold up a seeming eamity, 
and hia owd popular eaUmation, that he might aooner do the work."— 
Ufe of William*, pp. 77—80. He waa not alone in this revolting work. 
Uaay epiecopal dignitaries foigot the Chriatian in the baae proceodingl 
of the politiciim. 



200 EARLY ENGUSH BAPTISTS. 

Lodge gives us the following illustration of the social 
life of many of the clergy of this period It is the Vicar 
of Hope to whom he is referring : — " In the latter day, 
when all the justices but himself and one other were risen, 
he would have had the said vicar licensed to sell ale in his 
vicarage, although the whole bench had commanded the 
contrary; whereupon Sir J. Poole being advertised, returned 
to the bench (contradicting his speech), who, with Mr. Bain- 
bridge, made this warrant to bring before them, him, or anj 
other person that shall for him, or in his vicarage, brew or 
sell ale, &c. He is not to be punished by the justices for the 
multitude of his women, until the bastards whereof be it 
the reputed father be brought in."* 

The alarm of the Commons at the Popish tendencies of 
James and his favourite advisers was not without founda- 
tion. Lingard admits that he was willing to connive at the 
silent introduction of the Catholic missionaries into the 
country, and even to receive one at court, as his tutor in the 
Italian language. t On another occasion James said : — "And 
for myself, if that were yet the question, I would with all 
my heart give my consent that the Bishop of Rome should 
have the first seat. I, being a western king, would go with 
the Patriarch of the West. And for his temix)ral princi- 
palities over the signories of Rome, I do not qxiendl it, 
neither Jet him in God's name be primus Ej)iscopus inter 
omnes Episcopus et Princeps Episcoporum, so it be no other 
ways but as St. Peter was Princeps ApostolorunL^'J 

** Secret treaties were entertained with the court of Rome. 
. . . The Papists lost not their cnidit at court, where they 
now wrought no longer by open and direct ways, but 

* Illustrations of English History, vol. iii, , p. 280. 

t History of England, vol. viii., pp. 190, 244; vol. ix., p. 154. 

t Mrs. Thompson's Life of the Duke of Buckingham, voL i., p. 36i 
He ordered his son's chaplain, when in Spain, to go ^^hb near the R4>nuA 
form as lawfully can be done, for it hath ever been my way to go with tb« 
church of Rome, usque et aras." Pnd, ^7. Vide Marsden, pp. 343-4S. 



JAMES THE FIBST. 201 

humouring the king and queen in their lusts and excesses, 
found the most ready way to destroy the doctrine of the 
Oospel was to debauch its professors."* No one conversant 
with his court and his favourite divines can doubt this. The 
power of Laud was increasing. By his influence everything 
in the church, which could, was made to resemble Kome as 
much as possible. He was the founder of the High Church 
School, which from that time to this has confounded the form 
with the substance, and ignored every claim to piety which 
does not bear the name and superscription of the Beast. 

It would be difficult to trace, in the space we have allotted 
to ourselves, the effects of this combination of very power- 
ful influences on the morals of the community at large. That 
they were of the very worst kind, admits of no doubt : — 
the luxury and corruptions of the court and the higher 
classes ; the pride, the oppression, and the sycophancy of the 
bishops and the clergy ;t and the ejection of the wisest and 
best of the Nonconforming ministers, largely contributed 
to this result. 

The course of the narrative now demands advertence to 
another event, which has exerted an influence on the English 
Baptists. It transpired in that land from which so many had 
fled to our own island home, in the hope of protection from 
the power of the persecutors. Holland had sheltered large 



* Mrs. Hutchinson, p. 27. 

•f ** Tobey Mathews, Archbishop of York, on receiving some of James's 
works, threw himself on his knees to receive them from the messenger, 
kiflsed them, promised to keep them as the apple of his eye, and to read 
them over and over again.'' — lingard, voL ix., p. 105. 

*'Mr. Nichols, in his Plea of the Innocents, expressly affirms, p. 218, 
that conferring with the particular persons in his parish, after he had 
preached some good space amongst them, about the means of salvation, 
of four hundred communicants he scarce found one but that thought 
and professed a man might be saved by his own well-doing, and that he 
tnuted he did so live by serving Qod and good prayers." — ^Robinson, 
vol. ii., p. 288. 



202 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

numbers of Protestant lefagees daring the Mariftii pecaecs- 
tioDs. It now welcomed another class, glad to escape to iti 
reclaimed swamps from the -crashing tyranny of the Protet- 
tant hierarchy of England. It was about the year 1606. A 
company of Brownists or Separatists left for AmsterdaoL 
An English church already existed there, but rather PuiitoB 
than Separatist. The exiles were headed by their pasiot; 
J. Smith. He had ministered in the English church, but 
was compelled to leave it, and for some time he officiated 
probably as the pastor of a Separatist church, at Gtainshro*, in 
lincolnshira Others followed, and in 1608, BoIhoboh and 
most of the remaining members of his flock, arrived in the 
same city.* To trace the history of these pilgrims, the ooi- 
flicts, the separations which marked them, is not our provinoa 
Only on one case we detain the attention of the reader, — the 
separation of John Smith and the formation of the Eof^iak 
Bi^ist church in that city. We stop not to investigate the 
causes which led to this. Ivimey and Adam Taylor will 
supply this information to those who are curious enough to 
inquire into them. We do not dismiss the subject from 
want of interest. Whatever contributes to the formation 
of character, or is productive of results which affect com- 
munities, especially in their highest relations, can never be 
matter of indifference to the thoughtful. 

Upon two points differences had grown up in the church. 
Smith, Helwys, and certain others had renounced the Cal- 
vinistic doctrine, and had embraced Arminianism. Hc»lLmd. 
at this time, was shaken by the teaching of the man who 
gave his name to this system. The religious war was carried 
on with the fiercest spirit. Not only the English Separatists, 
but the Dutch churches, were divided by the strife. To calm 
it, and uproot the error, the Synod of Dort was convened-t 
England sent some of her best theologians to aid in the 



* Life of Robinson. Works, voL L, p. 25. 
t Vide History of the Council of Dort, bj ThomM Soott. 



JAMES THE FIBST. 203 

work. The power and prevalence of Anmnian sentimfflitB 
18 a sufficieat oommeDt on the efficiency of national Synods 
or (Ecumenical Coimcils. But these exiles imbibed another 
error, probably grayer at that time in the eyes of their 
teethren, for 'Hhey advocated the practice of believers' 
add adult baptism, to the exclusion of intuits from that 
ordinance.''* The adoption of these views not only involved 
separation from the comrnxmion of the church with which 
Johnson and Ainsworth were connected, but the formation 
of a new one Smith isuid Helwys were not alone in this. 
A considerable number, we cannot say a majority, simply 
because we do not know the extent of the membership of 
the community of the Amsterdam church, sympathised 
with them. Upon the very threshold o^ their enterprise 
a formidable difficidty presented itself. Who should bap- 
tijoe them? There were Baptists in Holland, those who 
admmistered the ordinance by immersion, as well as those 
who adopted the mode at present practised by our brethren 



♦ BobiiiBon's Works, vol. iii., p. 461. The editor says: "It is rather 
a singular fact that zealous as were Mr. Smith and his friends for believers' 
baptlBm, and earnest as were their opponents on behalf of infant baptism, 
the quisstion of the mode of baptism was never mooted by either party. 
Inimenion baptism does not apx)ear to have been practised or pleaded for 
by either Smith or Helwys, the alleged founder of the General Baptist 
denomination in England. Nothing appears in these controversial writ- 
ingB to warrant the supposition that they regarded immersion as the 
proper and only mode of administering that ordinance. Incidental allu- 
sions there are, in their own works and in the replies of Kobinson, that 
the baptism which Mr. Smith performed on himself, must have been 
rather by efihision or pouring. Kor is this supposition improbable, from 
the fact that the Dutch Baptists, by whom they were surrounded, uni- 
formly administered baptism by immersion." Robinson's Works, vol. iii., 
p. 4SL The remark of the editor is equally true of a considerable period 
of the controversy in this country. The all but universal practice of 
immersion in the ]B}nglish Church, rendered the discussion of the mode 
umecessary In Tombes's replies to his many opponents, the claims of 
in&ntfl are the p(Hnts in dispute. Upon the mode of Smith's baptism, we 
ihall have more to say presently; and we only add that there were a 
portion of the Dutch Baptists who uniformly administered baptism by 
immersion. 



204 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

in the Ketherlands. From some cause or other, applica- 
tion was not made to any of them, and the story goes thai 
after much prayer Smith baptized himself, then Helwya, 
and then the remainder of the company. He has since 
been called a Sebaptist. The story has been used witk 
uncommon, but to us amusing gravity, by the opponenti 
of Baptist principles, and repelled with no small amount of 
indignant feeling as b, calumny on the men.* Crosby, Ivim^, 
Taylor, and others in the past, and of living authors Messn 
Underhill and Cutting, have displayed considerable ingenoitj 
in shielding their brethren from reproach in this matter. To 
us it is of no moment whether it be true or fitlse, beyond the 
interest which we have in it as an historical fact. Writen 
who can fiud in ii materials for accusation, will never hafe 
their fancied complacency disturbed by us. They are perfecth 
welcome to all their ingenuity can extract from it We ky 
the whole case before our readers. Adam Taylor has asflkned 
that Robinson was the first reporter of tliis charge, and that 
it did not appear till some years after the event. Kobinsoni 
work was printed in 1614, and the separation took place 
certainly not later than early in 1609, more i)robably in the 
very year Robinson left for Leyden. Robinson certainly was 
not the originator of the story. The following was published 
four years earlier than his work : — 

* ' By what rule baptized you yourself ? What word or exampk 
had you for that in all the Scriptures ? Do you affirm the UajitiflB 
of children to be the mark of the Beast, because, you say, there ia n<» 
word nor example in aU the Scripture to prove that they may I* 
baptized : and yet durst you presume without either w^rd or exampk 
to baptize yourself ? If you go about to j)rove that lawf id which yo^ 
have done, by any word or example in the Scripture, I say you can- 
not set one step forward to that purpose, but you must allow thervby 
the baptism of children. I marvel you did not i»reveut thia ohjvc 
tion, which will be as hard a bone for you to gnaw uik>u as you i\^ 
the baptism of children is to us. It was a wonder you would o^ 



* Hanbury, vol. i. 



JAMES THE FIRST. 205 

receive your baptism first, from some one of the elders of the Dutch 
Anabaptists ; bat you will be holier than aU, and see how you have 
marred all!"* 

The following is Kobinson's statement : — " If the church 
be gathered by baptism, then will Mr. Helwys's church 
appear to all men to be built upon the sand, considering the 
baptism it has and had ; which was, as I have heard froxn. 
themselves, on this manner : — Mr. Smith, Mr. Helwys, and 
the rest, having utterly dissolved and disclaimed their former 
church, state, and ministry, came together to erect a new 
church by baptism ; unto which they also ascribed so great 
yirtues, as that they would not so much as pray together 
before they had it. And after some straining of courtesy 
who should begin, and that John Baptist (Matt. iii. 14) 
misalleged, Mr. Smith baptized first himself, and next Mr. 
Helwys, and so the rest, making their particular confession. 
Now to let pass his not sanctifying a public action by public 
prayer (1 Tim. iv. 4, 5) ; his taking unto himself that honour 
which was not given him, either immediately from Christ or 
by the church (Heb. v. 4), his baptizing himself, which was 
more than Christ did (Matt. iii. 14); I demand unto what 
church he entered by baptism ; or entering by baptism into 
no church, how his baptism could be true by their own 
doctrine ] Or, Mr. Smith's baptism not being true, nor he 
by it entering into any church, how Mr. Helwys's baptism 
could be true, or into what church he entered by it 1 These 
things then being, all wise men will think that he had small 
cause either to be so much enamoured of his own baptism, 
or so highly to despise other men for the unorderly or other- 
wise unlawful administration of it."t 

The substance of Mr. Taylor's arguments are very fairly 
condensed by Benedict, under the following particular : — 



* A Description of the Church of Christ, as against certain Ana- 
baptists, &c. By J. H. London, 1610, p. 23. 

t "Works, voL i., p. 168. London, 185L 



206 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 



(( 



1. It is not easy to trace the story to on earlier date than Ike 
middle of the seventeenth contory, that is, nearly half a oentmy after 
he became a Baptist. 

*^ 2. Bishop Hall, who wrote at this time, and appears to have had 
an intimate acquaintance with the persons and circumstances, WMld 
have seized with avidity a fact like this; 3ret he never alludes to it; 
a strong presumption that no such report was then in drciilitioa 
The righteous soul of this good prelate seems to have been sore vexed 
at the conduct of the whole company of the Separatists in leariog 
the church; and in conformity to the spirit of the times, he wii 
assiduous to detect all their imperfections, and exceedingly severe ii 
his castigations. 

**d. F. Johnson, in his Christian Plea, and H. Ainsworth, in kii 
Reply to it, though they frequently mention Mr. Smith and hit 
sentiments, make no allusion to this circumstance. When we reflect 
that they were, at first, Mr. Smith's associates, and afterwaids )m 
avowed opponents, it is probable that either had never lieird tk 
report, or knew it to be fsJse. 

' * 4. This is rendered still more probable by consulting Mr. Soiitk'i 
Character of the Beast. There was the fairest occasion, in thai 
work, to mention such a circumstance; and yet it does not appeir 
to be alluded to by either party. This work was in the form ef t 
dialogue, and all the objections of his opponents are put down befon 
Mr. Smith proceeds to answer them ; and as the fact of his Se, or 
self -baptism, was an event of but yesterday, if it had really takco 
place, it is indeed singular that nothing was said about it in thi» 
severe scrutiny of errors and mistakes, from Mr. Clifton and other 
concerned in the discussion. 

"From some expressions in the writings of this man, and from whaX 
appears in a book published by his followers in less than five yoan 
after his death, Mr. Taylor draws the conclusion that Smith asd »'D»- 
of his companions baptized each other, as was the case with R<>gtr 
WiUiams and some others."* 

Our readers will see how part of Mr. Taylor's arpi- 



* '^ As the whole company, in their estimation, were imbi4>tiaed. mbA 
they knew of no administration in any of the settlementM to whom th-} 
could apply, they with much propriety hit on the following expedient >- 
Ezekiel Holliman, a man of gifts and piety, by the suffrages of the Uttl*- 
company was appointed to baptize Mr. Williams, who, in return, ItsptiK^i 
Mr. Holliman and the other ten.**— Benedict's History of the Bapti<M< 
p. 450. Many examples of a like kind might ))e adduced fn>m Eerie 
siastical History. 



JAMES THE FIB8T. 207 

ment is weakened by the paragraph we have inserted 
firoia an earlier work than Robinson's, which he had not 
fleexL* 

Mr. Underbill has offered a new and verj different argu- 
ment. He questions the fact altogether. He states it in a 
letter to the Tenerable Dr. Benedict, of the United States, 
the Baptist historian. He says : — 



<«' 



Ib a visit I lately paid to Amsterdam, I found some more inte- 
restiiig manuscripts relative to the church of which John Smith was 
pastor, with the original Confessions of Faith published by him and his 
company. I was also able to discover and elucidate the name of Se- 
baptist, given to Smith, and so often used as a name of reproach. As 
these doctmients are now being copied for me, I am not able to send 
yoa the particulars, but the general facts are as follows : — 

" On Smith and his people becoming Baptists, the question arose 
how they were to commence the practice of the rite, and by whom it 
should be administered. The Dutch Baptists or Mennonites held at 
that time the opinion that baptism should be administered only by a 
minister or elder in office. As Smith did not agree in several mattera 
with the Dutch, they were unwilling to resort to them for baptism, 
and became of opinion that it might be originated among themselves ; 
they were therefore called **Se-baptists," — persons baptizing them- 
selves; — not that each one dipped, or baptized himself, but among 
them they commenced the practice. After this, Smith and several 
more came to be of the same opinion on this and other points with 
the Dutch, and applied to be admitted to communion with them. 
The Dutch received them, but at the same time required a recanta- 
tion of their error. A fac-simiU of this document I possess. The 
heading is in Latin, purporting that the persons whose names are 
sabBcribed, renounce the sentiment that they may * se ipsos bapti- 
zare,' — ^baptize tiiemsehres, — as contrary to the order of Christ. It 
thus iq^pears that the equivocal phrase, * se ipsos baptizare,' became 
tbe foundation of the charge that Smith baptised himself. But from 
the controversy which arose it is evident that the meaning of the 
words is as I have stated it. 



* The following work we have not seen, but it is contradictory to 
Mr. Taylor^s theory :-— "Plain Evidences : the Church of England is Apos- 
tolical : the Separation Schismatical. Directed against Mr. Ainsworth, 
and Mr. Smith the Sebaptist, &c. By Bichard Bernard, preacher of the 
Word of God at Worksop. S^ out by authority, 1610."— Ficfe Robinson's 
Works, voL ii, p. 2, Preface. 



208 EABLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

*' Among the names which follow is the autograph of John Smith 
and his wife Mary. A few remained of the first opinion, among 
whom was Thomas Helwys. I have seen a MS. letter of his, in 
which this subject is taken up and argued with the two Dutch piston 
to whom this letter is addressed, and he also treats of the succenion 
of the ministry in reference to the same subject, in a printed work 
still extant. A copy of this letter I hope soon to possess, I may. 
therefore, confidently affirm that the charge of baptizing himself a, 
with repect to Smith, a calumny, but arose from the dieumstaiieei 
referred to. In no other way can we account for the silence wiA 
respect to it, observed by himself in his writings and in those of kii 
friends."* 

In this conclusion, the last writer on this subject whom 
we have seen, fully concurs. t How far this is justified 
by the facts, we shall leave our readers to decide, after 
we have laid the documents before them. Mr. Underbill 
had only, we apprehend, seen one. The whole, for the 
first time, we now submit to our readers. It is only right 
to add that Mr. Underbill himself now gives up th» 
theory. 

It is admitted, on all hands, that from some cause nr 
other, the church over which Smith and Helwys presided 
was divided, but the cause of division is not so manifest. 
Smith, with some twenty-four pereons, was excluded fn»ra 
the church, and these sought comnuinion with oue of thf 
Mennonite churches in the city. It is mow. than proliaMe 
that it was one of the Waterland, one of the most libtTiI 
of the Mennonite churches, and their mo<lo of liaptisin 
was by sprinkling, or afiusiou. *'The said English were 
questioned about their doctrin<^ of salvation, and the gri>und 
and the form (mode) of their baptism.'' *' No ditferona* wa.* 
found between them and us." This stiitonirnt is singular, 
as the members of this conmiunity were not iia meruit Hii.^t?- 

♦ The Watchman (U.S.), July I kh, ISTiit. 

t Historical Vindications, &c., by S. S. ('utting, l*rofetWMr of lth»t«r.i 
and HiHtory in the University of Kochestcr. I>ot»u>u. IbTi!). l*MLjje (V. 
note (a). 



■i JAMES TH£ FIK3T. 309 

To satieiy their brethren. Smith and his friends made the 
following acknowledgment, on which Mr. Underhill has 
founded his defence : — 

"The aaiaB» of the English who confess this their eimr, and repent 
of it, viz., that they imdertook to baptize themaelveq contrary to the 
order appainted b; Christ, and who now degire, on this account, to 
be brought back to the true church of Ghriat as quickly as may be 
sufl'ered. 

[Of women.] 
that this our wish should be aignifiad to 



a uncertain. It called forth, we think. 



'■{Names of men.] 

"We unanimously dosi 
tbe church."* 

The date of this 
the following letter ; — 

"BbIiOVEd m THE Lord,' — Your approved care, diligence and faith- 
fnlnesa in the advancement of God's holy truth, being the good 
«Zperience (to tied be given the glory) well known unto us, makes 
lU that wo can do no less than, with our best bojies, hope that, 
tbmugh the grace of Ood (hia word and Spirit directing you), wa 
alull find yon so still. And therefore we are with much gladness 
and willingoeaa starred np to write to you, praying you, as you love 
the Lord and his tnith, that you will take wise counsel, and that 
from God's Word, how you deal in this cause betwiit ua and those 
who are jnstly, for their ains, cast out from us. And the whole 
canse in question being Succession (for so it is in deed and in tmth), 
consider, we beseech yon, how it ia Antichrist's chief hold, aud that it 
IB Jewish and ceremonial, an ordinance of the Old Testament, bat not 
of the New. Furthermore, let it be weU consideri.d that the Succcs- 
noo which is founded npon neither the times, person, nor place, can 
ha [ffoved to any man's conscience, and so herein we should ground 
Ota faith, we cannot tall upon whom, nor when, nor where. We 
beseech you consider, how can we, if faith forsake the evident light 
cS God's truth to walk in such darkneas ! And this is our warrant 
ti^ the Word of tmth. Firat, from Baptism. John Baptist, being 
oobaptized, preached the baptism of repentance, ond they that 
believed and confessed their sins he baptized. And whosoever shall 
now bo stirred up by the aame Spirit to preach the same Word, and 
men thereliy being converted, may, according to John his example, 
wash them with water, and who can forbid! And we pray that wa 
may speake freely herein, how dare auy a 



' The original, with the i 



in the Appendix, Note D. 



210 EARLY ENGLISH BAFnST& 

themselves a pre-eminence herein, as though the Spirit of Grod 
only in their hearts, and the Word of Gk>d now only to be fetched 
at their mouthes, and the ordinance of God only to be had from 
their hands, except they were apostles? Hath the Lord thus re- 
strained his Spirit, his Word, and Ordinances, as to make particiJtf 
men lordly over them, or the keepers of them? God forbid. This ii 
contrary to the liberty of the Gospel, which is free for all men, at aO 
times, and in all places: yea, so our Saviour Christ doth testify, 
wheresoever, whosoever, and whensoever, two or three are gatherad 
together in his name, there is he in the midst of them. And tha 
much in all Christian love we do advertise you, that this ground oC 
truth is and will be maintained against all the world, and that bj 
the great adversaries of our faith in divers other main points, who 
will be glad to have such an advantage against you if you shaD 
publish or practice any things against this ground in the xviiL d 
Matthew, and the professors of Christ shall sustain much reproach 
by it; and therefore we earnestly entreat you, even by the loTe U 
Christ that is in you, that you will be well advised what you do m 
these things. 

'* And now for the other question, that elders must ordain elden; 
or if this be a true perpetual rule, then from whom is your eldenkip 
come? And if one church might once ordain, then why not lU 
churches always? Oh, that we might be thought worthy to bt 
answered in these things, or that the poor advice of s<> few, so 
simple, and so weake, might prevail with you to cause you to look 
circumspectly to your ways in these things ! The Lord that knowt-th 
all hearts, knoweth ours towards you herein, that we do desire thit 
there may be found no way of error in you ; but that you and ire 
might walk uprightly in the ways of God, casting utterly away all 
the traditions of men, and this, we are persuaded, is your unfei^ed 
desire also ; now fulfil our persuasion herein, and try your standing 
in these points, and respect not how many hold these things with 
you, but respect from what grounds of truth you hold them. 

**Thu8 bechewing (ffic) the Lord to i)er8uade your hearts tlut 
your hands may not be against his truth, and against us, the Lord'- 
unworthy witnesses, we take leave, commending you to the grocinu* 
protection of the Almighty, and to the blessed direction i)f his Woni 
and Spirit, beseeching the Lord to do by you according to the gn?aJ 
love and kindness that you have shown unto us. (irace and pcjft 
be with you. Amen. — Your brethren in Christ, 

**TH0S. HEL\k-^*S, 

"William Puicott, 

**TU()S. S^L/iMER, 

"Amtterdam, **J0UN MoBTON. 

thit titk itf Marcks l«l^ 



JAMES THE FIRST. 211 

** P.S. — We have written to you in our own tongue because we are 
not able to express our minds in any other, and seeing you have an 
interpreter. And we have been much grieved, since our last confer- 
ence with you, because we dishonoured the truth of Grod much for 
wont of speech, in that we were not able to utter that poor measure 
of knowledge which €k)d of his grace hath given us." 

There is also a confession of faith, consisting of thirty- 
^iglit articles, and signed by thirty-nine individuals, which 
it is probable was presented by Smith and his fiiends to the 
church at the same time.* A short confession, also signed by 
Smith, is preserved, but on what occasion it was prepared, 
or to whom presented, the MS. affords no cluct 

The following will throw some additional light on this 
subject. It will be seen, from this and a subsequent page, 
with what caution our Dutch brethren acted in the new 
and delicate affair. This letter has no date. The writer was 
Lubbert Gerrits. J It was addressed to the church at Leeu- 
warden, the chief town of the province of Tariso, asking 
the advice of the brethren about "the English persons, of 
whom formerly they got intelligence, who long ago entreated, 
by iterations, to unite with our church : " — 

"Jesus, the eternal "Wisdom of the Father, be with you, heartily- 
regarded brothers and feUow-servants in the Lord. 

" Our purpose is, dearly beloved in Christ, to inform you by this 
about the state of the affairs here with us and the EngUsh persons 
{about whom some informations have been given you already), who 
have, a long time since and continually, requested the union with our 
churches. In the first x^lace, know that, as well by the ardent 
requests of the persons already mentioned as by the insisting desires 
of some of our brethren by whom their doings and godly walks are 
perfectly known, we have been brought thus far that we, by no 



* Appendix, Note E. t Note F. 

X Gerrits was one of the principal Waterland ministers in Amsterdam. 
He, and the not leas celebrated Hans de Rios, drew up, in behalf of the 
English Baptists, the Confession of Faith, generally known under their 
names. It has been translated into Latin, Enghsh, German, &c. , and is 
generally quoted as the authentic exposition of the religious views of the 
Butch Baptists (Confessio fidei Johannis Risfii et Lubherti Gerardi). 
This creed has no authority now in the Mennonite Church. — Dr^ H^er. 



212 EARLY EKGLISH BAJPTISTS. 

means, could shut our ears any longer before them with, a good ood- 
science, but have represented their affair to our whole broiheriMod, 
in order to- see, with our congregation, what will be the resulli wkick 
the merciful God will allow us, as the affiur here foincipsJly ooooenBd 
us most. Therefore, first of all, we ministers have» aocordingW 
the desire of our brethren, sommoned these TCwgH*^ bef <»e w, and 
again most perfectly examined them as regards the doctrine of salva- 
tion and the government of the church, and also inquired for ilie 
foundation and form of their baptism, and we have not found M 
there was any difference at all, neither in the one nor the otiMr 
thing, between them and us ; while we have also, coiioeniing their 
baptism, received as an answer, that they, in baptizing, have tokiea 
notice of 1° Act ii. 38 : * Repent and be baptized, every one of yea, 
in the name of Jesus Christ,* &c, in order to demonstrate repentanoe 
and to explain fundamentally the death from sins (which is abo 
symbolized by baptism) according to the manner of Peter here, — ^S" of 
Act viii. 37 : ^ If thou believest with all thine heart, tho« mayeitk' 
&c., in order to add to all this the belief in Jesua Christ, that lie 
is the Son of God, and to demand this from him who is to be bap- 
tized ; and after this they hav^e baptized him, receiving the pcomiK 
&om the christened one that he will bend himself under the wbok 
Gospel, with the doctrine of it ; it might be that they did wndrntari 
it or did not yet understand it ; so then we remark; that they have 
not taught persons with an impure understanding, nor instructeii 
them who were to be baptized to found their baptism on any nut- 
understanding whatsoever, as has sometimes happened with other 
Baptists, but that they have only followed therein the Scriptural 
foundation, and have, therefore, acted unanimously with ua. 

"All this is afterwards and at a due time explainetl before the 
brethren, and we have represented to them our judgment upon their 
baptism, according to the desire of the brethren, and t>ecaas^ we 
were considered the maintainers of the congregation; and then we 
have advised them to take this into consideration (as they dt>ire«l 
also), and admonished them to bring the affair before God in thiir 
prayers. And, after some weeks, again having met, we have de- 
manded to relate to us, every one of them in particular, what was given 
in their hearts by God, and so we found that most of the brethn'H. 
only a few excepted, had the same o]>inion as we represeuU^l 
them, and, therefore, agreed with us. Now then, the state of th** 
affair is, that, though we have obtained here a reasonable n-«uit in 
the affair among our brethren, we, however, have resolved {as wi 
thought tliis much better) not U) go on before we had informed tur 
neighbouring fellow-ministers alxuit this matter, in orjer to instruct 



JAMES THE FIRST. 213 

and our oongregation by them out of the Word of the Lord, 
if it were that we were erring. 

** Our opinion and our best idea about this affair is, then, that 
Khese Ttnglmh, without being baptized again, must be accepted ; and 
•we oorBelvtes, also, are too scrupulous, and should not venture to 
baptize them again, as this is said also by every one of us, and by far 
the greatest part of the congregation, as we have told already ; and 
this being the reason, viz., that we know, and have seen and 
obeearved, we ourselves, that formerly those persons that belonged 
to the Monster party, the Amsterdiun naked-walkers, the Harers- 
wonde* sect, and that of the Old Cloister, who were already baptized, 
not are re-baptized, as they did not dare to do it in that time, but 
luKve accepted them without re-baptizing them ; while, at the same 
time, even in our da3n3, their baptism is considered as valuable. 
Moreover, the manner in which, and the foundation on which bap- 
tizing these persons [the English] is performed, are, according to our 
opinion which we have of these afiairs, when we mutually consider 
them, much better and more Christian-like than the former which 
were suffered among us, and still are suffered. 

"Now then, if it be the case, dearly beloved brethren, that you 
think that we err in this affair, you will act well to come hither, and 
to teach us and the congregation with the Word of God, as this is 
the kind and fraternal prayer and desire of us and the whole 
•congregation. We are most willing to be taught by any one whoso- 
ever, if we are erring and lack the truth in this affair. Be so kind 
and teach the English also with the Word of God, if it were neces- 
sary that they ought to be baptized again ; for they declare that they 
have no objection to be baptized again, if you can prove with the 
Word of God and with reason, that their baptism is a less valuable 
one than that of the Flemings, Frisians, and other Baptists (to take into 
consideration, and distinguish the baptism of those that are baptized 
by their minister himself, for we ourselves do distinguish the act of 
baptizing by which he has baptized himself ; this is an afiair quite 
different; at present the other baptism is the question — do notice 
this). We have no courage to do this, because they are very intelligent 
people, who will not at all be blinded with discourses without good 
reason. We pray you once more, pay attention to that which we 
desire ; notice our proposition, and consider all things weU. If it be 
your opinion that we are erring, come to us and deliver us from error, 
and bring us into the right way ; if this were not your opinion, you 
can satisfy us by being silent, and leaving the affair to God and our 
•conscience.'' 

* Harerswonde, a village in the neighbourhood of Leyden, the seat of 
certain notorious Anabaptists in the first times. 



214 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

To this request the brethren at Leeuwarden forwarded 
the following i^eply : — 

" Mercy and peace from Grod our Father and your Lord Jesus Chrut. 
be, very dear and beloved brethren, with us all who love oar 
Lord Jesus Christ, without end. 

"Very dear, and in Grod, beloved brother and fellow-servant in the 
Lord, Lubbert Gerritsen, and you, beloved fellow-servants, we wiak 
you altogether, with all our hearts, all good things from the Lord, 
with our Christian greetings. We have received your letter sent to 
us, and understood the contents of it for the greatest part ; this in 
particular, that you, dear brother, request us, and are desiring very 
humbly to come to you at Amsterdam, on May 23, ittilo novo; the 
cause of which, being, as we understand, to make peace with the 
English who are with you there. Li consequence of this, we write, 
our dear brother, as an answer, on this moment, that our visit would 
be very inconvenient to us at this time. Misfortune also teadies lu 
to pay particular attention to your request ; for several times we 
have been in HoUand, according to the desire and letters of othot, 
and in order to settle several affairs ; and, indeed, we have then 
given our best advice that we could give, it has availed very little for 
the promotion of peace, and even ingratitude and cooling of love were 
the consequences, which we most sadly have taken to heart, a» the 
Lord knows. Therefore, dear brethren, if it had been c<»nvenient to 
us to come to you, which you most seriously desired, we an? yet vi-ry 
scrupulous about this matter of uniting yourselves with the Engli.<h, 
as long as we have no more knowledge of their affairs. It is, in<i«*nl 
a very critical thing, and ought seriously to Ihj taken into consitKri- 
tion, what might be the consequences on our side that are still in 
peace ; for experience teaches us very well, &c. 

"Therefore, dear brethren, our opinion would Ik? in th<»se affair*, 
that we should desire to deal with our congregations, which wc 
acknowledge to serve unworthily, with oi)en doors and not st-cretly, 
for it concerns them as well as us. And if it were that we wt-rt* all 
with you, and saw and heard all things, we should not In? indintNl ^) 
consent for our own persons, in any affair whatsoever, unless it were 
that we, in the first place, received from you a short account of the 
chief articles of yoiu- doctrine and the customs of the congregation, 
which you have pointed out for them, in \nnting, and on which the* 
persons would be inclined to unite themselves with you, in t>nlor ti> 
afford us the opi)ortunity to examine these with our congn»gati»»DJ 
everywhere ; for, as the affair would be spoken of everywhere ami»Dg 
us, as you yourselves write us, dear brethren, if they were not 



JAMES THE FIRST. 215 

informed of it, it requires much responsibility. Therefore, we should 
be inclined to take care, that our congregation also knew everything 
that we should do and advise in this affair, that we, afterwards, 
will not be involved in any trouble or unquietness. For as neither 
we ourselves, without the congregation, nor they without us, are one 
body, so we think it necessary (though we are unworthy servants) not 
to do anybhing without their knowledge, as we know, dear brethren, 
the condition of our congregation here perfectly well. This is, as 
nearly as passible, our humble opinion of these aflairs. Do not take 
it amiss. If you were anything else but happy, it would grieve our 
hearts very much. For this time no more, but that we recommend 
you altogether to ths Lord and his mercy, and offer you our kind 
greetings in the Lord of peace. Pray God for us. We remain most 
willingly your debtors. — May 5, old styh, a" 1610. 

" Undersigned by us, in Leeu warden : — 

"Hans Mathyszoon, "Jan Janszoon Schellinckwoun, 
**Ana Anesz, **Yeme de Rynck." 

"Dybck Dobdbsz, 

Dissatisfied with this reply, the Amsterdam brethren 
again addressed the following epistle to their friends in 
Prussia : — 



«c 



Loving, and in God beloved, brethren and fellow-servants in the 
Lord, Jan Schellinckwoun or Hans Mathys, with your fellow- 
helpers in the service of the Lord, we wish you the peace of the 
Lord and a merciful, illumination in Christ, in all your ways. — 
Amen. 

"May it please you, that we inform yoji that we are very much 
desiring for some answer on that which, a long time ago, we have 
asked and desired concerning the affair with the English, with which 
affair we have acquainted you. We are very surprised that this 
affair seems to have been taken at heart by you so very little, for 
which we are ashamed before these persons, and scarcely know 
what to answer that this affair is put off such a long time. There- 
fore, our request and serious desire is, that you do not defer this 
affair any longer, but shortly, and within a fortnight after the date 
of this, send us some answer, either by coming yourselves, if it 
be possible that we may be valued by you so much, or by writing us 
something concerning the two following questions : — 

** Firstly, What there may be in the confession which, according to 
your desire is sent to you, as you wished to examine it with your con- 
gregations in comparing it with the Word of God, — that deserves to be 



216 SABLT EHGLISH BAFCISIS. 

rejected and to be improyed?* Secondly, Wkftt, Moardlng to yom 
opinion, and aocoiding to the Word of €h>d, must be thoo^^ ol Mi 
being baptized ? Concerning the last qdestion, on this especiallj vt 
should like very much to receive an answer and good instmetioa ■ 
soon as it is possible. And if you do not send ns this within tiMiifll 
above-mentioned, we shall take it, therefore, tiiat you leave it to ■ 
and pat it wholly in oar hands to do, or to leave this, what ws^ will 
oar congregation, think best of all, alter the wisdom which we pot* 
ssss, and that you will be contented and qnite at ease in this sfta^ 
wards. Ther^ore, act with diligence, beloved brethren, if yov think 
it necessary, in virtue of GUkI's Wofd, to warn us in one thing m 
another, and to teach us to oar weUare ; and forward it to us moit 
speedily, as we asked already, that we the sooner the better aqr hi 
able to do what our duty is. 

** Besides this we have nothing else to mention, but the hmttf 
greetings to you, our dear brethren and fellow-servants in the Goipel 
of the Lord, yonder in Friesland. Jesus remain everlastingly 
you with his Spirit. — ^Amen. 

" At Amsterdam, July 16 a", 1610, atUo novo." 



The correspondence was closed with the following 

refusal to have anything to do with the affidr of thi 

English : — 

"Our loving greeting, and great affection of our hearts to you, 
very dear and beloved brethren and fellow-servants in the kingdom 
of God, Lubbert Gerrits and your feUow-servants. We, undersigned, 
may not conceal from you our astonishment at your ardent and impeta- 
ous writing to us, in which you demand our answer within a 'fortnight, 
or that we afterwards shall be quiet about the alliance or union witli 
the English, in your town, having taken place or intended, &c. We are, 
dear men, after very much thinking about the affair, about which yott 
demand and request most ardently and impetuously the advice from 
us in Friesland ; though it is an affsdr quite new and never heard of. 
Therefore, it were very necessary that aU churches in Prussia and the 
whole of Germany, and wherever established, were acquainted with 
it, as you youn elves, dear brethren, know very well what words and 
promises have been given by us in formerly transacteil affairs, viz. : 
not to do anything without asking the advice of every one in (tartiai' 
lar. What astonishment will be occasioned in several CDUgregationi, 
as well as with private persons everywhere, at this alliance or union 
of this jH-'ople with their absurd labour and service, y«)u, yourselves, 

* Pn>bably the Confetsion, Appendix, Note £. 



JAMES THE FIB3T. 21f 

deiir men, may «aaily uoderatoiid, ood tlierefore, it is not necess 
iruiely to explain tbia. In abort, we thought it vory iidviBablo (isTe 
eorrectian) still to tany a little time in thia aSkir, not to be so seiJouB 
and ardent, but to apply mucth more all diligence, trouble, and labonr 
Uut is posaible, in ord«r to prevent rain, harm, hurt, and perdition 
of the churches ccmceming the Westerland peace-making or union : 
if this first was brought to an end, that fire extinguished, and every- 
thing woe brought again to peace, qiiietnegg, and Eilenee, it would bo 
a hearty juy and giaduegg of aoul to oa. Do Dot leave ao easily the 
oU fiiends, by choosiag new ones, who, perhaps, will oat he so good. 
We take very much at heart the augmentation of the kingdom and 
the improvement of the Church of Chriat (God, our Lotd, knowa it) ; 
hot if the BCatteriog of our friends is conuected with it, it is not to 
bedeainid. This harm is woe to our hearts; your inteniiierate zeal is 
partly the cause of it as welL We will finiah thia aSiui here, though 
we had to say much more concerning it. 

"As t^ards the request for our advice and examination which you 
desire about the thirty-eight articles of creed presented to us, — this 
is aU in vain ; as they are all revealed in printed booka before ths 
eyes of every man, we may now exjiectwithyou a general judgment of 
it from all men. Therefore, we think it rather impertinent to demand 
UiiB from us in partietilar. Tmie will teach ua that comoiudity haa 
yet bettn nothing else with many, obiter, seen once and read over 
once, expect what time will reveal ; in this a^ar, also, fte have to da 
something else. 

"Finally, that you demand principally, and before all things, dot 
advice and opinion about their baptism, tlii" makes ua astonished 
very much, becanse you yuurBelves have not shown your opinion nor 
tlioaghts alwut this piece, and this you ought to have done. If we, 
than, bad seen this, we ourselves might have examined it, and oun 
pttt together with it, in order to choose the best with each uthoi 
But to ^ve a short answer and correction, we say, that we do not 
know Buuh use, custom, or ordinance from the Holy Scriptures, and, 
tiumfoFe, we me scrupulona and have no courage to say much of this. 
It is an affiiir never heard of, therefore we wiU leave it as it is; and we 
ahall behave ourselves according to the iuatructiou given ua in tiM 
Word of God, and not according to the work and actiona of men. 
We think, for this inatonce, to have safficiently answered yoiir 
writing and your request ; you, certainly, will iierforiu your aervioe 
and the duty of your office in this and all other aSiuni, if our anaww 
eaonot satisfy you, — with the observation only to inform every ona. 
Mid in all places already-mentioned, about the condition of the a&iM. 
Deliberate together most aerionsly, and keep watch over tits Soak cf 



1 






218 EABLT ENGLISH BAFTISTS. 

the Lord. Let ns try to restore, first of all, the present harm, before 
some new affiur is intended ; to this we exhort you, this we pray from 
yoo. Be recommended, all together, to the eternal and Almig^ 
God and his mercifol Word, and to his eternal and merciful protec- 
ti(m. We, altogether, your unworthy brethren and fellow-servants, 
offer you our hearty greetings. Farewell ! 

"Dyrck Doedes, 1610 7/18 
"Mr. Doume Lybrants, 
"by me, Haks Mathtsz. 

**/«iyl8flk,lSI0. (I am nearly tired of this, byaaxietj.)* 

Upon th% minds of the brethren this letter had little 
effect. The English were finally admitted into the fellowship 
of the church, and a subsequent page will disclose to us the 
manner of their admission. 

The effect of this change of sentiment on the commonitj 
was not powerless. It awakened the most virulent hostilitj 
fironi the wise and the good iu Holland. Not only the 
"charity which thinketh no evil" was violated, bat truth 
itself was sacrificed, to the injury of a dissenting fnenA* 
It had other results. Jud^jins: from the statements of an 
opponent, ft gave an extension to Baptist statements of no 
ordinary magnitude. Of this truthfulness we have collateral 
proof. 

Mr. Pagit, in his Arrow against Separation, says "that 
out of a few members in the Brownist's churches, more fell 
to Anabaptism than out of many thousand members of the 
Presbyterian churches amongst the Dutch, or out of all the 
English Reformed churches there." 

"Brown's church, at Middleborow, abundance turned Ana- 
baptists, which discontented him. Suiitli himself, the great 
leader in this new way, turned Anabaptist. So also did 



* As a sample, and that a rather mild one, take the following : - " A* I 
acknowledge the unblamable conversations of many amongst you, * » «!<> 
many Papists, Anabaptists, and other vile heretics and schismatirsi, »ilk 
as unblamably this way as you : and yet are they not true shephenU ii 
Christ's sheep."— Robinson's Reply to Bernard, voL iL, pp. 409-10. 



JAMES THE FIBST. 219 

-Cann, at last, as I have heard. Johnson and Ainsworth's 
church, at Amsterdam, abundance of them turned Aliabap- 
tists, and were, therefore, excommunicated. So also hath it 
&llen out in England : the church that came from Holland, 
many of the members fell to Anabaptism, both of Shadrack 
Sympson's and Thomas Goodwin's, and some separated upon 
it into distinct congregations."* He attributes this to the 
logical tenaency of Independency. 

"The tendency of Independency doth, as it were of 
course, breed Anabaptism ; so that, if they judge Anabap- 
tism a pestilent error, as others do, they should renounce 
their Independency, which is so natural an occasion of it. 
St. Austin said of Anabaptism, that it shaketh the very 
foundations of the church. And holy Philpot, the martyr, 
said it was undoubtedly set on foot by the devil to destroy 
the GosiDel."t 

" The reason is plain, because no man can be true to the 
principles of Independents and Brownists, but they must 
turn Anabaptists." How far this reasoning of the accuser 
of our brethren be true, we stop not to say. Certainly, 
others besides Jessey, Simson, Lawrance, Blackwood, and 
Allen, mentioned by this author, have felt its force, and we 
greatly mistake if multitudes more wiU not yet acknowledge 
its power. 

Before dismissing this matter of the English in Holland, 
a word or two on the subsequent condition of the church 
may not be uninteresting to the reader. Little, indeed 
nothing, is known in this country about it. From the 
date of this correspondence up to 1614, the period when 
Helwys left Holland, its history is unknown. Nor could 
we fully fill up this gap in our annals till now. Supposing 
that materials might exist in some of the archives of our 
Dutch brethren, we sought information in Holland, and 

* Lamb's Fresh Suite against Independency, p. 37. 
t Vide his Letter to an Anabaptist, in Fox. Ibidf p. 33. 



290 SABLT BirOIISH BAPTISTS. 

tlie result we bow lay before our readenL " Assisted \ij 
one of the two professora of our aewBaaj,*^ says Protaor 
Miill^ ''I have made fdrtlier reseafches, a&d I haye tk 
j^easore to impart to yoa the following results. We hsft 
aso^tained by Tarioos dispersed notes, that the 8boT«> 
asid English Baptists at Amsterdam, held their usal 
meeting in the building known as ' the Cake-Hoiue of Jofai 
Hunter,'* where some of them dwelt, and where old ui 
necessitous people belonging to the Waterland <^iirch foosd 
a refuge. John Munter was one of the most oonsidenbk 
and rich members of that church. The records of the oo»> 
sistory contain nothing about the English in question, Mr 
about their desire to unite with the Waterlanden, beto 
November 6th, 161 4.+ 

** On that day the consistory resolved to bring the propottl 
of the English to join the commimity on the next Sundij, 
before the brethren, granting them a fortnight or three weeb 
for taking it into consideration. This was done aooordinglj 
on the 9th of November, and ample details of their affiun 
were given at the same time. 

" On the 18th of January, 1615, trhen some young people, 
desiring to be baptized, were presented to the commuiiitfi 
the consistory declared that on the next Wednesday thi 
English would be taken up in the community, according to 
their demand, provided none of the members objected to it, 
as no one had done until that time. On the following Tue* 
day, the 20th of January, the English (worshipping) iu the 
' Cake-House,' numbering about thirty individuals, male «nd 



* "Some of our churches had formerly peculiar bakehouBes for tbe 
baking of bread, &c., for the necessitouB people amongst them. Pertup* 
the building alluded to here was such a house, and at the same xiat 
afforded accommodation as a dwelling for indigent members.**— Prof e»Y 
Miiller. 

t These are evidently to be distinguished from Smith*:* Ittrtt, 
and no doubt are the remaiiu of the early church over which Helwit 
presided. 



^ JAMBS THE FIRST. 221 

female, were called before the consiatory, in the ' Spyker' 
(»ii old granary, adapted for a meeting-hoiBe of the Water- 
lauclei's, of whicli tnujBmutation there aiv many iostajicas), 
and aekod : — ' 1st. If they persisted in their demand to join 
the community ? 2nd. If they stood firm in their agreeing 
to our interpretation of the dagm:i5 and professionfl of faith, 
wbich they had aigued with their own hands j when they 
fully declared such to be the case, except a few, abont foai', 
wiio stood not firm in some poiiitij, having a different opinion, 
principally in what regards magisti-acy, and from taking an 
oath; but who proniised to l>ehave themselves quietly and 
to make no opposition. 

" The conaiatoiy, however, objected to take np these few 
who differed in opinions, but all the English declared forth- 
with, that if some were struck out, all of them would stick 
to their seclusion, as they were too much attached to each 
other to separate. To this demand the consistory would not 
accede, iinlems the community granted leave to take up also 
those few whose opinions differed from those of the Water- 
landera, and refused once more to the signing of the profea- 
aioDs of faith, &om which not one of these had refrained 
himself Ou that night this matter remained undecided, to 
the regret of all. 

"But already, on the early morning of Wednesday, the 
20tli of January, the English retamed to the conaiatory tmi 
declared that they had amply discussed the matter during 
the last night, and were happy to state, that to their great 
relief and joy, eventually the four dissenting, advised to, and 
approved of, the joining of the others to the community, 
even if they were to bo rejected. Aceordingly they were 
admitted in the community, aftei* those being baptized 
who were to be baptized (adminiatered by Hans do Riea), 
in the open congregation, wilftoal baptism. Room has been 
left in the memorial for filling in their names, but it has 
been omitted to set them down. It appears, however, 
clearly, that on the same day were baptiaid, araoDgst many 



222 EARLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

others, four English : Swithin Crrindall, a young man ; 
Thomas Odell, a spur maker; Anthony Thomassen, an 
old man, husband of Lysbeth, an English woman ; and 
Thomas Huysbertsen, glover, a bachelor, in the 'Cake- 
House.* 

"After their joining us, the English, however, continued 
their separate worship in the * Cake-House,' where ihey 
preached in English. Even on the 8th of June, in 1620, 

their preacher, Thomas , was confirmed to full service 

(ie., to administer baptism and the Lord's Supper, kc) bj 
the old minister, Rcinier Wybrands, and his colleague, Peter 
Andriessen, and until 1637 baptism was frequently admin- 
istered in their place of worship, although it does not appear 
by whom." A list of names and dates of persons baptized 
follows, which we omit, as adding nothing of interest to 
the narrative; but the close of the list presents us with 
the name of Jane Morton, the wife, we have little doabt, 
of the John Morton whose name occurs in the letter of 
Helwys. "We give this record : " September 26th, 1630, 
Janneker (Jane) Morton, and 12th December, 1G38, Michael 
Wallis: the five first, because they were baptized foniieily 
by Mr. Smith; the latter, because he was baptized an adult 
in England." 

" It is consequently evident," the Professor adds, '* that 
although the English congregation had in some i-es|>ect3 a 
separate existence, it was nevertheless closely united to the 
Waterlanders. Those who were baptized and admitted 
were instantly considered as members of the Waterland 
church, and while those who wanted relief were asi>i>trtl. 
likewise those who misbehaved were censured bv the 
consistory. The marriages of the English were conclinled 
by the Waterlanders, of which five instances can U* 
quoted." We omit them, as of no comparative interest 
to our readei's. 

"Several of the English, probably those who undoi-stcHKi 
Dutch better, were baptized in the church of the Water- 



.TAMES THE FIBST. 223 

landers, and not in their own place of worship. The 
instances noted in the memorial are the following. 'The 
list extends from 1615 to 1645, and in it are the names of 
Piggott, Overton, Drew, Armfield, &c., children, no doubt, 
of some of those whose names are attached to the confession. 
Some in this list were admitted as members, without bap- 
tism, being already baptized adults in England.' 

"Later on, the difference between the English and the 
Waterlanders cannot be traced any further. No mention is 
made any more, as formerly, of an * Englishman' or * English- 
woman,' and the names are wholly Dutchified ; nay, already 
in 1615, behind the name of Swithin Grindall, we read, in 
Dutch, called Swithin Janssoon, and behind the name 
Margaret Morris, Grietje Thomas. 

" The union of the two parties had become so close, that 
on the 8th of July, 1640, an Englishman, Joseph Drew, was 
proposed by the Waterland consistory as minister, which offer 
he accepted on the 8th December, 'although he was rather 
a&aid that his language might be an objection, he being used 
to the English.' It does not appear that he actually officiated 
S3 minister. He and his two brethren, Alexander and John, 
belonged to the most respectable number of the English 
iiongregations." 

To these statements Dr. Miiller says : " I, for myself, add 
the following remark : It appears to me that the persons 
mentioned in the memorial, who were not yet baptized, were 
admitted to the Waterlanders by the baptism not of immer- 
sion, but of sprinkling. This mode of baptizing was, from 
the days of Menno, the only usual mode amongst them, and 
it is still amongst us. The Waterlanders, nor any other 
of the various parties of the JSTetherland Doopsgezinden, 
practised at any time baptism by immersion. Had they 
made an exception, in that use, on behalf of the English, 
who in their country had not yet received baptism, it is 
more than probable that the memorial would have mentioned 
that alteration. But they cared only for the veri/ nature 



224 EABLY ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

of the baptism,* and were therefore willing to admit ereii 
those who were baptized by a mode differing from theiiB» 
just as we are wonted to do now-a-days." 

This narrative supplies us with very valuable material, 
and enables us to correct some mistakes into which previooi 
writers on our history have fallen. The coarse of the Eng- 
lish refugees in Amsterdam may be thus traced. Smith's 
first negotiation to unite with the Waterlanders, in 1610^ 
was, after some application, successful ; later on, Helwyi^ 
inl611orl612, returned to England, which evidently led 
the peoplei^who were left behind, to seek a onion with the 
Dutch Church, and which was consummated in 1615. 

We have now arrived at a period in our annals when our 
information becomes more abundant, and the movements of 
our brethren much more distinct and traceable. In the ptst, 
the persecuting edicts of monarchs, and the ruthless proceed- 
ings of the professed ministers of Christ, have been oar 
guides; the existence of the Anabaptists has been indictted 
by the sufferings of the Gatehouse and the Fleet, or the fire* 
of Smithfield. Though suffering will still mark their courjc, 
intense and very cruel, for another generation or two, still 
we can listen to their own statements, and are less dependent, 
consequently, on the prejudiced accounts of their bittered 
foes for our knowledge of their i)rinciples and our estimate 
of their characters. As we hear their own voice, and become 
more familiar with their proceedings and their great prin- 
ciples, the mists which ignorance and malice have gathentl 
around them disappear, and they stand before us invested 
with a moral grandeur which few, if any, of their contem- 
poraries could surpass. 

We have seen that Mr. Helwy^i, and probixbly some of 
his brethren, returned to England about IGllorlGli. The 
unhappy condition of the Amsterdam church may have lia«l 



* "As foimdedon full age?." The nicaniDg U, that they baptize«l nolf 
Adults, and that by sprinkliDg. 



JAMSS THK FIB8T. 225 

some weight in his decision.* The motives which he avows 
are of the very highest kind, though his judgment in the 
matter may not meet with unmixed approval. He thought 
it wrong to flee from persecution. It had " been the over- 
throw of religion in this island; the best, ablest, and greater 
part being gone, and leaving behind them some few who, by 
the others' departure, have had their affliction and their con- 
tempt increased, hath been the cause of many falling back, 
and of their adversaries rejoicing." London was fixed on as 
the place of their future residence. Many causes would 
contribute to this decision. Here "they continued their 
church state and assemblies for worship as publicly as the 
evils of the time would admit." Mr. Taylor regards this as 
the first General Baptist church formed in England. The 
claim, we think, cannot well be questioned, though Crosby 
appears to be of a different opinion, t There is no evidence 
to sustain his views. We refer not only to the fact in the 
fi>nner part of this chapter, but the Greneral Baptist historian 
has supplied an amount of evidence that must silence every 
doubt. Still Helwys held some opinions which the intelligent 
members of that section of our body would repudiate. The 
doctrine "that the New Creation, which is begotten of 
Qody needeth not the outward Scripture, or ordinances of 
the church, to support him, but is above them (1 Cor. xiii. 
10, 1 John ii. 27), seeing he hath in himself three witnesses, 

** " Neither is it likely, if he, and the people with him at Amsterdam, 
could have gone on comfortably as they desired, that the unlawfulness of 
flight would ever have troubled him,'' &c. — Robinson's Works, voL iii., 
p. 159. 

+ Crosby, voL i., p. 270. His own witnesses fail him. "Mr. Helwys, 
elsewhere and rightly, disclaims all free wOl, or power in a man's self to 
work out his salvation, but teacheth that *this grace, which is his mercy in 
Christ, Grod hath given to all, though all receive it not."* "That original 
sin is an idle term, and that there is no such thing as men intended by 
the word (Ezek. xviii. 20) ; because God threatened death only to Adam 
(Gen. iL 17), not to his posterity ; and because God created the souL" — 
Robinson, voL iii., pp. 232-3, 246. Other instances will be found pp. 251, 
253,258. 



326 EABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, which are better 
than all Scripture; or creation, though such as have not 
attained the new creation need them for instruction, com- 
fort, and to stir them up," Ac. (2 Peter L 19; 1 Cor. xL 26; 
Eph. iv. 12, 13,*) would find no welcome from them. 

Crosby supposes that the Baptists were mixed up moie 
or less with other Christian organizations. The &ct8 of 
their prevalence, and, yet, of the absence of all records of 
their separate organization, he would thus reconcile: No 
one, we apprehend, acquainted with the estimate in whidi 
these religious outcasts were held by all classes of the com- 
munity, as indicated by the &cts laid before our readeis, 
can doubt this. The success of Helwys and his ftiends 
was considerable. Of his death we know nothing, t 



* Qaoted by Bobinson, voL in., p. 268. 

t On the fly-leaf of a f^ook of 212 pages, entitled, "A Short DedaniM 
of the Mistery of Iniquity,'' printed "anno 1612," without any indieitiai 
of the place where it was printed, there is the following paaaage wriUea 
by the author : — 

"Heare, O king, and dispise not y« counsell of y« poore, and l«t 
their complaints come before thee. 

''The king is a mortall man, and not Ood, therefore hath no power 
over y« jmmortall soules of his subiects, to make lawes and ordinaaow 
for them, and to set spirituall lords over theuL 

" If the king have authority to make spirituall lords and lawea, then 
he is an jmmortall God, and not a mortall man. 

*'0 king, be not seduced by deceivers to sin so against God, whome 
thou oughtest to obey, nor against thy poore subiects, who ought and will 
obey thee in all thinges, with body, life, and goods, or els let their lives 
be taken from y« earth. 

"God save y« king. "Thomas Hklwts. 

"SpUiUMdL, nectre lAmdon." 

Our friend, Mr. Wenger, who kindly copied this for us, says : — ** I ac 
inclined to think the volume from which this passage is copied was wlut 
we should call a presentation copy, and that the fly-leaf contained wkst 
was intended to occupy the place of a dedication. The reasons whxh 
suggest this are certainly not conclusive, yet deserving of attentioiL 
1. The handwriting is beautiful, and betrays special care. 2. The clixiois 
line, ' God save the king,' would hardly have been added in an ordinjir 
copy. 3. The signature, ' Thomas Helwys,' is placed as low down, and m 



JAMES THE FIRST. 227 

Under the date of 1616, Sir S. D'Ewes says : " In the Low 
Countries the heretical faction of the Anabaptists, under the 
new and false name of Arminians, began openly to defend 
the errors of their Pelagian blasphemies, which to this day, 
like all weeds, have grown to such a rankness as they have 
almost outgrown the truth. Notwithstanding, our learned 
King James did now labour earnestly, by Sir D. Carlton, 
his ambassador, with the States, to have these heretics sup- 
pressed, as he had at first after the death of Arminius,* the 
enemy of God." In 1629 he commends the zeal of the 

completely in the comer, as you would expect in a piece intended for the 
king's eye : but it is most beautifully written, though in plain unadorned 
characters.'' 

In the same library there are two other works by this writer. The 
following is the Title of a Tract of 144 leaves, 8vo., printed in 1611. "A 
Short and Plaine Proofe, by the Word and Workes of Grod, that God's 
Decree is not the Cause of anye Man's Sinne or Condemnation : 

AND 

That all Men are Redeemed by Christ ; 

AS ALSO 

That no Infants are Condemned." 

The following ^is one of 94 pages, and was printed in the same year : — 

"An advertisement or admonition unto the congregations which men 
call the New Fryesters, in the Lowe Countries, written in Dutche, and 
published in Englis. 

" Wherein is handled four principaU pointes of religion : — 

" 1. That Christ took his flesh of Marie, having a true earthlie, naturall 
bodie. 

"2. That a Sabbath, or day of rest, is to be kept holy everie first day 
of the weeke. 

" 3. That there is no succession nor privilege to persons in the holie 
thinges. 

'* 4. That magistracie, being an holy ordinance of God, debarreth not 
anie from being of the church of Christ. 

"After these followes certen demandes coDceming God's decree of 
salvation and condemnation." 

fThese scarce works are in the Bodleian Library at Oxford.] 

* "King James, after the death of James Arminius, Professor at 
Leyden, in Holland, an arch Anabaptist, &c. . . . He called him a 
blasphemer, an atheist, &c., terming the deceased Anabaptist, Arminius, 
the enemy of God." — ^Life of Sir S. D'Ewes, vol i., p. 82. 



228 EARLY EKGLISH BAPTISTS. 

Commons " that the true religion might not be intermixed 
with Popish ceiremonies or idolatrous actions, nor the pare 
doctrine of the Ghurcfh of England be corrupted with the 
blasphemous tenets of th'e Anabaptists, in derogation of 
God's grace and providence; which tenerts had been freely 
broached by Sebastian Castellio, in Latin, and by oAer 
Anabaptists in England, about seventy years past; and 
now, some twenty years past, in the Low Cotintries, by 
James Arminius and his fellow Anabaptists, in Latin and 
Dutch." From other sources the £Ame conclusions wonM 
be reached. Though we have no distinct proof of the 
separate organization of our churches at this time, yet the 
evidence is abundant as to the wide prevalence of our 
opinions.* Johnson, referring to the denial of in£uit 
baptism, says: "How greatly it spreadeth, botb in tiwee 
parts (Holland, 1617) and of late in our own country, thit 
is, England."! 

Important as this movement of Helwys and his friends 
was, it was not alone. The pen was wielded, and from the 
press various works issued in defence of Baptist principles. 
Against the ignorance, the intolerance, the cruelty of the 
ruling faction, they appealed. Sentiments were uttered then 
which have exerted the most benignant influence on society. 
Sentiments which surpliced hypocrites, wanton courtiers, 
and a sensual monarch, could not appreciate, but which 
Williams, Taylor, Milton, and Locke, in after years, heard 



* D'Ewes' Life, vol. i,, pp. 97, 400. The Knight is very angrv witk 
the Anabaptists, and in every instance identifies them with the foUowern 
of Arminius. — Ft(/e pp. 102, 120, 201, 388, 405-6. 

t Crosby, vol. i., p. 94. 

"There was also another sect amongst the Anabaptists, that were called 
the Puritans; from whence the Precisians of our kingdom, who, out d 
self-^vill and fancy, refuse to conform themselves to the order of <'ur 
Church, have borrowed this name." — King James's Works, p. 371. 

''Pagit also mentions a kind of Anabaptists, so called (t. r, SepantifU) 
because they pretended to be separated from the world." — Uereeiog, |x 36. 
Hanbury, vol. i., p. X). 



JAMES THE FIRST. 229 

rapture and propagated with success. Scarcely were 

Aeard at first. The rigid Presbyterians, as well as the 

\]. Divine Episcopalians, repudiated them. But they 

aot powerless. In the senate and in the church 

worked, and on them rests the mighty structure of 

Jid's liberties. * 

1614 there resided in London a humble citizen, who 
ned his daily bread with difficulty. Persecution was in 
the cause of this. He had been an exile, and probably 
\i^ mingled with his brethren in Holland. His scholarly 
attainments were considerable. With the Greek of the New 
Testament he was familiar. Of the exact period of his 
return to London we know nothing. The rage against the 
Puritans was not abating. Episcopacy and arbitrary power 
were in the ascendant. To the wilds of the New World 
multitudes of the holiest of the nation were repairing, to 
find in the wilderness a home, and to lay the foundation 
of a purer civil and ecclesiastical commonwealth. Leonard 
Busher* — a name that will never perish — issued his work : 
^^ Religious Peace; or, A Plea for Liberty of Conscience. Long 
since presented to King James, and the High Court of Parlia- 
Tnent then sitting, by Leonard Busher, Citizen of London; and 
printed in the Year 1614." We cannot analyze this book, 
or present an outline of the noble sentiments it advocates. 
The exterior may be rough, but there is a massive grandeur 
about it which is well worthy the mighty theme it embodies. 
It will pass before us again. Still there are two or three 
sentences the production of which justice demands : — 

**/ read that Jews, Christians, and Turks, are tolerated in Con- 
stantinople, and yet are peaceahle, though so contrary, the one to the 
other. If this he so, how much more ought Christians not to force one 
another to religion? And how much more ought Christians to tolerate 



* He was probably a descendant of onje of the Walloon refugees. We 
find a Domynic Buaher antiongst them, as a subscribe o( £100 to a loan 
to Elizabeth in 1588. — Bums's History of the French and Walloon 
Ohurch, &c., pp. 6, 7. 



!»30 XOtLT ISTGUSH BAPTISTS. 

i%rmiiwfi v^m tkt TSurbt do tolenUe them? Shall wi n la 
matcsFm trax irhi: Ttuks? oe rwatt. wb lkate the Tcsd 9 
3«Riarm i^lHiasnANs? It is not only xmnaatciFm^ bct w- 

KATnua AXI^ ABOXIKABLE: TEA, MONSTROUS, VOti ONE ChBBUI 
^^ T13L aKI> laSSTROT ANOTSES FOB DIFFERKNCES AND QCBIKW 

**Aii3 iW kiiur And }i&r}iaiii»it may please to permit all aortitf 
\%ire«S3Mi^; tvia ^lews, Tuiks, and Pagans, so long as they at 
|i0a(waKWu and ih^ TnaMacfeore, as is above mentioned, whidi if tfaf 
W ikvtm^ ^^ K\ under two or ihi«e witnesses, let them be pusukii 
«nev■^In^r iik'' iv^^s TS'oid. Also, if any be found to be willing 6^% 
iake actnevKw iabe aBc^rs and quotera of Scripture, or other mm't 
WTicmss^—tis saoxae mm willingly do, — let them be punished aoeaniaig 
w li^ aad jimtace: it is due desert, not persecution. M Id 
Gvti's V'jv^i Mrnr ist^^mii oJMf Jree pasmx^ among them all; eom to At 
emii v/ Vkfir uk*^ im nil ^KmaUifiilmess, Umgguffermg, and patimue: 
immm^ tikii is i* i^niaimeti ^ GoiTs rich mercy to lead mjddt ni 
4mch (g^ irrr c«4u rfptnUemce and amendment, out of the snare tf ^ 
d^rvU^ 6y ¥rk<Mm tkey are taken €fnd dleerfrod." 

The whole work breathes this loftiness of spirit; theaaine 
enlarged riew and nobleness of pmpose pervade it. We ctt 
only give another example : — 

*• T/'/.itrhr the mom ptfuct and quietfiess^ and for the satisfying ojtk 
weak aiul fimpley among no many persons differing in religion, it ^ 
Uifjcjul fi/r any i>er^n or persons, yea, Jews and Papists, to uniU. 
dispute, confer ami reason, print and puMisk any matter touching 
religion, eitl^er for or against ichomsoever ; always provided thfy 
allege no Fathers for proof of any point of religion, hut only th^ Hoif 
^Scriptures.''* 

Not only is the broadest libei-ty for thought and utter- 
ances oil i-eligious matters pleaded, but the doctrine of 
*' unlicensed printing" was within the wide circle of his 
advocacy. Another and yet another of these compositioni 



* Tracts on Liberty of Conscience, pp. 24, 33, 51- Cecil, in reply to a 
letter from the Archbishop of York, who pleaded with him for the uje of 
gentler means with the Puritans, says : *' I love not to pn»ciire or yield w 
any toleration ; a matter which I well know no creature living dare pc\^ 
pound to our religious sovei'eign." — Lodge, vol. iii., p. 128. The tpirit o( 
the givut BiM-ghley had not rested on hifi Ron. 



JAMES THE FIRST. 231 

fcUowed,* pleading the cause of the oppressed with a power 
mnd earnestness which at that time had no parallel. Presby- 
terians and Separatists asked for toleration^ but it was for 
the liberty of a sect. The Anabaptists only, though despised 
and persecuted, pleaded the claims of all, and maintained 
that no power, civil or ecclesiastical, had authority over 
ocmscience. 

Other events, which have exerted an unmistakable and 
not less powerful and benignant influence on the church, 
transpired about this time. They form an epoch in the 
world's histoiy. They have given an impulse to commerce, 
to liberty and religion, which arrested the downward ten- 
dency of this nation, and have contributed more than any- 
thing else to its present greatness. Whilst in many places, 
in England especially, the power and life of the Church were 
dying out, from the pressure of the multiplied ceremonies 
and superstitious forms which clothed it,t the Redeemer was, 
from other causes, giving it a new and more Scriptural 
development, and preparing a wider circle in which its 
triumphs should be won. We have seen already, that many 
devout men, despairing of liberty in England, and anxious 
for freedom from the intolerable oppression of the hierarchy, 
had fled, some to Holland, and others to the wilds and 
wastes of the new world. To the latter, the church over 
which Robinson, the antagonist of Smith and Helwys, 
' presided, resolved to go. As a religious community they 

* ''Ferseoution for Religion Judged and Condemned. 1615." ''A most 
Humble Supplication of many of the King's Majesty's Subjects. 1620." 
Both these works will claim attention again. 

1* The decay of piety towards the dose of the reign of James, i.e., 
when his pernicious example and worthless character had wrought their 
full effect upon the nation, is an afiUcting topic. The lewdness of his 
oourt was such, that those who drew the sword against his son and 
brought him to the scajffold, do not hesitate to contrast the many virtues 
of King Charles, and the discourse of his courtiers, with the low and in- 
fainoaB bebaucheries of the court of James." — Vide Mrs. Hutchinson's 
MJemoiis. Manden, p. 337. 



S32 SARLT SVOI18H BAPTISTS. 

voold emigrate. The hisioiy of the enterprise is one of 
Arilling ioterest Genias has adorned it with some of her 
BoUest efforts. In the pages of the historian and of tin 
poet it forms a commanding and glowing episode, and the 
poicil of the painter has ponrtrayed it in a lasting fom. 
To the pagte of Bancroft and others we must refer our 
readers for the full details.* Only a sentence or two viB 
our limits allow. The Puritan character, with all its exeel- 
lencies and defects, marked the civil and ecclesiastical ooosti- 
tution of the colony, which after almost unparalleled safiferiog 
this noble band of Christian heroes succeeded in founding 
Suffering for conscience sake had not taught them forbear- 
ance. Dissent &om the opinions of the ruling power wu 
not tolerated. Hence the annals of the State are maiked 
with blots of the deepest hua Koger Williams was peise- 
cuted, and had to flee for his life. He subsequently ettab- 
lished another colony, founded on the broadest pHnciplee of 
civil and religious freedom, and gave rise to the Baptot 
body in that distant land.t 

From the struggles and mistakes of the Pilgrim Fathers 
we must turn to another scene. It is the last of the long 
series of sacrifices which pampered bigotry and ignorance 
offered in this kingdom. Other victims followed, as we 
^shall presently see, but their tortures were more refined and 
protracted. This was the last avio-da-fe which the church 
offered to attest the purity of its faith, and the accordance of 
its spirit with the tender and loving mind of the Prince of 
Peace. The episcopal city of Lichfield was the spot selected 
for this act of devotion. The victim was the very embodiment 
of all the heresies of the past. In him were embodied " the 
wicked heresies of the Ebionites, Cerienthians, Valentinians, 
Arians, Macedonians, of Simon Magus, of Manes, Manichees, 

* Bancroft's History of the United States. 

t Vide Life uf Roger Williams, by ProfeMor Knowles. Dr. R Hioo'i 
HDiallcr, but iuterosting, volume may be consulted. 



JAMES THE FIRST. 233 

of Photiniis/' and, to crown all, ''of the Anabaptists, and of 
other heretical, execrable, and nnheai'd-of opinions, by the 
instinct of Satan, by him excogitated and holden." He 
held ''that the baptizing of infants is an abominable cus- 
•iomL That there ought not to be in the church the use of 
^e Lord's Supper to be celebrated in the elements of bread 
and wine ; and the use of baptism to be celebrated in the 
element of water, as they are now practised in the Church 
of England. But that the use of baptism is to be adminis- 
tered in water only to converts of sufficient age and under- 
standing, converted from infidelity to the faith." Edward 
Wightman was of Burton-on -Trent. Few, excepting epis- 
oopal judges, would doubt his insanity. An asylum, where 
he might have indulged his wild fancies, would have been a 
more appropriate place than the martyr's stake.* Before the 
bishop the heretic was called, but reasoning and threats were 
powerless. The warrant for his execution informs us that 
his lordship was aided by " other divines and learned in the 
lawj" the aforesaid wicked crimes, heresies, and other detes- 
table blasphemies and errors "were stubbornly and per- 
tinaciously, knowingly, maliciously, and with an hardened 
heart, published, defended, and dispersed," &c. Only one 
alternative remained. The Church could do no more. Her 
tender mercies were exhausted. "As a blasphemous and 
condemned heretic" he was "left to the secular power to be 
punished with condign punishment." The bidding of the 
church was heard. " We, therefore," says the royal execu- 
tioner^ " as a zealot of justice and a defender of the Catholic 
&ith, and willing that the holy church, and the rights and 
liberties of the same, and the Catholic faith to maintain 
and defend, and such like heresies and errors everjrwhere, so 
much as in OS lies, to root out and extirpate, and heretics 



* '* Wightman was a visionary who should have been placed in the hands 
of a keeper rather than in the hands of the execntioner." — ^Vanghan's 
History of England, vol v., p. 121. 



234 BABLT ENGLISH BAPTISTS. 

SO convict to punish with condign punishment^ holding tint 
such an heretic, in the aforesaid form convict and condemn, 
according to the laws and customs of this our kingdom of 
England, in this part accustomed, ought to be burnt with 
fira We command thee (the sheriff) that tliou cause the 
said Edward Wightman, being in thy custody, to be com- 
mitted to the fire in some public and open place below the 
city aforesaid, for the cause aforesaid, before the people; 
and the same Edward Wightman cause really to be burnt, 
in the detestation of the said crime, and for manifest 
example of other Christians, that they may not fiJl into 
the same crime." Evidently there was a burning sense in 
which royal theologians and episcopal divines understood 
Paul, "jBy the terrors of the Lord we persuade m/enP 

The closing period of this reign was marked by the 
stronger development of those principles which were disas- 
trous to the highest interests of the nation, and finally led 
the first Charles to the scaffold The graphic pen of 
Macaulay thus describes the opposing elements : — 

" Theories tending to Turkish despotism were in fashion 
at Whitehall. Theories tending to republicanism were in 
favour with a large portion of the House of Commons. The 
violent prelatists, who were to a man zealous of their pre- 
rogatives, and the violent Puritans, who were to a man 
zealous for the privileges of parliament, regarded each 
other with animosity more intense than that which, in 
the preceding generation, had existed between Catholit^ 
and Protestants."* 

Every year augmented this. ' The folly, the debasement 
of this despicable creature, increased till, after an illness of 
some fourteen days, he closed his ignoble reign the 27th of 
March, 1625. We shall be forgiven if, in addition to the 
remarks on a previous page, we offer one or two on the 
character of James. 



* History, voL i., p. 82. 



JAMES THE FIBST. 235 

His personal appearance is thus described by a contempo- 
rary : — " His eye large, ever rolling after any stranger that 
came in his presence, insomuch as many for shame have left 
the room, as being out of countenance. His beard was very 
thin; his tongue too large for his mouth, and made him 
drink very unseemly, as if eating his drink, which came out 
into the cup of each side of his mouth. His skin was as 
soft as taffate sarsnet ; which felt so because he never 
-washed his hands, only rubbed his finger ends slightly with 
the wet end of a napkin. His legs were very weak, having 
had, as some thought, some foul play in his youth, or rather 
before he was bom, that he was not able to stand at seven 
years of age ; that weakness made him ever leaning on other 
men's shoulders."* 

The social habits of the monarch were as filthy as his per- 
son. His drunkenness was excessive. The presence of the 
most illustrious of his guests had no influence on him. From 
under the table the royal drunkard was not unfrequently 
taken by his attendants from the company of his visitors. + 
The disgusting vices of the monarch were reflected with the 
fullest accuracy by his courtiers. **The court of the king was 
a nursery of vice and licentiousness j he had brought in with 
him a company of poor Scots, who, coming into this plentiful 
kingdom, surfeited with riot and debaucheries, and got all 
the riches of the land only to cast away. The honour, 
wealth, and glory of the nation, when Queen Elizabeth left 
it, were soon prodigally wasted by this thriftless heir ; the 
nobility of the land utterly debased, by setting honours to 
public sale, and confening them on persons that had neither 



* Weldon'B Court and Character of James L, p. 177-179. 

** It was no light thing that, on the eve of the decisive struggle between 
our kings and parliaments, royalty should be exhibited to the world 
stammering, slabbering, shedding immanly tears, trembling at a drawn 
sword, and talking in the style alternately of a buffoon and a pedagogue. 
— M«canlay*s History, vol. i., p. 74. 

t History of England, vol. i., p. 166. 



236 EARLY EHGU8H BAngSTS. 

blood nor merit to wear, nor estates to beaar up i^eir titks, 
but were £sdn to invent projects to pill (plunder) the peopk 
and pick their purses for the maintenance of vice and 
lewdness."* *' Ebriety was not confined to the nude sex, and 
on some occasions females of the highest rank, who had spent 
weeks in the study of their respective parts, presented them- 
selves to the spectators in a state of the most disgusting 
intoxication."t '* Those whom I never could get to taste 
good liquor, now follow the ^ishion, and wallow in beastly 
delight. The ladies abandon sobriety, and are seen to roll 
about in intoxication.''^ 

The Earl of Worcester, in a letter to Lord Shrewsbury, 
thus speaks of the maids of honour : '' But the plotting and 
malice amongst them is such, that I think envy hath tied an 
invisible snake about most of their necks to sting one another 
to death."§ The detaUs so supplied by contemporaries, are, 
at least, many of them, totally imfit for our pages, and more 
than justify the statement of a modem writer, that ^to 
remain incorrupt in the reign of James, would have argued 
almost superhuman strength of character." || 

Four days before James's death, great religious prepara- 
tions were made for the solemn event. The di*unken sensual- 
ist went through the form of confession, devoutly making 
his })rofessions of faith to the Lord-Keeper Williams. The 
sachvment was then administered with great solemnity, and 
the bishop says ''that the dying monarch received it with 
that zeal and devotion as if he had not been a frail man, but 
a cherubim clothed with flesh and blood." " Our onlv 

* Life of Colonel Hutchinson, p. 27. 

t Lingard, vol. ix., p. 109. X Ibid. voL ix. 

§ Lodgo'a Illustrations, voL iii., p. 68. Vide Sir A. Weldon's Secret 
nititi»ry oi James I., vol. i., p. 399; ii. p. 387 (note). 

II Vidt Uallam, vol. i., p. 331 (note). Life of Villiare, vol. i., p. 133. 
lUnliop Williiuns was charged with an improper intimaey with the molhiif 
(«f lUiokiughain. Ibid^ vol i., pp. 208, 308. Biahop Goodman doubt« thd 
truth of the ohtvrge, vol. i., p. 286. 



JAMES THE FIBST. 237 

comfort," says the courtly prelate, " is this, that as he lived 
like a king, so he died like a saint. Never have you read 
of any king that left this world more resolved, more pre- 
pared, as though he had^ embraced himself for bed rather 
tban for his grave."* We cannot forget a sentence from 
another pen : " The wicked have no bands in their death." 
Thus " the monarch who broke the heart of Arabella Stuart 
by long imprisonment and blighted hopes, and who beheaded 
Kaleigh, and denied restitution to his son Carew, died well ! 
So self-deceived is the rich man ; so easy is it to substitute 
profession for practical Christianity, "f 

The funeral of the monarch lasted from ten in the morn- 
ing to seven in the evening. Charles was present as chief 
mourner. Williams pronounced the warmest eulogy on 
the king. Though an habitual swearer, ^drunkard, and a 
notorious liar, yet he was equal to Solomon in every view, 
and his superior in many things. The bishop told them 
that the abandoned prince "was now reigning gloriously 
with (jk)d in heaven." The strain of Bishop Hall was 
equally disgraceful. | 



♦ Williams's Sermon; Somers* Tracts, vol. ii., p. 51. "He breathed 
forth his blessed soul most religiously, and with great consistency of 
faith and courage." — Laud's Diary. London, 1695, p. 15. 

t Life of Villiars, vol. ii, pp. 146-7. 

t Vide lyEwes* Journal, vol i, p. 267; Rushworth, vol. I., p. 171; 
Marsden, p. 367. 



I 



I 



i 



I! 



i 

n 
li 

J 



APPENDICES. 



A.— Page 66. 

(From a Book of Ceremonies. Vide Stiype^ Eoc. MemotialB, vol. vi., pp. 170-74.) 



THE RITES AND CEREMONIES OBSERVED ABOUT THE SACRAMENT 

OF BAPTISM. 

First, the catechism which goeth before the baptism; and it is as 
much as to say, a teaching and instruction. For in the primitive church, 
where many came to the Christian faith, at the year of age and discretion, 
it vras used that snch, before they were admitted to baptism, should be 
taught the articles of the faith, and the sum of Christian religion, and 
should promptly and readily render the same to their pastors or curates ; 
which were yet to be used, if any such would desire to receive baptism. * 
But in baptism of infants, which for lack of age cannot be instructed, the 
priest shortly expresseth then such instruction, and then chargeth the 
godfather and godmother further to teach the child or children when they 
come to lawful age ; and then beginneth to make a cross upon the forehead 
of the child that is offered to be baptized ; entokening that he is coming 
to be professed and totally to be dedicated to Christ crucified ; whom he 
will never be ashamed openly before men to confess and acknowledge. 

Then he maketh another cross upon the breast, from whence cometh 
the belief ; signifying that it is not enough to confess Christ with mouth 
openly, imless he doth steadfastly believe in heart inwardly. And, there- 
fore, the minister calleth Almighty Gk>d to take away the blindness of his 
heart, and to make him apt to receive grace in baptism. 

And then he putteth hallowed salt into his mouth, to signify the spiri- 
tual salt, which is the Word of Gk)d, wherewith he should be seasoned and 
powdered ; that thereby the filthy savour of stinking sin should be taken 
away; preserving him from corruption, and making him a more apt vessel 
to continue in the moisture of wholesome and godly wisdom. And, 
therefore, the minister prayeth that he may be replenished with heavenly 
food, and that he, receiving his grace of baptism, may obtain his ever- 
lasting reward. Then the minister maketh the sign of the cross on the 
child's forehead ; adjuring the devil to depart, and no more to approach 
to him, but to acknowledge his sentence of damnation, and to give glory 



340 APPEirDicss. 



God mmd to Chnti, vbich toinmplied on the cross over him ialii 
pen« ; pr^jiitg tkai this child, now pniged £rom the wicked afirit, 
mfkj be i^ siBc^fied tonple of the Holy Ghost. 

After this is read the Go^iel, taken ont of Matt., chap, xix., begioaog, 
sweet Jesfu, pmeri ft; wherein is showed, that the oblation of 
^ildroi is acceptable to Christ, of whose church, without baptioB, 
tkey cannol be made monbexs. Wherefore the people, according to thii 
»rnM^ offereth their children to the minister to be baptized. 

Hms the minister wetteth with spittle the nose, thurles, and ears of 
him that shall be baptised ; putting us in remembrance of the mirarU of 
the deaf and dumb made by Christ, who looking up into heaven, pntteth 
his ^ittle wiUi his finger to his ear, and touching his tongue, sutb, 
l^**'«^^ Lt, Xo say. Be opened. And so he . healed him ; signilyiDC 
therrifT the gnoe and godly influence descending from heaven, which, bj 
the c^poation of the Holy Ghost, <q9eneth our nose to take the sweet 
savDor of the knowledge iA Christ ; and our ears to hear his Word and 
ccMnmandment. 

Hms the minister exhorteth the godfather and godmother, wi^ sll 
others that are present, to pray to €rod that the diild may worthily reeeive 
the blessed sacrament of baptism, to the honour of God, and to the Mha- 
tion <rf his aoul, and confusion of his ^lostfy enemy the devil ; aai si 
the minister and aU they together say. Pater If otter. 

Then immediately the minister maketh the sign of the croas in the li^ 
hand of the infant, whidi cron should, in all our lifetime, 
NalisBtly to defend Christ, and withstand the crafty assaults of ovr i 
the devil, and all our corrupt and perverse affections and des^^ns. And 
so blessing the child in the name of the Father, the Son, and the H<^ 
Ghost, taketh it by the right hand, and biddeth it enter into the chorefau 
then to be admitted as one of Christ's flock and congregation, and to 
proceedeth to the font. 

And then entering towards the baptism, the first inquisition is made of 
the name of him that should be baptized, to the intent that by giving in 
his name, he may now profess himself to a new master, Christ. For of a 
certain, such professions were made by such in Scripture, and giving in 
their name. 

Then there f olloweth a stipulation under prescript words : the minister 
demanding certain questions, and he that is baptized, or his sureties, 
making answer to any questions and demands particularly. [Which 
demands, questions, and answers (to the intent the godfather, with othen 
then present, may know what is a Christian man's profession at his bap- 
tism), we think it very convenient and meet to be uttered hereafter in 
English], and first to this interrogation by the minister.* 

The minister saith, "Forsakest thou the devil?" He, or his sureiiai 
for him, answereth, ''I forsake him." The minister saith, '^ And all his 



* Thv wordii within biuok«to ( ) wers added in the BMtrgiB by Biihop GaniiiMr^i ovn 



APPENDICES. 



241 



uiawered, "I fonake thorn." The minuter nitb, "i 
il pomps and vanities!" The answer ia, "I forsake them." 
' a thii the miniEtsr, with holy oil, onointeth the ohild before, a\ 
[f'kit breut, and behind, between his ahtnilden. Which vaoHon BignifisUi 
II hearts anil affedKoQB should be wholly dedicated to Christ, and. 
a perfect faith in bis mercj ; wliicb the oil doth commanl; 
■ignify in Seriptnrea. And the anointing hatwean the sbuuldera with 
the sign of the cross, signifieth that we should be bold and strong 
bear the joke of our Lord ; and particularly to auatain such cross of 
peiBecntiona, trouble, and afflictions, b^ out most mercifnl Lord shall lay 

That further, the miitiater maketh inquisition of his belief that ia tc 
chnfltened, saying, "fieliOTeat thou in God, the Almighty Father, Maker 
of heaven and earth!" It ia answered, "I believe." The miniHter saitb, 
"Belicvest thou in Christ, his ouly Sou, our LordT" and the answer is 
muie, "I believe." The miuister uaitii, "Believeat tbou iu the Holy 
Ghost, the holy Cathnlic Church, the comtnuuiua of sajate, the remisaiQD 
of sine^ the cesurrection of the body, and after death, to bare everloBting 
life!" It ia answered, "I believe." All which promises and profeflsione 
of recomicing the old errors, aud believing and embracing the tmDi, 
made in baptism, evei; Chriftiaa man ought to Iiavc in his after reioeia- 

And after this the minister saith imto him that is to be baptiEed, thsM 
words, "What asketh thou!" It is anawered, " Baptism." The minister 
demandeth farther, "Wilt thoa be baptised!" It is answered, "I 
nlL" For there ia no man saved against his will, but willingly. Fot 
w man by his cwn free will, obeying the serpent, did perish ; so when 
God calleth by grace, by the conversion of his own mind, every mu 
tmlf believing and inteading to work accordingly, is aaved. 

Ihen tho minister calleth the child by the name, and baptiieth it in 
the nonie of the Father, and the Son, and of the Holy Ghost ; putting it 
ioto the water of the font, and taldng it out again ; or else pouring water 
npmi the infant, whereby the peraon christened hath not only the remi*- 
■ioD of all his sine, by the operation of the Holy Ohoet, hut also by tlu 
sane is ajgnified the death and reaucToctioa of Christ, the only cause of 
onr health and salvation. And, moreover, that we should oleariy morii^ 
our evil desires and corrupt aSectioos ; and so washed from sin, walk iq 
a new, pure, and godly life and conversation. 

Then aftor this baptism, he is anointed wit^ holy chrism on the head, 
as the supreme and principal part of man. Signifying thereby, that be ii 
matte a Obriatian man by the bead of the congregatiou, and that ha ii 
aiminted with the spiritual unction of the Holy Ghost, that by hii 
■irriitnn"- aud grace ho may obtain everlasting life. 

Th£u he that ia baptized ia clothed with a white veetmeut, in taken of 
)iis manumisaion and freedom from Ills former captivity of the devil And 
U dgiiifietb also a. Christian purity and innoceace. which, after the wash- 
ing away of (he >pat> of his old mta, be aught atndiously to conserve aad 



V" 



242 APPENDICES. 

keep, and so to come to the presence of Christ a,t the day of judgment, 
and remain with him in glory everlasting. 

Finally, the minister putteth a candle-light in the right hand of him 
that is baptized, in token that he should, through all his lifetime, ihov 
before all men a light of good example and godly works ; that he my 
be always in readiness with the saints, to meet our Lord, and receiTc Uh 
fruitions of everlasting joy. 



B.— Page 75. 

THE SENTENCE AGAINST JOAN OF KENT, WITH THE CERTIFICATl 

MADE UPON IT. 

In Dei Nomine, Amen. Nos Thomas, permissione divina OantuarieiL 
Archiepiscopus, totius Angliae primas et Metrapolitanus, Thomas Smith 
Miles, Willielmus Cooke Decanus de Arcubus, Hugo Latimer Stem 
Theologise Professor, et Bichardus Lyell Legum Doctor, illustrisBmi, 
invictissimi in Christo Principis et Domini nostri Domini Edwardi sexti, 
Dei Gratia Angliae, &c., per literas suas Begias Patentes, dat. duodecimo 
die mensis Aprilis, Anno Begni sui tertio, contra te Joannam BodMr, 
alias nuncupatam Joannam de Kente, coram nobis super haeretica pnvi- 
tate, juxta et secundum Commissionem dicti Domini nostri R^;is detectaa 
et declaratam, ac in ea parte apud bonos et graves Kotorie et Publiee, 
diffamatam, rite et legitime procedentes, auditis, visis, intellectis, cog- 
nitis, rimatis, et matura deliberatione discussis et ponderatis dicti negotii 
meritis et circumstantiis, servatisq ; in omnibus et per omnia in eodem 
negotio de jure servandis in quomodolibet requisitis : judicialiter et pro 
tribunali sedentes, Christi nomine invocato ac ipsum solum Dcum pre 
oculis nostris habentes ; Quia per acta inactitata, deducta, proWta. con- 
fesaata, ac per te saepius coram nobis in eodem negotio recugnita, cora- 
perimus et clare invenimus te, turn per confessiones, turn per rec«»giiitionrt 
tuas coram nobis judicialiter factas, nefandum et intollerabilem em>rem, 
haeresin damnatam et scandalosam opinionem subscriptam, juri l)ivin>» el 
Fidei Catholic* obviantem, contrariam et repuguantem : viz.— "That 
you believe, that the AVord was made flesh in the Virgin's belly ; >mt that 
Christ took flesh of the virgin, you believe not; because the fle^sh »'f the 
virgin, being the outward Man, was sinfully gotten and bom in sin ; but 
the Word, by the consent of the inward Man of the virgin, wa* made 
flesh." Mauutenuisse : quern quidem errorem, hieresin danmatani et 
scandalosam opinionem, jifri divino et Fidei Catholieae, obviantt-ni, oon- 
trariam et repugnantem, &c. Idcirco nos Thomas Archit-p. &r., te 
Joannam Bocher, alias Joannam de Kente pnudictjim, de nu'riii>, lulpia, 
obstinaciis et contumaciis, &c., de et super horreu(h> haTotica* iimvitat*.! 
reatu confessam, ad Eccleaia) imitatem rediro nolcntem, }i:«rn*t:v*.in 
opinionem credentem, prjemissorum praetextu fuiase et esse, cum ;aiiru 
dolore ct cordis amaritudine Judicamus. teq ; ex nunc tnn<iiiain \n.rd- 
nacem et obstinatam ha^reticam, judicio sive curiae secular! ad oniueBi 
juris effectum, qui exindo sequi debeat, aut poterit, relinqueudiiui fort 



APPENDICES. 243 

decemimus et declaramus, et sic per prseseutes de facto relinquimus : 
Teq : Joannam Bocher, alias Joannam de Kent, memoratam haereticam, 
pertinacem, in majoris Excommunicationis sententiam occasione praemis- 
sorum incidisse et incurfisse, nee non excommunicatam fuisse et esse, 
etiam sententialiter et definitive pronunciamus et declaramus, per banc 
nostram sententiam definitivam, quam ferimus et promulgamus in his 
scriptis. Lecta fuit haec sententia per praenominatos, Reverendum, &c. 



C— Page 81. 
EXAMINATION OP GILES VANBELLER. 

In the Xame of Crod, Amen. I, Giles, a Dutchman bom, now of the 
diocese and jurisdiction of York, arrested and detected of heresy, here 
before you, Master William Clyff, Doctor of Law and Vicar-General to 
the most Reverend Father in God, Lord Edward, Archbishop of York, 
Primate of England and Metropolitan in Ordinary, openly confess and 
acknowledge that I have heretofore spoken, afiirmed, declared, divers 
erroneous opinions and articles against the true faith of holy church, and 
contrary to the determination of the same. Which articles and erroneous 
opinions the principal hereafter follow : — 

I have divers and sundry times affirmed, said and taught, defended and 
holden, in the parish of Worksop, of the said diocese, that there is no 
priest but God only ; and that no priest hath power to consecrate the very 
body of Christ, as he was here reigning on earth ; for the apostle had no 
power to consecrate the body of Christ, and that no priest had power to 
take away man*s sins. 

Item : That the sacrament of the altar is but bread, except it be 
received by faith and in the name of Christ. Item : That God doth not 
dwell in temple or church made by man's hands, but in a faithful * 
man to God. Item : That no man can make any water holier than God 
made it : therefore the water in the font, nor the holy water in the church, 
is holier than the water in the river, for the water in the river is as holy 
as the water in the font, if a man be baptized in it, and the words of bap- 
tism be spoken over him. Item : Tliat any man may baptize in water 
as well as a priest. 

Item : That no bishop can make one ground holier than another. That 
no man is bound to fast. That no man ought to keep any holy day but 
the Sunday. That prayers made to saints be of no value. That no man 
ought to go on pilgrimage. That a man may be confessed of another man, 
as well as of a priest. That there is no purgatory. Also, I have kept, 
holden, taught, and read some books called the New Testament, in the 
Dutch tongue ; a false and corrupt translation, prohibited for me to have, 
to the infection and evil example of Christian people. For which cause, 
articles, and erroneous opinions, and many other by me holden and believed 



"* A word we cannot make oat. We tliink it is Christian. 



S44 APFXHDICBB. 



mpomf I wm brong^t before yoo, to them, and ewmj of tliem, to mikt 

aaewer; bj wbom I am now miffieieiitly and truly enforeed that thw 

artielee» and ereiy of them, be enoneoos and heretical, and ccmtmy to 

the tme undentandiBg and inteipretatioB of the Holy Senjptni% and the 

hol^ doctrine of the gDod and Oatholk docton qppoaed by our mother thi 

hol^ ohmeh, and her detenninatlon, danderona and eiril aoonding to aft 

tme and fbithfal (as before) ean. Wheraat, I do now acknowledge aad 

oonf eae, and believe upon the true Catholic faith in all points ; and do, 

above all and every, these erroneous <^nmons and heresiea, personified os 

all manners of heresies, oontravoiing the determination of the said mother 

holy church; and in case, hereafter, I be found enable in this or laj 

other like contraries to the determination aforesaid : I do submit mjidf 

to the holy canon and laws of the church, and promiae, and do show bj 

these holy evangelists, here by me bodily touched, that, from henosfntk, 

I win no more speak, declare, affirm, teadi, prononnce, hold in bslMf 

the said erroneous <qnnions, in any order, nor anything thai is or shsll W 

condemned for heresy by holy church's determination. Ne, that I will 

hereafter use, read, teach, keep, buy or sell, any booka, iiiliiaiM m 

quires, any worics called Lnthen, or any other man's bodka, or hia Iwsli 

eal sects, or of any other, containing heresy in them, or prcdnbitcd by As 

laws of holy church; . . . nor be oonvenant or familiar, if mesial 

with any person or persons suspected or defamed of heresy. But, so sooa 

as I shall know any such, I shall forthwith, upon such my knowlsdli. 

detect them, and every of them, to his or their ordinary or ordinari«k 

with all their heresies and errors, submitting myself most humbly t« 

our mother holy church and to your correction. In witness whereof b> 

this my present submission, I have subscribed my name, and set the ugtk 

of the cross. 

+ GUIS VA5BILLI1. 



D.— Page 209. 

Nomina iEng^onun qui hunc errorem suum agnoscunt, ejusque poui- 
tentioe agunt, viz., quod incceperint se ipsos baptizare, contra urdioem s 
Christo constitutum, quique jain cupiunt hinc veros Ghristi ecdeaioB vsairi. 
ea qu& f eri possit expeditione. 

Nomina virorum, &c. Nomina feeminamm, &c. 

Cupimus unanimiter votum hoc nostrum eccleaice significari 

Hugh Bbomheao, Ann Bbomhxao, 

Jabvase Nevill, Jane Southwobth, 

John Sxtth, Mabt Sxtth, 

Thomas Canadtne, Joan Halton, 

Edwabd Hankin, Aus Abnfixld, 

John Habdt, ThabetJi Thohbov, 

Thomas Ptoott, Maboask Stanlt, 

Francis Ptoott, Mart Qbihdall, 

BOBIBT STANLT, MOOBE PTOOXT, 



APPENDICES. 245 

Alexander Flemino, Alis Ptgott, 

Alexander Hodgkins, Margaret Ptgott, 

John Grindall, Betteris BicKiNsoir, 

Solomon Thomson, Mart Dickinson, 

Samuel Halton, Elltn Patnter, 

Thomas Dolphin. Alis Parsons, 

JOANE Briggs, 
Jane Argan. 



K— Page 211. 
A SHORT CONFESSION OF FAITH. 

Article 1. We believe, through the power and instmction of the H0I7 
Scriptures, that there is one only God, who is a Spirit, eternal, iiicompre- 
hensible, infinite, ahnighty, merciful, righteous, perfectly wise, only good, 
and only fountain of life and all goodness; the Creator of heaven and 
earth, things visible and invisible. 

2. This only God in the Holy Scriptures is manifested and revealed in 
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, being three, and nevertheless but one 
God. 

3. The Father is the original and beginning of all things; who hath 
"begotten his Son from everlasting before all creation : that Son is the 
everlasting word of the Father, and his wisdom. The Holy Ghost is his 
virtue, power, and might, proceeding from the Father and the Son. 
These three are not divided, nor separated in essence, nature, property, 
eternity, power, glory, or excellency. 

4. This only God hath created man good, according to his image and 
likeness, to a good and happy estate, and in him all men to the same 
blessed end. The first man was* fallen into sin and wrath ; and was* again 
by Gk>d, through a sweet comfortable promise, restored and affirmed to 
everlasting life, with all those that were guilty through him; so that 
none of his posterity (by reason of this institution) are guilty, sinful, or 
bom in original sin. 

5. Man being created good, and continuing in goodness, had the ability, 
the spirit of wickedness tempting him, freely to obey, assent, or reject 
the propounded evil : man being fallen and consisting (itie) in evil, had 
the ability, the T — himself moving him freely to obey, assent, or reject 
the propounded good ; for as he through free power to the choice of evil, 
obeyed and affirmed that evil ; so did he through free power to the choice 
of good, obey and reassent that propounded good. This last power or 
ability remaineth in all his posterity. 

6. God hath before all time foreseen and foreknown all things, both 
good and evil, whether past, present, or to come. Now as he is the only 
perfect goodness, and the very fountain of life itself, so is he the only 
author, original, and maker of such things as are good, holy, pure, and of 



• intoTliMd. 



246 APPENDICES. 

nature like unto him; but not of sin, or damnable uncleanness. H« 
forbiddeth the evil, he forewameth to obey evil, and threateneth the evil 
doer: he is the permitter and punisher. But evil men, through free 
choice of all sin and wickedness, together with the spirit of wickedneu 
which ruleth in them, are the authors, originals, and makers of all sin. 
and so worthy the punishment. 

7. Tlie causes and ground, therefore, of man*s destruction and damna- 
tion are the man's free choice of darkness or sin, and living therein. De- 
struction, therefore, cometh out of himself, but not from the good Creafcir. 
For being perfect goodness and love itself (following the nature of love 
and perfect goodness), he willeth the health, good, and happiness of hii 
creatures ; therefore hath he predestinated that none of them shoul«l be 
condemned, nor ordained, or willed the sinner, or means whereby they 
should be brought to damnation : yea, much more (seeing he hath no 
delight in any man's destruction, nor willing that any man perish, but 
that all men should be saved or blessed) hath he created them all to & 
happy end in Christ, hath foreseen and ordained in him a medicine of life 
for all their sins, and hath willed that all people or creatures, through the 
preaching of the Gospel, should have these tidings published and declared 
unto them : Now all they that with penitence and faithful hearts receire 
and embrace the gracious benefits of Crod, manifested in Christ, fur the 
reconciliation of the world, they are and continue the elect which God 
hath ordained before the foundation of the world, to make partaken 
of his kingdom and glory. But they which despise and contemn this 
proffered grace of God, which love the darkness more tlian the lij;ht. 
persevere in impenitence and unbelief, they make themselves unworthy 
of blessedness, and are rejected, excluded from the end whoret<> Owj 
were created and ordained in Christ, and sludl not tiiste for ever «»f tht* 
Supper of the Lord, to whicli they were invited. 

8. The })Uii)ose which God, before tlie foundation of tlie w«>rM, h.ii f r 
the reconciliation of the world (which he saw would fall into wnith ;ii.'l 
want of gi-ace), he hath in tlie fulness of time accomplished ; and for thin 
puipose hath sent out of heaven his everlasting Word, or Son, for tl:e 
fulfilling of the promises made unto the fathei"s, and hath caust'tl him t" 
become tlesh . .* in the >s'onib of a \u*]y vir;^n (called Maryi by \il< 
wt»rd, and power, and working of the Holy Ghost. Xot that the e>M':i«v 
of Gixl, the eternal AVord, or any pail thereof, is changed into a >:>iMf 
mortal tlesh or man, ceasing t*> be Spirit, God, or God's essence; >>ut th .: 
he, the everlasting Son of Gi)d, continuing that he wj.s before, iiamtly. 
Gixl or Spirit, became what he was not, that is, flesh i>r man ; and l.e i< 
in one person true God and man, bom of Mar}', being vi.sil^ly ..:.! 
invisibly, inwardly and outwardly, the true S«ni of the living GimI. 

0. This Pel-son, God and Man, the Son of the living Giwl, is coni«» in: 
the worhl to save sinners, or t«> reconcile the .>inful worM t»> <io«l i:;f 
Father: therefore now acknowledge him to be the only Mediat"r. K;l.9. 

• Word wantintc. 



24T ' 



Priest and Prophot, Lawgiver and Teacber, which Ood hath proniiBed to J 
■end into the world, whom we mnst truat, beUeve, and foDow. 

10. Id htm is fulfilled, and by Idm ia Uken away, an iotnlentble burden I 
of the Law of Moaes, even all the shadows and figures ; ni, Eamely, the 1 
prieBthuod, temple, altar, sacrifice ; also the kingly ofGce, kin^nlom, j 
Word, reTsnge appointed by the law, battle, and whatsoever waa a figure I 
^ bia person or office, so thereof a shadow or representation. 

11, And as the true promised Prophet he bath manifested and rove 
onto U£ vthatsoever Oud asketh or requirotb of the people of the New ] 
Testament : fur as Ood, by Uuaea and the other prophets, hath spoken I 
■nd dnolared his wUl to the people of the Old Testament ; so hath h< 
those last days, by his Prophet, spoken unto us, and revealed unto us 
mystery (ui>iii;eiiled from the beginning of the world), and hath bow 
manifested to ns whatsoever yet remained to be manifested. He hath 
preached the promiseii glad tidings, appointed and ordained the saora- 
ments, the offices and miiiisterieB, b; God thereto destinated ; and hath 
■howed by doctrine and life, the law of Christians, a rule of their life, the 
path and way to everlasting life. I 

. 12. Moreover, as a High Priest and Mediator of &e New Testament, | 
after that he hath accomplished the will of his Father in the foresaid 
works, he butb Enally given himself obediently (for the reconcLhation of 
the Bins of the norldl-to all outward suffering, and hath offered up him- 
■elf in death upon the cross unto the Father, for a sweet savour and 



oblatioi 



13. We acJmowIedge that the obediencs of the Son of God, his suffering, 
dying, bloodshed, bitter passion, death, and only sacrifice upon the cross, 
IB » perfect reconcihation and aatisfnction for OUI' sins and the sins of the 
world; so that men thereby are reconcUDd to Qod, are brought into 
power, and have a sure hope and certainty to the entrance into evar- 
Lwtjng life. 

14. Christ, onr Prophet and Priest, being also the promised, only 
ipiritual, beavenly King of the New Testament, hath erecteci, or built, a 
■piritual kingdom, and united a company of faithful, spiritual men ; these 
pecBons bath ho endowed with spiritual, kingly laws, after the nature of 
the heavenly kingdom, and hath entabhshed therein justice, rigbteous- 
neas, and the ministers thereof, 

IB. Having accomplished and performed here upon the earth, by dying 
the death, his office of tbe croea, he was afterwards buried, thereby 
deelaring thEit he waa truly dead; the third day ho rose again, and stood 
np from, tbe dead, aboUahing death, and testifying that he was Lord ovar 
death, and that he uould not possibly bo detained by the handa of death, 
thereby comfortably assuring all tbe faithful of their reaurrection 
itanding up from death. 

16. Afterwards, forty days spent, ho conversed amongst his discipls^ M 
and ofttimea showed himself unto them, that there might no doubt bail 
had concerning bis resurrection ; after that, being compassed by u cloud, I 
ho was carried up into heaven, and entered unto his glory, leading J 



248 APPENDICES. 

captivity captive, and making a show of hia enemiaa, haih g^orioo^ 
triumphed over them, and is sat at the right hand of the Majesty of Qod, 
and is become a Lord, and Christ,. glorified in body, advanoed, lifted wft 
and crowned with praise and glory, and remaineth orer Mount Sum, i 
Priest and King for everlasting. 

17. The holy office of this glorified Priest, King, Lord, and Chxii*i h 
the heavenly ^orioos being, is to help, govern, and preserve, by his hotj 
Spirit, his holy church and people in the world, through the stonn, wind, 
and ironbles of the sea ; for, according to his priestly office, as an ovenev 
or steward of the true tabernacle, is he our Intercessor, Advocate, sad 
Mediator by the Father. He teacheth, comforteth, strengtheneth, sad 
baptizeth us with the Holy Ghost, his heavenly gifts and fiery victiim, 
and keepeth his spiritual supper with the faithful soul, irm^Hwg it partskv 
of the life-giving food and drink of the soul, the fruit, virtue, and wortk 
of his merits obtained upon the cross; the only and necessary good 
signified in the sacraments. 

18. And according to his kingly office, in his heavenly* being be 
govemeth the hearts of the faithful by his Holy Spirit and Wotd ; he 
taketh them into his protection, he covereth them under the shadov of 
his wings, he armeth them with spiritual weapons for the spiritosl 
fare against all their enemies, namely, the Spirit of wick^lneae, 
heaven, and whatsoever dependeth on them in this earth. He, their moii 
Glorious, Almighty, Heavenly King, standeth by them, delivereth end 
freeth them from the hands of their enemies, giveth them victory and the 
winning of the field, and hath prepared for them a crown of righteousneei 
in heaven. And they being the redeemed of the Lord, who dwell in the 
house of the Lord, upon the Mount Sion, do change their fleshly weapnuL 
namely, their swords into shares, and their spears into sythes, do lift ap 
no sword, neither hath nor consent to fleslily battle. 

19. All these spiritual good things and beneficial, which Christ, by hii 
merits, hath obtained for the saving of sinnei-s, we do gracioasly enj-^y 
through a true, living, working faith. Wliich faith is an aMured under- 
standing and knowledge of the heart, obtained out of the Word of C^id, 
concerning God, Christ, and other heavenly things which are neceMiry 
for us to know, and to believe to salvation, together with a hearty confi- 
dence in the only God, that he, as a gnicious and heavenly Father, will 
give and bestow upon us, through Christ, and for his merits, whatsoever 
is helpful and profitable for body and soul for salvation. 

20. Through such a faith we o])tain true righteousness, forgiveness, 
absolution from sin through the bloodshed of Christ, an<l true righteimt- 
ness, which throuph the Christ Jesus, by the co-operation of the H"ly 
Ghost, is plentifully she<l and poured into us, so that we truly are nude, 
of evil men, good; of fleshly, spiritual; of covetous, liberal; of pniaJ. 
humble; and through regeneration are made pure in heart, and the 
children of God. 



• Interlined. 



APPENDICES, 249 

n hemg thna jnatified by faith, tiveth and worketh b; lora 
e Boly Ghost Bhedd?th inio the henrt) in all gnad wnrks, i> 
precepta, nrdinnnceB given ilism b^ God through Christ; ha 
h and blesseth God, by a huly lift, for every benefit, eapedally of 
Ik K>ul ; and to are all such plant* nf the Lord trees of riehteouaiieif, 
ir God through good works, and eipoot a blessed reward. 
L Snch futhful, rightBons people, scattered in aeveraJ parts of tba 
1, being the true congregation a of Ood, or the church of Chriet, vhom. 
i, and for whom he gave htnieelf, that he might sanctify them, jm 
at hs hath cleansed by the washing of vat«r in the word of life ; of 
is Jesua the Head, ttie Shepherd, the Leader, the Lord, the Ein^ 
ttt. Now although among these there may be mingled a com- 
IJ of seeming holy ones, or hypocrites; yet, neyertheless, they are and 
m only the righteous, true members of the body of Christ, accordinj 
Ktbe spirit and the truth, the heirs of the promises, tiuly saved from 
p hypocrites and dissemhleTs. 
\ In this holy ebnrcb hath Qod ordained the ministera of the Gospel, 
of the holy Word, the use of the holy sairaments, the ovei^ 
It of the poor, and the ministers of the same offices ; furthermore, the 
' le of brotherly admonition and corroction, and, finally, the sepan- 
If Of the impenitent ; wbich holy ordiniuiGes, contained iu the Word of 
f, are to be administered according to the onteat* thorereof. 
L. And like us a body eonsisteth of divers parts, and every part haA 
n prc^>er work, seeing every part in not a hand, eye, or foot ; so is it 
1 the church of Gad; for although every believer is a member at 
' the body of Christ, yet is not every one therefore a teacher, elder, or 
1, bot only such who are orderly appointed to such offices. There- 
lore, also, the administration of the said offices or duties peitaineth only 
to those that are orduned thereto, and not to every particular common 

25. The vucation or election of the said officers is performed by the 
ehnrch, with fasting, and prayer to God ; for God knoweth the heart ; he 
is amongst the faithful who are gathered together in his name ; and by 
his Holy Spirit doth so govern the minds and hearts of bis people, that 
he by them bringeth to lig^t and propoandeth whom he knoweth to be 
profltable to hia clinrch. 

36. And although the election and vocation to the said offices is per- 
formed by the toreasid nieeiia, yet, nevertheless, the investing into the 
laid service ii accomplished by the elders of the church through the 
facing on of hands, 

27. The doctrine which by the foresaid ministers must be proposed 
to the people, is even the same which Christ brought out iif heavei^ 
nhich he, by word and work, that is, by doctrine and hfe, hath taught, 
which was preached by the apostles of Christ, by the commandment of 
Oirist and the Spirit, which we find written (so much as is needful for nl 
to salvation) in the Scriptun of the New Testament, whereto we apply 
whatsoever we find iu the catiuoical book of the Old Testament, which 



I 
I 



250 APPENDICES. 

hath affinity and verity, which by doctrine of Christ and his i^Mstlea, ud 
consent and agreement, with the government of his Spiritual kingdam. 

28. There are two sacraments appointed by Christ, in his holy chordi, 
the administration whereof he hath assigned to the ministry of teaching 
namely, the Holy Baptism and the Holy Supper. These are oatmri 
visible handlings and tokens, setting before our eyes, on God's side, dn 
inward spiritual handling which God, through Christ, by the co-opentiai 
of the Holy Ghost, setteth forth in the justification in the peniteai 
faithful soul; and which, on our behalf, witnesseth our religion, expe> 
rience, faith, and obedience, through the obtaining of a good consdeuoe 
to the service of God. 

29. The Holy Baptism is given unto these in the name of the Father, 
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, which hear, believe, and with penitent 
heart receive the doctrines of the Holy GospeL For such hath the Lord 
Jesus commanded to be baptized, and no unspeaking children. 

30. The whole dealing in the outwai'd visible baptism of water, setteth 
before the eyes, witnesseth and signifyeth, the Lord Jesus doth inwanllj 
baptize the repentant, faithful man, in the laver of regeneration and 
renewing by the Holy Ghost, washing the soul from all pollution and un, 
by the virtue and merit of his bloodshed ; and by the power and woikiuf 
of the Holy Ghost, the true, heavenly, spiritual, living Water, deanaetk 
the inward evil of the soul, and maketh it heavenly, spiritual, and living, 
in true righteousness or goodness. Therefore, the baptism of water 
leadeth us to Christ, to his holy office in glory and majesty ; and ad- 
monisheth us not to hang only upon the outward, but with lioly prayer 
to mount upward, and to beg of Christ the good thing signifie<l. 

31. The Holy Supper, according to the institution of Clirist, is t-* be 
administered to the baptized ; as the Lord Jesus liath commanded ilui 
whatsoever he hath appointed should be taught to be observed. 

32. The whole dealing in the outward visible supper, setteth bt-f >n 
the eye, witnesseth and signifyeth, that Christ's body was br«»keD ui-pd 
the cross, and his holy blood spilt for the remission of our sins. TL»: 
the being glorified in his heavenly Being, is the alive-making bread. mr.»t, 
and drink of our souls : it setteth before our eyes Christ's offioo and 
ministry in glory and majesty, by holding his spiritual supper, whi'.-h the 
believing soul, feeding and * the soul with spiritual Uhh\ : it to.uh'th 
us by the outward handling to mount upwards with the heart in h-ly 
prayer, to beg at Christ's hands the true signified f<)o<l ; and it adni"n:*h- 
eth us of thankfulness to God, and of verity and love ono witli an-»:h'-r. 

33. The church discipline, or external censures, is also an uuiward 
handling among the believers, whereby the impenitent sinntT, .if'.er 
Christian admonition and reproof, is severed, by rea.son i>f his sin-*, fn-a 
the communion of the saints for his future good ; and the wnith of <td 
is denounced against him until the time of his contrition and reforruj- 
tion ; and there is also, by this outward sepamtion of the Church, niju- 



• Word wanting. 



APPENDICES. 251 

fested what God before had judged and fore-handled, concerning this 
secret sinner, by reason of his sin. Therefore, first before the Lord, the 
prejudging and predetermining of the matter must pass * in respect 
of the sinner * and the after-judging and handling by the 

cliurch. Therefore the church must carefully regard that none in the 
^iirch be condemned with it, and be condemned in the Word of God. 

34. The person separated from the church may not at all be admitted 
(so long as he proceedeth in sin) to the use of the holy supper or any 
other * handling, but he must be avoided therein, as also in 
all other things betokening the communion of saints or brotherhood. 
And as the rebellious life, conversation, or daily company of the godless 
and perverse, or anything with them, is dangerous and hurtful, and oft- 
times promoteth scandal and slander to the godly, so must they withdraw 
themselves from the same rebels, avoiding them in all works and ends 
whereby their pure souls might be polluted and defiled: yet so that 
always the Word of God take place, and that nothing take place or be 
performed that id contrary to love, mercy, Christian discretion, promise, 
or any other like matter. 

35. Worldly authority or magistracy is a necessary ordinance of God, 
appointed and established for the preservation of the common estate, and 
of a good, natural, politic life, for the reward of the good and the 
punishing of the evil : we acknowledge ourselves obnoxious, and bound 
by the Word of Grod to fear, honour, and show obedience to the magis- 
trates in all causes not contrary to the Word of the Lord. We are 
obliged to pray God Almighty for them, and to thank the Lord for good 
reasonable magistrates, and to yield unto them, without murmuring, 
beseeming tribute, toll, and tax. This office of the worldly authority 
the Lord Jesus hath not ordained in his spiritual kingdom, the church of 
the New Testament, nor adjoined to the offices of his church. Neither 
hath he called his disciples or followers to be worldly kings, princes, 
potentates, or magistrates ; neither hath he burdened or charged them to 
assume such offices, or to govern the world in such a worldly manner ; 
much less hath he given a law to the members of his church which is 
agreeable to such office or government. Yea, rather they are called of 
him (whom they are commanded to obey by a voice heard from heaven) 
to the following of his unarmed and unweaponed life, and of his cross- 
bearing footsteps. In whom approved- nothing less than a worldly 
government, power, and sword. This then considered (as also further, 
that upon the office of the worldly authority many other things depend, 
as wars * to hurt his enemies in body or goods * with 
evilly or not at all will fit or consort with the Christ, and the crucified 
life of the Christians), so hold we that it beseemcth not Christians 
to administer these offices ; therefore we avoid such offices and adminis- 
trations, notwithstanding by no means thereby willing to despise or con- 
demn reasonable discreet magistrates, nor to place him in less estimation 
than be is described by the Holy Ghost, of Paul. 

' Caimot decipher the word. 



252 APFENDICE& 

36. Christ, the King and Lawgiver of the Kew Testament, hath pio- 
hibited Christians the swearing of oaths; therefore it is not permitted 
that the faithful of the New Testament should swear at alL 

37. The married estate, or matrimony, hold we for an ordinann d 
€k)d, which, according to the first institution, shall be observed. Evoy 
man shall have his one only wife, and every woman shall have her om 
only husband ; those may not be separated but for adultery. We penut 
none of our communion to marry godless, unbelieving, fleshly perscns out 
of the church ; but we censure such (as other sinners) according to tkt 
disposition and desert of the cause. 

38. Lastly, we believe and teach the resurrection of the dead, botk oC 
the just and the unjust, as Paul (1 Cor. zv.) soundly teacheth aai 
witnesseth : The soul shall be united to the body, every one disU bi 
presented before the judgment seat of Christ Jesus, to receive in his owi 
body wages according to his works. And the righteous, whosoever katk 
lived holily, and through faith brought forth the works of love and wfBKj, 
shall enter into everlasting life with Christ Jesus, the. BridegrooiA ti the 
Christian host. But the unsanctified, which have not known God, sad 
have not obeyed the Gospel of Jesus Christ, shall go into everlasting tre. 
The Almighty, gracious, merciful Grod, preserve us from the poniihBnt 
of the ungodly, and grant us grace and gifts helpful to a holy life, lafiag 
death, and joyful resurrection with all the righteous. Amen. 

We subscribe to the truth of these Articles, desiring farther infdoBir 
tion. [Forty-two names are attached to this document. We caiBot 
decipher the whole, but the following are plain. A line is drawn throegh 
some of them. The * mark them, t Uncertain.] 

* John Smyth, * , 

Hugh Broomhead, * Matthew Pigott, 

* John Grindall, Mary Smyth, 



Samuel Halton, Janus , 

Thomas Piggott, Margarett Stavelet, 

John Hardie, t Isabella Thomson, 

Edward Hawkins, * Jane ARGAN,t 
Thomas Jessopp, Mary Dickins, 

Robert Staveley, Bettriss Dickens, 

Alexander Fleming, Dorothe Ham and, 

John Arnfeld, * Elnh. Buywater, 
Hannah Piggott, Ann Broomhead, 

Thomas Solphin, Alexander Parsossj, 

Solomon Thomson, * Joan Haughton, 

Alexander Hodgkin, * Joane Buigge, 
Ursula By water, Alexander Pigott, 

Dorothea Oakland, Margaret Pigott, 

John , Alexander Armfield, 

Fylis , Elnh. White, 

Dorothe Thomson, 
Margaret Morris. 

[We judge the whole of these signatures autograph.] 



'e belioTfl witli the heart and with the mouth confess : — 
^] That there is one God, the beat, the highest, aud most glo 

md Preserver nf all ; who is Father, Son, and Holj Spirit. 
B.) That Ood has created anil redeemed the human race to his oim 
_ ■ ■ IB ordained all men (no one being reprobated) to life. 

f.) That God imposes no necesaitf of sinning on any ooe ; but man 
"/, by Satanic instigation, departs from Gud. 
IL) That the law of life was originally plated hy God in the kaeping of 
- ; -then, by retwan of the weakness of the flesh, was, by the good 
re of God, throogh the redemption of Christ, changed into jnstifi- 
m lit faith ; un which account, ao one ought justly to blame God, but 
irith his inmost heart, to revere, adore, and praise his mercy, 
1 should have rendered that possible to man, by bis grace, vhich 
tirfore, siace man had faUen. was impossibla by nature. 

(9.) Thai there is no original sin (lit,, lunn of origin or detcenti, but 
all na is sctnal and voluntary, viz., a wnrd, a deed, or a design against 
the law of Ood ; and therefore, infants are witliout ein. 

{& ) That Jesus Christ is true God and true man ; viz. , the Son of God 
taking to Idmeelf, in addition, the true and pure nature of a num, out 
of a true rutioual soul, and existing in a true human body. 

(7. ) That Jesus Christ, as pertaining to tbe flesh, vaa cunceived by the 
Holy Spirit in the womb of the Virgin Mary, afterwards was bom, oir- 
cnnudsed, baptized, tempted ; also tliat be hungered, thirated, ate, drank, 
increased both in stature and in knowledge ^ he was wearied, be slept, at 
lait was crudfled, dead, buried, lie rose sgain, ascended into heaven; and 
that to binLself as only King, Priest, and Prophet of the cborch, all power 
both in heaven and earth is given. 

(8. ) That the grace of God, through the finished redemption of Christ, 
was to be prepared and offered'to all without distinctdon, and that sot 
feignedly but in good faitli, partly by things made, which declare ths 
invisible things of Oocl, and partly by the preaching of the Gospel, 

(9. ) That men, nf the grace of God through the redemption of Christ, 
are able (the Holy Spirit, by grace, being before unto them ffrace prr- 
vewiinl) to repent, to beliEVC, to turn to Ood, and to attain to eternal 
lite ; so ou the other hand, they are able tbemeelTeB to resist the Holy 
Spirit, to depart from God, and to perish for ever. 

(10.) That the justification of man before the Divine tribunal (which M 
Iwth the throne of justice and of mercy), consists portly of the imputa- 
tdoD of the righteousness nf Christ apprehended by faith, and partly of 
inherent lighteousness, in the holy themselves, by the operation of ths 
Holy Spirit, which is called regeneration or sanctiflcatioD ; since any one 
it lightsous, who doeth righteousness. 

4IL) Hut faith, destitate of good works, is vain; but true and hving. 
faith is distinguished by good works. 



\ 



I 



254 APPENDICES. 

(12. ) That the church of Christ is a company of the faithful ; bapdied 
after confession of sin and of faith, endowed with the power of ChnsL 

(13.) That the chiirch of Christ has power delegated to themsehe* of 
announcing the word, administering the sacraments, appointing miiiiaten, 
disclaiming them, and also excommunicating ; hut the last appeal lk to the 
brethren or body of the church. 

(14.) That baptism is the external sign of the remission of sins, of 
dying and of being made alive, and therefore does not belong to infanta. 

(15.) That the Lord*s Supper is the external sign of the communion of 
Christ, and of the faithful amongst themselves by faith and love. 

(16.) That the ministers of the church are, not only biiibops (''^n«- 
copos"), to whom the power is given of dispensing both the word and the 
sacraments, but also deacons, men and widows, who attend to the affjiin 
of the poor and sick brethren. 

(17. ) That brethren who persevere in sins known to themselves, aft«r 
the third admonition, are to be excluded from the fellowship of the saints 
by excommunication. 

(18.) That those who are excommunicated are not to be avoided in what 
pertains to worldly business {civile commercium). 

(10.) That the dead (the living being instantly changed) will riw 
again with the same bodies; not the substance but the qualities being 
changed. 

(20.) That after the resurrection, all will be borne to the tribunal of 

Christ, the Judge, to be judged according to their works ; the pious, after 

sentence of absolution, will enjoy eternal life with Christ in hejiven : the 

wicked, condemned, will be pimished with eternal torments in hell with 

the devil and his iingels. * 

John Smith. 



I believe with the heart and confess with the mouth : — 

(I. ) That there is only one God, one Christ, one Holy Spirit, one churv,h, 
one truth, one faith, one true religion. 

(2.) In the Godhead are three persons really distinct, — Fatlier, Sm. ;aj'l 
Holy Spirit, co-eterual, co-equal, co-original ; all and singulur of th'.:- 
one and the same God, not divided, but really distinct amonj,' then!S».lvrt 
in their .fpt'Cialiti(:'<, viz., in Creation, Redemption, and San«-tifiratii.n. 

(3.) God the Father is self-existent from himself, not fn»m an"t}i«?r; 
God the Son is also self-exi.stcnt, not from himself, hut from iho Father: 
God the Holy Spirit is also self -existent, but not from liinis'lf. liut fr«»rD 
the Father and the Son : so that the Divine essence of these three is ih< 
same, and one in number. 

(4.) Tliis Trinity in unity ought to he worship})cd both in spirit an«l :3 
truth, and whosoever shall so woi-ship (iod shall he huppy in cti-rnul life; 
and the rule of so worslui)i>ing God is thoroughly expres«sc<l by (i*o«l h:ci- 

• This has no dat.-. The M-"*. is in Lat.-u. 



APPENDICES. 255 

self in the Old and New Testament, by the hands of prophets and apostles. 
And whoever shall worship God in any other method than that expressed 
in these two Testaments, shall be cast from the presence and favour of 
God to eternal death with demons and their angels. 

(5. ) I believe and confess that our Lord Jesus Christ, preached by the 
apostles, was Messiah himself, promised from eternity, concerning whom 
the prophets prophesied and wrote. 

(6. ) I believe all things written and contained in the Law and the Gros- 
pel are true, divine, and are to be affirmed and maintained by all. 

(7. ) Christ, the only begotten Son of God, was Priest, Prophet, and 
King, according to the order of Melchisedec, for ever. And his church 
ought to be governed by no other in heaven, earth, or hell, but by him- 
aelf. 

This prophetic office is (1) to reveal the will of the Father, and (2) to 
appoint a ministry, and (.3) to teach internally, or to be effectual through 
the ministry. 

His priestly office is, First, To teach us, and otherwise than any other 
jpriest, that is, not only to the ears by words, but in our hearts by the Holy 
Spirit ; Second, To offer himself a propitiatory sacrifice for all and singu- 
lar the sins of the whole world ; Third, To pray and intercede for us con- 
tinually with the Father. So that his sacrifice is enough and sufficient 
for the people of all and every nation in the whole universe, for their 
redemption and salvation, if it be by them received in true faith, and held 
fast to the end. 

His kingly office consists in his resurrection from the dead, and his 
ascension into heaven to the right hand of the Father, living, and casting 
beneath his feet, hell, death, sin, and final condenmation ; governing 
with all power in heaven and earth, spiritually, his church ; adorning her 
with spiritual gifts, and at length freeing her from, all the evil ; and 
openly thrusting down the conquered into eternal punishment. 

His true and visible church is a certain number of people, separated 
from the world by the Word of God, and by the baptism of faith and 
repentance, gathered together and constituted. > 

Christ allowed full power and authority to his church, assembled 
together, cordially and unanirrumsly, to choose persons to bear offices in 
this church. And these and no other are to be included, viz. (the offices), 
of pastors, of teachers, of elders, of deacons, of sub-ministers, who, by 
the Word of God, from every part are qualified and approved. 

All antichristian offices of whatever kind they may have been, are not 
to be admitted into this church, but utterly extirpated. 

All human traditions and opinions are to be pursued with cordial hatred 
(lit., the. hate of the heart), and avoided; and if ever they should be 
adopted by any, they are not to be encouraged, but immediately put 
down. 

But before I proceed, or come to an end, that it may not (I pray) be a 
hindrance to you to have known me as an Englishman, lately of the 
English church, but convinced by the Word and Holy Spirit of God, £ 



^ 



\ 



2^6 APPENDICES. 

give up all its errors, and renounce its matemitj, and with the wholt 
ioul and mind, desire to enter by baptism into the true church. 

I believe that there are but two s&craments to be administered and 
embraced in the church of Christ, viz.. Baptism and the Lord's Sapps, 
and these sacraments are to be administered to, and participated by, tkoae 
who are penitent and manifest faith; so that both of them are to \m 
denied to all infants and all unbeUevers, because they do not belaag t» 
such. 

Lastly, I grieve most of all for sin ; and with sadness and great giief I 
do confess myself to be the greatest sinner, and heretofore to have lived 
in great and daily sias ; but I e^)ect and seek their renusaion through 
Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of God, and after death to enter into ei«^ 
nal life. In his name, therefore, with all the powers of body and mind, 
I wish and seek to enter, by baptism, into the true chiDoh, and to 
persevere. 

What doth hinder, therefore, that I should not be baptised? 

RioHABD Ovnrar. 



[The above has no date. Neither can we ascertain to which commimity 
in Holland it was addressed. The writer is probably the author df 
a book entitled : — 



cc 



Man's Mortautie : or, a Treatise wherein *tis proved, both Theolngi- 
caUy and Philosophically, that whole Man (as a ratioruUl Creature) i* a 
Compound wholly mortall, contrary to that common distinction of Soitit 
and Body : And that the present going of the SouU into Heavtn or HtV 
is a meer Fiction ;. And that at the Resurrection is the beginning of nm 
immortality J and then Actual CondemiwMon, and SalvatioHy and not 
before. 

""With all doubts and Objections Answered, and resolve*!, both >»y 
Scripture and Reason; discovering the multitude of Blasphemies, anil 
Absurdities that arise from the fancie of the Soule. 

"Also, divers other Mysteries, as, of Heaven, Hell, Christ's humace 
residence, the extent of the Resurrection, the New Creation, &c., upeued. 
and presented to the tryall of better Judgments. 

"By R. O. 

" * That vBhich hefalUth the tong of mm, hefdOelh bea$t$; even one thimo be/bBtlk Atm off 
at the one dyeth, ao dyeth the other; yea, th^ hcwe aU one l^reath, «o OuU mom hath mi pn- 
kemtiMnee above a becut; for aU u vomUif.'—EccLaiAsm iiL 19. 

"Amsterdam: Printed by John Caune. Anno Dam. 1644."] 



APPENDICES. 257 

G. 

SMITH'S CONFESSION. 

foUowig is now, for the first time, given to tlie English publia 
It was issued by the remainder of John Smith's company. The only 
knowledge we have of it is from Robinson's remarks on it (Robinson's 
work was published in 1614).* From the latter work, Crosby has 
•xtracted a few fragments. It is a translation from the Butch, 
executed for the author by his friend Professor MUller, from the copy 
preserved in the archives of the Church at Amsterdam. This Creed 
must not be confounded with another, articles from which have been 
given by Crosby, and subsequently by Mr. UnderhiU, in a fragmen- 
tary form.+ The title of the one differs somewhat from the other. 
Mr. Underbill regards the latter as^the joint production of Smith 
and Helwys, and wonders that his name is not attached to it. The 
mystery, we think, can be solved. It is clear, that the one which 
we have given in a former note, with the forty-two names attached, 
was the Confession of Faith presented to the Waterland church 
on the application of Smith and his companions for fellowship with 
that commtmity, and is altogether different from the one which he 
has given. He says, "A/ac-simile of the subscriptions before the 
editor begins thus: *We subscribe to the truth of these articles, 
desiring further instruction. Forty-two names follow, and among 
them those of John Smyth, and of Mary Smyth, his wife.' "J I need 
not say that this is altogether a mistake. A moment's comparison 
will settle the question. The one now given covers a wider circle, and 
embraces a larger variety of subjects. Its teaching will pass under 
review in the second volume of this work. As the first Baptist Creed, 
at least of modem times, it will be perused with great interest by 
most of our readers: — 

L 

We confess, that there is a God (Job ai. 6), against all Epicureans 
and Atheists, who say with the heart, or pronounce with the mouth, that 
there is no God. (Pslm. xiv. 1. ; Job xxii 13.) 

n. 
That there is only one God in number (1 Cor. viii. 6), against the 
heathens, and some others, who introduce many gods. 

That God is incomprehensible and inexpressible, i.e., that the essence 
or substance of God cannot be comprehended by the understanding, nor 
expressed by words of men and angels. 

* " A Survey of the Confeadoni of Faith, pahlished in Certain Concladons, hy the nmaiof 
der of Mr. Smith's company, after his death."— Rohinson's Works, vol. iii., p. 337. 

t Hansard KnoUys Society. Confessions of Faith, Introd., p. tIL Crosby, roL ii., Ap. 
No.1. tiM(2,p.Tii. 

S 



258 APPEan>ioB& 

That Qod has not dedgned the creatares and holy wriimgB to inA 
us, how God is in his essence or sahstance, but how he is in his woridag 
(operating) and attributes. (Bom. i 1^2L) 

▼. 

That the words Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, do not dedare OoA 

essence or substance, but only his back or nearest parts thstt can be knovi 

of God. (Bom. L) 

VL 

That God is to be known by his names, attributes, and wotis 

expressed in the creatures and revealed in the Scriptures. (John xiiL 3L) 

vn. 

That to understand and conceive God in the mind, car in the «Bdv> 
standing, is not the saving knowledge of God; but to be likn to Gedls 
his effects and properties,— to be made conformable to his 
heavenly attributes : this is the true saving knowledge of God, 
we ought to give all diligence. (2 Cor. iii 18; Matt. v. 49 ; 2 Peter i 4) 

"vnL 
That this God is revealed as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost (Mali 
iii 16), and is infinite in mercy, in all omnipotence, holiness, i i(|,lilsiws 
ness, truth, glory, and eternity. (Fdm. xc. 2; cii 27.) 

EC 
That God, before the foundation of the world, did foresee and deter- 
mine the issue and event of all his works (Acts xv. 18); and that he 
accomplishes at the just time, instantly, all things by his dispoeitioo, 
according to the pleasure of his will (Ephes. i. 11) ; and that we consider, 
therefore, as an abomination, the understanding (sentiment) of those who 
teach that all things happen by luck and fortune. (Acts iv. 27, 28; Matt 
X. 29, 30.) 

X. 

That God is not the author and worker of sin or wickedness (I^Ibl 
V. 4 ; Jas. i. 13) ; but that He only has foreseen and determined what 
evil the free-will of angels and men would do : yet he gave no inftuenoe, 
instinct, motion, or inclination to the least sin. 

XL 

That Grod has created, in the beginning, the world, namely, the 

heavens, the earth, and all things which are therein (Gen. i. ; Acts xviL 

24) ; so that things which are seen, were not made of things which do 

appear. (Heb. xL 3.) 

xu. 

That God has created man for salvation (bliss, happiness) in his own 
image, in a state of innocence, without a spot of sin (Gen. i 27 ; ii 25). 
He created them male and female, namely, an only male and an oalj 
female (Gen. i 27). He formed man of the dust of the ground, and 
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life ; and man became a liviaf 



APPENDICES. 259 

soul (Gen. ii. 21, 22) ; and G^ has blessed them,' and said nnto them, Be 
fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have 
dominion over all that is therein. (Gen. i. 28. ) 

xrn. 

That, therefore, marriage be honourable amongst all, and the bed 
nndefiled, namely, between a man and his wife (Heb. xiii. 4 ; 1 Cor. vii. 
2) ; but G^ shall judge adulterers and fornicators. 

XIV. 

That God created man with a free will, having the faculty to choose 

what is good, and to avoid what is evil; or, to choose what is evil, and to 

avoid what is good : and that this liberty of will was a natural power and 

property, created by God in the soul of man. (Gen. ii. 16; xvii 3; 

xvii 10; Gen. L 17; vii. 31.) 

XV. 

That Adam, when falling, was not moved or caused by God, or by any 
instigation of God : that he has fallen out of his innocence, and has died 
the death, only from the temptation of Satan, while his free-will yielded 
freely therewith (or consented). (Gen. iii. 6.) 

XVL 

That Adam died the same day that he sinned (Gen. IL 17) : for the 
reward of sin is death (Rom. vi. 23); and it is that the apostle calls 
(Ephes. ii. ) dead in sins and transgressions ; that is, a loss of innocence, of 
peace of conscience, and of the comfortable presence of God. (Gen. iii. 7.) 

xvn. 

That Adam being fallen, did not lose any natural power or 'faculty 
which God created in his soul ; because the work of Satan, who is sin, 
cannot abolish Grod's works and creatures ; and therefore, being fallen, he 
still retained freedom of wilL (Gen. iii. 23, 24.) 

xvm. 

That original sin is not a Scriptural term, and that there is no such 
thing as men intended by the word (Jerem. xviii. 20); because as God 
threatened death only to Adam (Gen. ii. 17), not to his posterity, for 
their sins, and because God over-rates the souL (Heb. xii. 9.) 

XIX. 

That if original sin might have passed from Adam to his posterity, 

yet is the issue thereof stayed by Christ's death, which was effectual 

before Cain and AbeFs birth, as Christ is the Lamb slain from the beginning 

of the world. (Rev.' xiii. 8.) 

XX. 

That infontd are conceived and bom in innocency, without sin, and 
that they dying, therefore, are all undoubtedly saved ; which is to be 
understood of all infants who live in the world (Gen. v. 12 ; Gen. i. 17 ; 
1 Cor. XV. 19), for the sin is not imputed ; because, where there is no law, 
there is no transgression. Now, the law was not given to infants, but to 
them that could understand. (Rom. v. 13; Matt, xiii 9; Matt, viii 3.) 



S60 



Tbak aH actaal aiiuiei* bear tiie ima^ <^ the first Adam, in lis 
iMBOceaej, faHy and r es iiUi fcki n , in the offer of grace (1 Cor. xv. 49), audio 
poHB under this threefold estate. 

xxn. 

That AdMmhtiag hJSat, God did not hate him, but lored him still, aid 
sought his welfare vith all his heart (Gen. iiL 8 ; xr. 1) ; neither doih kt 
hate any man that faUeth vith Adam ; but he loves mankind, and, from 
his lo¥e, sent his cmlj b^otten Son to save that which "was lost, and to fiad 
that iriiich was gone astraj. (John iiL 16; Matt. xriiL 11-14 ; Lake Ik) 

xjxa. 

That God never forsaketh a man till there be no remedy; neithtr 
doth he cast away his innocent creature from all eternity, bat casteU 
away men irrecoverable in sin (literally, who wiU not be aided). (Job v. 4 ; 
xviiL 2^-32; xxxiii. 6l) 



But as tbera is in all creatares an inclinati<m to their yonsg, to do 
them good, so in the Ijord is an indioation towards men to proMots 
their welfare (happiness) ; for each spark of goodliness that is in ths 
creatares, is also infinitely in God. (Kom. i 20; Pslm. xix. 4 ; Bom. x. 1&) 

XXV. 

ThaA God has d^iermined, before the foundation of the woild, tkaft 
the way of life and salvation shoold be by Christ, and that he has foressa 

who would follow it (Eph. L 4, v. 2; Tim. i. 9), and also who would 
follow the way of infidelity and impenitency. (Job L 8. ) 

XXVI. 

That no more than a father begets his child to the gallows, and a 
potter forms a pot to be broken, so Go<l predestinates and creates nobody 
to damnation. (Ezek. xxxiii. 11; Gen. i. 17; 1 Cor. xv. 49; Gen. v. ;>.) 

xxvn. 

That as God created all men according to his image, 8r> hath h« 

redeemed all that fall by actual sin to the same end ; and that Oixi. in 

his redemption, has not swerved from the way of his mercy which ht 

manifested in his creation. (John i. 3-16 ; 2 Cor. v. 19 ; 1 Tim. iL 4, r», 6 ; 

Ezek. xxxiii. 11.) 

xxvni. 

That Jesus Christ, who was iu the beginning, ha.s laid the foundatioD 
of heaven and earth, which perish or are to be change<l. (Heb. i. 10; 
Pslm. cii. 28.) He is the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the enti, 
the first and the last (Rev. xxii. 13). He is the brightness of the glt)ry and 
the expressed image of the substance of his Father, upholding all ihinp 
by the word of his power. (Heb. i. 3.) He is the wisdom of Gi»d, 
begotten from all eternity, before all creatures. (Prov. viii. 20. ; Mic. r 
4 ; Luke xi. 49. ) He was in that form of God, and thought it no robbery 
to be equal with God ; but took upon him the form of a servant, and sa» 



APPENDICES. 261 

in the body of the Virgin Mary, miraculously (marvellously), by the power 
of the Holy Ghost, and the overshadowing of the Almighty, the word is 
made flesh (John i. 4 ; Luke L 34) ; being of the seed of David, as con- 
cerning the flesh (origin), God having prepared him a body. (Phil, ii 7 ; 
Bom. i. 3; Heb. z. 5.) 

XXIX. 

That Jesus Christ, after being baptized, by a voice out of heaven from 
his Father, and by the anointing of the Holy Ghost, which appeared on 
his head in the form of a Dove, is ordained to be the prophet over his 
church, whom all men might hear (Matt. xvii. ; Heb. i. 2) ; and that both 
by his doctrine and life, which he has lived here on earth, by all his 
doings and sufferings, he has declared and preached, as the only prophet 
and lawgiver of his church, the way of peace and life, the glad message of 
the GospeL (Acts iu. 22, 23. ) 

XXX. 

That Jesus Christ is come into the world to save sinners, and that 
the love of God towards his enemies has sent him thereunto out of heaven 
{John iii. 16) ; that Christ has died for his enemies (Bom. v. 10) ; that he 
has bought them who denied him (2 Peter ii. 1), teaching us thereby to 
love our enemies. (Matt. v. 44, 45. ) 

XXXI. 

Hiat Christ was surrendered unto the death for our sins (Bom. iv. 25), 
«s we obtain forgiveness of sins by his death (Eph.L7); for himself lessen- 
ing or annihilating (sic)y he has humbled himself, and is become obedient 
unto death, even the death of the cross (Phil. ii. 8), redeeming us from our 
vain conversation, not with silver and gold, but with his own precious 
blood, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot (1 Pet. i. 18-19) ; 
for he has blotted out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us 
(Eph. ii. 15; Col. ii. 14; Deut. xxxi. 26), and has spoiled principalities 
and powers, and made in that cross a show of them openly, triumphing over 
them in it (CoL ii. 15), and through death has destroyed him who had the 
power of death, — that is, the deviL (Heb. ii. 14.) 

xxxn. 
That the enemies of our salvation, whom Christ has conquered (van- 
quished), are the gates of hell, the powers of darkness; namely, Satan, 
sin, death, the grave, the curse and damnation, wicked men and persecu- 
tors (Ephes. vi. 12 ; 1 Cor. xv. 26 ; 1 Cor. v. 4, 5-7 ; Bev. xx. 10-14, 15) ; 
and these enemies we must vanquish in no other mannw than Christ has 
Tanquished. (John xxi. 12 ; 1 Pet. ii. 21 ; Bev. xiv. 4. ) 

xxxm. 

That the sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, offered unto €^ his 
Father, upon the cross, though a sacrifice of sweet savour, and though God 
be well pleased with him, doth not reconcile God unto us, who did never 
hate us, nor was our enemy, but reoondleth us unto God, and ilayeth the 
enmity and hatred which is in us against God. (2 Qot. v. 19 ; Ephea. iL 
ii 14-17; Bom. i 3a) 



S$2 MJeBBSDlCES, 

XXXIV. 

Tliat the effiob^ of Ghzislfs deaCh U only effectaal to the nhntioiKf 
tiKMe who nuntify their ihis, and who have been planted together mtkt 
likfineaB of his death (Bcnn. vi 3-6); who are circiimclBed with tkt 
drcumcisioii made without hands ; in putting off the body of the anof 
the flesh, whereof Chiist has become a servant of the eizGumeiaionfortht 
trtiiih of God to secure tiie promises of the Father. (Bom. zr.; DmL 

XXX. a) 

XXXT. 

Tliat there are three who bear witness in earth — ^the ^nbrit, tiie Watei; 
and Kood, and these three are one in their witness, te stif y in g tki 
CSirist in truth has died (1 John y. 8) ; for he gave up Hie gjiost (John zix. 
90), and out of his side, which was pierced by the spear, came water sad 
blood, because that included (encompassed) that wherein the hesii ii 
preserved. (John xiz. 36-38.) 



Tliat eveiy man being Id truth dead to sin, has likewise then 
three witneeses in himself (1 John ▼. 10) ; for the spirit, the blood, sad 
water of the sins, that is, the life, the food, and the enj<^ym0nt of ah, ii 
put away. (1 Pet. iv. 1 ; Bom. vL 7 ; 1 John iii 9.) 

xxxvn. 
That Christ being dead in truth, is slso buried (John '"'g 3MS)^ 
and that he has lain ^i the grave the whole Sabbath of the Jews ; bat he 
has not seen corruption in the grave. (Fslm. xvL 10 ; Acts ii 3L) 

xxxvm. 

That all men, in truth died, are also with Christ buried by baptiim 
into death (Bom. vi. 4 ; Col. ii. 12), holding their Sabbath in the grave 
with Christ ; that is, ceasing from their works as Gk>d did from his (Meb. 
iy. 10), expecting there, in hope of a resurrection. (Pslm. zvL 9.) 

XXXIX. 

That Christ, early in the morning of the first day of the week, hae 
risen after his death and burial (Matt. xx. 6) ; and he has risen for our 
righteousness (Bom. vi.), and is declared to be the Son of GUxi vith 
power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the 
dead. (Bom. i 4.) 

XL. 

That those who have been planted with Christ t<^ther in the like- 
ness of his death and burial, shall be also in the likeness of his resurrectioa 
(Bom. vi. 4, 5) ; for he quickens (re-creates) them, and quickens them to- 
gether with himself (Col. u. 13 ; Eph. ii. 5, 6) ; for that is their bliss, and 
it is done by grace. (Eph. iL 5 ; 1 John v. 11-15 ; Tit. iii 5-7.) 

XLT. 

That this re-creation and quickening of Christ, in the bath of regenera- 
tion, is the renewing of the Holy Ghost, our justification and salvation. 
(Tit. iii 3-7. ) This is the pure stream of the living vrater, dear as ctysla^ 



APPENDICES. 263 

coming from the throne of God and the Lamb (Bev. xxii. 1) ; which also 
flows from the body of those who believe in Christ. (John vii. 38. ) These 
are the precious promises whereby we are made partakers of the divine 
nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust. 
(2 Peter i. 4. ) This is the fruit of the tree of life, which is in the midst 
of the paradise of God ; this is the white stone, and in the stone a name 
written, which no man knoweth, saving he that receiveth it ; this is the 
morning star ; this is the new name — the name of God, the name of the 
city of God, of the new Jerusalem, which has descended from God out of 
heaven : it is the hidden manna, the white cloth, the eye-salve, the gold 
and the heavenly repast, which Christ promises them who vanquish. (Rev. 
IL 7, 17, 28; Rev. iii. 5-12; xviii. 20.) 

XLH. 

That there are three who bear witness in heaven — ^the Father, the 
Word, and the Holy Ghost, and that these three are one in their witness, 
declaring the resurrection of Christ. The Father says : Thou art my son ; 
to-day 1 have begotten you. (Acts xiii. 33-35.) The Son declares his, 
resurrection^ conversing forty days with his disciples. (Acts i. 3. ) The 
Holy Ghost declares the same thing, that Christ did rise, unto his dis- 
ciples on the day of Pentecost. (Acts ii.) 

XLin. 
That every regenerated man who has risen with Christ, has also in 
himself the three above-mentioned witnesses (1 John v. 20) ; for Christ 
dwells in his heart by faith (Eph. iii. 17) ; and the Father dwells with hia 
Son (John xiv. 2), and likewise, the Holy Ghost (1 Cor. x. 3) ; and the 
grace of Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the 
Holy Ghost, is with them. (2 Cor. xiii. 13.) 

xuv. 
That Christ having conversed forty days after his resurrection 
amongst his disciples (Acts L 18), was visibly and bodily taken up into 
heaven, whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of 
all things, which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets 
since the world began. (Acts iii. 21.) 

XLV. 

That those who are risen spiritually, are taken up with him into 
the heaven, seeking the things which are above, where Christ sitteth on 
the right hand of God ; and they set their affections on things above, not 
on things on earth. (CoL iii 1, 2.) 

XLVI. 

That Christ being now in the heaven, sitteth on the right hand of 
God. (Mark xvi. 9. ) He led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men 
(Eph. iv. 8) ; that God highly has exalted him, and given him a name 
which is above every name ; that at the name of Jesus every knee should 
bow, of things in heaven, and things on earth, and things under the earth ; 
and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the 



264 AFPEETDICBa. 

g^ny of €fod the Father (Fhil iL 29) ; thmt he alone has reeeiTed pow 
B heaven and in earth (Matt, xxriii 18); that €rod haa pat all tluB^i 
uder his feet, and gare him to be head over all things to the chuthi 
which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in aU. (Eph. L fi; 

That the regenerated are made to sit together in heavenly plaeet, ii 
Christ Jesus (Eph. iL 6) ; that they sit with hinwin his throne (Rev. iii 
21); that they shall have power over the nations, and that they shall rak 
them with a rod of iron, and break them to shivers as the vessels of t 
potter (Bev. iL 6-27) ; and that they sit upon the twelve thrones, judgiic 
the twelve tribes of Israel (Matt. xix. 28), which is to be understood 
qiiritually, that all their enemies shall be subjected under their feet, so 
that wicked one will not touch them (1 John v. 18), nor the gates of heO 
shall prevail against them (Matt. xvL) ; and that they are become jsIUa 
in the temple of God, which shall never perish. (Bev. ilL 12. ) 

XLYin. 

That Christ being exalted at the right hand of God his Father, Ux 

above all principalities and power, and might and dominion, and eveiy 

name that is named, — ^not only in this world, but also in that which is to 

come (Eph. L 21), — has received from his Father the promise of the Holy 

Ghost, which he has also poured out on his disciples on the day of Peiite> 

cost (Acts iL 23.) 

ZLDL 

That Christ, in his resurrection, ascension, and exaltation in heaven, 
is become the Lord Christ, Saviour, anointed, and King, dearer and 
more than in his humiliation, passion, and death (Acts ii. 36; PhiL 
iL 7); for the end is more worthy than the means; and the sufferings 
and dying of Christ were the way through wliich he entered into his ^l-ry 
(Luke xxiv. 26) ; and, in consequence, the power of his resurrection in the 
new creature is more excellent and glorious than that which is in the 
dying to sin, the mortification of sin, and the rising from it. 

L. 

That to know Christ after the flesh, is of little advantage (2 Cor. v. 
16, 17); and the knowledge of the lineage and the history of Christ, ii 
nothing more than what the devil knows as well, or possibly better, than 
some men ; but the knowledge after the spirit is serviceable for salvation, 
that is, to become embodied by Christ in a spiritual manner, in the hke- 
ness of Christ's birth, life, miracles, facts, sufferings, dying, burial, 
resurrection, ascension, and exaltation. (Rom. vL 'iS.) 

LI. 

That Christ, after the flesh and history, in his operations and suffer- 
ings, is a great mystery, and holy sacrament of himself, and of his 8ervi<« 
in the Spirit, and of such heavenly things which he perft)nus in thoM» who 
shall be inheritors of the salvation (Rom. vi. 3, 6, 7 ; Eph. ii. 5, 6); and 
that he, in a spiritual manner, performs all his miracles in the regenerate 
which he formerly performed in the days of his flesh. He heals their 



APPENDICES. 265 

leprosy, bloody flux, blindnew, dumbness, lameness, paralysis, and fevers; 
he casts out the devils and impure spirits ; he raises the dead ; he checks 
the winds, and the sea becomes calm; he entertains, feeds thousands 
with barley loaves and fishes. (Matt. viiL 16, 17 ; Isaiah liii. 4 ; John vL 
27.) 

LIL 

That Christ (in that manner) is become a Mediator of the new 
Covenant, namely, priest and prophet unto his church, and that the 
regenenfted are become also through him spiritual kings and prophets. 
(Bev. i. 6; IJohnii. 20.) 

Lm. 

That the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son of Qod 
(John xiv. 26 ; xiv. 7) ; that he is one only spirit, through whom Christ 
offered himself without spot to God (Heb. ix. 14); that he is the only 
comforter, whom Christ begs, obtains, and sends down unto us from the 
Pather (John xiv. 16), which dwelleth in the regenerate (1 Cor. iii. 16), 
which teacheth them all things ; and they need not that any man teach 
them, as the same anointing teaches all things. (1 John ii 20-27.) 

LIV. 

That although there are diversities of gifts of the Holy Ghost, there 
is but one spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will (1 Cor. xii 4~ 
11 ; Eph. iv. 4) ; that the external gifts which the Holy Ghost poured out 
on the day of Pentecost on the disciples, as tongues, prophecies, and 
miracles, which are called the Baptism with the Holy Ghost (Acts i. 5), 
were only figures and introductions to better gifts, — namely, the proper 
gifts of the Spirit of Sanctification, — which gifts are the new creatures of 
our only baptism. (Eph. iv. 4 ; Acts ii. 23-28 ; Luke x. 17.) 

LV. 

That John the Baptist and Christ were two diverse persons : their 

offices, two diverse offices ; and their baptism, two diverse baptisms, — the 

one differing from the other. (John i 20 ; Acts xili. 25 ; Acts i 4, 6 ; 

Matt. iii. 2.) 

LVL 

That John has taught the baptism unto repentance for the forgive- 
ness of sins, baptising with water unto amendment of life (Matt. liL 11), to 
prepare, in that manner, the way for Christ and his baptism (Luke iiL 3), 
bringing men to repentance and faith in the Messiah, whom he had indi- 
cated with his finger, saying : ** Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh 
away the sin of the world.'' (John i 29-31) ; Acts xix. 4.) 

Lvn. 
That Christ is mightier, and has a greater office and service than 
John (Matt. iii. 11) ; that he baptises with the Holy Ghost and with fire ; 
that he comes and walks in the way which John had prepared for him ; 
and that the new creature comes after repentance. (Luke iii 6. ) 

LYUL 
That repentance, and faith in the Messiah, are the things or condi- 
tions which we must perform on our side, that we may enjoy the promisa 



kBinnw of «be ipiril, tint K tk 

to m for tte pcKfooniiv of tke fa* 

Kxz. 6; AetoiL 38; Gia.nL 

of God, whaAasnjm^tadwgj 

|»Cbg.LaDi^MimHiewewitiilul (Gia.m. 





(l«N«|ifr about) m me bMiti 

liy tiie H^ Sc rii i iiini , 

gnee Ii^siib bj iiie awiiaB and 

i) flff Ob Hfflty Ghort^ iHudi mu is aUe to iceeift 

ST; Acte^ 10; Bon. X. 14^ 15.) 



Iicioie Chid cemtSidm, not m the pa f uti am g of 
vlddi Chid j e quiwM oa or ride, Imt <mi1j m tlw 
cqofiaK tte pnniM, m tiw poMMOB of CaiiiBt, tiie f otgiveii^ 

Ft&Aftide4L • 



nut God tte Fuller b^gete w of bis own irffl and witb the woid 
of tnifth ( JsflMs 1 18), iddeh woid is not a ooxn^tible seed (1 Petor i 2S); 
■ot the doefaiiie of npentsnee snd futfa that can be lost (Luke ym. 17); 
and that God the Father in the woik of regeneration, needs not, aor 
enqdojs the asristance or the means of the creatoie, bat that the Fathei; 
the Word, and the Holy Ghoefc, perform that work in the eonl withovt 
means, wherein the free-will of man reigns. (John i. 13. ) 

Lxn. 
That those who have not yet obtained the new creature, stand in 
need of the Scriptures, creatures, and ordinances of the outward (V 
visible church, to teach, to comfort, and to excite them in order to perfona 
better the condition of repentance and faith, to enjoy forgiveness of sins. 
(2 Peter L 19; 1 Cor. ii. 26; Eph. iv. 12, 13.) 

Lxm. 
That the new creature which is bom from God, needs not the out- 
ward Scripture, creature, or ordinances of the external churches, so that 
it might bear itself on it for support (1 Cor. xiii. 10-12; 1 John, iL 17; 
1 Cor. i. 15, 16 ; Rev. xxi. 23) : because it hath three witnesses in itself, 
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, which are better than aH 
Scriptures, creatures, ordinances, whatever they may be. 

LXIV. 

That even as (likewise) he, who was above the law, nevertheless ii 
made under the law for our sakes, so the regenerated can and will not do 
other thing, from love towards their . . . than to employ the external 
things that therewith they might come to aid and support men, and that, 
therefore, the visible church and ordinances are at all time necessary for 
all men, whatever they may be. (Matt, iii 15; xxviiL 19, 20; 1 Cor. 
▼iii. 9.) 



APPENDICES. 267 

LXV. 
That the new creature, although being above the law and the Scrip- 
ture, cannot act contrary to the law and the Scriptures, but strives that 
all its works may serve to confirm and establish the law (Rom. iii. 31) ; 
therefore he cannot lie, nor steal, nor fornicate, nor slay or hate any man* 
nor perform any carnal works : all carnal lusts and libertinism, or freedom, 
is against the regeneration, and a damned and execrable abomination. 
(Rom. vL 15, 16, 18; 2Pet. ii 18, 19; John viu. 34; IJohn v. 18.) 

LXVL 

That the outward visible church is an . . . figure of the real 
spiritual and invisible church, which consists of the spirits only of perfect 
and justified men, namely, of the regenerated. (Rev. L 20; xxL 2.) 

Lxvn. 

That the outward and visible church consists of 'r^enerated and 
believing men, as much as men can judge thereof, who bring forth fruits 
worthy of amendment of life (1 Tim. vii. 3-6; 2 Tim. iii. 5-10; Acts 
xix. 4); although hypocrites and feigners are often hidden among the 
repenting. 

Lxvm. 

That repentance is the changing of the mind from evil to good (Matt. 
iiL 2), and sadness for the sins before committed, with an heart humbled 
on account of them, with an intention of amendment for the future, and 
with a sincere diligence therein. (2 Cor. vii. 8, 11 ; Jer. xxxi. 18, 19. ) 

LUX. 

That when we shall have done all these things which we are able to 
do, we are still unprofitable servants, and all our righteousness is nothing 
else but a soiled cloth (Luke xvii. 10) ; and that we only can suppress and 
cut off the branches of the sin, but we are not able to pluck up the roots 
of sin from our hearts. (Jer. iv. 4 ; Beut. xxx. 6, 7. ) 

liXX. 

That faith is a science (knowledge) of the mind of the doctrine of 
the law and the Grospel in the prophetic and apostolic Scriptures of the 
Old and the New Testaments, accompanying repentance with a confidence 
that God will accomplish by Christ, in us all, the promise, namely, the 
forgiveness of sins, the mortifying of them, with the new creature which 
is the eternal life, on the conditions of our sincere repentance and amend- 
ment of life. (Acts ii. 38, 39; Heb. iL 1; Matt. i. 15.) 

LXXI. 

That all repenting and believing Christians are brethren in the com- 
munion of the outward visible church, wherever they may live, or by what 
name they may be named, be they Roman Catholics, Luthems, Zuinglians, 
Calvinists, Brownists, Anabaptists, or any other pious Christians, who in 
truth, and by godly zeal, strive for repentance and faith, although they 
are implicated in great ignorance and weakness. Nevertheless, we greet 
them altogether with a holy kiss, deploring with our whole heart, that 
we, who strive for one faith, one Spirit, one Lord, one God, one body, 



268 APPEimicEs. 

one baptism, should be so divided and severed into so many sects and 
splitting, and that for so less considerable reason. 

Lxxn. 

That the external water-baptism ought only to be administered to 
those who are repentant and believing, as is mentioned, and not to inno- 
cent infants or wicked men. (Matt. iii. 23 ; xrviii. 19, 20; John iv. L) 

Lxxm. 
That baptism put before the repentant and believing, and preached, 
is the spiritual baptism of Christ, that is, the baptism of the Holy Gho«t 
and fire, the baptism for the death and resurrection of Christ, iba 
promises of the Spirit, which he shall surely partake off, if he perseverei 
imto the end. 

LXXIV. 

That only the baptized are to taste the elements of the Lord's Sap- 
per, wherein, before the repentant and believers, are put and preached, 
the spiritual Lord's Supper, which is prepared from the flesh and blood of 
him who was crucified, and his blood poured out for the forgiveness at 
sins, even as the bread is broken, and the wine is poured out, and is eaiea 
and drunken as bread and wine, in a bodily manner only by those who are 
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, in the communion of the same 
spirit. (1 Cor. xii. 13; Apo. iii 20; 1 Cor. xxi 23, 26; John vi 53, Sa) 

LXXV. 

That the outward baptism and the Lord's Supper give not, mv 

administer grace and regeneration to those who enjoy or partake them 
(see Art. 61), but even as the word which is preached ; so the sacraments 
only serve to awaken and support repentance and faith in those who 
enjoy them, unto the time when Christ comes, and the day breaks, and 
the morning star arises in their hearts. (1 Cor. xi. 26 ; 2 Peter L 9 ; 1 Cor. 
XV. 8.) 

LXXVI. 

That the sacraments have the same use or advantage that the 
preached word has ; for they are a visible word, and they teach to the eyei 
of them that can understand, as the word teaches to the ears of them that 
have ears to hear (Pro. xx. 11), and that, therefore, they pertain no more 
to infants than the word doth. 

Lxxvn. 

That the preaching of the word and the use of the sacraments put 
before the eyes the service of Christ in the Spirit, which teaches baptism, 
and nourisheth the regenerated through the Holy Spirit, inwardly and 
invisibly. (See Art. 41. ) 

Lxxvm. 

That Christ in his outward church has appointed two sorts of aer- 
vants, namely, some who are called pastors, teachers, elders, or bi»h«»pa, 
who administer the word and sacrament : and some who are called dear 
cons, men and women, whose office it is to serve tables and to wash ih« 
feet of the saints. (Acts vi. 2, 4 ; Phil i. 1 ; 1 Tim. iiL 2, R.) 



APPENDICES. 269 

LZXDL 
That the leparation of the impenitent from the external communion 
of the church, is a figure of the eternal rejection and punishment of those 
who are impenitent and persevere so until the end. ( Apo. xxi. 27 ; xxiL 
14, 15 ; Matt, xvi 16, 18 ; Matt, xviii 18 ; John xx. 28; Apo. iii. 12. ) 

LXXX. 

That none ought to be kept from the outward communion of the 
church but those who remain impenitent and deny the power of godliness. 
(2 Tim. iii. 5, 18. ) And that none ought to be rejected on account of igno- 
rance and error, or weakness, so long as they retain their repentance and 
faith in Christ (Rom. xiv. 1 ; Thess. v. 14 ; Rom. xvi 17, 18); but they 
ought to be taught with meekness : those who are strong ought to bear the 
weak, and support one another in love. 

LXXXL 

That one may speak a word against the Son and be forgiven; that 
is, one may err in the historical knowledge of God and in the matter of 
the outward church, and obtain forgiveness, if it springs from an unripe 
seal ; but whosoever speaks a word against the Holy Ghost, that is, who- 
eTer, after his enlightenment, forsakes repentance and faith in Christ, and 
tramples under his feet the blood of the holy covenant, turning with the 
dog to ittf own vomit again, such shall not be forgiven neither in this world 
nor in the world to come. (Matt, xii 31, 32; Heb. vi. 4.) 

Lxxxn. 
That they who are separated from the outward communion of 
churches, ought to be reckoned as heathen and publicans (Matt. 
jEviiL 17); and that they ought to be shunned and avoided, so far 
M they might infect us. Nevertheless, we ought to be always ready to 
teach them, and provide them with necessaries, and by all means seek to 
win them, because the separation is designed only to mortify the flesh, 
that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord. (1 Cor. y. 5, 11 ; 
Matt. xiv. 19 ; Luke xv. 12.) 

TiXXIJU. 

That there is no succession in that outward church where the truth 
is ; but the succession is only from heaven ; and that the new creature 
only has the thing signified, and the substance, whereof the visible 
church with its ordinances, are the figure and shadow. (Col. :i. 16, 17.) 
The regenerated, therefore, only have power and knowledge to officiate in 
the visible church, for the service and benefit of others. (John vl 45.) 
Kevertheless, God is not the author of confusion, but of peace and unity : 
and, therefore, we ought to adhere as near to the primitive institution of 
the visible church, or to effectuate it, bM far as it is possible. Where- 
fore, it is not permitted that all the brethren administer the sacrament 
(£ph. iv. 11, 12 ; 1 Cor. xii 4, 5, 6, 28, 29), except those only who are 

called and ordained to it. 

LXXXIT. 

That Christ has ordained in his visible church the vocations of 

masters and Bervants, of parents and children, of husbands and wives 



270 APPENDICES. 

(Epb. Y. 22, 25 ; vL 1, 4, 5, 9) ; and has ordered that every soul be labjed 
to the higher powers, not only for wrath bat for conscience sake ; that we 
most pay tribute, fear to whom fear is (Bom. xiiL 1, 2, 3, 7); thatve 
onght not to despise dominion, or speak evil of dignities (Jnd. 8) ; that ve 
ought to make prayer or thanksgiving for them (1 Tim. ii. 1, 2, 3), for thii 
is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour. 

LXXXV. 

That the office of the magistrate is a permissive ordinance <^ God 
(Bom. xiii. 1), or an ordinance of man (1 Pet. iL 13 ; 1 Sam. viii 5, 22) 
which God has permitted, that the one might not devour the other, as the 
wild beasts; so that honesty, decency, sobriety, amongst men mi^t be 
maintained, and that the magistrate hereby may please God in his voca- 
tion, doing what is right and just in the sight of the Lord, in order that 
they may obtain a temporal blessing from God for themselves, titeir 
families, and their subjects. (2 Kings x. 30.) 

LXXXVL 

That the magistrate, by virtue of his office, is not to meddle 
with religion or matters of conscience, nor to compel men to this or that 
form of religion or doctrine, but to leave the Christian religion to the free 
conscience of every one, and to meddle only with political matters (Bam. 
xiiL 3, 4), namely, injustice and wrong of one against another, so as mur- 
der, adultery, theft, and the like ; because Christ alone is the King sad 
Xiawgiver of the church and the conscience. (James iv. 12.) 

Lxxxvn. 

That the magistrate, so far as he will follow Christ and be hii 
disciple, ought to deny himself, take up his cross and follow him. He 
must love his enemies and not kill them ; pray for them and not hate 
them ; feed and comfort them, but not let them die from hunger ; he 
must visit them in prison, but not throw them there ; he must not banish 
them out of the country, nor divest them or rob them of their goods, or 
appropriate them to himself. He must suffer persecution with Christ, be 
scolded, slandered, flogged, beaten, spit on, imprisoned, and put to death 
with Christ, and that by the power of the magistrate, which it is impoe- 
sible to do, and to keep the sword of vengeance. 

Lxxxvm. 
That Christ's disciples, the members of the visible church, mu«i 
judge and compose all their own differences amongst themselves, and may 
not go to law before magistrates (1 Cor. vi. 17), and that all their differ- 
ences must be decided by yea and nay, peacefully, without using an oath. 
(Matt. V. 33, 37; James v. 12.) 

LXXXIX. 

That Christ's disciples, the members of the visible church, ought not 
to marry wicked and impious people of the world, but that every one must 
marry in the Lord (1 Cor. vii. 39, 40); that is, every man only one wife, 
and every woman only one man. (I Cor. vii. 2; Acts xiii.) 



APPENDICES. 271 

XO. 

That parents are bound to nourish their children, or to bring them 

up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord (Eph. vi 4) ; and that they 

must provide for their house : otherwise they have denied the faith, and 

are worse than the infideL (1 Tim. v. 8. ) 

xci. 

But in so far as any man of a particular vocation serve the Lord, so 

as Simeon, Andrew, James, and John, then he must forsake all, father, 

ships, nets,* wife, children, nay, his life, to follow Christ. (Luke x. 4-26 ; 

Mark iv. 18-22.) 

xcn. 

That in the necessity of the church and poor brethren, all things 

ought to be common (Acts iv. 32) ; nay, that the one church ought to 

assist the other church in its wants. (Gal. ii. 10; Acts zi. 30; 2 Cor. 

viiL29.) 

xcm. 

That the bodies of all men who have died, shall be raised out of the 
•earth at the last day, by the almightiness of Christ, and to every one his 
own seed, even as the grain out of the seed corrupting in the earth. 

xciv. 

That all who are remaining on the earth at the day of judgment, 
shall not die, but shall be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an 
«ye, at the last trump (1 Cor. xv. 52), for the trumpet shall sound and the 
dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed : not in the 
essence or substance, but in the quality. For the bodies being sown 
spiritually in dishonour, in weakness, in corruptibility, and natural, 
cdiall rise in glory, power and incorruptibility. (1 Cor. xv. 42, 44.) 

XCV. • 

That the bodies being risen, are to be joined to the soul, wherewith 
or whereto they were formerly united in life, which, until this time, are 
kept under the protection of the Lord. (Apo. vi 9 ; Job xix. 25, 27.) 

XCVL 

That it is appointed unto all men once to die, and after this the 

judgment. (Heb. ix. 27.) And the change of those who remain alive at 

the last day, shall be equivalent to death. (1 Cor. xv. 12 ; 1 Thess. iv. 

15, 17.) 

xcvn. 

That there will be a general or universal day of judgment, wherein 
every one shall receive (according) to the things done in his body, whether 
they be good or bad. (2 Cor. v. 10 ; Acts xvii. 31.) 

xcvm. 

That of that day and that hour knoweth no man, no not the angels 
which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father only. (Mark xiii 3.) 
But at this time, if it be revealed unto the church or not, we dare not say 
anything positively. 

* The word may be mett«&, " with,** or mitten, nets. We have piefemd the Ukttervrord. 



272 APPENDICES. 

XCIX. 

That Chrisfc shall be the Man and Judge in that day (Acts xvil 31); 
that he shall come in his glory in the clouds, with all his holj angels 
(ICatt. xxv. ), with a shout and the v^ioe of the archangel and trump of 
God (1 Thess. iv. 16) : he shall sit on the throne of his glory, and ill 
nations shall be gathered before him, and he shall separate them one from 
the other, even as the shepherd dirideth his sheep from the goats, aettinf 
thfi sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left. (Matt, xxr.) 

0. 

That the King shall say unto the sheep, the regenerated, who stand 
on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom 
of my Father, prepared for you from the foundations of the world : and 
so it shall be done. (Matt. xxv. ) 

CI. 

That the King shall say unto those who stand on his left hand, the 
goats, which are wicked men. Depart from me, ye cursed, into ererlasting 
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels : and so it shall be done. 

cn. 

That after the judgment is finished and consummated, and the last 
enemy, that is, death, is put under the feet of Christ, the Son also him- 
self shall deliver the kingdom into the hands of the Father, and shall bt 
subject to him who put all things under him, that God niay be all in aO. 
(1 Cor. XV. 24.) 



[Dr. Miiller says : — ** i have made the translations as faithful asi 
possible, and aa literal, as far as it could be done. The incorrect- 
ness of style, and the writing, have caused much obscurity in many 
parts. I have occasionally altered a word, and in some instances 
transposed one, to make the meaning plainer. In no case is the s«?nso 
altered. I have carefully avoided that. I wish I could have reminfd 
all obscurity from some of the articles, but that I found all but im- 
possible."] 



H. 

There is an allusion to this letter at i)age 78. It should have l)eon 
inserted earlier, but from some cause it was overlooked. The 
author is indebted to the courtesy of the authorities of Emanutl 
College, Cambridge, for the transcript of the MS. in their i>osst'«:$:i»n, 
and to his friend the Rev. W. Robinson, for obtaining it for him. 

The men to whom this letter was addressed were from Essex. They 
were burnt in Smithfield on tho 23rd of April, 155C. They wen;— 



APFENBICEB. 273 

EoBBRT Drake, miiuBter, of Thiuderslj. 

Wu. TvHH, curate of Hockley. 

KicHARD Sfubok, shewman. 

Thos. Spubob, fuller. 

John Cabal, weaver. 

Gborge Ahbbosi, tulor. 
Fox haa given an account of them, and some of tlie letters of John 
Careless, given by the same hietariao, ar« addressed to Tyms. I can 
Rnd no allusion to this controversy in tlie details of tlie martyrolo- 
gists. It is peiiapa difficult to say to whom we are indebted for the 
marginal notes. Mr. lUibioson says ;^" The spelling is modernized 
by me, and here and there is an (!), indicating a little doubt on my 
part. The figures on the first page, I am not sure about." 

"A true copT of letter which Henty Hart sent to Newgate, 
to the prisoners there condemned to die far the confes- 
sion of Christ's verity, sgunsi certun articles which 
they ollowed, that were Bet forth by certain prisoners in 
the King's Bench, to qipease the contentions that their 
fellow-prisoDers had with them, if it mi^t have been. 
'"As ye know not what God is, otherwise than he hath Ajilut ihc 
shewed himself in his woid, no more do yon or any other *"• "*'''■ 
man else (?) know whether he have any parts or passions or .^ j^, y, 
not. Wherefore, as ye ought to tesch nothing which ye ni Pni. liv. 
cannot prove, no more ought 3^00, or any other, though 
' they think them of the church, or the church itself, to 
search after secrets wli y* Holy Ghost forbydeth yon, 
lest yon perish. 

" ' And where ye say that every one of you doth acknow- 
ledge other to be true and lively (!) memheis of your church, 
if ye maintain any errors, ye bear witness against yoor- 

"'In the second article, ye say that God and man were ciiriii huh 

joined together in Christ into one person, never to be divi- u u' aa nn- "' 

ded ; and in the fiist, ye say that God was three penoas, ^li^i^^^' 

without beginning and ending, BO that ye make quatemyty {^ts^iae° 

in God if ye hold the humanity which our Saviour Christ jiiioii J«2["^* 

took of the blessed Virgin Haiy for a person, and is not : t^SC '" 

" 'This is of verity uncartaine faith for a man to give his 
life for, when ye hold and affirm in yooT fint article that God 
is three persons, and then ye say in the second that he is 
made one person for ever. I pr^ you, let me know which 
of these ye intend to hold for the truth, when ye have well 
weighed the matter amongst yourselves. 

" ' In your fourth article you say you do bdieve all your 



274 



APPENDICES. 



salvation, redejaption, and the remission of sins, cometli 
unto you, wholly and solely by the mercy and favour of 
God in Christ, purchased unto you through his most pre- 
cious death and bloodshedding only, and in no part or piece 
(?) by, or through, any of your own merits, works, or deser- 
vings, how many or good soever they be ; and yet ye say ye 
do not deny nor destroy good works, but ye acknowledge 
and confess that sJl men are bound to do them, and to 
know and to keep God's commandments. But for all the 
confession of this your stronger faith, ye were best to 
follow St. Paul, who thought it no derogation to Christ's 
death nor passion, to say, Kow joy I in any sufferings which 
suffer for you, and fulfil that which is behind or lacking of 
the passion of Christ in my flesh, for his body's sake, which 
is the congregation ; for, indeed, friends, if ye do them, ye 
shall find them works of Christ, and, therefore, profitable ; 
for, although ye allow good works in word, yet, if ye 
declare no benefit to be towards them which do them, ye 
were almost as good to deny them. Friends, I fear ye 
.accept a careless man to be your teacher, and he hath 
taught ye as careless a faith ; but yet, I say unto you, look 
to the matter, for it is weighty ; put yourselves imder the 
covenant of God, and do it, and see that your hearts at the 
least keep his commandment: which things, if ye do, you 
shall obtain all the benefit of Christ promised, which ye 
speak of, and at the end the crown of glory ; but if not, ye 
shall be sure, by God's promise, though you gave yourselves 
twice, (?) to be refused and cast off out of the kingdom of 
God. I spare, because I want time to speak anything now 
of your fifth and sixth articles, lest T should lose more 
labour until I may hear how this is accepted at your 
hands. 

" 'By your fricDd, whatsoever ye say or find, (?) Henry 
Hart, as far as charity bindeth me, as knoweth God. 

" * K your last article were true, then would ye hear one 
man as another, depend not of men but on the truth ; for 
such as trust in men are cursed of God.' 

("Here followeth that which the aforesaid prisoners in 
Newgate wrote upon the backside of the letter. ) (?) 

" 'Before God and man, I protest this doctrine of Henry 
Hart to be most blasphemous to Christ's death and passion. 
By me, William Tyms, the day of April, in Newgate, 
condemned to die for Christ's verity.'* 



CoImbuul 
TeBluUfiad 
■omewlutilw 
for yoa to d» ii 
thefledi,bcMk 
all thatChnii 
hath done, vkkk 
if ye do not 7c 
shall perii^iMt 
withmandiBC ill 
hisdoinsL 



• •« 



Blessed be God for thee, my dear brother Tyms, and blessed \>t Ood again, that *»*r 
knew thee, for in a most happy time I came first into thy compaDy.**- Letter of Caxtirf* -i 
Fox. 



APPENDICES. 



275 



(C ( 



Also I, 



Lister, do affirm the same that oi^ 



brother Tyms iiath said ; yea, (?) I say, moreover, that this 
doctrine of Henry Hart is more to the derogation of Grod's 
glory than ever was heard at any Papist mouth : from the 
which good Lord. deliver us and all other. Signed by me, 
Lysteryd.' 

" * Also I, Robert Drake, earnestly affirm the same that 
our brother Tyms hath said ; yea, (?) I say further, that this 
doctrine of Henry Hart is more to the derogation of God's 
glory and Christ's passion than all that ever any Papist 
taught : from which God deliver us. Signed by me, Robert 
Drake.'* 

^' ' And so doth George Ambrose affirm the same that is 
above said.* 

" 'Also I, Thomas Spurge, alBrm the same above writ- 
ten, and so doth Richard Spurge, and so doth Richard 
Gratwick.' (?)t 

(Another attestation apparently, but illegible, through 
the fold.) 

" *This is to certify you and all men, that I, Simon 
Few, (?) do grant to the whole of Christ's Testament ; but 
as fur your false opinions and slanderous report of my 
faithful brethren, I utterly deny and defy with all my 
heart.'" 



* " Ah, my loving brother Drake, whose soul now draweth nigh unto God, of whom you hare 
received the same, fall glad may ye be that ever Ood gave yon a life to leave for his sake."— 
Letter of Careless, in Fox. 

t "Ah, mine own hearts, and most dearly beloved brethren, Caral, Ambros;, and both the 
.Spurges; blessed be the Lord\>n your behalf, and praised be his name, which hath given you 
such a glorious victory."— /did. 



END OP VOL. I. 



J. HEATON AKD SON, PRINTERS, PATERKOSTSR-ROW, LONDON. 



fx 



jf/Jlj 



r* 



.1 



I' 
I" 

i-'i 
.1 
■I 



•i 
11 

>l 



u 






hi 



i 



^U' 



'M 



2044^024 2o'll 



THE BORROWER WILL BE CHARGED 
AN OVERDUE FEE IFTHIS BOOK IS NOT 
RETURNED TO THE LIBRARY ON OR 
BEFORE THE LAST DATE STAMPED 
BELOW, NON-RECEIPT OF OVERDUE 
NOTICES DOES NOT EXtj^qX THE 
BORROWER FROM OVERQ 




