ARGRNG
EN Siaae


seen


wep


SOY
REESE


See Ssnere


bss


Oakland S.U.M.


ee i a.
igh)" a


1 aaa 7
PAA oy a Piatt beret 3 he


ane my Plata — <<
=——
” =
ee aa “
a ae . A
ae
2 a eae * Bee
wn? Goa 5 ‘
! 1 by
* ° a
; Za


~..,)
a)
a A
4 — > Le f
, 7 ae 5 _—
—— ae
_—_ 4 =
aac Sree Buses z i
i " —* _ ~
ee ee a cs
@ @ ; ~ as = ae
; ~ : =
a —
f J
ut cae mal
al = sat


Digitized by the Internet Archive
, in 2024


https://archive.org/details/pulpitcommentary0001 edit


ERE,


~PULPIT COMMENTARY


EDITED BY THE


WERY. REV. Ho DAM SPENGE, M-A,


DEAN OF GLOUCESTER


AND BY THE


REY JOSEPH S-EXELL, M.A:


ISAIAH


Exposition and abomiletics
By REV. GEORGE RAWLINSON, M.A.


CANON OF CANTERBURY; AND CAMDEN PROFESSOR OF ANCIENT HISTORY, OXFORD
Homilies hy Warious Authors


REV. PROF. E. JOHNSON, M.A. REV. W. CLARKSON, B.A.
REV. W. M. STATHAM, REV. R. TUCK, B.A.


VOL. I


FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND TORONTO


THE


BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISATAH.


INTRODUCTION,


ote


§ 1. On tHe Personarity or Isarn.


Tsaiah’s name. The name borne by this great prophet was really Yésha’-
yahu, which signifies “the Salvation of Jehovah.” The name was not an
uncommon one. It was borne by one of the heads of the singers in the
time of David (1 Chron. xxv. 3, 15), by a Levite of the same period (1
Chron. xxvi. 25), by one of the chief men who returned to Jerusalem with
Ezra (Ezra viii. 7), by a Benjamite mentioned in Nehemiah (xi. 7), and
others. The form may be compared with that of Khizki-yahu, or Hezekiah,
which meant “the Strength of Jehovah,” and Tsidki-ydhu, or Zedekiah,
which meant “the Righteousness of Jehovah.” It was one of singular
appropriateness in the case of the great prophet, since “the salvation of
Jehovah”? was the subject which Isaiah was especially commissioned to
set forth.

His parentage and family. Isaiah was, as he tells us repeatedly (ch,
i. 1; ii. 1; xiii. 1, ete.), “the son of Amoz.” This name must not be con-
founded with that of the Prophet Amos, from which it differs both in its
initial and in its final letter. Amoz, according to a Jewish tradition, was
a brother of King Amaziah; but this tradition can scarcely be authentic,
since it would make Isaiah too old. Amoz was probably not a man of any
high distinction, since he is never mentioned excepting as Isaiah’s father.
Isaiah was married, and his wife was known as “the prophetess”’ (ch,
viii. 8), which, however, does not necessarily imply that the prophetic gift
had been bestowed upon her. It may have been, as it was upon Deborah
(Judg. iv. 4) and upon Huldah (2 Kings xxii. 14—20); or she may have
been called “the prophetess” simply as being the wife of “the prophet”
(ch. xxxviii. 1). Isaiah tells us that he had two sons, Shear-jashub and

WAIAH. F b


ii INTRODUCTION TO
Bag cpg a eee


Maher-shalal-hash-baz, whose names are connected with his prophetical
office. Shear-jashub was the elder of the two by many years.

His date. The prophet tells us that he “saw a vision concerning Judah
and Jerusalem in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah ” (ch.
i. 1). It would follow from this, that, even if he began his prophetic
career as early as the twentieth year of his age, he must have been born
twenty years before Uzziah’s death, or in B.c. 779. He certainly lived
till the fourteenth year of Hezekiah, or B.c. 714, and probably outlived
that monarch, who died in B.c. 699-8. It is not unlikely that he was
even contemporary for some years with Manasseh, Hezekiah’s son; so that
we may, perhaps, assign him, conjecturally, the space between B.c. 780 and
B.c. 690, which would give him a lifetime of ninety years.

His position. That Isaiah was a Jew of good position, dwelling at Jeru-
salem, and admitted to familiar intercourse with the Jewish monarchs,
Ahaz and Hezekiah, is sufficiently apparent (ch. vii. 3—16; xxxvii. 21—
85; xxxvili. l—22; xxxix. 3—8). Whether or no he was brought up in
the “schools of the prophets” is uncertain; but he must have received
his call at a very early age, probably when he was about twenty. That
he was historiographer at the Hebrew court during the reign of Jotham,
and again during the reign of Hezekiah, appears from the Second Book
of Chronicles (xxvi. 22; xxxii. 32). In this capacity he wrote an account
of the reign of Uzziah, and also one of the reign of Hezekiah for the
“Book of the Kings.” He may also have written accounts of the reigns
of Jotham and Ahaz, but this is not stated. His main office was that of
prophet, or preacher to both king and people; and the composition of his
numerous and elaborate prophecies, which are poems of a high order, must
have furnished him with continual occupation. It is not certain that we
possess all his prophecies; for the book, as it has come down to us, has
a fragmentary character, and appears to be a compilation.

His call. Isaiah relates, in his sixth chapter, a very solemn call which
he received from God “in the year that King Uzziah died.” It is thought
by some that this was his original call to the prophetical office.’ But the
majority of commentators are of a different opinion. They note that the
original call of a prophet, where recorded, naturally occupies the first place
in his work, and that there is no conceivable reason for Isaiah’s having
postponed to his sixth chapter an account of an event which ex hypothest
preceded his first. It would follow that the original call of the prophet
is unrecorded, as is the case with most prophets; e.g. Daniel, Joel, Amos,
Obadiah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi

His prophetic career. The career of Isaiah as a prophet commenced, a»
he tells us, in the reign of King Uzziah, or Azariah. It is a reasonable
supposition that it began late in that monarch’s reign, but still a yeaa
or two before its close. Uzziah was at that time a leper, and “dwelt in


’ De Wette, ‘ Einleitung im das Alt. Test..” § 207.


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAR. iii


a several house,” Jotham his son being regent and having the direction
of affairs (2 Kings xv. 5; 2 Chron. xxvii. 21). Isaiah’s early prophecies
(ch. iv.) were probably written at this time. “In the year that King
Uzziah died” (ch. vi. 1)—probably, but not certainly, before his death —
Isaiah saw the vision recorded in ch. vi., and received thus a fresh dosigna-
tion to his office under circumstances of the deepest solemnity. It is
remarkable, however, that we cannot assign any of his extant writings,
except ch. vi., to the next period of sixteen years. Apparently, during the
reign of Jotham he was silent. But with the accession of Jotham’s son
Ahaz, the father of Hezekiah (B.c. 743), commenced a period of prophetic
activity. The prophecies from ch. vii. 1 to ch. x. 4 have a structural con-
nection and a unity of purpose which unite them into a single body, and
belong manifestly to the portion of the reign of Ahaz when he was engaged
in the Syro-Ephraimite war. A prophecy in ch. xiv. (vers. 28—32) is
assigned by the writer to the last year of the same king. Hitherto the
prophetic energy of Isaiah had, seemingly, been fitful and spasmodic, but
from henceforth it proceeded to flow in a steady continuous stream. There
are sufficient grounds for assigning to the reign of Hezckiah the entire
_ series of prophecies following upon ch. x. 5, with the single exception of
the short “ Burden of Palestine,” dated in Ahaz’s last year. The contents
of these prophecies tend to spread them over the different periods of Heze-
kiah’s reign, and show us the prophet constantly active throughout its
entire duration, Whether Isaiah’s prophetic career lasted still longer,
extending into the earlier part of the reign of Manasseh, is doubtful. A
portion of the prophecies contained in his book are thought by some to
belong to Manasseh’s time,” and Jewish tradition places his death under
Manasseh. Our conjectural estimate of his lifetime, as falling between
B.c. 780 and B.c. 690, would make him contemporary with Manasseh for
the space of nine years.

His death. The tradition of the rabbis concerning Isaiah’s death placed
it in the reign of Manasseh, and declared it to have been a most horrible
and painful martyrdom.’ Isaiah, having resisted some of Manasseh’s
idolatrous acts and ordinances, was seized by his orders, and, having been
fastened between two planks, was killed by being “sawn asunder.” The
mention of this mode of punishment in the Epistle to the Hebrews is
thought by many to be an allusion to Isaiah’s fate (Heb. xi. 37).

His character. Isaiah’s temper is one of great earnestness and boldness.
He lives under five kings, of whom one only is of a religious and God-


1 Dr. Kay says the phrase means “after bis death” (‘Speaker’s Commentary,’ vol. v.
p. 67); but he adduces no proof. To us the probability seems the other way. Why men-
tion Uzziah at all, unless he was on the throne? Why not say, “In the first year of
Jotham ”?

2 Ewald, ‘History of Israel,’ vol. v. p. 15, note 4.

8 ‘Jebamoth,’ xlix. 2; ‘Sanhedr.,’ ciii. 2, The tradition was accepted as authentic by
Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Lactantius, Jerome, and Augustine.


iv INTRODUCTION TO
Se eee


fearing disposition; yet he maintains towards all of them an uncompro-
mising attitude of firmness with respect to all that bears upon religion,
He conceals nothing, keeps nothing back, out of a desire for court favour.
“Ts it a small thing for you to weary men?” he says to one king; “ but
must ye weary my God also?” (ch. vii. 13). “Set thine house in order,”
he says to another; “for thou shalt die, and not live” (ch. xxxviil. 1).
Yet more bold is he in his addresses to the nobles and the powerful official
class, which in his day had the chief direction of affairs, and was most
unscrupulous in its treatment of adversaries (2 Chron. xxiv. 17—22; ch.
i. 15, 21, ete.). He denounces in the strongest terms their injustice, their
oppression, their grasping coveteousness, their sensuality, their pride and
haughtiness (ch. i. l1O—23; ii. 11I—17; ui. 9—15; v. 7—25; xxviii. 7—15,
etc.). Nor does he seek to curry favour with the people. It is “the faithful
city ” itself which has “become an harlot” (ch.i.21). The nation is “a
sinful nation” (ch. i. 4), the people are “laden with iniquity, a seed of
evil-doers, children that are corrupters” (ch. i. 4). They “draw near to
God with their mouth, and with their lips do honour him, but have removed
their hearts far from him” (ch. xxix. 13). They are “a rebellious people,
lying children, children that will not hear the Law of the Lord” (ch. xxx.
9). But this boldness and severity for God, and uncompromising sternness
where his honour is concerned, are counterbalanced by a remarkable tender-
ness and compassion towards the individuals who fall under notice as
having provoked God’s anger. Not only does he “weep bitterly,” and
refuse to be comforted, “because of the spoiling of the daughter of his
people” (ch. xxii. 4), but even the woes of a foreign nation, like Moab,
draw forth his compassion, and make his “bowels” thrill with sorrow
(ch. xv. 5; xvi. 9—11). He detests sin, but he mourns over the fate of
sinners. For Babylon itself his “loins are filled with pain: pangs take
hold upon him, as the pangs of a woman that travaileth: he is bowed
down at the hearing; he is dismayed at the seeing; his heart pants;
fearfulness affrights him: the night of his pleasure is turned into fear for
him” (ch. xxi. 3, 4). And as he sympathizes in the calamities and
sufferings of all nations, so has he a heart wide enough, and a spirit
comprehensive enovgh, to delight in their prosperity, their exaltation,
their admission to the final kingdom of the Messiah (ch. ii. 2; xi. 1O—12;
xviii. 7; xix. 23—25; xl. 5; xlii. 1—4; liv. 3, etc.). No narrow views of
race-privilege, or even of covenant-advantage, hem him in, and cramp his
sympathies and affections. Yet still he is not so cosmopolite as to be
devoid of patriotism, or to view with unconcern anything which affects the
welfare of his country, his city, his countrymen. Whether it be Syria and
Ephraim that plot against Judah, or Sennacherib that seeks to come in and
crush her with an overwhelming flood of invasion, he is equally indignant,
equally contemptuous (ch, vii. 5; xxxvii. 22). Against Babylon, as the fated
destroyer of the holy city and ravager of the Holy Land, he nourishes a
deep-seated hostility, which shows itself in almose every section of the


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. v


book (ch. xiii. 1—22; xiv. 4-23; xxi. 1—10; xlv. 1—8; xlvi. 1—11;
xlvii. 1—15; xlviii. 14, etc.). Again, upon the enemies of God he lets
loose, not only a storm of indignation and fierce anger, but also the keen
arrows of his sarcasm and irony. A delicate vein of satire runs through
the description of female luxury in ch. ili. (vers. 16—24). A bitter sarcasm
points the description of Pekah and Rezin—‘“the two tails of these smoking
firebrands” (ch. vii. 4). Against idolaters a somewhat coarser rhetoric
is employed: “The smith with the tongs both worketh in the coals, and
fashioneth it with h»mmers, and worketh it with the strength of his arms:
yea, he is hungry, and his strength faileth: he drinketh no water, and is
faint. The carpenter stretcheth out his rule; he marketh it out with a
line; he fitteth it with planes, and he marketh it out with the compass,
and maketh it after the figure of a man, according to the beauty of a man;
that it may remain in the house. He heweth him down cedars, and taketh
the cypress and the oak, which he strengtheneth for himself among the
trees of the forest: he planteth an oak, and the rain doth nourish it. Then
shall it be for a man to burn: for he will take thereof, and warm himself;
yea, he kindleth it, and baketh bread; yea, he maketh a god, and wor-
shippeth it; he maketh it a graven image, and falleth down thereto. He
burneth part thereof in the fire; with part thereof he eateth flesh; he
roasteth roast, and is satisfied: yea, he warmeth himself, and saith, Aha,
TI am warm, I have seen the fire: and the residue thereof he maketh a
god, even his graven image: he falleth down unto it, and worshippeth it,
and prayeth unto it, and saith, Deliver me; for thou art my god” (ch. xliv.
12—17; comp. Jer. x. 3—16; Baruch vi. 12—49). While the prophet
reserves sarcasm for certain rare occasions, he shows himself a thorough
master of it, and pours a stream of scorn on those who provoke his scorn,
which effectually disposes of their pretensions.

Two other qualities must be noted in Isaiah—his spirituality and his
tone of deep reverence. The formal, the outward, the manifest in religion,
are with him absolutely of no account; nothing is of importance but the
inward, the spiritual, the “hidden man of the heart.” Temples are worth-
less (ch. Ixvi. 1); sacrifices are worthless (ch. i. 11—13; Ixvi. 3); the
observance of days is worthless (ch. i. 14); attendance at assemblies is
worthless (ch. i. 13); nothing has any value with God but real purity of
life and heart—obedience (ch. i. 19), righteousness, “a poor and contrite
spirit” (ch. Ixvi. 2). The imagery which he of necessity employs in
describing spiritual conditions is drawn from material things, from the
circumstances of our earthly environment. But it is plainly not intended
in any literal sense. The abundance and variety of the imagery, some-
times the incongruity of one feature with another (ch. lxvi. 24), show that
it is imagery—a mere shadowing vut of spiritual things by means of trope
‘and figure. And Isaiah’s reverence is profound. His most usual title for
God is ‘the Holy One of Israel ;’’ sometimes, still more emphatically, “the
Holy One;” once with special elaboration, “the high and lofty One that


vi INTRODUCTION TO
Sh (ne er eee


inhabiteth eternity” (ch. lvii. 15). God is primarily with him an object of
reverent fear and awe. ‘Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself,” he exclaims;
“and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread” (ch. viii. 13) ; and
again, “ Hunter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust, for fear of the
Lord, and for the glory of his majesty ” (ch. ii. 10). It is as if the memory
of his “vision of God” never quitted him—as if he felt himself ever
standing before the throne, where he “saw the Lord sitting, high and
lifted up, and his train filled the temple. Above it stood the seraphims:
each one had six wings; with twain he covered his face, and with twain
he vovered his feet, and with twain he did fly. And one cried unto another,
and said, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of
his glory. And the posts of the door moved at the voice of him that cried,
and the house was filled with smoke.” And the prophet cried, “ Woe is
me! for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips, and I[ dwell
in the midst of a people of unclean lips: for mine eyes have seen the King,
the Lord of hosts” (ch. vi. 1—5).


§ 2. On rue HisToricaL CIrRcUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH ISAIAH LIVED
AND WROTE.


\saiah grew to manhood as a subject of the Judean kingdom, during
ae period of the two kingdoms known respectively as those of Israel and
Judah. Israel, the schismatical kingdom established by Jeroboam on the
death of Solomon, was approaching to its fall. After existing for two
centuries under eighteen monarchs of eight different families, and with
some difficulty maintaining its independence against the attacks of its
northern neighbour, Syria of Damascus, the Israelitish kingdom was on
the point of succumbing to a far greater power, the well-known Assyrian
empire. When Isaiah was about ten or twelve years of age, an Assyrian
monarch, whom the Hebrews called Pul, “came against the land,” and
his enmity had to be bought off by the payment of a thousand talents of
silver (2 Kings xv. 19). A far greater monarch, Tiglath-Pileser II.,
ascended the Assyrian throne about twenty years later (B.c. 745), when
Isaiah may have been thirty or thirty-five, and began at once a career of
conquest, which spread alarm over all the neighbouring nations. In Syria
it was felt that the new enemy could only be resisted by a general con-
federacy of the petty monarchs who divided among them the Syro-
Palestinian region; and accordingly an effort was made to unite them all
under the presidency of Rezin of Damascus.! Ahaz, however, the king
of Judah at the time, declined to make common cause with the other petty
princes. Taking a narrow view of the situation, he thought that his own
interests would be best promoted by the crippling of Syria and Israel,
powers generally hostile to Judah, and close upon his borders. The
immediate eonsequence of his refusal to join the league was an attempt


1 See ‘Ancient Monarclies,’ vol. ii. p. 131.


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. vii


to coerce him, or to depose him and place upon his throne a prince who
would adopt the Syrian policy. Rezin of Damascus and Pekah of Samaria
attacked him in different quarters, and inflicted on him severe defeats
(2 Chron. xxviii. 5, 6). They then conjointly marched into the heart of
his kingdom, and besieged Jerusalem (2 Kings xvi. 5). Under these
circumstances, Ahaz placed himself under the protection of the Assyrian
monarch, declared himself his “servant,” and humbly besought his aid.
Tiglath-Pileser readily complied, and, having marched a great army into
Syria, conquered Damascus, slew Rezin, defeated Pekah, and carried a
large portion of the Israelite nation into captivity (2 Kings xv. 29; xvi.
9, 1 Chron. v. 26). Ahaz personally appeared before him at Damascus,
ahd did homage for his crowns thenceforth reigning as a vassal and
tributary eee

The crushing blow dealt to the kingdom of Israel by Tiglath-Pileser was
shortly followed by a still severer calamity. In B.c. 724, when Isaiah was
about fifty-five years of age, Shalmaneser IV., Tiglath-Pileser’s successor,
determined to destroy the last vestige of Israelite independence, and, march-
ing an army into the country, laid siege to Samaria. The city was one of
great strength, and for three years resisted every assault. Finally, how-
ever, in B.c. 722, it fell, just about the time that Shalmaneser was dis-
possessed of his throne by the usurping Sargon. Sargon claims the glory
of having captured the place, and of having carried off from it 27,280
prisoners."

Judea now stood stripped of independent neighbours, manifestly the next
country on which the weight of the Assyrian arms would fall. The sub-
mission of Ahaz, and his subserviency to Assyria throughout his whole reign
(2 Kings xvi. 1O—18), had helped to defer the evil day; in addition to which
Assyria had been much occupied by revolts of conquered countries and by
internal dissensions. But with the accession of Hezekiah (B.c. 727) a bolder
line of policy had been adopted by the Jewish state. Hezekiah “ rebelled
against the King of Assyria, and served him not” (2 Kings xviii. 7). In
this rebellion he had probably the countenance and support of Isaiah, who
always exhorted his countrymen not to be afraid of the Assyrians (ch. x.
24; xxxvii. 6). Isaiah’s counsel was that no foreign alliance should be
sought, but that entire dependence should be placed on Jehovah, who would
protect his own people, and discomfit the Assyrians, should they venture on
making an attack. Hezekiah, however, had other advisers also, men of a
different stamp, politicians such as Shebna and Eliakim, to whom the simple
faith of the prophet appeared fanaticism and folly. The dictates of worldly
wisdom seemed to them to require that the alliance of some powerful nation
should be courted, and a treaty made whereby Judxa might secure the assiste
ance of a strong body of auxiliaries, should her independence be menaced.
The political horizon presented at the time one only power of this kind—


1 G. Smith, ‘Eponym Canon.’


viii INTRODUCTION TO


one only possible rival to Assyria—viz. Egypt. Egypt was, like Assyria, an
organized monarchy, with a considerable population, long trained to arms,
and especially strong where Judea was most defective—that is, in horses
and chariots. Behind Egypt, closely allied with her, and exercising a species
of suzerainty over her, was Ethiopia, with resources from which, in case of
need, Egypt might draw.’ It is uncertain at what date the Assyrian monarch
began to threaten Hezekiah with his vengeance. Sargon certainly made
several expeditions into Syria, and even into Philistia, and in one place he
calls himself ‘‘ the conqueror of the land of Judah;” but there is no sufficient
evidence of his having really made any serious attempt to reduce Judea to
subjection. Apparently it was not until after Sennacherib had ascended the
Assyrian throne (in B.c. 705) that the conquest of the rebellious Jews was
actually taken in hand by the great monarch. But the danger had impended
during the whole of Hezekiah’s reign; and, as it became more imminent,
tiie counsels of the anti-religious party prevailed. Ambassadors were sent
into Egypt (ch. xxx. 2—4), and an alliance appears to have been concluded,
whereby the reigning Pharaoh, Shabatok, and his Ethiopian suzerain,
Tirhakah, undertook to furnish an army for the defence of Judea, if it were
attacked by the Assyrians.? In the fifth year of Sennacherib (B.c. 701) the
attack came. Sennacherib in person conducted his army into Palestine,
spread his troops over the whole country, took all the smaller fortified
towns—forty-six in number, according to his own account*—and, con-
centrating his forces about Jerusalem, formally laid siege to the city
(ch. xxii. 1—14). Hezekiah endured the siege for a time, but, despairing
of being able to resist for long, and receiving no aid from Egypt, felt him-
self after a while forced to come to terms, and buy off his adversary. On
the receipt of a large sum in gold and silver, derived chiefly from the temple
treasures (2 Kings xviii. 14—16), Sennacherib retired, Hezekiah submitting
himself, and professedly resuming the position of a tributary.

But this position of things satisfied neither party. Sennacherib dis-
trusted Hezekiah, and Hezekiah no sooner saw the Assyrian hosts retire
than he resumed his intrigues with Egypt. After a very brief interval—to
be counted, perhaps, by months—war once more broke out. Sennacherib
with his main forces occupied the Shefeleh and Philistia, keeping watch
on Egypt; while at the same time he sent a detachment under a general to
threaten, and, should opportunity offer, seize Jerusalem. Of the proceedings
of this detachment Isaiah gives a detailed account (ch. xxxvi. 2—22 ; xxxvii.
8). He was himself present in Jerusalem, and encvuraged Hezekiah to
defy his foes (ch. xxxvii. 1—7). Hezekiah acted on his advice; and Sen-
nacherib was provoked to write a letter containing still more violent threats
against the holy city. This Hezekiah “spread before the Lord” (ch. xxxvii,

' Rawlinson, ‘ History of Ancient Egypt,’ vol. ii. pp. 433—458.


* This is not distinetly stated, but seems to be implied im ch. xxx. 2,7; xxx1 1, xxxvi,
6,9; xxxvii. 9.
3 G. Smith, ‘ Eponym Canon.’


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. ix


—_—_—_—_—_—_—_—____—_—_—_ Rr ————————.


14); and then the fiat went forth for the destruction of his host. The place
of the slaughter is uncertain; but there can be no manner of doubt that
a tremendous disaster befell his army, producing complete panic and a hasty
retreat. Nor were the consequences merely temporary. “ Like Xerxes in
Greece, Sennacherib never recovered from the shock of the disaster in
Judah., He made no more expeditions against either Southern Palestine
or Eeypt.’’}

Judzea was now for a considerable space of time completely relieved from
all threat of attack or invasion. The closing years of Hezekiah’s life were
peaceful and prosperous (2 Chron. xxxii. 23,27—29). Manasseh, during his
early reign, was untroubled by any foreign foe, and was too young to introduce
innovations in religion. If Isaiah’s sun set ultimately in blood-red clouds,
he must still have enjoyed an interval of peace and rest between the final
withdrawal of the Assyrians and the commencement of Manasseh’s persecu-
tion. The interval may have sufficed for the composition of the “ Book of
Consolation.”


§ 3. On THE CHaracTER AND ConTENTS OF THE Book AscrIBeD TO IsarAn,
AS IT HAS COME DOWN ‘O US.


The Book of Isaiah, as it has come down to us, presents a certain com-
posite character. To the critical and the uncritical it is equally apparent
that it divides itself into three main parts, each with characteristics of its
own. The first thirty-five chapters are wholly, or almost wholly, prophetic
—that is to say, they are didactic, admonitory, hortatory, containing next
to no narrative—a declaration to the Israelites of the “‘ word of the Lord,”
or of the will of God with respect to them. These thirty-five prophetical
chapters are followed by four historical ones (ch. xxxvi.—xxxix.), which
contain a plain and simple narrative of certain events in the reign of
Hezekiah. The work concludes with a third part, which is, like the first,
prophetical, and which extends to twenty-seven chapters (from ch. xl. to
ch. lxvi.).

There is a marked contrast of subject-matter, and of certain features in
the composition, between Part I. and Part III. The main enemy of Israel
in Part 1. is Assyria; in Part III., Babylon. Part I. deals with the times
of Hezekiah and Isaiah; Part III., with the time of the Babylonian captivity.
Part I. contains numerous headings and dates, which very palpably divide
ig, into, portions (ch. i. 1; v.12; viz 13, vii. 1; xiii. 1; xiv..28;-xv..1;
xvii. 1, etc.); Part III. has no such subdivisions, but seems to flow on
continuously. Part I. is chiefly denunciatory; Part III. chiefly consolatory.
Part I. embraces all the known world; Part III. touches only Babylon,
Persia, and Palestine. Both parts are Messianic; but Part I. presents
Messiah as a mighty King and Ruler; Part III. reveals him as a suffering
Victim, a meek and lowly Redeemer.


1 Professor Sayce, ‘ Ancient Empires of the East,’ p 380


x INTRODUCTION TO


Further, when Parts I. and III. are carefully examined, they are found
to resemble compilations rather than continuous and connected com posi-
tions. Part I. manifestly divides itself into a number of sections, each of
which is complete in itself, and but slightly connected with what precedes
or follows. Part III. has less appearance of discontinuity, but really con-
tains so many and such abrupt transitions, that it is almost impossible to
regard it as a continuous whole. The entire book thus presents the charac-
teristics of a collection or compilation—an artificial gathering into one of
prophecies, uttered at various times and on various occasions, each of
which was complete in itself, and originally intended to stand by itself,
without proem or sequel.

The general arrangement of the book, by whomsoever it was compiled,
which will be considered later,’ seems to be chronological. All the notes
of time contained in Part I. are in their proper order,’ and all are anterior
to the period considered in Part IL, which again belongs probably to an
earlier date than the composition of Part III. It is not clear, however,
that chronological order has always been observed in the arrangement of
the sections whereof Parts I. and III. are composed. The prophecies were
apparently delivered orally at the first, and reduced to writing subsequently,
sometimes at.a considerable interval. In their earliest written form they
were thus a number of separate documents. From time to time collections
seem to have been made, and in some of these an order other than the
chronological may have been followed. For instance, in the “ Book of
Burdens,” extending from ch. xiii. to ch. xxiii., the opening burden, that
of Babylon, is not likely to have been composed nearly so early as several
of the others; and the fifth burden, that of Egypt, contains indications of
still later authorship. The compiler would seem to have thrown together
prophecies that were similar in character, whatever might have been the
date of their composition.

To enter a little more into detail, Part I. seems to contain eleven
sections—


Section L, which fs ch. i. in the Hebrew text, is a sort of general introduction,
reproachful and minatory.

Section I, which forms ch. ii—v., opens with an announcement of Christ’s kingdom,
and then contains a series of denunciations of the various sins of God’s people.

Section IIL., which corresponds to ch. vi, records a vision vouchsafed to Isaiah, and
a special mission given to him,

Section IV., which extends from ch. vii. 1 to ch. x. 4, contains a series of prophecies,
largely Messianic, delivered in connection with the Syro-Israelite war.

Section V., which begins with ch, x. 5 and extends to the close of ch. xxiii., has been
called the “ Book of Burdens,” and consists of a series of denunciations of woe upon
different nations, chiefly upon the enemies of Israel.


1 See below, § 6.


* Eg. ch. vi. 1 (B.c. 759); ch. vii. 1 (8.0. 734—730); ch. xiv. 28 (Ro. 727); ch. xx. 1
(3.0. 711).


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. . x1


ee EE eee


Section VI., which comprises ch. xxiv.—xxvii., consists of denunciations of woe upon
the world at large, relieved by promises of the salvation of a remnant.

Section VIL. which extends from ch. xxviii. to ch. xxxi., consists of renewed denunci-
ations of woe upon Israel and Judah.

Section VIIL., which is limited to the first eight verses of ch. xxxii., is a prophecy of
Messiah’s kingdom,

Section IX., which forms the remainder of ch. xxxii., is a renewal of denunciations of
woe upon Israel, joined with promises.

Section X., which coincides with ch. xxxiii., is a prophecy of judgment on Assyria.

Section XI., which comprises ch. xxxiv. and xxxv., declares the Divine judgment upon
the world, and the glory of the Church consequent upon it,


Part II. consists of two sections—


Section I. is formed of ch. xxxvi. and xxxvii., and contains an account of the threaten-
ing embassy of Rabshakeh, the letter of Sennacherib to Hezekiah, and the miraculons
destruction of Sennacherib’s army. (It corresponds closely with ch. xviii. and xix.
of 2 Kinzs.)

Section IL. is formed of ch, xxxviii. and xxxix. It contains an account of Hezekiah’s
illness and recovery, of the embassy of Merodach-Baladan, and of Isaiah’s prediction
of the ultimate conquest of Judza by Babylon. (It corresponds with ch. xx. of
2 Kings.)


Part III. appears at first sight to be divided into three equal sections,
each composed of nine chapters—(1) ch. xl.—xlviii.; (2) ch. xlix.—lviii,;
(3) ch. lviii.—lxvi.; the same refrain (“ There is no peace, saith my God,
to the wicked’’) terminating both the first and the second portions; and it
is almost certain that whoever made the present arrangement into chapters
must have intended this division. But such a division of Part III. would
be one according to form, and not according to substance. Considered in
respect of its subject-matter, the “Part” divides, like Part L., not into
three, but into a much larger number of sections. No doubt different
arrangements might be made; but the following seems to us the most free
from objection :—


Section I. coincides with ch. xl., and is an address of consolation to the people of God
in some deep affliction—presumably the Babylonian captivity.

Section II. extends from ch. xli. to ch. xlviii., and is a prophecy of the recovery of the
people of God from their sin, and from their bondage in Babylon.

Section III. extends from ch. xlix. to ch. liii., and is an accuunt of the mission of a
great Deliverer who is called the “Servant of Jehovah.”

Section IV. extends from ch, liv. to ch. lvi. 8, and consists of promises to Israel, com-
bined with exhortations.

Section V. begins with ver. 9 of ch. lvi., and extends to the close of ch. lvii. It is an
address of warning to the wicked.

Section VIL. consists of ch. lviii. and lix., and contains practical instructions aud
warnings, followed by a confession and a promise.

Section VII. coincides with ch. lx., and consists of a description of the glories of the
restored Jerusalem.

Section VIII. comprises ch. lxi. and lxii., and is a soliloquy of the “Servant of
Jehovah,” who promises peace and prosperity to the restored Jerusalem,


xil INTRODUCTION TO


Section IX. contains the first six verses only of ch. Ixiii., and gives a picture of God’s
judgment upon his enemies.

Section X. extends from ver. 7 of ch. lxiii. to the close of ch. lxiv., and is an address
of the Jewish Church in Babylonia to God, including thanksgiving, confession of
sin, and prayer.

Section XI. coincides with ch. lxv., and contains God’s answer to his exiled Church’s

rayer.

ah XII. coincides with ch. lxvi., and consists of very solemn final threatenings
and promises,


§ 4. On THe Srvzz anp Diction or tHe “ Boox or Isaran.”


Tt is generally allowed that Isaiah, as a writer, transcends all the other
Hebrew prophets. ‘In Isaiah,” says Ewald, “ we see prophetic authorship
reaching its culminating point. Everything conspired to raise him to an
elevation to which no prophet, either before or after, could as writer attain.
Among the other prophets, each of the more important ones is distinguished
by some one particular excellence, and some one peculiar talent; in Isaiah,
all kinds of talent and all beauties of prophetic discourse meet together, so
as mutually to temper and qualify each other; it is not so much any single
feature that distinguishes him, as the symmetry and perfection of the
whole.” ?

A lofty and majestic calmness, a grandeur and dignity of expression, is
perhaps his first, most patent characteristic. However strong the feelings
that move him, however exciting the circumstances under which he writes,
he always succeeds in maintaining a perfect self-control, and a command
over his language which prevents it from ever becoming extravagant or
inappropriate. While the strain rises and falls in accordance with the
variety of the subject-matter, and the language at times becomes highly
poetic, figurative, and out of the common, there seems always to preside
over the composition a calm spirit of self-restraint, which checks hyperbole,
bridles passion, and renders the progress and development of the discourse
majestic, and, in a certain sense, equable. As Ewald observes, ‘‘we note
in him an overflowing, swelling fulness of thought, which might readily
lose itself in the vast and indefinite, but which always at the right time,
with tight rein, collects and tempers its exuberance, to the bottom
exhausting the thought and completing the utterance, and yet never too
diffuse. This severe self-control is the most admirably seen in those shorter
utterances, which, by briefly sketched images and thoughts, give us the
vague apprehension of something infinite, while nevertheless they stand
before us complete in themselves and clearly delineated.”

Next to this lofty and majestic calmness, the energy and liveliness ot
Isaiah’s style seem to demand notice. This energy and liveliness are pro-
duced, primarily, by the profuse employment of striking images; seconaly,
by dramatic representation; thirdly, by the large employment of pointed


1 ¢Propheten des Alten Bundes,’ p. 166,


/


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. xih


antithesis ; fourthly, by frequent play upon words; fifthly, by the strength
of the expressions used; sixthly, by vivid descriptions; and seventhly, by
the amplification and elaboration of occasional points.

1. The profuse employment of striking images must be evident to every
reader. Not a paragraph, scarcely a verse, is without some simile or
metaphor, which gives a poetical turn to the form of expression, and elevates
the language above that of ordinary life. And the variety and force of the
metaphors are most remarkable. Assyria is a swarm of bees (ch. vii. 18),
a raging stream (ch. vill. 7, 8), @ razor (ch. vil. 2U), a lion (ch. v. 29), a
rod (ch. x. 5), an axe (ch. x. 15), etc. Jehovah is a potter (ch. xxix. 16;
xlv. 9, etc.), a shepherd (ch. xl. 11), a man of war (ch. xlii. 15), a stone of
stumbling and rock of offence (ch. viii. 14), a gin and a snare (ch. viii. 14),
a purger of metals (ch. i. 25), a lion (ch. xxxi. 4), birds flying (ch. xxxi.
5), a strong fortress guarded by moats and streams (ch. xxxiii. 21), a rock

/ (ch. xvii. 10), a shadow (ch. xxv. 4), a crown of glory (ch. xxviii. 5). Zion


is a cottage in a vineyard (ch. i. 8), a lodge in a garden of cucumbers (ch.
|


| i. 8), the mountain of the Lord (ch. ii. 3), a captive sitting in the dust


(ch. lii. 2), a woman in travail (ch. lxvi. 8). Israel generally is a diseased
body (ch. i. 5, 6), an oak whose leaf fadeth (ch. i. 34), an unproductive
vineyard (ch. v. 7), a bulging wall that is about to burst (ch. xxx. 18).
Messiah is “‘a root of Jesse” (ch. xi. 10), “a rod” (ch. xi. 1), “a branch ”
(ch. xi. 1), “a tender plant” (ch. liii. 2), “a servant” (ch. xlii. 1), “a man
of sorrows” (ch. lili. 3), “a lamb brought to the slaughter” (ch. liii. 7),
“a sheep dumb before her shearers” (ch. liii. 7). The degenerate are
described as those ‘whose silver has become dross, whose wine is mixed


\ with water” (ch. i. 22); the persistently wicked as those who “draw ini-
) quity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart-rope” (ch. v. 18).


Boasters ‘“ conceive chaff, and bring forth stubble” (ch. xxxiil. 11); nations
are in God’s sight “as a drop from a bucket, and as small dust upon a
balance” (ch. xl. 15); humanity in general is as “grass that withereth,”
and as “the flower that fadeth.” Among specially beautiful metaphors
may be cited: ‘ His heart was moved, and the heart of his people, as the
trees of the wood are moved with the wind” (ch. vii. 2) ; “The people which
walked in darkness have seen a great light: they that dwell in the land of the
shadow of death, upon them hath the light shined” (ch. ix. 2); “The earth
shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea” (ch.
ter) With joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation” (ch. xii.
3); “A man shall be... as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land”
(ch. xxxii. 2). To do full justice, however, to this branch of the subject,
we should have to quote from every chapter, almost from every paragraph,
sinve the beauty of which we are speaking pervades the entire composition,
even entering into the historical chapters (ch. xxxvil. 3, 22, 25, 27, 29;
xxxviii. 12, 14, 18, etc.), where it was scarcely to be expected.

2. Dramatic representation is, comparatively speaking, infrequent, but
still occurs sufficiently often to be characteristic,and to have an appreciable


xiv INTRODUCTION TO


effect upon the liveliness of the composition. The most remarkable instance
of it is the dialogue at the beginning of ch. Ixiii.—


“ Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah? this that is
glorious in his apparel, travelling in the greatness of his strength ?”
IT that speak in righteousness, mighty to save.”
Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him that treadeth in
the wine-fat ?”
“TJ have trodden the wine-press alone; and of the people there was no man with
Nne,” etc,


But there are also numerous other passages, where, for a verse or two at a
time, words are put into the mouth of speakers other than the author, with
a lively and stirring effect (see ch. ili. 6,7; iv. 1; v.19; vil. 12; viii. 19;
ix, 10; x..8—I1, 13, 145 xiv. 10,13) iG iv xix. Is xxigs: aii
xxii. 13; xxvi. 155. xxix. 11, 12, 153 xxx) 10/01, 163x136, 75 xe
xlii. 17; xliv. 16—20; xlv. 9,10, 14; xlvii. 7, 10; xlix. 14, 20, 21; li. 7;
lvi. 3, 12: Iviti.-8; Ixy. 5 -lxvic 3).

8. Antithesis is, no doubt, a characteristic of Hebrew poetry generally,
but in the other sacred writers it is often rather verbal than real, while in
Isaiah it is almost always true, pointed, and telling. The following may
suffice as instances: ‘Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white
as snow ; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool” (ch. i. 18);
“Tt shall come to pass, that instead of sweet smell [spice] there shall be
rottenness ; and instead of a girdle, a rope; and instead of well-set hair, bald-
ness; and instead of a stomacher, a girdle of sackcloth; burning instead of
beauty ” (ch. iii. 24); “ He looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for
righteousness, but behold a cry” (ch. v. 7); “ Ten acres of vineyard shall
yield one bath, and the seed of an homer [or, ‘a homer of seed’] shall yield
an ephah” (ch. v. 10); “ Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil;
that put darkness for light, and light for darkness ; that put bitter for sweet,
and sweet for bitter” (ch. v. 20); “‘ Behold, my servants shall eat, but ye shall
be hungry: behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty: behold,
my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed: behold, my servants shall
sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for
veaation of spirit” (ch. Ixv, 18, 14).

4, “Play upon words” is also a common feature in Hebrew literature;
but only a few of the sacred writers use it so frequently, or give it such
prominence, as Isaiah. Knobel gives, as instances, ch. i. 23; v. 7; vii. 9;
xvii. 1,2; xxii. 5,6; xxviii. 10, et seqg.; xxix. 1,2,9; xxx. 16; xxxii. 7, 1g;
19; to which may be added ch. xxxiv. 14; lxii. 4; and Ixy. 10. As, how-
ever, this ornament, depending generally upon the assonance of the Hebrew
words, is necessarily lost in translation, and can only be appreciated by a
Hebrew scholar, we do not propose further to dwell upon it.

5. The “strength” of Isaiah’s expressions will be recognized by all who


1 «Exegetisches Handbuch,’ vol. vi. p. 21.


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. xv
ce = Se See LR eee
have studied his work, and may be seen to a certain extent even through
the veil of a translation. Such phrases as the following arrest attention,
and lodge themselves in the memory, from their intensity and inherent
force: ‘‘There is no soundness in it; but wounds, and bruises, and putre-
fying sores” (ch. i. 6); ‘How is the faithful city become an harlot!” (ch.
i, 21); “ Hnter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust” (ch. ii. 10); “ What
mean ye that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor ?”
(ch. ii. 15); “ Held hath enlarged her desire, and opened her mouth without
measure” (ch. v. 14); “Their horses’ hoofs shall be counted like flint, and
their wheels like a whirlwind” (ch. v. 28) ; “ The two tails of these smoking
firebrands”’ (ch. vii. 4); “‘ His name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor,
Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace” (ch. ix. 6); “He shall
smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall
he slay the wicked” (ch. xi. 4); “The earth shall reel to and fro like a
drunkard” (ch. xxiv. 20); “God will swallow up death in victory” (ch. xxv.
8); “The Lord with his sore and great and strong sword shall punish
leviathan the piercing [swift] serpent” (ch. xxvii. 1); “The people shall be
as the burnings of lime” (ch. xxxiii. 12); “ They that wait upon the Lord
shall renew their strength ; they shall mount up with wings as eagles” (ch. xl,
31); “A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench”
(ch. xlii. 3) ; “I clothe the heavens with blackness, and I make sackcloth their
covering” (ch. 1. 3); ‘‘ His visage was so marred more than any man”
(ch. lii. 14); ‘* The wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose
waters cast wp mire and dirt” (ch. lvii. 20); “The Lord will come with fire,
and with his chariots like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury and his
rebuke with flames of fire” (ch. lxvi. 15) ; “ Their worm shall not die, neither
shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh”
(ch. lxvi. 24).

6. The power of vivid description is remarkably shown: (1) In the pictures
of desolation which are so frequent, especially in those of ch. xiil., xiv., and
xxxiv. “Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees,
excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. It
shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to
generation: neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there; neither shall the
shepherds make their fold there. But wild beasts of the desert shall lie
there; and their houses shall be full of doleful creatures; and owls [or,
‘ostriches ’] shall dwell there, and satyrs (?) shall dance there. And jackals
shall cry in their castles, and dragons in their pleasant palaces: and her
time is near to come, and her days shall not be prolonged ” (ch. xiii. 19—22).
“ [ will make it [equivalent to ‘Babylon’] a possession for the bittern, and
pools of water: and I will sweep it with the bosom of destruction, saith the
Lord of hosts” (ch. xiv. 23). ‘‘ The pelican and the bittern shall possess it
[equivalent to ‘Edom ’] ; the owl also and the raven shall dwell in it : and one
shall stretch out upon it the line of confusion, and the plummet of emptiness,
They shall call the nobles thereof to the kingdom, but none shall be there,


xvi INTRODUCTION TO


ee  —————————————————————————————————


and ail her princes shall be nothing. And thorns shall come up in her
palaces, nettles and brambles in the fortresses thereof: and it shall be an
habitation of dragons, a court for owls [or, ‘ostriches’]. And the wild
beasts of the desert shall meet with the wild beasts of the island [equivalent
to ‘jackals ’], and the satyr shall cry to his fellow; the night-monster also
shall rest there, and find for herself a place of rest. There shall the arrow-
snake make her nest, and lay, and hatch, and gather under her shadow;
there, verily, shall the vultures assemble, every one with her mate” (ch.
xxxiv. 11—15). (2) In the idyllic passages, ch. xi. 6—9; xxxv. 1—10;
xl. 11; and lxv. 25, of which we will quote one only: “ The wolf also shall
dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the
calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a little child shall
lead them. And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall
lie down together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox. And the suck-
ing child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put
his hand on the basilisk’s den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my
holy mountain.” (3) In the account of woman’s finery (ch. iii. 16—24).
(4) In the imitative description of rushing water, in ch. xvii.: ‘ Woe to the
multitude of many people, which make a noise like the noise of the seas;
and to the rushing of nations, that make a rushing like the rushing of
mighty waters. The nations shall rush like the rushing of many waters”
(ch. xvii. 12, 13). (5) In the graphic portraiture of an army marching on
Jerusalem: “ He is come to Aiath, he is passed through Migron; at Mich-
mash he hath laid up his baggage: they are gone over the passage: they
have taken up their lodging at Geba; Rama is afraid; Gibeah of Saul is
fled. Lift up thy voice, O daughter of Gallim: Hearken, O Laisha! O
thou poor Anathoth! Madmenah is removed; the inhabitants of Gebim
gather themselves to flee. That very day shall he halt at Nob; he shall
shake his hand at the mount of the daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem ”
(ch. x. 28—32).

7. The seventh and last point, giving energy and force to Isaiah’s style,
is the effective use of rhetorical amplification. By a repetition of the same
idea in different words, which is sometimes twofold, sometimes threefold,
often fourfold, occasionally as much as fivefold, a deep impression is pro-
duced—an impression at once of the earnestness of the writer and of the
vast importance of the points on which he insists with so much reiteration.
“ Ah sinful nation,” he says, “a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil-
doers, children that deal corruptly: they have forsaken the Lord, they have
provoked the Holy One of Israel unto anger, they are gone away back-
ward” (ch. i. 4). And again, “‘Thou hast been a strength to the poor, a
strength to the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow
from the heat, when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against the
wall” (ch. xxv. 4). And, ‘Who hath measured the waters in the hollow of
his hand, and meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust
of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. xvii


ey


hills in a balance?” (ch. xl. 12). And, “ With whom took he counsel, and
who instructed him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught
him knowledge, and showed to him the way of understanding ? ” (ch. xl. 14).
And, “ He hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows. . . . He was
wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the
chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are
healed ” (ch. lni. 4, 5). Another form of rhetorical amplification may
be noted in ch. ii, 13—16; iii. 2, 3, 18—23; v.12; xxii. 12, 13; xli. 19;
xlvii. 13, ete.

A further characteristic of Isaiah’s style is its wonderful eh Some-
times smooth and gently flowing (ch. xi. 6—9; xxxv. 5—10; lv. 10—13),
at other times abrupt and harsh (ch. xxi. 1], 12; lvi. 9—12), now and
then simple and prosaic (ch. vii. 1—3; viii. 1—4), anon soaring into the
highest flights of poetic imagery (ch. ix. 2—7; xi. 1—9; xiv. 4—23, etc.),
it includes every kind of artificial ornament known at the time—parable
(ch. v. 1—7), vision (ch. vi. 1—13), symbolic action (ch. xx. 2), dramatic
dialogue (ch. xxi. 8,9; xxix. 11, 12; xl. 6—8; lxiii. 1—6), lyric bursts of
song (ch. xii. 1—6; xxvi. 1—18), refrains (ch. ii. 11, 17; v. 25; ix. 12, 17,
‘20; x. 4; xlviii. 22; lvii. 21, etc.), assonance (ch. v. 7; vii. 9, ete.) ; and
uses all, as occasion arises, with equal point and appositeness. Isaiah’s
style has thus no single peculiar colouring. As Ewald remarks, “ He is
neither the specially logical, nor the specially elegiacal, nor the specially
oratorical, nor the specially admonitory prophet, as perhaps Joel, or Hosea,
or Micah, in whom a particular colouring more predominates. Isaiah is
capable of adapting his style to the most different subjects, and in this
consists his greatness and his most distinguished excellence.”?

The diction of the book is that of the purest and best times of Hebrew
literature. It is remarkably free from archaisms. A certain number of
“ Aramaisms” or “Chaldaisms” have been pointed out,* more especially
in the later prophecies; but these are not sufficiently numerous to disturb
the general conclusion (which is that of Dr. 8. Davidson* and of Mr.
Cheyne,‘ as well as of other critics) that the vocabulary, on the whole,
may be pronounced “pure and free from Chaldaisms.” The number
of words not occurring elsewhere in the Bible (dra& Acydueva) is large,
and the vocabulary is ampler than perhaps that of any other book of
Scripture.


1 ¢Propheten des Alten Bundes,’ p. 173.

2 See Mr. Cheyne’s ‘Prophecies of Isaiah,’ vol. ii, p. 243;
Handbuch,’ vol. v. p. 297.

8 ‘Introduction to the Old Testament,’ vol. ii, p. 54,

« ¢Prophecies of Isaiah,’ vol. ii. p. 244,


xviii INTRODUCTION TO


eT


§ 48. On Certain Mopsrn THEORIES AS TO THE AUTHORSHIP OF THE
Existing ‘“ Book.”


A theory was started, towards the close of the eighteenth century, by
a German writer named Koppe, in his translation of Bishop Lowth’s
‘Isaiah,’ to the effect that Isaiah was not the real author of the prophecies
contained in ch. xl.—lxvi. of the work ascribed to him. The work of an
entirely different prophet, living towards the close of the Captivity, had, he
conjectured, been attached by some accident to the genuine prophecies of
the son of Amoz, and had thenceforth passed by his name. The theory
thus started was welcomed by other Germans of the rationalistic school,
and could shortly boast among its supporters the names of Déderlin,
Eichhorn, Paulus, Bauer, Rosenmiiller, De Wette, Justi, and the great
Hebraist Gesenius. It based itself mainly on two grounds: (1) that the
author of ch. xl.—lxvi. takes for his standpoint the time of the Babylonian
captivity, and, speaking as if that were present, from thence looks forward
into the subsequent future; (2) that he has a knowledge of the name and
career of Cyrus, which a prophet living two centuries before could not
possibly have had. The theory was subsequently further supported by
allege? differences between the style and diction of ch. i—xxxix. and ch.
xl.—lxvi., which were declared to necessitate different authors, and to
mark ch. xl.—lxvi. as the production of a later age.

The simple theory thus started of two Isaiahs, an earlier and a later, one
contemporary with Hezekiah, the other with the later Captivity, whose
works had been accidentally thrown together, has, since its original pro-
mulgation, been elaborated and expanded, chiefly by the labours of Ewald,
in a wonderful way. Ewald traces in the Book of Isaiah, as it has come
down to us, the work of at least seven hands.’ To Isaiah, the contemporary
of Hezekiah, the son of Amoz, he ascribes thirty chapters only out of the
sixty-six, together with parts of two others. To a second great prophet,
whom he calls “the Great Unnamed,” and whom he places towards the
close of the Captivity, he assigns eighteen chapters, with parts of four
others. A third prophet, who lived in the reign of Manasseh, wrote one
whole chapter (the priceless fifty-third) and portions of four or five others.
A fourth, belonging to the time of Kzekiel, wrote almost the whole of four
chapters. Another, perhaps Jeremiah, wrote two chapters; and two
others wrote portions of chapters—one of them the prophecy in ch. xxi.
1—10; and the other that beginning ch. xiii. 2 and terminating ch. xiv. 23.
The Book of Isaiah, as it has come down to us, is thus a patchwork of an
extraordinary kind. Ewald’s theory may be thus exhibited in a tabular
form—


) Ewald’s views are propounded, partly in his ‘Propheten des Alten Bundes,’ but more
eompletely in his ‘History of Israel,’ vol. iv. p. 207, et segg.; and vol. v. pp. 15, 41—47.


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. xix
ee


ee


AUTHOR. DATE,
Ch. {.—xii. ete eee | Isaiah himself bse A 2k AD — Als)
Ch. xiiii—xiv. 23 eee | Unknown author (No. 1) ... | ,, 570—560
Ch. xiv. 2i—xx. eee | Isaiah himself oss coe | 99 727—710
Ohexxiel 108s eee | Unknown author (No, 2) .. | 4 570—560
Ch. xxi. 11—xxxiii, ... | Isaiah himself ees eee | 95 715—700
Ch. xxxiv. and xxxv. «.. | Jeremiah (?) eco eee | 9 540—538


Ch. xxxvi.—xxxix. .. | Not assigned,

Ch. xl.—lii. 12 ... «.. | The Great Unnamed coe | 99 550—540
Ch. li: 13—liv. 12 eee | Unknown author (No. 3) .. | 9 690—640
Ch. liv. 13—lvi. 8 ee | Lhe Great Unnamed coe | 99 550—540
Ch. lvi. 9—Ivii. 11... | Unknown author (No, 3) ... | ,, 690—640
Ch. lvii. 12—21... eee | The Great Unuamed cece | yp 550—540
Ch. lviii. L—lix. 20... | Unknown author (No. 4) ... | ,, 595—575
Ch. lix. 21 —Ixii. eo | The Great Unnamed coe | 9p: 550—540
Ch. Ixiii. and Ixiv, — «. | Unknown author (No. 4) ... | ,, 595—575
Ch, lxv. and lxvi, eo. | The Great Unnamed eos | yp 550—540


Nor does it at all appear that with Ewald’s theory of a sevenfold authorship
of “Isaiah ” we have reached the final outcome of the separatist hypothesis
started by Koppe. The latest English writer! is of opinion that “‘ Ewald’s
treatment of the latter part of the Book of Isaiah cannot,” at any rate, “ be
complained of on the score of excessive analysis.” He declares that “ it is
becoming more and more certain (?) that the present form of the prophetic
Scriptures is due to a literary class (the so-called Sopherim, ‘scribes,’ or
‘Scripturists’), whose principal function was collecting and supplementing
the scattered records of prophetic revelation. This function they performed
with rare self-abnegation. Of a regard on their part for personal distinc-
tion there is not a trace; self-consciousness is swallowed up in the sense
of belonging, if only in a secondary degree, to the company of inspired men.
They wrote, they recast, they edited, in the same spirit in which a gifted
artist of our own day devoted himself to the glory of modern painters.”
The result is that the Book of Isaiah, as it has come down to ua, is a
“mosaic,” or patchwork, the production of no one knows how many
‘authors, brought gradually into its present condition.

Nothing is more certain than that these theories did not originate in any
marked differences of style between the portions of the Book of Isaiah
which are assigned to different authors. They arose entirely from the
subject-matter of the prophecies. “The really decisive arguments against
the unity of authorship are derived,” we are told, “ (1) from the historical
circumstances implied in the disputed chapters, and (2) from the originality
of the ideas, or of the forms in which the ideas are expressed.”* Under


See Mr. Cheyne’s ‘ Prophecies of Isaiah,’ vol. ii., Essay vi. pp. 215-—217.
® Cheyne, ‘ The Book of Isaiah chronologically arranged,’ p. xxi.


ay. INTRODUCTION TO
ET


the former head, the sole ground urged is the standpoint occupied by the
writer of the later chapters, which is that of an exile in Babylon, writing
when Jerusalem and the temple have long lain in ruins, and the Jews are
becoming dispirited at the apparent refusal of God to interpose in their
behalf; under the latter come the sarcastic descriptions of idolatry, the
appeals to the victories of Cyrus, the references to the influence of the
angelic powers (ch. xxiv. 21), the resurrection of the body (ch. xxvi. 19),
the everlasting punishment of the wicked (ch. 1. 11; lxvi. 24), and the
idea of vicarious atonement (ch. liii.).! It was only after Isaiah had been
split up into fragments upon the ground of the contents of the different
portions, that the argument from differences in the style of different parts
occurred to the critics, and was brought forward as subsidiary. Even now
no great stress is laid upon it. It is admitted that questions concerning
style are very much matters of taste, and that no unanimity can be expected
on them! It is allowed that “the Great Unnamed,” if a different writer
from Isaiah, often imitated his style, and knew his prophecies by heart.’
It is not even pretended that seven styles can be made out, corresponding
to the seven Isaianic authors of Ewald’s list. The most that has been
attempted is to prove two styles—an earlier and a later; but even here
the success of the efforts made is not great. In Germany the unity of
the style has been maintained, in spite of them, by Jahn, Hengstenberg,
Kleinert, Havernick, Stier, Keil, Delitzsch, and F. Windischmann; in
England, by Henderson, Huxtable, Kay, Urwick, Dean Payne Smithy
Professor Birks, and Professor Stanley Leathes. A recent advocate of
the separatist theory seems almost to concede the point, when he sets
himself to argue that unity of style does not necessarily imply unity of
authorship, and so that “Isaiah” may be a work by several hands, even
though the style be uniform.‘


§ 6. A Derence or THe Unity or THE Boor.


The question whether “Isaiah” be the work of one writer or more, is to
be regarded rather as one of literary interest than of theological importance,
Nobody doubts but that the “book” existed in the form in which we have tt
during the time of our Lord and his apostles; and it is thus our present
book which has their sanction as a portion of the inspired Word of God.
This it is equally, whether it is the work of one prophet, or of seven, or of
seventy. The controversy may therefore be conducted without heat or
asperity, being one as purely literary as that of the unity of the ‘Odyssey’
or the ‘ Iliad.’


1 Cheyne, ‘The Book of Isaiah chronologically arranged,’ p. xxiii. It is noticeable that,
in two cases, these “late ideas” are contained in passages which Ewald assigns to Isaiah
himself.

* Cheyne, ‘Prophecies of Isaiah,’ vol. ii, p. 218. Compare Moody-Stuart, ‘The Bible
True to Itself,’ p. 416, who quotes Professor Robertson Smith and Bleek to the same effect.

® Cheyne, ‘ Prophecies of Isaiah,’ vol. ii. p. 232, ‘ Ibid., p. 219,


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. xxi
a

The argaments in favour of the unity may be divided into the external
and the internal. Of external arguments, the first and most -mportant is
that of the versions, especially the Septuagint, which is a distinct evidence
that, as early as about B.c. 250, the entire contents of the “book” were
ascribed to Isaiah the son of Amoz. It is said that the Psalms were
similarly ascribed to David, though many were not of his composition; but
this is not the fact. The Septuagint translators headed the Book of Psalms
with the simple word “ Psalms ;” and in their headings to particular psalms
assigned several to authors other than David, as Moses, Jeremiah, Asaph,
Ethan, Haggai, and Zechariah.

The next external testimony is that of Jesus the son of Sirach, the author
of the Book of Ecclesiasticus. The writer is supposed to have lived about
B.0. 180. He distinctly ascribes to the Isaiah who was contemporary with
Hezekiah the portion of the work (ch. xl.—lxvi.) which the separatists of
all shades assign to an author, or authors, of a later date (Hcclus. xlviii.
18—24). Now the prologue to the son of Sirach’s work declares him to
have been “a man of great diligence and wisdom among the Hebrews,”
and “no less famous for great learning,” so that he may be assumed to
deliver the judgment of the most learned among the Jews of his time.

Isaiah’s authorship of the later (disputed) chapters was further, most
clearly, accepted by the writers of the New Testament and their contempo-
raries—by St. Matthew (iii. 3, etc.) ; St. Mark (i. 2, Revised Version), St.
Luke (iii. 4—6); St. John (xii. 38); St. Paul (Rom. x. 16—21, etc.);
St. John the Baptist (John i. 28); the Ethiopian eunuch (Acts viii. 28—
84); the elders of Nazareth (Luke iv. 16—20); Josephus (‘ Ant. Jud.,’ xi.
1), etc. If the greater part of these were unlearned and uncritical men,
yet St. Paul, at any rate, who was “brought up at the feet of Gamaliel”
(Acts xxii. 3), had been fully instructed in the Scriptures, and “ must have
known,” as Mr. Urwick says, “if the learned Jews of his day recognized
two Isaiahs, or the absorption of the prophecies of a very great yet un-
named exile into those of the first Isaiah.”? Josephus was also a man of
considerable reading and research; yet he unhesitatingly ascribes to Isaiah
the composition of the prophecies respecting Cyrus (ch. xliv. 28, ete.). it
may be confidently laid down that there was no Jewish tradition which
taught that the “ Book of Isaiah” was a composite work—a congeries of
prophecies of various dates, and from the hands of various authors.

Aben Ezra, who wrote in the twelfth century after our era, was the first
critic who ventured on the suggestion that the prophecies of ch. xl.—lxvi.
might not be the actual work of Isaiah. Previously to his time, and again
from his date until the close of the eighteenth century, not a breath of
suspicion was uttered, not a whisper on the subject was heard. The Book
of Psalms was known to be composite; the Book of Proverbs bore on its
face that it consisted of four collections (Prov. i. 1; xxv. 1; xxx. 1; xxxi.
1); but Isaiah was universally accepted as the continuous work of one and


he same author.
on 1 «The Servant of Jehovah,’ p. 9.


xxii INTRODUCTION TO
a


The internal evidence of unity divides itself under five heads: 1.
Identity in respect of the greatness, and the quality, of the genius exhibited
by the writer. 2. Similarity in the language and constructions. 3. Simi-
larity in the thoughts, images, and other rhetorical ornaments. 4. Simi-
larity in’ little characteristic expressions. 5. Correspondences, partly in the
way of repetition, partly in that of completion, in the later chapters, of
thoughts left incomplete in the earlier.

1. It is universally allowed by critics that the genius exhibited in the
writings acknowledged as Isaiah’s is extraordinary, transcendent, such as in
the entire history of the world has been possessed by few. The genius is
also admitted to be of a peculiar quality, characterized by sublimity, pro-
fusion and novelty of thought, breadth and variety of power, and a self-
control which keeps the utterances free from any approach to bombast or
extravagance. We maintain that not only is the genius exhibited in the
disputed chapters equal to that shown in the undisputed, but that it is a
genius of exactly the same kind. The sublimity of ch. lii. and lili. is allowed
on all hands, as also is that of ch. xl.; xliii. 1—4, and Ixiii. 1—6. Ewald
says of two of these passages, “The strain here attains to such a pure
luminous sublimity, and carries the hearer away with such a wonderful
charm of diction, that a person might be ready to fancy he was listening
to another prophet altogether.”* The great variety of power is similarly
attested. ‘In no prophet,” observes Ewald again, “does the mood in the
composition of particular passages so much vary, as throughout the three
several sections into which this part of the book (ch. xl.—lxvi.) is divided,
while under vehement excitement the prophet pursues the most diverse
objects. . . . The complexion of the style, although hardly anywhere pass-
ing into the representation of visions properly so called, varies in a constant
interchange; and rightly to recognize these changes is the great problem
for the interpretation.”* The profusion of thought cannot possibly be
questioned; and the self-control is certainly as noticeable in the disputed
chapters as in the undisputed.

2. The similarity in the language and constructions has been abundantly
proved by Delitzsch* and Urwick.‘ It is true that it has been also denied,
strenuously by Knobel;* more faintly by others, To examine the point
thoroughly would require an elaborate treatise, and would involve the
copious use of Hebrew type, and the employment of arguments only appre-
ciable by the advanced Hebrew scholar. We must therefore content
ourselves, under this head, with alleging the authorities of Delitzsch, Dr.
Kay, Professor Stanley Leathes, Professor Birks, Dean Payne Smith, Mr.
Urwick, and Dr. S. Davidson, himself a separatist, who agrees that there
is a general unity in the phraseology throughout the prophecies, or, at any


1 «Propheten des Alten Bundes,’ vol. ii. p. 407. * Thid., pp. 408, 409.
* ‘Commentary on the Prophecies of Isaiah,’ vol. ii. pp, 128—518,

* «The Servant of Jehovah,’ pp. 86—47.

* *Exegetisches Handbuch,’ vol. vi. pp. 296—298.


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. xxiii


rate, that “there is not enough evidence in the style and diction to show
the later origin’? of the disputed chapters.

3. The similarity in the thoughts, images, and other rhetorical ornaments
is another large subject, which it is almost impossible, within the limits of
such an Introduction as the present, to treat adequately. Isaiah’s pre-
dominant thought with respect to God is of his holiness—his spotless,
perfect purity, before which nothing “unclean” can stand. Hence the
favourite title of God, “the Holy One of Israel,” used eleven times in
undisputed and thirteen times in disputed chapters, and only five times
in the rest of the Old Testament. Hence his words (in Part I.), when he
sees God, “ Woe is me! for Iam undone; because I am a man of unclean
lips” (ch. vi. 5); and his description of God (in Part III.) as “the high
and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy” (ch. lvii. 15).
Next to God’s holiness, he loves to magnify his power. Hence he is “the
Mighty One of Israel” (ch. i. 24; xlix. 26; lx. 16), and has his power
magnificently described in such passages as ch. ii. 10, 21; xl. 12—17, etc.
The high and holy One has entered into covenant with Israel—they are
his “ people,” his “children,” his ‘“ well-beloved,” as no other people are
(Che itv o sit, 105314 12, letess, and ch: xls 1, 11. xii.) 8; 9xliit. 1, 15;
etc.). But they have rebelled against him, they have broken the covenant,
they have provoked him by their sins (ch. i. 2—4, 21—23; v. 4; xliii.
22—24; xlviii. 1—8; lxiii. 10, etc.), by oppression and injustice (ch. i
17, 23; iii. 12, 15; v. 7, 23; lix. 8, 13, 14), by their idolatries (ch. i. 29;
ii. 8, 20; xxxi. 7; xl. 19, 20; xli. 7; xliv. 9—20; lvii. 5), by their shedding
of innocent blood (ch. i. 15, 21; iv. 4; lix. 3,7). And for this they have
been in his counsels cast off, rejected, put away, forsaken (ch. i. 15; ii. 6;
iii. 8; iv. 6, ete., in Part I1.; and ch. xlii. 18—25; xliii. 28; xlix. 14, etc.,
in Part I/1.), carried into captivity (ch. v. 13; vi. 11, 12; xiv. 3, ete. and
ch. xlii. 22; xiii. 5, 6; xlv. 13; xlvili. 20), to Babylon (ch. xiv. 2—4;
xxxix. 6,7; xlvii.6; xlviii. 20, etc.). They are not, however, wholly cast
off; God is chastening them, and will bring back a “remnant ” (ch. vi. 13;
x, 20—22; xi. 12; xiv. 1—3, ete.; and ch. xliii. 1—6; xlviii. 9—20; xlix.
25, ete.), and plant them again in their own land (vi. 13; x. 21; xiv. 1;
xxxy. 10; and ch. xliv. 26; xlv. 13; li. 11, etc.), and give them peace and
prosperity (ch. xi. 11—16; xii; xiv. 3; xxv. 6—8; xxxii. 15—18; xxxv.
1—10; and ch. xl. 9—I11; xliii. 19, 20; xlix. 8—13; li. 11; lii. 7—10,
etc.). And then for their greater’ glory, he will call the Gentiles, and join
the Gentiles with them into one Church or nation (ch. xi. 10; xxv. 6;
xlii. 6; xlix. 6; lv. 5; lx. 3, etc.). Of this nation there will be a great
King (ch. ix. 6, 7; xxiv. 23; xxxii. 1; xxxili. 17; xlii. 1—4; xlix. 1—12,
etc.), who will reign in “God’s holy mountain” (ch. ii. 2; xi. 9; lvi. 7;
lvii. 13; lxv. 11, 25; Ixvi. 20) over his holy people perpetually. This
“King” will be also a Redeemer (ch. i. 27; xxxv. 9,10; xl. 14; lix. 20)
and a Saviour (ch. xxxv. 4; liii. 5—12); he will reign in righteousness

1 Dr. 8. Davidson, ‘Introduction to the Old Testament,’ vol. ii. p 54.


XXIV INTRODUCTION TO


and peace (ch. ix. 7; xxxii. 1, 17; xlii. 1—4; xlix.8—10), in a place where
the voice of weeping will be heard no more (ch. xxxv. 10; li. 11; lxv. 19),
and where there will be no more hurt nor destruction (ch. xi. 9; lxv. 25).

Among the favourite images which pervade the book, and belong alike
to the disputed and the undisputed chapters, may be noticed—

(1) The image of “light” and “darkness,” used in a spiritual sense for
moral ignorance and moral enlightenment. We are rendered so familiar
with the imagery by the constant employment of it in the New Testament, |
that we are apt to regard it as biblical generally, and not as characterizing
particular authors. The metaphorical use of “ light” and “ darkness ” is,
however, rare in the Old Testament, and characterizies three books only—
Job, the Psalms, and Isaiah. Isaiah is the only prophet in whose writings
the imagery is at all frequent. He uses the word “light” in a meta-
phorical sense at least eighteen times, and “darkness” at least sixteen,
zontrasting the two together in nine. Of the contrasts, four occur in
undisputed chapters (ch. v. 20, 80; ix. 2; xiii. 10), five in disputed ones
(ch. xlii. 16; 1.10; viii. 10; lix. 9; lx. 1—3). Of the other uses, seven
are in undisputed (ch. ii. 5; viii. 20, 22; ix. 19; x. 17; xxix. 18; xxx.
26), and nine in disputed chapters (ch. xlii. 6, 7; xlv. 3; xlvii. 5; xlix.
6,9; li. 4; 1x. 19, 20).

(2) The images of “blindness” and “ deafness,” for a similar condition,
especially when self-induced. This is a use almost peculiar to Isaiah
among Old Testament writers, and occurs at least twelve times—four
times in undisputed chapters (ch. vi. 10; xxix. 10, 18; xxxii. 3), and eight
in disputed ones (ch. xxxv. 5; xlii. 7, 16, 18,19; xliii. 8; xliv. 18; lvi. 9).

(3) The image of humanity as “a flower that fadeth,” or “a leaf that
fadeth,” occurs in ch. i, 80; xviii. 15 (undisputed), and in ch. xl. 7 and
lxiv. 6 (disputed).

(4) The image of a “rod,” “stem,” or “sprout,” applied to the Messiah,
occurs in ch. xi. 1, 10 and in ch. liii. 2. The latter is a disputed, the former
an undisputed chapter.

(5) The imagery expressive of the final peace and prosperity of Messiah’s
kingdom is closely similar, almost identical, in the “true Isaiah” and the
“other writers;” e.g. ch. ii. 4, “‘He shall judge among the nations, and
shall rebuke many people: and they shall beat their swords into plough-
shares, and their spears into pruning-hooks: nation shall not lift up sword
against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.” Ch. xi. 5—49,
“Righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle
of his reins. The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard
shall lie down with the kid... . And the cow and the bear shall feed;
their young ones shall lie down together: and the lion shall eat straw like
the ox... . They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for
the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the
sea.” Ch. Ixv. 24, 25, “It shall come to pass, that before they call, I will
answer; and while they are yet speaking, I will hear. The wolf and the


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. XXV


lamb shall feed together, and the lion shall eat straw like the bullock: and
dust shall be the serpent’s meat. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all
my holy mountain, saith the Lord.”

(6) The image of “water,” for spiritual life and refreskment, occurs in
both the disputed and the undisputed chapters, most frequently in the
former, but still unmistakably in the latter also (comp. ch. xxx. 25 and
xxxill. 21 with ch. xxxv.6; xli.17,18; xliii. 19,20; lv.1; lviii.11; Ixvi. 12).

(7) The comparison of God with a potter, and of a man with the vessel
which he fashions, is found both in ch. xxix. 16, an undisputed chapter,
and also in two of the disputed chapters (ch. xlv. 9 and Ixiv. 8).

(8) Jerusalem is represented as a tent, with stakes, cords, ete., both in
ch. xxxii. 20, an undisputed chapter, and in ch. liv. 2, a disputed one.

(9) Israel’s purification from sin is described as the purging of dross
from a metal, both in ch. i. 25 (undisputed) and in ch. xlviii. 10 (disputed).

(10) Other examples of metaphors common to the disputed and undis-
puted chapters are the metaphor of “tow,” for something weak and easily
consumed (ch. i. 31; xliii. 17) ; of “stubble,” for the same (ch. v. 24; xl,
24; xli. 2; xlvii. 14); of “the wilderness blossoming,” for a time of
spiritual well-being (ch. xxxii. 15; xxxv. 1, 2; li. 3; lv. 12, 13); of
“drunkenness,” for spiritual infatuation (ch. xxix. 9; li. 21, “drunken,
but not with wine”); of the “healing of men’s wounds,” for God’s
forgiveness of sin (ch. i. 6; xxx. 26; lili. 5; lvii. 18); of “an overflowing
stream,” for an invading host (ch. vili. 7, 8; xvii. 12, 13; lix. 19); of a
“whirlwind,” for the rush of chariot-wheels (ch. v. 28; lxvi. 15); of the
“dove’s note,” for lamentation (ch. xxxviii. 14; lix. 11); of “the worm,”
for decay or dissolution (ch. xiv. 11; li. 8); of a nation “eating its own
flesh,” for internal discord and disunion (ch. ix. 20; xlix. 18); of “shadow,”
for God’s protection (ch. xxv. 4; xxxii. 2; xlix. 2; li. 16); of “a feast of
fat things,” for spiritual blessings (ch. xxv. 6; lv. 2); of “earth bursting
out into singing,” for mankind rejoicing (ch. xxxv. 2; lv. 12); and of
“harlotry,” for spiritual unfaithfulness (ch. i. 21; lvii. 3, etc.).

Among the other rhetorical ornaments which characterize Isaiah’s style
in the undisputed chapters, there is not one which does not also charac-
terize the disputed ones. Dramatic representation, pointed antithesis, play
upon words, strong expressions, vivid descriptions, amplifications, variety,
are as noticeable in the one set as in the other, as may be seen by reference
to the passages already quoted in pp. xiiii—xvi. Even the very peculiar
ornament called éravadopd, or the repetition of a word or words at the end
of a sentence previously used at the beginning, is to be found alike in both,
and can scarcely he said to be more frequent in the one set than in the
other (see ch. i. 7; iv. 3; vi. 11; viii. 9; xiii. 10; xiv. 25; xv. 8; xxx. 20;
and ch. xxxiv. 7; xl. 19; xlii. 15,19; xlviii. 21; li. 13; liii. 6, 7; liv. 4,13;
lviii. 2; lix. 8).

4, The similarity of the disputed with the undisputed chapters in little
characteristic expressions has frequently been pointed out, but cannot be


xxvi INTRODUCTION TO


—eaeaQQQSQSoeOO


omitted in s review like the present. Note especially the following: (1)
the designation of God as “the Holy One of Israel” (ch. i. 4; v. 19, 24;
x.20; xii.6; xvii. 7; xxix.19; xxx. 11, 12,15; xxxi.1; and ch. xxxvii. 23;
xli. 14, 16, 20; xliii. 3, 14; xlv. 11; xlvii. 4; xlviii. 17; xlix. 7; liv. 5; lv.
5; Ix. 9, 14); (2) the combination of “Jacob” with “Israel” (ch. ix. 8;
x. 21, 22; xiv. 1; xvii. 3, 4; xxvii. 6; xxix. 23; and ch. xl.27; xli.8; xlii.
24; xliii. 1, 22, 28; xliv. 1, 5, 23; xlv. 4; xlvi. 3); (3) the phrase, “the
mouth of the Lord hath spoken it” (ch. i. 20; xl. 5; lviii. 14); (4) the
unusual form, yomar Yehovah, or yomar Elohim, in the middle or at the end
of a statement (ch. i. 11, 18; xxxiii. 10; and also in ch. xl. 1, 25; xli. 213
Ixvi. 9); (5) the quasi-hypostatic recognition of “the Spirit of the Lord”
(ch. xi. 2isexxxiv..16 3x1, 7,183) alvin, 16; lix..19; Isi,, 1, ete:)3 (6): the
application of the term “Maker” to God in the plural (ch. x. 15; liv. 5);
(7) the frequent mention of tohu, “chaos” (ch. xxiv. 10; xxix. 21; xxxiv.
ll; xl. 17, 28; xli. 29; xliv. 9; xlv. 18, 19; lx. 4); (8) the frequent
mention of “lifting up an ensign” (ch. v. 26; xi. 10, 12; xiii. 2; xviii. 8;
and ch. xlix. 22; lxii. 10); (9) the designation of God’s people as “out-
casts” or “outcasts of Israel” (ch. xi. 12; xvi. 3,4; xxvii. 13; and lvi. 8);
(10) the peculiar expression, “from henceforth, even for ever” (ch. ix. 7 and
lix. 21); (11) the declaration that God’s wrath against his people endures
but “a little while” (ch. xxvi. 20 and liv. 7, 8); (12) the use of the rare
word ndkoakh for “right things,” “uprightness” (ch. xxvi. 10; xxx. 10;
Ivii. 2; lix. 14); (13) the phrase, “‘ Who shall turn it back ?” to express the
irreversibility of God’s doings (ch. xiv. 27 and xliii. 13,—in both places as
the concluding clause); (14) the expression, ‘‘ Peace, peace,” for “ perfect
peace” (ch. xxvi. 3 and lvii. 19), only used elsewhere in 1 Chron. xii. 18.

5. Among correspondences, in the way of repetition, may be noted the
following :—


Ch. i. 13, “ Bring no more vain oblations; Ch. lxvi. 3, “ He that offereth an oblation


incense is an abomination unto me.” is as if he offered swine’s blood; he that
burneth incense, as if he blessed an
idol.”

Ch, i. 29, “Ye shall be confounded for the Ch. lxvi. 17, “They sanctify themselves
gardens that ye have chosen.” and purify themselves in the gardens,”
Ch. ix. 7, “The zeal of the Lord of hosts Ch. xxxvii. 32, “The zeal of the Lord of

will perform this.” hosts shall do this.”
Ch. xi. 9, ‘‘ They shall not hurt nor destroy Ch. Ixv. 25, “They shall not hurt nor
in all my holy mountain.” destroy in all my holy mountain, saith


the Lord.”
Ch. xi. 7, “The lion shall eat straw like Ch. Ixv. 25, “The lion shall eat straw like
the ox.” the bullock.”
Ch. xiv. 24, “ As I have purposed, so shall Ch. xlvi. 10, “ My counsel shall stand.”
it stand.”
Ch. xvi. 11, “My bowels shall sound like Ch, Ixiii. 15, “The sounding of thy bowels
an harp for Moab.” and of thy mercies towards me, are they
restrained ?”


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. xxvii


@a. xxiv. 19, 20, “The earth is utterly Ch. li. 6, “ Lift up your eyes to the heavens,
broken down, the earth is clean dis- and look upon the earth beneath: for
solved, the earth is moved exceedingly. the heavens shall vanish away like
The earth shall reel to and fro like a smoke, and the earth shall wax old like
drunkard, and shall be removed like a a garment, and they that dwell therein
cottage.” shall die in like manner.”

Ch. xxiv. 23, “Then the moon shall be Ch. Ix. 19, “The sun shall be no more
confounded, and the sun ashamed, when thy light by day; neither for brightness
the Lord of hosts shall reign in Mount shall the moon vive light unto thee:
Zion.” but the Lord shall be unto thee an

everlasting Light.”

Ch. xxv. 8, “The Lord God will wipe Ch. lxv. 19, “The voice of weeping shall
away tears from off all faces.” be no more heard in her, nor the voice

of crying.”

Ch. xxvi. 1, “Salvation will God appoint Ch. Ix. 18, “Thou shalt call thy walls
for walls and bulwarks,” Salvation.”

Ch. xxvii. 1, “In that day the Lord, with Ch. li. 9, “ Art thou not it that hath cut
his sore and great and strong sword Rahab, and wounded the dragon ?”
shall punish leviathan the piercing ser-
pent, even leviathan that crooked ser-
pent; and he shall slay the dragon that
is in the sea.”


Correspondences of a more recondite kind have also been pointed out,!
where the later portion of the prophecy appears to fill up and complete
the earlier. Such are the following: In Part I. Israel is threatened:
“Ye shall be as an oak whose leaf fadeth (ch. i. 40); in Part III. the
threat is accomplished, and Israel confesses: “ We all do fade as a leaf”
(ch. Imv. 6). In Part I. God promises “a feast of fat things, a feast of
wines on the lees” (ch. xxv. 6); in Part III. he issues an invitation to the
world at large to partake of it: “‘Come ye... buy wine and milk without
money and without price . . . eat ye that which is good, and let your soul
delight itself in fatness” (ch. lv.1,2). In Part I. Jerusalem is represented
as desolate and sitting in the dust (ch. iii. 26); in Part III. she is bidden
to “arise” from the dust and shake herself free of it (ch. lii. 2). In Part
I. Israel is “a garden that hath no water” (ch. i. 30)—a vineyard on
which the clouds have been commanded to “rain no rain” (ch. v. 6); in
Part III. the promise is made that she shall “ be like a watered garden ”
(ch. lviii. 11). God (in Part I.) forsook her for her iniquities (ch. v. 5—7;
xxxii. 10—14); but in Part III. the promise is made, “Thou shalt no
more be termed Forsaken; neither sball thy land any more be termed Deso-
late. . . . And they shall call them, The holy people, The redeemed of the
Lord: and thou shalt be called, Sought out, A city not forsaken” (ch. Ixii.
4—12). Again, in Part I., Jehovah is set forth as “a crown of glory and
a diadem of beauty” to his people (ch. xxviii. 5); while in Part III. is
found the complement of the image, Israel being set forth as “a crown of

1 See ‘The Bible True to Itself, by Dr. Moody-Stewart (2nd. edit., London, 1884), pp.
874414.


xxviii INTRODUCTION TO


glory and a royal diadem” in the hand of Jehovah (ch. Ixii. 3). The
“thorns and briars,” which are represented in Part I. as all that Israel
produces (ch. v. 6; xxxii. 13), give place in Part III. to a better growth:
“Instead of the thorn shall come up the fir tree, and instead of the briar
shall come up the myrtle tree” (ch. lv. 18); “They shall spring up as
among the grass, as willows by the water-courses”’ (ch. xliv. 4).

It may also be observed that the local colouring, including the allusions
to scenery and natural objects, to mountains, forests, trees, rocks, streams,
fertile fields, etc., has the same cast in both the earlier and the later
chapters. The scenery is throughout that of Syria and Palestine, not that
of Babylonia or of Egypt, except in one short passage (ch. xix. 5—10).
The writer’s admiration is for Lebanon, with its cedars that are high and
lifted up (ch. ii. 13; x. 34; xiv.8; xxix. 17; xxxiii. 9; xxxv. 2; xxxvii. 24;
xl. 16; lx. 13); its “choice firs,” its “pines,” and ‘“ box trees; ” for Bashan,
with its oaks (ch. ii. 13) and orchards (ch. xxxiii. 9); for Carmel (ch. v.
18; xvi. 10; xxix. 17; xxxii. 15, 16; xxxv. 2; xxxvii. 24); for Sharon
(ch. xxxiii. 9; xxxv. 2; lxv. 10); for the rich Gilead region, with its
vineyards and “summer fruits,” and glad harvests (ch. xv. 9, 10). The
trees are all of them Palestinian, or at any rate Syrian—cedars, oaks, firs,
pines, box trees, sycamores, cypresses, shittah trees, olives, vines, myrtles.
The palm, which is the great glory of Babylonia, obtains no mention. The
abounding river Euphrates occurs once only (ch. vili. 7), and that once is
in Part L_ Elsewhere the water spoken of consists of “streams,” “ brooks,”
‘‘ fountains,” “pools” or reservoirs, “springs,” and the like (ch. xv. 7;
xxii. 11; xxx. 25; xxxv. 7; xli. 18; xlviii. 21; lviii. 11, etc.)—all forms of
water familiar to dwellers in Palestine. Rocks, “ragged rocks,” “ clefts
in the rock,” “holes in the rock,” are also portions of the writer’s scenery
(ch. ii. 10, 19, 21; xlii. 22; lvii. 5)—things unknown in Babylonia. Moun-
tains, woods, forests, wild beasts of the forest, bears, are equally within his
cognizance, and furnish him with frequent images (ch. ii. 14; ix. 18; x,
18, 84; xiii. 4; xl..12; xlii, 11; liv. 10; lv. 12, 18; lvi. 9; lix. 11, ete.).
Mr. Cheyne confesses the force of this entire argument, when he says—

“Some passages of II. Isaiah (t.e. ch. xl.—lxvi.) are in various degrees
really favourable to the theory of a Palestinian origin. Thus, in ch. lvii. 5,
the reference to torrent-beds is altogether inapplicable to the alluvial plains
of Babylonia; and equally so is that to subterranean ‘holes’ in ch. xlii.
22; and, though no doubt Babylonia was more wooded in ancient times
than it is at present, it is certain that the trees mentioned in ch. xli. 19
were not for the most part natives of that country, while the date-palm,
the commonest of all the Babylonian trees, is not once referred to.” }

It is evident that the “ Palestinian origin” of II. Isaiah, though not
conclusively proving Isaiah’s authorship, is in thorough harmony with it,
and has an appreciable value as a subsidiary argument in favour of the


unity of the book.
1 ¢Prophecies of Isaiah,’ vol. ii. p. 211.


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. xxix
eeEe————— OO


§ 7. LireratTuge or IsarAn.


The earliest, and one of the best, comments on Isaiah is that of Jerome, written in
Latin, about the year a.p. 410. It is divided into eighteen books, and contains much
that is of the highest value, especially on philological and geographical points. Jerome’s
knowledge of Hebrew was great, and his acquaintance with the works of the Jewish
rabbis extensive. But his exegesis is to a large extent fanciful. Jerome was followed,
towards the end of the fifth or beginning of the sixth century, by Procopius of Gaza,
who wrote, in Greek, a long and elaborate work, which was little known until it was
translated into Latin by Curterius towards the close of the sixteenth century (‘In
Esaiam Prophetam Commentationum Epitome,’ Grace et Latine, J. Curterio interprete,
folio, Paris, 1580). Christian interpretation had then a long pause, and the exegesis of
Isaiah was carried on in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries by Jewish scholars, of whom
the most eminent were Rashi (died 1107), Aben Ezra (died 1167), and D. Kimchi
(died 1235). Rashi’s works are printed in the rabbinical Bibles, and have been partly
translated into Latin by Breithaupt (3 vols., Gotha, 1710). Aben Ezra’s commentary
on Isaiah has been translated by Dr. Friedlander, and published, with the text, for the
Society of Hebrew Literature, by Triibner and Co, (London, translation in 1873, text
in 1877). D. Kimchi’s work was printed, with a Latin version, at Ulyssipolis, in
1492. Of these three commentators, Aben Ezra is regarded as the best. He is clear-
headed, laborious, and clever, though somewhat given to scepticism. The labours of
the Jewish writers were utilized for the Church by Nicolas de Lyra, a Franciscan
monk, about a.p. 1300-40, His critical work, entitled ‘ Postilla Perpetuz,’ in eighty-
five books, was published by the Benedictines at Antwerp in 1634, It has considerable
merit, though somewhat too venturous in its allegorical interpretations, as the author
himself felt in his later years.

With the Reformation an increased amount of attention was devoted to the writings
of “the evangelical prophet.” Calvin (‘Commentationes in Isaiam,’ folio, Geneva,
1551) gave the views on the subject taken by the more advanced Reformers; while
Musculus (‘In Esaiam Prophetam Commentarii locupletissimi,’ Bale, 1570) wrote from
the Lutheran standpoint, Marloratus (‘ Esaiz Prophetia, cum Catholica Expositione
Ecclesiastica,’ folio, Paris, 1564) and Pintus (‘Commentaria in Esaiam,’ folio, Lyons,
1561) from the Roman. Of these commentaries, Calvin’s is by far the most important.
“ Calvin’s works,” says Diestel, “ offer even yet a rich store of biblical knowledge.” His
comment on Isaiah will be found largely quoted in the present work. Another writer
on Isaiah, belonging to the Reformation period, was Pellicanus, a good Hebraist, whose
notes upon Isaiah will be found in the third volume of his ‘Commentaria Sacra’ (3 vols.,
Zurich, 1540).

The seventeenth century did not do very much for the criticism or exegesis of Isaiah.
Its chief theological writers belonged to the Dutch school, and comprised Hugo Grotius,
whose scanty notes upon Isaiah, in his ‘Annotata ad Vetus Testamentum,’ vol. ii.
(folio, Paris, 1644), are of little value; De Dieu, who wrote ‘ Animadversiones in
Veteris Testamenti Libros Omnes’ (Leyden, 1648); Schultens, whose ‘ Animad versiones
Criticee et Philologicw ad Varia Loca Veteris T'estamenti’ (Amsterdam, 1709) were
highly esteemed by Gesenius; and Vitringa, whose great work (‘Commentarius in
Librum Prophetiarum Jesaizx,’ 2 vols. folio, Leuwarden, 1704-10) is still regarded as ‘‘a
vast mine of rich materials” by modern critics. This commentary is characterized by
considerable learning and much sound sense, but is spoilt by its diffuseness,

Towards the middle of the eighteenth century, England began to show her interest in
the study of the greatest of Hebrew prophets, and to produce commentaries and transla-
tions. The lead was taken by Robert Lowth, Professor of Poetry at Oxford, and after-
wards Bishop of London, who published, in 1758, a work on the ‘Sacred Poetry of the
Hebrews,’ which he followed up, in 1778, by ‘Isaiah: a New Translation with a Pre-
liminary Dissertation, and Notes Critical, Philological, and Explanatory’ (1 vol. 4to). This
work excited great attention. It was translated into German in the year following, by
J. R. Koppe, under the title, ‘Dr. R. Lowth’s Jesaias neu tibersetzt, nebst einer Kin-
leitung * (2 vols. 8vo, Leipzig, 1779), and provoked criticism both in Germany and in


England. Kocher in Germany criticized its emendations of the Hebrew text in a small
2


XXX INTRODUCTION TO


volume, entitled, ‘ Vindicia S. Textus Hebrai Esaiw Vetis’ (Berne, 1786). In England,
a layman, Mr. M. Dodson, endeavoured to improve upon it in his work, ‘Isaiah: a New
Translation, with Notes Supplementary to those of Bishop Lowth,’ by a layman (1 vol.
8vo, London, 1790); and this work was shortly followed by another of the same kind,
from the pen of a Dr. Joseph Stock, called, ‘The Book of the Prophet Isaiah in Hebrew
and English, the Hebrew metrically arraned, and the ‘l'ranslation alt-red from that of
Bishop Lowth, with Notes,’ etc. (Bath, 1803). Bishop Lowth’s work has, however, held
its ground against all attacks, and, though far from faultless, still deserves the attention
of students.

A French translation of Isaiah was published in the year 1760, by M. Deschamps
(‘ Exaias, Traduction Nouvelle,’ 12mo, Paris) ; and a second German translation (‘ Jesaias
neu iibersetzt’) by Hensler, in 1788. J. C. Déderlein also published the text, with a
Latin version (8vo, Altorf), in 1780, None of these works is of any considerable merit.

The first step in advance that was nade after Bishop Lowth’s labours was by the
publication of the comment and translation of Gesenius (‘ Philologisch-kritischer und
historischer Commentar iiber den Jesaia,’ 2 vols. 8vo, Leipzig, 1820, 1821). Ges nius,
as a Hebraist, far exceiled Lowth. He possessed more historical and antiquarian know-
ledge. His work, we are told, “is hardly yet superseded.” He had, however, the
demerit of being a pronounced rationalist, an absolute unbeliever in either miracle or
prophecy, and his exegesis is thus poor and shallow, nay, almost wholly wor'hless.

Gesenius was followed by Hitzig, a writer of the same class and type. Hitzi.’s work
on Isaiah (‘ Der Prophet Jesaia iibersetzt und ausgelehrt,’ 8vo, Heidelberg, 1833)
intensified Gesenius’s rationalizing tone, but had merits which must not be denied.
Hitzig’s intellect is acute, his historical knowledge extensive, his grasp upon Hebrew
grammar unusual. He is sometimes overbuld, sometimes oversubtle ; but the serious
student can scarcely dispense with the light to be derived frum his ex)lanations.
Rosenmiiller’s ‘Scholia in Esaiam’ (3 vols. 8vo, Leipzig, 1811-20) are also frequently
of great service, though he also belongs to the rationalistic or sceptical school. Con-
temporary with [litzig, but somewhat later in publishing his views, was the distinguished
critic and historian Ewald, ‘the second founder of the science of the Hebrew language,’
acute, philos phic, profound, of a po: tic temperament. Ewald’s criticism of Isaiah will
be found, partly in his yeneral work upen the prophets (‘Die Piopheten des Alten
Bundes,’ Berlin, 1st edit., 2 vols. 8vo, 1810-41; 2nd edit., 3 vols. 8vo, 1857-68), partly
in his‘ History of the People of Israel# (‘Geschichte des Volkes Israel,’ Gottingen, 5 vols.
8vo, 1843-55), translated into Euglish, and published in five volumes by Longman,
(London, 1869-71). Ewald is to be read with caution. He is overbold, oversubtle,
overfond of minute systematizing, and possessed of an overweening s-lf-contidence,
which makes him put forward the merest theories as ascertained facts. Auother com-
mentator of importance, belonging to the sceptical school, is Knobel, whose work (¢ Der
Prophet Jesaia erklart,’ forming the sixth volume of the ‘ Kurzgefasstes Ex egetisches
Handbuch zum Alten Testament,’ Leipzig, 1854, 2nd edit.) will be, for its liuguistic
and archeological notices, found of service by every student.

The anti-rationalistic school in Germany has uot been idle on its side in the Isaian
controversy. Hengstenberg’s views are contained in his ‘ Christology of the Old T'esta-
ment, translated for Clark’s Foreiyn Theological Library (Edinburgh, 1854—7),
and are well worthy of attention. Dreschler produced, between 1845 and 1851, his
valuable treatise, ‘Der Prophet Jesaja tibers-tat und erklart,’ which was continued after
his death by Habn and Delitzsch, Kleinert had, in 1829, published a noteworthy
defence of the genuineness of the whole of Isiiah (‘ Die Aichtheit des Jesaias, Berlin,
1829). This was followed, in 1850, by the excellent work of Stier (‘ Jesaias, nicht Pseudo-
Jesaias,’ Barmen, 1850), a comment on ch. xl.—Ixvi., “of real value for its spiritual
insight;” and in 1866, Delitasch, the continuator of Dreschler, produced what 1s
generally allowed to be the best and most con plete of all existing commentaries
(‘Commentar tiber Jesaias,’ Ist edit., 1866; 3rd edit., 1879) which has been made
accessible to the English reader in Clark’s I’o eiyn Theological Library.

Of recent Euglish commentaries ou Isaiah, the most important are the following: Dr.
E. Henderson, ‘The Book of the Prophet Isaiah, translated from the Hebrew, with a
Commentary, Critical, Philological, and Exegetical’ (1 vol. 8vo, London, Ist edit., 444;
2nd edit., 1857); J. A. Alexander, ‘Isaiah, Translated and Explained’ (2 ws. 8


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. xxxi
an eS EEE ee


New York, 1851-2); Professor Birks, ‘Commentary on Isaiah, Critical, Historical,
and Prophetical’ (1st edit., Cambridge, 1871; 2nd edit., London, 187s); Dr. Kay,
‘Commentary on Isaiah’ (London, Murray, 1875, published in vol. vii. of the ‘ Speaker’s
Commentary’); and Rev. T. K. Cheyne, ‘The Prophecies of Isaiah, a New Translation,
with Commentary and Appendices’ (2 vols. 8vo, London, 1882). Of these the com-
mentaries of Dr. Kay and Mr, Cheyne are specially to be commended—the former for its
boldness and originality, the latter for its thoroughness, its large grasp of the historical
facts, and its candour and fairness towards critics of different views. Both writers are
remarkable for their profound knowledge of Hebrew, and acquaintance with other
kindred dialects. Mr. Cheyne is distinguished by the large use which he makes of the
recently discovered cuneiform inscriptions.

Among minor works connected with Isaiah, and worthy of the student’s attention,
may be enumerated, C. P. Caspari’s ‘ Keitrave zur Einleitung in das Buch Jesaja’ (Berlin,
1848); Meier, ‘ Der Prophet Jesaja’ (Piorzheim, 1850); 8. D. Luzzatto, ‘ I] Profeta Isaia
Volgarizzato e Commentato ad uso degli Israeliti’ (Padua, 1855-67); G. Vance Smith,
‘Prophecies relating to Nineveh and the Assyrians’ (1 vol. 8vo, London, 1857); Dean
Payne Smith, ‘The Authenticity and Messianic Interpretation of the Prophecies of
Isaiah vindicated’ (Oxford and London, 1862); Rev. Rowland Williams, ‘The Hebrew
Prophets,’ translate! atresh from the original (2 vols. 8vo, London, 1866-71); E. Reuss,
‘Les Prophétes’ (2 vols. 8vo, Paris, 1876); Neubauer and Dr. Driver, ‘The Fifty-Third
Chapter o! Isaiah according to the Jewish Interpreters’ (Oxford, 1877); Rev. T. K. Cheyne,
‘Notes and Criticisms on the Hebrew Text of Isaiah’ (1 vol. 8vo, London, 1868); and
§ The Book of Isaiah chronologically arranged’ (1 vol. 8vo, London, 1870); Klostermann,
‘Jesaja cap. xl.—lxvi., eine Bitte um Hilfe in grosser Noth,’ published in the Zeitschrift
Sir lutherische Theologie of 1876 (pp. 1—60); Urwick, ‘The Servant of Jehovah’
(1 vol. 8vo, Hdinburgh, 1877); F. Kostlin, ‘Jesaia und Jeremia, Ihr Leben und Wirken
ausibren Schriften dargestellt’ (Berlin, 1879) ; Moody-Stuart, ‘The Old Isaiah ’ (Edin-
burgh, 1880); H. Kriiger, ‘ Essai sur la théolugie d’Esaie xl.—lxvi. (Paris, 1881); and
W, Robertson Smith, ‘The Prophets of Israel, and their Place in History to the Close
of the Eighth Century B.c.’ (Edinburgh, 1882).

The following Euglish translations have been published, besides those of the Autho-
tized and Revised Versions: (1) ‘The Prophecye of Isaye,’ by George Joy, 8vo,

(Strasburg, 1531); (2) ‘Isaiah, a New Translation, with a Preliminary Dissertation,’ ete.,
by Bishop Lowth (London, 1778); (8) * Isaiah, a New Translation, with Notes supple-
mentary to those of Bishop Lowth,’ by M. Dodson (London, 1790) ; (4) ‘ Isaiah Versified,’
by Dr. G. Butt (Loudon, 1785); (5) ‘‘l he Book of Isaiah in Hebrew and E: glish,’ by
Dr. Joseph Sock (1 ath, 1803); (6) ‘Isaiah ‘!ranslated, with Critical and lxplanatory
Notes,’ by Rev. A. Jenour, (Oxford, 1880); (7) ‘Isaiah Translated,’ by Rev, J. Jones
(London, 1830); and (8) ‘The Prophecies of Isaiah, a New Translatior, with Commen-
tary and Appendices,’ by Rev. T. K. Cheyne (London, 1882),


rH


THE


BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISATAH.


PART I, EARLIER PROPHECIES OF ISAIAH
(GHeal=3X-X V.).


Szorion I, Tu Great ARRAIGNMENT (CH. L).


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER L


Ver. 1.—TiTLz oF THE Worx. It is ques-
tioned whether the title can be regarded as
Isaiah’s, or as properly belonging to the
work, and it is suggested that it is rather a
heading invented by a collector who brought
together into a volume such prophecies of
Isaiah as were known to him, the collection
being a much smaller one than that which
was made ultimately. In favour of this
view it is urged (1) that the prophecies,
as we have them, do not all “concern Judah
and Jerusalem;” (2) that there is a mistake
in the title, which Isaiah could not have
made, none of the prophecies belonging to
the reign of Uzziah. But it may be an-
swered, that, in the scriptural sense, all
prophecy “ concerns Judah and Jerusalem,”
te. the people and city of God; and,
further, that it is quite impossible to prove
that no part of the “vision” was seen in
the reign of Uzziah. There are no means
of knowing whether Isaiah collected his
prophecies into a volume himself or whether
the collection was the work of others. In
either case, the existing title must be re-
garded as designed for the entire work.

ISAIAH,


All the earlier prophecfes—those of Hoses,
Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Micah, Nahum, and
Zephaniah — have some title introducing
them,

Ver. 1.—The vision (comp. Obad. i. 1;
Nah. i. 1). The term is probably used in
a collective sense, but is also intended to
suggest the intrinsic unity of the entire body
of prophecies put forth by Isaiah. As pro-
phets were originally called “seers” (1 Sam.
ix. 9), so prophecy was called “ vision; ”
and this latter use continued long after the
other (comp. 1 Chron. xvii. 15; Ezek. xii.
27; Dan. ix. 23; Obad. i. 1, etc.). Isaiah
the son of Amoz (comp. ch. ii. 1; xiii. 1;
Xxxvil. 2, etce.; 2 Kings xx. 1; 2 Chron.
xxxii. 32). The signification of the name
Isaiah is “the salvation of Jehovah.” The
name Amoz (Améts) is not to be confused
with Amos (’Amés), who seems to have been
a contemporary (Amos i. 1). Concerning
Judah and Jerusalem. The prophecies of
Isaiah concern primarily the kingdom of
Judah, not that of Israel. They embrace
a vast variety of nations and countries (see
especially ch. xiii., xv.—xxi., xxiii., xlvii.);
but these nations and countries are spoken
of “only because of the relation in which
they stand to Judah and Jerusalem” (Kay),
or at any rate to the people of God, sym-
bolized under those names. Jerusalem occu-
pies a prominent place in the prophecies
(see ch. i. 8,21; iii. 16—26; iv. 3—6; xxix

B


2 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH,


(on. 1. 1—31.


—_— oe _  006€&wC ea ———<—<—_—_— ee


1—8; xxxi.4—9, etc.). In the days of Uzziah,
Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah. Uzziah (or
Azariah, as he is sometimes called) reigned
fifty-two years—probably from B.c. 811 to
B.0. 759; Jotham sixteen years—from B.0.
759 to B.c. 743; Ahaz also sixteen years—
from B.o. 743 to B.o. 727; and Hezekiah
twenty-nine years—from B.o. 727 to B.O.
698. Isaiah probably prophesied only in
the later years of Uzziah, say from B.0.
760; but as he certainly continued his pro-
phetical career till Sennacherib’s invasion
of Judea (ch. xxxvii. 5), which was not
earlier than B.o. 705, he must have exercised
the prophet’s office for_at least fifty-six
years. The lowest possible estimate o
duration of his ministry is forty-seven years
—from the last year of Uzziah, B.o. 759, to
the fourteenth of Hezekiah (ch. xxxviii. 5).
The highest known to us is sixty-four years
—from the fourth year before Uzziah’s death
(B.0. 762) to the last year of Hezekiah (B.0.
698). (See ‘Speaker’s Commentary,’ vol. v.
p. 5.)

Vers. 2—6.—Gop’s ComMPLAINT AGAINST
nis Prope. The groundwork of Isaiah’s
entire prophecy is Judah’s defection from
God. God’s people have sinned, done amiss,
tlealt wickedly. The hour of vengeance
approaches. Punishment has begun, and
will go on, continually increasing in severity.
National repentance would avert God’s
judgments, but the nation will not repent.
God’s vengeance will fall, and by it a rem-
nant will be purified, and return to God,
and be his true people. In the present
section the indictment is laid. Judah’s sins
are called to her remembrance,

Ver. 2.—Hear, 0 heavens, and give ear,
O earth. “A grave and magnificent exor-
dium! All nature is invoked to hear Jeho-
vah make complaint of the ingratitude of
his people” (Rosenmiiller), The invocation
is cast in the same form with that so common
in Deuteronomy (iv. 26; xxx. 19; xxxi. 28;
xxxii. 1), and seems to indicate familiarity
with that book. The idea extends widel
among sacred and other poets (see Ps. 1.
3, 4; Micah vi. 1, 2; Adsch., *P. V.,’ IL
88—92). The Lord hath spoken; rather,
the Lord (literally, Jehovah) speaketh (80
Lowth, Cheyne, and Gesenius). The speech
of Jehovah follows in vers. 2, 3. I have
nourished and brought up children; lite-
rally, (my) sons I have made great and high ;
ie. I have raised Israel to greatness and
exalted him among the nations. Notwith-
standing their disobedience, God still ac-
knowledges them as his “sons.” They have
rebelled against me. ‘I'he verb used is
generally rendered in our version “trans-
gressed” (see Jer. iii, 13, Hos. vii. 13;


Amos iy. 4); but it may also have the
stronger sense here assigned it. Lowth
translates, “revolted from me;” Gesenius,
“fallen away from me;” Cheyne, “broken
away from me.”

Ver. 3.—The ox... the ass. The ox
and the ass are probably selected as the
least intelligent of domesticxted animals
(so Jerome, Rosenmiiller, and Gesenius),
Yet even they recognize their owner or
master. Jeremiah contrasts the brutish
stupidity of Isracl with the wise instinct
of animals that have not been domesticated,
as the stork, the tvrtle-dove, the crane,
and the swallow (viii. 7). Israel doth not
know ; f.e. does not acknowledge its Master
and Owner, pays him no respect, does
not recognize him as either Owner or Master.
My people. Compare tlie formula, so fre-
quent in Exodus, “ Let my people go” (vii.
16; viii. 1, 20; ix. 1, etc.). Israel was
God’s people by election (Gen. xv. 13), by
covenant (Exod. xix. 5—8; xxiv. 3—8),
by pardoning grace (Exod. xxxiii. 12—17),
Despite all their backslidings, he had not
yet cast them off. They are still “his
people” in Isaiah from first to last, standing
in contrast with “the nations,” or “the
Gentiles,” among whom they are to be “ set
as a sign” (ch. lxvi. 19). Doth not consider.
Gesenius translates, “doth not consider
thereof ;” Cheyne, “is without understand-
ing.” Bishop Lowth retains the words of
the Authorized Version. The meaning
would seem to be, “My people doth not
consider me, doth not reflect on my relation
to them as Lord and Master.”

Ver. 4.—Ah sinful nation. These are the
words of Isaiah, not of Jehovah. The pro-
phet, having delivered God’s message in
vers. 2 and 3, proceeds to impress and en-
force it on the people by remarks of bis own,
He begins with a lamentation over their
wickedness and impenitence; “ Ah sinful
nation!” or “Alas for the sinfv! nation |”—
the nation called to be holy (Exod. xix. 6;
Lev. xx. 26, etc.), but sunk in sin and
wickedness. How sad their condition!
How almost hopeless! Laden with iniquity ;
literally, heavy with guilt. But our version
well expresses the sense. As the psalmist
says, ‘‘ My sins have gone up over my head,
and are like a sore burden, too heavy for
me to bear” (Ps. xxxviii. 1; cf. Matt. xi. 28).
A seed of evil-coers. Not descendants of
evil-doors, but “an evil-doing seed,” or
“race” (orépua rovnpsy, LXX.; comp. ch.
xiv. 20; Ixi. 9; Ixv. 23). Children that are
corrupters; literally, sons that do corruptly.
It is not their corrupting of others, though
that might follow, hut the corruption that
was in themselves, which is spoken of.
The corruption was both moral and doctrinal
(see ver. 21). In corroboration of the fact,
see 2 Chron. xxvii. 2. They have forsaken


on. 1. 1—31.]


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 3


the Lord. Not by renouncing his worship,
which they still continued (see vers. 11—15),
but by reducing it to a formality. The
people “ honoured him with their lips, while
their hearts were far from him” (ch, xxix.
13). They have provoked to anger; rather,
despised (Revised Version), or scorned (Kay,
Cheyne), or rejected with disdain (Lowth),
in allusion to their disobeying his command-
ments (see vers. 21—23). The Holy One of
Israel. This title of God is a favourite one
with Isaiah (see ch. v. 19, 24; x. 17, 20;
xii. 6; xvii. 7; xxix. 19, 23; xxx. 11, 12,
15; xxxi. 1; xxxvii. 23; xli. 14, 16, 20;
xlili, 3, 14; xlv.°11; xlix. 7; liv. 5; lv. 5;
lx. 9, 14), and is very rarely used by the other
sacred writers. We find it thrice in the
Psalms (Ps. Ixxi. 22; Ixxviii. 41; Ixxxix.
18); once in Kings (2 Kings xix. 22), but
then in the mouth of Isaiah; twice in
Jeremiah (1. 29; li. 5); and once in Ezekiel
(xxxix. 7). According to Isaialh’s concep-
tion of God, holiness is the most essential
element of his nature (see ch. vi. 3, 5, 7).
They are gone away backward; literally,
they are estranged backwards; or, a3 Bishop
Lowth paraphrases, “they are estranzed
from him; they have turned their back
upon him.” Instead of looking to God, and
following after him, they “ followed a multi-
tude to do evil” (Exod. xxiii. 2).

Ver. 5.—Why should ye, etc.? Translate,
Why will ye be still smitten, revolting more
and more? or, Why will ye persist in re-
bellion, and 80 be smitten yet more? The
Authorized Version does not express the
sense, which is that suffering must follow
sin—that if they still revolt, they must still
be smitten for it—whiy, then, will they do
80? Compare Ezekicl’s “Why will ye die,
O house of Israel?” (xviii. 31). The whole
head ...the whole heart. Mr. Cheyne
translates, “ Every head . . . every heart ;”
but Lowth, Gesenius, and Ewald agree with
the Authorized Version. The prophet per-
sonifies Israel, and means to say that the
whole head of the nation is diseased, its
whole heart faint, or “ prostrate with lan-
guor” (Kiy), The head and heart repre-
sent respectively the intellectual and morai
natures.

Ver. 6.—From the sole of the foot even
unto the head (comp. Job ii. 7). From top
to bottom, the body corporate is diseased
throughout —there is no soundness in it
(cf. Ps. xxxviii. 3, 7)—all is one wound,
one livid bruise, one festering sore. Note
the use of the singular number in the ori-
ginal. They have not been closed; lite-
rally, they have not been pressed; which is
explained to mean (Aben Ezra, Kay) that
they have not had the matter formed by
suppuration pressed out of them. Neither
bound up; ¢.e. not bandaged. Neither molli-


fled with ointment; rather, with od. On
the treatment of wounds and ulcers with oil
in ancient times, see Hippocrat., ‘ De Ulceri-
bus,’ § 4; Galen., ‘De Compos. Medie.,’ § 2;
and comp. Luke x. 34. Recent medical
science has revived the practice, and wounds
of all kinds are now frequently treated with
nothing but carbolic oil. The general
sentiment of the entire passage is that
there las been no medical treatment of the
wounds of any kind; they have been left
to themselves, to spread corruption over the
whole body—no attempt has been made to
cure them.

Ver. 7.—Your country is desolate. Me-
taplior is now dropped, and the prophet
describes in strong but simple language the
judgments of God, which have already fol-
lowed the sins of the nation. First of all,
their land is “a desolation.” It has been
recently ravaged by an enemy; the towns
have been burnt, the crops devoured.
There is nothing to determine who the
enemy had been. Knobel supposes the
Edomites and Philistines, who invaded
Judea in the time of Ahaz (2 Chron xxviii.
17, 18), to be intended; Rosenmiiller sug-
gests the Israelites under Amaziah (2 Chron.
xxv. 21—24); while Mr. Cheyne supposes the
devastation to have been wrought by the
Assyrians under Sargon. If we could be
assured that the prophecies of Isaiah are
arranged in chronological order, we should
either have to accept Rosenmiiller’s view,
or to suppose some invasion of Judwa to
have taken place in the later years of
Uzziah of which no mention is made by
the authors of Kings and Chronicles; but
it is impossible to be certain on what prin-
ciple Isaiah’s prophecies are arranged. The
mention of “strangers” is in favour of the
enemy having been actual foreigners, and
therefore not the Israelites. Yorr cities are
burned with fire. The conmen fate of
cities taken in war. In the Assyrian sculp-
tures we often see the torch applied to
them. Your land. Mr. Cheyne translates,
“ your tillage.” Adamah means “svil” or
“round” generally; but here no doubt
denotes the ground which bore crops.
Strangers devour it; i.e. “foreigners ”—
others than the sons of the soil—not neces-
sarily persons of @ different race, but still
probably such persons. In your presence;
before your eyes, as you look on—an
aggravation of the affliction. It is desolate,
as overthrown by strangers; litvrally, ¢t ¢s
a desolation, like an overthrow by strangers.
The near approach to repetition displeases
moderns, who conjecture (1) that zarim,
strangers, has another meaning, and should
be here translated by “inundation” or
“deluge” (Aben Ezra, Michaelis, Lowth);
or (2) that it is a wrong reading, and should


4 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


[ou. 1. 1—31,


Ee


be altered into sodim, a word not very
different (Ewald, Cheyne). But “the
return to words whose sounds are yet
lingering in the ear” is characteristic of
ancient writing, and a favourite practice of
Isaiah’s (Kay). The translation of the
Authorized Version may therefore stand.
Ver. 8.—The daughter of Zion. Not “ the
faithful Church” (Kay), but the city of
Jerusalem, which is thus personified. Comp.
ch. xlvii. 1, 5, where Babylon is called the
“daughter of the Chaldeans ;” and Lam. i.
6; ii. 1, 4, 8, 10, where the phrase here
used is repeated in the same sense. More
commonly it designates the people without
the city (Lam. ii. 13; iv. 22; Micah iii.
8, 10, 18; Zeph. iii, 14; Zech. ii. 10;
ix. 9, etc.). As a cottage; rather, as a booth
(Revised Version ; see Lev. xxiii. 42). Vine-
yards required to be watched for a few
weeks only as the fruit began to ripen; and
the watchers, or keepers, built themselves,
therefore, mere “ booths ” for their protection
(Job xxvii. 18). These were frail, solitary
dwellings—very forlorn, very helpless.
Such was now Jerusalem. As a lodge in
a garden of cucumbers. Cucumber-gardens
required watching throughout the season,
é.e. from spring to autumn, and their
watcher needed a more solid edifice than a
booth. Hence such gardens had “ lodges”
in them, ¢.e. permanent huts or sheds, such
as those still seen in Palestine (Tristram’s
‘Natural History of Palestine,” p. 442).
As a besieged city. Though not yet be-
sieged, Jerusalem is as if besieged—isolated,
surrounded by waste tracts, threatened.
Ver. 9.—Except the Lord of hosts had
left unto us a very small remnant, we should
have been as Sodom. Lowth and Cheyne
prefer to divide the two clauses differently,
and to translate, “ Except the Lord of
hosts had left us a remnant, within a little
we should have been like Sodom.” The
“remnant” is that of the few godly men
who still inhabit Jerusalem. ‘The com-
parison of Jerusalem with Sodom is made
again in ch. iii. 9, and is carried out at
some length by Ezekiel (xvi. 44—57). It
implies a condition of extreme depravity.
Vers. 10—15.—Tur Prorir’s PLEA no
Exovuss, BUT AN AGGRAVATION OF THEIR
Gut. The prophet supposes the people,
by the mouth of their rulers, to meet
the charge of rebellion with an appeal to
the fact that they maintain all the outward
ordinances of religion, as required by the
Law, and are therefore blameless. This
draws from him a burst of indignant
eloquence, which the Holy Spirit directs
him to put, mainly, into the mouth of
God (vers. 11—15), denouncing such @


pretence of religion as an aggravation of
their sin, and characterizing their whole
worship as an “abomination.”

Ver. 10.—Hear the word of the Lord ; ¢.e.
“Do not speak to no purpose, but hear.”
The rulers are supposed to have begun their
plea, but the prophet stops them. Ye rulers
of Sodom. Having said in the preceding
verse how nearly Jerusalem had suffered
the fate of Sodom and Gomorrah, the writer
grows more bold, and proceeds to give Jeru-
salem the obnoxious names. Her “rulers,”
literally, judges (kdtsin in Hebrew corre-
sponding to kadi in Arabic), are “rulers of
Sodom;” her people are the “people of
Gomorrah.” There is as much wickedness,
though it may be not the same wickedness,
in “the daughter of Zion” at the existing
time, as in the cities of the plain when God
destroyed them. The law of our God. Not
the Levitical Law, though the word used
has generally that sense, but the “in-
struction” or “ direction” that was about to
be uttered (comp. Ps. Ixxviii. 1; and see
below, ch. ii. 3 and li, 4), See Mr. Cheyne’s
note on the passage.

Ver. 11.—To what purpose is the multi-
tude of your sacrifices unto me? Cut bono?
What good epd do they serve? “ Thinkest
thou that I will eat the flesh of bulls, and
drink the blood of goats?” (Ps. 1. 13). God
“delights not in burnt offerings.’ From
the time of Samuel he had declared,
“Behold, to obey is better then sacrifice,
and to hearken than the fat of rams”
( Sam. xv. 22). David had said of him,
“Sacrifice and meat offering thou wouldest
not; burnt offerings and sacrifice for sin
hast thou not required” (Ps. xl. 8, 9); and
again, “I will not reprove thee because of
thy sacrifices, or for thy burnt offcrings,
because they were not always before me,
I will take no bullock out of thy house, nor
he-goat out of thy folds; for all the beasts
of the forest are mine, and so are the cattle
upon a thousand hills” (Ps. 1. 8—10). Not,
of course, that either David or Isaiah
desired to abolish sacrifice, or had any com-
mission so to do; but they were, both of
them, anxious to impress on men that sa-
crifice, by itself, was nothing—that self-
dedication, self-renunciation, true devotion
of the heart, with its necessary concomitant
obedience, must accompany sacrifice, for
God to be pleased therewith. The sacrifices
of a people such as is described in vers,
21—23 could not but be an offence to him,
Saith the Lord. The phrase employed is
unusual, and almost confined to Isaiah,
occurring elsewhere only in Ps. xii. 5,
Isaiah uses it again in ver. 18, and also in
ch. xxxili, 10; xli. 21; and lxvi. 9. It ig
explained to be emphatic, implying that
this is what God says, and will say. con-


cx. t, 1—31.]


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 5


cerning the matter in hand, once and for
ever (Kay). I am full of the burnt offerings
of rams; rather, I am overfull, satiated,
wearted with them. Rams formed a part
of the required sacrifice on all great occa-
sions, as at the Passover (Numb. xxviii. 19),
at the Feast of Weeks (Numb. xxviii. 27), at
the Feast of Tabernacles (Numb. xxix. 13,
17, 20, 23, 26, 29, 32, 36), at the Feast of
Trumpets (Numb. xxix. 2), and on the
great Day of Atonement (Numb. xxix.
8). They were commanded as the sole
sacrifice for a trespass offering (Lev. v. 16,
18). Under David were offered on one
occasion “a thousand rams” (1 Chron.
xxix. 21); and the occasions where seven
rams formed the legitimate sacrifice were
many. Unaccompanied by a proper frame
of mind, each such offering was an offence
to God, displeased him, wearied him. The
fat of fed beasts. The fat was always
regarded, both by the Hebrews and the
Greeks, as especially suitable for sacrifice.
It was burnt upon the altar in every case,
even where the greater part of the victim
was corsumed as food (see Lev. i. 8, 12; iii.
3, 10, etc.; note particularly the expression
in Lev. iii. 16, “ All the fat is the Lord’s’’).
“Fed beasts” are those which were kept
separate in stalls or sheds for some time
before the sacrifice, and given food in which
there was nothing “unclean.” The Paschal
lambs were required to be thus separated
and fed for four days (Exod. xii. 3, 6). I
delight not in the blood. The blood,
“which is the life” (Lev. xvii. 14), was to
be sprinkled on the altar in every sacrifice
of a victim. This sprinkling was of the
very essence of the sacrifice (Lev. i. 5; iii.
2, 8, 13; iv. 6, 17, 25, 30, etc.). Bullocks
... lambs... he-goats. These, together
with rams, constituted all the sacrificial
beasts of the Hebrews.

Ver. 12.—When ye come to appear before
me. Mr. Cheyne translates, “to see my
face;” but most other commentators (Gese-
nius, Delitzsch, Ewald, Kay) regard the
phrase used as equivalent to that employed
in Exod. xxiii. 17; xxxiv.23; Deut. xvi. 16;
and the passage as referring to that attend-
ance in the temple at the three great annual
festivals, which was required of all adult
male Israelites. The requirement of the
Law was still observed in the letter, but
not in the spirit. They came with no true
religious object. Hence the question which
follows: Who hath required this at your
hand, to tread my courts? This was not
what God had enjoined—a mere bodily
attendance, a trampling of his courts with
their feet, when their hearts were far from


Ver. 18.—Bring no more vain oblations.
The command is not “Bring no more


oblations,” as though the daily oblation was
to cease; but “bring no more oblations
that are vain ones,” é.e. € and unre41-—
mere forms, without the proper correspond-
ing spirit. The “oblation” spoken of is the
minchah, or “ meat offering,” of Lev. ii. 1—
11; Numb. xxviii. 12—31, which was a cake
of el parecer eta with oil, and generally
had incense joined with it, which explains
the nevus of this clause with the following
one. Incense is an abomination unto me,
God had commanded the use of incense in
worship, as he had commanded burnt offer-
ings and oblations (Exod. xxx. 1—8, 34—38;
Ley. ii. 2; xvi. 12, 13). But incense sym-
bolized prayer (Ps. cxli. 2); and if no heart-
felt prayer accompanied its use, it was
emptied of all its significance, and became
hateful to God—a mere form, and conse-
quently an “abomination.” The new moons
and sabbaths, the calling of assemblies, I
cannot away with. The weekly festival of
the sabbath, the monthly one of the “ new
moon,” and the annual “assemblies” or
“solemn feasts ’’ (2 Chron. viii. 13), were the
main occasions of Jewish worship As at
this time conducted, God could endure none
of them; all were tainted with the preva-
lent unreality. The construction of the
passage is highly rhetorical, and indicates
great excitement of feeling. Kay translates
it literally, “New moon and sabbath, the
calling of assemblies, I cannot —it is
ungodliness—even the solemn meeting.”
The authors of the Revised Version also
suppose an aposiopesis. The solemn meet-
ing. The word thus translated is applied
only to particular days in the great festival
seasons, as to the eighth day of the Feast
of Tabernacles (Lev. xxiii. 36; Numb. xxix.
35; Neh. viii. 18), and the seventh day of
the Passover (Deut. xvi. 8), or else to days
specially appointed for religious services by
civil authority (2 Kings x. 20; 2 Chron. vii.
9; Joel i. 14; ii. 15). The meaning thus
is, that even the very highest occasions of
religious worship were abused by the Is-
raelites of the time, and made an offence to
God.

Ver. 14.—Your new moons. (or the
ceremonies to be observed at the opening of
each month, see Numb. xxviii. 11—15.) Your
appointed feasts. The “appointed feasts”
are the great festival-times—the Feast of
Unleavened Bread, the Feast of Weeks, and
the Feast of Tabernacles. They do not
include the sabbath or the “new moon,”
with which they are, both here and else-
where (1 Chron. xxiii, 31; 2 Chron. xxxi. 3),
contrasted. They are a trouble unto me;
literally, an encumbrance (see Deut. i. 12).

Ver. 15.—I will hide mine eyes, ete. A
time comes when the wicked are alarmed,
and seek toturn to God; but it is too late.


6 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


(on. 1. 1—31.


“Then shall they call upon me, but I
will not answer; they shall seek me early,
but they shall not find me” (Prov. i. 28).
When ye make many prayers; literally,
multiply prayer. Full of blood (comp. ver.
21). Actual bloodshed may be pointed at,
as the murder of Zechariah (2 Chron. xxiv.
21), and the fate which befell Isaiah himself,
according to the tradition, would seem to
show. But cruelty and oppression, produc-
ing poverty and wretchedness, and tending
to shorten life, are no doubt also included
(comp. Micah iii. 10,11), These were the
special sins of the time (see vers. 17, 23).

Vers. 16—20.—Tue RrQUIREMENT OF
Gop—AMENDMENT oF Lire. God, having
put aside the worthless plea of outward
religiousness made by his people, goes on
to declare, by the mouth of his prophet,
what he requires. First, in general terms
(ver. 16), and then with distin specifica-
tion (ver. 17), he calls on them to amend
their ways, both negatively (“cease to ao
evil”) and positively (“learn to do well”).
If they will really amend, then he assures
them of forgiveness and favour; if they
refuse and continue their rebellion, the
sword will devour them.

Ver. 16.—Wash you, make you olean.
The analogy of sin to defilement, and of
washing to cleansing from sin, has been felt
among men universally wherever there has
been any sense of sin. Outward purification
by water has been constantly made use of
as typical of the recovery of inward purity.
Hence the numerous washings of the Levi-
tical Law (Exod. xxix. 4; Lev. i. 9, 13;
Numb. xix. 7,8, 19; Deut. xxi. 6; xxiii. 11;
etc.); hence the ablutions of the priests in
Egypt (Herod., ii. 37); hence the appro-
priateness of the rite of baptism; hence the
symbolical washing of hands to free from
complicity in blood-guiltiness (Matt. xxvii.
24). ‘Wash you, make you clean,” could
not be misunderstood by the Israelites; they
would know that it was a requirement to
“wash their hands in innocency” (Ps.
xxvi. 6; Ixxiii. 13), even apart from what
follows. Put away the evil of your doings
from before mine eyes. Not “hide it,” for
that was impossible; but remove it alto-
gether—in other words, “cease from it.”
“ Cast off all the works of darkness;” get
rid of evil, to begin with. So much is
negative.

Ver. 17.—Learn to do well. Now comes
the positive; first, in the general form—
“learn,” etc. ; which resembles the apostle’s
“ Put on the armour of light” (Rom. xiii. 12),
Then follow the particulars, Seek judg-
ment; or, seek out justice; ie. endeavour to


get justice done to all men; see that they
“have right.” Relieve the oppressed. So
the LXX., the Vulgate, the Syriac, and the
Chaldean Versions. But the word translated
“oppressed” is thought by many to mean
“oppressor” (Kimchi, Gesenius, Cheyne).
This is certainly its meaning in Ps. lxxi. 4.
Translate, righten the oppressor; i.e. correct
and chasten him. Judge the fatherless;
rather, do justice to the orphan (Cheyne); see
that he is not wronged—be his champion.
Plead for the widow; t.e. plead her cause
in the courts; or, if judge, and she have no
advocate, lean towards her, as if her
advocate. The widow and the orphan
were taken under God’s special protection
from the time of Moses, and constantly com-
mended to the tender care of the righteous
(Exod, xxii. 22—24; Deut. x. 18; xxiv. 17;
Xxvii. 19, etc.).

Ver. 18.—Come now, and let us reason
together. God has from time to time
permitted man to reason with him (Gen.
Xviii. 23—32; Exod. iv. 1—17; Job xxiii.
3—7; Micah vi. 2); but it is difficult to
see that there is any “ reasoning” or “ con-
troversy” here. Mr. Cheyne translates,
“Let us bring our dispute to an end.”
Though your sins be as scarlet, ... like
crimson ; f.e. “ gpen, eyident, glaring.” Or
there may be an allusion to their blood-
guiltiness (see vers. 15, 19). They shall be
as white as snow. Comp. Ps. li.7, which is
completely parallel, whether it was written
before or after. There can be no better
image of purity than snow (comp. Job ix
30; Lam. iv. 7). As wool. A weaker
illustration than the preceding one, but
needed for the parallelism. (The resem-
blance of falling snow to wool is noted in
Ps. exlvii. 16.)

Ver. 19.—If ye be willing and obedient.
Rosenmiiller explains this as equivalent to
“if ‘i be willing to obey” (cf. Ezek. iii,
7); but perhaps it is better to give each
verb its separate force: “If you consent in
your wills, and are also obedient in your
actions” (so Kay). Ye shall eat the good
of the land; i.e. there shall be no invasion;
strangers shall not devour your crops (see
ver. 7); you shall consume them your-
selves. “'The good of the land” is a com-
mon expression for its produce (Gen. xly.
“ee 20; Ezra ix. 12; Neh. ix. 36; Jer.
ii. 7).

Ver. 20.—If ye refuse and rebel; te, “if
ye neither consent in will, nor obey in act,”
antithetical to the two verbs in the first
clause of ver. 19. Ye shall be devoured;
or, ye shall be eaten. The same verb as in
the latter clause of ver. 19. With the sword.
The metaphor is not a common one, but
occurs in Jeremiah (ii. 30; xii. 12; xlvi;
10, 14) and Nahum (ii, 13) The mouth of


oH. 1. 1—31.]


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 7


————


the Lord hath spoken it. A weighty end-
ing, indicating the certainty of fulfilment,
Jehovah, who cannot lie, has spoken; the
result will assuredly follow.

Vers. 21—23.--Isaran’s LAMENT OVER
JERUSALEM. The exhortation to amendment
has been made—the results have been set
forth; the temporal reward has been pro-
mised ; the temporal vengeance, unless they
amend, threatened. Time must be allowed
the people for the prophet’s words to reach
them, and do their work upon them, i.e.
either soften or harden them. Meanwhile,
Isaiah reflects on the condition of Jerusalem,
and the unlikelihood of its rulers turning to
God in consequence of his preaching.

Ver. 21.—How is the faithful city become
an harlot! Not here an idolatress, but one
that has left her first love, and turned to
other attractions. Faithful once to her lord
her spouse (Cant., passim), she has now cast
him off—she is an adulterous wife, she no
longer obeys or loves her husband. It was
full of judgment; righteousness, ete. “She
that was full” (Revised Version). Under
Solomon (1 Kings iii, 9—28) and again
under Jehoshaphat (2 Chron. xix. 5—11).
Tt is not clear when the systematic perver-
sion of justice by the rulers began. Perhaps
it originated in the latter part of Uzziah’s
reign, when the royal authority was weak-
ened by being divided between Uzziah and
Jotham (2 Chron. xxvi. 21). But now
murderers (see the last note on ver. 15).

Ver. 22.—Thy silver is become dross.
Primarily, “thy great men have deteriorated.”
From pure silver, they have become mere
dross, the vile refuse of the smelted ore, only
fit to be cast away as worthless. But per-
haps there is some further reference to all
that was once precious in Jerusalem; there
had been a general deterioration—all the
silver was now a debased metal of no value.
Thy wine mixed with water. A parallelism;
but (as so often happens) a weakened itera-
tion of the preceding sentiment.

Ver. 23.—Thy princes are rebellious; ¢.e.
“rebels against their true King, Jehovah.”
Companions of thieves, Leagued with those
who are engaged in filching away the in-
heritance of the widow and the orphan by
chicane in the law courts (see above, vers.
15—17; and compare the Homiletics on vers.
16—20). Gifts ... rewards; t.e. “ bribes,”
given and taken on the condition of their
perverting justice (comp. Jer. xxii. 17;
Ezek. xxii. 12; Micah iii. 11; vii. 3). They
judge not the fatherless, etc. They dismiss
the orphan’s complaint without hearing it,
and are sv noted for perversion of justice that
the widow does not even bring her cause
before them.


Vers. 2431.—TuE Deciaration or Gon’s
Jupcment. It is foreknown to God that
Israel will not repent. He therefore fulmi-
nates his judgment; which, however, is stiil
conditional, so far as individuals are con-
cerned. His vengeance will fall upon the
land; but the result will be twofold.
Destruction will come upon the unrighteous
and the sinners (ver. 28)—they will be “con-
sumed” (ver. 28), and “confounded ” (ver.
29); but there will be some on whom the
punishment will have a purifying power,
whose dross it will purge away, and whom
it will convert to God (vers. 25, 27). From
these will rise up a new Jerusalem—a “ city
of righteousness,” a “ faithful stronghold”
(ver. 26).

Ver. 24.—The Lord, the Lord of hosts. In
the original, Ha-Adén, Jehovah Subaoth—
i.e. “The Lord” (or “ Master” of men and
angels), “ the Self-Existing One of the hosts
of heaven ”’—+.e, their Gud, the only proper
object of their worship. It gives peculiar
weight and significance to this prophecy,
that it is introduced by a triple designation
of the Divine Being. The Mighty One of
Israel. A very unusual designation, only
found here and, with the modification of
“Jacob” for “Israel,” in the fullowing
places: ch. xlix. 26; lx. 16; Gen. xlix. 24;
Ps. exxxii. 2, 5. God’s might would be
shown alike ‘n nis venveance on his
enemies, avd in his purification of a remnant
to serve him. I will ease me of mine
adversaries; literally, I will comfort me; i.e.
I will rid myself of them, and so obtain the
only comfort that they will allow me to
receive from them (comp. Ezek. vy. 13, “I
will cause my fury to rest upon them, and
I will be comforted ”’).

Ver. 25.—I will turn my hand upon thee;
rather, I will bring back my hand upon thee ;
i.e. I will once more put forth the “strong
hand and mighty arm,” with which [ brought
thee out of Egypt (Ps. exxxvi. 12), and will
work another deliverance—the deliverance of
Isracl out of captivity. Purely purge away
thy dross ; literally, will purge away thy dross
like borax, which was used as a flux in puri-
fying the metal. The prophet continues the
metaphor of ver. 22. And take away all thy
tin; rather, thy lead—the alloy with which
the “silver” had become mixed.

Ver. 26.—I will restore thy judges as at
the first (see Exod. xix. 25, 26). In the early
times there was no bribery, no perversion of
justice (Jer. ii. 2,3). God will bring back
a time when the nation will renew its first
love, and be as it was in the days of Moses
and Joshua. Thy counsellors (comp. 2 Sam.
xv. 12; 1 Chron. xxvi. 14: xxvi.. 32, 33,


8 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


(on. x. 1—31.


en — ee


etc.). The city of righteousness; or, of
justice. The prophecy may have been ful-
filled in part by tie earthly Jerusalem under
Zerubbabel, Ezra, and the Maccabees, but is
mainly fulfilled in the heavenly Jerusalem
—the Church of God, the true Israel. The
faithful city (comp. ver. 21). Certainly, the
post-Captivity Church was “faithful” to
Jehovah, in the way of acknowledging him,
and him only, to be God, to a very remark-
able degree, and in strong contrast to its
inclination during pre-Captivity times.

Ver. 27.—Redeemed with judgmens;
rather, delivered through judgment ; i.e. God’s
judgment shall have the effect of “ deliver-
ing” a remnant, who shall build up Zion
once more, and dwell in it. Her converts;
t.e. those of her children who turn to God,
shall be delivered through God’s righteous-
ness, #.e. through the righteous vengeance
which he executes upon the unfaithful
nation. Some, however, understand both
clauses to mean that the penitent remnant
shall “deliver their own souls by their
righteousness” (comp. Ezek. xiv. 14, 20;
Xviii. 27, etc.).

Ver. 28.—Transgressors ... sinners...
they that forsake the Lord (comp. vers. 2
and 4). These are scarcely distinct classes—
rather different names for the ungodly. All
of them, by whatever name they were called,
would perish “ together.”


Ver. 29.—The oaks which ye have desired
are, primarily, the “green trees” under
which images were set up (2 Kings xvii. 10),
but perhaps represent also any worldly
attractions which draw the soul away from
God—as wealth, or power, or honours. In
the day of suffering, sinners are ashamed of
having been led away by such poor tempta-
tions as those to which they have yielded
(comp. Rom. vi. 21, “ What fruit had ye
then in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed?”). The gardens. Kay suggests
“idolatrous pleasure-gardens as those at
Daphné, near Antioch,” which is a reason-
able exegesis. Such were probably to be
found wherever Astarté, or the “ Dea Syra,”
was worshipped.

Ver. 30.—Ye shall be as an oak, etc. Con-
trast the case of the godly, whose “leaf
shall not wither” (Ps. i. 3).

Ver. 31.—The strong (literally, the strong
one) shall be as tow; 7.e. weak and powerless
(comp. Judg. xvi. 9), utterly unable to
resist the Divine fiat when it goes forth.
The maker of it. An extraordinary mis-
translation, since po’al never means anything
but “ work.” His own acts would light the
fire by which the “strong one” would be
consumed and perish.


“Nec lex justior ulla est,
Quam necis artifices arte perire sua.”


HOMILETICS.


Ver. 1.—“ The vision of Isaiah which he saw.” The modern theory, that the prophetical
gift was a mere “ presentiment,” or “insight,” closely akin to that by which clear-sighted
men of all times and nations have been able, in many respects, to forecast the coming
course of events, is not very easily reconcilable with these words, “the wision of
Isaiah which he suw.” As a commentator whose freedom from the shackles of tradition
is beyond dispute observes, “ With Isaiah, it” (¢.e. prophecy) “is not a mere presenti-
ment; it is a calm and settled conviction, based on a direct revelation, and confirmed by
a deep insight into the laws of the Divine government” (Cheyne, ‘ Prophecies of Isaiah,’
vol. i. p. 233, note). Isaiah “sees” that which he announces. It is placed distinctly
before him, as that which is about to be. He no more doubts it than he doubts that
which is presented to his bodily vision. Hence it may be concluded—

I, That the prophetic inspiration was absolutely convincing to those who were
favoured with it, and precluded all feeling of doubt. (

Il. That it was wholly different in kind from that power of prevision which all men
more or less possess, resting, not upon grounds of reason or experience, but upon an
inward spiritual conviction that the substance of the prophetic announcement had been
communicated to the prophet by God.


Vers. 2, 3.—God’s arraignment of his people. God claims his people’s willing
obedience on three grounds. 1. They are his children. 2. He has made them great. 3,
He has exalted them to eminence among the nations.

I, As HIs CHILDREN, they are bound to love and serve him, to be grateful to him for
his manifold mercies, and to yield him entire obedience. He is the Author of their
being ; he sustains their life; he feeds them, supports them, gives them every blessing
which they enjoy. In return, what less can they do than love him unfeignedly,
serve him truly, and obey him implicitly? Earthly children are bound to act thus


OH, 1, 1—31.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 9


ee their earthly parents: how much more God’s children towards their heavenly
‘ather

_UL. As RAISED BY HIM TO POWER AND GREATNESS, they are yet more bound to serve
him. Every gift of God to us increases our responsibilities, lays us under a more
stringent obligation to make a due return to our Benefactor. Israel was increased from
a family into a nation, was multiplied in numbers, given a land flowing with milk and
honey, raised from the bondage of Egypt to an independent and commanding position.
Each step in their progress constituted a demand on them for greater love, profounder
gratitude, more exact observance of every Divine commandment.

II. As EXALTED AMONG THE NATIONS, they are at once called upon foi additional
thankfulness, and required to manifest to the heathen that God’s favour has not been
bestowed on them by mere caprice, but with some reference to their capacity of profiting
by it. “A city set on a hill cannot be hid” (Matt. v.14). Eminence of whatever
kind calls upon us for increased exertion. Noblesse oblige. If men are bound to serve
God in the lowest walks of life, still more are they bound to serve him when he has
“raised them out of the dust, and lifted them out of the dunghill, that he may set them
with princes, even with the princes of his people” (Ps. cxiii. 7, 8). And as with
individuals, so with nations. Kminence among the powers of the earth calls on them
to set a good example—to “let their light shine before men,” to make a decided pro-
fession of religion, and to carry out their profession in their acts. a

Israel, however, had acknowledged none of these obligations. They had “rebelled
against God,” turned away from following him, cast his words behind their back. More
dull thaz either ox or ass, they had refused to “know God,” to have him in their
thoughts, to “consider his operations” (ch. v. 10). Have not multitudes of Christians
also followed their example? They too are God’s children (Rom. viii. 16; 1 John
iii. 1, etc.), created by him, regenerated by him, adopted by him in his beloved Son,
Jesus Christ. They too have been raised by him to greatness, increased from a “little
flock ” to hundreds of millions, “carried on eagles’ wings ” (Exod. xix. 4), borne safely
through the storms of centuries. And they have been exalted among the nations of
the earth, given the chief place, manifestly elevated above both Jews and heathen,
Must not-Christians, if they rebel, if they refuse to “ know God” or “consider” him,
expect the same terrible punishments as overtook the Israelites, or others similar to
them? “If we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment
and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries ” (Heb. x. 26, 27). “Itisa
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God” (Heb. x. 31).


Vers. 4—9.— The prophet’s enforcement of God’s charge. God’s words are so weighty,
that they may well be few; the preacher’s enforcement of them must needs be, com-
paratively speaking, lengthy. Isaiah, in addressing his erring countrymen, aimed at
producing in them—

I. Convicrion oF stn. For this purpose, he begins with an array of seven charges
ver. 4), varying, as it were, the counts of the indictment: (1) they are a sinful nation;
oy they are laden with guilt; (3) they are a race of evil-doers ; (4) they are children
that act corruptly; (5) they have forsaken Jehovah; (6) they have scorned him;
(7) they have estranged themselves from him, and, as it were, turned away from him
and gone backward. ‘The first four are general, and seem to be little more than
rhetorical variations of one and the same theme. We may learn from them that
rhetorical variation is allowable, nay, proper, since different words catch hold of different
persons, rouse them, touch them to the quick, are effectual to the producing of repent-
ance. The last three charges are particular, and to some extent different, each exceed-
ing the last in heinousness, and thus rising in the way of climax—desertion, insult,
complete estrangement. Metaphor is then called in to work on the imagination, and
through the imagination on the conscience: the nation is depicted as a diseased and
stricken body, a mass of sores and corruption (vers. 5, 6). :

I. FEAR OF PUNISHMENT. Undoubtedly fear is a low motive in religion—some think
it altogether an unworthy one. But while human nature remains such as it is, while
the mass of men are incapable of being stirred by the higher motives, appeal must be
made to the lower ones. The prophet, therefore, reminds his people of God’s judgments


10 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. 1 1—31.


in the past (ver. 7), threatens them with further judgments in the future (ver. 5), and
ends the paragraph by suggesting that his people have barely escaped the most terrible
of all judgments—a destruction like that of Sodom and Gomorrah.


Vers. 11—14.— The outward form of religion, without inward piety, an offence to
God. It is strange now deeply ingrained the idea is in man, that formal acts of worship,
outward acknowledgment, ritual, ceremonial, pageantry, constitute religion, and will be
accepted by God in lieu of the inward devotion of the heart. Heathenism was full of
the notion. Plato tells us that the Greeks thought they might commit any number and
any kind of sins or crimes, and obtain pardon for them at the hands of the gods, if they
offered sufficient sacrifices (Plato, ‘Rep.,’ ii. § 7). It is evident that the Jews of
Isaiah’s time were possessed with a similar idea. They “tried to compensate for their
unrightcous lives by sumptuous—perhaps extravagant—performance of ceremonial
observances” (Kay). So did the Pharisees of our Lord’s day. “Ye pay tithe of mint
and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the Law, judg-
ment, mercy, and faith.” ‘ Ye devour widows’ houses, and for a pretence make long
prayer” (Matt. xxiii. 28, 14). And do not professed Christians too often do the same ?
Is not “saying prayers” too often made a substitute for private devotion, and “ going
to church ” for the true public worship of God? Nay, is not attendance at the Holy
Eucharist itself sometimes allowed to become a mere form? Alas! /saiah’s warning
voice is needed as much by Christians as by Jews. He tells us that the outward form
of religion, without inward piety, is not only not pleasing to God, but is an offence unto
him. It is so—

J. As IMPLYING A LOW AND UNWORTHY CONCEPTION oF Gop. To imagine that God
will be content with external observance is to suppose, either that he is unable to read
our hearts or that he does not care how we are in our hearts disposed towards him. It
is thus either to question his omniscience or to deny his moral nature. A good father
does care whether his sons render him a mere formal obedience or are heartily bent on
obeying him through love and gratitude. Only one unworthy of the name is careless
upon the point, and content so long as that which he commands is done.

Il. As A sPecIES OF HYPOcRISY. ‘ Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites!”
was our Lord’s denunciation of those who paid tithe of every minutest vegetable, yet
were without mercy and faith (Matt. xxiii. 23), The outward acts of religion—prayer,
praise, observance of fast and festival, attendance at sacraments, and the like—constitute
a profession of certain inward feelings—love, gratitude, faith, reverence—and, if these
are absent, the performance of the acts is deceptive and hypocritical. It is to make a
preven that we are what we are not. It is bad enough if it is done to deceive men;

ut it is worse if we think thereby to hoodwink God. God hates hypocrisy, and is
revolted by the conduct of such as “honour him with their lips, while their hearts are
far from him.”

III. AsS A DESECRATION OF THINGS SACRED. The observances of religion have some-
thing sacred about them. They are either suggested by nature or formally ordained by
God for a holy use; and, if practised in an irreligious, or even in a non-religious, spirit,
they are desecrated. It is a mockery to bend the knee and repeat the words of for-
mularies while our thoughts are straying to other matters, as business, amusements,
gaieties—it is emptying things holy of their holiness, and bringing them down to a
lower level. We injure ourselves by so doing, we scandalize the truly religious, we
give occasion to the enemies of God to blaspheme. Better not to “ tread God’s courts ”
at all than to do so without a reverent and prayerful spirit.


Ver. 15.—God will not listen to the prayers of the wicked. Sinners sometimes think
that they may persist in sin as long as they like, because they can at any time turn to
God, ask his forgiveness, obtain pardon, and be saved. But Scripture is very full of
warnings that this is not the case. There is “a sin against the Holy Ghost,” which
“shall not be forgiven to men, neither in this world, neither in the world to come”
(Matt. xii. 32). There is a persistence in sin, which “ quenches the Spirit ” (1 Thess. v. 17).
Men cannot turn to God whenever they please. The “accepted time ” passes away, and
they find it impossible to turn to him in true faith and penitence. They may “say
prayers,” but they do not really pray. And God shuts his ears against such prayers


on, & 1—31.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 11


(see, besides the present passage, Job xxvii. 8,9; Prov. 1.28; Jer. xi. 11 ; Ezek. viii. 18;
Heb. vi. 4—6; x. 26—29; 1 John v. 16).


Vers. 16—20.-—No return tv God's favour without amendment of life. The outward
show of religion, which the Israelites maintained, vain and futile as it was, seemed to
indicate that they were not wholly irreclaimable—they did not desire to break altogether
with God. The prophet, therefore, assumes that they would wish to know the way by
which they may remove God’s anger, and enter once more into favour with him; and
he proceeds to point out that the one and only road open to them is to amend their
ways—to reverse their course of life. This amendment consists in two things: one
negative, the other pvsitive.

I, NEGATIVELY : AMENDMENT CONSISTS IN CEASING TO DO EVIL. Thisis the first thing
needed. Men must break off their sins, put away the iniquity of their doings, reso-
lutely determine that the works of darkness shall be done by them no more. The works
will be different in different cases. To one man they will be impure acts and words;
to another, falsehood, deception, equivocation; to another, profanity of speech; to
another, drunkenness; to another, intemperate anger, and so on. To the Israelites at
this time, or at any rate to their chief men, who are here specially addressed (ver. 10),
the evil-doing most common, and to which they were most prone, was cruelty and
oppression. ‘The chief men acted as judges, held courts, heard complaints, determined
causes ; but, instead of seeking to do justice between man and man, they sought merely
to advance their own interests by means of the office entrusted to them. They accepted
bribes from rich suitors to determine law-suits in their favour; they leaned in their
judgments against the weak and the defenceless. They were probably a clique, who
enriched themselves by playing into each others’ hands, and ousting weak persons from
their properties and estates by legal artifices. All this whole system of evil-doing they
were required, first of all, to put aside, before they could hope that God would look upon
them with anything but anger and reprobation.

Il. PostrTIvELY : AMENDMENT CONSISTS IN LEARNING TO DO WELL. Negative goodness
is not enough. God expects each man to glorify him by good actions. Those who have
gone astray must not only retrace their steps, but must enter resolutely on the path of
virtue. They must “set themselves in some good way.” And this must be especially
done in the matters wherein they have failed. The Jewish judges had failed in their task
of administering justice—they had given unjust sentences, favoured oppressors, dealt
hardly with the widow and the orphan. Hence the prophet’s exhortations to them are
“Seek out justice; correct the oppressor; right the orphan; plead the cause of the
widow ” (ver. 17). And so it must be with all the varieties of evil-doers. Each must
be exhorted to the virtue which is the opposite of the vice that he has indulged in.
Each must labour, if he really seeks restoration to God’s favour, to do deeds the very
opposite of those which he did formerly. If he was a drunkard, he does well to become
a total abstainer; if a glutton, to chasten his flesh by fasting; if impure, to give him-
self to the reclaiming of outcasts; if niggardly, “to sell all that he has and give to the
poor ;” if violent, to suffer wrong, and turn his cheek to the smiter.

From the nature of amendment, the prophet proceeds to its consequences, which are
likewise twofold, consisting in—

J, THE CLEANSING OF THE INDIVIDUAL souL. Here much is kept back which is
revealed later, as (1) the mode whereby the soul is cleansed, or in other words, the
doctrine of the atonement, which appears in ch. liii. 5,6; (2) the necessity of laying
hold of the atonement by faith (Rom. iii. 25; iv. 5, etc.); and (3) the immediate
removal of the guilt of sin, when God justifies us, and the gradual removal of its taint,
as he sanctifies us, But the declaration of the fact of our cleansing is directly made,
and made with the utmost plainness : “Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow,” etc. The cleansing will be entire, complete, thorough. Snow will not
be purer than the redeemed soul, which “the blood of Jesus Christ has cleansed from
all sin” (1 John i. 7).

II. A REWARD, EXTERNAL TO THE SOUL ITSELF, WHICH Gop’s FREE GRACE WILL
pestow. Here still more is kept back. The reward held out is merely temporal: “ Ye
shall eat the good of the land.” Ye shall live in peace and prosperity, under your own
vines and fig trees, and enjoy the fruits of the earth, which God in his bounty gives you,


12 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. 1 1—SL.
ET


Not a whisper of the eternal reward—the blessedness reserved for man in heaven, the
bliss which “ eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of
man to conceive.” Probably the Israelites of Isaiah’s day were too gross and sensual,
too much wrapt up in material things, to have been stirred to action by anything so
distant and intangible as the heavenly life, even if they could have formed the faintest
conception of it. Here, again, “God has provided better things for us” (Heb. x. 40),
and given us @ motive for exertion far beyond any that was presented to his ancient
people.


Vers. 21—23.— The grievousness of the sin of oppression in God's sight. The Israelites
of Isaiah’s time were guilty of many heinous sins, as we see by later chapters. They
were idolaters (ch. ii. 8), haughty (ch. ii. 11, 17), wanton (ch. iii. 16), covetous (ch. v. 8),
drunken (ch. v. 11), perverse (ch. v. 20), vain (ch. v. 21). But of all their sins, none
seems to have so much offended God as their oppression of the poor and weak. The
prophet refers to it over and over again (ch. i. 15, 21,2335 iii. 5,12, 14,15; v. 7, 23, etc.).
He denounces it in the strongest terms (ch. i. 15, 23). He represents it as an especial
offence to Jehovah (ch. iii. 15; v. 7). The reasons would seem to be—

I. BECAUSE OPPRESSION IS A BREACH OF TRUST. To oppress another we must have
authority over him, and all authority is committed to man by God, as a trust. “Thou
couldest have no power at all against me except it were given thee from above”
(John xix. 11). God entrusts us with power over others for their benefit and for our
own moral training. He puts us in his place, to act for him, to be his instruments:
“By me kings reign, and princes decree justice” (Prov. viii. 15). Abuse of our position
is breach of trust; it is to use the power God has committed to us for a purpose the
very opposite to that which he intended. It is flagrant rebellion against him.

Il, Because If 18 CRUEL AND INHUMAN.


“Tis excellent to have a giant’s strength,
But tyrannous to use it like a giant.”


Weakness naturally makes an appeal to our emotions of pity and compassion. To
injure the defenceless, to hurt, crush, ruin the poor and the weak, instead of being
their champion, is to be wanting altogether in manhood. It is to be at once unjust
and cowardly. Oppressors have always been the objects of general hatred and con=
demnation. Rameses II., Nebuchadnezzar, Tarquin, Nero, Bajazet, have left an evil
memory behind them, which will continue while the world endures. Oppressors are
of various kinds. Some are emperors or kings, some princes, some judges, and other
public personages. But there is far more oppression in private life than in public.
Slave-owners, and still more, slave-drivers, are apt to be fearful oppressors, making
the lives of hundreds a burden to them. Even employers of free labour are often
oppressors, when they take advantage of competition to beat down wages below the
rate at which life can be sustained in decent comfort. Masters often act oppressively
towards their servants, heads of schools towards their pupils, even parents towards
their children. Of all the evils “done under the sun,” there is none more widespread
than oppression (Eccles. iv. 1), and none more hateful.

III. Because IT OUTRAGES GoD’s ATTRIBUTE OF JUSTICE. To be just is of the very
essence of God’s nature. ‘Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right } ” (Gen. xviii. 25),
Exact justice is what he deals out even to the feeblest, the weakest, the most con-
temptible of his creatures. And he “has made man upright ” (Eccles. vii. 29). He has
implanted in man a sense of justice, the reflex of his own attribute, and made him to be
self-condemned if he transgresses it. God’s law of conduct, “ Do unto others as thou
wouldst have them do to thee,” is a law of strict, equal justice, and if carried out would
put an end to all oppression and wrong. Thus, when men oppress their fellow-men,
they disobey both God’s inward and his outward law; nay, more, they outrage him by
showing contempt for one of his highest attributes.


Ver. 25.—The purifying power of punishment, Great national judgments, such as
that which Isaiah was sent to announce, have a purifying effect in three ways.

I, THEY ALARM A CERTAIN NUMBER OF PERSONS, AND INDUCE THEM TO QUIT
THEIR SINS. The careless and indifferent have their attention excited and their fears


on, 1. 1—81.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 13


sroused by the dangers which manifestly threaten all, and the calamities which naturally
fall on some. The class of waverers, who would fain be on the side of gvod, but continu-
ally fall away when temptation assails them, find their power of resistance strengthened
by the perils of the time, which render sinful enjoyment insecure, and bring home to
them the certainty that there is retribution in store for sin, Even among pronounced
and habitual sinners there are apt to be some whom the novel circumstances of the time
startle and induce to “consider their ways.” It is an undeniable fact, that of such
penitents a certain proportion repent with extreme earnestness, and become examples to
the flock, advancing with the same impulse and fervour in the way of godliness as they
formerly advanced in the “ way which leadeth to destruction” (Matt. vii. 13).

Il. THEY INCREASE THE SERIOUSNESS OF THE BETTER DISPOSED, AND RENDER THEM
MORE CIRCUMSPECT AND STRICT IN THEIR coNDUCT. Men are aware, under ordinary
circumstances, that they may at any moment be summoned to meet their Judge. But
they do not commonly realize the possibility. It is one of the effects of great national
judgments—war, pestilence, famine—that they force on men the consideration of the
peril in which they stand, and compel them to contemplate death as near, and their own
speedy demise as probable. They lead men’s thoughts to existence beyond the grave,
and encourage them to prepare for the great change which death will make in their
condition. They break in upon the placid calm of everyday life, which laps so many
souls in an elysium of unconsciousness, and remind men of their Lord’s solemn injunction
to them: “ Watch” (Mark xiii. 37).

Ill. THEY GIVE OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE EXERCISE OF THE HEROIO VIRTUES, AND
HAVE THUS AN ELEVATING AND PURIFYING INFLUENCE ON THE BEST MEN. There is
more room for self-devotion in times of national calamity than under any other circum-
stances. Thousands are thrown upon the charity of their neighbours. The sufferin
which exists is at once guas/-universal andextreme. Much danger has to be encounter
in its relief. The best men at such times give themselves up wholly to the task of
alleviating their neighbours’ woes. Singly, or in bands, they go forth, fling themselves
into the thick of the struggle, and do their best to relieve the general distress and misery.
Whether they succeed or whether they fail in their object of helping others, they do not,
cannot fail in one thing—the improvement of their own characters. Their “dross” is
certain to be “purged away” by their unselfish efforts, and the pure metal of their
virtue to shine forth ever more and more, as time goes on, free from all alloy of pride,
or vanity, or self-seeking. Affliction has also a purifying effect on the individual.
“Whom the Lord loveth, he chasteneth,” etc. Thus only can “patience have her
perfect work” (Jas. i. 4). Thus only can faith be tried (1 Pet. i. 7) and strengthened.
Thus only can “the fellowship of Christ’s sufferings” (Phil. iii, 10) be known and
realized. But this branch of the subject lies outside of Isaiah’s teaching in the present
chapter.


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1—9.—Jehovah arraigns his people. I. INGRATITUDE THE BASEST OF SINS.
He, the Father, has been faithlessly forsaken by ungrateful sons. This is the worst
form of ingratitude.

“Vilial ingratitude!
Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand
For lifting food to t?”
(‘King Lear.}


It has been said that


«The wretch whom gratitude once fails to bind,
To truth or honour let him lay no claim,
But stand confess’d the brute disguised in man.”


But the brutes are grateful; while Jehovah’s sons seem to have neither memory nor
understanding. Man, by his nature, if he does not rise above, must sink below, the
vel of the beast. There is nothing more hateful, then, because more radically amiss
and evil, than ingratitude. It is, great men have said, the sum of guilt and evil, worse
than any taint of the blood, more odious than lying, vainness, babbling, drunkenness.


14 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. 1. 1—31.
LL


TI. THE PEOPLE HAVE ADDED REBELLION TO INGRATITUDE. They have forsaken,
reviled, “ gone backward” from him. This is a climax of sin. Our passions are ever
in movement; there is no stagnation. Insensibility to God’s goodness svon leads to
antipathy, antipathy to active hatred, and this to open revolt. “Be ye thankful.”
The neglect of the heart and its proper attitude to God is certain to lay us open to
every sin. The greatest physical pests of the city, and not less its moral corruptions,
may be traced to neglect. Some “covenant” of God made known to us in natural or
in spiritual law has been broken; hence sin and sorrow, and hence alone, as the
prophets ever teach.

IJ. Heaven AND EARTH WITNESSES OF MAN’S GUILT. The whole language and style
call up to mind the court of justice. All human events form part of a drama, of which
God and the angels are spectators. We in all our thoughts and deeds are surrounded
by a great cloud of spectators. The great sulid mountains, for example, seem the very
symbols of those fixed laws by which our actions must be judged. Napoleon in
Egypt called his soldiers to reflect that “ forty centuries were looking down upon them
from the pyramids.” By a similar figure, Micah summons the people to trial in the
presence of the mountains (vi. 2); the ]euteronomist appeals to heaven and earth to
listen to his words (xxxii. 1). So does a psalmist (Ps. 1.) represent Jehovah as demand-
ing the attention of earth from east to west. All our acts run out into a universal
significance.

lV. ‘(HE EXTREMITY OF NATIONAL RUIN. The people have run the whole course
of sin, have left no stone unturned in the attempt to defeat Jehovah; and lo! the
result. The body corporate is one mass of disease and wounds, fresh and bleeding.
The land is devastated and fire-scarred. Barbarians are devouring it; it reminds of
awful Sodom’s ruin. Jerusalem, indeed, is as yet unscathed; but she stands alone
in the midst of the dread silence. Like “a booth in the vineyard, a hammock in a
cucumber-field,” is she! Thus, when appeals to the ear have been repeatedly neglected,
God paints the truth upon the field of vision. If we heed not the voice, we must feel
the weight of the hand, of the Lord. Yet there is still a spark of hope. Jerusalem is
all but, yet not quite, a Sodom or Gomorrah. There is still a remnant of people left.
Thank God, while there is life there is hope. At the very moment when we are
tempted to say of the ruined nation, the broken life, “ All is lost!” a voice is heard,
“ All may yet be restored | ”—J.


Vers. 10—17.—The people’s plea considered. The leading men of Jerusalem are
supposed to reply to the charge of Jehovah, pvinting to the elaborate manner in which
his worship is kept up. And Jehovah rejects their plea with scorn.

I. Tue Divine INDIGNATION AGAINST WICKEDNESS. No more scathing denunciation
could there be than to term the rulers of the holy city “chiefs of Sodom,” and the
people in general “people of Gomorrah.” Those were names of horror and shame,
Christ used them in the same manner of extreme denunciation. Three forms of sin
were prevalent—luxury, violence, and oppression. The widow and the orphan stand
out especially as victims of greed and hard-hearted, grasping selfishness. As nothing
could be more humane and gentle than the spirit of the Law, so nothing could be more
wicked than the disregard of it. The Talmud, no less than the prophets, said the
strongest things against injustice. The judge is particularly cautioned not to be biassed
in favour of the poor against the rich. What a light does this throw upon the fine
education of the conscience! How much more flagrant the opposite fault! ‘ He who
unjustly hands over one man’s goods to another, he shall pay God for it with his own
soul. In the hour when the judge sits in judgment over his fellow-man, he shall feel
as it were a sword pointed at his own heart.” So says the Talmud. Jerusalem had
evidently, in the earlier time of Isaiah, been obscuring its highest conscience.

Il. Divine CONTEMPT FOR SACRIFICES AND RITUAL. 1. These things were never
beautiful nor acceptable unless as expressions of piety. If the piety were not existent,
the streams of blood, the reek of incense, became a spiritual disgust. The beasts chosen
for sacrifice were from the meeker and pursued animals: how horrible a lie for the
plane and the proud to bring such symbols to God! Says the Talmud, “ Look at

cripture: there is not a single bird more persecuted than the dove; yet God has
chosen her to be offered up on his altar. The bull is hunted by the lion, the sheep by


on. 1. 1—31.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 15
eee eee eee


the wolf, the goat by the tiger. And God said, ‘Bring me a sacrifice, not from them
that persecute, but from them that are persecuted.’” 2. Mere attendance on public
worship is not acceptable. Who has required them, Jehovah asks, to “ wear out” his
courts? Their thronging and their noise is offensive to him. Their meat offerings are
vanity; meaning nothing spiritual, they have no value whatever. The incense itself,
the finest flavour and aroma of the offering, stinks as it were in the nostrils of God. New
moon and sabbath, and all the innumerable solemnities,—they are hateful and burden-
some to Jehovah. He cannot endure the contradiction—wickedness and worship.
Quantity goes for nothing, quality is everything in the service of God. There is only
one act of true worship, but it fills a lifetime. Repetitions of unmeaning acts harden
the heart, dull the perceptions, accumulate guilt. Homer spoke of the crimes of men
“going up to the iron heaven.” So here the heaven is like an iron bound, not suffering
the prayers of the wicked to pass through.

Ill. THe True Divine service. 1. It consists in moral, as distinguished froin
ritual acts. In making the “inside of the cup and platter clean. It is a “washing”
of the soul from those thoughts and passions which lead to sin. It is a giving of
one’s self up to the godly sorrow that works repentance. ‘ When the gnios-of prayer
heaven are shut, that of tears is open,” says the Talmud. What more blessed than the
tears of the sinner over his sin? The rainbow of hope never fails to overarch them.
2. It has a negative side. Self must be denied in every evil meaning that self bears.
The evil lusts and habits in the embrace of which we have been locked, must now be
held at arm’s length, and a divorce a mensd et toro be effected. Every true learning
must be preceded by an unlearning; there must be a pause and a turning of the whole

erson, in short, a conversion, before we can start on a new course. (iod’s voice says to
us, “ Hold! Leave off!” as often as it says, “Go forward!” Habits form unconsciously.
It is, perhaps, a question more important to ask, because easier to be answered and dealt
with—Are we doing anything to break off bad habits? It is God’s part to weave and
form the good in us. We should make space and rogm for him to operate in our sguls.
8. It has a positive side. We are to learn—to inquire, to seek, in ony to act rightly.
Thought is the soul of act. We learn to do well by looking to good examples. The
“ consideration ” of Christ is the life-business and art of the Christian. ‘ Why do I tell
you incessantly to study the old masters?” asked a great painter of his pupils.
“Because the great masters are nearest to nature” (Ingres). So Christ is nearest to
God, to the nature and soul of all goodness. “Learn of me!” Nor can we approxi-
mate to right living without much seeking, much thought, comparison of experiences,
much earnest prayer. “Show me thy ways, teach me thy paths!” Note the stress
laid upon justice. This is the basis of character. Love is a vague sentiment without
it, and may work as much harm as good. Love strengthened and purified by justice.—
this is the ideal of the good man’s character. It is the imitation of God. And to seek
to resemble the revealed Divine in temper and in life,—this is the essence of worship,


the heart of piety.—J.


Vers. 18—23.— Argument and conviction. I. THE TRIAL OF THE CASE. 1. God is
reason, otherwise he could not be God of justice. And if the nature can defend itself,
clear itself from guilt, its plea will be allowed. Just so in ch. xlili. 19, the imagery of
a court of justice is presented: “ Let them bring forth their witnesses that they may
be justified, and let them hear, and say, It is true.” The question is—Can the nation
clear itself from the charges alleged against it? If so, the deep fixed stain that now
seems to rest upon them shall be taken away, and they shall be white as driven snow
or as undyed wool. 2. God appeals to fixed principles of right. These have long been
known, are written in the conscience of the people. A willing spirit of obedience to
Divine law is assured of blessing; rebellion brings about hostility, invasion, and all those
calamities from which the people are now suffering. Have these curses come “ cause-
less” upon the people? Or are they the just consequences of disobedience ? Let them
answer. A long pause and silence convey the admission of guilt. They have no
argument to urge, no cause to show why judgment should be stayed.

Il. Tue PROPHET’S LAMENTATION. He, as daysman, or go-between, mourns over the
city thus convicted, unable to stand in judgment against Jehovah. He is compelled in
this cause to turn witness against his own people. Once loyal and pledged as in the


16 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. 1 1—81.


a a


covenant of marriage to Jehovah, the city has become like her who “forsakes the
guide of her youth and forgets the covenant of her God.” Where once the splerdid
seat of justice and purity stood, there is now lawless bloodshed. The pure metal of her
virtue has been debased; and “as water unto wine” is her moral feebleness now as
contrasted with her moral strength then. They who, as rulers, were set for an example
of obedience to God, integrity among men, are rebels and thieves’ comrades. Instead
of withholding their hands from bribes, they greedily clutch after them. Pity and
mercy sre extinct; the orphan and the widow are thrust aside. ‘he guilt of guilt lies
in the use of power without love. Christ, as the impersonation of humanity and of love,
points out that the condemnation of evil conduct lies in this, that love is wanting. The
splendid temple ritual was naught, because there was no love in it, as their conduct out
of the temple so clearly showed. We may never miss a Sunday service or a celebration
of the communion, yet for all that be undone. And many who have never been
“ professed” Christians will be, on other grounds, professed by Christ.- —J.


Vers. 24—31.—Sentence passed. I. Tus Juper. He is “Jehovah of hosts, the
Strong One of Israel.” He saith, “ By the strength of my hand I have done it ” (ch. x. 18).
He has power to carry out his sentences. The holy fire of his indignation breaks forth
like a volcanic flood. From one point of view evil men must be conceived as the
enemies of God, and their punishment as his vengeance. If alone dwelt upon, such a
representation becomes false, because it ignores the aspect of Divine love, which converts
this holy vengeance into a remedial process. Human vengeance would extinguish the
sinner and the sin in one act; Divine vengeance would save the sinner by extinguishing
the sin.

II. THE PURPOSE OF JUDGMENT. 1. It is separation. The dross and the lead are to
be detached from the silver. Human nature is a mixture. There are two extremes to
be avoided in thinking of it—one that it is all evil, the other that it is all pure. Pes-
simism enervates, and optimism hoodwinks us. The Bible always takes the middle
view. Things are bad enough with us, but they might be worse. We are sunk low
enough, but cannot sink out of sight of our spiritual end, nor beyond the redeeming
power of God. The separation of the gross and base element from the spiritual in men
involves a fiery process. This fire is always burning in the heart of mankind, sometimes
breaking out into flame and fume of war or pestilence, to remind of its presence.
God has in constant operation his purgatory for souls. It is this truth which only can
reconcile us to the presence of suffering. As mere pain it seems intolerable; as the
means to the removal of evil it is blessed. 2. It is restoration. 'The better or golden
age is ever ready to begin; good judges and rulers will again be given to the city, and
it will deserve the title of Righteous and Faithful once more. When we see clearly
the abuses that exist, and the necessity of fiery suffering for the renewal of purity, we
have grasped a hope that cannot fail. God is ever remaking and recasting life. Not
a day passes but some rust gathers, some disintegration of solid structure takes place.
It may appear in any and every day that society is becoming hopelessly choked in its
vices; or that we ourselves are slipping down into moral ruin. Yet in a happier
morning mood it seems that all is mending with ourselves and the world. God’s
holiness is the vital sap of human life, and when we die to hope of ourselves, we live
anew in him. Conversion, if real, will take place, not once, but many times in a life. The
heliotrope turns every morning by a fresh effort to the sun. The result of many such
personal acts is seen now and again in times of religious revival, when the multitude
turns as one man, saying, “ Let us walk in the light of Jehovah!”

Ill. THe PERDITION OF THE OBSTINATE. One will may defeat the remedial purposes
of God. If man says, “I will be joined to my idols and my sins,” no fire, no earthquake
has power to dislodge him. If we will not relax our hold on the evil object, we must
share its fate. ‘To fix our affections on objects unworthy of our choice is to bring on
ourselves shame and self-contempt. The terebinth trees and the pleasant gardens, the
seats of ancient idolatry, are typical of all scenes of spurious enjoyment. The volup-
tuary, the mammon-worshipper, the votary of ambition, create around them a world of
objects, fascinating, but unreal. The terebinth shall wither; the garden, parched for
want of water, shall lose all its charm. The man who seemed but now the very type

(of force, shall feel himself slack as tow, and his life-work the spark that sets it on fire,


cu. L 1—31.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 17


So both shall irretrievably be consumed. What are the “terebinth trees and pleasant
gardens” of our idolatry? Each man’s soul must answer. Any and every pleasure is
good under right conditions; pernicious else. Everything that is naturally precious to
the human heart should be precious to each one of us. In the soul lies the only test.
In the way that objects react upon our finest feeling we know whether they are objects
for our personal pursuit or no: idols that must degrade us to their level, or symbols and
sacraments of God. It is in the life of imagination and association that we differ.
Any scene supposed to be holy may become an idolatrous pleasure-garden to the ill-
ordered fancy ; and the soul that lives in God, seeking ever the true amidst the false,
will ever convert the terebinth tree of ill repute into an altar of pure religion. The
world is to us what our will permits it to seem. Wedded to the sensual, we must
perish from the spiritual; united to the spiritual, the sensual becomes transformed and
acquires new associations.—J.


Ver. 4.—“ Children that are corrupters.” Here we have a broad light on the mission
of Isaiah the prophet. The holy nation had become evil. Plants are more poison-
spreading in their corruption than forest trees. It is an old proverb, “The corruption
of the best is the worst.” ‘“ Children that are corrupt.” How solemn the emphasis of
the prophet’s adjuration! ‘ Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth: for the Lord hath
spoken, I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me.”

I. THE MEASURE OF LIFE IS THE MEASURE OF CORRUPTION. Even physically it is so.

The horse does not breed such corruption as man. The body, God’s most perfect work,
must in its corpse state be buried quickly. Israel was a privileged people. They had
the Law and the prophets and the glory ; but their rottenness was complete : “ From the
sole of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness in it ; but wounds, and bruises,
and putrefying sores” (ver.6). Such, then, is the revealed philosophy concerning evil
—the richer the life the more rotten the corruption.
- II, THE MBASURE OF OPPORTUNITY IS THE MEASURE OF RESPONSIBILITY. “The whole
head is sick, and the whole heart faint.” But in head and heart they had been
* nourished and brought up as children.” And as children their character ought to have
reflected the Father’s image. ‘“ Ye are my witnesses,” saith the Lord. But Israel had
become vain, proud, cgupal, selfseeking, idolatrous. They imagined themselves elected
to the enjoyment of privilege instead of to the use and responsibility of privilege.
Hence they sought to become a “ vortex” instead of a “ rar bie And evil had spread
through them. Their lofty position had made the leaven of their influence wider. Alas!
the “children” were “ corrupters”!|—W. M. 8.


“Ver. 9.— The faithful remnant. “Except the Lord of hosts had left unto us a
very smal] remnant, we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto
Gomorrab.” This is as music of hope amid a strain of grief. And it is the first note
of an evangelic prophecy, which is to merge into the “ Comfort ye, comfort ye my people,”
of a later chapter. Where there is life there is hope in national calamity as well as in
personal sickness. “A cottage in a vineyard” és a cottage that speaks of home (ver. 8),
“a lodge ina garden of cucumbers” is a centre of care and toil; and a very small remnant

‘may be a branch of healing to save a nation.

~ J, THE SMALL REMNANT BELONGS TO THE LorD or Hosts. Therefore power is on
their side. What a contrast !—“ host” and “remnant.” Even so. God can multiply
the loaves and fishes. God can put such power int» the remnant that they may be
able to say, “ Greater is he that is for us than all that can be against us.” We must
not judge by numbers or statistics, nor by quantity, but by quality. Whose are these ?
Decide that; and then “ This is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith,
for that faith centres in God.

II. THE SMALL REMNANT IS ANTISEPTIC. It can arrest disease. It can heal. Take
a few grains of some chemical substance, and they will colour and cleanse an entire
stream. ‘ We should have been as Sodom is.” Yes; God’s judgments on a nation, as
in our own at the time when profligate plays had undermined the moral life, have saved
the nation. For when men laugh at sin, well-nigh the deepest depth has been reached ;
but godly souls are then used as leaven to purify the body politic. Judah and Jerusaler
were almost gone, but the Lord had mercy on them.

ISAIAH. 0


18 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. 1. 1—31.


II. Tee sMALL REMNANT IS TO SPREAD THE WorpD of THE Lorn. The next verse
says, “ Hear ye the Word of the Lord.” It is a Divine revelation that is to save them.
And the prophet who speaks is called Isaiah, or Iesahiaha, signifying “ the salvation of
the Lord;” so that though the prophet speaks stern words of rebuke, his very name
contains the glorious issue of his work. His work was laborious and long—he prophesied
in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah. ‘Terribly profane were those days,
for in the days of Ahaz “ the doors of the house of the Lord were shut up, and idolatrous
altars were erected in every corner of Jerusalem.” But God sent his Word and healed
them; and that is the true regenerator in every age.—W. M. S.


Ver. 18.—Salvation to the uttermost. “Come now, and let us reason together,
saith the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though
they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.” The previous verses show that the Jews
had mistaken the ideal of Divine services; they had turned them into a correct ritual,
to a multitude of sacrifices without purpose. And purpose or motive is the very heart
of religion. They were devotional, but cruel. “ When ye make many prayers, I will
not hear: your hands are full of blood.” It was all empty ceremony. The solemn -
meeting even was iniquity. A change must come. And it must begin in character.
“Cease to do evil.” Yes; but that is not enough. Negation is not salvation. There
must be life unto God as well as death unto sin. “ Learn to do well.” Then come the
words of our text. They sound a strange note at first; they speak of what man cannot
do and what God can.

I. HERE IS THE GOSPEL IN IsaraH. Hee, full, perfect redemption. We see in these
words Gethsemane and Calyary. There God’s purpose was fulfilled; but it is in his heart
when these words are spoken, for “the Lamb was slain before the foundation of the
world.” It is a glorious gospel—God giving himself for the world. And now, as we
read Israel’s sins in this record, we may see even then that, where sin abounded, grace
did much more abound.

Il. HeRE Is THE REASONABLENESS OF RELIGION. How condescending! Let #s—the
Infinite and the finite, the immaculate and the eyil. Yet so it is. God says, “ While
you are stained with blood and cloaked wit hypocrisy, I can have nothing to say to
you or to do with you.” It cannot be that light slould have fellowship with darkness,
That ts reasonable surely. But how can the sins of Judah and Jerusalem be purged
away? Amendment is not atonement. And God is their Ransom, the high God is
their Redeemer!

Il]. Here Is THE CHARTER OF THE CHURCH'S LIBERTY. These words will never be
forgotten. They have comforted millions. It is not liberty to sin, but salvation from all
sin, and from the punishment of sin. Not from punishment only, but from sin itself, in
all its forms, all its depths, all its degrees! For the colours are chosen as the symbols
of the most marked and malignant evil—scarlet and crimson. Yet God is able to save
to the uttermost. The words are best understood beneath the cross and in the histcry
of redeemed men in every age.—W. M.S.


Vers. 1, 2.—Ingratitude and intervention. The “ vision of Isaiah ” during the reigns
of four kings of Judah (ver. 1), and the declaration (ver. 2) that “ the Lord hath spoken”
(or speaketh), suggests—

I. THE FACT THAT GOD HAS INTERVENED AND DOES INTERVENE IN HUMAN AFFAIRS,
1, Such Divine intervention ought not to have been necessary. For God has so
ordered everything around us, and has so constituted us ourselves, that there were
abundant sources of truth and heavenly wisdom without it. All visibie nature
(Rom. i. 20); the bounties of Divine providence (Acts xiv. 17); the manifestations
of Divine pleasure and displeasure in the events and issues of life (Ps. xxxiv. 15,
16); the conscience that speaks and strikes within the soul—the moral judgment
of which our spiritual nature is capable (Prov. xx. 27; Acts xxiv. 16; Rom. ii. 15);
—these should have sufficed for man’s instruction, integrity, perfection. But we find,
from the religious history of our race, that these sources of enlightenment and influence
have not been sufficient. 2, There has been needed, and there has been grinted, special
intervention from God. “The Lord hath spoken” to mankind: (1) From the_Fall
to the Imearmation, God intervened, “at sundry times and in divers manners »—by


on, 1. 1—31.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 19


such visions as those he gave to Isaiah, and which the prophet communicated to the
people; by creating and ordaining men of illumination and leadership, such legislators
as Moses and Nehemiah, such kings as David and Hezekiah, such prophets as Elijah
and John Baptist; by the institutions and precepts of the Law; by parental chastise-
ments. (2) dé and im the Incarnation itself: when the eternal Father said to the human
race, “This is my beloved Son, hear him; ” by the words, the works, the surrow, the
death, the resurrection, of that Son of man who was the Son of Gud. (3) From the
Ascension to this present time: by the Word of his truth; by tle ministry of the gospel ;
by the corrections of his disciplinary hand; by the quickening influences of his Spirit.
By these things “ the Lord is speaking ” to us still, is speaking to us all.

Il. HUMAN INGRATITUDE THE OCCASION OF THE DIVINE INTERVENTION. What is it
that calls forth the Divine utterance? It is tiie shameful ingratitude of his own sons.
“JT have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me.” There
are great and terrible crimes which have to be recorded against the human race; there
are evil and shameful wrong-doings which stain and darken many individual lives; but
there is one common and inexcusable wrong, to which all people and all souls must
plead guilty, one common sin, with which we have all to reproach ourselves,-—it is that
with which God himself reproaches Israel—heinous and aggravated ingratitude. 1. God
has done everything to attach us to himself. He has closely related us to himself; he
has made us his children; he has expended upon us the lavish love, the patient care,
the multiplied bounties, of a Father’s heart, of a Father’s hand. 2. We have broken
away from his benignant rule. We “have rebelled against him; ” our rebellion includes
forgetfulness, inattention, dislike, insubmissiveness, disobedience. To whom we owe
everything we are and have, to him we have rendered nothing for which he has been
looking, everything which has been grievous in his sight.

Ill. Our FITriNG ATTITUDE WHEN Gop Is SPEAKING. When God speaks, let every
voice be hushed ; let all things everywhere, even the greatest and most majestic of all,
lend their reverent attention. ‘“‘ Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth.” ‘l'here are
(1) those who mock; (2) those who are deliberately deaf, who close their ears by filling
them with nvisy activities or absorbing pleasures ; (3) those who are persistently uncon-
cerned; (4) those who pay a passing and fruitless consideration ; (5) those who bring
a reverent and obedient inquiry.—O.


Ver. 3.—Obligation and interest. I. THE WEIGHTIEST OBLIGATION. Isaiah speaks
of ownership asa relation existing between a brute beast and a man; the “ox knoweth
its owner.” ‘There is a legal and not unimportant sense in which a man may own an
animal; the creature is his in so far as this, that no one else can lay an equal claim to
its use, and no one can dispute his legal right to employ it in his service. In a far larger
sense than this dues man belong to God. God has that strong and indefeasible claim
(1) which the Creator has on the creature he has called into being; (2) which the
Divine Sustainer has on the one whom he has been momentarily preserving in being;
(3) which the generous Giver has on the one upon whom he is bestowing innumerable
and invaluable benefactions; (4) which the merciful Judge has on the one he has
spared again and again when life has been forfeited by wrong-doing; (5) which the
Divine Friend has on the one whom he has delivered at the greatest possible cost to
himself. Surely he is, in very deed, our Divine Owner: to him we beloug; our lives,
our powers, ourselves, are h/s, There is nothing which the brute of the field owes to his
human master, there is nothing which man owes to man, that is comparable to that
strong, supreme obligation under which we all rest to God. ;

Il. THe HienEsT INZEREST. The ass or any other domestic animal has the greatest
interest in his “crib:” there he finds food, rest, renewal,—life. The highest interest
which man has is not in the place where he secures food and rest. This is, indeed,
necessary for his hudily well-being. But in gaining this he does not find his life. The
life of man is in an instructed mind and, still more distinctively, ina well-ordered soul ;
in an intelligence that holds the highest truth it is capable of receiving ; in a heart that
fills and overflows with purest and holiest emotions; in a will that chooses the wisest
courses; in a spiritual nature that realizes and rejoices in its hizhest relationships. A
man who acts as if his chief interest were in a comfortable “ crib,” a well-stocked “stall,
is a man who does not know himself and his opportunities,


20 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. 1 1—31.
Pa sca a


TI. Tar Divine reproacn. “The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master’s
crib,” ete. The brute beast has sense enough to recognize his master, discernment enough
to perceive what is best for him to do, but instructed and enlightened Israel, recipients
of so many mercies, and with all their golden chances of enlargement and elevation, did
not recognize their God nor understand their true and real interests. When we live in
ignorance of God and in pursuit of the lower instead of the higher blessedness, we may
see ourselves condemned and feel ashamed in our soul as we look on the beasts of the
field, and see them using their humble powers to discharge their duties and to enjoy
their heritage. A life of spiritual ignorance is (1) a shameful thing, rebuked by the
“beasts that perish;” (2) a guilty thing, exciting the high displeasure of Almighty
God, drawing down his urgent and powerful remonstrance; (3) a needless thing,—it is
in our power to rise above it, if we will and when we will. ‘The last word of the text,
as rendered in our version, is suggestive of the true way of return. We have to
“consider,” to reflect upon our obligation and our interest; and honest and serious
consideration must lead to self-condemnation, conviction will end in repentance, and
repentance will issue in eternal life—C.


Ver. 4.—The course of sin. It is true that both righteousness and sin have very
varied manifestations, the course of one good or one bad man’s life differing widely from
that of another. Yet there is a logical and moral order in which both holiness and
iniquity pursue their path from their beginning to their end. The course of sin is not
indicated by the sequence of these accusations, but the different steps are included in
the prophetic denunciation.

I. Iv BEGINS IN THE WITHDRAWAL OF THE SOUL FROM Gop. The first movement
in the soyl’s downward course is to “ forsake the Lord ”—to withdraw itself from him.
At first it has no intention to take up an attitude of positive rebellion; it does not say
to itself, “I will not have this One to reign over me.” But it withholds its thoughts,
its affection, its consultation of his revealed will, its activity and contribution in the
field of Christian work. It fails to “magnify” him in its own mind and sphere; it
“ follows afar off ;” it loses its hold on him, and its joy in him, It allows an increasing
distance to be placed between itself and him.

Il. Iv sHows ITSELF IN wRone-poIne. They who withhold from God the reverence
and the obedience which are his due soon become “a seed of evil-doers.” Morality rests
on religion as on its only solid basis. Without a sense of religious obligation—as indi-
vidual and national histories abundantly testify—moral principles will soon decline and
disappear. When God is forgotten and his will is disregarded, life becomes darkened
with evil deeds, it is stained with vice and crime.

III. Iv passes INTO DELIBERATE DISLOYALTY TO HIM. “They are gone away back-
ward;” or, “they have turned their backs upon him.” ‘The outcome of irreligion and
iniquity is presumptuous infidelity, unblushing atheism: man turns his back on God.

IV. Ir BRINGS DOWN THE HIGH DISPLEASURE OF THE Hoty One. “They have
provoked the Holy One of Israel unto anger.” We read that God is “angry with the
wicked every day” (Ps. vii. 11); that sin “grieves him at his heart” (Gen. vi. 6).
The Divine emotion is doubtless different, in some respects, from that with which we
are familiar, but there is enough resemblance between a holy man and the Holy One of
israel for us to say that such grief and anger as we feel when we look upon shameful
sin and shocking crime God himself feels in an infinitely greater degree. It is a
thought as true as it is terrible that, when we forsake, disobey, and disavow the Lord,
his high and awful wrath is directed against our souls.

V. Iv RESULTS IN THE HEAVIEST OF ALL PENALTIES THAT OAN BE BORNE. “ A
people laden with iniquity.” Sin, “ when it is finished,” when it has run its course and
done its work, triumphs over the sinner; it may seem at first to be a power under his
feet, and then to be a pleasure to his heart; but it ends in being a crushing weight upon
his head. J¢ becomes an insupportable burden; he becomes a soul “laden with
iniquity.” 1, Iniquity itself, ever growing and spreading, covers the entire surface of
his life. _ 2. The effect of sin is to dwarf and shrivel his whole nature. A man who has
given away to sin (notably to such a hateful vice as intemperance, or licentiousness, or
gambling) suffers like a man who all his life bears a burdensome weight upon his
shoulders. He “bears his iniquity.” His soul is dominated, damaged, tyrannized, by


on. 1. 1—31.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 21
ens eee


it. He is the miserable, pitiable slave of his own sin; it bears him down to the very
ground in feebleness and humiliation. Yet there is one aspect of the course of sin which
is even worse.

VI. Iv cULMINATES IN THE PERPETRATION OF SPIRITUAL MISCHIEF. The people
laden with iniquity are “children that are corrupters.” The very darkest aspect of
evil is that it communicates itself on every hand. It is a terribly infectious thing.
Every corrupt man is a corrupter of souls. Who shall estimate the evil which one false
life starts and spreads? Who shall calculate the distance, in space or time, which the
consequences of one wrong action travel? 1. What need of mercy! 2, What need of
Divine direction and guardianship !—C.


Vers. 5—9.—Sin in its hopelessness. I. THAT SIN I8 MORE OR LESS RECLAIMABLE.
Whatever we might have antecedently expected, we find practically, that there are
those on whom Divine truth is far more likely to tell than it ison others. Thus (1)
youth is more impressionable than age; (2) poverty is more accessible than riches;
(8) the unprivileged are more open to influence than the “children of the kingdom.”
Time, pleasure, the misuse of sacred opportunity,—these things indurate the soul and
make it far less responsive than it once was; so that there are some that are more hope-
less than others.

Il. Tuar THOSE WHO HAVE BEEN UNCHANGED BY THE DISCIPLINE OF GoD ARE THE
MOST HOPELESS OF ALL. Many things are effective as spiritual weapons—the Word of
God, the ministry of the gospel, the entreaties of friendship, the influence of a godly
home, sacred literature, etc.; but not one of them is so penetrating, so affecting, so
reformative, as the discipline of the Divine hand. When God comes to a man in his
providence; when he sends loss, disappointment, bereavement; when he lays his
correcting hand on the man himself,—then there is the deepest silence in the soul, then
the voices which are from heaven reach the inmost chambers of the spirit. And if these
be felt and heard in vain, if the lessons which come thus be unlearned by the rebellious
heart, then the last state of that man is about the worst that is imaginable: “There is
more hope of a fool than of him.”

lil. THaT THERE ARE THOSE UPON WHOM GOD SEEMS TO HAVE EXHAUSTED HIS
DISCIPLINARY RESOURCES. The prophet says (ver. 5), ‘lhe whole head is sick,” etc.,
already. As it is, the entire body is covered with open, unhealed wounds (ver. 6); the
nation (the body politic) was witnessing the most harrowing evils and the most
humiliating indignities to which it could be subjected (vers. 7, 8). What further
chastisement cou/d the arm of the Almighty inflict? By what severer blows could he
recall his people to repentance and righteousness? So with individual men. God has
sent them chastisement after chastisement, reminder on reminder ; he has touched them
in one part of their nature, he has laid his correcting hand on another part; he has
visited them in many ways; he has multiplied his most solemn lessons unto them.
What more cun he do? Where “can they be stricken any more”? In what other
way shall he strike their follies and seek to save their souls ?

IV. THat IN THEIR CASE FURTHER SUFFERING WOULD PROBABLY RESULT IN AGGRA-
VATED SIN. Isaiah might well ask (if that be not the precise point), ““ Why should ye
be smitten any more?” (ver. 5); he certainly does say, “ Ye will revolt more and more.”
His thought apparently is that added blows will only mean increased rebelliousness.
When a man (or a nation) has reached a certain depth in iniquity, the very thing
(Divine chastisement) which ought to arrest and restore him will only goad him to
proceed with quickened step on his evil way. Thus are the purposes of love defeated
and the means of recovery perverted. And yet there remains one redeeming thought,
riz.—

V. THAT, THOUGH COMPARATIVELY, SIN I8 NOT UTTERLY HOPELESS HERE. ‘The
“ daughter of Zion” was little better than a “cottage in a vineyard,” a “lodge in a
garden of cucumbers” (ver. 8); but it was left, to be at least as much as that. The
Lord of hosts had left a “remnant,” though that was “very small” (ver. 9). Jerusalem
had not yet becomeas “ the cities of the plain.” The penalty of sin is great: it reduces
the sinner very low indeed; it robs him of his heritage; it leaves him almost nothing
of the spiritual faculties, of the filial portion (Luke xv. 12), of the heavenly hopes with
which he was endowed. But it leaves something—some sensibility to which we can


22 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. un 1—31.
OO a eS EEE EE EE ee


appeal ; some thread of willingness by which we can draw him; some plank by which,
through a thousand perils, he may yet reach the shore.


“The blackest night that veils the sky
Of beauty hath a share,
The darkest soul hath signs to tell
That God still lingers there.” rm


Vers. 10—20.— The prophetic strain. Isaiah had gone only a very little way in his
testimony when he broke into the true prophetic strain. The prophets were God’s
witnesses against the mere shows and semblances of piety, and for the rcality of godliness
and virtue; they lived to expose the false and to expound the true, to pierce with keen-
edged sword that which was hollow and rotten, and to commend with glowing zeal that
which was sound and good. Here we have a deliverance which evidently came hot
from a neart that burned with fiery indignation.

I. THE UTTER INSUFFICIENCY OF MERE RITUAL TO COMMAND THE DIVINE FAVOUR.
“To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me?” etc. (vers. 11—13).
These various offerings were all according to the commandment, correct, scriptural ; but
they were unacceptable; they were “ vain oblations,” all of them. They were ineffectual,
because they came from hands that were unclean, from hearts that were unholy. It is
a significant and solemn fact that men may be engaged in doing those very things, using
those very words which God has plainly prescribed, and yet they may be utterly failing
to win his Divine favour. The services of the sanctuary, the “ eating of that bread and
drinking of that cup,” the ministries of the pulpit and the study,—all these may be
uniipeachably correct, but yet wholly unacceptable. If the heart be not right, if the
life be not pure, they are unacceptable.

II, Its PossiBLE ODIOUSNESS IN THE SIGHT oF Gop. Those who are rendering an
abundance of formal devotion are actually denominated by a term which indicates the
last extremity of wrong-dvoing: “ Ye rulers of Sodom,” “ ye people of Gomorrah ; ” they
are addressed as if they were responsible citizens of those infamous cities. Jehovah not
only does “not delight in the blood of bullocks” (ver. 11), and not only does not require
this kind of service (ver. 12); not only does he call the oblations “ vain,” but he declares
incense to be an abomination to him (ver. 13). “Your new moons... my soul
hateth: they are a trouble unto me; I am weary to bear them” (ver. 14). The thought
is positively terrible that the very things we are doing with a view to gain Gud’s
pleasure may be bringing down upon us his awful anger; that the very means we are
taking to avert his wrath may be only adding to its weight. It is certain that the
offerings of the hypocrite are of this kind. his prophetic strain is not only applicable
to the specialities of the Hebrew ritual; it includes all the ordinary approaches of the
human soul to the Divine Father; it embraces that which we call “ prayer” (see
ver. 15). And we have to face the fact that the most devout utterances of our lips, in
the most approved or even in biblical phraseology, may be worse than worthless in the
sight of God.

II]. Tue PRIMARY DUTY OF REPENTANCE. “ Wash you, make you clean; put away
the evil of your doings,” ete. (vers. 16, 17), When men are leving and practising
unrighteousness the first thing they have to do is to “ put it away,” both from their minds
and from their lives. The drunkard must first dash down his cup, the untruthful man
must at once give up his falsehoods, the licentious man his impurities, the dishonest
man his rogueries ; it is a vain and even guilty thing for a man to kneel in prayer or to
sit down at the Lord’s table when he is deliberately intending to go on in his sin: that is
nothing less than mockery; it is defiance assuming the attitude of devotion. “ Let the
wicked forsake his way,” etc. (ch. lv. 7).

IV. THE READINESS OF GOD TO PARDON THE PENITENT, (Ver. 18.)

V. THe ALTERNATIVE WHICH GOD PLACES BEFORE ALL HIS CHILDREN—OBEY AND
PROSPER, OR REFUSE AND SUFFER. (Vers. 19, 20.) They who now return unto the Lord
from the state of sin in which they are found—from crime, from vice, from ungodliness,
from indecision—and who attach themselves to the service of Jesus Christ, shall “ eat
the good of the land ;” to them shall be granted the sunshine of God’s favour, the
biessedness of Christ’s friendship and service, the hope of a heavenly heritage. But


ou. I. 1—31.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 23


they who remain apart and afar from God, who will not have the Man Christ Jesus to
reign over them—they must abide under the condemnation of the Holy and the Just.—C,


Ver. 18.—The magnitude of the Divine mercy. I. THe FuLNess or Tun Divine
mercy. In estimating the fulness of God’s grace to mankind, we must include: 1. His
patience toward all men, both penitent and impeni'ent. From the beginning of sin
until the present hour God has been forbeariny to inflict penalty. “He has not dealt
with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities.” The times of long-
continued ignorance God overlooked, or did not interpose with special penalty or
redemption (Acts xvii. 30). 2. His pardon offered to the penitent and believing. In
the Law we read that he is “ the Lord God, merciful and gracious,” etc. (Exod. xxxiv.
6,7); in the Psalms we read that he is “ plenteous in mercy,” etc. (Ps. cili. 8, 11, 12);
in the prophets we read that “he is merciful and will not keep anger for ever” (Jer.
iii. 12; and see text and ch. lv. 7—9; Dan. ix. 9). In the gospel of Jesus Christ remis-
sion of sins is a cardinal doctrine (Matt. xxvi. 28; Luke xxiv. 47; Acts ii, 88; v. 31;
x. 43; xxvi. 18). 38. The thoroughness of his forgiveness, (1) Vhe breadth which it
covers. (1) The worst kinds of sin—blasphemy, idolatry, all forms of impurity, murder,
etc.; (b) the most criminal condition—long-continued forgetfulness, sin against multi-
plied privilege, persistent and obdurate rebelliousness of heart, etc. (2) he depth
to which it yoes duwn. (a) Penetrating to the most secret thoughts of the mind, to the
most inward motives of the soul, to the sliglitest choices of the will; (+) extending to
the thoughis and things which have been overlooked and omitted, as well as to those
which have been entertained and wrought. (3) The height to which it rises. (a)
Leading to actual holiness—for pardon is the fruit of penitence and faith, and with them
in the soul, the scarlet becomes as snow, the crimson as wool, the mind is radically
changed, the life is thoroughly transformed ; (0) including full restoration, not merely
the not exacting penalty, but the actual bestowal of the Divine favour—admitting to
the Father’s home and table, lavishing upon the accepted clild every sign and proof of
parental love.

II. Tue Divine ARGUMENT THER“YROM. God condescends to “reason” with us; he
appeals to our sense of obligation, to our regard for our own interests, to our human
affections, etc. The argument here is not stated, but it may be easily inferred. If
such is the Divine mercy—so large and full and free, then how wise to seek it ut once!
because of: 1. The blessedness of being right with God henceforth. 2. The uncertainty
of the future. Between our souls and its possession may be interposed (1) sudden death;
(2) hardening of the heart; (3) increased outward obstacles. 3. ‘Ihe immeasurable
issues which are at stake—“ everlasting punishment or life eternal.” —C.


Vers. 21—31.— Divine dealing with the degenerate. We have here—

J. DEPLORABLE DEGENERACY. 1. Deyenerucy of character. “ How is the faithful city
become an harlot!” etc. (vers. 21, 23). ‘here is nothing more melanclioly than the
sight of a people or city or of a human being fallen from spiritual and moral integrity te
a depth of sin and folly—devoutness exclianged for impiety, conscientiousness for unscru-
pulousness, self-restraint and self-respect for laxity or even for licentiousness, spiritual
excellency for moral unloveliness. But many illusirations confront us, both in history
and experience. 2. Degeneracy of power. ‘The result of this spiritual decline is weak-
ness: the silver becomes dross, the wine is mixed with water (ver. 22). The sinner is
not long before he finds that there is “no might in his hand” (Deut. xxviii. 32), Sin
saps the life-blood from the soul, and leaves it strengthless and useless. It makes him
to be as an Oriental garden from which the life-giving waters have been withdrawn, as
a tree whose leaves have faded and fallen (ver. 30)—everything is parched, barren,

uitless.
ei Il. Divine visrration. This includes: 1. Punishment; the outpouring of wrath
upon the wicked, involving (1) personal ruin (vers. 24, 28); and this (2) the result of
the sinner’s evil deeds: the man himself is as tow, and his work (not the maker of it) is
as a spark which enkindles it (ver. 31). The “work ” of the drunkard, i.e. his intem-
perance, consumes him—it wastes his estate, it enfeebles his strength, it reduces the
number of his friends, it brings him to destruction ; and so with other vices which are
the “works” of the unholy; they burn and they consume, and nothing quenches


24 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, [on. 1. 1—381.


them. One part of the Divine punishment is (3) the shame with which the guilty are
confounded : “ They shall be ashamed . . . and confounded” (ver. 29). It is one of the
constant penalties of sin that, when enjoyment is over, then comes shame and confusion
of face. The soul is smitten with a sense of abasement; it suffers the smartings of
conscience, the pangs of remorse. 2. Purification. (Vers. 25—27.) God would turn
his hand—his hand that healed and saved; and, in his purity, would purge away the
dross, and restore to the favoured city its ancient righteousness. Penalty would become
correction, and correction would end in transformation and redemption. Whether God
visits (1) nations, or (2) churches, or (3) individual souls, it is that they may “ come to
themselves;” that they may return unto him; that they may be purified of their
iniquity, their pride, their selfishness, their worldliness, their self-indulgence ; and that
they may rejoice in his holy service.—C.


Ver. 1.—The times and mission of Isaiah. God raises up the man for the age,
giving him gifts for the particular work which the age may demand. History is not a
mere faithful record of things done, but a wise and sympathetic estimate of men doing.
A man has more power on us than a truth. A man is grander than any doctrine or
any book. Christianity, as a mere system, is a powerless thing; it never quickened
anybody from his death of trespasses and sins. The personal Christ is our life. In
the sphere of philanthropy we are interested in the doings of Howard and Wilberforce
and Nightingale; in politics we trace the influence of Pitt and Burke and Cobden; and
in the field of patriotism you kindle into enthusiasm all America when you speak of
Washington and Lincoln, and all Scotland when you speak of John Knox. But it is
not an easy thing for us to reproduce the men of a long bygone history. The men of
one period must not be judged by the ideas and manners and social sentiments of another
period; and yet it makes a surpassing demand on us if we have to create, with our
imaginations, times wholly differing from our own. If we could be set down amidst the
ruins of the buried Pompeii, and see around us the rooms, the furniture, the pictures,
the ornaments, and the utensils, we think that, with their help, it would be easy to
reproduce the life of old Rome; wecould fill banqueting-hall, and theatre, and baths, and
market-place with the men and women of that age. With old Israel we can have no
such helps; we are dependent on the historical and imaginative faculties.

I. THE PROPHET HIMSELF. “The vision of Isaiah, the son of Amotz.” Little is
known of his private life, and nothing of his personal appearance. He resided in Jeru-
salem; he was married, and his wife is spoken of as a pronhetess. They had two sons;
both were named with prophetic names, the two taken together embodying the substance
of Isaiah’s message. The one was called “ Maher-shalal-hash-baz ’”’—“ He hasteth to the
prey ”—indicating the swift desolating forces that were coming on the people of Judma ;
the other was called “ Shear-Jashub ”—a “ remnant shall return ”’—indicating the mercy
of God towards some, the mercy with which so much of the Book of Isaiah deals. It
appears that the prophet wore a garment of haircloth or sackcloth, the ordinary symbol
of repentance among [astern nations; and so his very appearance reminded the people
of his message. Isaiah prophesied for nearly fifty years. No record is left of his death,
but Jewish traditions represent him as martyred in the reign of Manasseh—sawn asunder
with a wooden saw. He was a prophet, not necessarily foretelling future events, but
a directly inspired man; one who received communications from God which he was to
address to the people. The prophet had three things to do: (1) to awaken the nation
to a sense of sin in disobeying and forsaking the Lord their God; (2) to counteract the
delusion that an external observance of rites and ceremonies is suflicient to satisfy God;
and (3) to oppose the delusions of those who imagined that their election as a nation,
and their covenant with Jehovah, formed an absolute security against overwhelming
national judgments,

IJ, THE TIMES IN WHICH THE PROPHET LIVED. They were times of national decline
and decay. Isaiah saw four kings upon the throne of Judah. He saw the flickering of
the candle ere it went out in the darkness. There was some appearance of prosperity ;
but Isaiah knew that it did but gloze over deep national corruption that called for
national judgments. During the time of Isaiah the neighbouring kingdom of the ten
tribes did actually fall—the corruptions of idolatry and sensuality, in their case, running
a swifter course; and the prophet holds up their case as a solemn warning to the people


on. 1. 1—31.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 25


—_—_—_—_—_— eee ee


of Judah. The first six chapters of Isaiah have been referred to the reign of Uzziah, a
king whose prosperity developed a strong self-will and masterfulness, which led him to
attempt a sad act of sacrilege. Jotham was a pious king; but Ahaz plunged into all
the idolatries of the surrounding nations, making molten images for Baal, and _ sacri-
ficing his children by passing them through the burning hands of Moloch in the valley
of Hinnom. The people were only too ready for this debasing change. But judgment
quickly followed on the heels of iniquity. Pekah of Israel and Rezin of Damascus
attacked and injured the country, though they failed to take Jerusalem. Soon other
enemies came—Syrians in front, Philistines behind. Ahaz sought help from Tiglath-
Pileser, King of Assyria, who soon turned upon him, and Assyria became the gravest
enemy of Israel.

IJ. THe work WHICH THE PROPHET HAD To vo. 1. His first work was to make
men understand that their sufferings were actual Divine judgments on their sins, and
therefore calls, like thunder-peals, to awaken them to repentance. God will not leave
men in their troubles to imagine that some evil chance has befallen them, that they
are the victims of accident. By the mouth of some prophet he will assuredly vindicate
the connection between sin and suffering. 2. But Isaiah had also to bring comfort to
the people of God in the time of national calamity. Godly people are often bowed
down by the pressure of surrounding evil, and in their despairing they sometimes say,
“God hath forgotten to be gracious.” God will never leave his faithful few to sink
under discouragements. 3. Isaiah’s work may he more precisely stated as this: he
was to prepare the way for the spiritual kingdom of God, in the person of Messiah the
crucified yet glorified Redeemer. The old theocracy was breaking up, and God’s rule
in the world might be lost. Isaiah was to say that it was only passing into a spiritual
theocracy, giving place to the spiritual and eternal reign of God in souls. In Isaiah
messages of severity and of mercy are most graciously blended. The following passage
precisely represents his mission: “ Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God:
on them which fell, severity ; but toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in his goodness :
otherwise thou also shalt be cut off.”—R. T.


Ver. 2.—Sin as broken sonship. Literally, the verse reads, “Sons I have made great
and high, and they haxe broken away from me.” The later conception of the Jewish
covenant embraced the ideas of fatherhood and sonship, and thus prepared for the
revelation of the fatherhood of God in the teachings of the Lord Jesus, and for the
apprehension of the “sonship of men” through Christ’s own sonship. It is the point
of impression, that this relation intensifies the guilt of the people’s unfaithfulness and
rebellion, just as Absalom’s relation, as son, to David aggravates the criminality of his
deceptions and his revolt. In addition to the actual relation of father and son, the text
suggests the exceptional goodness and considerateness of Israel’s Father-God. He had
brought the nation to its maturity, and given it a high place among the kingdoms.
And still the extreme painfulness of sin is not its breaking of law, its insult to kingly
majesty, or the necessarily bitter consequences that must attend upon it; it is its filial
ingratitude, its dishonour of the sacred claims and duties of sonship. All heaven
and earth may be called to see this shameful sight—children turning against their
father.

I. THE SIN OF THE UNFILIAL SON. Dwell upon its characteristic features. We
estimate the motive and spirit of the wrongs rather than the precise nature of the acts.
Show the ageravations of such sin. Every persuasion of dependence, love, and duty
must be pushed aside ere unfilial sin can become possible.

Il. Irs possIBLE EXCUSE IN AN UNWORTHY FATHER. This is the only excuse that
can be urged, and this does not count for much. The natural relation sustains the
demand for obedience, and nothing can conflict with parental law save the supreme
law of God. If even parents command what is contrary to God’s revealed will, we
must obey the Father in heaven rather than the father on earth. Illustrate how
this conflict of the human and Divine law was the burden of the Greek dramas. Short
of this, obedience must be fully rendered, even when fatherly requirements cannot be
approved.

Ill. THe ABSENCE OF ALL SUCH EXCUSE WHEN THE Fatuer Is Gop. His will is
right, is love. Apprehend what he és. Apprehend what he hus been to our forefathers


26 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. 1. 1—31.


nee


and to us. Realize the “ goodness” of bim in whom our breath is, and wnose are all
our ways, and then the unspeakable iniquity must be to grieve him, disobey him, and
revolt from him.—R. T.


Ver. 5.—The foolishness of increasing Divine judgments. The plea of the prophet
appears to be this: “ You have run terrible lengths in sin; and you have seriously
suffered from the conseqnences of sin; now why will you bring down fresh judgments
upon your head through persisting in your infidelity ” (comp. Ezck. xviii. 31)? So
serious, indeed, had been the penalties of transgression already that there seemed to be
no part of the body politic upon which another stroke might fall; new inflictions must
come upon old sores and wounds. “The two noblest parts of the human body are here
selected to represent the body politic; and the extreme danger to which it was exposed
is significantly set forth under the image of universal sickness and languor. There
were no parts which did not suffer from the calamities which sin had entailed.”
Remember the expression of St. Paul (Rom. 11. 5), “ After thy hardness and impenitent
heart treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the
righteous judgment of God.”

I. ALL SIN» ARE FOLLOWED BY JuDGMENTS. We say, by consequences; and we even
admit that they are usually “unpleasant ” consequences; but we must go further and
admit that every sin—be it neglect, or be it wilful disobedience, whether it concern
the individual or tie community—is attended by its appropriate and necessary result,
and that this is always the Divine judgment. Sorrow waits on sin. Suffering follows
sin. Mucal deteriyration is Diyine judgwent. Painful circumstance is Divine judyment.
The old world sins, and comes under the judgment of the Flood. Sodom sins, and
comes into the judgment of the l)ivine fires. David sins, and quarrel and cyrge
break up his family and break his heart. Judgment always links on to sin, and no
human power can snap the uniting tie. If we will enjoy sin we must bear suliering.
Illustrate by the pagan conceptions of the Furies and the Fates. Something bad grows
out of all sin; and “‘ whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.”

Il. ALL JUDGMENTS ARE CHASTISEMENTS. It is impossible to assuciate punishment,
as a mere excrcise of tyrannical power, with God the great Fatler. In the long run, or
in the short run, all Divine judgments must be proved to have been remedial in their
design. It is quite beyond our province to decide to what extent tbe free-will, the
self-will, of man may resist the remedial purpose of God’s judgments. All we can say
is, that a father’s punishments must be, at the very heart of them, chastisements;
and that the plea of the passage before us rests upon the fact that God had been smiting
in order to correct, and was deeply grieved because his correcting purpose had hitherto
been so successfully resisted. Illustrate how epidemics and plagues, following upon
sanitary sins, are designed to correct sanitary evils. The same applies in moral spheres.
From this point a review of God’s dealings with us in our past lives may be taken, and
we may be searchingly reminded how we have resisted the remedial intluence of God’s
chastisements.

IIL. RerusaL TO LEARN BY CHASTISEMENT IS FRESH 8IN. This the prophet pleads.
“ You are further grieving God by this, that you will not be humbled; you will not
Jearn; you will not let him lift his judgmenis off you.” Illustrate by the hardened boy
who will not respond to his father’s punishment. That hardened resistance is a
fresh sin.

[V. FRESH SIN INVOLVES FURTHER AND WORSE JUDGMENTS. Before, the judgment
was but to reveal the evil character of the sin; now, the judgment has to bear upon
the heart-hardness, and it must be more searching and severe. ‘The secret of more
than half our calamities and afflictions is, that they are second and sharper strokes
because we would not heed the first. Israel was swept away into captivity at last,
because she would resist the smaller national calamities that were gracious Divine
persuasions to repentance. In a great measure it is true that our life-troubles are in
our own hands. We suffer so much because we are such dull and unwilling scholars in
the school of God.

V. THE WORST OF ALL WOES WOULD BE THE SUSPENSION OF DIVINE JUDGMENTS,
There is no more terrible conception than that ordinarily awakened hy the passage
“Ephraim is joined to his idols, let nim alone.” The unspeakable calamity for a


Oz, 1, 1—31.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. on


man or for a nation would be for God to lay down his chastening rod, and stop his
judgments. There is hope for us so long as he will smite.—R. T.


Vers. 11—13.— Mere ceremonial an offence to God. What a painful sight it would
be to see some of our houses with the fronts off !—to look into the abodes of vice; to
witness the impurity and profanity, and wretchedness and wild licence, and seething
corruption of our large towns! That sight we may escape, but we must see ourselves
with the fronts off—those false fronts with which self-worship hides the truth from
view. We must look behind the gaily painted scenes of a decent moral life and
conformity with outward social laws, We must know our souls if we would know
ourselves. Isaiah seeks to lay bare to the view of Israel their transgressions, by
lifting off them that covering of religious service under which they tried to hide the
truth of their moral state. That is the burden of this first chapter. The people drew
near to God with the lip, but their heart was far from him. Their relations to the
worship of God in the temple were anxiously maintained, but with that they thought
to be satisfied; and, while keeping up the ceremonials, they “followed the devices and
desires of their own hearts.” Jehovah declares that the merely formal service of the
impure is an abomination unto him. Tulse very sacrifices and offerings which were
his delisht, became hateful to him when offered with unclean hands, and when no
loving, trusting, obedient hearts found expression through them, “1 cannot away
with iniquity and the solemn meeting.”

I. THE PossIBILITY OF UNITING TOGETHER INIQUITY AND THE SOLEMN MEETING. At
first it may seem as if that were not possible. Surely conscience will prvvent men
from joining in religious worship who are indulging in open sin. Perhaps this is the
real reason why so many people around us stay away from worship. But it is a fact
that many of the worst men have kept, all through their lives, in outward association
with religious worship. In the times of the old monasteries you might have listened
to the solemn services and heard the monks breathe out strains of holy music set to
holy words. You might have seen priests in gorgeous garments waving incense and
uplifting the symbol of the Redeemer. They were prccise in all prayers, minu'e in all
ecremonial, And many of them were faithfil and true men. But History writes one of
her saddest pages abont many of them. They were given over to gluttony, drunken-
ness, and immorality, and were uniting “iniquity and the solemn meeting.” This is
even a possibility for our own times and for ourselves. Many of us, if we were conscious
of heart-sins and lifesins cherished and layed, would only become more exact in
religious formalities, trying to cover up the wrong and hide it, as far as possible from
our own view. We do religiously somewhat ax Cain did when he hid his murdered
brother in the ground, and then st vigorously to work in his fields, tryiny, by sheer
earn:stness in work, to persuade himsclf and to persuade others that he knew nothing
whatever of his brother’s blood. We are not, however, so likely to unite the open
forms of iniquity with the solemn meeting as we are the more secret forms, the inner
heart-sins, which may be cherished without disgracing us before God; sich sins as:
1. The unforgiving spirit. To fail to forgive is to sin. 2. Backslidings and lustings of
heart: proud, selfish, sensual, corrupting thoughts, “ Asa man thinketh in his heart,
so is he.” And the God to whom we offer worship is the Heart-searcher, the Thought-
searcher. 8. Openness to the vanities of the world. 4. Occasional yieldings to tempta-
tion and self-indulgence. Many indulge the idea that, if their indulgences do not
become habitual, ‘hey need not interfere with their religious worship. lead the Divine
requirement as given in Ps, xxiv. 3—5.

Il. Tue view Gop TAKES OF UNITING INIQUITY AND THE SOLEMN MEETING. “TI ain
weary to bear.” “I cannot away with.” “It is an abomination to me.” We should
clearly distinguish what it is which is thus hateful to God. It is not the sacrifice, or
the offering, or the solemn meeting. God takes delight in those places and in those
services in which his Name is recorded. They are the highest things that can engave
human attention, the seasons in which man transcends the earthly and anticipates the
hallowed occupations of heaven. They are the times in which man ought to be the
truest, the most sincere, the most himself; all cloaks, all hoods, all masks, all pride,
ought to be laid aside whenever we pass the threshold of God’s sanctuary. — Naked,
guileless, oven souls alone may stand before the all-holv Lord. The thing which is so


28 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. {cu. 1. 1—31,


a


hateful is the separation between a worshipping and an obedient heart. God has
encouraged outward worship, that it might express, and strengthen while it expresses,
the love and trust of an obedient heart. The husk becomes worthless when the worm
of self and pride has eaten out the kernel. The dress is hideous which no longer
clothes a warm living body, but covers, and scarcely hides, the skeleton of rebellion,
The voice is hateful that is only a voice, and utters no joy, no trust, no love of the
heart. Be true in thy worship, be spiritual, and God will look down on thee with
delight and acceptance. Be formal, be insincere, and God will frown thee from his
presence; from thine hands he will reject the costliest sacrifices and the grandest show
of devotion. Our cherished sins will as surely be an offence to God as were those
which are referred to in this chapter. Ours, indeed, are not sins of violence and blood,
but rather sins of secret indulgence. We have seen the light of the sun as effectually
hidden by thin light mists as by black thunder-clouds. And God’s face has often been
hidden by the mists of little transgressions. He notices sins of will. He observes sins
of inadvertence. He sees sins of neglect. He reckons sins of nourished evil thoughts.
More souls have died away from the love of God through the subtle plague-breath of
little heart-sins than have fallen under the strokes of temptation in open conflict with
evil. And what shall we do, if it is revealed to us that secret evils have come in upon
our souls, and that the devil’s work of woe has been progressing in us, and the work
of God’s grace in us is flagging and failing? What shall we do if we can detect stains of
secret disobediences, unforgivings, and self-indulgences? Let us not stay away from
worship; but let us at once obey in this: “‘ Wash you, make you clean; put away the
evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil; learn to do well.”—R. T.


Vers. 16, 17.— Conditions of Divine acceptance. The prophet has been dealing with
the insufficiency of mere ceremonial as a ground of acceptance before God. He is
equally severe on mere professions of penitence, that find no adequate expression in
changed moral conduct and hearty return to the rules of duty and charity.

I. Iv wouLD BE MISCHIEVOUS TO ACCEPT THE HARDENED. Mischievous for the har-
dened themselves, who would be made yet harder by a goodness they could not fail to
misunderstand. Mischievous for all others, in whose minds moral distinctions would
be confused, and the Divine righteousness sullied. Under no pretence, by no equivo-
cations, through no disguises, can God possibly accept the guilty and impenitent. In
this, as in all else, the Judge of all the earth will do right.

II. Ir Is HOPELESS TO ACCEPT MERE PROFESSORS. For they are self-deluded, and
would be kept from awakening to their true state, if God accepted them as they are.
The man who is satisfied with profession, and fails to aim at vodly living, can never
appreciate Divine acceptance or rightly respond to it. Divine acceptance is one great
help to righteousness, and this the professor neither admires nor seeks. What good is
it to accept professors? God cannot get beyond their fine outer shell. They are apples
of Sodom, acceptable neither to God nor man. “He that doeth righteousness is
righteous, even as he is righteous.”

III. Gop accEprs ONLY THOSE WHOSE PENITENCE FINDS EXPRESSION IN EFFORTS TO DO
RIGHT. ‘They only show that they are sincerely desirous of help; and they only are
in a moral condition to receive, and to use well, Divine forgiveness and favour. Show
how intensely practical the plea is in the text: “ Put away just those very sing
that you have been so freely indulging in. But do not be satisfied with any mere
negation of evil; seek opportunities of doing justice; take care to blend justice with
charity ; do the right, and do the kind to all those who cannot right themselves.”
Goodness as a sentiment is of little value. Goodness as a life God looks for, and man
asks from his fellows. “I will show thee my faith by my works.”—R. T.


Ver. 18.—Reasoning with God about our sins, Conceive a man respcnding to this
ae what may we think he would say to God, and what may we suppose God would
reply

I. First puea. “Thou art revealed as the great God, inhabiting eternity, whose
Name is Holy; who art of purer eyes than to look upon iniquity. T am afraid thou
wouldst not concern thyself about the sin, much less about the forgiveness, of such
creatures as we are.” What is God’s answer? “I have a great interest in that little


‘


CH. & 1—31.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 29 «
a


world where you dwell. I have given you many proofs of it. I have bidden my great
sun to shine on you, and quicken life and beauty everywhere around you. I am coming
down continually in the rains and winds that provide food for you, coming down to
attend your steps and ward off evils from you. It is quite true that by me even ‘the
very hairs of your head are all numbered.’ If I take such interest in you, should I
not concern myself about your sin, the worst of the evils that gather about you? Do
you think I could temper the storms and the sunshine, keep away pestilence and blight,
and not strive to take away sin? And there is something more: I am ‘merciful and
gracious, slow to anger, and of great kindness.’ You know that I am Light, Power,
Majesty, King, Judge. But you do not really know me till you know that I am Love,
and love will spend itself until every stain is cleansed from those whom it loves. My
love sends forth streams that wash away sins.” When love opens the cleansing fountain,
what can we do but


“Plunge into the purple flood,
And rise into the life of God”?


II. Seconp rrEa. “TI read that thou hast given a great Law, by which thy creatures
are to be judged. ‘The Law is holy, and the commandment holy and just and_ good,’
Thou hast said, ‘The soul that sinneth, it shall die.” I do not see how thou canst keep
thy justice and thy truth, and yet blot out my scarlet, my crimson sins.” What is
the reply? “It is indcved the mystery of mysteries, but love has solved it. I can be
just and justifying. 1 have set forth my dear Son as your Sin-bearer, your Substitute,
the Propitiation for your sin. In his righteous life, by his vicarious death, my Law is
magnified and shown to be honourable. Not a stain can even seem to be upon it after
such an obedience as Christ rendered, if I did gather every sinful creature into my love
and heaven. I have myself put such an eternal honour upon Law by permitting my
Son to submit to it, that none can ever doubt the transcendent glory of my justice.”

Ill. Tuixp piesa. “ But my sins are so great, so aggravated, it seems to me as
though such sins as mine cannot even be atuned for; even if atoned for, I think I
should never be able to hold up my head for very shame.” Some of us know what
scarlet sins mean, crimson sins, sins of deepest die. What is God’s reply? “I have
provided for the uttermost of sin in the infinite merit of my Son. His worth outweighs
all sin; it can cover and blot out the deepest crimson stains. His sacrifice sends up
such a fragrant incense to me that I can freely pardon all your iniquity. If his robe of
righteousness cover you, I shall not see any of those stains; I shall accept you in
him.”

IV. Fourts puza. “ But my sins are not just acts of wilfulness and rebellion, they
are the habits of my life, the neglectings and self-servings of my life. I hear of rolling
sin as a sweet morsel under the tongue, and that is just the way with me. If I were
forgiven, I fear I should just go on sinning still.” But God answers, “I have provided
also for this. I will pour out of my Spirit upon you; and to them that have no might
he shall increase strength. He shall be Teacher, Guide, Comforter, Earnest, and Seal.
He shall be with you always.”

V. Firru pura. “ Even if my scarlet sins are made like wool, and my crimson sing
like the snow, | fear I shall never be able to return anything for such grace abounding.”
What a wonderful reply God makes to you, closing up your mouth and humbling you
in the very dust! “ Not for your sakes do I this, O house of Israel, but for mine own
Name’s sake.” Truly that is a wonderful answer, It is like God coming to us, opening
the fountain of his being, and saying, “ Look in, look long, and peer into the depths.
Iam love.” There is all the secret. Love saves, Love saves even those who never can
hope to make worthy returns for love-—R,. T.


Vers. 19—23.—Unrighteousness a nation’s curse, Comp. Prov. xiv. 34, “ Right-
eousness exalteth a nation; but sin is a reproach to any people.” The prophet is pic-
turing the corrupt state of the metropolis, and contrasting its present moral degradation
with the high and honourable character which it had formerly sustained, The following
points may be illustrated, and the lessons of them enforced.

L UNRIGHTEOUSNESS IN THE LEADERS IS THE CURSE OF A BAD EXAMPLE. ee.


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


30 [cx. 1. 1—22,


by the mischievous influence of a corrupt court and aristucracy, and by the discontent
produced by corruptions of the fountains of justice.

II. UnriGHTEOUSNESS IN THE PEOPLE ENFEEBLES THE NATIONAL LIFE. Illustrate by
the effect of prevalent sensuality on the morale of soldiers. The moral degradation of
France was the secret of her weakness when struggling against Germany. A nation’s
manhood sinks under the power of self-indulgence and sin. ‘his was strikingly illus-
trated again and avain in the history of God’s people Israel. When they were idolatrous
and immoral they were weak before their foes. Virtue is strength.

II]. UnrigHTEOUSNESS PREPARES THE WAY FOR NATIONAL EVILS. Both for such as -
are internal and for such as are external. Family life, society, religion, all are affected.
Ordinary checks are removed. The sense of common weal no longer binds men together
to seek national interests. And the “enemy coming in like a flood” finds no “standard
of the Lord lifted up against them.” Illustrate by the iniquities wrought by and
encouraged by Hophni and Phinehas, and the consequent despising of Jehovah’s
worship, and inability to stand before the nation’s foes. Nobody from outside can
really hurt a nation. Nations hurt themselves by permitting vice and iniquity to run
riot. Show what are the features of modern city sins, country sins, national iniquities.
These are our peril, our woe, our curse. Against these every servant of the Lord must
strive and plead and fight. Nations can build national life securely on no other
foundation than this—morality, righteousness, the clean heart, and the clean hand,
—R. T.


Vers. 24, 25.—Hope in God’s refinings. Cheyne translates, “Ha! I will appease me
through mine adversaries, and avenge me on mine enemies, and will bring back my
hand upon thee, smelting out as with lye thy dross, and will take away all thy lead-
alloy.” The “lye” referred to is potash, which was used as a flux in purifying metals.
Calamities, diseases, bereavements, failures, anxieties, are God’s refining forces, but
their influence for good depends on the state and condition of those to whom they come.

I, CaALAMITIES OF LIFE TO MEN STANDING ALONE. Without any faith in God, or idea
of the gracious meaning there is in earthly trouble. How such men fret and chafe, and
question why they have to suffer, and give way to rebellious thoughts! ‘Too often
troubles only harden them, and drive them further still from God.

II. CaLAMITIES OF LIFE TO MEN UNDER Gop’s wRATH. These must take intense and
severe forms. They must first crush and humble, breaking down proud wills and
rebellious spirits. ‘They must first look like overwhelming judgments, and then, if men
will respond to them, they shall seem to be gracious chastisements and retinings.

III. CaLaMITIES OF LIFE TO MEN UNDER Gop’s MERCY. This opens the whole subject
of God’s refining and purifying of his people. We all have so much tin and dross
mingled with our gold, and it is so good of God that he will not let the dross stay.
With his “ fires” and his “lye” he will graciously refine us, until all the dross is got
away, and his image shines clear on our purified gold. And God’s dealings with indi-
viduals may be illustrated by his dealings with nations, and especially with his own
favoured nation.—R. T,


Srorion IL Dernunoration or Gop’s JUDGMENTS UPON HIS PEOPLE (CH. IL.—vV.).


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER IL


Ver. 1.—TiT.z or THe CHapter. It is
generally allowed that the heading belongs,
not to this chapter only, but toa section of
the work, beginning here and ending at the
close, either of ch. iv. or of ch. v. It is
arobable that the section was originally
published separately.


Vers. 2—4,—PropHrcy or THE Last
Days. The resemblance of this prophecy
to Micah iv. 1—3 is so close as to neces-
sitate the conclusion eitlier that one of the
two prophets copied from the other, or that
both copied from an earlier document. The
latter view, which is that taken by Rosen-
miiller, Maurer, De Wette, Meier, and Mr.

| Cheyne, seems preferable.


oH. 11. 1—22.]


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 31


a ae ee


Ver. 2.—In the last days; literally, in the
sequel of the days; but generally used of a
remote future (Gen. xlix. 1; Numb. xxiv.
14; Deut. iv. 30, etc.). The mountain of
the Lord’s house; #.¢. the Church, the true
Zion, which is to be the antitype of the exist-
ing Zion, and is therefore given its material
attributes. Spiritually, it would be a
“mountain,” as “a city set on a hill,”
which “could not be hid” (Matt. v. 14);
and again, as occupying a position from
which it would command the whole earth.
In the top of the mountains; rather, at the
head of the mountains ; i.e. with pre-emi-
nence over them. Tle metaphor is drawn
from the common physical fact of a high
mountain range culminating in a sinvle
supreme eminence. So Mount Hermon
towers above the rest of the Antilibanus,
Demavend over Elburz, Rowandiz over
Zagros. The “mountains” above which
the true Zion shail tower are the kingdoms,
or perhaps the religions, of the earth. All
nations; literally, all the nations; i.e. “all
the nations of the earth” (comp. Ps. Ixxii.
11). Shall flow; or, stream. A constant
accession of converts from all quarters is
intended. These are represented as con-
tinually streaming upward into the holy
mountain of Gud’s house.

Ver. 3.—Many people; rather, many
peoples. Shall go; or, set forth. The pro-
phet means to represent the nations as en-
couraging one another on the way. There
is no jealousy among them, for the ‘‘moun-
tain” can hold them all. He will teach us.
The nations feel their ignorance of Ged,
and their need of “teaching.” God alone
can teach them concerning himself (Rom.
xi. 33, 34; 1 Cor. ii. 10, 11); and “he will
teach” them, either directly, as the In-
earnate Son, or indirectly through those
whom he has appointed to be “teachers”
(1 Cor. xii 28). Of his ways; 7.e. “some of
his ways,” not “all of them;” for at pre-
sent “we know iu part” only (1 Cor. xiii.
9), and the greater portion of his ways are
“past finding out” (Rom. xi. 33). The
“ways” here spoken of are, no doubt, rules
for the conduct of life, which are practically
inexhaustible. God, however, will teach
every man, who honestly seeks to learn,
enough to enable him to “walk in his
paths.” Out of Zion shall go forth the Law;
rather, instruction, or teaching. The word
(torah) is without the article. The instruc-
tion intended is that of the Church of God.

Ver. 4.—He shall judge among the na-
tions. This is clearly not yet fulfilled.
How God shall ultimately “judge among
the nations,” or rather “between nation
and nation,” is a mystery which only the
future can reveal. It has been supposed
that “by his providential retributions he


will decide those international questions
out of which war ordinarily springs ” (Kay).
But it would seem to be at least as likely
that he will bring the nations to such a
pitch of wisdom and moderation, that they
will voluntarily discard war, and agree to
decide any disputes that arise by means of
arbiters. The arbiter would then, like
other judges, represent God, and “ by him
decree justice” (Prov. viii. 15). Shall re-
buke. Rosenmiiller translates, “ Arbiter
pacis sit;” Cheyne, “shall arbitrate.”
Here again, as in ver. 3, “ people” should
be “ peoples.” They shall beat, etc. On a
sudden call to war, nations “beat their
ploughshares into swords, and their pruning-
hooks into spears ” (Joel iii. 10). They will
do the reverse “in the latter days,’ when
God shall have “ade wars to cease” (Ps.
xlvi. 9) and “ speak peace unto the nations”
(Zech. ix. 10). ,

Vers. 5—11.—Tue ContTrastT OF THE
PRESENT WITH THE FuTuRE. Having shown
to Israel the vision of a far-distant future,
when holiness and peace would reign upon
the earth, and “the mountain of the Lord’s
house” would draw all men into it, the
prophet returns to things as they are—first
exhorting Israel to “walk in the light of
Jehovah” (ver. 5), and then showing how
far they have withdrawn from the light; (1)
by magical practices (ver. 6); (2) by com-
mercial greed (vers. 6, 7); (3) by ostenta-
tion and luxury (ver. 7); (4) by idolatry
(ver. 8). Such being the case, punishment
must come—mean aud great must be equally
brought low (ver. 9)—the people must fly to
their cave-fastnesses (ver. 10), and hide
themselves; they must be humiliated to
the uttermost (ver. 11).

Ver. 5.—O house of Jacob. ‘House of
Jacob ” is the common expression in Isaiah,
instead of “ house of Israel” (see ch. viii.
7 xo205 KIVe lL | xxix 22s xiv. 3s Xvi Ls
lviii. 1). It has no particular force, merely
signifying “ Israelites.” Come ye, and let us
walk. The same words as those of the
“nations” in ver. 3, “Come ye, and let us

o up.” As the nations will invite each
other ‘in the last days,” so the prophut
now invites his countrymen to walk with
God.

Ver. 6.—Therefore; rather, for. The
prophet, in calling upon Israel to “ walk in
the light of the Lord,” implies that they
are not so walking. He then proceeds to
give the reasonsof this. They are not, “ for
God has forsaken” them, or, “cast them
off.’ The first reason is because they be
replenished from the east (Revised Version,


32 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


mT


“they be filled with customs from the east) ;
i.e. they have adopted a number of Syrian,
Assyrian, and Ammonite superstitions; e.g.
high places, images, and “groves,” the
burning uf their children in honour of Mo-
loch, the use of divination and enchant-
ment, ete. (2 Kings xv. 4; xvi. 3, 4; xvii.
10—12, 16,17, etc.), Most of these prac-
tices reached the Israelites from Syria,
though many had their origin either in
Assyria or Babylonia. Soothsayers, like
the Philistines. The “diviners” of the
Philistines are mentioned in 1 Sam. vi. 2.
By the word here employed, it would seem
that they foretold the future from observa-
tions on the clouds and the general appear-
ance of the sky. During the reign of Uz-
ziah, the Israelites had been brought into
closer contact with the Philistines than
usual, through his conquest of several of
their cities (2 Chron. xxvi. 6). They please
themselves in the children of strangers;
literally, strike hands with the children of
strangers (comp. Job xxvii. 23). This is
thought to refer to striking hands upon a
bargain (Cheyne), and to be an allusivn to
the commercial activity of the reigns of
Uzziah and Jotham (2 Kings xiv. 22; xvi.
6). But perhaps it does not mean more
than familiarity.

Ver. 7.—Full of silver and gold. The
results of the commercial activity—not evil
things in themselves, but probably acquired
by sharp dealing, and leading to undue
softness and luxury. The Law had given a
warning against “greatly multiplying silver
and gold” (Deut. xvii. 17). For the fact
of the vast abundance of the precious
metals in Judea at this time, see 2 Kings
xiv. 16; xx. 13; 2 Chron. xxxii. 27; and
compare Sennacherib’s inscription on the
Taylor Cylinder (‘Ancient Monarchies,’
vol. ii. p. 163, 2nd edit.), Full of horses
.. Chariots (comp. Micah y. 10) There
is no reason to believe that the Jews or
Israelites ever possessed (unless it were
under Solomon) any considerable cavalry
or chariot force. But from the time of
David horses and chariots were imported
for convenience and for show by the kings,
the princes, and the nobles (see 2 Sam.
xv. 1; 1 Kings iv. 26; x. 28, 29; xxii $1;
Eccles. x.7). Like the silver and the gold,
they were signs of luxury and ostentation,

Ver. 8.—Full of idols. The historians
declare that both Uzziah and Jotham main-
tained the worship of Jehovah and dis-
allowed idolatry (2 Kings xv. 3, i; 2
Chron. xxvi. 4; xxvii. 2), so that we must
regard the idol-worship of the time as an
irregular and private practice. (It is, per-
haps, alluded to in 2 Chron. xxvii. 2; and
the fact of its prevalence is stated in Amos
ii. 4; Miceh y. 13.) Perhaps Bishop Lowth


(ox. 11. 1—22.


is richt in regarding it as mainly a con-
tinuation of the old private teraphim-wor-
ship (‘ Notes,’ p. 25).


Ver. 9.—And the mean man boweth
down, etc. So Ewald and Kay; but most
other commentators render, ‘“ Therefore


shall the mean man be bowed down, and
the great man brought low, and thou shalt
not for, ‘canst not’] forgive them”
(Rosenmiiller, Lowth, Gesenius, Knobel,
Cheyne). The transition from narrative to
threatening comes best at the beginning of
the verse.

Ver. 10.—Enter into the rock. The lime-
stone rocks of Palestine are full of extensive
caverns, to which the Israelites often be-
took themselves in times of danger (see
Judg. vi. 2; 1 Sam. xiii. 6; xxii. 1, ete.).
The prophet exhorts them to flee thither
now, but without stating what exactly is
the peril (comp. vers. 19,21). Hide thee
in the dust. Not “the dust of humilia-
tion” (Kay), but “the dust of the earth”
(Gen. ii. 7), put here for the earth itself, as
in ver. 19. For fear of the Lord; rather,
from before the terror of Jehorah. Some
awful manifestation of Jehovah’s power is
intended, its nature being still kept back
and shrouded in darkness.

Ver. 11.—The effect of the judgment
which, in ver. 9, was sxid to be the humili-
ation of high and low alike, is here declared
with special reference to the high-minded
and proud, whom it will humble more than
others. The Lord alone shall be exalted;
like a lofty and strong tower (comp. ch, xii.
4; xxxiii. 5).

Vers. 12\-22.—Tuer DesorIPTION OF THE
Day or THE Lorp. The prophet now,
having announced that God is about to
visit his people in anger (vers. 10, 11),
proceeds to describe in highly rhetorical
language the visitation itself, (1) as to its
object, which is to bring down all that
exalts itself against God (ver. 12); (2) as
to its scope—it is to be upon trees, moun-
tains, hills, towers, walls, ships, pleasant
pictures, idols (vers. 13—18); (3) as to its
practical effect, which will be to alarm and
terrify, to make men fly and hide them-
selves, and to produce contempt of the
idols in which they have so long trusted
(vers. 19—21).


Ver. 12.—For the day of the Lord of
hosts shall be upon every one; rather, For
the Lord of hosts shall have a day upon
everything. The passage is exegetical of
“that day” in the preceding verse. A
“day ”—or time—is certainly coming which
shall be emphatically * the Lord’s ”—a day
on which he will descend to judgment.


cH. 1, 1—22.]


Proud . . . lofty . . . lifted up (comp.
ver. 11). “The ideas of eminence, pride,
and opposition to God melt into each other
in the Old Testament” (Cheyne). And he
shall be brought low; rather, that it may
be brought low (80 Gesenius and Cheyne).
Ver. 13.—Upon all the cedars of Lebanon.
It is usual to take this metaphorically; and
no doubt men are often compared to trees
in Scripture (Ps. i. 3; Jer. xvii. 8; Job viii.


16, 17), and “cedars of Lebanon” espe-°


cially are symbols of the great and proud.
ones (Ezck. xxxi. 3). But it has been well
observed that either all the details of the
description in the text must be taken
literally, or ali of them metaphorically, and
that the mention of such objects as “ships
of Tarshish” and “ pleasant pictures ”
pleads strongly for a literal interpretation.
The day of the Lord was upon the cedars
when Sennacherib “ with chariots upon
chariots came up to tle height of the
mountains, to the sides of Lebanon, aid cut
down the tall cedars thereof, and the choice
fir trees thereof” (ch. xxxvii. 24); and
siinilar devastation accompanied, it is pro-
bable, the other invasions of the Assyrians
(see ‘ Ancient Monarchies,’ vol. i. pp. 474,
475). Upon all the oaks of Bashan. The
“oaks of Bashan” are cvlebrated also by
Ezekiel (xxvii. 6) and by Zechariah (xi. 2).
It is quite likely that the Assyrians cut
timber in Bashan, as they did in Lebanon
end Amanus.

Ver. 14.—Mountains ... hills. It is
Sennacherib’s boast that he “‘came up to the
height of the mountains” (ch. xxxvii. 24).

Ver. 15.—Upon every high tower. Uz-
ziah and Jotliam had, both of them, paid
much attention to fortifications, and had
especially “ built towers,” both at Jerusalem
and in other parts of Ju !ea (2 Chron. xxvi.
9, 10; xxvii. 4). Isaiah means to pour
contempt on these indications of “ trust in
an arm of tiesh,” and to say that they will
be of no avail when the time of calamity
arrives. Every fenced wall. ‘“ On the wall
of Ophel” Jotham had “ built much”
(2 Chron. xxvii. 3). Hosea (viii, 14) and
Micah (iv. 11) also notice the trust of
Judah in her fortresses, and threaten their
destruction. :

Ver. 16.— All the ships of Tarshish.
“Ships of Tarshish ” meant originally
“ships built to sail to Tarshish;” but was
used by the later writers for ships of a
certain class or size (1 Kings xxii. 48;
Ps. xlviii. 7; Ezek. xxvii: 25). Tarshish
was T'artessus, in Spain, and voyages thither
were regarded as long and dangerous
(Herod., i. 103). Consequently, the ships
which were built for the Tartessian trade
were of unusual size and strength. Uzziah
hai “built [¢e. rebuilt] Elath,” in the

ISAIAH.


“paintings.”


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISATAH. 383
+p pAb a Ree es i ee e


eastern arm of the Red Sea, early in his
reign (2 Kings xiv. 22), and no doult main-
tained a flect there, as Jehoshaphat had done
( Kings xxii. 48), Elath remained in the
possession of the Jews till the reign of
Ahaz, when it was taken by Rezin, and
restored to Edom (see ‘Speakei’s Com-
mentary’ on 2 Kings xvi. 6). Upon all
pleasant pictures; Revised Version, all
pleasant imagery. The exact word here
translated “ pictures” does not occur elses
where in the Old Testament; but a cognate
word is not uncommon. From the passages
in which this cognate word occurs (espe-
cially Lev. xxvi. 1; Numb. xxxiii. 52;
Prov. xxv. 11; Ezek. viii. 12), it is con-
cluded that works of art, of some sort or
other, are intended. More than this can
scarcely be determined. Dr. Kay thinks
the term to include “scul; tures and fresco
Mr. Cheyne translates *“ all
delightful works of imagery.” ‘The senti-
ment is that the judgment of God will fall
ou the most valued contents of palaces and
grand houses, no Jess than upon the forests
and the mountains, the fortified places, and
the national navy. All will be involved in
one sweeping destruction.


Ver. 17.—The loftiness of man. This
verse interrupts the sequence of the
thoug!its somewhat awkwarily. It is a


sort of refrain (see ver. 11; and for the use
of refrains 1n Hebrew poetry, see Kxod. xv.
1, 21; Ps. evii. 8, 15, 21, 31), and perhaps
comes in for rhythmical reasons, to the
detriment of the sense.

ver. 18.—And the idols he shall utterly
abolish; rather, and the idols shall utterly
pass away. While the visitation shall fall
only paitially on the other objects precious
to Israel—the cedars, the oaks, the terraced
mountains and hills, the stronzholds, the
ships, and the works of art—the idols shall
be wholly swept away by it. It is impos-
sible to say what visitation exactly was in
the prophet’s mind ; but if we may suppose
that the Babylonian captivity came within
the range of the prophetic vision, we must
pronounce the prediction to have received
a very remarkable fulfilment in this matter,
since that calamity did put an entire end
to the idolatry of the nation.

Ver. 19.—They shall go into the holes of
the rocks, etc. (see ver. 19, which is an
exhortation to do what this verse declares
will be done). On the abundant caves of
Palestine, see note on the former passage.
To shake terribly the earth ; literally, to
affright the earth. It is not said in what
way he will affright it. The cognate
Arabic verb has the meaning “ to shake ;”
but it is not clear that the Hebrew one has
ever this sense.

Ver. 20.—In that day a man shall cast, etc,

D


34 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH,


When the idols disappoint their worship-
pers, and prove to be unable to save them,
they are treated with scorn and ignominy.
The African beats his fetish on such occa-
sions, The Israelites would fling theirs to
the moles and the bats. Idols of silver...
idols of gold (comp. Exod. xx. 23; Ps.
CXxvV. 45 cxxxy. 15° ch. xxx. 2235) xxxie/s
Hos. viii. 4; xiii. 2). A passage of Habak-
kuk (ii 19) shows that sometimes the main
bulk of the idol was of stone, which was
overlaid with a coating of one or other of
the two precious metals; but it would seem
that ordinarily the entire image was either
of gold or silver (comp. Exod. xxxii.
4, 24; 1 Kings xii. 28). No doubt it was
thought that the god worshipped through
the image was more honoured, and there-
fore better pleased, by the more costly
material. Which they made each one for
himself; rather, which they (¢.e. the manu-
facturers) have made for him. Idol-making
was a trade, as we see by the Acts of the
Apostles (xix. 24—27) To the moles;
literally, to the dig-holes. The metaphor
must not be pressed. They would throw
the idols into holes and corners, pits and
caverns, where moles and bats might be
expected to be the only visitants. Some


idea of the blindness implied in any regard
for idols may have prompted the imagery.

Ver. 21.—To go into; or, as they go into;
ie. “as they make their escape, they shall
fling the idols away.” The clefts of the
rocks (comp. Exod. xxxiii. 22, the only
other passage of Scripture where the word
occurs). The tops of the ragged rocks ;
rather, the rents, or crevices. ‘The idea of
hiding themselves from the awful majesty
of God is kept up throughout (ef. vers. 10
and 19; and see also Luke xxiii. 30).

Ver. 22.—Cease ye from man. This
verse is regarded by many as a late mar-
ginal note, which has accidentally crept into
the text (Diestel, Studer, Cheyne). It is
omitted in the Septuagint, and interrupts
the sequence of ch. iii. on ch. ii. somewhat
awkwardly. If retained, it must be re-
garded as an appeal to Israel on the part
of the prophet to give up their trust in
man, whence had flowed all their other
errors. Whose breath is in his nostrils;
i.e. “ whose life is a mere breath; who, if
he ceases to breathe, ceases to live.” For
wherein is he to be accounted of? or, for of
what account is he? Surely, of no account
at all.


HOMILETICS.,


Vers. 1—4.— Hope and fear to be both called out as motives by the preacher. Already
in the first chapter Isaiah has appealed to both motives, and while for the most part
denouncing Israel’s sins, and declaring their coming punishment, has taken care to
intersperse among these warnings announcements of a more cheerful character (see
particularly vers. 9, 19, and 25—27). Now, being about to devote almost two whole
chapters to denunciations, he prefaces them with one of the most glorious and joy-
inspiring of all his prophecies, thus setting forth a light which not all the gloom of the
succeeding sections can wholly obscure, but which casts some portion of its radiance
into their darkest places. The reasons for thus intermingling light and darkness, joy
and sorrow, warning and promise, would seem to be—

I, ON accoUNT OF THE INTERMIXTURE OF GOOD AND EVIL IN THE WORLD. Tares are
always mingled with the good seed. In no nation, in no state of society, is the whole
mass utterly corrupt. ‘There is always “a remnant.” (ch.i. 9). Nay, more—in no
man is the character wholly evil, absolutely without redeeming points, altogether wicked.
The preacher has to take care lest he “ break the bruised reed,” or “ quench the smoking
flax” (Matt. xii. 20). He must tenderly nurture what there is of good in a corrupt
society or character; and this can only be done by comforting announcements, cheerful
views, words of promise. On the other hand, never is there any state of society or
human character without some defilement of evil, some darker shades, some blemishes
(to say the least) and imperfections. Never, therefore, can the preacher dispense with
the motive of fear, Never must he give himself up wholly to “speaking smooth
things,” else will he assuredly “ prophesy deceits ” (ch. xxx. 10).

Il. ON accouNT OF THE DOUBLE DANGER OF DESPAIR ON THE ONE HAND, AND OVER-
CONFIDENCE ON THE OTHER. If all that is preached is denunciation of sin, declaration
of God’s wrath against sinners, and threatenings of his vengeance, the soul may be made
sad whom God has not made sad—the timid may be scared, and the penitent “ swallowed
up with overmuch sorrow ” (2 Cor. ii. 7). Nay, absolute despair may be produced, and
the soul lost which we sought merely to rouse. ‘To prevent such a result, it is needful
constantly to set forth, not only God’s judgments, but his mercies; not only his wrath,


oH. 11. 1—22.] THE BOOK’OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 38
SSS


_ but his loving-kindness. On the other hand, if these alone are set forth, if his justice
is ignored, if the severity of his judgments upon sinners is concealed, a feeling of over-
confidence is apt to be produced, and then carelessness and general laxity of life follow.
The wise preacher will steer clear of both dancers, will avoid alike Scylla and Charybdis.
He will make his appeal in all cases to both motives, but will dwell upon the one
or upon the other, as the circumstances of the case require. If he has reason to
suspect over-confidence, which is the more usual peril, he will enlarge on the “ terrors
of the Lord; ” if, on the contrary, he has to deal with tender consciences and souls too
timid and distrustful, he will choose topics of a cheerful character, and make his com-
fortable assurances preponderate over his warnings.


Vers. 6—8.—National judgments the result of national sins, God’s dealings with
Israel are to be viewed as a pattern of his dealings with nations generally. He has not
two standards of right and wrong, or two rules of action under like circumstances. He
is “no respecter of persons.” As he dealt with his own peculiar peuple, so will he deal,
so has he always dealt, with the other nations of the world.

I, EveRY NATION HAS ITS PROBATION. God proved Israel during the space of above
seven hundred years by the laws which he gave them, and the circumstances in which
he caused them to be placed (Exod. xv. 25; xvi. 4; xx. 20; Deut. viii. 2,16; Judg.
ii, 22; iii. 1, 4, etc.). He chastened them by foreign enemies, comforted them by
deliverances, warned them by his prophets, afflicted them by famine and pestilence,
gave them “times of refreshing.” So long as there was any hope of their repentance
and reformation, he bore with them, forgave their transgressions, prolonged their time
of trial, “ destroyed them not.” It was only after all the resources of his mercy had
been exhausted, and there was “ no remedy ” left (2 Chron. xxxvi. 16), that the destruction
fell, and the nation ceased to exist. And so it was with the other nations of the earth.
God raised them up, set each a work to do, gave them laws, if not by revelation, at any
rate through their conscience, and proceeded to “ prove them,” whether they would
work his willor no. Each fell in its turn because it rebelled against God, and persisted
in its rebellion, until God could suffer it no more. (See the example of Assyria in
ch. x. 5—19.)

II. THE PKOBATION IS CARRIED ON PARTLY BY THE BESTOWAL OF FAVOURS. Peace,
prosperity, good seasons and rich harvests, a succession of capable monarchs or ministers,
and, again, success in war, victories, conquests, and the wealth that sometimes flows in
through conquests, are, all of them, blessings which God bestows on nations with the
object of trying them. Will they be thankful? Will they make a good use of the
favours granted them? Will they maintain their equanimity, and not, like Assyria,
be unduly puffed up ? The discipline of prosperity is exceedingly trying; and under
it nations almost invariably wax wanton and proud. Israel was thus tried in the times
of David and Solomon, and also under Uzziah and Jotham (2 Chron. xxvi. 6—16;
xxvii. 3—6). Assyria underwent the probation for many centuries, from the time of
the king contemporary with Ahab to the great blow received under Sennacherib.
Egypt in early days, and Rome in later ones, had even longer periods of unmixed pros-
perity, and became proportionally “lifted up.” It is rarely, indeed, that we find any
nation improve under this kind of probation. Almost invariably there is a rapid change
for the worse.

III. THe PROBATION IS FURTHER CARRIED ON BY THE INFLICTION OF JUDGMENTS. God
has many arrows in his quiver, many plagues whereby he can punish nations, as he
showed in Egypt (Exod. vii.—xii.); but three of these stand out from the rest as the
especial instruments of his wrath—the sword, famine, and pestilence. (See 2 Sam. xxiv.
13; 1 Chron. xxi. 12; Ezek. xxxiv. 17. In Ezek. xiv. 12—21, “four sore judgments ”
are mentioned; but “ the noisome beast ” is clearly not on a par with the other three.)
On the employment of the sword to chastise Israel, see Exod. xxii. 24; Lev. xxvi. 17—
83; Judg. iii. 8,12; iv. 2; vi. 1; xiii. 1; 2 Kings xvii. 20; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 17; of
fumine, see Lev. xxvi. 19, 20, 26—29; Deut. xxviii. 22—24; 1 Kings xviii. 1—18;
Joel i: 4—20; ii. 8—11; of pestilence, see Numb. xvi. 46—49; 2 Sam. xxiv. 15;
Ezek. xiv. 19; xxxviii. 22. Of these three, famine and pestilence are the minor
scourges, and are employed to warn, to terrify, to arouse; war has sometimes the sai ne
object, but is especially used to destroy. War destroyed Assyria (Nah. iii, 2—15),


36 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. 1, 1—22.


Babylon (Jer. 1. 2—87; li. 1—58; Dan. v. 30, 31), Media (Herod., i. 127, 128), Egypt
(ibid., iii. 11—18), Persia (Dan. viii. 3—7, 20, 21), Greece, Rome. War is still God’s
last, most terrible scourge, and will remain such until the happy time, described by
Isaiah in vers. 2—4, arrives.


Vers. 12—22.—The terrors of the day of the Lord. Every visitation of man by God
is typical of his coming to judgment. “That day ” is, in its deepest and truest sense,
the day whereon Christ shall come again to judge both the quick and the dead. Of
“ that day and that hour knoweth no man ” (Matt. xxiv. 36); and the terror is increased
ty the mystery. ‘Ihe prophet sees God descend to judge Israel. The particular features
are local; but through them may be discerned without much difficulty the characteristics
which are recurrent, and which belong especially to the last and great day, viz.—

I. ABASEMENT OF THE PROUD. Earthly distinctions come to nought when the earth
itself comes to an end. Rank, titles, dignities, fail. The “mean man” and the “great
man ” (ver. 9), the highest and the lowest in earthly rank, are upon a par, when all have
to appear before their Judge. And spiritual pride is equally brought low. None but
must then feel himself a miserable sinner, a suppliant for mercy at God’s feet, with hope
only through the merits and intercession of the incarnate Son. “The loftiness of man
shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be made low: and the Lord
alone shall be exalted in that day ” (ver. 17).

II. DesrRucTION OF THE GRANDEST OF HUMAN WORKS. ‘Towers, walls, palaces, are
shattered and overturned at the great seasons of national judgments, and will fall with
a crash everywhere at the final judgment-day. The great navies of the world will
perish in the “fervent heat;” the works of art, the “pleasant pictures,” and all the
“ delightful works of imagery,” will shrivel like parchment scrolls. The accumulated
civilization of millennia will be brought to nought. Egypt’s pyramids and temples,
Persia’s palaces, Greece’s lovely fanes, Rome’s amphitheatres, Christendom’s magnificent
cathedrals,—all will totter to their base and be overthrown. Nothing will stand that
human skill, contrivance, energy, has constructed ; all will disappear, and—


“ Like the baseless fabric of a vision,
Leave not a wrack behind.”


III. Destruction OF GRAND OBJECTS IN NaTURE. The taint of man’s sin has passed
upon nature itself. Pride and vanity have employed natural pre‘ucts for self-glorification ;
the precious metals have been prostituted to sinful uses; seliishness has turned natural
beauties into private property, and either made a gain of them, or jealously secluded
them from the intrusion of ordinary humanity. Therefore Nature, as she now is, has
become unfit for the habitation of man in his regenerate condition; and “the first earth ”
has to “ pass away,” and to be succeeded by the “ new heaven and new earth ” of the
Apocalyptic vision (Rev. xxi. 1). What the exact amount of change will be, we do not
know. Many fcatures of the existing earth may remain—pure snowy summits that the
foot of man has never trod; blue glacier caves that have escaped his prying eyes; deep
forest glades preserved from the desecration of his presence by thorny jungle or im-
penetrable wealth of undergrowth; but much of that with which man is most familiar
will disappear—perhaps all that could recall acts or thoughts of sin—and the “new
heaven and new earth,” that God will create, will to such an extent supersede the old,
that “the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind” (ch. lxv. aleAs

TV. GENERAL ALARM, ESPECIALLY OF THE SINNER AND THE WORLDLY. They of
Israel fled into “the holes of the rocks, and the caves of the earth, from the terror of
the Lord, and from the glory of his majesty ” (ver. 19), At the last day, “ men shall
say to the mountains, Fall on us; and to the hills, Cover us” (Luke xxiii. 830); “Hide
us from the face of him that sitteth upon the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb ”
(Rev. vi. 16). The brightness of his presence will be intolerable to those who have
“jJoved darkness rather than light ;” and they will desire, at any rate, to flee from it,
Alas! flight will be impossible, concealment will be impossible; no rocks will offer
hiding-places to the ungodly from the presence of God. One only refuge ie possible;
but to that men must have fled before, with the heartfelt, earnest cry—


“ Rock of ages, cleft for me,
Let me hide myself in thee!”


cH. 11, 1—22,] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 87


HUMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1—4.—The golden age. I. THE BLESSED OR GOLDEN AGE A SUBJECT oF
EARLY PROPHECY. It is believed that we have in these verses a very ancient oracle,
first delivered by the earlier prophet Joel (see Joel iii. 10), and from him repeated by
Isaiah and Micah (iv. 1—4). An eternal hopefulness lived in the heart of the great
prophets, like a light shining in a dark place, amidst all the scenes of national sin and
depression. What has been said of true poetry is to be said of prophecy—it is the “light
that never shone on sea or shore; the inspiration and the poet’s dream.”

Il. A REVIVAL OF RELIGION WILL USHER IN THE GOLDEN AGE, The mountains
were earliest seats of Divine worship, both amongst Jews and Gentiles. One of the
seais of the great god of the Greeks, Mount Lycos in Arcadia, commanded, Pausanias
telis us, a view over nearly the whole Peloponnese. Zion was a small and lowly mount,
but it is to become a peak that shall overtop all mountains, the “joy of the whole
earth” (Ps. xlviii. 2), unrivalled in the majesty of its Divine associations (Ps. Ixviii. 16).
The Gentiles will make pilgrimages to this holy mountain. All this poetically
describes the commanding influence of true religion. 1. The revival of religion means
the revival of morulity. When the conscience is really awakened, the inquiry will
ever be—What must we do? What are the ways and paths of God? What are the
principles of a true, a just, and a blessed life? 2. It means social unity. In the vision
the Gentiles are seen converging with the Jews to one point—to Zion. The more deep
religion is, the more do men feel that truth is but one, thought one, spiritual worship
one. ‘The love of God solves all differences in itself. 8. True religion is a self-diffusive
power. It goes forth like light, like heat, like a fame and rumour insensibly stealing
through the air.

III. Justic—E AND PEACE WILL BE THE EFFECTS OF TRUE RELIGION. We can clearly
see that it is so from the course of history. With the progress of Christianity, the admin-
istration of justice within the sphere of each nation has become milder, because more
thoughtful, more respectful of the value of the individual life. Not only so, the idea of
international justice has gained ground. Whatever a certain school of politicians may
say, conscience does gain ground in the dealings of nation with nation. Wrong cannot
be done to the weak without censure. Nations as well as individuals are more alive to
the voice of public opinion, and more sensible of shame. In our own time, “ justice”
has again and again been the watchword of our politics, and has gained attention and
overcome the clamours of the bellicose and the sneers of tle cynical. Let us be
thankful for these things. Best of all, peace and its occupations replace war and its
waste, as true religion prevails. In this beautiful picture, or slight sketch of a picture,
we see the soldier going back to his fields, that he may turn the murderous steel into
the hoe, the share, the pruning-knife, while the arsenals and military schools are
closed (see the touch added by Micah iv. 4; cf. Ps. xlvi. 9; Hos. ii. 20; Zech. ix. 10).
It is the picture of an ideal and a future, not yet nor soon perhaps to be converted into
an actual present, except in the delightful world of holy dreams which makes the best
of our life. But for every one who works and lives in the true Christian spirit, the
picture ever more nearly tends to coincide with the reality.

IV. REFLECTIONS OF THIS PROPHECY AMONG THE GENTILES. Doubtless a large collec-
tion might be made of passaves of similar scope from the lore of other nations, Best
known are those from the Roman poets. Virgil, like Joel (iii. 10), reverses the imagery.
When right and wrong are confused, wars prevail and all manner of crimes, The
plough receives no honour ; the fields run to weeds, because the farmers have gone to
serve as soldiers, and the curved sickles are turned into the rigid sword (‘ Georg.,’ i. 506,
syq.). So Ovid: in time of war the sword is apter than the plough ; the toiling ox gives
way to the war-horse, while hoes and rakes are turned into javelins (‘ Fast.,’i. 697, 899.).
He further sketches the picture of peace bringing back the ox to the yoke, and the seed
to the ploughed land. For “Peace nourishes Ceres, and Ceres is the foster-child of
Peace.” We must reserve the further pictures of the perfection of the golden age in
the Gentile poets until we come to ch. xi. In their way they, too, recognized that so
happy a state of things could only be brought about by religion—by the returning of
men to obedience to Divine laws,


38 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, (cH. m. 1—22.


a


V. Moperw tessons. Let us “come and walk in the light of the Eternal.” In that
light the hideousness of war and of the national discords which lead to it are clearly
seen, No sound understanding can ever look upon war as other than an occasional and
dread necessity. Preaching against war may do a certain good. But practically to
walk in the light and lead others to it is better. All sides of the subject need to be
better understood by the popular mind. The most serious fallacies prevail. Were the
energies now employed in preparing for and carrying on war devoted to exploring,
breaking up, and cultivating new regions, how truly blessed the result! In fighting with
the stubbornness of nature man may find an outlet for all his pugnacious energy. The
poets should sanctify their art to glorifying the ideals of peace ratuer than those of war.
None can read these lines without being enkindled—


“ Ah, when shall all men’s good
Be each man’s rule, and universal peace
Lie like a shaft of light acro-s the land,
And like a lane of beams athwart the sea,
Thro’ all the circle of the golden year?”
(Tennyson.)


And let every earnest toiler in whatever sphere for the good of man, for the glory of
God, take these words to heart—


‘Unto him who works, and feels he works,
This same grand year is ever at the doors.”


J.


Vers. 5—10.—Purgation by judgment. The blessed age cannot yet come in. If we
suppose the prophet to have been reading the previous oracle as a sabbath lesson out of
the elder prophet Joel’s scroll, he adds the exhortation, “ Let us walk in the light of
Jehovah!” Then a sudden pause. For he calls to mind the present corrupt condition
of the nation. They cannot pass over to that new and happy condition of things as
they now are. Peace can only be the fruit of righteousness. God cannot impart
blessings for which the heart makes no room.

I. THe Reasons oF DIVINE REJECTION. ‘The nation’s practices and fashions are
inconsistent with the religion of Jehovah. 1. Wizardry, magic, soothsayiny, and
augury prevail. Thereare distinctly heathen, Philistine, practices. The Law repudiated
every kind of magic (Lev. xix. 26; Exod. xxii. 17). Such arts are described under
various names in Deut. xviii. 10, 11. The principle was in every case the same—the
attempt to gratify human curiosity and desire by unlawful means. Modern “ spiri-
tualism ” springs from the same root. The path of true science is above-ground and full
of light; that of false science is subterranean and dark. The methods of sound know-
ledge may be explained to all. The worker of good comes to the light, and hates occult
procedure which can give no account of itself. The magical spirit still works against
true Christianity, which is the “light of the Eternal.” Christian ministers become
magicians if they teach that changes can be wrought or blessins secured by the mere
administration of sacraments; or by the mere repetition of a formula, such as “I do
believe, I will believe ;” or by the artificial putting on of a particular frame of mind.
Obedience, not the mimicry of it, purity, not the representation of it, is required by God.
2. Lll-votten wealth and luxury. The people were immoderately money-loving. Like
Tyre, they heaped up silver like dust, and gold like the mire of the streets (Zech. ix. 8),


“Tll fares the land, to hastening ills a prey,
Where wealth accumulates and men decay,”


The excess of accumulation ever does mean the waste of manhood. A nation is only
healthy when the vigour of its masculine intellect goes to promote the ulterior ends of
existence. ‘Those ends are spiritual. Wealth should be prized for the sake of leisure,
and leisure for the sake of culture. When leisure hangs heavy on the business man’s
hands, it is a sign that he has been overtrained in one direction. ’Tis a sad failure to
be found fit only for grinding at the money-making mill. Such a man cannot enjoy
wealth when he has got it. We need a larger conception of the true conduct of life.


cu. 11. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 39


Cr eee


Men often lose more morally in their rest-time than they can recover in their work-
time. No unjust trading can produce real prosperity. England has gained by every
act of righteous policy, such as the abolition of the corn-laws, the slave-trade
Whatever is gain to the health of the national conscience is permanent. Every just
act is a tonic to the soul. 3. They are full of the materials for war. Their reliance is
on horses and chariots. When a nation places confidence on physical force only, it is
another symptom of moral enervation. How often has this been seen in history \' The
very existence of a great armed force is a constant provocative to war. It breeds a
martial imagination and a bellicose spirit. National jealousies are roused, and the
slightest occasion may set a continent aflame. The people must learn that Jehovah
delights not in the legs of men, .. in serried battalions, and that in proportion as they
lean on armies they are faithless to God. They must learn to say, “ Asshur shall not
save us; we will not ride upon horses: neither will we say any more to the work of
our hands, Ye are our gods: for in thee the fatherless findeth mercy ” (Hos. xiv. 3). 4,
They are full of idols, This is perhaps the worst feature of their state The prohibi-
tion of idols is grounded in the nature of our thought. The idol defines and narrows what
ought to be left indefinable. The Pheenician and other idols introduced into Israel
brought down the Divine to the forms and dimensions of the human being, and all
human passions the most sensuous could be projected upon them. And when man sees
only his idealized self before him in the sculptor’s work, he falls to self-adoration. It
was quite otherwise with the grand music and religious poetry of the prophets and
psalmists. Lofty poetic images by their very vagueness and suggestiveness lead the
mind to the truth beyond and behind them. High music and poesy we ever need in
worship; but too definite forms fetter the flight of the devout imagination. In general
idolatry means self-love, and must ever be antagonistic to pure religion. “Thus man
lowers himself, becomes unworthy to appear before Jehovah, and belong to his people.”
And judgment is inevitable; there can be no escape from it now!

II. Terrok AT THE APPROACH OF THE JUDGE. “ Enter into the rock, and hide thee
in the dust, fleeing before Jehovah’s terror, and the splendour of his majesty.” The soul
living in falsehood as its element shrinks away from the coming truth which must
annihilate it. Men’s fears represent to them at last their follies and their sins,


“ Like bats and vermin hurrying from the sudden light,
Our sordid vices far from God would take their flight.”


The eyes that were not cast down in prayer, the mien of profane impudence that
laughed at Heaven, are now shrivelled, prone in the dust now before the lonely
sublimity of the eternal Holiness. Those who made nought of God must learn that
nought can exist which does not exist in God.


“ At last we hear a voice upon the slope
Cry to the summit, Is there any hope?
To which an answer peals from that high land,
. But in a tongue no man can understand ;
And on the glimmering limit far withdrawn,
God makes himself an awful rose of dawn.”


J.


Vers. 12—22.—The day of judgment. Here follows a grand picture, in which a few
simple thoughts are set.

IL. Tue pay or Jenovan. This stands for any and every epoch of clearer light
which reveals the relative worth of things. False estimates of life and its objects have
become by custom fixed. The imagination has been under a delusion. A false idea of
greatness and goodness has become so fixed that nothing but a revolution will subvert
it. The criticism of words may be defied ; but the criticism of facts, of results,—against
this there is no appeal. There is no reversal of the judgment of events. A great day of
judgment was, for example, the French Revolution of a century ago. The falsehood of
generations was then expiated in blood. Social institutions which were bad, inhuman,
yet which those who had grown up in them regarded as impossible to alter, were effaced
in that terrible outpouring of the wrath of God, The sense amidst great wrong that the


40 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. 11. 1—22,


8


judgment of God cannot long be delayed, is expressed in the coDrmos saying, “ Things
must take a turn before long.” In the life of the individua!, every stopping-point or
turning-point at which a false way of life terminates, may be viewed as a day of judg-
ment and a day of Jehovah. ;

Il. THE DAY BRINGS WITH IT A SHOC TO HUMAN IMAGINATION. The prophet piles
up images to represent the reversal of all human ideals of greatness and Sab eee
gigantic trees of Lebanon and Bashan, the mountains and hills, the towers an a an
ramparts, the tall ships sailing Tarshish-wards (Ps. xlviii. 8), the turrets of villas an
houses of pleasure, draw down upon them the violence of the, storm. The vast and
lofty in nature and in works of art are not of more value in the eyes of God than the
small and lowly. ‘hey are hints of the greatness of the spirit, and if we give such
objects an independent greatness, we are suffering from an illusion. The greatness and
the beauty are in the seeing mind. There is not so much to be seen of the work of
God in a mountain as in a moth. “Life apparent in the small-st midge is marvellous
beyond dead Atlas’ self.” The palaces, the streets of a great city, are signs of the human
soul and its greatness, but not the truest signs. It is a common error to look for the
tokens of a people’s greatness in their buildings and mechanical achievements. But
from what source does material creation and production come? That is the ultimate
question. Our works of art are works of the flesh and of pride, or works of the spirit
wrought in humility and the love of trnth. A few such works in plastic stuff of stone,
or on canvas, or in poetic words, endure through all change. ‘That which is untrue must
fall sooner or later beneath the criticism of God and be exposed. And in the downfall
of human works the eternal God is again manifested in his supreme greatness and glory.
It is our own false imaginations which hide him from us.

IIL. THe ABANDONMENT OF THE Inots. For the idols cannot help their worshippers,
who must run to bide themselves. Yet at first they cling to them. But soon in alarm
they cast them away into any corner, any refuse-heap, any filthy haunt of bats and
moles. “'l'o cast to the bats” is as proverbial an expression in the East for throwing!
clean away as rejected rubbish, as “ throwiug to the dogs” with us. There comes a
time when men will be willing to get rid of their most precions objects so that they
may but save themselves. A secret terror haunts the false conscience, which in
moments of cle»r revelation of truth rises to an acme and becomes a panic. ‘The true
heart longs for more of God’s licht, the false can only exist behind an artificial veil or
screen. In every time larger light is appearing, truths for the conduct of life are coming
into currency ; in short, the Livine Critic of our life is making his censure felt. Alas for
those who rush into any cave at hand, plunge into obscurantism rather than face the
worst, which thus faced will prove the best !

IV. THe moran, “Cease ye from man.” If in any such day of revelation all the
proud ideals of human society may be discovered false, and cast aside as worthless; if
the time of revelation shows that we have been resting upon rotten shams; if we have
an uneasy conscivusness that it is always so;—how vain is all confidence in human wit
and work! ‘The bitter words seem to cast contempt upon every species of boast and
satisfaction. A poet of our time has wiitten a great work to show that “ our human
speech is nought, our human testimony false, our fame and human estimation words
and wind” (Browning, ‘ Ring and Book’). But how can we cease from man? We can
only know the true and the eternal through some form of human experience. The
answer is—Man merely as man, an independent fact, is nought ; he and all his pass away.
In living for himself as if there were no truth, no good, beyond, he becomes a lie. If
we see man only we see the false; if God working in and through man and his history,
we find the true in the false. Working through the false shows of sense, we may reach
the spirit of things, the mind of Gud. We leave our hold on the fugitive human fact,
“Ise if we try to stereotype it, that we may plant our foot on the constant. The Divine


“Truth is foreed
To manifest itself through falsehood ; whence divorced
By the excepted eye, at the rare season, for
The happy moment, truth instructs us to abhor
The false, and prize the true, obtainable thereby.”


J.


oun. U1, 1—22.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 41
SS a


Ver. 3.—Real religious revival. “Many people shall go and say, Come ye, and
let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob.” Here is
the tide of national feeling, no longer on the ebb, but on the flow. God is “to teach
them lis ways, and they are to walk in his paths; ” for they have found out that pleasure
gained by sin is peace bartered. Elevation of the trucst kind is to be theirs now. This
is the image of their uplifted state. They are to go up to the mountain of the Lord’s
house—the consecrated height of holiness and peace.

1, THERE IS SPONTANEITY OF LIFE. “Come, let us go.” It is no mere fashion, or
custom, or compulsion of obedience. Life always says, “Come.” I read delight here.
For what we enjoy we invite others to see. When we ascend to the mountain-top, and
see the winding river, like a streak of silver, and the village-dotted plains, we cry
“Come!” to others, that they too may delight in the loveliness of the scene. So an
varnest Christian not only says “ Come!” because of the urgency of the salvation, but

iso because of the beauty and blessedness of religion, ‘“ Oh taste and see,” he says, “that
she Lord is good: blessed is the man that trusteth in him.”

I], THere ts SACRED FELLOWsHIP, “ Let us go up.” [or religion is intensified in its
experiences by mutual faith and joy. The interaction of miud on mind and heart upon
heart in a great congregation is wonderful. “ Let us go up.” And beautiful were those
spectacles in Hebrew history, when the pilgrims went to tabernacle or temple. “'! hither
the tribes go up.” The festal caravans met each other from distant parts, as they
merged at last into oue common road to time-beloved Jerusalem. At the Feasts of
Pentecost and Passover, as in the days of our Saviour, the interest felt in these upgoings
to Jerusalem was both buman and Divine. Old frieuds met again, whilst youths
and maidens set eyes for the first time on the city and temple of their fathers, On their
way they sang the songs of Zion, till in noblest worship the gathered tribes lifted up
their praise to the Lord God of Israel.

-l. THERE Is SUBLIME PROPHECY. “Many shall go.” Yes, and in these Christian
days, Greck and Jew, bond and free, have been united in one common song of
deliverance. Missionary societies have founded Churches and schools on well-nigh
every shore. “Many shall come.” Verily, unto Christ shall the gathering of the
people be. “ Alj nations shall call him blessed.” How verified the words have been!
“For out of Zion shall go forth the Law, andthe Word of the Lord from Jerusalem.”—


W. M.S.


Vers. 1—5.—The promised future: a missionary sermon. I. Toat Divine TRUTH
WILL KNOW A TIME OF GLORIOUS ELEVATION. The “last days” (ver. 2) may be distant
cays, may be “ afar off” still, but they are coming; we are steadily advancing to them.
‘The mountain of the Lord’s house ” may be low down to-day, but it will rise; it may
be but as a hill of sacred truth obscured among the mountains of error. But God’s
high purpoxe shall surely be fulfilled in time; the day will dawn when they who gaze
upon the spiritual scenery of the world will see Zion lifting up its head far and high
above all those little hills intu which the proud peaks of falsehood will have diminished.
There is a power that can raise the hills and that can “thresh the mountains”
(ch. xli. 15).

Il. Tua?’ Irs POWER SHALL HAVE THE WIDEST POSSIBLE EXTENSION. “ All nations
shall flow unto it.” ‘lhe river of human thought, faith, hope, shall set in a strong current
to this high mountain. Divine truth shall not only gain a formal triumph over the
idolatries, superstitions, infidelities of the world, but human hearts everywhere will
rejoice in its salvation.

LIL. THAT oNE SIGN OF ITS EXALTA'TION AND EXTENSION WILL BE A PREVALENT SPIRIT
OF RELIGIOUS InQuIky. (Ver. 3.) Men will be convinced of the hollowness of their old
faiths; of the unsatisfying character of their present pleasures; of the insufficiency of
the light in which they have been walking to lead them into wisdom and_blessedness,
And they will turn to the one and only source of illumination and joy; they will say,
“Let us go up,” etc. (ver. 3). The hungry heart will cry out for the Bread of life; the
thirsting soul will pant for the living streams. When men have found—and are they not
finding more and more largely ?—that the errors into which they have wandered are but
ashes in their mouth, they will seek and they will accept the bountiful provision which
awaits them in the “ Father’s house,” in the gospel of the grace of God.


42 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. m. 1—22.


IV. THAT ONE RESULT OF IT WILL BE THE PREVALENCE OF THE SPIRIT AND OF THE
INSTITUTIONS OF PEACE. (Ver. 4.) The love of war, the institutions of war, the readi-
ness to have recourse to war, the pride and glory in military achievements which even
Christian nations are not ashamed to own,—this will disappear as the will of God takes
its due, its exalted place among mankind. The sword will give place to the plough-
share, not only in the use of the nation’s metal, but in the honour and estimation of the
pecple’s mind. And instead of a country wasting its strength and lavishing its energy
in the cultivation of the science and in the construction of the enginery of war, it will
devote its mental power to the acquisition of those arts which heal and bless and raise.

V. THAT ONE CONTRIBUTION TO ITS COMING WILL BE FOUND IN OUR OWN FAITH-
FULNESS. (Ver. 5.) If we would be sure of the dawn of this blessed future, let us take
our part, however humble it may be, in the work of enlightenment; let ws walk in the
light of the Lord. It is the critical and the censorious whose faith fails them; it is
they who have no bright visions of a coming day of glory: they are only conscious of
the clouds, and see no light in the far horizon. But those who study the will of God
as revealed in his Word, who make haste to keep his commandments, who live the
Master’s life, and illustrate his Word by deeds of helpfulness and love,—it is they who
have the assurance in their hearts that “the mountain of the Lord’s house shall be
established,” that the day will come when truth will be crowned, and “universal
peace” shall


“Lie like a shaft of light across the land,
And like a lane of beams athwart the sea,
Thro’ all the circle of the golden year.”


For it is


“Unto him who works, and feels he works,
This same grand year is ever at the doors.”


G.


Ver. 5.—The wisdom of walking in the light. The prophet inserts a parenthesis
which evidently expresses the deepest and strongest feelings of his heart. He is
oppressed with a sense of the folly of those who deliberately go astray in the darkness,
when they might walk on in the light of Divine truth toward the goal of human
blessedness ; hence his fervent exclamation, “ O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us,” etc.

I, Tue TRUTH OF GoD THE LIGHT OF THE HUMAN souL. Light is “ that which makes
manifest ” (see Eph. v. 13). And as the sunshine makes clear to us our own persons,
shows us all surrounding nature, and enables us to find our way to the objects of our
desire, so the truth of God (1) enlightens us as to our own selves, revealing our spiritual
nature and our actual character; (2) shows us the relation in which we stand to our
fellows and to our Divine Maker, revealing to us human life and human destiny; and
(3) enables us to walk in the way of eternal life, becoming that which pleases God, and
doing that which is right and good in his sight.

IJ. THE sUPREME WISDOM OF WALKING IN ITs LIGHT. Well may the man of God
exclaim with even passionate earnestness, “ Come ye, and let us walk in the light of
the Lord.” For: 1. It is the one right course to take; any other must be one of error
and of sin. 2. It is the path of progress, leading up to heights of strength, prosperity,
sanctity. 3. It is the way to abiding joy; other paths, though they may open tempt-
ingly enough and may promise keen delights, will conduct ultimately to sorrow, shame,
and death. This way, in which the light of the Lord leads us, may be entered upon
with spiritual struggle (Luke xiii. 24), may be attended with much self-denial (Matt.
xvi. 24); but it is a path of purest and noblest joy (Rom. v. 11; Phil. iii 1; iv. 4;
1 Pet. iv. 13), and it ends in everlasting glory (1 Pet. i. 8, 4).—C.


Vers. 6—21.—Retribution and its results. In this noble prophetic passage, as
charged with poetic grandeur as it is full of religious zeal, we have our thought
directed to—

I. Two HEINOUS SINS WHICH BELONG TO EVERY AGE AND CLASS. They are these:
1. Disobedience. The divination to which reference is made (ver. 6) is expressly
prohibited in the Law (Deut. xviii. 10—12); alliance with strangers (ver. 6) is also


on. 11. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 43


eee


forbidden (Exod. xxxiv. 12; Deut. vii. 2); the multiplication of silver and gold anc
of horses (ver. 7), however unobjectionable it may seem to us, was disallowed to tli
Hebrew nation (Deut. xvii. 16,17). The Jews would be under strong temptation ti
disregard these prohibitions; many of the lower ambitions of our nature would urge
them to transgression. But the clear, unmistakable “ Law of the Lord” pronounced
against these things. And as every fact, both of a brighter and a darker kind,
admonished them “ to obey the voice of the Lord their God,” they were “ verily guilty ”
in their disobedience. God requires of men, of every age and land, that they should
obey him. He will accept nothing of any kind as a substitute (1 Sam. xv. 22; Matt.
vii. 21). Our ignorance of his purpose in commanding is no excuse for our disregard
of his will. How can such little children as we are expect to fathom the wisdom of
the Infinite Father? When we set our poor judgment against his perfect knowledge,
our mistaken wishes against his holy will, we fall into the most serious sin. Our
obedience is to be intelligent and not mechanical, cheerful and not grudging, instant
and not tardy, or it will not be obedience at all. 2. /dolatry. This sin, so grievous in
the sight of God, is found in one of three forms. (1) In its most gross and degra:ling
form, as in Judwa at this period (vers. 8, 9), when both the “ mean” and the “great”
prostrated themselves before the image made with hands; or (2) in the less gross but
still degrading form of superstition in “Christian ” rites; or (3) in that which con-
stitutes its essence, viz. the giving to the creature the thought, the affection, the energy,
which are due to the Creator. In this last form we are all under condemnation. We
withhold from him whose we are and to whom we owe ourselves and all we have, the
devotion and the tribute which we reserve for our neighbours or expend upon ourselves.
This is essentially idolatrous.

II. Divine gerripution. Here are four features of it. 1. It begins in the with-
drawal of Divine favour. ‘God forsakes his people” (ver. 6). He ceases to make the
light of his countenance fall on them; their prosperity wanes, their joy diminishes,
their power declines. 2. It may well be dreaded as certain to arrive in time. “ 'lhere-
fore thou wilt not forgive them ” (ver. 9). God cannot and will not pardon the im-
penitent, and those who are disubedient or idolatrous may count on the coming of his
judgments as the most certain of all future things. 3. It is such that the boldest may
well shrink from it. ‘ Enter into the rock, and hidethee... for fear of the Lord,” etc.
(vers. 10, 19). (1) When God makes the sins of a man’s life to bring forth their natural
and fitting fruits (intemperance, dissoluteness, dishonesty, etc., working themselves out
in penury, disease, contempt, etc.); (2) when God causes special enormities to be
followed by extraordinary calamities; or (3) when he makes the hardened sinner to
confront death, judgment, and eternity ;—then does he come as One who is in “the glory
of his majesty, shaking terribly the earth; ” then does he manifest his will and his
power in such wise that the boldest and most fearless may well shrink and shudder at
his appearing. However valiant sin may show itself while the righteous Lord delays
to speak and strike, there is an hour coming when it will “call to the rocks to hide it,
and to the hills to cover it,” when it will tremble and cower at the touch of the hand
of the Holy One. 4. It is that which nothing can escape. (1) No man, “The day of
the Lord. . . every one that is proud,” etc. (ver. 12); not only the humble, but the
haughty ; not the defenceless only, but the strong and well fortified, even those who
think themselves most secure, will feel the keen edge of the avenging sword (ver. 17).
(2) Nothing. The cedars of Lebanon and the oaks of Bashan, the mountains and the
hills, the treasure-laden ships and the pleasant pictures and even the trusted idols,—
all shall feel the blow of the mighty hand; nothing too high or too strong to be beyond
its reach (vers. 13—18). a

Ill. Tue issuz. The end of Divine judgment is: 1. The humiliation of that which
is false and evil. The idols which had been so honoured are to be cast to the moles and
to the bats (ver. 20). When God appears in judgment there is a great reversal and over-
throw. That which was first becomes last; that which was highest in esteem becomes
the object of derision and contempt. 2. The exaltation of the Lord himself. “The
Lord alone shall be exalted,” etc. (ver. 17). And, though we do not gain the thought
from these verses, we may add: 3. The salvation of the penitent and the faithful.
There ts one Rock in which, if we seek its gracious shelter now, we shall then be able to
hide, and in whose shadow we shall be safe; “for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken
- 9

t


44 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. 1. 1—22,


EEE UTE yEIEISEESSEIII ESI


Ver. 22.—Trusting in man. I. Our sTRoNG TEMPTATION. We are very strongly
tempted to “ put our trust in man,” to “ make flesh our arm;” for: 1. We see signs of
strength in man. And that which is visible las most influence on our human nature.
“Tf a man loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he
hath not seen?” (1 John iv. 20). In like manner we far more readily trust the man
who is before us with visible signs of health, riches, power about him, than any unseen
force which may really be more reliable. 2. Human affection invites trust in man.
There are loving hearts around us, enclosing our spirits in the embrace of their
affection; it is natural to us to respond to their kindness, and to offer them the full
confidence of our souls. We love those who love us; and whom we love we trust.
8. Confidence is often directly offered to us and urged upon us. Those who wish—
perhaps for their own purposes—to secure our confidence in them know how to employ
successful arts to win our assurance. They virtually say to us, “Trust me, I will
ensure your good, I will lead you in the path of honour, of enjoyment, of prosperity ; ”
and it is all too likely that their blandishments or their importunity will prevail. 4. Trust
in man is contagious. We find our fellows on every hand, in every circle, leaning the
whole weight of their well-being upon the arm of men, confiding wholly in their friends
and neighbours, risking everything on their integrity; and what others do we are
tempted to do also, The frosts may have been very few and the ice may seem very
thin, but many are skating on its surface, and we think that where they have gone we
also may go with impunity.

Il. Our wispom IN 1Ts PRESENCE. lL. We should never trust man absolutely. We
are to “cease from man;” he is “not to be accounted of ” in such way as to be worthy
of our implicit trust. Of this we may assure ourselves if we will remember: (1) His
liability to mistake. The cleverest, the most learned, the most thoughtful, the most
esteemed, are wrong in some things, are often found wrong in great and grave things;
there is no man whose judgment is always sound. (2) His spiritual insecurity. ‘lhe
man who is held in highest regard may be overtaken by a storm of temptation in which
even he will make shipwreck. Men have fallen on whose security their companions
counted with unbounded certainty. Belore the friend whom we honour above all others,
there may prove to be a course which will end in spiritual declension, or even in moral
degradation. The painful facts of life pierce our theories while they break our hearts.
(8) l/s physical fragility. “Man, whose breath is in his nostrils.” Hale, strong,
capable of noble work to-day, he may be brought down to utter weakness and incapacity
to-morrow ; nay, before the sun goes down he may have drawn the last breath of life!
2. We should trust the only One who is trustworthy—even him who is the “ Truth,”
who is the “ Holy One,” who is the “ Immortal One.”—C,


Ver. 3.—The attractions of the gospel Church. The earthly Jerusalem, which was
thought of as a mountain snrrounded by mountains, but superior to them all, is in the
prophet’s mind, and it gives form to his thought of the Gospel times—the setting up of
the Christian Church, and the planting of the Christian religion in the world. Christi-
anity shall then be the “mountain of the Lord’s house,” or the “ Lord’s mountain
house,” exalted above all other religions, and made the rendezvous of all the spiritual
seed of Abraham. “The prophet sees the Church permanently placed in a conspicuous
position, so as to be a source of attraction to surrounding nations. To express this
idea, he makes use of terms which are strictly applicabie only to the local habitation
of the Church under the old economy. Instead of saying, in modern phraseology, that
the Church, as a socicty, shall become conspicuous and attract all nations, ke represents
the mountain upon which the temple stood as being raised and fixed above the other
mountains, so as to be visible in all directions ” (J. A. Alexander). T. K. Cheyne
notices an “old belief in Eastern Asia that there was a mountain reaching from earth
to heaven, on the summit of w' ich was the dwelling of the gods. The prophet is,
perhaps, alluding to this belief, which he recognizes as true in substance, though attached
by the heathen to a wrong locality.” The text may be illustrated by the custom of
the Israelites to journey from all parts of the country for the yearly feasts. Keeping
the figure of the prophet, we observe—

I, THE (OsPEL CHURCH Is LIKE A MOUNTAIN. Illustrate from the conspicuous position
of Jerusalem, or of Safed. A mountain rises up out of the plain; so the gospel Church


OH. m1. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 45
a ee


1s right in the midst of the world and the people. A mountain towers up above the
plain, within sight of all; and so the gospel Church is such a striking and impressive thing
that all eyes must be turned to it. Men cannot be blind to it; men dare not ignore it.
Like the mountain, it is an indestructible fact, of which men must take account. The
buildings erected for its worship are the symbols of itself; in every village, town, and
city, the church tower and cathedral spire rise above the buildings of the people, well
in everybody’s sight. Show that however men may think to dispel the so-called myths
that have gathered round the historic Christ, they must deal with this mountain-fact,
the gospel Church exists; it must have had a source; it must have a mission at the
heart of it. Surely it is the witness of the truth of Christ.

II. THe GospeL CHURCH IS FIGURED AS ON THE TOP OF THE MOUNTAINS. Other
religions, other social and philanthropic schemes fur the elevation of the race, may be
figured as mountains. But let them all be gathered together, and it will be found that
Christianity towers high above them all. Its origin, its character, its provisions, make
it the most conspicuous, the most important of them all. Comparisons may be insti-
tuted (1) with man-made religions, paganism, Buddhisin, etc.; and (2) with previously
given Divine religions, such as patriarchism, Mosaism, etc. The points of superiority
are such as these: 1. Revelation of God to man under the figure of Father. 2. Mani-
festation of God in the person of his Son as a fellow-man. 3. Redemption of man by
the intervention of Divine love. 4. Perfect provision for the needs of man, asa spiritual
being. 5. Adequate and final mastery of all man’s moral foes and evils. Show that
other religions touch some of man’s needs. Christianity is at the “top of the mountains,”
because it reaches them all, and deals with them efficiently.

III. THE GosPEL CHURCH ATTRACTING ALL NATIONS. They will be drawn, not forced
into it. One shall tell another of it. One shall invite another to journey to it. They
shall flow to it as streams flow to the sea. “There is an Eastern fable of a great
mountain of lodestone, out in the middle of the sea, that attracted, to their destruction,
all the ships that came near it. This mountain of the Lord’s house is a great spiritual
magnet, and it draws souls, not to destruction, but to everlasting life” (Dr. Edmond),
Illustrate (1) from the various nations attracted by the preaching of the early Church;
(2) from the power of the preached gospel in various heathen lands now ; (8) from its
proved fitness to meet the needs of all sinners and all sufferers. Jesus said, “I, if I be
lifted up, will draw all men unto me.”—R. T.


Ver. 4.— War nomore. It seems that the reign of Uzziah was famous for the invention
of new weapons of war (2 Chron. xxvi. 11—15). Isaiah, observing this, contrasts with
it the good time coming, when righteousness rules the relations of kings and kingdoms ;
and when Messiah, the Prince of righteousness, and therefore Prince of peace, judges
among the nations. If Christ really reigned, and held the allegiance of every man and
of every nation, all disputes could be settled by arbitration; if each man, and each
nation, only wants what is right and what is kind, there need be no more war.
Matthew Henry well says, “ The design and tendency of the gospel are to make peace
and to slay all enmities. It has in it the most powerful obligations and inducements

peace, so that one might reasonably have expected it should have this eflect; and it

ould have had it if it had not been for those lusts of men from which come wars and
ghtings.” Christianity has, in some measure, already triumphed over war and the
ar-spirit.

I. Ta HORRORS OF WAR ARE RELIEVED. Certainly they are so far as concerns
civilized and Christian nations. Compare ancient and modern warfare in respect (1) of
giving no quarter; (2) of unbridled licence on taking a city; (3) of the treatment of
captives; (4) of provisions for the care of the wounded; (5) of the respectful burial
of the dead. “So far as the teaching of Christ has influenced international polity and
law, he has been the supreme Arbitrator of their disputes.” “It is undeniable that
Christianity has greatly contributed to ameliorate the political condition of mankind,
by diminishing the horrors of war, promoting mutual intercourse, and advancing the
useful arts.” f

lL. THE IMPLEMENTS OF WAR ARE DEVOTED TO OTHER USES. The expression, “ beat
their swords into ploughshares,” is figurative, and what it represents is met by the fact
that commerce and manufactures advance faster tnan the making of war-tools, Time


£6 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (on. m. 1—22,
goin Ln ees Gh eS ES


was when men and energies were given to the manufacture of weapons and implements
of war, and when kings lived to make war. That is all past and gone. Only a small
fringe of human labour is related to war material; and kings have discovered that
national prosperity and national peace go together hand in hand, Contrast the life in
England under the Edwards, and under Victoria. “In such states of society as that
among the Hebrews, the peasantry, when summoned to the field, are obliged to provide
their own weapons. When, therefore, they were poor, and material for weapons was
too expensive for their resources, it would be an obvious thought to turn the plough-
share, which was thin, long, and light for such an instrumert, into a sword, which was
short and thick as compared with our sword. Wher the war was over, the change
might easily be made back again. A sword would, of course, with equal facility, be
changed into a ploughshare. Pruning-hooks may include anything employed in reaping
or mowing; such as a sickle or scythe, as well as the long knives used for trimming
vines.” Show that commerce, knitting lands together by mutual interest, is a hand-
maid to Christianity in her work of peace.

II]. THE wasre OF TIME AND POWER IN LEARNING WAR ARE CHECKED. Illustrate
from the formation of our volunteer army, the members of which give their best
energies to peacefil pursuits, and only their leisure to learning the art of war. Note
the growing feeling that the soldier-class is almost a useless class; that the money
expended on them is a waste; and that the nation suffers by having so much of her
young manhood idle, and getting into the moral mischiefs of the idle. The results we
thus can recognize have been attained by the triumph of the great Christian principles,
of peace, brotherhood, and care for others rather than for self. But we may not rest
with any present attainments; we must witness and work for that glorious coming
time, when the ideal king is to “judge among the nations,” and in reliance on his
wisdom and equity, the nations will refer their disputes to his decision, instead of the
arbitrament of war.—R. T.


Ver. 5.— Walking in the light. That is in the path of present duty on which the
light of revelation shines. The text is part of a spirited address to the Jews to avail
themselves of the privileges they had. The prospects of a glorious peace-time must not
keep them from fixing their thoughts on their immediate and pressing duty. It is right
for us to cheer our souls by the look away to rest and heaven; but we must not lose
the present opportunity in idle dreamings. The real way to win the heavenly is to live
in righteousness, in truth, and in charity—to “walk in the light of the Lord.” We
remark, in uffolding this “light ” in which we are invited to walk, that—

I, Gop Gives LIGHT BY @IVIN@ COMMANDMENTS. Illustrate from the great natural
laws written in men’s consciences and hearts. The Decalogue was in existence as
unwritten law before the finger of God traced it on the tablets. Also from the ten
commandments, as elaborated by Moses, and made to cover all the minutest details of
a Jew’s life and relations. And also from the commandments given by the Lord Jesus,
and elaborated in detail by the apostles, 80 as to apply to all the circumstances and
relations of the early Christians.

IJ. Gop Gives LIGHT BY REVEALING PRINCIPLES. These underlay Mosaism, and were
discovered by the more devout and thoughtful Jews, These were brought out to view
by the later prophets. It is the great characteristic of Christianity that it is a religion
of principles rather than of commands; and makes its appeal to the purposes and the
motives rather than to the mere ordering of the conduct. ‘lhe renewed man, in whom
the Holy Ghost dwells, should rule life by the light of holy principles.

III. Gop Gives LIGHT BY MANIFESTING HIMSELF, In the person of his Son, who is
the “ Light of the world;” “the Light that lighteth every man that cometh into the
world.” God shows us hix glory in the face of Jesus Christ; and to walk in obedience
to Christ, in dependence upon Christ, in fellowship with Christ, and in full purpose to
serve, honour, and glorify Christ, is the way to “ walk in the light of the Lord.”—R. T.


Vers. 10, 11.—Shame for the sinner. We can more easily bear suffering than
shame. Man has great powers of physical endurance. But we dread shame as we
dread nothing else. ‘lhere was the keenest distress in that old and cruel way of treating
some crim uals. They were put in the pillory. They were lifted up on a stage in the


on.  1—22.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 47
sw


market-place. A frame was fastened round the neck and wrists, which left the head
and hands exposed. Crowds gathered below, and scorned the poor man, throwing at
him all manner of vile things, and then raising the laugh at his soiled and bemired face,
The shame of such a punishment must have been very hard to bear. The chapter
before us intimates that this intenser kind of punishment, this shame and humiliation,
awaits all who forsake or neglect the living God, and serve the idols of their own
pleasure. The Law of God must indeed rise up to vindicate its claims and execute its
sanctions; it must lift up its hand to smite. but there is something more solemn than
that ; the Law shall come to the sinner himself one day. It shall look upon him with
its look of inward purity and outraged love; it shall be the look of his God. That will
be a flash of the eternal light; it will reveal to him the blackness of his heart, and
pride will be, once for all, crushed ; vain confidences will drop out of his hands, and,
putting those hands on his face, he will cry in his shame, “O rock, hide me from the
fear of the Lord, and from the glory of his majesty.” The fear of coming shame ought
to deter men from evil.

I. RIGHT AND WRONG ARE READILY CONFOONDED IN THIS WORLD. “ Woe unto those
who call evil good, and good evil,” disturbing thus the foundations of morals, and
confusing the testimony of men’s consciences. Evil and good are opposites, contra-
dictories; they meet nowhere, they blend nohow. Few men question the distinction
between right and wrong, but many ask on what ground the distinction rests; and
“Ts it possible for us men clearly to recognize the distinction?” Are there no finer
shades of circumstance which occasion difficulty and confusion? In this complicated
state of society do we not need some very clear, sharp, precise test? And is there any
such? Thereis. The right, the true, is everything with which we can associate the
presence and inspection of God, without feeling either sense of unfitness or fear. In
order to discover the contents and qualities of a substance, the chemist will add some
testing fluid to it, and by the effect produced he learns the qualities. That we can do
to test the rightness or wrongness of any act of life. Add the thought of (tod to tt.
But the fact stares us in the face that good and evil are now sadly confounded. 1. It
is often so when the movements of life are made without befitting consideration. Into
so many undertakings we are simply borne by the press of social customs, the example
of our neighbours, or the influence of excitement; and we have actually stepped over
the borderland of the right before we have quite realized our position. 2. It is often
so because the false can put on such appearances as will suffice to deceive us. “Even
Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light.” 38. And it is often so because
the wrong bias of our souls even makes us willing to see fancied goodness in the false.
So often the wrong offers a present gratification of passion, and so stills opposition and
effects its evil design.

Il. SoonER OR LATER THE FALSENESS OF THE FALSE, AND THE TRUTHFULNESS OF THE
TRUE, MUST BE MANIFESTED; and that manifestation must prove an overwhelming
shame to all who have served the false. The time of the manifestation is called “ the
day of God.” In some sense the present is man’s day. His voice is loud now; his
will is strong now; his pleasures abundant; and God seems to be still. Wrong riots,
and God seems to hold aloof. Sin rules, and in forbearance God restrains himself. And
yet the truth is that God’s day is an eternal now ; it is always close at hand. It may
be shown that God’s day comes (1) in the time of our conversion; (2) in the humbling
of our first sight of the cross; (3) in the time of the sinner’s remorse; (4) in the time
of national calamity; (5) and in what is spoken of in Scripture as “the day of judg-
ment.” Men may do in this twilight time of earth, deceiving themselves, and being
deceived, in this dim, uncertain light, this mingled shade and shine. If they want to
do wrong, it is only to push it a little further into the shadow, and then they cannot
well see what it is. But men would blush to do their wrongs in the full blaze of day.
They will hide their heads in shame when God dispels the shadows, and makes the
revealing light of his day rest on their lives.—R. ANS


Vers. 12—17.—The Lord’s day for the proud. Any time of specific judgment or
mercy is in the Scriptures called a “ day of the Lord.” The day of the Lord has come
for the antediluvian world, for Sodom, for the Canaanites, for Babylon, for Israel. It is
ever coming to nations, in the corruption or the calamity that follow on national sin.


48 TUE BOOK OF THE PROPHET JSAIAH. (cm. m. 1—22


Tt will come as long as the world endures; that is, so lorg as God needs, by external
judgments, to mark the evil of sin. The sin of all others that cal-s fur a “day of the
Lord” is pride, self-confidence, rebellious self-assertion ; and this was precisely the sin
of the times in which Isaiah wrote. Man is made for God; he was ruined when he
broke relations with God, and in self-will separated himself from God. And there is
no hope of restoration until pride is humbled. Therefore for this humbling of self God
pleads, aud to secure this God sends judgments. Henderson says, “These verses con-
tain a specification of several of the most distinguished vbjects of nature and art, in
ordcr, metaphorically, to represent the different persons or orders of men elevated by the
dignity of office, or rendered notable by their riches, or the elegance and luxury of their
establishments, whom the judgments of God would, in a more remarkable manner, hurl
into ruin.” It has been also observed that the emphatic iteration of “lifted up” is
noticeable as indicating that the prophet sees in that self-assertion the root-evil of his
time, that which was most destructive of the fear of the Lord, and most surely brought
down judgment on the offender.

1, One DAY GOD HUMBLES THE PROUD NATION. Illustrate from Babylon. Nebuchad-
nezzar exalted hiniself, and took all the glory to himseif, and Belshazzar followed him
in the same wilfulness; but a day of darkness and terror came for Babylon, of which
the handwriting on the wall gave awful warnings. Or take Jerusalem as representing
the kingdom of Judah. Puffed up with self-confidence, wilfully resisting the Divine
lead, a day of vindication and judgment at last came; her enemies poured in like a
flood; the holy city lay in ashes, and her people were either slain or captive. And it
is not without good reason that we find modern illustration of God’s day for nations in
Napoleonic France. Napoleon claiming both to “propose and dispose,” and overtaken
by God’s avenging day at Moscow and Waterloo,

II. Gop’s DAY HUMBLES THE PROUD INDIvipUAL. That day comes in such forms
as these. 1. A slip from integrity brings disgrace and ruin. 2. Masterfulness and
arrogance bring hatred, which finds occasion to injure. 38. Riches take to themselves
wings and flee away. 4. Mind becomes unsettled, as in the case of Nebuchadnezzar.
5. Sickness and bereavement come in his family. Sooner or later a day dawns in which
the haughty, self-reliant, God-despising man is touched on his sorest, tenderest place.
No man can ever be permitted to exalt himself against God and permanently prosper.
Give instances from modern life of the dowufall of pride, such as the closing years of
Squire Beckford’s life.

Ill. Gov’s HUMBLINGS, FOR NATIONS OR FOR MEN, MAY BE MELTINGS, OR THEY MAY
HAVE TO BE ORUSHINGS. ‘The result of them depends upon the way in which they are
met and responded to, That which is designed to melt may harden; and a judgment
that bruises only may be so abused, that it must be followed by a judgment that breaks.
Israel] would not be humbled by calamity after calamity graciously tempered, so it must
be made overwhelming; and Samaria was taken, and the distinct life of Israel, as a
nation, crushed out for ever. It is a thought full of painful seriousness, that the quality
and degree of our troubles depend on our response to those God has sent, as chastenings,
in earlier times. God’s hand may be heavy on us, because we have so long resisted his
pleadings and his humblings. Judgment is his strange work, mercy is his delight; but
if we resist him, further and heavier judgments are demanded by very “ mercy.”—R. T.


Ver, 20.—Man’s disjust at his idols. Yn ver. 8 the prophet had observed that one
characteristic of the times was prevailing idolatry. The men who had, in their self-will
and pride, turned from the living God, had taken up with idols, deities of their own
imagining, which answered to the devices and desires of their own hearts, and allowed
them to keep their self-will even in their religion. Divinely revealed religion and man-
made religions differ in this—the first demands the surrender? of self-will, the second
finds expressions for, and strengthens by expression, man’s self-will. That is the real
reason why men constantly fall into idolatry; it keeps them in the “ self-sphere.” The
prophet recognizes this by saying, “ Their land also is full of idols they worship the
work of their own hands, that which their own fingers have made.” ‘hen, when
Jehovah arises to vindicate himself, man is humbled, and one sign of that humbling is
sure to be, that his trust in his helpless, self-fashioned idols is broken. Tle finds out
their uselcssness when God’s testing day comes upon him, and in disgust he is ready


OH. 11. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 49
2 eee eee eee eee


to cast them to the “moles and to the bats,” creatures of the darkness, “God can
make men sick of those idols that they have been most tund of, even the idols of silver,
and the idols of gold, the most precious. The idolaters here throw away their idols
because (1) they are ashamed of them, and of their own folly in trusting to them, or
(2) because they are afraid of having them found in their possession when the judg-
ments of God are abroad; as the thief throws away his stolen eoods when he is searched
for or pursued.” Idolatry is a delusion, and when that is suddenly dispelled, the idols
will be “thrown away in haste, terror, shame, and desperate contempt by those who
had worshipped them and trusted in them.” It should be kept in mind that the
prophet’s words apply to the characteristic idolatries of civilized and modern, as well as
of heathen and ancient, times. ‘“Covetous men make silver and gold their idols.”
Worldly men make pleasure or fame their idols. Parents make children their idols.
All will be cast away when God arises to vindicate himself, and his sole claim to man’s
trust and love and life. The immediate reference of the prophet probably is to
the terrible earthquake that took place in Uzziah’s reign, and the fright which it
occasioned.

I, IpouaTry 1s pDrLuston. The calm onlooker sees that the description of idols
given in Ps. cxv. is strictly and perfectly true. But the worshipper cannot see this,
He believes his idols can really help him, and prays to them with passionate intensity.
So the man whose idol is money is deluded. He thinks his money can help him in
whatever circumstances he may be placed. But sickness comes, danger comes, plague
comes, earthquake comes, shipwreck comes, fire comes, death comes, and it is quite plain
that he was deluded. Money is a helpless idol; it cannot aid its votaries in God’s
day. Point out that the root of the delusion is self-trust; a man wants to rely on
something that he has, or that he has done, or that he has made. Blessed only is that
man whose trust is in the Lord his God.

II. SconER OR LATER THE DELUSION IS DISPELLED. Awakening days are sure to
come for us all. The apostle teaches that all our trusts and all our works must be tried
by fire; “the day shall declare them.” Illustrate the dispelling of the delusions of
idolatry : 1. By the proved helplessness of the idols. Baal’s priests and worshippers had
their eyes opened at Carmel, when there “ was none that heard, nor any that answered.”
2. By advancing intelligence. Illustrate from the influence of education on the natives
of India. Science and geography have made it impossible to believe in the legends of
their gods. ‘Ihe delusion is in great measure expelled, but a first result is infidelity.
Christianity alone can satisfactorily take the place of discarded idolatry. 3. By Divine
judgments. [Illustrate by such scenes as the earthquakes at Java and Ischia, or the
destruction of Pompeii. Or take a visitation of cholera or plague in an idolatrous land.
Churches, temples, idols, are forsaken; public helplessness and despair prepares the way
for an extension of the evil. He only can be calm whose trust is in the living God.
Impress by the contrast of the calmness and confidence of the pious psalmist (Ps. xci.)
“Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome
pestilence. . . . Because thou hast made the Lord, which is my Refuge, even the Most
High, thy habitation; there shall no evil befall thee, neither shal] any plague come nigh
thy dwelling.”—k. T.


Ver. 22.—The unreliableness of man. Some think this verse should commence
ch. iii.; but it is an exhortation naturally following on the humbling of all human
pride and the destruction of all human glory. Man at his best estate is altogether
vanity, therefore do not rely upon man. God is from everlasting to everlasting,
therefore trust him. The counsel is elsewhere given in Scripture, “ Cursed be the man
that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm, and whose heart departeth from the
Lord. For he shall be like the heath in the desert, and shall not see when good
cometh; but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, in a salt land and not
inhabited” (Jer. xvii. 5, 6). “ Put not your trust in princes, nor in the son of man, in
whom there is no help. His breath goeth forth, he returncth to his earth; in that
very day his thoughts perish.” Quick-passing breath is the symbol of fleeting life
(Gen. ii. 7; vii. 22); and the sentence of the text would better read, A Cease from man,
in whose nostrils is a breath.” ‘Trusting man was the sin of Isaiah’s age. Compare,
later on, the afflicted nation seeking succour from Egypt rather than from ee and

ISAIAH.


50 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cH. 1, 1—26


Se


therefore coming under the prophet’s reproach. But man-trusting is a characteristic
sin of owr age; and we also need to learn that there is—

I. No rrustin@ IN MAN’s PowER. That is within very narrow limits. “Let not
your eye be to the power of man, for it is finite and limited, derived and depending; it
is not from him your judgment proceeds. Let not him be your fear, let not him be
your hope; but look up to the power of God, to which all the powers of men are
subject and subordinate.” There is so much that man can do, we fail to realize, as we
should, that he fails us just at the points of our extremest need, at the times when
trouble overwhelms, heart fails, and fears are on every side. The man came to Christ
with confidence that he cowld help, but doubting his will. We may seek our fellow-
men in our troubles, confident of their good will, but full of fears as to their ability.

Il. No rRusTING IN MAN’S KNOWLEDGE. That, indeed, is vast and wonderful; and
it is ever-increasing. And yet it is uncertain; we cannot make any foundations of it.
What men call facts of knowledge are again and again disproved by the discovery of
other facts; and what men call theories give place to new theories, as fresh minds work
upon the old data, and gather new. Apart from revelation men have never found out
reliable truth respecting God, man, sin, redemption, or the future.

III]. No Trust IN MAN’s CHARACTER. The most humiliating thing in human life is
the failure from righteousness of those whom we have admired, trusted, and loved.
Character, built on self, is uncertain, and in peril whenever temptation draws nigh. In
middle life the honourable man so often fails from either (1) drink, (2) dishonesty, or
(8) sensuality, that we have sometimes felt we could say, in a moment of excitement,


as David did, “ All men are liars.”

IV. No Trust IN MAN’S EXAMPLE.
absolute model.
he was the Divine man.


It is always imperfect; it never can be an
Only one man set us an example that we should follow his steps, and
We can follow no other man wholly. We can only follow


one of our fellows so far as he follows Christ, and so we really only follow the Christ


in him.
Where, then, are we to trust ?
is everlasting strength.”


“Trust in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah
“ None of them that trust in him shall be desolate.”—R. T.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER III.


Vers. 1—7.—Gon’s JUDGMENT UPON JERU-
SALEM. The general denunciations against
Israel of the two preceding chapters are
here turned especially against Jerusalem.
God will deprive her of all her superior and
more honourable classes (vers. 1—3); and
will give her “ children ” for her rulers (ver.
4). There will be continued oppression, and
the rise of an insolent and undutiful spirit
(ver. 5). Those fit to bear rule will refuse
to do go (vers. 6, 7).

Ver. 1.—The Lord, the Lord of hosts (sce
note on ch. i. 24). The stay and the staff;
rather, stay and staff. Neither word has the
article. The latter is the feminine form of
the former; and the intention is to announce
that all support of every kind is about to be
withdrawn. The whole stay of bread... of
water. Mr. Cheyne agrees with Hitzig and
Knobel that this clause is probably a gloss
on the text, subsequently introduced into it,
and a gloss which did not proceed from a
very enlightened commentator. The ‘ stay”


and “staff” intended are certainly not literal
“bread” and “ water,” but the powerful and
respectable classes enumerated in the two
following verses. If the words are Isaiah’s,
he must have intended them to be taken
metaphorically.

Ver. 2.—The mighty man, and the man of
war; or, hero and warrior. The first rank
is given to those distinguislied in war, as
being held in the highest esteem, and per-
haps as actually, under the coming circum-
stances, the men of most importance to the
country. It is thus implied, as later (vers,
25, 26) it is expressly taught, that the im-
pending visitation will be a terrible invasions
The judge, and the prophet ; literally, judge
and prophet. The judge holds his place
as one of the highest officers of the state
(see ch. i. 26); the prophet holds a lower
position than might have been expected, on
account of the writer’s humility. The pru-
dent; rather, the diviner, as the word is
translated in Deut. xviii. 14; 1 Sam. vi. 2;
ch. xliv, 25; Jer, xxvii. 9; xxix. 8; Ezek,
xiii. 9; Micah iii. 7; Zech. x. 2; or sooth-
sayer, as in Josh. xiii. 22. Isaiah arranges
the classes, not so much according to the


on. mm. 1—26.]


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 51


—_—————eeeeeeeeee eee eee — — — — —


order in which he values them, as to that in
which they were valued by the people. The
ancient; 7¢.e. “tle elder,” as the word is
translated commonly. The “eldcrs” had
an ascertained position in the state under
the monarchy (2 Sam. v. 8; xix. 11;
1 Kings viii. 1; xx. 7; 2 Kings vi. 32, etc.).

Ver. 3.—The captain of fifty. ‘Captains
wf fifties” were scarcely at this period
“civil officers” (Cheyne). They represent
simply the lowest grade of officers in the
army (2 Kings i. 9, 11, 13). Honourable.
The same expression is used again in ch. ix.
15. It occurs also in 2 Kings v. 1 and Job
xxii. 8. The cunning artificer. “ All the
craftsmen and smiths” in Jerusilem were
carried away by Nebuchadnezzar in the
captivity of Jehoiachin (2 Kings xxiv 14;
ef. Jer. xxiv. 1). They were among tle
most valuable of the population, in time of
war no less than of peace, since on them
depended the construction and repair of the
military engines which were regarded as of
so much importance (2 Chron. xxvi. 15).
The eloquent orator; rather, the expert en-
chanter (comp. Eccles. x. 11; Jer. viii. 17).

Ver. 4.—I will give children to be their
princes; rather, youths than “children.”
The extreme youth of the later kings of
Judah at the date of their accession is very
remarkable. After Hezekiah, only one was
as much as twenty-five years old when he
came to the throne. Jehouhaz was twenty-
three (2 Kings xxiii. 31); Amon, twenty-vwo
(2 Kings xxi. 19); Zedekiah twenty-one
(2 Kings xxiv. 18); Jehoiachin, eighteen
(2 Kings xxiv. 8); Manasseh, twelve (2 Kings
xxi. 1); and Josiah eight (2 Kings xxii. 1).
Thus this prophecy was fulfilled to the letter.
And babes shall rule over them; literally,
puerilities shall rule over them; i.e. the
youths shall behave in a childish way.

Ver. 5.—And the people shall be oppressed,
ete.; rather, shall oppress each man his fellow,
and each man his companion. This would be
no new thing (see ch.i. 17, 21,23), but perhaps
might be more widely spread, having passed
from the upper classes to the lower ones, as
is usual with vices. The child; rather, the
youth. Shall behave himself proudly; or,
tnsolently. The respect for age inculcated
by the Law (Lev. xix. 32) shall disappear.
Youths shall set at nought the counsel of
the aged. The spirit of Rehoboam shall
prevail over that of Solomon, with the usual
result—rashness, recklessness, and failure.
And the base, etc. Respect for station
shall likewise disappear. The dregs of the
people shall grow insolent towards those
above them in the social scale; and thus the
old social order shall be inverted.

Ver. 6.— When a man shall take hold of
his brother. A new departure. In the
general anarchy described (vers. 4, 5) it will


be felt that something must be done. A
man will take hold of his brother (7.e. his
fellow) in his (#.e. the latter’s) father’s house,
where he lives in seclusion, and say to him,
“Thou hast clothing” (or, “ thou art de-
cently clad ”), “thou must be our ruler; let
this ruin” (de. “this ruined state”) “be
under thy band.” This ruin; literally, this
stumbling-block (see Zeph. i. 3; and com-
pare the uniform translation of the kindred
noun mitkshél (Lev. xix. 14; Ps. exix. 165;
ch. lvii. 14; Jer. vi 21; Ezek. iii. 20; vii.
10, ete.). The Jewish community is meant,
which was full of stumbling itself, and
might well cause all those to stumble who
came into contact with it.

Ver. 7.—In that day shall he swear; or,
lift up his voice—speaking with emotion
(Kay). I will not be an healer; literally,
a binder-up (comp. ch. i. 6); “I will not
undertake to heal the calamities of the
state.” In my house is neither bread nor
clothing ; 7.e. “I am not a wealthy man; I
have no stores laid up; Iam quite unfit to
be tle people’s ruler.” Make me not; or, ye
shall not make me. The decently clad man
entirely declines to be advanced to the helm
of the state.

Vers. 8.—26.—THE CAUSE OF THE JUDG-
MENT SHOWN TO BE THE SINS OF JERUSALEM.
1. The sins of the men. (Vers. 8—15),
These are declared to be partly sins of
speech, but mainly sins of act (ver. 8). Of
sins of speech the only one specified is the
open and shameless declaration of their
wickedness (ver. 9). Under the head of
sins of act are enumerated (1) childishness
and effeminacy; (2) irreligion and leading
people away from God (ver. 12); (3) op-
pression of the poor and afflicted (vers. 14,
15). The enumeration of the sins is mixed
with exhortation and comment in such a
way as to give rise to the conjvcture that
we have here, not the original prophecy as
the author penned it, but a later “summary ”
of several prophetical discourses, which
summary itself is “‘a little fragmentary ”
(Cheyne).

Ver. 8.—Jerusalem is ruined; or, has
come to ruin—the “ perfect of prophetic
certainty” (Cheyne)—(comp. Amos v. 2,
“The virgin of Israel 7s fallen”). Their
tongue and their doings. Sins of the tongue
are denounced in the Old Testament ag
well as in the New, though not, perhaps, so
frequently (see Exod. xx. 7; xxi. 17; xxii.
QS exxiitel, 25 bs, xxxin 183" xciv. 4, (etc):
To provoke the eyes of his glory. This is
an unusual metaphor. God’s glory seems
here to be identified with himself, as being


52 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


(cn. ur. 1—26.


a


of his very essence; and thus “ provoking
the eyes of his glory” is simply provoking
him to look on them with anger.

Ver. 9.—The show of their countenano:
doth witness against them. This is not
in itself a sin, but it is a sign of frequent
and habitual sin. Vice, long indulged in,
stamps its mark upon the countenance,
giving men what is called “a bad ex-
pression ’—a guilty and lardencd look. It
does not require a skilled physiognomist
to detect at a glance the habitual criminal
or sensualist. They declare their sin as
Sodom. Not only dves their countenance
betray them, but, like the Sudomites (Gen.
xix 5, 9), they boldly and impudently
declare their wicked purposes befor: hand,
and make no attempt at concealment.
Hypocrisy las been said to be the homage
that vice pays to virtue. Where there is
none, where vice has ceased to shroud or
veil itself, a very advanced stage of wicked-
ness has been reached. They have rewarded
evil unto themseives. They have “ received
tn themselves the recompense of their error
which was meet” (Rom. i. 27). Their sins
have at once marred their countenance and
injured ti.eir moral nature.

Ver. 10.—Say ye to the righteous. The
mention of the fact that the men of Jeru-
salem have permanently injured their moral
natures by sin, and thus “ rewarled evil to
themselves,” leads the prophet to declare at
this point, parenthetically, the general law,
which extends alike to the evil and the
good—that men receive in themselves tlie
recompense of their deeds. The righteous
raise their moral nature, become better, and,
in becoming better, become happier. “It
is well with them, for of the fruit of their
doings they eat.” The wicked deprave
and corrupt tlemselves, lower their moral
nature, become worse than they were, und,
in becoming worse, become mure miserable.
“Woe unto them! with them it is ill; for
the achievement of their hands is given
them.”

Ver. 12.—As for my people. Return is
now made to the sins of the dwellers
in Jerusalem, and the first thing noted
is that the people suffer from the ch ld-
ishness and effeminacy of their rulers.
The rulers are culled “ oppressors” by the
way here, the sin of opprcssion being dwelt
on later (vers. 14, 15), Here the emphatic
words are “children,” “ women.” Children
(see ver. 4). The rulers are “children,”
or rather “ babes”—foolish, capricious,
cowardly. It is not clear that any prince
in particular is meant; rather, by the
plural form, the upper class generally seems
to be intended, as in ch. i. 10, 17, 23, ete.
Women; comp. Herod., viii. 88, where
Xerxes says that “his men have shown


themselves women, and his women men; ”
and see also Virg., ‘ Aneid ’—


“O vere Phrygiz, neque enim Phryges.”


Therulers were womanly, i.e. weak, wavering,
timid, impulsive, passionate, and are there-
fore called actual “ women.” There is no
allusion to female sovereigns. They which
lead thee cause thee to err; or, they which
direct thee lead thee astray. Professing to
point out the right path, they led men
away from it. Destroy the way; literally,
swallow it wp, or obliterate tt.

Ver. 13.—The Lord standeth up to plead.
The great sin of the time was oppression of
tlie poor by the rich, and especially by the
rulers (ch. i. 15, 17, 21) In noticing this,
the prophet, to give more weight to his
denunciation, introduces Jehovah as stand-
ing up, and coming forw:rd on the popular
side, to plead the people’s cause, and re-
monstrate with their oppressors. There is
great force in this sudden entrance on the
scene of Jehovah himself, as Pleader and
Judge, And... judge the people; rather, the
pee Primarily, Israel is God’s care;

ut he does not stop at this point. All the
nations of the earth are also under his
protection.

Ver, 14.—The ancients . . . the princes.
These were the chief oppressors. They de-
livered the judgments, and it was by them
that justice was pervertel. Jehovah there-
fore enters specially into judgment with
tlem. For ye have eaten up; rather, So
ye have eaten up. Jeliovah is supposed to
address the unjust judges. He reproaches
tlem with having “eaten up,” or rather
“scorched up,” his vineyard, i.e. Israel
(comp. ch. v. 1—7), and taxes them with
having still their ill-gotten gains in their
houses. ‘So ye,” he says, “ have thus acted
—ye whose duty it was to have acted so
diff rently.”

Ver. 15.—What mean ye? i.e. “ What has
come over you?” or “ What strange per-
versity has possessed you?” (Kay) That
ye beat my people to pieces, etc. The
strongest possible expressions are used to
mark God’s abhorrence of the oppression to
which the poor were snbjec ed. Under the
Law, he constituted himself the champion of
such persons (see Exod, xxii. 22—2+).

2. The sins of the women. (Vers. 16—
26.) These may be summed up under the
three heads of pride, wanton manners (ver.
16), and love of dress and ornament (vers.
18—23). It was natural that, with in-
creased commerce (2 Kings xiv. 22; ch. ii,
16) and more frequent communication with
foreign nations, such as Assyria (2 Kings


xvi. 7—10) and Babylon (2 Kings xx. 12,


cH. 111. 1—26.]


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 53


—_—_—_—_—_——— eee


13), there should be an increase of luxury,
and quite in accordance with Eastern ideas
that the luxury should particularly show
itself in the dress and adornment of the
women. The Egyptian remains show an
advanced state of luxury among the women
at a time anterior to Moses; and in Assyria,
though the evidence is less abundant, we
find also indications of a similar kind. The
Jews, whose reyurd for their women was
high, are not likely to have been behind-
hand in the gallantry which shows itself in
heaping ornament and the newest appliances
of civilization on the weaker sex.

Ver. 16.—The daughters of Zion. It is
over-fanciful to go beyond the plain mean-
ing of the words here, and suppose allegory.
“The dangiiters of Zion” are the femile
inhabitants of Jerusalem. Are haughty,
or, proud—like the men (ch. ii. 11, 12, 17).
Walk with stretched forth necks and wan-
ton eyes. Mr. Cheyne translates, ‘‘ ogling
eyes.” Both actions indicate the desire
to attract men’s attention, and are shameless
and immodest. Walking and mincing as
they go; i.e. taking short steps in an
affectedly childish way. Making a tinkling
with their feet. This meaning is generally
accepted, thougl: not very certain. It has
been suggested that the anklets which they
wore (ver. 18) had silver bells attached to
them.

Ver. 17.Therefore the Lord will smite
with a scab. Thus destroying their beauty
by producing baldness (comp. ver. 24; and
for the meaning “smite with a scab,” see
Lev. xiii. 2; xiv. 56).

Ver 18.—The bravery of their tinkling
ornaments about their feet; rather, of their
anklets. Anklets were worn by the Egyp-
tian women from the time of the twel.th
dynasty (about s.c, 1900). They were, in
general, plain rings of metal, but appear
to have been sometimes set with precious
stones (see Lepsius, ‘ Denkméaler,’ pt. ii.
pls. 128, 12%). No bells appear attached
to any; but bells were known in Assyria
from the time of Sennacherib (‘ Ancient
Monarchies,’ vol. i. p. 417, 2nd edit.).
Their cauls; margin, networks. The mar-
ginal rendering is probably correct (comp.
LXX., eurAsnia). Network caps to cont un
the hair seem to be intended (so Kimchi,
Saadiah, Jarchi, Rosenmiiller, Kay). Mr.
Cheyne prefers “ wreatlis worn round the
forehead, reaching from one ear to the
other.” Round tires like the moon; rather,
crescents. Flat ornaments in metal, like a
young moon, generally worn suspended
round the neck (see Judg. viii. 26, where
the same word occurs).


Ver. 19.—The chains, and the bracelets,
and the mufflers; rather, the ear-drops, and
the armlets, and the veils. Ear-rings were
worn from very ancient times by both the
Assyrians and the Eyyptians. The ring
had frequently a pendant hanging from it.
Men wore armlets in Assyria, and both men
and women in Egypt (Lepsius, ‘ Denk-
miler,’ pt. iii, pl. 1). Veils have always
becn regarded in the East as almost a neces
sary part of female attire.

Ver. 20.—The bonnets; rather, the head-
gear. It is quite uncertain what this was,
since we have no represcntations of Hebrew
women. Egyptian women commonly wore
a mere fillet with pendant ends. The
Hebrew word here employed is used in
Exodus of the head-dress of the priests
(xxxix. 28), The ornaments of the legs,
These are explained as chains connecting
the two anklets together. The head-bands,
and the tablets, and the ear-rings; rather,
the girdles, and the scent-bottles, and the
amulets. Sceut-bottles and jars for holding
sweet-smelling unguents are amony the
most frequent toilette articles recovered
from Eyyptian tombs and Assyrian palaces,
Amulets have been worn in the East from
very ancient times, and are still trusted in
as much as ever. ‘They frequently take the
form of ornaments.

Ver. 21.—The rings; literally, seal-rings,
or siqnet-rings. Such were known in Egypt
from the time of Joseph (Gen. xli. 42), and
probably earlier. It woull seem from the
present passage that their use was not con-
fined to men. Nose-jewels. Actual nose-
rings are not represented in any of the
ancient remains; and the use of them seems
to be confined to very barbarous commu-
nities. Probably the “nose-jewels ” here
meutioned were ornaments depending from
the forehead and touching the upper part
of the nose.

Ver. 22.The changeable suits of ap-
parel; rather, the festival robes (Revised
Version), or the full-dress suits; i.e. those
worn upon grand occasions, and then put
off and set aside. The mantles, and the
wimples, and the crisping-pins; rather, the
upper petticoats, the wraps, and the purses.
An inner and an onter tunic or petticoat
were commonly wo1n by females of tho
higher class in the East. The inner tunic
was a simple linen vest; but the outer
was generally of a better material, and
richly ornamented. Outside this, a sort of
wrap, or cloak, was worn occasionally (see
Ruth iii, 15). Purses were, no doubt,
carried by wealthy persons of both sexes;
but their mention in this list does not seem
very appropriate. Perhaps totlet-bazs of
some kind or other are intended (see 2 Kings
v. 23).


54 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


Ver. 23.—The glasses ; rather, the mirrors.
In ancient times these were not made of
glass, but of some métal which took a high
polish. Most commonly, the material seems
to have been bronze. Many such mirrors
have been found in Egypt, a few in Assyria,
in Etruria a considerable number. They
are of small size, intended to be carried in
the hand, and have for that purpose a metal
or a wooden handle, which is somctimes
highly artistic. The fine linen; rather, the
muslin robes. Sedin, the Hebrew word used,
is probably a corruption or analogue of sén-
don, the Greek name for Indian fabrics. It
is only used here and in Judg. xiv. 12, 13;
Prov. xxxi. 24. The hoods, and the vaiis;
or, the turbans and the scarfs. The word
translated “ hood” is neurly the same as
that which desivnates the head-dress of
the high priest in Exodus (xxviii. 4, 37, 39;
xxix 6, etc.) and Leviticus (viii. 9; xvi. 4),
which seems to have been a “ turban ” (see
note on Exod. xxviii. 4). The other word,
here translated “vail,” occurs only in this
place and Cant. v. 7. Its exact meaning is
uncertain; but it can scarcely be a veil;
since “ veils” have been already mentioned
(ver. 19).

Ver. 24.—Instead of sweet smell; lite-
rally, spice (comp. Exod. xxxv. 28; 1 Kings
x. 10, etc.). Stink; rather, rvttenness, as
translated in ch. v. 24 (compare the cog-
nate verb in Lev. xxvi. 39). Instead of a
girdle a rent. So Lowth and Kay; but
most moderns prefer the meaning given by
the Septuagint and Vulgate, “instead of a
girdle, a rope.” The word used occurs only
in this pluce. Instead of well-set hair bald-
ness (compare above, ver. 17). By “ well-
set hair” seems to be meant “ hair arranged


[cu. m1. 1—26.


with such exactness and order as to look
like a work of art.” The exact arrange-
ment of the hair is very remarkable, both in
the Egyptian and the Assyrian sculptures.
Instead of such elaborate attempts to im-
prove their looks, the daughters of Jeru-
salem would soon pluck their hair out by
the roots, or shave it off, in mourning. A
girding of sackcloth (comp. Gen. xxxvii.
34; 2 Sam. iii. 31, etc.; and for the adop-
tion of the custom by women, see 2 Sam.
xxi. 10; Joel i. 8), Burning instead of
beauty. This meaning is now generally
acknowledg.d, the sense of “burning”
being borne out by the cognate verb used
in Prov. vi. 28; ch. xliii. 2, and the cog-
nate noun used in Exod. xxi. 25. The “ burn-
ing” intended is probably branding by a
barbarous enemy (see Herod., vii. 233;
‘Hist. Tamerlan.,’ p. 320).

Ver. 25.—Thy men; rather, thy people;
ie. the inhabitants of Jerusalem generally.
Note here the first distinct statement that
the coming visitation will be one of war.

Ver. 26.—Her gates. The sudden change
of person is common in Oriental poetry.
Shall lament and mourn. On account of
their destruction, which would be very com-
plete (see Lam. i. 4; ii.9; Neh.i.3; ii. 13).
Conquerors could not do more than break
breaches in the walls of a town, but they
carefully destroyed the gates. Bving deso-
late; or, emptied—plundcred of everything,
and so far “cleansed” from her abomina-
tions. Shall sit upon the ground. In deep
grief (see Job ii. 13; and comp. ch. xlvii. 1;
Lam. ii. 10). So in the coin of Vespasian,
the captive Judah (Judza capta) sits upon
the ground,


HOMILETICS.


Vers. 1—7.— Many steps in the decay of states. Ruin does not often come on states
at once, even when God has determined on it. There are many steps in the fall of a


great nation.


I, CEesSATION OF A SUCCESSION OF GREAT AND WISE MEN. (Vers. 2,3.) One of the
first marks of decay is a falling off in this succession. When the intervals between one


great man and another lengthen; when wise men, capable of giving the state good
counsel, grow rare; when mediocrity everywhere prevails, and no one steps forth con-
spicuous by marked superiority to his fellows ;—then it may at once be proclaimed that
decline has set in, and that the nation is verging towards its fall. The great and the
wise are the salt which preserve society from corruption. Without them all goes
wrong; the pulse of the national life slackens, energy disappears, foreign aggression. is
weakly resisted, a general debilitation becomes apparent in every part and ‘function of
the body politic. No state can long resist the insidious malady, which, like atrophy or
anemia, steals gradually over the entire frame, exhausting it and bringing about its
dissolution. 3 Fate

ll. AcTIvE FOLLY IN THE RULERS. (Ver. 4.) When the great and the wise fail
government necessarily falls into the hands of the incompetent. If not “children” in
age, they will be “babes” in respect of policy and statecraft. So long, however, as


CH. 11. 1—26.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 55


they are willing to follow the traditions of the past, to work upon well-known lines, and
carry out established practices, no very great harm can arise. But they are seldom
content for many years to act thus. A childish desire seizes them to attract attention,
to exhibit their power. Hence they plunge into active follies, wild schemes of ageression
and conquest, or imprudent and unsuitable alliances, as that of Ahaz with Tiglath-Pileser
.2 Chron. xxviii. 16, 20). The state is brought into difficulties and entanglements,
and the wisdom is wanting that should have seen a way out of them. One embarrass-
ment follows another, Unexpected circumstances arise, and it is not perceived how
they should be met. The unwisdom of the good is perhaps as fatal as the folly of the
wicked (¢.7. Josiah’s uncalled-for resistance of Pharaoh-Nechoh, 2 Kings xxiii. 29), and
leads to great disasters. Meanwhile other causes are at work, which advance the general
confusion and accelerate the final catastrophe.

III. DEVELOPMENT OF SELFISHNESS AMONG THE PEOPLE. (Ver. 5.) Society is based
upon the principles of justice and mutual good will. While states prosper, it requires
no extraordinary virtue in men to deal justly by their neighbours, and act towards them
in a friendly spirit. But when the times are out of joint, when there is general im-
poverishment and distress, it is no longer easy tc be amicable or even just. “Every
man for himself!” becomes the cry; the spirit of selfishness is evoked and runs riot;
“the people ” (no longer the “rulers” or the “judges,” ch. i. 10, 23) “oppress every
one another, and every one his neighbour” (ch. iii. 5). This indulgence of the selfish
spirit acts as a solvent—loosens the bonds which have hitherto held society together,
and goes far to reduce the united mass, in whose union was its strength, to a congeries
of atoms.

IV. CEssaTION OF RESPECT FOR AGE OR SOCIAL RANK. (Ver. 5.) The disintegration
of society tends to place all the atoms upona par. While the social order was maintained,
and the whole society felt itself one, the parts knew their need one of the other, and
recognized their respective positions of inferiority and superiority. But with the loosening
of the social ties comes naturally a general self-assertion. In a physical chaos atoms
are of equal value, and why not in a disintegrated society? Hence the young in such
a state throw off their allegiance to the old; even sons cease to respect or obey their
fathers, and daughters their mothers. ‘The humbler classes of toilers for daily bread no
longer look up to their more favoured brethren, but rather view them with jealousy and
hatred. Class is alienated from class, and the tendency to a complete dissolution of
society avgravated.

VY. NEGLECT OF THEIR CIVIL DUTIES ON THE PART OF THE WELL-TO-DO CLASSES,
(Vers. 6,7.) Noblesse oblige. In a distracted state of society, it is especially incum-
bent on those whose means place them beyond the reach of want, and allow them ample
leisure, to come to the relief of their neighbours by undertaking those civil duties and
offices on which the welfare of the body politic depends. But it is exactly at such
times that we find this class of persons most inclined to ignore this obligation, and with-
draw wholly from political life (ver. 7). Some, like Plato, justify themselves under the
plea that nothing can be done to save society, and that they may be excused for taking
refuge under the first shelter that offers while the storm rages and exhausts itself. Others
plead the vulgarizing effect of active political life, and claim the right of keeping their
superfine humanity free from the smears and stains which mixture with the crowd would
bring upon it. On one excuse or another, or not unfrequently without condescending
to make any excuse, the upper classes in a distracted state stand aloof, neglect their civil
duties, and refuse all the calls that are made on them to come to the rescue, and do their
best to save the “ruin” that is tottering to its fall.


Vers. 9—11.— The law of retributive justice not mechanical, but moral. The doctrine
of future rewards and punishments is sometimes preached in a way that is, if not offensive,
at any rate unsatisfactory. God is made to deal with men as not even judicious parents
would deal with their children—viz. for so much obedience, so much bestowal of pleasure
or indulgence; for so much disobedience, an equal award of pain and punishment. But
this is certainly not the doctrine of Holy Scripture. Scripture represents the reward of
well-doing as “eternal life,” and this “eternal life” is the vigorous energy of all that is
good in the man himself, sustained and strengthened by the Spirit of Christ in the soul,
and accompanied by happy feelings of love and trust and thankfulness, “ Eternal life


56 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (on. m1. 1—26,


begins in this world, and is only carried out to perfection in the next. It is, in the main,
a state of feeling—consciousness of being at one with (od, consciousness of communion
with bim. It admits, no doubt, of exaltation from without, as here by the special
shedding of Divine influences upon the soul, and hereafter by the transcendent blessing
of the beatific vision; but it is principally in the man himself. It is a condition of
mind, not a set of external circumstances. And so with ill-doing and its consequence,
“eternal death.” Men make their own misery by their deeds. They “ receive within
themselves the recompense of their errors.” ‘Chey mar their moral nature; they refuse
to hold communion with God; and then, thrown back upon tliemselves, and having
nothing within them pleasing to contemplate or to be conscious of, they find themselves
wretched—they have created their own hell.


Vers. 16—24.— The share which women have in producing the ruin of a nation. The
influence of women upon men was intended to be helpful (Gen. ii. 20), purifying, and
refining. Woman is naturally more pure than man, more modest, more retiring, more
instinctively right in her moral judgments. Good women exercise an extraurdinary
influence over the best men, who continually consult them in the most difficult crises
of politics and diplomacy. They read men far better than men read one another, and
are excellent counsellors on many of the most important occasions. But as the
power for good which they wield is great, so is their power for evil. Corruptiv optimi
pessima. Bad women are far worse than the worst men; and the ruin of a state is
always jartly, sometimes mainly, caused by its women. The sins of women chiefly
noted by Isaiah in this passage are: 1. ‘lhe vanity and love of admiration which show
themselves in excessive attention to dress and ornament. 2. The wantonness and
immodesty which sometimes characterize tleir conduct. 8. The pride and haughti-
ness which under certain circumstances they display. All these are corrupting influences
in a state, and help forward its decay and ruin,

I, VANITY AND LOVE OF ADMIRATION, AS SHOWN IN EXCESSIVE ATTENTION TO DRESS
AND ORNAMENT. ‘The desire to please is not in itself wrong, and attention to dress
within certain limits is to be commended. A woman does not prove herself perfectly
virtuous by being a sloven. But there is an attention to such matters and a quasi-
devotion to them which is plainly excessive, and which has often the most injurious
consequences. <A tone of frivolity is engendered by much consideration of matters so
trivial, which unfits a woman for dealing with the difficult problems of life and action.
The manayement of her household and the training of her children, which are the prin-
cipal duties, at any rate, of married women, are apt to be neglected by the woman of
fashion, who dresses five times a day, and passes half her time at her tvilet-table.
Serious inroads are made upon a husband’s means, sometimes to the extent of actual
ruin, by the extravagance of those who cannot bear to see any one better dressed than
themselves. Seltishness, worldliness, littleness, are impressed on the character, all
higher aims being set aside, and nothing sought but the admiration of the other sex.

I. Wanronnuss AND IMMODESTY often follow on the love of admiration and grow
out of it. A woman who court» admiration forgets the reserve which becomes her sex,
and is tempted to enhance her charms by an indecorous display of them. Once let the
limits of modesty be overstepped, and one defence falls after another. Fucilis descensus
Averni. Wanton glances (ver. 16) are succeeded by immodest words, and these lead
on to immodest deeds ; and at last every barrier is thrown down, and the world sees a
Messalina or a Lucrezia Borgia. General immodesty in the women of a state is of
inirequent occurrence ; but where it occurs, is an almost certain indication of approach-
ing social dissolution, The most flagrant instance is that of Rome. ‘There, from the
time of the establishment of the empire, the disorders of married and domestic life were
excessive, “A kind of rivalry in impurity grew up between the two sexes; and there
were more seducers than seduced of the female sex ” (Déllinger, ‘Jew and Gentile,’
vol. ii. p. 257). “In Rome the women, deprived of all moral support, became just what
the men made them, and so sank with them incessantly deeper and deeper” (ibid.
p. 276). Hisiorians generally, ascribe the fall of the Roman empire to no cause more
than to the corruption of the Roman women.

IIL. Prrper anp HAUGHTINESS are not natural vices of women; but, when developed,
they attain vast proportions, and lead on to great calamities. Jezebel and Athaliah in


on. ut 1—26.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 57


Old Testament history, Amestris and Parysatis in Persian, Tanaquil in Roman, are
examples of the power of women for evil, when they step out of their sphere, assume to
direct the policy of states, dispense life and death, and lord it over the people of a
kingdom. In such cases their haughtinexs outdoes that of men, and provokes a more
intense feeling of dissatisfaction and resentment. Revolution often follows, or in any
case disaffection towards the government; and an additional element of danger is intro-
duced, which becomes fatal under certain circumstances. Altogether, it would seem
that women have quite as much influence as men towards producing the ruin of states,
and are quite as responsible for political catastrophes.


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1—7.—A picture of anarchy. The words carry on the sease of the closing
saying of the preceding paragraph, “ Cease ye from man.”

I, THE RULERS OF THE PEOPLE REMOVED. Government is one of the necessities of
human life. Hence the rulers are spoken of as “staff and stay, staff of bread and staff
of water.” Even bad rulers are better than none, so that they may be described as
main props or supports of life. In the same way says Ezekiel, “I will break the staff
of bread in Jerusalem” (iv. 16; v.16). To see how truly good government may be
thus described, let us remember that, by timely and wise legislation, bread and other
necessaries of life have been cheapened and secured to the people. With good govern-
ment men may be well fed and prosperous even in unkindly lands, while through evil
government once fertile plains (like the Roman Campagna) have become wastes.

Il. THE NERVE AND STRENGTH OF THE NATION BROKEN. A nation needs heroes, men
of courage for the battle-field. It needs men of discretion and integrity for the seat of
justice and the bar. It nceds men of religious faith and insight as prophets and teachers;
and in every department, military, civil, ecclesiastical, scientitic, there is a constant
demand for able and honest men. There is to be a dearth of them in Jerusalem. The
false leaders to whom the people have looked up, the idol-prophets and the magicians,
are to be taken away along with the true. “Children” and “ baby-boys,” the prophet
caustically says, shall become the princes and rulers of the nation. Ahaz was quite a
young man; his “weakness of character and foolish humours would have been quite
sufficient, in the sixteen years of his reign, to put the whole kingdom out of joint.”
The picture may remind us that men of intelligence and virtue are the great necessity
in every time. Ii! in the state statesmen are not being bred, and in the Church weak
and illiterate men swarm, it is a sign of most certain moral weakness and decay.

Ill. ANARCHY THE RESULT. 1. /n privute life. Good neighbourhood is broken up,
for it must rest on the common recognition of law and custom; and what if these be
subverted? Age and rank no longer command respect. ‘The beardless boy aflronts the
hoary head, the churl would level the gently born with himself. Nothing is more
odious than the levelling temper of troublous times; for the fine gradations of rank are
part essentially of a system of higher culture. 2. In public life. So extreme is the
“need of guidance and rule, that private proposals will be made to almost any seeming
respectable man to take up the reins of government. But none will be found willing to
govern “tlese ruins,” or to be chief of so mere a rabble. We may use the picture as an
allegory of the soul. When sin has set our being at variance with itself, and all our
confidence and self has failed, we may be glad to find any yoke that we may creep
beneath. Yet this may be denied. ‘Those who, in the rebellion of lust and self-will,
have sought to be “lords of themselves,” may find a heritage of woe entailed, “The
soul would never rule. It would be first in all things; but this attained, commanding
for commanding sickens it."—J.


Vers. 8—15.—The reasons of judgment. In man’s sufferings they must own they
are subject to the reasonable rule of him who is eternal Reason. ;

I. ANTAGONISM To THe DivINE RULE. In word and deed. 1. In current talk, writing,
speechifying, it is difficult to detect where the falsehood lies. It consists in the suppression
of certain important sides of truth, and in putting forward interested, partial views of
things. ‘The literature of a people cannot be sound, if it be sunk in greed of gold and


58 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. 111. 1—26.


a


luxury as Judah had been. The hollowness consists in the reference of everything to a
low standard of value. Not until a great preacher, prophet, or writer—a Savonarola, a
Latimer, a Carlyle—arises to shed the splendour of eternal truth upon our ways, do we
discover how false and mean they have been. 2. We find we have “provoked the eyes
of God’s majesty ” by our way of life. What hard-heartedness and brazen defiance of
humanity and morality is brought to light from time to time, when some reformer
directs attention to an abuse! Men cynically “make fortunes” out of the flesh and
blood of their fellow-creatures. Have not in our time the cries of factory children, and
over-toiled seamstresses, and drowning sailors, and “ gutter children” gone up into the
ears of the Lord of hosts? Isaiah is modern as well as ancient, for the Word he delivers
is eternal.

Il. Tue NEMESIS OF EVIL, THE RECOMPENSE OF Goop. 1. Wickedness is suicidal.
“ Woe to their soul, for to themselves they did evil!” Here lights the deepest curse,
here rankles at last the arrow; in the soul! Dante sees in hell (c. xii.), in three circles,
those who have wronged their neighbour, their God, and themselves. But every species
of wrong works out its woe in self.


“Man can do violence
To himself and his own blessings; and for this
He in the second round must aye deplore
With unavailing penitence his crime.
Whoe’er deprives himself of life and light,
In reckless banishment his talent wastes,
And sorrows there where he should dwell in joy.”


Men may afford the loss of property, of a limb, of health; but not of love, not of the
soul. The denial of love, or the waste of it, means the loss of the soul. 2. Goodness ts
self-rewarding. Often is the good man compared to a tree, bringing forth fruit by a
law of nature, according to its kind and in its season. There is strict and beautiful
sequence in life and character. No curse, no blessing, “causeless comes.” The bitter
fruit we bring forth comes from interference with the Divine nature God has given us.
It is said that wanton Arabs sometimes


“Foil a dwarf palm
Of bearing its own proper wine and oil,
By grafting into it the stranyer-vine,
Which sucks its heart out, sly and serpentine,
Till forth one vine-palm fastens to the root,
And red drops moisten the insipid fruit.”
(R. Browning, ‘ Sordello,’ p. 131.)


Such is sin and sin’s result on the being; a parody and mockery of that sound and true
life so beauti.ully presented under the image of a tree in the first psalm.

II. Misruue. There has been weakness and effeminacy in high places. And this
is often more mischievous than strong and open violence. A vast growth of vicious
and interested passions springs up in the neighbourhood of a weak court. It is the
opportunity for many bad men to exert their ambition. A powerful will generally
works some good at the head of affairs, even though its wielder be not a good man.
But feebleness is always baneful in public life. Everything is uncertain “when the
purpose is vacillating, and no settled principle exists. The freble ruler will be swayed
by every gust of caprice, by every personal influence that attacks his ear, every passion
that enslaves his heart. Several of our kings—John, Richard II., the Charleses—have
been examples of this, The country may be compared to a beautiful vineyard which
the rulers have been appointed to keep (ch. v. 1—7). They have trampled it down and
despoiled it, and have “ground the sufferers’ \aces.” The image is taken from the mill
where a substance is worn down until nothing is left. The contemporary prophet
Micah uses still stronger language (iii, 2, 3). The rulers flay the people, and cutting
them in pieces, cast them, as it were, into a caldron. Unhappily this picture has its
counterpart to-day in many Eastern lands. The women of the harem practically rule
and devour the people in their greed. Personally, the description may be applicd. God
has entrusted to each of us a garden or vineyard to keep. Diligence and faithtulness


on. m1. 1—26.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 59


a


will have their reward. For sloth, neglect, waste, and abuse, God will enter into
judgment with us.—J,


Ver. 16—ch. iv. 1.—The women of Jerusalem. The habits and the morale in general
of the court and the aristocracy are a sure index of the state of the nation. Fashion
guides, but is in a measure controlled by the general opinion. Wanton pride and luxury
in high places bespeak a general want of moral tone.

I. Tuerr prips. The picture is minute and scathingly satirical. The daughters of
Zion walk with “necks held up.”

Il. Tuete wasciviousness. The “rolling eyes” are often mentioned as characteristic
of Aphrodite or Ashtoreth, the unchaste goddess of sensual love.

Il. Tuetr FINERY AND LUXURY. A complete catalogue of articles of personal adorn-
ment is civen. The instinct for dress and decoration, so strong in women and so
gracefil if followed with moderation, easily passes beyond the bounds, and becomes an
offence and vice.

IV. THe REVERSE OF THE PICTURE. The perfumes will be exchanged for a stench,
the waistband for the rough cord of poverty, the abundance of flowing hair will be
replaced by repulsive baldness. “A brand instead of beauty!” Their husbands will
fall in the war. There will be melancholy groups gathering at the public place, the
gates; and in vain will they, once lapped in luxury, seek the protection and the honour
of the marriage state (cf. 1 Cor. vii. 36). One of our poets has called up the picture
of Venice and her women in old days of mirth and folly, which may be compared.


“ As for Venice and her people, merely born to bloom and drop,
Here on earth they bore their fruitage—mirth and folly were the crop,
What of soul was left, I wonder, when the kissing had to stop?
Dust and ashes!”


Only the “sweet and virtuous soul” can give to woman an immortal charm, and ensure
her from corrupting and being corrupted.—J.


Ver. 9.—The revealings of the face. ‘The show of their countenance doth witness
against them.” We are “fearfully and wonderfully made.” Just as the countenance
reveals the state of our physical health, so do thought and character manifest themselves
in the face. All our nature, with its complexity of being, has yet a subtle and myste-
rious oneness, and the tone of the mind and the inclination of the heart are made
manifest, not alone in speech, but in look and gesture and manner. In the simple
language of the holy Book, there is a show of the countenance.

J. MEN CANNOT PREVENT SELF-REVEALING. As the New Testament says, “They
that be otherwise cannot be hid.” ‘There is no concealment in nature. ‘he hidden
seed springs up even in the cleft of arock. There is always sume damaging witness
waiting for an evil man. As the snow reveals the footsteps of the beast uf prey, as the
wind of the desert drifts the sand from the body that is buried in it, so sin will surely
be found out. A bad man’s face is a tell-tale of levity and scorn and shame. If God
is not in the heart, the light of his presence will not be in the countenance.

II. Men cannot Lone act A PART. Nature is against insincerity. You cannot forge
her handwriting. You cannot make your artificial rock so that it shall remain unknown
beside hers. No. And it is so with voice and face. Hypocrisy drops unconsciously
its mask. The same words are spoken differently by sincere and insincere men. We
read of hollow laughter. So there is hollow exhortation which does not exercise inspira-
tion over our hearts. So men cannot twist their countenances into false witnessing,
There is a blatant iniquity about the wicked which cannot be concealed by long effort.
“ They declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not.” ;

TI]. Men cannor AVERT PUNISHMENT. “ Woe unto their soul! for they have
rewarded evil unto themselves.” They create their own inquisition-chamber. Memory
is their misery. No theorirs of unaccountability can live. Excuses there are none. The
conscience tears them to pieces like a spider’s web. Life is personal and accountable.
We all feel that. “Say ye to the righteous, it shall be well with him: for they shall
eat the fruit of their doings. Woe unto the wicked! it shall be ill with him: for the
reward of his hands chall be given him.” Reward, then, is not always blessing; it is


60 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cH. 11. 1—26.


nn ne ee E EEE EnEEEIEE EEE EESEEEEESESnEEEEEREEE


harvest of golden sheaves or gathered tares, according to our planting. Verily a light
from within fills the countenance even of godly men. ‘The prayer is fulfilled. “ Cause
thy face to shine upon us.” “ Who is the Health of my countenance, and my God.”—


W. M.S.


Vers. 1—8.— National and spiritual anarchy. We have a vivid picture here of—

I. Nationan ANARCHY. 1. /ts cwuse is found in national rebellion against its rightful
Lord. “Their tongue and their doings are against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his
glory ” (ver. 8). Sin, both in word and deed, draws down the righteous indignation of
God, and, under his just administration, the penalty of iniquity is paid, 2. /¢s signs are
seen in: (1) The loss of all fitting leaders (vers. 1—3). Those who constiiuted “ th«
stay and the staff” are no longer found in positions of authority; those capable of
ruling, those qualified to direct and to advise, those who have learnt political sagacity
by long experi nce,—these are not to be obtained; they have been deported, or they have
withdiawn, or they are no more trained. (2) The consequent elevation of the incapable
(ver. 4). hose hold the high offices of state who are utterly incompetent to fill the
posts they have accepted. (3) The presence of injustice and confusion (ver. 5). Instead
of all duing tha! which is conscientious and right as between man and man, every one
seeks to overreach his neighbour; fraud and violence are the rule rather than the
exception ; and instead of the natural subordination of the younger to the elder, there is
insolence and presumption. (4) The absence of unselfish patriotism (vers. 6, 7). They
who are in a position to render help refuse to do so, untruly and unworthily excusing
themselves. 38. /ts issue. (Ver. 8.) “ Jerusalem is being ruined (is ruined); Judah is
falling (is fallen).” Bad as things are, they are not at their very worst; there remains
a darker and sadder catastrophe yet to complete the destruction ; and that, viz. dreary
exile for the people and depopulation for the land, will soon arrive.

ll. Sprriruat anarcuy. We trace the same cause here as in the case of the ruined
nation. 1. Its cause is in rebellion against God, and his consequent high displeasure
showing itself in just and appropriate penalty (ver. 8). 2. Jts styns are found in: (1) The
dethronement of the soul’s true authorities: conscience, which directs us what we
ought to do; reason, which leads us in the path in which it is wise to walk; pure
affection, which draws us toward the objects we do well to love (vers. 1—8). When sin
dves its work within, these powers which were meant to rule are supplanted by unworthy
rivals. (2) The enthronement of the unfitting (ver. 4). As unsuited to govern a
human soul are the rude, uncultured appetites and passions of our lower nature as are
“children ” and babes to rule over the great affairs of state. (8) Internal struggle and
insubordination (ver. 5). The animal appetites asserting themselves unduly and
violently against spiritual aspirations and holy principles, and doing them dishonour.
(4) Appeal, without response, to our better nature (vers. 6, 7). It is one of the last
stages in spiritual demoralization when an earnest, strenuous challenge is made to that
which is left in the’soul of the heavenly and Divine, and it makes no response, or none,
but a miserable resort to that which is false. There is little hope left then; the last
sparks are expiring. 38. Jés issue. (Ver. 8.) A human spirit in such a state is hastening
fast to utter and irretrievable ruin. It is in the very act of falling; it is coming to the
ground, to be utterly humiliated and broken. It may be perhaps that on earth a soul is
never in such complete ruin but that it may be repaired. Yet there are those who have
fallen into such disorder that it may be said that the last destruction overhangs them.
To such the Master’s warning words may well be uttered (see Luke xvii. 31, 32); for
they must flee for their life, not losing a moment in starting, nor looking behind them
when on their way.—C.


Vers. 9—11.—The puth of sin and the rest of righteousness. I. THAT SIN CANNOT
BE CONCEALED, “The show of their countenance doth witness against them” (ver. 9).
Whether Isaiah’s words point to the wnconsc/ovs revelation of sin is uncertain, but they
clearly suggest the fact. The evil that is in men’s hearts is shown in their countenance,
whether they wish to conceal it or whether they take a shameful pride init. The
thoughts that flit through the mind, the passions that burn within the soul, the sins
that defile the inward man, are written, line by line, on the visage, and “ may be known
and read of all men.” Are there not those whom we have to look upon in the inter-


cH, U1, 1—26.) THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 61
oS eee


course of life “ whose eyes are full of adultery,” or whose cheeks are stained with intoxi-
cation, or whose features are drawn together with cruelty ; those who, instead of “ bearing
in their body the marks of the Lord Jesus,” carry with them the signs of Satan’s
service? It is a fact which may well make the guilty wince and hesitate before they
continue, that, by the operation of God’s righteous laws, the sin which at the beginning
they would fain hide in the depths of their own soul, will at length be written on
ee tablet of the body, and “the show of their countenance will witness against
them.’

Il. THAT SIN, IN ITS LATER STAGES, SCORNS TO BIt SCREENED FROM VIEW. “They
declare theirsin, ... they hide it not” (ver. 9). In the further stages of iniquity there is
no attempt, for there is no desire, to hide the wrong thing from view. Shame gradually
declines until it passes away, and in its place there grows up a horrible pride in sin.
Men come to gloat over that from which they ought to shrink with utmost sense of
humiliation ; they “glory in their shame” (Phil. iii. 19). This is eminently true of
acts of rapacity and fraud; it also applies to sins of direct ungodliness and of self-
indulgence.

Il. THaT sIN IS ALWAYS WORKING TowaRDS RUIN. “ Woe unto their soul; they
have rewarded evil unto themselves” (ver. 9). “ Woe unto the wicked,” ete. (ver. 11).
Sin sometimes prospers long; the “ sinner may do evil a hundred times, and his days be
prolonged, yet surely we know. . . that it shall not be well with the wicked ” (Eccles.
viii. 12, 13). Nor ds it well when the end comes (see Ps. Ixxiii. 1—20). 1. Sin tends
to tempura! ill-being, to penury, to sickness, to carly death. 2. Sin tends to isolation,
to the withdrawal of confidence and affection on the part of the good and worthy, to
dishonour, and even degradation. 3. Sin must inevitably lead to spiritual deterioration
and, if it be persisted in, to spiritual death. “The wages of sin is death.” 4. Sin
finally conducts to condemnation and exile from the home of God. Alas! for the soul
that is impenitent, that seeks not Divine mercy, that does not return on its way to the
living God and to his righteousness. There is a world of meaning in that one small
word which constitutes here such a significant sentence—* dil.”

IV. THAT RIGHTEOUSNESS MAY REST SECURE IN HOPE. (Ver. 10.) It may seem ill to
the righteous; “ weeping may endure for a night.” He may find himself inclined to
sigh, “ All these things are against me” (Gen. xlii. 36) But “unto the upright there
ariseth light in the darkness.” The converse of all that applies to the ungodly is true
of the godly. Righteousness (1) tends to prosperity here; (2) begets trust and love;
(8) results in moral excellency—the good man finds that honesty, purity, truthfulness,
sobriety, kindness, etc., issue in spiritual increase, in a harvest of inward good, and thus
he “eats the fruit of his doings;” (4) conducts at last to the heavenly land, where
he who does the will of God “is recompensed at the resurrection of the just.”—C.


Vers. 12—15.— Penalty, natural and supernatural. We learn—

I. THAT THE NATURAL RESULT OF FOLLY IS TO BE GOVERNED BY THOSE WHO
HAVE NO RIGHT TO RULE. 1. The nation suffers this penalty. As with Judah now
(ver. 12), so with each and every country in its turn and in its way. Unmaniiness,
frivolity, wickedness among the people, will be reflected in the sovereign power. A
nation that lives supremely for material enrichment, or for military conquest, or for
pleasurable excitement, must expect to see upon the throne—in the government—men
who will represent their evil genius, who will pamper their evil tastes, who will “ cause
them to err” more wildly, and “destroy them in the way of thy paths.” Action and
reaction are here as everywhere; the folly of the people expresses itself in the weakness
and perversity of the ruler, and these qualities on his part tell in their time and measure
upon them. 2. The Church endures the same evil. Unspirituality, discord, unbelief,
laxity in the Christian community, will certainly issue in a degenerate ecclesiastical
authority, and the ruler, using or abusing his opportunity, will lead astray and destroy.
3. The individual finds the same natural law operating on him and on his life. By
his folly he allows passions instead of principles, impulses instead of convictions, men
instead of God, to be his rulers, his “ oppressors ;” and these cause him to err; they
pervert the way of his paths.

Il. THat THEY WHO ARK GUILTY OF MISRULE AND PERVERSITY MUST LOOK FOR THE
RIGHTEOUS VISITATION OF Gop. (Vers. 13—15.) “The Lord stundeth up to ai “to


62 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. 11. 1—26.


judge the people.” He confronts and confounds those who have wronged and oppressed
his people. If the usurper, the tyrant, the oppressor, the debauchee, the misieader of
the nation (the Church), should not meet with the resentment and feel the blows of those
whom he has wronged, he must lay his account with the facts that God takes note of
all that passes in our human communities, that he holds those who are in power
responsible for the effects of their administration, that he regards with severest indigna-
tion those who abuse their trust, that he will visit them in his own time and way, here
or hereafter, with proofs of his Divine displeasure.—C.


Vers. 16—26.— The vanity of vanity. The graphic pen of the prophet brings before
us the thoughts—

I, THAT THE LAST AND SADDEST SYMPTOM OF NATIONAL DECLINE IS FOUND IN WOMANLY
FOLLY. “Moreover ... the daughters of Zion,” etc. (ver. 16). Corruption may have
spread far and done much evil work in the community, but there is hope for the city or
the Church so long as the wives and the mothers, the daughters and the sisters, retain
their moral and spiritual integrity. When that is gone all is gone. Purity and worth
find their last retreat under the domestic roof; if they be driven thence they are
doomed to die, and with them perish the prospects of the land.

Il. THAT PRIDE AND VANITY IN WOMAN ARE OFFENSIVE IN THE SIGHT oF Gop. His
prophet here condemns them “ because they are haughty, and walk with stretched forth
necks ” (ver. 16); he also describes, evidently in the spirit of strong reprobation, the
various articles and instruments of vanity (vers. 18—23). Here are denounced the two
sins of pride and vanity—the overweening estimate of self, and the foolish desire to
excite the attention and the passing admiration of others. To be blind to our own
defects and, at the same time, to magnify our own excellences, thus gaining and
exhibiting a sense of our own goodness and importance quite beyond the measure of
our deserts,—such pride is hateful to God (Ps. xviii. 27 ; ci. 5; Prov. vi. 17; 1 Pet. v. 5).
And vanity is nearly as offensive as pride. To be studying, by every art, to attract
the notice of our fellows, and to be peevishly, nervously anxious to secure their praise,
instead of seeking first the approval of God and then the commendation of our own
conscience,—this is sinful in the sight of the holy and the true One. We may
safely say—

Ill. THAT THESE ARE NOT ONLY HEINOUS OFFENCES AGAINST GOD, BUT PITIABLE
MISTAKES IN THE SIGHT OF MAN. 1. ‘hose who assume a worth to which they are
not entitled, and hence walk arrogantly before the world, do not receive the tribute of
honour which they claim; they only excite derision and contempt. 2. They who, by
meretricious ornamentations of their person or their style, endeavour to draw to thems
selves admiring observation, only succeed in provoking the smile of pity or disdain.

IV. THAT FRIVOLITY IN MAN OR WOMAN WILL MEET ITS DOOM IN THE DAY OF
Diving penaury. (Vers. 24—26.) This will involve: 1. The removal of the sources
of frivolous delight. These “the Lord will take away” (ver. 18). For how brief a day
do the pleasures of sense last! How soon the sun goes down on the trivialities and
temporalities with which the sons and daughters of men amuse themselves and waste
their time! 2, A visitation answering to the folly (ver. 24). Sin finds itself paid in
its own coin. 3. The sorrow which comes with a sense of desolation (ver. 26). The
“arm of flesh ” will fail; the human admiration and attention will soon pass. And if
the esteem of the wise and the favour of God have been unsought, there is nothing left;
everything is in ruins.—C, -


Ver. 1.—The mission of famines. The words “stay and staff” are by the prophet
referred to the two necessaries of life, bread and water. The judgments of God, in the
older time, often came in the form of famine and drought; famine as the result of the
drought. It was necessary, and it still is necessary, that men should be made to feel
their entire dependence upon God for little things as well as great, for common everyday
necessities as well as for special days’ gifts and mercies. The necessaries of every day
seem to be our right; famine-times remind us that they are always direct Fatherly
providings. Entering into covenant with Noah, God promised that “while the earth
remaineth, seed-time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and
day and night shall not cease.” But the promise concerned the earth as a whole, and


on. m1. 1—26.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISALAH. 63
Se EE ee ee eee


cannot be applied to particular portions of it. Seeding time has always been kept;
harvesting work has always been done. Where man has not come to aid the operations
of nature, God has provided seeding times and seeding ways for himself. In desert
districts, where tribes wander, and corn cannot be grown, God makes two plants grow
freely, whose fruitage is a harvest of necessaries for the people. Local and temporary
failures there have been; but they have been due to special causes acting but locally
over certain districts; terrible oftentimes for the sufferings they cause, when men are
isolated from their fellows, but ameliorated when men dwell together in brotherhood,
and the overplus of one land can be used to supply the deficiencies of another. The
chief causes of harvest failure are lack of rain, destruction of growing crops by caterpillar
and locust, and war which prevents the proper seeding of the fields, A special cause of
famine in Egypt was the failure of the Nile-flood.

I. GoD USES FAMINE TO KEEP UP MEN’S DEPENDENCE ON HIM. A tale is told of
a widow woman who had lived for many years rent free in a cottage, through the good
will and kindly arrangement of the owner. She lived in it so long that she came to
think the place was her own, and quite forgot her dependent condition; so far forgot
herself, indeed, as to send a message to her landlord threatening to leave the house if
some repairs were not at once attended to. It might have been good for the poor
woman to let her feel homeless for a while, so that she might learn to value her mercies.
But we, like her, are in great danger of presuming on the goodness of God. We also
get the feeling of a right to the things which God freely and graciously bestows. We
call them owrs. And then the temporary loss of them wakens us to thought; humbles
us in the dust; calls upon us to look on the fields, and say, “They are God's, not
ours;” and on the sunny skies and genial rain, and say, “They are God’s, not ours.”
“ Every good gift, and every perfect gift, is from above, and cometh down from the
Father of lights.”

Il. Gop USES FAMINE AS AN AGENT FOR PUNISHMENT. No man is able to say of
any particular famine, it must be a punishment; but we have a perfect right to say,
famine may be a punishment. When God would visit David’s sin in numbering the
people for his own vain-glorious purposes, he offered him a choice which included “ seven
years of famine for thy land.” In the reign of Ahab the violent adoption of Baalism
was visited by a terrible famine for the humbling of the wilful king. And still we
must keep hold of this truth—all outward calamities may be visitations of Divine wrath.
It settles nothing to say that pestilence follows on man’s disobedience of sanitary laws ;
and famine results from deficient government and hindered commerce ; and wars spring
out of national ambitions. That is all quite true, but we thus deal only with “ second
causes.” God is still the First Cause. We, at least, will not push God out of the world
he has made. We will trace his working everywhere. And just as we know he orders
our personal circumstances so that they shall be chastisement and correction for our
personal mistakes, wilfulnesses, and transgressions, so we will be sure that the sins of
cities, communities, and nations bring judgments and corrections by public calamities ;
famine may be the hand of the Almighty raised to smite and humble sinful peoples.

III. Gop usEs FAMINE TO KNIT THE LANDS IN BROTHERHOOD. In the older times
of famine in Egypt, other nations and tribes were compelled to visit that land to secure
their supplies of food, and so everybody became interested in the preservation of peace
and kindly relations. The common distress made even hostile tribes forget their
enmities. In the present day it is essential to the well-being of every nation that
universal peace should be preserved. Every country 1s interested in keeping a free way
for the world’s ships over the oceans, War is a calamity. ‘Ihe strong men who are
slaughtered on battle-fields, ought to be toiling at the harvests, growing the world’s
food, carrying it from land to land, or making the things which should supply the
world’s ever-varying and multiplied needs. We are dependent, as nations, on one
another, and our mutual dependence ought to culture a spirit of brotherhood. England
cannot grow from her soil, as at present cultivated, the supply of all her people’s needs.
Heavily laden grain-ships bring the bounty of other lands for our relief week by week
throughout the year; and so intercourse is maintained. We get to know and respect
each other; we even, in a sense, sit down at each other’s tables ; we eat bread ana salt
together, and so are bound to one another in eternal amity, as are the desert tribes. We
eat bread from America, and Russia, and Hungary, and Egypt, and other parts, and at


64 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cH. 1, 1—26.


—


the common feast we cultivate the common brotherhood. And it may be further said,
nothing binds men together and breaks down prejudices and enmities like a common
trouble. How we are drawn together when a common woe lies upon our town, or upon
the community to which we belong! Mutual sympathy and mutual sacrifice make us
feel that God has “ made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of
the earth ;” and that brothers of the one family, whose Head is the everlasting Father,
may well be brotherly and kind. In conclusion, gathering up what has been illustrated
and enforced, it may be shown that (1) famine makes a public testimony for the one,
living God; (2) famine, reaching to affect all classes, makes this testimony everywhere ;
and (3) famine becomes everywhere a test of characters and beliefs.—R. ‘T.


Ver. 4.—The evil of childish rulers, “Babes shall rule over them.” No greater
calamity can come on a nation than the succession of mere children to the throne, and
government by regency and party. Ahaz ascended the throne at the age of twenty
(2 Chron. xxviii. 1). Manasseh at age of twelve; Josiah at age of eight (2 Chron.
xxxili. 1; xxxiv. 1). The evil was, of course, exaggerated in Hastern countries, where
kings are irresponsible despots. ‘In an Eastern monarchy the rule of a young king,
rash and without experience, guided by counsellors like himself, was naturally regarded
as the greatest of evils, and the history of Rehoboam had impressed this truth on the
mind of every Israelite.” ‘ Woe to thee, O land, when thy king is a child” (Eccles.
x. 16). When the strong men and wise men are removed by disease and calamity,
weaklings get into office and place of authority, and surely create fresh evils by their
incapacity.

]. THE EVIL OF RULERS WHO ARE CHILDREN IN AGE. Such, being unable to decide
and act for themselves, are dependent on court advisers; so there is every opportunity
for court intrigue, rivalry of parties, and the sacrifice of national interests to party
advantage. Under weak governments class is set against class. Illustrate the petulance
of boys in the exercise of assumed authority. It comes out even in their play. In old
times young kings were under the supreme influence of the queen-mother, and she
might be a Jezebel or an Athaliah. The most anxious times of English history are
times of regency.

Il. THe EVIL OF RULERS WHO ARE CHILDREN IN UNDERSTANDING. Such as Reho-
boam. ‘The evil is qualified in constitutional countries; but even in them the king
gives tone to society. It has often been a consequence of war that a land has been left
to the government of the incompetent. Corruption at court has sometimes led the best
meu to retire from the government. Under such inefficient rule, in an Eastern kingdom,
all is chaotic and anarchic; there is a conditioa which can only be fittingly represented
by the Turkey or Egypt of our own times. Apply to the small kingdoms of (1) society,
(2) friendship, (8) families, and urge the importance, to the well-being of a nation, of
manly men, and manly, strong, wisely ruling fathers.—R. T.


Ver. 8.— The secret of national ruin. ‘Their tongue and their doings are against the
Lord.” This is given distinctly as the reason and the explanation of the ruin of Judah.
The prophet goes right past all accidents and all national events, and fixes on the moral
cause of the ruin. A nation is bad at the core when it can doubt and dishonour God;
and no such nation can stand long. God will surely arise to vindicate himself and to
shake terribly the earth. Isaiah uses a singular figure: “To provoke the eyes of his
glory.” The offence which wilfulness and iniquity give to the holiness of God is com-
pared to the sensitiveness of the human eye. Matthew Henry says, “In word and
action they brake the Law of God, and therein designed an affront to him; they wilfully
intended to offend him, in contempt of his authority and defiance of his justice. Their
tongue was against the Lord, for they contradicted his prophets; and their doings were
no better, for they acted as they talked. It was an aggravation of their sin that God’s
eye was upon them, and that his glory was manifested among them; but they provoked
him to his face, as if the more they knew of his glory the greater pride they took in
slighting it, and turning it into shame.”

I. ReBELLIoUS sPEECH A CORRUPTING ForcE. Apply to boastful, self-conceited
specch ; the speech of the masterful and ambitious man. Apply to the influence of the
infidel lecturer, or infidel literature, The young especially are carried away by it to


CH. OL 1—96.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 65


self-indulgence, and find in it excuse for vicious practices. Infidelity never lays
foundations for virtue to build on. It is ever the substratum of vice. Illustrate from
the French Revolution,

I]. ReBeLLIoUs DEEDS A CALL FOR JUDGMENT. The bad deeds are the proper fruitage
of bad speech. Illustrate by the evil work of the demagogue. Break down the sacred
restraints of faith in God, and evils rush in like a flood. When man feels free to do
what he likes, his likes are sure to be bad ones, Impress that no account of a man’s
ruin, or a nation’s ruin, will suffice which deals only with his circumstances. Nobody
was ever ruined by accident. Man’s tongue and doings will always provide the expla-
nation of his extreme calamities.—R. T.


Vers. 10, 11—Messages to the righteous and the wicked. These verses are paren-
thetical. “They assert the doctrine of ‘ future rewards and punishment’ in a spiritual
and not a mechanical sense. Good deeds ripen into happiness, as evil deeds into
misery ” (Cheyne). The point of impression may be stated thus—

I. Vo THe rigHTEous—Gop’s JUDGMENTS ARE NOT INDISCRIMINATE.

Il. To THE wick~ED—Gop’s JUDGMENTS ARE INEVITABLE, “The pious are graciously
assured, that in the worst of times, and under the most trying circumstances, God will
be their Friend and Rewarder; while the ungodly are equally assured that they shall
suffer merited punishment ” (Henderson). Compare the Divine pleadings with Cain
(Gen. iv. 7), and Abraham’s pleading over guilty Sodom (Gen. xviii. 25). See Asaph’s
perplexity because it was so often ill with the righteous, and well with the wicked
(Ps. Ixxiii.). How can God answer those who, looking cursorily upon life, say that the
earthly lot of the righteous and of the wicked is very much the same? His answer
may be set forth under the following divisions. 1. God cares for the righteous, and has
some kind purpose towards tliem in letting them suffer. 2. The righteous should be
willing to accept of a share of suffering, which aims at the correction and salvation of
the many. 3. God keeps the conscience of the righteous quiet under suffering, and so
he does not feel its real bitterness. 4, God can keep the righteous from sharing suffering
if it pleases him so to do, just as he saved Israel in Goshen from the plagues that smote
the rest of Egypt. ‘To the wicked God’s judgments have a bitter sting, for they are
conscious of the connection between their sins and their judgments, unless conscience is
utterly dead, and then there must come for them an awful day of awakening. And if
the wicked do escape calamities here, there is the inevitable day coming when he mus‘
receive “according to the deeds done in his body.”—R. T.


Ver. 15.—Grinding the faces of the poor. Two figures are here employed: “ Beat my
people to pieces; ” “ Grind the faces of the poor.” One of these may help to the under-
standing of the other. Both deal with the tyrannies of masters, and may be illustrated
by the cruel treatment of slaves in the old slave-holding times. J. A. Alexander explains
the figures thus: “ Crush my people is a common figure for severe oppression (Job v. 4;
Prov. xxii. 22), Grind the faces upon the ground, by trampling on their prostrate
bodies, is also another strong figure for contemptuous and oppressive violence.” Ewald
thinks blows or wounds in the face may be referred to. ‘The figure may be taken from
the threshing-sled, a cart without wheels, having pieces of flint and iron on the under
side, which was drawn by oxen over the heap of wheat, grinding the grains. So the
exactions and forced labours to which the poor were subject was making lines and
furrows in their faces by their grinding influence. The figure may be illustrated by the
condition of the wretched fellahin in Egypt, who are ground with taxation until life has
become a burden. Matthew Henry gives two suggestions by way of explanation. “ You
put them to as much pain and terror as if they were ground in a mill, and as certainly
reduce them to dust by one act of oppression after another.” “ Their faces are bruised
and crushed with the blows you have given them; you have not only ruined the °
estates, but have given them persona! abuses.” Roberts gives specimens of similar
proverbial expressions current in India. “ Ah! my lord, do not thus crush my face.
Alas! alas! my nose and other features will soon be rubbed away. Is my face to be
made quite flat with grinding?” ‘That head man has beez grinding the faces of all his
people.” The opposite figure to this is to “smooth the tace,” mewing to “court o
flatter.”

ISAIAH. F


66 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH [cH. 11. 1—26


I. Man’s cRUELTY To THE Poor. [Illustrate the condition of poor people in Eastern
lands. They are the first to suffer in times of national calamity, pestilence, famine, or
war. The selfishness induced by national distress is seen in the neglect and ill treat-
ment of the poor. Weak governments make cruel exactions from the poor. Lordly
aud rich men too often crush the poor. Slave countries have awful records of cruelty to
the slave poor. Forced labour has, in many lands, embittered the lot of the poor. Now
the evil is rather selfish neglect than open cruelty. Rich and poor are separated by
wide class distinctions, and the poor are too often left in their misery to perish.

II. Gop’s CARE FOR THE Poor. Seen in his counsels respecting the treatment of
them, in his own wondrous ways of providing for them, and in the relation of his
manifested Son to them. Of him this was the characteristic, “ Blessed are the poor ; ”
“To the poor the gospel is preached.”

II]. Man’s CONCERN FOR THE POOR WHEN HE BECOMES Gop-LIKE. ‘Then he strives to
feel as Christ felt, and to act as Christ acts. See the spirit of pious Job (Job xxix.), and
compare Barnabas and Dorcas. The regenerate man cannot fail to interest himself in
those who are needy, or in trouble. The good man deals justly and kindly and thought-
fully with the lowly folk who serve him. Grinding the face of the poor is an absolute
impossibility to any man who has “ the mind of Christ.”—R. T.


Ver. 16.—Dress and character. The Word of God has sometimes things to say which
it cannot be satisfied to address generally to mankind; it requires a more direct super-
scription for its message, and writes to men, to women, even sometimes to wives,
maidens, mothers, widows, children. In the effort of Isaiah to produce a deep and
general conviction of the national sin and disgrace and impending ruin, he singles out
the women of that day; he bids us trace the influence of a godless luxury in their vain
dressing, frivolous manners, and overloaded ornamentation and jewellery. He intimates
that the nobler qualities of womanly mind and character were being lost in this great
increase of frivolity and vanity; and he sets us upon imagining not only the present
degradation of the land, but the yet deepvr degradation that must come, the utter ruin
of the generation that owned such women as mothers. Hallam says, “The love of
becoming ornament is not perhaps to be regarded in the light of vanity; it is rather
an instinct which woman has received from nature to give effect to those charms which
are her defence; and when commerce began to minister more efticiently to the wants of
luxury, the rich furs of the north, the gay silks of Asia, the wrought gold of domestic
manufacture, illumined the halls of chivalry, and cast, as if by the spell of enchantment,
that ineffable grace over beauty which the choice and arrangement of dress is calcu-
lated to bestow.” God cannot be especially pleased with a clothing of wearisome drab;
and he must know that when bright colours are forsworn, the vanity of the human
heart will still find expression in shape and pattern. He is ever dressing the brown
earth in garments of grass and flower, pluming the wings of his birds with varied tints;
and making gorgeous with bars of gold and crimson and blue the sky at sunsetting,
There are a few simple rules of dress which at once commend themselves to Christian
judgment.

I, A CHRISTIAN SHOULD DRESS WITHIN REASONABLE EXPENSE. What is reasonable
expense can never be settled by figures; it must always be left to individual decision ;
the utmost carefulness of one person may, relative to station, appear censurable extrava-
gance to another person. But we may say this: any expenditure is unreasonable
which deprives us of the means for meeting those higher claims which may be made
upon us—claims of (1) food, (2) family, (3) education, (4) hospitality, (5) charity, or (6)
religion, And all expenditure on luxurious dress is unreasonable, which prevents our
laying aside something against the calamities, diseases, and old age of the future.
Above all, dressing which involves the spending of money which belongs to our creditors
is a lie towards men, and an insult to God. Archbishop Leighton says, “ Excessive
costliness argues and feeds the pride of the heart, and defrauds, if not others of their
dues, yet the poor of their charity, which in God’s sight is a due debt too; and far
more comfort shalt thou have on thy death-bed, to remember that at such a time,
instead of putting lace on my own back, I helped a naked back to clothing.”

Il. A CuristIAN SHOULD DRESS ACCORDING TO THE BEST STANDARDS OF TASTE.
Best, not necessarily newest. These you will discover, not by observing persons who


OH. mm. 1—26.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 67
as


areforemost in fashion, but by observing those persons for whom you have the most
real respect. Whatever may be the class of society to which you belong, you can
discern, within the limits of your sphere, the contrast between the dress of the shallow
the frivolous, and vain, and the dress of the thoughtful, the humble, and the worthy.
Peter gives an idea of the standard of taste, in 1 Pet. iii. 3—5. :

Il. A CuRIsTIAN SHOULD DRES3 SUITABLY TO THE SPHERE IN LIFE WHICH 8HE
OCCUPIES, AND THE CLASS OF SOCIETY TO WHICH SHE BELONGS. If you do not act thus
you make yourselfa caricature ; you must be a hypocrite, trying to deceive people into the
idea that you are what you know that you are not. Most people easily read the disguise
and put a low estimate on the persons who foolishly resort to it. We honour the men
and women who bravely say, “ My sphere in life may be humble, but it is honest, and
therefore it is honourable. I am not ashamed to dress according to it. I can occupy my
place, and look just myself, with the smile of God, and the approbation of all good men,
upon me.” Let servants dress as servants, maidens as maidens, married women as
married, and the axed as aged. Lach to herself be true.

IV. A CurisTIAN SHOULD DRESS SO AS TO SERVE GoD BY HER DRESS. Our dress
has an influence on others—on those in our station, on those in classes of society below
us, and on the children we meet. This mode of influence is to be laid in service on the
Lord’s altar. Two points may be impressed from these considerations. 1. Dress reveals
character, ‘This is true of the character of each individual. We often take our notions
of a person from her dress. Carelessness, untidiness, and uncleanliness, things which
are very nearly akin to ungodliness, are revealed only by looking at some, so-called,
well-dressed people. Self-conceit, passion, and temper are exhibited in others. Some-
times we see persons of whom we think very pityingly. Poor creatures! There is
little inside the coxy dress but vanity, pride, and worldliness. And others as certainly
tells us of the inward modesty, the delicacy, seriousness, refinement of their souls.
Burns sings—

“Qh, wad some poo’er the giftie gie us,
To see o’orsels as ithers see us!”


And many of us have longed for the courage to tell others around us the impression
which their dress was making upon us. If the looking-glass could speak, what sur-
ree revelations it would make! It is true also of nations; dress is characteristic.
t is true of towns and districts in our own land. In some parts of our country, where
wages are good, and imitation finery is cheap, we find sharp contrasts of colour,
commonness of material, rude bold shapes, and overloading of tinsel. In other parts
where work is concerned with the more necessary articles required for man’s use, the
taste is sober, the quality good, and ornamentation refined. 2. Dress cultures churacter.
A woman feels right when she is well dressed, and in a sense is kept right by her dress.
The beautiful in appearance wants the beautiful in conduct to match it. Plato says,
* Behaviour, and not gold, is the ornament of woman. For a woman who wishes to
enjoy the favour of one man, good behaviour is the proper ornament, and not dresses,
You should have the blush upon your countenance, which is the sign of modesty,
instead of paint, and worth and sobriety instead of gold and emeralds.”—R. T.


Vers. 25, 26.—National evil in the loss of male population. The destruction of the
males in war is the cause of the extreme grief and helpless desolation of womanhood.
The figure is intense when read in the light of the condition of unprotected woman in
Eastern countries. ‘In the East of antiquity, as in many Eastern lands to this day,
the position of an unmarried woman, whether maid or widow, was a very unhappy
and perilous one. Only in the house of a husband could a woman be sure of respect
and protection. Hence the Hebrews spoke of the husband’s house as a woman’s menu-
chah, or ‘rest’—her secure and happy asylum from servitude, neglect, licence ”
(S. Cox). In the verses before us the etfect of the slaughter of the males on the com-
munity is described. The chief places of concourse are full of desolate, wailing women ;
and the state or nation is then personified as a desolate widow seated on the ground, a
sign both of mourning and degradation. For illustration of the figure, see Vespasian’s
coin. The device on it is a woman, disconsolate, in a sitting posture, leaning avainst
a palm tree, and the legend is “Judza capita.” As a@ modern illustration take the


68 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. rv. 1—6.


et


calamity which came upon France through the series of revolutionary and Napoleonic
wars. The conscription swept off the males; the age for soldicrs, and standard height,
were again and again reduced, until even the nation’s youths were destroyed ; and it has
taken years to recover the national strength. }

I. A NATION’s STRONG MEN ARE HER PRESENT Joy. They work well in the factory.
They advise well in the council. They ensure healthy and strong populations.


ll. A NaATION’s STRONG MEN ARE HER DEFENCE.


They ensure her respect abroad.


They preserve her when attacked. They keep olf disease by their vitality.
IIL. A NaTIon’s STRONG MEN ARE HER HOPE FOR THE FuTURE. ‘They put strength


into governmvnt, art, science, literature, labour.


Health is energy. A nation’s hope


lies in this being the description of her sons—mens sana in corpure sino. ‘hen what


a national calamity war is!


It takes a nation’s manhood. We may well “seek peace


and ensue it,” for it keeps our manhood.—R, T,


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER IV.


The existing division between ch. iii. and
iv. is scarcely satisfactory. Ver 1 of ch. iv.
belongs to the miuatory portion of the sec-
tion beginning with ch. ii. 1 and terminating
with ch. iv. 6, and so stands connectcd in
subject with ch. ili., which is wholly mina-
tory; whereas the remainder of ch. iv.
(vers. 2—6) is consolatory, consisting of a
series of promises. Ch. iv. 1 is also for-
mally connected with ch. iii. by the vaw
conjunctive, while the absence of any such
link at the opening of ver. 2 indicates the
commencement of a new paragraph at that
point.

Ver. 1.—Seven women shall take hold of
one man. This verse has been well called
a “companion picture to ch. iii. 6,7.” As
there, in the evil time of God’s judgmeit,
thedespairing menure represented as* taking
hold” of a respectable man to make him
their judge, so now the despairing women
“take hold” of such a man and request him
to allow them all to be regarded as his
wives. There has been such a destruction—
men are become so scarce—that no other-
wise can women escape the shame and re-
proach of bemg unwedded and childless.
Our own bread will we eat. They do not
ask him to support them; they are able
and willing to support themselves. To take
away ; rather, take thou away—the impera-
tive mood, not the infinitive. Our reproach.
Children were regarded as such a blessing
in the ancient times that to be childle-s
was a misfortune and a subject of reproach.
Hagar “despised” the barren Sarai (Gen.
xvi. 4). Her “adversary provoked Hannah
sore, because the Lord had shut up her
womb ” (1 Sam. i. 6). Compare the lament
of Antigoué, who views it as a disgrace that


she descends to the tomb unwed (Soph.,
‘ Antig.,’ ll. 813—816). Among the Jews
chiidle-suess was a special reproach, because
it took away all possibility of the woman
being in the line of the Messiah’s descent
(comp. ch. liv. 1—4).

Vers. 2—6.—<As the present prophecy (ch.
iii—iv.), though in the main one of tiireaten-
ing and denunciation, opened with a picture
that was encouraging and comforting (ch.
ii. 2 —4), so now it terminates with a similar
picture. The evangelical prophet, like the
great apostle of th» Gentiles, is unwilling
that any one should be “swallowed up with
overmuch sorrow.” He will not separate
the mercies of God from his judgments.

Ver. 2.—In that day shall the branch of
the Lord, etc. Some see in this pussage
merely a promise that in the Messianic times
the produce of the soil would become more
abundant than ever before, its harvests
richer, and its fruitage more luxuriant. But
in the light of later prophecy it is scarcely
possible to shut up the meaning within such
narrow limits. The “Branch” of Isaiah
can hardly be isolated altogether in a sound
exegesis from the “ Branch” of Jeremiah
(xxiii. 5; xxxiii. 15) and of Zechariah (iii.
8; vi. 12). Now, the “Branch” of Zecha-
riah is stated to be “a man” (vi. 12: note
that the word used for “Branch” is the
same as Isaiah’s, viz. tsemahh), and the
‘* Branch ” of Jeremiah is a King (xxxiii. 15).
Moreover, Isaiah uses a nearly equivalent
term (nétser) in an admittedly Messianic
sense. Although, therefore, there is some
obscurity in the phrase, ‘Branch of Je-
hovah,” it would seem to be hest to under-
stand Isaiah as here intimating, what he
elsewhere openly declares (ch. xi. 1—5)—
viz. the coming of the Messiah in the latter
days as the ornament and glory of his pecple.
Be beautiful and glorious; rather, for beauty
and glory; or, for ornament and glory; ie
for the ornament and glorification of Israel


oH. Iv. 1—6.]


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, : 69


a


And the fruit of the earth. It is argued
with reason that the two clauses of this
verse are parallel, not antithetical, and that
as we understand the one, so must we under-
stand the other. If, then, the “ Branch” is
the Messiah, so is “the fruit of the earth ”—
which may well be, since he was “the grain
of wheat” which “fell into the ground and
died, and so brought forth much fruit”
(John xii. 24). Excellent and comely;
rather, for majesty and beauty (comp.
Exod. xxviii. 2, 40). Unto the escaped of
Israel; ¢.e. “to those who shall have sur-
vived the great calamity, and become citi-
zens of the restored Jerusalem.” Dr. Kay
well remarks that “the prophecy was ade-
quately fulfilled only in those who ‘saved
themselves’ froin the generation which re-
jected Christ. That remnant was the verm
of the Catholic Ciurch, made such by being
incorporated into the true Vine” (‘Speaker’s
Commentary,’ note ad loc.).

Ver. 3.—He that is left ... he that re-
maineth. Equivalent to the “escaped ” of
the preceding ver-e. Shall be called holy,
Strikingly fulfilled in the fact that the early
Christians were known as Gyio, “holy,” or
KAntol Gyo, “those called to be holy,” in
the first age (Acts ix. 13, 32, 41; xxvi. 10;
Momma tiple Cor, le 2) 2) Cor. i. _1 >) Eph,
i. 1; Phil. i. 1, etc.). Perhaps, however,
more is meant than this. ‘The early Chris-
tians not only were called, but were “ holy.”
Even Gibbon plices the innocent lives of
the early Christians among th» causes of
the conversion of tae Romanempire. Every
one that is written among the living. A
register of the “living,” or “ heirs of life,”
is here assumed, as in Exod. xxxii. 32; Ps.
lxix. 28; Dan. xii. 1; Rev. xiii. 8; xxi. 27,
ete. It is a“ bouk,” however, out of which
names may be “ blotted ” (Rev. iii. 5).

Ver. +.—When the Lord shall have washed
away the filth of the daughters of Zion (sce
ch, iii. 16—24). Sin must not be merely
repented of and pardoned; it must be put
away. There could be no Jerusalem, in
which all should be “called holy,” until
the mora! detilement of the daughters of


15; lix. 3). It is possible, however, that
the murder of infants in sacrifice to Moloch
may be in the prophet’s mind. Ahaz “ burnt
his children in the fire after the abomina-
tions of the heathen” (2 Chron. xxviii. 3).
Manasseh did the same (2 Chron, xxxiii. 6);
and the practice was probably widespread
among the people long before Isiiah’s time
(see Ps. evi. 38; ch. lvii. 5). By the spirit
of burning; or, by a blast of burning; i.e.
a fiery blast which shall destroy everything
(comp. ch. i. 31),

Ver. 5.— Upon every dwelling-place
(“over the whole habitation,’ Revised Ver-
sion). Mr. Cheyne translates “upon the
whole site,” and takes the “site” to be
especially the temple. Makén seems cer-
tainly never to be used for anything but
“God’s dwelling-place” (Exod. xv. 17; 1
Kings viii. 13, 39, ete.; 2 Chron. vi. 2, 30,
étel;) Hizra, ii GS sebss Xxxiiel 4 Ixxxixs
14; xevii. 2; civ. 5; ch. xviii. 4; Dan. viii.
11). Perhaps, however, evry dwelling-
place of God, i.e. every Christian Church,
is intended. On these, and on all Christian
assemblies, there will rest a new prcvsence
of (:od—one which he will have “ created ; ’
recalling that of the pillar of fire and of
cloud which rested in the wilderness on
the Jewish tabernacle (Exod. xxxiii. 9; xl.
84—388, etc.). A cloud and smoke by day.
The “pillar of the cloud” is never said in
the Pentateuch to liave been one of “ smoke;”
but Sinai “smoked” when God descended
on it (Exod. xix. 18; xx. 18), and the
psalmist speaks of a “smoke” as issuing
out of God’s nostrils (Ps. xviii. 8). In the
poetry of Isaiah, “smoke,” no less than
“cloud,’ symbolizes Gou’s presence (see ch.
vi. 4). Upon all the glory shall be a de-
fence; rather, as in the margin, a covering.
Over all the glory of Zion, its purged temple
and its puritied assemblies. the presence of
God shall rest like a Ganopy, protectiig it.

Ver. 6.—And there shail be, etc.; rather,
and it (i.e. “the canopy”) shall be a taber-
nacle, or bower, a shelter from the sums heat
by day, and from storm and rain both Ly day
and night. The metaphors need no explas


Zion was swept away. Purged the blood | nation.
of Jerusalem from the midst (comp. ch. i.
HOMILETICS.


Vers. 2—6.—The glories of the restored Church. Three principal glories are here
noted by the prophet as belonging to “that day ”—the day of judgment upon Judah
and Jerusalem for their manifold sins, and of restoration and re-establishment of the


mountain of (iod’s Church at the head of the mountains (ch. ii. 2).


These are (1) the


coming of Messiah in person for ornament and glory, for majesty and beauty, to be
the admiration and delight of his people; (2) the purity and holiness of the persons
who constitute the restored Church ; and (3) the continuity of the presence of God with
bis Church from the time of its re-establishment, and the security consequent upon his


70 . ‘THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. 1v. 1—6.


protection. At all periods of its existence, the Church will do well to bear in mind
that these are its special glories, and to make each a subject of frequent thought and
meditation.

I. THe comine or Mgssta TO FOUND HIS CHURCH LIES AT THE ROOT OF ALL. The
glorious “ Branch ”--the new shoot of the house of David (ch. xi. 1)—which sprang
from the old stock, and grew up “ like a tree planted by the water-side, which bringeth
forth its fruit in due season, the leaf whereof shall not wither ” (Ps. i. 3), had first to
come and to dwell with man, and to reveal himself, in his glory and majesty and beauty,
as the perfect moral Being, the pattern Man, after whom all should shape their lives,
before a ho/y Church, a Church of “ saints,” could be set up on earth, or men could
know in what true holiness and righteousness consisted. The “Branch” came,
“beautiful and glorious, excellent and comely,” “the chiefest among ten thousand”
(Cant. v.10), ‘his eyes as the eyes of doves” (ver. 12), “his lips dropping sweet-
smelling myrrh ” (ver. 13), “bis countenance as Lebanon, excellent as the cedars, his


mouth most sweet,” yea, he himself “ altovether lovely ” (vers. 15, 16); and the earth
saw what it had never seen before—atsolu erfect humanity. Nor was this the
whole. He who set the perfect pattern made also the perfect atonement; “ washed


away the filth” of sin (ch. iv. 4); “ purified to himself a peculiar people ” (‘Titus ii. 14) ;
made holiness possible to man, who was “ very far gone from original righteousness,”
corrupt, “sold under sin” (Rom. vii. 14). Thus the first glory fitly introduces the
second—

IJ. THE HOLINESS OF THOSE WHO ARE TRUE MEMBERS OF HIS CuurcH, “ Holiness
becometh God’s house for ever ” (Ps. xciil. 5); “ Without holiness shal] no man see the
Lord” (Heb. xii. 14). Christians are holy by profession, by call, by oblivation; if they
will, by life and act. Not, indeed, holy in the highest sense; not as they ought to be;
not “as he is holy” (1 Pet. i. 15); for “if we say that we have no sin, we deceive
ourselves, and the truth is not in us” (1 John i. 8), But still “ holy ” in a real sense;
ever striving to be holy, ever repenting, ever seeking and obtaining forgiveness, ever
washed afresh in the blood of Christ, which “cleanseth from ail sin” (1 John i. 7).
The unholy, who “ persist in sin” without striving against it, are no true members of
the Church of Christ, but false pretenders to membership, “stranzers to Christ’s
covenant, and aliens from his commonwealth” (HKph. ii. 12). The real Church ig
“holy,” as it is called in the Apostles’ Creed ; deriving its holiness ever from him who is
its Life, from whom it receives continually fresh supplies of vrace, and fresh power to
resist temptation. The holiness of the Church is thus dejendent on the presence of
God with it; and the second vlory leads naturally to the consideration of the third—

Ill. He coNTINUED PRESENCE OF GoD WITH HIS CHURCH, AND HIS CONTINUED
PROTECTION OF IT. “ Lo, 1 am with you alway, even unto the end of the world,” is
the most precious promise of the New Testament. Christ is with his Church (1) in
her sacred buildings, when common prayer is made (Matt. xiii. 19) and sacraments are
administered ; (2) in her synods, when doctrine is formulated and false teaching
exposed and condemned (Matt. xviii. 17); and (8) in the secret chamber of each one
of her members, when approach is made to the throne of grace, and confession poured
forth or prayer offered to God through Christ. In this presence is the Church's sole
trust. Without it she would be powerless against the world, and against Satan. With
it she may contemn all attacks. Satan can do her no harm, for “the gates of hell
shall not prevail against her” (Matt. xvi. 18). The world cannot hurt her, for he who
is her Protector “ has overcome the world” (John xvi. 33), Safe under his protection,
nestling under the shadow of his wings, she is safe both by day and night ; whether the
scorching fire of persecution seeks her destruction, as in the early times, or whether, as
now, the murky night of agnostic criticism closes around her and endeavours to affright
her with its shadows.


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers, 2—6.—Glimpse of futwre prosperity. There will come a day when the cleans-
ing fire will have run its course through the spiritual field, consuming the tares. The
impurity of licentious luxury will have been washed away, the stain of blood effaced


ou. Iv. 1—6.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 71
ee


from Judah’s rulers (ch. iii. 14; comp. ch. i. 25; vi.13; Matt. iii. 11). Then, and then
only, can the glorious day come in the vision of which the prophet exults.

I, NaTIONAL CONDITIONS OF PROSPERITY. “The shoot of Jehovah will be for adorn-
ment and honour.” Hrit germen Domini in magnificentia et gloria. The rich (ertility
of the land is compared to a new sprouting growth, caused by the creative energy of
God, When the Spirit of God is felt to be operative in the life of a people, then, and
then only, can its life be both strong and beautiful. See, again, this thought in ch.
XXviii. 5: hv will be as a “ crown of glory and diadem of beauty ” to the residue of his
people. “Then shall he give the rain of thy seed, that thou shalt sow the ground
withal; and bread of the increase of the earth, and it shall be fat and plenteous: in
that day shall thy cattle feed in large pastures” (ch. xxx. 23). “In thut day the
mountains shall drop down new wine, and the hiiis shall flow with milk, and all the
rivers of Judah shall flow with waters, and a fountain shall come forth out of the house
of Jehovab, and shall water the valley of Shittim ” (Joel iii. 18). “ Behold, the days
come, saith Jehovah, that the ploughman shall overtake the reaper, and the treader of
grapes him that soweth seed; and the mountains shall drop sweet wine, and all the
hills shall melt... . They shall plant vineyards, and drink the wine thereof; they
shall also make gardens, and eat the fruit of them. And I will plant them upon
their land, and they shall no more be pulled up out of their land which I have
given them, saith Jehovah thy God” (Amos ix. 18—15). “I will sow her unto me
in the earth” (Hos. ii. 23). Glowing pictures! Israel’s golden age ever is in the
future. And for all who “ hope in God,” the “ good old times,” the “Saturnian reign,”
is coming again. Maynus ab inteyro secloruwm nascitur ordo. The hard oaks shall
again sweat with the dewy honey; our sweetest dreams become a solid fact. ‘ From
me is thy fruit found ” (Hos, xiv. 8).

II. PERSONAL CONDITIONS OF PROSPERITY. The one condition is personal holiness,
“Every relict in Zion, and every one remaining in Jerusalem, will be called a saint;
every one who has been written among the living in Jerusalem.” Profound thought!
the holy man alone is the living man. Matter is death; spirit is exemption from the
rule of matter. Holiness is victory over matter—in its lower form, fleslily cleanliness ;
inits higher, the purity of self-consistent truth that will not njy with what is alien
to itself.

Ill. Visistz etorres. Upon every home on Mount Zion, and every place of prayer,
there will be the cloud by day, and the fyme and splendour of famine fire by night ;
over all the glory a Tgplection, “‘ Wherever there is true spiritual exaltation and
majesty, there is around it a covering and protection which keeps the world away from
it.” ‘“There’s a divinity doth hedge a king.” We cannot constantly bear the splen-
dour; we need the cool calm commonplaces of life to resort to when our eyes are
wearied with the glare of highest truth. And we may find the “calin retreat, the silent
shade,” of religious life no less welcome than the mount of glory and of vision. From
the storm and rain we may find a refuge in the “secret place of the Most High.”—J.


Ver. 1.— Depopulation and its doctrine. This passage belongs to the two concluding
verses of the last chapter; but as it is the most striking of the three, we may allow it
to be our starting-point in gleaning the thoughts which the whole scene suggests.
These are—

I. EXTREME DESOLATION WROUGHT IN THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF Gop. The land is
stripped by war of its male population (ch, iii. 25); those who gather at the gates
bewail the humiliation under which they smart, the privation to which they are
reduced. “Her gates shall lament,” etc. (ch. iii. 26). Jerusalem can no longer stand
in her strength and honour; she is prostrate in weakness and in her shame; desolate,
she sits upon the ground. Such tS the havoc which war has made, that the virgin
daugiffers of the land, instead of waiting modestly to be addressed, go out in numbers
to find themselves husbands under any unnatural condition, sv that the reproach of
perpetual virginity and childlessness may le somehow removed (text). In the righteous
rule of God, sin ends in utter desolation. It may be the history of the nution, as in this
instance. Its stages are these: departure from the will and Word of God ; luxury and
corru;tion; effeminacy and weakness; strife and defeat; exile, poverty, loneliness,
attempts to gratify hope and ambition by unnatural and pitiable methods. But this


72 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [eu. 1v. 1—6.


——


may be the experience of the individual. “Evil shall slay the wicked, and they that
hate the righteous shall be desolate” (Ps. xxxiv. 21). Sin is likely, if indeed it is not
sure, to lead duwn to tlis sad estate. It manifests itself in folly and, through folly,
conducts to loss, privation, loneliness, desolation. And the last scene of all is one like
this of the text; it resorts to unnatural and wholly unsatisfactory means to fill its heart
and restore its life.

I]. A SIGNIFICANT PROVISION ORDERED IN THE PROVIDENCE OF Gop, The abnormal
circumstance suggests the normal. In the absence of such a scourge as that of war—
and for this our sin is entirely responsible—there would be found to be a virtual equality
in the number of the sexes. For nearly every son of man a daughter is born into the
world, Surely this points to the Divine intention that man and wife should dwell
together in bonds of conjugal affection. It places no stigma on single life, but it
indicates the purpose of our kind Creator, that one human heart should comfort and
sustain another, with reciprocated love and complementary succour, along the path of
human life. It says to those who have ears to hear it that polygamy is not according
to the Divine will; that the celibacy of a class, or order, or community is not vf Divine
appointmerit ; that the home where one husband and one wile dwell in undisturbed and
ever-deepening attachment—the providing hand of the one clasping the dispensing
hand of the other—is the realization of the Divine design.

II]. AN HONOURABLE INSTINCT PLANTED BY THE HAND OF Gop. Similar passages
(Gen. xxx. 23; 1Sam.i.6; ch. liv. 1; Lukei. 25) suggest that the “reproach” which
the women desired to have removed was that of childlessness rather than that of vir-
ginity. Jewish women, we know, carnestly desired to be mothers; they may have
cherished the hope that of them the Messiah would be born. In any case it was an
honourable ambition. The real reproach rests with those who wish to be childless that
they ma) be saved the anxieties, respousibilities, and labours that devolve on tie faithful
mother. ‘lhere cannot be a more desirable or excellent as; iration for the parent to
indulze than that of so training her (his) children that they shall become men and


women whom the Lord will love, and for whom the Church and nation will give
thanks.—C.


Vers. 2—4.— Restoration. It is uncertain whether there is a secondary allusion here
to the coming of tiie Messiah; but it is certain that, in its primary sense, the passage
refers to the condition of Judah after the return from exile. ‘Treating it in this latter
signification, we leam— 7

I. THar THE END OF DIVINE JUDGMENT IS HUMAN TRANSFORMATION. (Ver. 4.) The
Lord would “ wash away the filth of the daughters of Zion... by the spirit Lor, ‘ power]
of judgment.” It may be that the righteous Ruler, as such, is bound to make penalty
follow sin, whatever may be the consequence to the individual transgressor, But it is clear
that, in the exercise of his judicial function, God seeks moral and spiritual renovation.
He desires that the nation (the man) which is humbled and afflicted, shall be purified
by the fires throuzh which it (he) is passing. In the midst of the flame the offender
may hear the voice from above saying, “ Put away thy sin; return unto me; euter a new
path; live the better life of righteousness, purity, devotion.”

Il, ‘THatT THE NEW AND BETTER LIFE WILL BE AN ESSENTIALLY HOLY ONE, (Ver, 5.)
“ He that is left in Zion shall be called holy.” Whether by him “ thar is left in Zion”
we are to understand those that were never carried into cay tivity, or those that have
returned, is of no importance ; the reference is to Jews who have undergone humiliation
and suffering, and who have been cleansed and purified thereby. These sliall be possessors
of life in its excelleney and reality—* written among the living.” Before, existence was
nothing but existence; enlarged and ennobled by “the spirit of judgment,” it bas
become life; and it “shall be called holy,” because ét has become holy. Atter a genuine
repentance (national or individual) there comes a profound and enduring sanctity cf
spirit and of life, Old sin is abhorred, strenuously striven agaiust, sedulously shunned,
New graces and virtues are carefully cultivated and daily illustrated (see 2 Cor. vii.
10, 11; Ps. li. 7—11).

Tl. Tuar THIS NEW LIFE WILL BE NOT ONLY ACCEPTABLE TO Gop, BUT EVEN
ADMIRABLE IN HIS SIGHT. (Ver. 4.) The “ branch of the Lord” é.e, the outgrowth of
piety from the fallen nation, shall be “beauty and glory ;” the produce of the land


CH. Iv. 1—6.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHE'’ ISAIAH. 73
eg ee a


(fruit of the earth), the worth which springs up from the restored nation, shall be excel-
lency and ornamentation. The Holy One of Israel will not only accept the new national
life thus presented to him ; he will regard it with distinct, Divine satisfaction. And that
which is pleasing in his sight will be attractive and excellent in the esteer of men.
National and individual renovation is not only a thing which God accepts and acknow-
ledges, worthy of our sanction ; it is much more than that. It is beautiful, comely, even
glorious. Here is: 1. Encouragement to the fallen. Let the nation, or the Church, or the
individual soul which has fallen, which has felt the blow of the Divine hand, and which
is understanding the Divine summons, rise and be renewed; there is a future before it
of acceptable service, of beautiful and admirable excellency. 2. Inspiration for the
devout worker. Let communities or let souls be reduced by sin and brought very low;
let the judgment of God be heavy upon them; it is far from hopeless that they may
rise again ; trom the fallen trunk may spring a living branch, bee”\tiful to the sight
and fruitful in every good word and work.—C,


Vers. 5,6.—Divine protection. In strong, poetic terms the prophet intimates—

I. Tuat Gop Takes A DIVINE PLEASURE IN HIS PEOPLE. We know from other
Scriptures tliat the Lord’s portion is his people (Exod, xix. 5; Deut. xxxii. 9; Ps. xlvii. 4).
Here the people of God are spoken of as “the glory” of the Lord (ver. 5). There are
aspects in which it must appear to us the extreme point of Divine condescension to use
such terms of his redeemed ones. But there are other aspects in which we can see that
they are not altogether inappropriate. God’s ancient people were, and his regenerated
children are, the witnesses und instances of his glorious redemption. Redeemed from
political or spiritual bondage, they rejoice in a blessed freedom ; raised from dark depths
of misery and despair, they sing the psalms of joy and hope; purged from vanity and
folly, they walk in the ascending path of heavenly wisdom.

II. Tuat Gop PROMISES HIS PEOPLE HIS DIvINE Protection. ‘Upon all the glory
shall be a defence.” As in the old desert days the tribes of Israel were led by the pillar
of cloud by day and all the night by a pilar of fire, so shall the Divine Leader guide
his people in the path which is still before them (ver. 5). From the burning heat and
from the pelting storm there shall be found a covert for those who put their trust in
him. God’s promised defence extends: 1. To his people in their various relationships ;
whether gathered in the family “ dwelling-place,” or met in their sacred “ assemblies,”
or, we may add, whether jourueying in that solitariness of spirit with which we must
all be ‘amiliar (Gal. vi. 5) along the path of life;—that is, in their domestic,
ecclesiastical, and individual relations. 2. To his people in the checkered experiences
of their career. God will be their defence from (1) the perils peculiar to prosperity
(pride, selfishness, contemptuousness, worldliness, etc.)—there shall be “a shadow in
the daytime from the heat;” and (2) the dangers incident to adversity (sullenness,
rebelliousness, moroseness, despair, etc.)—there shall be “a covert from sturm and
from rain.”

IJ. ‘Hat THEsE DIVINE PROMISES ARE CONDITIONAL ON OUR CONTINUED OBEDIENCE
AND BELIEVING PRAYER. God speaks peace unto his people, “ but let them not turn
again to folly ” (Ps. lxxxv. 8; see Ezek, xxxiii. 13), The Divine promise proved good
in this particular instance just so long and so far as the conditions which were implied
were faithfully observed. God’s promises are “ exceeding great and precious,” and we
may “live thereby,” ¢f we will. But we must not fail (1) to walk in the way of his
commandments, nor (2) to plead his Word in expectant prayer; if we do, we shall fail
to enjoy in its fulness the defence of the “ almighty arms.”—C.


Ver. 1.—Immortality in a continued race. “ Take thou away our reproach.” This verse
has been much misconceived. Its figures are Kastern, and their interpretation depens
on our knowledge of the condition and sentiments of Hastern women. It is simply a
forcible description of the calamities brought upon a nation by continued war. ‘Ihe
men were tu (all by the sword; and the slaugliter was to be so great that the number
of women should far exceed the number of men who should survive. Now, to be
unmarried and childless is an occasion o! the greatest reproach in the Kast; from the
Jewish standpvint this was not only a great sorrow, but a great shame, implying, as
was then thought, some sin of which it was the chastisement. And there was a yet


74 YHE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. rv. 1—6.


deeper sentiment concerning childlessness which needs to be taken into account.
Immortality was, in those older days, thought of as a family rather than a personal
privilege. A man lived on, lived again, in his descendants. Lange says, “ In its most
ancient parts the Old Testament knows no other genuine life than that on this earth,
and thus no other continuation of living after death than by means of children. To be
childless was, then, the same as being deprived of continuance after death. It corre-
sponded to the being damned of the New Testament.” In their distress and wretched-
ness the young women who had minced and flirted through Jerusalem with their gay
clothing and fine trinkets, contrary to their natural modesty, would become suitors to
the men, and under the hardest conditions seek the name and credit of wedlock, to be
free from the reproach that would otherwise be their portion. Kimchi, the Jewish
commentator, says this happened in the days of Ahaz, when Pekah, the son of Remaliah,
slew in Judza one hundred and twenty thousand men in one day. The widows which
were left were so nunierous that the prophet said, ‘“‘ Their widows are increased to me
above the sand of the seas” (Jer. xv. 8). The idea that man’s immortality is the
continuance of the race has been revived and set attractively before the people in
modern poetry and literature ; and though it is only a small piece of the truth concern-
ing mau’s future, a mere beginning in the revelation of man’s immortality, we need not
hesitate to recognize it as a partial truth, and to set before ourselves those views of the
responsibility of our present lives which it suggests. We know that “life and immor-
tality ” for the individual have been ‘‘ brought to light by the gospel of the Lord Jesus
Christ,” and in this fuller and higher and more satisfying revelation we heartily
rejoice; but still we may learn something by occupying for a moment the older
standpoint.

I. THE IMMORTALITY OF A NATION IS ITS PERMANENCY AS A FREE PEOPLE. This is
illustrated by the anxiety of Eastern kings to secure heirs to their thrones and continu-
ance to their dynasties. Divine judgments cut off kingly races, as that of Saul,
Omri, etc. Divive promises assured that David’s and Solomon’s kingdoms should
endure for ever. Nations, as such, have no immortality in a future state.

IJ. THE IMMORTALITY OF A GENERATION IS ITS REPRODUCTION IN SUCCESSIVE GENERA-
Tions. ‘One generation passeth, and another cometh,” and in a very true sense the
next generation is the old one restored, under somewhat varying conditions. The
genius of a generation is immortal only in the generations that follow it.

Ill. THE IMMORTALITY OF A MAN IS THE FAMILY HE STARTS. ‘This explains the
ambition to “found a family,” which is not merely man’s monument, but the man
himself living again, and living on through the ages. He puts his personal impress
upon his children, and the children’s children keep alive the idiosyncrasy of the
parent. Illustrate from the Abrahamic race, which is, in a sense, the immortality of
Abraham.

IV. THE PRACTICAL BEARING OF SUCH A VIEW OF IMMORTALITY. Its fills with
seriousness the position of all parents. ‘What manner of persons ought they to be,”
if they are thus to be perpetuated? A nation must be riyhteous if it is to be worth
continuing. A generation must be physically and morally healthy, if its impress on
the coming generations is to be a blessing. The father, the mother, must bear pure,
true, worthy characters if their family is to be an honour. He who seeks an immor-
tality in his race is bound to see to it that he only perpetuates goodness, integrity,
truth, faith, and all thinys that are noble. From this -lower position the preacher may
easily advance to argue how much more solemn life has become for us now that nobler
views of the future are revealed by him who came forth out of the eternal mysteries,
and has passed again within them, that we might henceforth read our earth-lives in the
light of that sublime personal immortality which he has disclosed.—R. T.


Ver. 2.—The Divine and human Messiah. This verse has been explained as a
promise merely of the renewed lertility of the earth in God’s day of restorings. That
explanation is not, however, deep enough. It does not recognize how characteristic it
was of the ancient prophets to refer to local and historical circumstances while their
minds soared away to those Messianic pictures, which local incidents only suggested.
The constant thought of the prophets was the ideal age and ideal person of Messiah,
and we are right in detecting the expression of that thought everywhere. This verse


cH. Iv. 1—6.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 75
ee


may be regarded as introducing the person by whom the Church is to be delivered and
saved; and the terms employed appear to bear an intimation of his Divine and human
natures. The figure of the “ Branch ” suggests his divinity (comp. Jer. xxiii. 5; xxxiii.
15; Zech. iii. 8; vi. 12). The figure “ fruit of the earth ” suggests his humanity. That
this may have been the thought of the prophet is indicated by the adjectives which are
used. “Beautiful and glorious” are adjectives of admiration applied to Messiah,
regarded as the “Branch.” “Excellent and comely” are adjectives of appreciation
and relation to us, and are applied to him regarded as the “fruit of the earth.”

I, Tue Divine MussiIaH CAN BE A SUFFICIENT REVEALER OF Gop. Illustrate from
the way in which our Lord constantly urged that he only spoke the words given him
by the Father, and only did the works of the Father.

Il. Toe numAaN MEsstIaH CAN BE IN SYMPATHY WITH MEN. Illustrate the “ High
Priest who can be touched with the feeling of our infirmities.” In view of the troubles
and distresses which Isaiah pictures, and which Messiah is to rectify, it is evident that he
must be divinely strong if he is to master, heal, recover, cleanse, and bring on restored
blessings; and it is equally evident that he must be human, to sympathize with and
come helpfully near to those whom he would bless and save.—R. T.


Ver. 3.— The roll of the living. “Every one that is written among the living in
Jerusalem.” For the figure of “ Jehovah’s book,” or the ‘ book of life,” see Exod.
xxxii, 832; Ps. lvi. 8; Ixix. 28; Mal. ili. 16; Dan. xii. 1; Phil. iv. 8; Rev. xiii. 8;
xxi, 27. Matthew Heury says, “Those that are kept alive in killing, dying times
were written for life in the book of Divine He amtnone ana shall we not suppose
those who are rescued from a greater death to be such as were written in the Lamb’s
book of life?” We have a further description of them, which really explains their being
on the xgll; they are “ called holy.” Now, God never calls people what they are net
In olden times names were always significant, and expressed the personality to which
they were applicd; thus Jacob was called Israel, because he was a “prince.” We
have, then, two answering views of the godly man. Here he is “holy;” in heaven
his name is in the “‘ book of the living.” Following this out in a meditative way, we
dwell on—

J. THE BELIEVER’S PRESENT CHARACTER. In some sense he is “ holy,” for God calls
him “holy.” Illustrate the following senses in which we may be called “ holy,” even
while we tarry amidst the human frailties: 1. Holy, as separated from self-service and
the world’s service. 2. Holy, as consecrated to God’s service. 38. Holy, as called to
pursue holiness. 4. Holy, as in some measure actually holy. 5. Holy, as standing in
the holiness of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Il. THE BELIEVER’S ETERNAL SECURITY. Name is among the living ones, Illustrate:
1. The necessary permanence of all goodness. vil can die; good can never die.
Eternal life is in everything and every one who is good. 2. God rewards holiness with
immortality. That is the “crown of life.” Upon all goodness God’s special favour and
protection rests, 3. The holy are the natural citizens of the heavenly, which is the
secure eternal home. How, then, can our names be written in the book of life? Tlus-
trate (1) the way of regeneration; (2) the way of consecration ; (3) the way of sancti-
fication. If, through grace, we are numbered among the holy here, then one day the
great voice will speak to us out of the heavenly and say, “ He that is holy, let him be
holy still.”—R. T.


Ver. 4.-—Christ’s purified Church, We are often addressing the truths revealed in
Christ Jesus to the individual, but perhaps we unduly neglect their bearings on the
Church as a whole which Christ has founded in the earth; those relations in which
Christ himself stands to the Church, as the kingdom over which he is now actually
ruling. It would be well for us distinctly to apprehend this truth, that the gospel only
completes its work when, having renewed the individuals, it has also brought them
into a fellowship of love and service one with another. The revelation which is made
_ in Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is a revelation of our common sonship to God, and so
of our common brotherhood one with the other. We can only reach to feel or to keep
the full joy of our sonship through realizing and living out day by day our brotherhood.
The best brothers are the best sons.


76 THE BOOK OF THK PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. rv. 1—6.


i


I. Some pEscaipTions or Curist’s CuurcH are given us in the passage now before us.
The Church is composed of those who are “escaped of Israel;” those, that is, who
have come out from the world, and are separate; who have escaped through the
rescuings of Divine mercy; who have been “plucked as brands from the burning.”
The bond uniting them together, and securing upon them the Divine blessing, is uo
personal peculiarity, no extraordinary goodness or attainment of theirown. It is not
that they, differing from all others, have been without sin, but that the Lord has
redeemed them from sin; the mark of the Lord’s rescue must be upon them all. They
are the left ones, the preserved ones, the escaped ones, the monuments of Iivine mercy.
But the description should keep us from a serious mistake. They are aut merely
delivered ones; they are escvped ones, that word conveying the idea that their own
energy has been put forth, their own will was in the escape. The hand of the angel
was indeed upon them, but they also themselves tasted forth, and fled from the
spiritual Sodom.

Il. The text describes the cHARACTER OF CarRIstT’s Cuugca. “Shall be called holy.”
The name thus put upon the Church is that of its most necessary and distinguishing
quality. The term does not imply that each member has attained this holiness, but
that each one has it in his heart as his great aim, and makes it, in his daily life, his
great pursuit. “God hath not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness.” We
are “called to be saints,” and the central idea of holiness is not absolute purity, but
separation from sin, and unto God; separation from the world, from sclf-seeking, self-
indulgence, self-serving, from all forms and features of evil; and separation unto every-
thing that is righteous and lovely and of good report. ‘This, then, is to be the one
distinction of the members of Christ’s Church—the one thing which they are to main-
tain by their union together; their consecration unto God to the doing of his will; the
choosing of what he will approve; the fullowing whithersoever he may lead. The man
who thus, in heart and life, is set on God, is in his measure a holy man, a saint. The
Church which, in its collected life and labour, is thus set on God, is also in its measure
a holy Church, made up of “saints and faithful brethren in Christ Jesus.” The
members of Chirist’s Church may properly be described as “a peculiar people.” Not
qdd, but peeuliar; as an angel from heaven would be if he dwelt among men; peculiar,
as Christ was when he went to and fro among the people of Judeza Nowadays we too
often find the Church striving to rub away all the marks of her peculiarity. The
question asked by those who bere besa eilled to be saints” is— How near may we go
towards the world? To what extent may we yield to its enticements? What of
common earthly luxury and self-indulgence may we have without absolutely imperil-
ling our eternal safety ? While the Church asks such questions even in secret, and by
its conduct and spirit rather than by its language, it is proved to be fallen—and falling
—from the Divine standard. “ Love not the world, neither the things that are in the
world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.” “ Without
holiness no man shall see the Lord.”—R. T,


Vers. 4—6.—Christ’s gracious dealings with his Church. In this passage they are
presented under three forms: (1) as gleausings, (2) as gugdings, (3) as preservings,

I. CHRIST IS EVER WORKING WITH A VIKW TO THE CLEANSING AND PURIFYING OF HIS
Cuurcu, so that it might be presented at last “a glorious Church, not having spot, or
wrinkle, or any such thing.” That work of cleansing demands more constant. watchful-
fulness, care, and toil than we are wont toi: agine. It requires thatthe Church, as a
Church, shall pass again and again under Diyjne chastenings. We recogi.ze how much
the Lord does for us, as individuals, by Ehenpeciterte: and disappointments and
sorrows of our lives, but we do not so readily or so fully admit that such experiences
are also necded for our Churches, Uninterrupted prosperities as surely imperil the life
of the Christian Church as of the Christian man, Indulgences in sin hurt Churches,
The neglect of Church duties, the spirit of idle conteutment, growing tendency to
self-satisfaction, disrezard of holy living, and the encroachments of the worldly spirit,
all hurt and spoil the Church. Under the influence of such things the light of tae
Church will as surely wax dim as the candle in a foul atmosphere; the witness of the
Church will become fainter than a whisper; the unity of the Church will te broken up,
and its work will lie about it untouched, The descriptions of the seven Churches of


OH. V. 1—30.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. q7


ia given i Book of Revelation accurately present the conditions into which
Chur Losingetheir firstlave. Yielding to the enticements of th rid.

eakened by false doctrine. Deadened by en ry
Proud_of_outsy: srosperities. Lukes in Christian service. Surely the hope of
hurch lies in this—Christ is willing to be in the midst of her in the power of his
eleansing, correcting, and restoring vrace, and he is actually dealing with her as a spirit
of purifying. He is ever washing aw. 2 last-gathering “filth of the daughters of
Jerusalein, and the blood of her sins from the midst thereof.” “Ty-aceom) lishing this
work of cleansing, it may sometimes be needful that our Lord should deal severely.
The operations of his grace will sometimes ap) ear as a “spirit of judgment and a spirit
of burning.” r

II. Our Lorp atso DEALS WITH HIS CHURCH WITH A VIEW TO ITS GUIDANCE AND
Instruction. He would have his people grow in grace and wisdom and knowledge,
reachiny ever furtlier into the mysteries of reve:led truth, and making ever holier and
wiser expressions of their renewed spirit in all the spheres of their life and activity.
Journeving through the wilderness of this world, through the wilderness of truths, and
through the wilderuess of Christian duties Christ is ever near now, as he was in the olden
days to wandering Israel. Then acloud-pillar, looking dark against the bright sky by
day, and flashing out like flae agaist the dark sky by night, kept Israel in mind of
its ever-present Guide, Now, without the belp of suchgOuéward_ symbol, in inward
manifesiations to trustful hearts, Christ reveals his presente as our Shepherd, Teading
us on, now into scenes of coutlict, now up paths that are rough and stony, and some-
times into “the green pastures, and beside the still waters.” The ;ower of a Church
to hold fast the “ truth once delivered unto the saints,” and yet to receive whatever
new forms of truth God may be pleased to unfold from his Word, lies in this presence
of Christ with his Church, as a Teacher and Guide, as a “ spirit of judgment.”

Ill. Curist DEALS WITH HIS CHURCH WITH A VIEW TO ITS PRESERVATION AND ITS
DEFENCE. He not only cleanses and teaches, he also keeps. ‘ Upon all her glory shall
be a defence.” We may lovingly submit to all his chastenings and currectious, fur over
all the glory of his cleansing shall be his defence. It shall never be destructive. We
shall be kept through it all. We may wait on all Divine teachings, aud go forth to all
Christian duties; perils may be round about us, but over all the glory of his guiding
there siiall be a defence. God shall keep us safely. His “ mountains are round about
Jerusalem from heuceiorth, and even for evermore.” He does not nean by his dealings
to remove the candlestick out of his place, only to make the flame burn clearer and
brighter. He is but keeping it safe until the great time of removals, when it may take
its place, and shine for ever among the lamps of the heavenly sanctuary.—R. T.


EXPOSITION.


synoptic Gospels (Matt. xxi. 33—41; Mark
xii. 1—9; Luke xx. 9—16), has been fre-
quently noticed.

Ver. 1—Now will I sing to my Well-
beloved. The prophet sings to Jehovah
asong concerning his vineyard. The song
consists of eight lines, beginning with “ My
Well-belgyed,” and ending with “ wild


CHAPTER V.

Vers. 1—7.—IskABL REBUKED BY THE
PaRABLE OF A VINEYARD. This chapter
stands in a certain sense alone, neither
closely connected with what precedes nor
with what follows, excepting that it breathes


throughout a tone of denunciation. There
is also a want of connection between its
parts, the allegory of the first section being
succeeded by a series of rebukes for sins,
expressed in the plainest language, and the
rebukes being followed by a threat of pun-
ishment, also expressed with plainness.
The resemblance of the parable with which
the chapter opens to one of those delivered
by our Lord, and recorded in the three


grapes.” It is in a lively, dancing measure,
very unlike the general style of Isaiah’s
poctry. The name “ Well-beloved ” seems
to be taken by the prophet from the Sung
of Songs, where it occurs above twenty
times. It well expresses the feeling
of a loving soul towards its Creator and
Redeemer. A song of my Well-beloved.
Bishop Lowth translates “ A song of loves,”
and Mr. Cheyne “A love-song;” but this
requires an alteration of the text, and is


78 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


ES


unsatisfactory from the fact that the song
which follows is not a “love-song.” Muy
we not understand the words to mean
“@ song concerning my Well-beloved in
respect of his vineyard”? Touching his
vineyard. Israel is compared to a “vine”
in the Psilms (Ps. Ixxx. 8—16), and the
Church of God to a “ garden” in Canticles
(iv. 12; v. 1); perhaps also to a “ vine-
yard”? in the same book (viii. 12). Isaiah
may have had this last passage in his mind.
My Beloved hath a vineyard; rather, had a
vineyurd (aumedAav EyevhOn TE Hyatnuévo,
LXX.). In a very fruitful hill. So the
passage is generally understood, since keren,
horn, is used for a height by the Arabs
(as also by the Germans, eg. Matterhorn,
Wetterhorn, Aarhorn, ete.), and “ son of
oil” is a not unlikely Orientalism for
“rich” or “fruitful” With the “hill”
of this pxssage compare the “ mountain”
of ch. ii. 2, both passuges indicating that
the Church of God is set on an eminence,
and “cannot be hid” (Matt. v. 14).

Ver. 2.—He fenced it. So the LXX., the
Vulgate, Aben Ezra, Jarchi, Rosenmiiller,
Lowth, Kay. Gescnius, Knobel, and Mr.
Cheyne prefer to translate, “he dug it
over;” wuile the Revisers of 1885 have
sugvested, “be made a trench about it.”
The word occurs ouly in this place, and has
no cognates in Hebrew. And gathered out
the stones (comp ch. lxii. 10). In the
stony soil of Palestine, to collect the surface
stones into heaps, or build them into walls,
is of primary necessity for tle improvement
of the lind. Conversely the stones were put
back, an‘! scattered over the land, by those
who wished to “mar” it (2 Kings iii. 19,
25). Planted it with the choicest vine (comp.
Gen. xlix. 11; Jer. ii. 21). The sorék
seems to have been a particular kind
of vine, reckoned superior to others. The


etymology of the word indicates that it |


was of a deep red colour. Built a tower
(comp. Matt. xxi. 33). Towers had to be
built in gardens, orchards, and vineyards,
that watch might be kept from them against
thieves and marauders (see 1 Kinys xvii. 9;
Xvili. 8; 2 Chron. xxvi. 10; xxvii. 4, etc.).
Made a wine-press,; literally, dug a wine-
press. The excavation was made to contain
a vat, above which was the “ press,” worked
by men, who wrung the liquor out of a
great big containing the grapes. (See the
Egyptian rock-puiniings, passim, where
the operation is represented repeatedly.) It
brought forth wild grapes. The natural,
not the cultivated fruit, a worthless product.

Ver 3.—The prophet’s “song” here ends,
and Jehovah himself takes the word. As
if the story told in the parable had been
a fact, he calls on the men of Judah and
Jerusalem to “ judge between him and his


[cu. v. 1—30,


vineyard.” Compare Nathan’s appeal to
Duvid by the parable of the ewe lamb
(2 Sam. xii. 1—4).

Ver. 4.—What could have been done
more? Comp. 2 Kings xvii. 13 and 2
Chron. xxxvi. 15, where God is shown to have
done all that was p ssible to reclaim his
people: “ Yet the Lord testified against Israel,
and against Judah, by all the propiiets, and
all the seers, saying, Turn ye from your
evil ways, and keep my commandments and
my statutes, according to the Law which
I commanded your fathers, and which I
sent to you by my servants the prophets; ”
“And the Lord God of their fathers sent
unto them by his messengers, rising up
early, and sending; because he had com-
passion on his people, and on his dwelling-
plice: but they mvcked the messengers of
God, and despised his woids, and misused
his prophets, until the wrath of the Lord
arose against his people, until there was no
remedy.”

Ver. 5.—And now go to; I willtell you;
rather, and now, I pray you, let me tell you.
The address is still smooth and persuasive
up to the word “ vineyard.” Then there is
a sudden change; the style becomes abrupt,
the tone fierce and menacing. “ Let me
tell you what I will do to my vineyard:
break down its hedge, that it be grazed on;
destroy its wall, that it be trampied under-
foot,” ete. The hedge...the wall. Vine-
yrds were usually protected either by a
hedge of thorns, commonly of the prickly
pear, or else by a wall; but the rabbis say
that in some cases, for additional security,
they were surrounded by both. God had
given his vineyard all the protection
possible.

Ver. 6.—I will lay it waste; literally, I
will make tt a desolation (comp. ch. vii. 19,
where a cognate term occurs). Active
ravage is not so much pointed at, as the
desolation which comes from neglect.
There shall come up briers and thorns,
The natural produce of neglected ground
in Palestine (see Prov. xxiv. 31). The
“thorns and briers” symbolize vices of
various kinds, the natural produce of the
human soul, if God leaves it to itself. The
words are scarcely to be taken literally,
though it is probably true that “no
country in the world has such variety and
abundance of thoy plants as Palestine
in its present desolation ” (Macmillan, ‘ Min,
of Nat.,’ p. 103). I will also command the
clouds, Here at last disguise is thrown off,
and the speaker manifestly appears as
Jehovah, who can alone “command the
clouds.” The “rain” intended is probably
that of his gracious influences.

Ver. 7.—For the vineyard, etc. The full
explanation of the parable follows imme-


cu. v. 1—30.]


diately on the disclosure in ver. 6. The
vineyard is “Israel,” or rather “Judah; ”
the fruit expected from it, “judgment
and righteousness; ” the wild grapes which
alone it had produced, “ oppression” and
the “ery” of the distressed. His pleasant
plant; literally, the plant of his delights ; i.e.
the plantation in which he had so long
taken delight. He looked for judgment,
etc. Gesenius has attempted to give the
verbal antithesis of tle Hebrew, which is
quite lost in our version—
“Er harrete auf Recht, und siehe da
Unrecht,
Auf Gerechtigkeit, und siehe da Schlech-
tigkeit.”
Vers. 8—24.—Tue Six Wogs. After the
general warning conveyed to Israel by the


parable of the vineyard, six sins are par-


ticularized as those which have especially
provoked God to give the warning. On
each of these woe is denounced. Two
have special punishments assigned to them
(vers. 8—17); the remainder are joined in
one general threat of retribution (vers. 18
—PA).

Ver. 8.—Woe unto them that join house
to house. This is the first woe. It is pro-
nounced on the greed which leads men to
continually enlarge their estates, without
regard to their neighbours’ convenience.
Nothing is said of any use of unfair means,
much less of violence in dispossessing the
former proprietors. What is denounced is
the selfishness of vast accumulations of
land in single hands, to the detriment of the
rest of the community. The Jewish law
was peculiarly inimical to this practice
(Numb. xxvii. 1—11; xxxiii. 54; 1 Kings
xxi. 4); but perlaps it is not without
reason that many writers of our own time
object to it on general grounds. Till there
be no place; literally, till want of place ; i.e.
till there is no room for others. A hyper-
bole, doubtless, but marking a real national
inconvenience. That they may be placed
alone in the midst of the earth; rather,
that ye may dwell by yourselves in the midst
of the land The great landlords wished
to isolate themselves; they disliked neigh-
bours; they would fain “dwell by tlem-
selves,” without neighbours to trouble them,
Uzziah seems, by what is said of his pos-
sessions (2 Chron. xxvi. 10), to have been
one of the greatest sinners in respect of the
accumulation of land.

Ver. 9.—Either something has fallen out
in the first clause of this verse, or there is
a most unusual ellipse of the verb “said,”
which our translators have supplied, very
proverly. There seems to be nothing em-


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 79


phatic in the words, “on mine ears” (see
ch. xxii. 14; Ezek. ix. 1,5; x. 13). Many
houses shall be desolate. The greed of
adding house to house will be punished by
the death of those who have sv sinned,
and the extinction of their families, either
throngh war, or through a more direct
divine judgment.

Ver. 10.—Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall
yield one bath. The greed of adding field
to field will be punished by tiie curse of
barrenness, which God will send upon the
land. Dr. Kay calculates that ten acres
(Roman) of vineyard ought to yield upon
the average five hundred baths (or four
thousand yvallons) instead of one bath
(eight gallons). An homer ... an ephah,
The “ephah” was the tenth-part of a
“homer” (Ezek. xlv. 11). Corn lands
should return only one-tenth part of the
seed sown in them.

Ver. 11.—Woe unto them that . . . follow
strong drink. We have here the second
woe. Itis pronounced on drunkenness and
revelry. Drunkenness is an infrequent
Oriental vice; but it seems to have been
one whereto many among the Jews were
at all times prone (see Prov. xx. 1; xxiii.
29—32; Eccles. x. 17; Hos. iv. J1; ch.
XXvili. 7, etc.). Even the priests and the
svt-disant prophets “erred through strong
drink and were swallowed up of wine”
(ch. xxviii. 7). That rise up early in the
morning. Great banquets were held by the
“princes” and ‘“uobles,” beginning at an
early hour (Eccles. x. 16), and accompanied
by music of an exciting kind (Amos vi. 5, 6),
which were “continued until night,” or
rather, “nto the night ” (Revised Version),
and terminated in general drunkenness, per-
haps in general licentiousness. (See Prov.
xxiii. 27—30 and Hos. iv. 11 forthe connection
of inebriety with whoredom.) Two kinds of
intoxicating liquor seem to have been con-
sumed at these banquets, viz. orlinary grape
wine, and a much stronger drink, which is
said to have been “made of dates, pome-
granates, apples, honey, barley, and other
ingredients,” which was known as shékdr
(Greek, ofxepa), and is called “strong drink”
in the Authorized Version. Till wine inflame
them; or, the wine inflaming them.

Ver. 12.—The harp and the viol, the
tabret and pipe. It is difficult to identify
the Hebrew instruments of music with
modern names; but there seems to be no
doubt that the kinnér was a sort of harp,
and the khdlib a sort of pipe. The nebel,
generally rendered by “ psaltery,” but here
and in ch. xiv. 11 by “ viol,” was a@
stringed instrument played with the fingers
(Josephus) ; perhaps a lyre, perhaps @ sort
of dulcimer, The féph, hcre translated
“tabret,” and eleswhere often “ timbrel,”


380 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


EE  ————————— _  — _———<_—


was most likely a tambourine. All four
instruments had in the earlier times been
dedicated to the worhip of Jehovah
(1 Sam. x. 5); now they were employed to
inflame men’s passions at feasts. They
regard not the work of the Lord. The
“ work of Jehovah ” is his manifestation of
himself in history, more especially in the
history of his cliosen people (Deut. xxxii. 4;
Ps. xcii. 4 ; cxi. 3, ete.). A pious Israelite
was ever marvelling at all that God had
done for his nation (Deut. xxxii. 7—14;
Josh. xxiv. 2—13; 1 Chron. xvi. 12—22;
Ezra ix. 7—9; Neh. ix. 7—31; Ps. lxviii. 7
—28; Ixxviii. 10—72; ev. 5—45; evi. 7—46;
exxxvi. 5—24, ete.). The men of Isaiah’s
generation had ceased to care for things of
the past. and devoted themselves to enjoying
the present. Neither consider, ete. (comp.
ch. i. 3, “My people doth not consider”’).
The verb used is not, however, the same in
the Hebrew.

Ver. 13.—Therefore my people are gone
into captivity. “Are gone” or “lave gone”
is “the perfect of prophetic certainty ”
(Cheyne) The prophet sees the captivity
as a thing that had already taken place. It
was an appropriate punishment for drunken-
ness and revelry to be carried off into
servitude. and in that condition to suffer,
as slaves so often did, hunger and thirst.
Because they have no knowledge; or, wn-
awares, without foreseeing it (so Rosen-
miiller. Gesenius- Ewald, Delitzsch, Cheyne).
Their honourable men; literally, their glory,
for “their glorious ones”—the abstract for
the concrete. Are famished; literally, sons
of famine; i.e. “starvelings.” Their mul-
titude; or, their noisy crowd (Kay)—the
“throng of voluptuaries” who frequented
the great banquets of vers. 11, 12.

Ver. 14.—Therefore hell hath enlarged
herself; rather, hath enlarged her desire
(comp. Hab. ii. 5). “ Hell” here represents
the underworld, into which souls descended
at death, not yet perhaps recognized as
comprehending two divisions, but regarded
mucl: as the Greeks regarded tl.eir Hades—
as a gen: ral receptacle of the dead, dark and
silent. Hades (Shed), not viewed as a
person, but personified by poetical licence,
“enlarges her desire” and “opens her
mouth ’’ to receive the crowd that is ap-
prouching—the crowd of those who in
captivity succumb to the hardships of their
lot. Their glory; literally, her glory—the
glory, z.e., of Jerusalem, which is especially
in the prophet’s thoughts. “ Her glory, and
her crowd, aud her pomp, aud he that is
joyful in her, shall go down” into the sheél
that gapes for them.

Ver 15.—And the mean man shall be
brought down; rather, so the mean man is
brought down; ie. in this way, by the Cap-


[cn. v. 1—30.


tivity and the consequent sufferings and
deaths, both high and low are brought down
and humbled, while God is exalted in man’s
sight. The future is throughout spoken of
as present (comp. chi. ii. 9, 11, 17).

Ver. 16.—God that is holy shall be sanc-
tified in righteousness; rather, the holy God
shows himself holy by righteousness; i.e. by
executing this righteous judgment on Jeru-
salem the holy God shows his holiness.

Ver. 17.—Then shall the lambs feed. Dr.
Kay takes the “lambs” to be the remnant
of Israel that survived the judgment, who
will feed freely, cared for by the good
Shepherd; but the parallelism so generally
atfected by Isaiah scems to require a mean-
ing more consonant with the later clause of
the verse. Most commentators, therefore,
expound the passage literally, “ Then shall
lambs feed [on the desolated estates of the
covetuus|” (see vers. 8—10). After their
manner; or, after their vwn guidance; i.e.
at their pleasure, as they list (30 Lowth
and Rosenmiiller). And the waste places of
the fat ones shall strangers eat. Goim, i.e.
nomad tribes. shall consume the produce
of the wasted fields once possessed by the
Hebrew grandees. Ewald proposes to make
the verse immediately follow ver. 10; but
this is not necessiry. The occupation of
their lanls by wandering tribes, Arabs and
others, was a part of the punishment that
fell ou all the nobles, not on those only who
accumulated large estates.

Ver, 18.—Woe unto them, etc. We come
here to the third woe, which is pronvunced
against those who openly pile up sin upon
sin, and scoff at God. These men are repre-
sented as “drawing iniquity with cords of
vanity,” te. dragging after them a load of
sin by cords that seem too weak; and then
as “sinning with a cart-rope,” which is a
mere variant expression of the same idea.
Mr. Cheyne quotes from the Rig-Veda, as a
parallel metaphor, the phrase, “ Undo the
rope of sin.”

Ver. 1U.—That say, Let him make speed,
etc. Instead of trembling at the coming
judgment of God, which Isaiah has an-
nounced, they pretend to desire its imme-
diate arrival; they want to “see it.” They
walk, not by faith, but by sight. At the
bottom of this pretended desire there lies a
complete incredulity. The counsel; or, pur-
pose, as in ch. xiv. 26. Of the Holy One of
Israel, They use one of Isaixh’s favourite
titles of God (see note on ch. i. 4), not from
any belief in him, but rather in a mocking
spirit.

Ver. 20.—Woe unto them that call evil
good. This is the fourth woe. There are
persons who gloss over evil deeds and evil
habits by fair-sounding names, who call
cowardice caution, and raslness courage,


OH. V. 1—30.]


niggardliness thrift, and wasteful profusion
generosity. The same men are apt also to
call good evil; they brand prudence with
the name of cunning, call meekness want
of proper spirit, sincerity rudeness, and firm-
ness obstinacy. This deadness to moral
distinctions is the sign of deep moral cor-
ruption, and fully deserves to have a special
“woe” pronounced against it. That put
darkness for light. “ Livht” and “ dark-
ness” symbolize good and evil throughout
Scripture (1 Sam. ii. 9; 2 Sam. xxii. 29;
VODEX<IX.-35| Ps. cxtiocts Prova. 13):
Eccles, ii. 13; ch. ix. 2; Matt. vi. 22; John
i. 19; Acts xxvi. 18; Rom. xiii. 12; 1 Cor.
iv. 5, ete.). They are sometimes more
synonyius, as here; but sometimes they ex-
press rather the intellectual side of morality.
Bitter for sweet. More symbolism, but of
a rarer kind. Jeremiah calls wickedness
“bitter” (ii. 19; iv. 18), and the psalmist
calls the judgments of God “ sweet” (Ps. cix.
103). But the terms are notoften used with
any moral bearing.

Ver. 21—Woe unto them that are wise
in their own eyes, The fifth woe. Self-
conceit is the antithesis of humility; and as
humility is, in a certain sense, the crowning
virtue, so self-conceit is a sort of finishing
touch put to vice. While a man thinks
humbly of himsclf, there is a chance that he
may repent and amend. When he is “ wise
in his own eyes,” he does not see why he
should cliange.

Ver. 22.—Woe unto them that are mighty
to drink wine. The sixth woe seems at first
sight a repetition of the second. But tliere
is this difference, that the drinkers in the
present verse do not succumb to their liquor,
or remain at the banquet all day, but pro-
ceed to the business of their lives, attend
courts and judge causes, but with brain
obfuseated and moral vision bedimmed, so
that they are easily induced to pervert jus-
tice on receipt of a bribe. The sixth woe
may be considered to be pronounced rather
upon their corruption than upon their drink-
ing, and so to be really quite distinct from
the second (comp. Prov. xxxi. 4, 5).

Ver. 23.—Justify the wicked; é.¢. “decide
his cause in his favour,” declare him to be
right and his adversary wrong. For re-
ward; or, for a bribe, Take away the
righteousness of the righteous; #.e. “declare
him to be in the wrong by deciding his
cause against him.” ;

Ver. 24.—Therefore, etc. A general judg-
ment is now pronounced against all the
forms of wickedness enumerated—a judg-
ment of ruin or destruction. It is exprissed
by a mixed metaphor, or “combination of
two figures,” the former taken from the
burning of stubble and withered grass by
the farmer when he is cleaning his fields,


ISAIAH,


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 81


eee


the latter from the natural decay of a blos-
soming plant or tree. In either case the
destruction is complete, but in the one it
arises from an external force, fire; in the
other from an internal failure of vitality.
The ruin of Israel would include both; it
would be brought about by an internal
cause, their corruption, and an external
one, God’s anger. As the fire devoureth
the stubble; literally, as a tongue of fire eats
up stubble. “ Tongue of fire” is an unusual
phrase, occurring in all Scripture only here
and in Acts ii. 3. But it well depicts the
power of fire to lick up clean all that comes
in its way. Isaiah elsewhere notes the
analoxy, making it the foundation of a
simile (ch. xxx. 27). And the flame con-
sumeth the chaff; rather, and as dry grasa
sinks down in flame. The withered grass of
pastures was burnt by farmers to improve
the after-growth / Lucan, ‘ Pharsal.,’ ix. 182).
Their root shall be as rottenness (comp
Hos. ix. 16). The root is the last thing to
decay. When that fails, the case is des-
perate. Judah’s “root” did not utterly
fail (see ch. xi. 1); but the present warning
is to individuals and classes (vers. 8, 11, 18,
20—23), not to the nation. Their blossom
shall go up as dust; ¢e. their external
giory shall crumble and waste away. Ee-
cause they have cast away the Law. All
the sins of Israel had this one thing in
common—they were transgressions of the
Law of God as delivered to them by Moses,
and enforced upon them by the prophetical
ord-r (comp. 2 Kings xvii. 13—16). De-
gpised the word; or, the speech. Imrah is
rarely used by Isaiah. It does not refer to
the writien “* Word,” but to the declarations
of God by the mouth of his prophets (sce
ch. xxviii. 23 ; xxxii. 9).

Vers. 25—30.—Tuz NatTuRE OF THE
Counc JUDGMENT EXPLAINED. Hints have
been already given that the judgment which
is to fall on the nation is a foreign war, or a
series of foreign wars (see ch. iii. 25; v. 13).
But now for the first time a terrible inva-
sion, in which many nations will participate,
is clearly announced. At first the imagery
is obscure (ver. 25), but it soon grows more
distinct. “Nations” are summoned to the
attack ; a vast army comes, and comes “ with
speed swiftly ” (ver. 26); then their array
is described (vers. 27, 28); and finally their
ravin is compared to that of lions, and
their success in catching and carrying off
their prey is prophesied (ver. 29). In the last
verse of the chapter the prophet falls back
into vaguer imagery, comparing the roar of
the invaders to the roaring of the sea, and

G


82 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH,


the desolated land to one seen under the
gloom of a preternatural darkness (ver. 30).


Ver. 25.—The threats of this verse are all
vague and general, for there is no reason to
suppose that the phrase, “the hills did
tremble,” refers to an actual earthquake.
That there was an earthquake in the reign
of Uzziah is, indeed, clear from Amos i. 1;
but it was probably a thing of the past when
Isaiah wrote this chapter, and he is speaking
of the future. A “trembling of the hills”
is, in prophetic language, a commotion
among the chief men of the land. He hath
stretched forth his hand. Again the “ per-
fect of prophetic certitude.” Their carcases
were torn; rather, were as refuse (comp.
Lam. iii, 45). There would be many slain,
and lying unburied, in the streets of Jeru-
salem. For all this, etc. (comp. ch. ix. 12,
17, 21, and x. 4, where the same words are
used as a refrain). ‘lhe words imply that
God’s judgment upon Judah will not be a
single struke, but a continuous smiting,
covering some considerable space of time.

Ver. 26.—And he will lift up an ensign.
Mr. Cheyne translates, “a signal,” and would
so render the Hebrew word in ch. xi. 10, 12;
Xie 2 xXvill, os) xiixe 22ixn 105” But
“ensigns” or “standards” were in use both
among the Egyptians (Rosellini, ‘ Monu-
menti Civili,’ pl. cxxi.) and among the
Assyrians (‘ Ancient Monarchies,’ vol. i. p
461) before the time of Isaiali, and are, there-
fore, likely to have been in use among the
Hebrews. The standards, however, of this
early period were not flags, as Jarchisupposes,
but solid constructions of wood or metal,
exhibiting some emblem or other. God lifts
up his standard to draw the nations together,
indicating thereby that they are to fight his
battles. And will hiss. “ Hissing” is said
to have been practised by bee-keepers to
draw their bees out of the hives in the
morning, and bring them home again from
the fields at nightfall (Cyril, ad loc.). God
will collect an urmy against Israel, as such
persons collect their bees (comp. ch. vii. 18).
From the end of the earth; i.e. “to bring them
from the end of the earth.” The nations
are, or at least many of them are, extremely
distant, as Elamites from the Persian Gulf
(ch. xxii. 6), and perhaps Medes from beyond
Zagros. They shall come; literally, he
cometh; showing that, though the nations
are many, they are united under one head,
which here is probably the Assyrian power.
With speed swiftly (comp. Joel iii. 4), The
reference is not so much to the speed with
which the Assyrians marched, as to the im-
mediate response which they would make to
God’s call,


[ox. v. 1—30.


Ver. 27.—None shall be weary nor stumble.
None sliall lag behind on the march, none
fall and be disabled. None shall slumber.
They shall scarcely give themselves time for
necessary repose.

Ver. 28.— Whose arrows are sharp, and all
their bows bent. The special weapon of the
Assyrian soldiers is the bow. From the
king in his chariot to the light-armed recruit
just pressed into the service, all fight mainly
with this weapon, more particularly in the
earlier times (see ‘Ancient Monarchies,’ vol.
i. pp. 414, 421, 424—437, etc.). Swords and
spears are also known, but comparatively
little used. Their horses’ hoofs ... like
fiint. Hard, strong, and solid, as was most
necessary when shoeing was unknown.
Their wheels like a whirlwind. Sennacherib
(ch. xxxvii. 24) is represented as boasting of
the “ multitude of his chariots; ” and both
the sculptures and the inscriptions of
Assyria show that the chariot force was
numerous, and was regarded as more im-
portant than any other. The king always
went to battle in a chariot. For the com-
parison of the rush of chariot-wheels to a
whirlwind, see below, ch. lxvi. 15; and
comp. Jer. iv. 13).

Ver. 29.—Their roaring shall be like a
lion; rather, like a lioness, which the Hebrews
appear to have regarded as ficrcer than a
lion (see Gen. xliv. 9; Numb. xxiv.9; Nah.
ii. 11). The Assyrian armies probably ad-
vanced to the combat with loud shouts and
yells (see Jer, ii. 15). Yea, they shall roar;
rather, growl. The word is different from
the one used previously, and may express
the “deep growl” with which the lion
springs upon his prey (see Dr. Kay’s note,
ad loc.). Shall carry it away safe. Sen-
nacherib says in one of his inscriptions, that
he carried off to Nineveh 200,150 captives
on his first expedition against Jerusalem
(Oppert, * Inscriptions des Sargonides,’ pp.
45, 46).

Ver. 30.—Like the roaring of the sea.
Not content with one simile, the prophet
has recourse to a second. “The noise of
the Assyrian army shall be like that of a
a raging sea;” or, perhaps, “ After he has
carried off his prey, the Assyrian shall still
continue to growl and threaten, like a storm
sea.” If one look unto the land, ete. if
Israel turn its gaze from Assyria to its own
land, it sees nothing but a dark prospect—
darkness and distress, all light shrouded
amid clouds and deep obscurity. The text
and the construction are, both of them,
uncertain; but the general meaning can
scarcely be other than this,


on. v. 1—30.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 83
rr geese ge sce rr eS SSS


HOMILETICS,


Vers. 1—7.—God’s care for man, and mun’s ingratitude, Three times has God
made himself a vineyard upon earth, planted a plantation of choice vines, endued by
him with the capacity of bringing forth excellent fruit, fenced his vineyard round with
care, cleared its soil of stones, pruned its superfluous shoots, hoed out the weeds from
between the vine-stocks, bestowed on it all possible tendance, and looked to see a suitable
result; and three times has the result, for which he had every right to look, not
followed.

I. THE FIRST VINEYARD—THE WORLD BEFORE THE Fioop. Man was placed in a
world which God saw to be “ very good ” (Gen. i. 81); he was endued with excellent
powers; he was given dominion over the beasts; he was bidden to “increase and
multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it ” (Gen. i, 28); he was gnarded from a
thousand dangers; he was fenced round by the Almighty arms; Gou’s Spirit “ strove
with him ” (Gen. vi. 3), chastened him, warned him, spoke through his conscience, and
showed him the right path to walk in, What more could he have done to his first
Vineyard, that he did not do to it? Yet the time came when he “looked upon the
earth ” (Gen. vi. 12); looked for the fruits of what he had done; looked for “judge
ment and righteousness.” And what did he find when he looked? “ The wickedness
of man was great in the earth; every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only
evil continually ” (Gen. vi. 5). “The earth was corrupt before God; ” “all flesh had cor-
rupted his way upon the earth;” “ the earth was full of violence” (Gen. vi. 11, 12).
The vineyard that should have brought forth grapes had brought forth wild grapes,
God’s care for man had been met by man with ingratitude towards God; and it only
remained that God should take vengeance, and lay his vineyard waste, and so vindicate
his justice.

IJ. THE sECOND VINEYARD—THE PEOPLE OF IsraEL. This is the vineyard whereof
Isaiah especiaily speaks. God planted his second vineyard, Israel, on the “ very
fruitful ” upland of Palestine—“‘a land of corn and wine, of bread and vineyards,
of oil olive and of honey” (2 Kings xviii. 832); “a good land, a land of brooks of
water, of fountains and depths that spring out of valleys and hills; a land of wheat,
and barley, and vines, and fig trees, and pomegranates; a land of oil olive, and honey;
a land wherein they might eat bread without scarceness, and needed not to lack any-
thing; a land whose stones were iron, and out of whose hills they might dig brass”
(Deut. viii. 7—9). He fenced his vineyard round with laws and ordinances morally,
as with mountains and deserts topographically; he cleared out from it the stones that
marred its soil, the wicked nations—“ stones of offence ’—that once dwelt amid his
people; he planted it with choice vine-stocks, the children of “ faithful Abraham ;” he
built a tower—Jerusalem—in the midst of it, and made therein a wine-press—the
temple—where he would have the gifts and offerings of the people, their good works,
laid up in store; and he then “ looked that his vineyard should bring forth grapes, and
it brought forth wild grapes.” Oppression, wrong, robbery, murder, the form of
religion without the power, covetousness, drunkenness, vanity, impurity,—these were
what his eyes beheld when he cast them on his chosen people, who were “a sinful
nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil-doers, children that were corrupters ”
(ch. i. 4). Greater benefits than those bestowed on the first vineyard had been met by
a deeper ingratitude; and now the time was coming when the second vineyard would
be laid waste, withered up, and utterly “ ruined ” (ch. iii. 8).

IIL. THe THIRD VINEYARD—THE CHRISTIAN CuuRcH. God has yet planted a third
vineyard, which he calls “ his Church” (Matt. xvi. 18), the assembly of his “ selected
ones.” He has not fixed it in any particular land, but has given it the whole fruitful earth
for its habitation. Yet has he fenced it round, and separated it off from the rest of man-
kind by laws and rites and ordinances, which are peculiar, and made it a world within a
world, a society within a society. He has gathered out from it the stones of many
heresies; he has planted it with choice vines, the “chosen vessels” whom his grace
has from time to time converted from unbelief to the true faith ; he has given it for its
“tower” of strength himself, and for its “ wine-press” the book of life, in which he
records its good deeds. And now, what is the result? Has his constant, tender care


84 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISATAH. [cn v. 1—36.


nn eee UU yyIEIdEIynS Sassen


awakened the gratitude which it ought to have awakened? Has his Chureh brought
forth such fruit as might have been anticipated? Is it not to be feared that even now
his eye, resting on his third vineyard vith its searching gaze, looks for something
which it does not find—demands “ grapes,” and sees little but “ wild grapes”?


Vers. 8—17.—The appropriateness of God's punishments. Many of the punishments
of sin follow in the way of natural consequence, and these are generally ackuowledged
to be fitting and appropriate; ¢.g.—

I. IDLENESS IS PUNISHED BY WANT, ‘Ifa man will not work, neither shall he eat °
(2 Thess. iii. 10). Labour naturally produces wealth, or at any rate value of some
kind ; and those who work the hardest naturally acquire the most. The idle cannot
complain if they have few of this world’s goods, since they have made no etlorts to
obtain them. ‘Il'hey are fitly punished for their waste of time in sloth by the want of
those good things which they might have procured by diligence in toil. ‘lhe wise man
will not give indiscriminate relief to the poor and needy. There is much poverty
which is the simple natural result and suitable punishmeut of idle “ loafing” habits.

II. DruNKENNESS Is PUNISHED BY LOSS OF MENTAL POWER, AND IN SOME CASES BY A
TERRIBLE MALADY. ‘The drunkard voluntarily confuses his mental faculties, and
suspends tlieir healthy operation, each time that he indulges in the sin whereto he is
addicted, What can be more appropriate than that he should be punished by a per-
manent diminution of his intellectual vigour, a loss of nerve, promptitude, and decision ?
He also deranges his bodily functions by causing an undue flow of blood to the brain,
and an undue excitement of the nerves whose connection is so close with the cerebral
tissues. It is most natural and most fitting that such ill treatment of these delicate
tissues should result in permanent injury to them, and cause the dreadful malady
known to medical science as deliriwm tremens. The drunkard “receives within
himself” a most appropriate “ recompense of his error” (Rom. i. 27).

II. Lust 1s PUNISHED BY A LOATHSOME DISEASE. The nature of the subject here is
such as to preclude much illustration. But what can be more appropriate than the
punishment of the most foul and filthy of sins by a disease which is foul and filthy and
loathsome, alike to others and to the object of it? The body marred and scarred, the
blood infected, the whole constitution undermined, form not only a just, but a most
fitting, punishment of one, the peculiarity of whose sin is that he “sins avainst his
own body ” (1 Cor. vi. 18).

In the case of Israel special national sins were punished by special judgments, also
peculiarly appropriate ; e.g.—

I. THE GREED WHICH JOINED HOUSE TO HOUSE AND FIELD TO FIELD was punished by
an invasion which caused the destruction and ruin of the annexrd houses (ver. 9), and
the desolation of the annexed estates. The ruin of the vineyards was such that it
was scarcely worth while to gather the produce, the continued devastation of the corn
lands such that the harvest did not nearly equal the seed corn. Nomad tribes pastured
their flocks on the over-large estates, and the so-called owners derived little or no
benefit from their acquisitions (vers. 10, 17).

IU. Drunken REVELRY was punished by the captivity of the revellers, who were
carried off as slaves into a strange land, and there experienced the usual fate of slaves,
which included bitter experience of hunger and thirst (ver. 13). The dole allowed the
slave was seldom more than sufficient to keep body and soul together. His drink was
water. Kept to hard labour on imperial palaces and other “ great works,” he lost all
cheerfulness, all lightness of heart, all love of song or music. Asked by his task-
masters to “sing them one of the songs of Zion,” he declined sadly; the harp of his
revels was “hung upon the willows” of Babylon (Ps. cxxxvii. 2—4),

God’s judgments upon other nations have often had the same character of appro-
priateness. Egypt, whose great sin had been pride (Ezek. xxix. 4), was condemned to
be “the basest of the kingdoms” (ver. 15); never destroyed, but always subject to
one people or another—Assyrians, Persians, Greeks, Romans, Arabs, Turks. Rome,
the most cruel and bloody of conquering states, was made a prey, first to bloody tyrants
of her own race, and then to a succession of fierce and savage northern hordes—Goths
Huns, Vandals, Burgundians, Heruli, Lombards—who spared neither age nor sex, and
delighted in carnage and massacre. Macedonia, raised to greatness by her military


oH. V. 1—30.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 85
ee ee ee ee eee eee ee


‘


system, and using it unsparingly to crush all her rivals, is ruined by being brought
into contact with a military system superior to her own. Spain, elevated to the first
position in Europe by her colonial greatness, is corrupted by her colonial wealth, and
sinks faster than she had risen. States iormed by conquest usually perish by conquest ;
governments founded on revolution are, for the most part, destroyed by revolution,
The retributive justice which shows itself in the world’s history does not consist in
the mere fact that sin is punished, but rather in the remarkable adaptation of the
punishment which is dealt out to the sin that has provoked it.


Vers, 25—29.— Wicked men used by God as instruments for working out his purposes.
The psalmist declares the wicked to be “God’s sword” (Ps. xvii. 18). In a later
chapter Isaiah calls Assyria “the rod of God’s anger” (ch. x. 5). Nothing is more
clearly set forth in the prophetical writings than the fact that—

I, ConquERING NATIONS ARE RAISED UP BY GUD TO CHASTISE THE NATIONS THAT ARE
HIS ENEMIES. 1. Assyria was “the axe” with which God hewed down offending
peoples (ch. x. 14), “the rod” wherewith he smote them. God exalted her, in order
that she might “lay waste defenced cities into ruinous heaps” (ch. xxxvii. 26). ‘Ihis
was her raison d’étre, the purpose of her existence (ch. xxxvii. 26). She was sent against
one openly wicked or “ hypocritical nation” after another, and given a charge ‘‘ to take
the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire in the streets”
(ch. x. 6). 2. Babylon was raised up for the castization of Tyre (Ezek. xxvi. 7), of
Egypt (Ezek. xxix. 19, 20; xxx. 10—26), and of Judah (Jer. xxv. 9). 8. Media and
Persia were raised up to work the will of God upon Assyria and Babylon (Isa. xiii. 17;
xxi. 2; Jer. li. 11, etc.). 4. Greece and Macedon were raised up to punish Persia and
Media (an. viii. 5—8); and so on. Each of these nations was ungodly—full of
impurity, pride, selfishness, greed, cruelty. Yet God made use of them for his purposes,
and does not scruple to call their rulers “ his servants,” “his shepherds,” “those who
performed all his pleasure” (ch. xliv. 28; Jer. xxv. 11; xxvii. 6, etc.).

II. Bap MEN ARE EXALTED TO POWER TO CHASTISE BOTH NATIONS AND INDIVIDUALS.
Samson, Seunacherib, and Nebuchadnezzar seem to have been rather instruments for
punishing uations and states. But such men as Joab, Jehu, Hazael, effected God’s
purposes mainly with respect to individuals, God made use of them, and of their sinful
tempers, to execute vengeance upon certain special offenders. Jehu was anointed king
by God’s prophet to punish Jezebel and the house of Ahab (2 Kings ix. 2—26,;
x. 1—11). Fired by ambition, he rushed into crime, and “the blood of Jezreel” was
afterwards avenged upon his house (Hos. i. 4). But for Joab the crimes of Abner and
of Absalom would probably have gone unpunished. He may be viewed as God’s instru-
ment to requite their ill deeds; but as he punished the one treacherously and the
other against his kinz’s commands, their b)ood, or at any rate that of Abner, “ returned
upon the head of Joab” (1 Kings ii. 33), Hazael’s case is like that of Jehu, only not
set before us with such distinctness. He was “ God’s sword” to the wicked Benhadad ;
but not thereby excused. God turns the wickedness of men into particular channels,
making it effect his ends; but it is wickedness none the less,


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1—7.— The parable of the vineyard. 1. Novice THE ART OF THE PARABLE. Ie
has been remarked, “ A proverb finds him who a sermon flies.” Pictures from nature
are acceptable to all, especially of that nature which is familiar to the imagination of
the listener. Through the imagination we may glide into our listener’s heart and
conscience. The truth comes with much more power when it is made to glance from
an object intermediate between the mind and its uaked reality. A great secret of
teaching is to leave the learner much of the work to do. Here, as he looks upon the
bright picture drawn by the prophet, the wrappings of the parable gradually fall aside,
and the truth itself stands out.

I. Tue piorurRE oF THE VINEYARD. The close touch of accuracy suits the parable.
Then follows a short song. 1. Situation of the vineyard. It lay on “the horn of Ben-
Shamen,” #.e. son of fatness ; on a fertile height. ‘lhe Roman poet sung that the vine


86 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, [cu. v. 1—30,
————————— ee __—__—___annnnmnnnnEnnanaannaRIREERIEREER


loves the open sunny hills (Virgil, ‘Georg., ii. 113). The description is of fruitful Canaan,
flowing with milk, honey, and wine. We may think of the beautiful slopes of the
Rhine. 2. The care expended on the vineyard. It had been fenced, the stones had
been cleared from it, and it had been planted with the choicest vines. Some take the
word rendered “fenced” in the sense of digged about, thoroughly digged. The watch-
tower had algo been set up in the midst of the field, a post of observation and of guard
against the jackals and the foxes in the ripening time. 38. The thankless soil. The
vine-dresser’s hope is deceived ; for, instead of the true grapes wild ones only appear, or,
as the LXX. render akanthas, thorns. Gesenius and others think the plant meant
is the monk’s-hvood or nightshade, which produces berries like the grapes in appearance,
but poisonous. If we compare the story in 2 Kings iv. 89—41, also Deut. xxxii. 32, 33
(‘‘ vine of Sodom, grapes of gail, bitter clusters”), this will seem probable. ‘lhe Arabs
call them wolf-grapes. The idea is caught by one of our poets when he sings of


“Dead Sea fruits that tempt the taste,
And turn to ashes on the lips.”


Ill. Aprrication. 1. Jehovah's app-al. It is an appeal to memory and to con-
science. What more could Gud have done? Israel had been selected for special servise
and fruitfulness—had been fixed in a fertile land, her life and worship centred in the
holy city. What was that city now? A scene of order, morality, good government ?
Alas! a “den of thieves,” a scene of misery and anarchy. Instead of the genuine
grapes of a national life strong and pure, the poisonous berries of luxury and vice.
Such must be the result where man graits his own pride or folly upon the stock of
conscience. 2. Jehoval’s denunciation. The thick thorn fence shall be removed, and
the vineyard shal! become a prey to every trampling beast and invader. The hand of
the pruner and the digger shall be stayed, the clouds shall suspend their gift of rain.
Every protection and every blessing shall be withdrawn, and the thankless nation shall
earn its appropriate wages, Having deserted God, God will now desert her. So must
it ever be with the nation and the individual. Unless there is a constant disposition
to redress discovered wrong, to reform manifest evil, the doom must be felt. “ Thy
vineyard shall be wasted, thy candlestick taken from its place” (Rev. ii. 5). 3. The
reason of the judgment. In poignant language, by the use of paronomas/a, or play on
words, the prophet announces the ground of the Divine decision. He waited for Mish-
path, ie. Right, and behold Mispath, ie. Might ; for Zedakah, i.e. Hxactness, and lo
Zedyach, i.e. Hxaction! A bitter intensity suggests this form of speech.

IV. Persona appyrcaTion. In our sinful miseries God is calling us to account.
Our life-failure, whose fault is it? Does not Nature pour her beauty around us, instruct
us from childhood, fill our sense and fancy with wonder and joy? Does not the world
of men afford us a daily school of experience? Is not every suffering a pruuing-knife,
every change of life like a cleaning of the ground from weeds and stones? If our
lives turn out selfish and vicious, where does the responsibility lie? Where, except in
the secret fault that may poison all God’s good ?


“Lord, with what care hast thou begirt us round §
Parents first season us. Then schoolmasters
Deliver us to laws. They send us bound
To rules of reason. Holy messengers ;
‘Pulpits and Sundays; sorrow dogging sing
A filictions sorted ; anvuish of all sizes;

Fine nets and stratazems to catch us in!
Bibles laid open; millions of surprises ;
Blessings beforehand ; ties of gratefulness
The sounds of glory ringing in our ears;
Without, our shame; within, our consciences ¢
Anyels and grace; eterial hopes and fears |
Yet all these fences, and their whole array,
One cunning bosom-sin bluws quite away.”


J.


Vers. 8—10.— Woe to the covetous. To understand this passage we should bear in
mind the truths connected with real property as a condition of national well-being,


on. v. 1—30.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 87
ee ee


I. Tue INSTITUTION OF LANDED PROPERTY IN IsRaEL. According to the Law, each
of the twelve tribes was to have its landed possessious, and each particular household
was to have its definite portion of the land belonging to the tribe; and this was to be
an inalienable heritage. Among an agricultural people it is most necessary that each
family should thus have a fixed foothold on the land, a home, a centre of toil and
acquisition ; and that thus its members should be firmly bound to their native land
and to their fellow-countrymen. In a conquered land, again, it was equitable that the
fields should be divided among those who took part in the burdens of war, and who
desired to cultivate the conquered land in peace. In many passages of the Law we
find the impress of this institution of real property. In the year of jubilee every man
was to be restored to his patrimony (Lev. xxv. 13). The land was never to be sold,
because in fact it belonged to Jehovah (ver. 23), and the people were but his stewards,
In the interesting case of the daughters of Zelopheliad (Numb. xxvii. 1—11), who had
died in the desert, we find it laid down that the children, or nearest relatives of one
who had died without coming into his portion, were to possess it in his stead. Again,
the men of Reuben and of Gad refused to go to war until every man of them had
received his inheritance (Numb. xxxii. 16, sqgq.). And Moses agreed to their conditions.
In the same book we read the direction, “ Ye shall divide the land by lot for an
inheritance among your families: and to the more ye shall give the more inheritance,
and to the fewer ye shall give the less inheritance” (Numb. xxxiii, 54), The land, it
will be seen, was considered as in tenure from Jehovah himself, the only landlord.
And how attached an Israelite would become to his ancestral estate, is seen from the
story of Naboth, who will not give up his even for a better one, and at the king’s
request (1 Kings xxi. 3, sqq.; 2 Kings ix. 10, 25, sqq.). The virtues of patriotism
struck deep root in this relation to the soil of Pa'estine. These facts help us to under-
stand the moral and national evils springing from selfish greed, which threatened this
institution of property, of which the prophet here complains.

Il. Tue vice or coverousness. The root of the vice is a thorough-going selfishness.
The rich men use the means at their command unjustly to absorb the land into their
own possession. The result must be the hopeless misery and degradation of the
mass of the people. An instructive parallel to the state of things described by the
prophet is to be found in the history of Sparta, at the time of the great lawgiver,
Lycurgus. Plutarch tells us that the disorders which he found existing in the state
arose in great measure from the gross inequality of property, and from the long avarice
and rapacity of the rich, who had thus added house to house and field to field. The
lawgiver, therefore, redistributed the whole territory of Sparta. In Roman letters we
read allusions to the habit of forming latijfundia, or “ broad farms,” with its unsocial
consequences. ‘ How far,” indignantly exclaims Seneca, “ will ye extend the bounds
of your possessions ; not content to circumscribe the area of your estites by the sowing
of provinces? The broad acres own one lord; the people crowd into a narrow field.
‘he courses of bright streams fiow through private estates; great rivers, bounds of
great nations, from the source to the mouth, all are yours. And this is nothing unless
you have girdled your broad farms with seas; unless across the Hadriatic, the Ionian,
and the Afwean your bailiff reigns ; unless islands, domiciles of great dukes, are reckoned
amongst the commonest of things. Shall there be no lake over which the roofs of your
villas hang not? no stream whose banks are not covered by your buildings?”
(Ep. Ixxxviii.), In his beautiful ‘ Deserted Village,’ Goldsmith says—


“Tll fares the land, to hastening ills a prey,
Where wealth accumulates and men decay.”


Too well we know what inappeasable discontent and seeming incurable misery has
been begotten in Ireland of past selfishness and injustice of the few. Surely it is the
part of every patriotic Christian man to forward all legislation which throws open God’s
land to tillage, and breaks up selfish monopolies. ;
Ill. THe PUNISHMENT oF coveToUSNEss. 1. Its folly is exposed. One would think,
from their conduct, that these grasping men desired to dwell alone amidst a waste !
But, as the old agricultural poet of Greece says, “The man who frames ills against
another frames them against himself, and ill counsel turns out worst for him who


88 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. v. 1—30.


devisea it, The all-seeing eye of Zeus looks upon these things, and they escape him
uot ” (Hesiod, ‘ Works and Days, 265, 266). Judgment gets the better of injustice
when it comes to the final issue, and the fool who suffers from his avarice knows it to
his cost. Like a wronged woman, she passes through the city, bewailing the
manners of the people, clothed in mist; for men see not her approach, and know not
that she is the cause of their calamities, who have driven her forth by her unjust deeds,
Those, continues the poet, who do right by the strangers and the natives of the land—
their city flourishes, the people blossom therein; and peace, the nourisher of youths,
prevails through the Jand. ‘To them far-seeing Zeus appoints no bitter war; famine
and curse are unknown. The earth produces abundance, the trees drop fruit and
honey, the fleeces are heavy on the sheep; and mothers bear a noble offspring. But
often a whole city suffers from an evil man, who is a sinner and devises haughty plans.
Pestilence and famine come from the hands of the Supreme upon men; tle houses are
thinned and the people perish (ibid., vv. 217, etc.). These are close analogies to the great
thoughts of our prophet. 2. The appropriate punishment. Those who have grasped
at more than their right will find the cuveted good dwindling in their hands, or, like a
Dead Sea fruit, turning to ashes on their lips. One bucket only will be obtained from
the “yoke” of vineyard; one bushel of corn from a quarter’sseed. Thus niay we find in
nature a profound Scripture, a record and a testimony of Divine law not to be gainsaid.
In this day of science perhaps we fix our thonght too exclusively on the dependence of
man on Nature. There is another side of truth equally important—the dependence of
Nature on man. In moral energy, in compliance with the laws of right, we become
more and more the masters of Nature, and she smiles back upon us with an aspect of
recognition and blessing. In the sloth of our spirit and its corruption from truth we
can no longer win the sympathy of the earth; and her groaning aspect reflects and
represents a guilty decline of the soul. These truths are general; only experience can
teach where and how they must be modified in their application.—J.


Vers, 11—16.— Mirth and mourning. I. 'aouGHTLESS PLEASURE-SEEKING, A
scene of habitual dissipation is depicted by the prophet. 1. Wine and music are used,
not legitimately, to relax the tension of the overwrought mind, but to dispel thought
altogether. Sensuous pleasure is made an end and object, though it can never be
healthy except in succession to work, ‘They rise early in the morning to follow the
wassail; late into the night are heated by wine.” “Guitar, and harp, and tam-
bourne, and flute, and wine is their revel.” How wise were the teachings of Plato on
the use of music as a means of influence over the mind! He would not permit the
employment of “ effeminate and convivial ” airs in his ideal state, the lax Iouian and
Lydian. He would have only two kinds of tunes; those which represented the tones
and accents of. the brave man engaged in action, and those which chimed with the
devotional and peaceful mood; in short, the tones which reflect the temper of brave
men in prosperity and adversity. Makers of harps and dulcimers, and other more
elaborate instruments, were not to be maintained iu the city (‘ Rep.,’ p. 399). These
hints are perhaps too little attended to in our day. Yet there is modern music, eg.
that of the Italian opera in general, which tends to enervate the soul. Rather should
we choose to listen to the strains of the great German masters, Beethoven, Handel,
Mendelssohn. These men inspire us with lofty moods and religious thoughts. Avoid
mean and brainless music, whether so-called secular or sacred. 2. Dlindness fo the
thought and work of God. The most glorious privilege we can enjoy is that of intel-
lectual vision of Divine work in nature and in mankind, the lofticst pleasure that of
intellectual sympathy with the Divine mind. But the sensuous pleasure excludes the
spiritual. Do men consider what they lose by dimming their perceptions and confusing
their inielligence in these lower indulgences? Not on wine and soft music is that
“vision and laculty Divine” nourished, by which the prophet and the worshipper enter
into the scene of holiest enjoyments, of enrapturing revelations, The operation of the
Eternal in the soul and the world goes on silently and secretly, and we need the
“purged ear” that we may listen to his voice, the unclouded eye that we may note
events which flow from his causation.

Il, THE PUNISHMENT OF FRIvoLITY. 1, Captivity comes suddenly upon these
revellers, and they wander forth “ unawares,” like those who rub their blear eyes after


cx. v. 1—30.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 89
ee


a night’s debauch. They cannot understand what has happened to them. They talk
of “strange misfortunes,” of inexplicable calamities, But thev have an explanation.
The decay of a family, or of a class, or of a nation, is as much the result of Divine law
as any otter forin of decay. In exile and suffering men pay the long-due debt for their
voluptuous indulgences, he “nobility is spent with hunger, its revel-rout dried up
with thirst.” The music has to stop. The voice of Jehovah may be heard saying,
“Take thou away from me the voice of thy songs; for 1 will not listen to the melody
of thy viols” (Amos v. 23), Those that have put far from them the evil day, lying ou
ivory couches, luxuriously feasting, singing to the viol, drinking from the flowinz bowl,
anointed and perfumed, reckless of human suffering around them, shall pass into
exile, and darkness and desolation shali reign in the once bright and crowded hall of
banqueting (see Amos vi.), 2. With equal suddenness death shall come upon them,


Hades opening its jaws to swallow the uproarious rout of revellers, as in old days the


rebellious crew of Korah (Numb, xvi. 32). There is meaning in the phrase, ‘The
unexpected always happens.” ‘To the thoughtless and unprepared it does. \ But to
the-thoushital- watcher of the ways of God, and those that meditate on his truth, it
may be said that the expected happens, even as the harvest season in nature.

III. THE aABASEMENT OF MAN AND THE EXALTATION OF Gop. Deep in the prophetic
conscience lies this thought—human pride meas contempt of God, and human pride
needs lowering that God may receive his »roper place in men’s thoughts. The Gentile
poets in their way reflected this teaching. ‘I'he man whose thoughts aimed at
rivalry with the gods, the man who gave way to hybris, or insolence, was certain to be
a mark of Divine displeasure. Cast down to his proper level of weakness, the power
of the Eternal makes itself known, in an ‘‘aw/ful rose of dawn,” upon the conscience
of mankind. It is suffering alone that awakens the conscience, and brings sharply tc
light that dualism of good and evil in the will which we contrive to confuse in thought-
less hours. And only by this internal revelation do we learn to think of One who is
sanctity itself, and whose sanctity we, through life’s purging fires, must be brought to
share, or perish in the sins we have chosen, the lives we have lived in.—J.


Vers. 18—24.—Analysis of sin. I. THE VAIN AND WANTON MIND. A singular
image is used. Men are described as drawing down upon themselves, as with stout and
strong ropes, the burden of sin and guilt. Such is the effect of their mocking jests and
speeches. Dramatically, the hearers of the prophet are represented as exclaiming defiantly,
“Let his wrath hasten, let it speed, let us see it; let the counsel of the Holy Oue of
Israel draw near and come, that we may know it!” Amos alludes to the same spirit
of the time, of scuffing contempt of the signs and omens of a dread future. ‘* Woe
unto you that desire the day of Jehovah! to what end is it for you? the day of
Jehovah will be darkness, and not light” (v. 18). Idly do they dream that thus they
put far away the evil day which is close at hand (vi. 3). “The evil day shall not
overtake nor prevent us!” they persist in saying (ix. 10). In idle and wilful
minds superstitions about words are deeply lodged. By insisting that a wished event
must take lace, they think to bring it about; by repeating of something dreaded, “ It
shall not happen,” to avert it. But mere words have no magic in them. As the
incoming tide had no respect for the commands of King Knut’s followers, so neither
can the tidal march of moral forces be stayed by defiance or incantations, But our
words and wishes have a powerful reflex effect upon our own moods. And this
denial in words of God’s truth must in time quite harden the conscience and blind the
inner eye fir them. We may shake our fist at the growing thunder-cloud, but it will
not disappear. We may try to quell a demand for reform by obstinate clamours of,
“Tt shall not be!” but only the more surely will it proceed to accom) )lisliment.

II. ConFusIoN OF MORAL DISTINCTIONS, This is a further step in the climax and
progress of evil. It is indeed a serious reflection—how far we may succeed, by acts of
depraved will, in shutting out the light that would stream in upon the mind, or in
quenching the light within, Both are at once involved in the sin against intelligence,
This is, indeed, the sin against the Holy Ghost—the sin that cannot be forgiven. How
solemn are the words of the prophet elsewhere: “ It was revealed in mine ears by the
Lord of hosts, Surely this iniquity shall not be purged away from you till ye die” (ch.
xxii. 14)! Another serious question 1s, now far words may influence thought, and the


90 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cx. v. 1—30.


a


habit of saying false things disable the mind from seeing the true. South has some
powerful sermons from this text, entitled “The fatal force and imposture of words.”
Though an absolute talsehood cannot live, adulterations of the truth may and do obtain
a wide currency, just as adulterations of meat and drink in the half-dishonesties of trade,
Every truth comes to us in a certain guise of falsehood; no form of language or other
expression is adequate to clothe it. By insisting on the form as if it were the content,
the outside as if it were identical with the inside, the part as if it were the whole, we
commit ourselves to falsehood rather than to truth, The essence of social falsehoods
seems to be in maxims which make the spiritual subordinate to the material. In
times of physical comfort and prosperity this is always our danger. We mistake the
means of living for the ends, We rest in pleasure, comfort, wealth, instead of making
these the temporary standing ground of the spirit, whence it may proceed to higher levels
and nobler ends.

Ill. SeLF-concEITED FOLLY. We never see the full effect of sin, of heart-untruth,
until it works itself out in the imagination. filling the mind with a fatuous self-com-
placency in its own weakness and blindness. The man tiiinks himself “ wise,”
“intelligent,” who, to the piercing gaze of the prophet, is clearly a fool. He thinks
himself a hero. whose best expluit is to shine at a drinking-bont, and a mighty man
because he can play his part at the wassail, says the prophet with keen irony. Mean-
while they are deep in bribery. They would rob the poor of his honesty, and take
away the righteousness of the righteous from them. There are towns and villages
where we may now see on a small scale all those evils which the prophet exposed in
Jerusalem. [vil examples, old and bad customs, have so lone had their way that a true
standard of living seems no longer to be visible. Yet the moral tone may be restored,
if there be but one man who will live like the prophet, like a Christian, salting the
een by a quiet and continuous witness for rectitude, for the truth of God, and
the soul,

IV. THE END OF THE UNGODLY AND THE SINNER. In a powerful picture the end
is depicted as the end tc which all that is empty and worthless refuse must come. They
are like stubble before the devouring tongue of fire, like blazing hay sinking down in
light ashes, like a root struck with decay and rottenness, like flying powdery blossom,
Evil is nouyht, and ends in nought. Those whose “ honour has been rooted in dis-
honour ” must perish with the perishing of their root. The decline of once great nations
and cities historically proves the prophetic truth. A “name and a shade” is left of
Assyria, Egypt, Israel, Greece, and Rome. But one thing cannot perish: it is the
“ doctrine of Jehovah, the Word of the Holy One of Israel.” And in some “ remnant”
that Wurd ever does live, to breed new life in other scenes and ages. ‘The truth, while
it slays the rebels, gives immortality to the faithful; “born again, not of corruptibie,
but of incorruptible seed.”—J.


Ver. 25.—The unappeasable wrath of Jehovah. I. “Our Gop Is A coNsUMING
Fire.” Whether to burn and destroy the moral refuse of a people, to chasten and
refine its remnant and elect, he is revealed as the pure Flame. ‘The Gentiles had
a deep sense of the national significance of fire, as the pure element not to be united
with aught foreign to itself. In their simple way, the hymns of the Veda to Agni,
the god of fire, betray this feeling ; and, again, the idea, in Greek and Roman relivion, of
Hestia or Vesta, on whose altar the fire was kept ever burning, who “ relused to wed,”
whose priestesses must be virgins. ;

Il. Wak THE scourGE or Gop. Deep has been the sense also of this truth. There
isan obscure perception in the minds of men that war, with its attendant horrors, comes
asaretribution, Attila the Hun was spoken of as the “scourge of God.” To have
seen a fair city black with smoking ruins, and corpses lying in its streets, is to have
read with ineflaceable impressions the lesson that “it is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God.” There are moments when the solid base of things seems
trembling beneath our feet, the “eternal hills” as floors trembling beneath the awful
tread of the Eternal as he “cometh to judge the earth.”

III, THE DURATION OF PUNISHMENT, It seems as if it could not be exhausted, go
vast is the mass of guilt to be purged away. A protracted war, a dragging famine, a
prolonged season of ruin, seem, as we say in common speech, “ interminable,” The


ou. v. 1—30.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 91


SS


broad blue heaven, that seemed in sunny days as a benignant hand outspread above
mankind, wears the expression of a stern and relentless frown. Long scores must
be followed by long payment. The guilt of centuries cannot be wiped out in a day.
Divine judgment may require even the obliteraiion of a whole people. But the
individual may be saved. At no time are Jehovah’s “ mercies clean forgotten.” In
the saddest times, the rej entant heart pierces through the gloom to the sanctuary and


heart of him who slays to make alive, who by means of war reconciles to himself in
Christ Jesus.—J.


Vers, 26—30.—Foreign tnvasion. This powerful picture points to the threatened
Assyrian invasion.

I, THE IMAGE OF A WARLIKE ADVANCE. It is wrought out with singular bolduess.
Jehovah of hosts is conccived as lifting up a signal visible to the far-off nations, and
sounding at the same time a whistle-cry, so that they swifily gather together and
come in troops from the horizon. Then rapid and unbroken is their march, Not a
foot tires, not a warrior drowses or sleeps, or stays to rest. Not one looses his girdle,
or the thong of his sandal, as the eager host presses on. The arrows are all sharpened,
the bows all spanned. The sound of the horses’ hoofs strike and flash like fliut-stones,
and the chariot-wheels roll on like the rush of a whirlwind. The air is full of a horrible
roar, as of lions hastening to their unescaping prey. Such a picture is the faithful
representation of tle mood of the soul in its guilt and alarm. For nature ‘reflects all
our moods. Her sounds and sights are ever full of foreboding and terror to the self-
condemned conscience. But the conscience at peace will throw forth its licht upon all
external gloom, and convert, what seem to others the sounds of hell broke louse, into
the celestial tinies of eternal love.

II. THE IMAGE OF THE EARTHQUAKE. The rage in the heavens will be like a
tempest at sea. And when the stricken ones turn to the firm land, there is a darkness
which only reflects the anguish of their souls—thick darkness, and the light is hidden.
No gloom we can conceive in nature, no sounds of overwhelming vivlence, nor sights
that strike horror to every breast, can rival the terrors which the guilty soul may
know. ‘The soul is the real theatre of all these Divine dramas. So far as we can read
the faces of men or look into their breasts, some stand for fear and some for hope;
some the scenes of great quaking and terrors, some still conscious where the soft, still
voice of the God of mercy is ever heard. As the vow humuna stop way be used to
sound the accents of prayer amidst a storm, so in trouble the psalms of the believer
make a music of comfort. “ God is our Refuge and Strength. ... Therefore will we not
fear, though the earth be removed, and the mountains be cast into the midst of the
sea... . Lhe Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our Refuge.” “ He that
dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High shall abide under the shadow of the
Almighty.”—J.


Ver. 20.— Giving false names, “Woe unto them that call evil good, and good
evil; that put darkness for light, and light fur darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter!” Light is here cast upon the secret of Israel’s defection. ‘The “ woe”
has come from many causes, but liere is one too often forgotten root of evil—public
estimnate as expressed in public speech. ,

J. THE MORAL INFLUENCE OF LANGUAGE. We are all deceived at times by a fair
speech that covers foul things. ‘kere is no tendency more daugerous than to call the
vicious unfortunate, or the wicked gay. By this means the evil is concealed trom the
conscience. The prophet speaks of the tendency when it has gone so far as to exchange
to opposite poles, ‘I'he good is called “evil,” and the evil “good.” Even so “a good
fellow ” is olten the synonym for “a bad fellow;” for revelry and selfish enjoyment,
and neglect of home, often le aaa the ae fellow. ‘The youny are often led astray

il, in the angel-dress of beautiful speech,
weeeel ie ea Ht elation or sin. We ae promised brightness, good cheer, and freedom
from gl.owm; whilst evil brings darkness iustvad of licht—a darkness which shuts out
God, and a gloom which takes away all the brightness of inocent joy. “We are
promised a “ sweet ” brea; and lo! how “ hitter ” it is to the taste; what a flavour it
leaves behind! Afterwards! Men should think of that. Like the red wine-cup, pleasant


92 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cx. v. 1—30,


eT


and luscious at first, afterwards “it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder.”
We can never make a philosophy of life out of “ tirst” experiences. We have only to
wait and we shall find that “ the way of transgressors is hard.”

ILL. ‘HE MoRAL JUDGMENT oF Gop. “ Woe unto them!” Who? Why, special woe to
those who “ put” it. False counsellors, like Ahithophel to Absalom; false teachers, like
those who corrupt the truth. There is leadership everywhere—at school and college,
in the Church and in the world. Let no man despise the warnings of God.—W. M. 8.


Vers. 1—7.—Privilege and penalty. We have a striking picture of—

I. THe FULNESS oF THE Divine Provision. (Vers. 1—4.) The second verse describes
in detail the processes by which the vineyard is prepared for fruitfulness, and in the
fourth verse the question is asked, “ What could have been done more to my vineyard,
that I have not done in it?” The idea is that of the fulness of the Divine provision
for the Jewish nation. God had provided: 1. Illustrious men—Moses, Aaron, Joshua,
Samuel, David, ete. 2. A perfect Law; perfect inasmuch as it (1) reflected his own
holiness, and at the same time (2) was accommodated to their immaturity. 3. A helpful
ritual, a series of ceremonies adapted to the age and to their nature. 4. Providential
discipline ; all the attractive and inviting intluences of prosperity together with the
solemiizing and cleansing influences of adversity. We have now a corresponding
fulness of provision for mankind in the gospel of Christ. We have: 1. The knowledge
of God and of his will revealed in Christian truth. 2. The way to himself and to his
pardoning love opened by the mediation and atonement of his Son, our Saviour. 3. The
influences of the Holy Spirit, which are the purchase of his work and the promise of his
Word. 4. The leadership of him who lived a perfect life, and offers himself as the
Exemplar as well as the Friend of man. 5, The hope of eternal glory. The Author of
the salvation in Jesus Christ may well address us and say, “* What more could have been
done?” We may almost say that the ingenuity of Divine love is spent and exbausted
on the provision which is made in the gospel for the return, for the acceptance, for the
renewal, for the elevation, of the children of men. :

II. ‘THE SORENESS OF THE DIVINE DISSATISFACTION. (Vers. 4, 7.) Centuries of
bondage in idvlatrous Egypt might well account for, if they could not excuse, a large
measure of moral frebleness, of relizious error, of spiritual declension. But centuries of
Diviue teaching and Divine discipline should have wrought much of restoration. The
sovereign Ruler of Israel had a right to expect rich fruit in his well-cultivated vineyard.
But he was utterly disappointed. Instead of the good grapes he looked for, it brought
forth “ wild grapes;” instead of judgment was o)pression ; instead of rightvousness, the
cry of him that was wronged. In us, from us, who have been the recipients of his
manifold mercies and of multiplied privileges in Christ Jesus, God looks for great things;
he looks for penitence, faith, purity, spiritual worth, holy usefilness. Only too often
he finds the miserable and guilty opposites of these—impenitence, unbeliel, continuance
in sin, muvial unsightliness, injuriousuess of life. And the heart of the Holy One is
grieved. He who would have looked with delight on bis “ pleasant plant” looks with
pain and sorrow on the fruitless tree, on the bush that bears poisonous berries. He who
would have regarded with pleasure those “in whose heart are paths” observes with
indigiativu and regret those whose hearts are as a tangled wilderness, uncultivated and
useless. lor these he has only the language of severe reproach and of stern and solemn
warning,

lll. (He WeIcHT or THE Divine PENALTY. (Vers. 5, 6.) The doom is destruction.
The vineyard should, as a vineyard, entirely disappear. The defences should be
removed; the useful plant should vive place to the useless thorn; the elements should
work tor its withering, and leave nothing that was desirable or valuable. God’s
message to the guilty nation, Church, family, individual soul, is this solemn one—the
abuse of privileze will be visited by terrible tokens of Divine displeasure; all that was
promising will be removed; the signs and the sources of life will be taken away; from
him that hath not (that does not use what is in his power) will be taken his present
privilege (Matt. xxv. 29), He who (that which) is exalted to heaven in opportunity
will be cast down to hell in condemnation and in ruin (Matt. xi. 23).—O.


Vers. 8—10.— The character and the doom of covetousness. The judgment denounced


oH, V. 1—30.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 93
EE a


against those that joined house to house and field to field brings into view the nature of
the sin of covetousness, and the desolation in which it ends.

I, THE ESSENTIAL NATURE OF THE SIN. It is an immoderate ambition. To secure
a house or a piece of land, or to extend that which has been acquired, may be not only
lawful but positively commendable; it may, indeed, be highly honourable. But there
are bounds beyond which this ambition may not pass, the transgression of which is
wrong and soon becomes perilously evil. In the case of the Jews this limitation was
defined by their statutes—by that Law which they had received direct from God him-
self, and to which they owed a strict and cheerful obedience. In our case ambition
becomes covetousness when tt is indulged either at our own expense or at the expense of!
our brother. If we are indulging a purpose which cannot be executed without moral
or spiritual injury to ourselves, or without doing injustice or rendering unkindness to
our neighbour, we are guilty of the sin of covetousness. To some men the transgression
assumes the one form, to others the other. To some, covetousness is the craving for
property or money which becomes engrossing, absorbing, positively devouring all the
higher and purer aspirations; to others it is the desire and determination to secure the
neighbour’s good, however serious the loss they may thereby inflict. Solomon coveted
many wives, greatly to his own injury; Ahab coveted Naboth’s vineyard, shamefully
disrezarding his neighbour’s rights,

II. Ivs mnsaTIaBLENEss. The prophet uses the language of hyperbole when he says,
“ Till there be no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth”
(ver. 8); but his words clearly point to the fact that when men allow their ambition
to pass beyond moderate and reasonable bounds they permit it to carry everything
before it, so that their earth-hunger, or house-hunger, or their thirst for money is
never satisfied. However much they gain, they still crave and strive for more; it is
not only gold itself but that which it will bring which is


“ Hugged by the old
To the very verge of the churchyard mould.”


In nothing but death can the greedy eye be closed, and the grasping hand relaxed.

Til. Irs HEEpLessness. The concluding clause of the eighth verse not only intimates
the extent to which covetousness urges its victim to go in search of a satisfaction which
it does not find, but it suggests the heartlessness to which it leads. No matter who or
how many are disturbed and displaced, it goes on its devouring way, even though it
finds itself “alone in the midst of the land (earth).” Every vice tends to hardness of
heart, to pitilessness of spirit; and covetousness not the least. Self is magnified in
importance more and more, and the rights and feelings of others become of less and less
consideration until they are made of no account whatever.

IV. Irs poom. The end of the covetous man was to be desolation (ver. 9) and
poverty (ver. 10). Sin perpetually overreaches itself; and, of all particular sins,
ambition “o’ervaults itself and comes down on th’ other side.” So far is covetousness
from happiness that there is probably no more miserable man to be found in any
spiritual region than is the victim of this vice. 1. He <s desolate, friendless; hated by
those whom he has injured; unloved, disregarded, or even despised, by those who watch
his course. 2. He is destitute. Often, very often, avarice blinds the judgment, and the
false move is made that ends in overthrow and ruin; always, covetousness shuts out
those true treasures which make the heart rich and the life wealthy—those possessions
which death cannot touch, which immortality secures for ever.—C.


Vers. 11, 12, 22.— The evil and the end of intemperance. When other evils have
entered and other calamities have overtaken a state, intemperance is sure to make its
black and hateful mark. These verses suggest— ; ;

IL Ivs Tyranny. Such is its strength that it makes its devotees “rise up early in the
morning ” (ver. 11) in order to worship at its shrine. It is an unnatural and detestable
action; the earliness of the hour of the day might well be pleaded as a proof of inno-
cency (Acts ii. 15). But when the passion for “strong drink ” is at its height, it com-
pels its helpless victims to break through all decencies and proprieties, and get up early
in order to indulge. This is only one instance of its despotism ; it leads those who
« follow ” it along many a path and into many a dark pit, from which they yee fain


94 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. v. 1--30.


ET,


tuin away but cannot, At first a small silken cord, it becomes at last an adamantine
chain.

Il. Irs powER OF PERVERSION. It compels good things to minister to evil (ver. 12).
“The harp and the viol,” etc., are excellent things in their way and in their place; but,
used for the purpose of enlivening and protracting immoderate indulgence, they are
perverted to an evil and guilty end. Music is meant to cheer, to attract toward that
which is good, to gladden the heart and to brighten the life of man; it reaches its
highest function when, in the worship of God, it conducts the thought and utters the
feeling of man toward the Supreme. Made the minister of vice, it sinks to its lowest
level. The love of strong drink can thus pervert the good gifts of God to unworthy
uses.

IIL. Irs pEGRADING TouCcH. It leads “ men of strength to mingle strong drink ” (ver.
22) in order that they may glory in their power of drinking. In many lands and ages
men have boasted of their power to withstand the influence of the intoxicating cup.
What a miserable degradation of human strength] That men who are capable of per-
forming noblest deeds, of rendering highest service, of engaging in Divine worship, should
prostitute their powers by trying to drink much wine without becoming inebriated,—
this is a shocking degradation of human faculty.

IV. Irs BLINDING INFLUENCE. “ They regard not the work of the Lord,” etc. (ver. 12).
Certainly, at the table of unrestrained revelling, God would be forgotten and his works
be disregarded ; but not there alone is the influence of intoxication telt. he man who
gives way to this indulgence finds his mental powers becoming clouded, his spiritual
sensibilities benumbed, his appreciation of the sacred and the Divine lessened if not lost.
Strong drink dulls and deadens the hicher faculties of the soul, aud the nobler functions
of our manhood are undischarved, its purer joys abandoned.

V. THE Wor IT works. “ \Woe unto them,” etc. (ver. 11)! Beyond the evils which
we have been tracing to the intoxicating cup—evils which are of themselves woe
enough for any one sin to work—th:re are: 1. The loss of physical strength and
beauty. 2. The loss of reputation and of friendship. 8. The loss of self-respect and,
with this, the sinking of the moral character; the upgrowth of attendant moral evils.
4. Death and condemnation.—C,


Vers. 13—17.—The calamities of spiritual ignorance. The miseries which are un-
folded in this passage are ascribed, in the thirteenth verse, to ignorance. “ My people
are gone, etc., . . . because they have no knowledge.” But it is necessary to distin-
guish here. We must consider—

I. THE IGNORAN' WHICH IS SPIRITUAL AND THEREFORE GUILTY. There is ignorance
which is entirely wental and which is wholly guiltless; eg. that of the little child who
cannot understand some of the obligations into which we grow, or that of the heathen
who cannot possibly acquire a knowledge of Christ and his salvation. There is a mental
ignorance which is not guiltless, but culpable; viz. that of the man who has not acquired
the information he had the opportunity of gaining in earlier days, and that of the man
who goes down through iniquity and immorality irto intellectual feebleness and impo-
tence, But the ignorance of which our text treats (ver. 13) is not mental, but spiritual;
itis that of the whole spiritual nature rather than of the understanding; it is that of
men who had a formal knowledge of Gud and duty, but who did not lay it to heart and
did not act upon it. It is the ignorance of the nation, which might, if it would, under-
stand what the will of God is in the matter of Divine worship, or in regard to its poor and
uninstricted members, or to its uncivilized and helpless neighbours; but which will not
take the trouble to ascertain it, or even blinds its eyes so that it shall not see it. It is
the ignorance of the individual man, who has indeed an undefined knowl dge of his
obligations to his Father and his Saviour, but who studiously keeps it out of view; who
will not present it to the eyes of his soul, lest he should be constrained to reproach
himself and to change his course. ‘These are they who “have no knowledge,” in the
sense of the prophet. i

IL. THE CALAMITIES WHICH IT ENTAILS. These are manifold, as the passage intimates
They include: 1, Haile—* going into captivity ” (ver. 13); dwelling ina‘ far country ;”
being, spiritually, where all is strange and alien and hostile, a long way from God and
froin the privileges of his house and the enjoyment of his service. 2. A void and


oH. Vv. 1—30.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 95


aching heart. “The honourable men are famished, and the multitude dried up with
thirst” (ver. 18). Not knowing God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, depriving
themselves of the deep and lasting satisfactions of bis favour and friendship, men find
all material sources of joy utterly unsatistying; they eat, and buncer still; they drink,
but “thirst again.” 3. Impoverishment. (Ver. 4.) The nation that does not act up to
the height of its knowledge and its opportunity, that is not governed by its sense of
right and duty, but by its inclination to pride and pleasure, is a nation that will
decline; it will soon be stripped of its power. “ //ad-s will open its mouth without
measure,” and “swallow up” its glory, its eminence, its joy; it will be bereft of all
of which it boasts, for the hand of the Lord will be against it, and his righteous judg-
ments will overtake it (ver. 16). 4. Humiliation. (Ver. 15.) 5. Mortification. How
unspeakably mortified would those Jewish captives be to find themselves pining in
a foreign land when their own fields at home were unoccupied, the spoil of the roving
flock, tne prey of the marauding stranger (ver. 17)! And how bitter must be the
mortification and self-reproach which they must feel who have to realize the results
of their guilty spiritual ignorance; who have to see that, afar off and beyond their
reach, are joys which they might have shared, honours which they might have won,
spheres which they might have filled, a large heritage which was their own but which
will never be theirs again !—C,


Vers. 18, 19.—Sin in its strength. We have here some thoughts about sin.

I. Irs evi. GrowtH. Whatever the precise thought of the prophet, his words (ver.
18) are strongly suggestive of the fact that sin gradually attains a terrible power. Its
“pull” may at first be that of a silken thread; presently it becomes that of a strong
string; then it is found to be that of a bard wire; finally it reaches that of a “ cart-
rope.” And this, whether we regard the sinner as (1) the man mo whom iniquity actx,
or as (2) the agent through whom its force is exerted on others. In the one case he is
moved only with great difficulty, and often the bond which is thrown about him snays
in twain; but, in time, sin gains strength, and it pulls him as with a rope that cannot
be broken. In the other case—probably the one here intended—he himself haidly
succeeds, sometimes fails, in leading men astray; but in course of time he draws his
neighbuurs along the road of wrong-doing with ease; the tie by which he holds and by
which he constrains them is stout and strong. He draws sin “as it were with a cart-
rope.” 1. Shun the first overtures of the ungodly; have nothing to do, in the way
of friendship, with the enemies of truth and righteousness. 2. If wen have acquired
a fascinating power over you, there is no deliverance from their evil grasp save by
genuine penitence and an earnest appeal to the Almighty Frieud; Ais hand can cut
the strongest cords of sin.

Il. Ivs FEARFUL CULMINATION. Sin reaches its summit when it stands on the
height of impious defiance of the living God (ver, 19). Reverence shrinks with a holy
reluctance from taking such words into its lips, even when it simply quotes the
utterance of impiety. Yet men are found in the path of sin who will employ such
language without remorse! In the earlier stages of ungodliness men would be shocked
at the idea of doing and being that to which a continuance in irrelizion naturally leads
up. That puny man should positively defy his Maker seems antecedently unlikely,
if not impossible. Yet glaring facts too plainly prove that an evil course docs not stop
short of even this extreme. What awful possibilities of evil reside within a human
soul! How unmeasurably wise it is to place ourselves under the guidance of the

: Stine Ne
great Teacher, to have our hearts the residence of the Holy Spirit! Then, but only
then, are we safe from moral enormiti¢s which are’a thousand times more to be dreaded
than the extinction of our being.

Ill. Irs riguTzous Doom. “ Woe unto them!” And they shall have woe! They
may say in their shameless arrogance, “ Let us break their bands asunder,” etc.; but
“the Lord shall have them in derision . . . he shall vex them in his sore displeasure ”
(Ps, ii.8—5). They may “set their mouth against the heavens,” and may say, “ How
doth God know?” but “ how are they brought into desolation, as in a moment! they
are utterly consumed with terrors” (Ps. Ixxiii, 9, 11, 19). _ God will overturn their
purposes ; he will scatter their friendships and leave them in helpless loneliness ; he
will bring them into an intolerable humiliation; he will condemn them at his judg-
ment-bar ; he will sentence them to eternal exile.—C,


96 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. v. 1—30.


Ver. 20.—Spiritual perversity. Antecedently we should hardly have expected that
a being created in the image of God, a rational spiritual agent, would so far depart
from all that is reasonable and right as to put evil for good, and good for evil, ete. Yet
such is the case. We have to consider—

I. THE FACT OF SPIRITUAL PERVERSITY. Human perversity is not found in the
higher region only. We find it in things physical, notably in our treatment of the
body. Men take noxious drugs, thinking that they “do them good,” while they shrink
from plain and wholesome food, as unpalatable and undesirable. In things economical.
They shut their markets against the commodities of other nations, supposing that they
~re thereby benefiting their owa citizens, when they are only injuring their neighbours
snd impoverishing themselves thereby. And so in other spheres of activity. In
things spiritual the fact is most painfully apparent. 1. In our direct relation to
jod. Some men are found who condemn all worship as superstition, all earnestness as
fanaticism, all piety as hypocrisy; the same men speak of atheism under the euphe-
mism of free-thouzht; with them godlessness is emancipation from spiritual bondage }
2. In our relation to our fellow-men. There are those who call clemency weakness, and
oppression vigour; who denounce considerateness as mawkish sentimentality, and
honour a brutal selfishness as cleverness and spiritedness; who sneer at conscientious-
ness as being “ priggish,” and talk of roguery as if it reflected honour on its agents.
3. In our relation to ourselves. There are too many, especially among the young, who
consider dissipation to be another thing for “life,” and who decry purity and self-
restraint as dulness and poverty of spirit; they have honourable terms for the vilest
and foulest sins, and terms of discredit for the cause of virtue and self-respect. Thus is
everything misnamed, and not only misnamed but mistaken. These words are
more than mere labels; they represent the thought which is beneath; they stand for
false conceptions. All things, human and Divine, are seen in false lights, are regarded
as other than they are, indeed as the very opposites of what they are; the evil and
shameful thing is positively admired as well as praised; the holy and the beautiful
thing is actually hated as well as cursed! These are the sad facts which are before
our eyes.

II. Ivs ExpLanation. How can we account for such perversity as this, such a sad
and disastrous revolution in the mind? It is surely due to the deteriorating influence
of sin upon the soul. He that sinneth against God wrongs his own spiritual nature.
Sin blinds, distorts, discolours; not, indeed, suddenly and altogether, but gradually
and constantly. A man who falls under the power of any temptation is something
the worse in mind as well as in heart for his sin; his mental conception as well as his
moral habit is injured—imperceptibly, perhaps, but not unimportantly. And by slow
degrees the mind is affected and the view is changed, until everything is reversed in
thought and in language (see Matt. vi. 22, 23).

Ill. Irs end. “ Woe unto them!” But what worse penalty can be inflicted than
this? Surely they have their reward, in the overthrow of their reason, in the darkening
of their mind, in the deterioration of their soul. Truly; yet are there not other evils
which must be endured? Will not the light of eternity flash into these guilty souls,
showing them whereto they have fallen and wherein they have erred, awakening the
sensibilities which they have sent to slumber, stirring up in them the remorse which
is due to those who have so wronged themselves, so ill-treated their fellows, so sinned
against the Lord ?—C.


Ver. 21.— The pitiful estate of the proud. We may well commiserate those who are
* wise in their own eyes,” inasmuch as—

1, THEY HAVE A FALSE CONCEPTION AS TO THEIR OWN capacity. They think
themsclves able to determine what is true and beautiful and good, when they are
painfully and pitifully in need of guidance from without; their estimate of themselves
is essentially wrong. They “live in a fool’s paradise.”

Il, THEY ARE SHUTTING OUT FROM THEIR MINDS THE TRUTH WHICH WOULD REDEEM
AND ENNOBLE THEM. The blessing of the Lord is promised to the humble-hearted, to
those who have the docility of the little child. It is they, and they only, who are
willing to empty themselves of their own fancies and follies that they may receive the
eternal truth of God. ‘The men who think themselves wise can find no room in their


OH. v. 1—30,] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 9t
es


minds for those Divine teachings which save, which purify, which enlarge, which
transform the heart and life (see 1 Cor. iii. 18).

Ill. Tyey aRe IN A SPIRITUAL CONDITION WHICH IS POSITIVELY ANI) EVEN
PECULIARLY OFFENSIVE TO Gop. The Word of God, Old Testament and New, is
studded with texts in which the displeasure of Almighty God is revealed against the
hanghty of heart. God “ resists” the proud, and causes them to fall. It is the arrogant
Pharisee who is not justified in the great Teacher’s parable, who is continually rebuked
by the Lord of truth, who is repeat«dly condemned by the Searcher of souls. We
may therefore conclude, concerning those who are prudent in their own sight, that—

IV. THEY ARE ALL UNREADY FOR THE GREAT DAY OF TRIAL. ‘They will then
find themselves rejected instead of being accepted and commended, and to the gloom
of condemnation will be added the bitter mortification of being utterly and miserably
disappointed.—O,


Vers. 24—30.— The judgments of the Lord. These verses are obviously pictorial and
figurative; they must be treated as highly hyperbolical or they will be misconceived.
Though their primary reference is to the judgments which impended over the guilty
nation, we may discover in them some principles which not only extend to every
age, but apply to every individual soul. 3

I, THAT THE INDIVIDUAL AS WELL AS THE NATION MAY BE THE OBJECT OF THE
AWFUL ANGER OF ALMIGHTY Gop. “The anger of the Lord is kindled against his
people” (ver. 25). Without attributing to the Divine Spirit the very same sentiment
as that which fills our human minds, we may and should feel that the burning indig-
nation of which we are conscious when we witness wrong-doing is the reflection of the
“anger of the Lord” against all unrighteousness; and we do well to think that what
we now feel in regard to others God may feel toward us, if, like his ancient people, we
fall into disobe‘ience and condemnation. Well may we, “who are his offspring,”
shrink from the high displeasure of the holy Father of souls.

Il. THat Gop’s ANGER IS EXCITED BY OUR INATYENTION AND DISOBEDIENCE.
“ Because they have cast away the Law... and despised the Word of the Holy One of
Israel ” (ver. 24). The evil thing which God hates takes many forms, the later and
darker ones being shocking even in the sight of good meu. But they all spring from a
disregard of his will as revealed in his Word. Despising the Word in the mind leads
to a casting out of the Law from the rule of life, and thus shows itself in all kinds of
iniquity. He who is neglecting the will of God, as that will is stated in his Word, is at
the source of the stream of sin, and is in danger of being carried down to the rapids of
destruction.

Ill. (Hat THE JUDGMENTS OF GOD ARE SOMETIMES SWIFT IN THEIR APPROACH.
“ They shall come with speed swiftly.” Sometimes they are “ leaden-fuoted but heavy-
handed;” yet at other times they speedily overtake the transgressor. At all times,
indeed, a violation of righteousness is instantly attended with some spiritual injury and
loss; but, beyond this, the more apparent punishment often comes with rapid march
to confront and confound the transgressor.

IV. THat THESE DIVINE JUDGMENTS ARE SOMETIMES UNEXPECTEDLY PROLONGED.
“ For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still ” (ver. 25).
Men are apt to think, when they have suffered some great adversity, that God has
poured out his anger, and that they may thenceforth expect continuous prosperity.
But they overlook the two facts: (1) that at any time in each man’s life there is a
vast amount of unpaid penalty for which God may righteously punish him, and (2) that
God is seeking a remedial as well as a punitive end in his inflictions, and that impeni-
tence has always reason to fear—perhaps we should more properly say hope —that the
hand of the Lord will still be stretched out in the attitude and act of correction.

V. THAT THEY ARE IRRESISTIBLY STRONG. ‘Their root shall be as rottenness, and
their blossom shall go up as dust,” etc. (ver. 24; see vers, 27—30). God’s judgments
cannot be evaded; there is no escape from them by human strength or cunning. They
move up with steady, unflinching step (ver. 27); they strike with unerring aim and
piercing power (ver. 28); they reach the source as well as the sign of prosperity—
root as well as blossom (ver. 24); they leave no way of escape open—seaward, hcaven-
ward, landward (ver. 30). ‘It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living


ISAIAH. H


98 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. v. 1—30.


God;” “Who may stand in his sight, when once he is angry?” Therefore:
1. Hearken dilig ntly to his Word and hasten to cbey, that the anger of the Lord be
not kindled, but that his good pleasure may abide and abound unto you. 2. If any
one of his judgments fall, turn unto him with unhesitating penitence, and his anger
will be “turned away ” (see Joel ii. 12—14).—C. :


Ver. 4.—The ingratitude of an unfruitful life. The passage connected with this
verse is conceived quite in the spiit of our Lord’s parables. In a picture taken from
familiar scenes of nature, the relations between God and his people are shown. As in
the parable spoken by Nathan, a deiinite judgment is asked, That judgment, whether
given audibly or only felt, is made an earnest appeal of God to their own conscience
and their own hearts. ‘Three things are set forth prominently in this parable.

I. Tue Gracious ATTENTIONS. ‘The picture of a vineyard was especially interesting
to Isaiah’s audieuce. because Canaan was a land of vines, which grew freely along the
terraced hillsides, The prophet observes that the vineyard of which he speaks had every
advaniae of situation and soil; it was properly protected, well cleared, planted with vines
of the choicest quality, and fitted with everything necessary to the securing of abun-
dant fruitage. Everything was dove, according to the description, that good judgment,
large ability, and careful consideration could suggest. It was not a mere vineyard
planted for gain; it was a garden of delights; the pleasure as well as the interest of
the owner were bound up in it. Such was the land of Canaan, as prepared by God for
his people; and such was Israel, as God’s vine planted in it. What nation ever was
like Israel, in the s) ecial choice, and call, and scttling, and tendi:g, and pruning, and
nourishing, and loving interest of God? ‘Tle deep feelings of God tuwards them find
very tender expression in the books of the prophets (see Jer. ii. 2, 21; Hus. ii. ; vi. 4;
xi., etc.). We may well think that no other nation except England has ever been so
favoured of God. He has chosen her, fenced her round, “encompassed her with the
inviolate sea,” enriched her with food growing out of her soil, and with wealth stored
in almost inexhaustible heaps beneath it. He has lit, even in ber martyrs’ fires, a
candle of truth which neither the dogmatism of science nor the extravagances of priests,
will ever blow out. He has planted her with noble elements of character, given fruitful
soil for their growth, watched against evil influences, sent forth right, wise, faithful
busbandmen in every age to prune and tend and clear out the stones of obstruction.
Surely God rightly looks for fruit—for full, rich, ripe clusters of the “ vine of Sorek ”
hanging on the branches of England. But we may take the description home to our-
selves. What gracious attentions have we received! Sometimes, looking over our lives,
it seems to us that if we had been his sole favourites in the world, he could not have
been more kind, more constant, more gracious, more unsparing in his dealings with us,
We think of the godly families into which we entered as members; of our saintly
“ forbears ;” of the trust of health, and mental power; of the ;lace where we are set,
and the successes we have won. Surely we are just a vineyard of delights to our God,
and we ought to respond to him with abundant truitfulness.

II, THE REASONABLE EXPECTATIONS. “I looked that it should bring forth grapes.”
He who plants and tends flowers does so expecting to gain beantiful blossoms; and
he is cheered all through the long waiting time by the pleasant expectation. He who
casts corn-seeds into the ploughed earth buries them with visions of the waving harvest
and the ioaded barns. He has long patience because of right and reasonable expecta-
tions, He who prepares a vineyard waits while the rough branches cover with leaves,
and the clusters han down, growing bigger every day. He too expects the riches and
the joy of the ingathering, And God planted those Jews in fertile Canaan, expecting
from them the fruitage of a clear witness for him to all the nations around. He looked for
ee of judgment. He looked for righteousuess. He expected that they would be a

oly people, zealous of good works.” What, then, does God now expect of his English
vineyard? What does he expect of us? We may remind of some of the good fruit
God expects to find on our tree. 1. He expects us to reach a very high standard of
Christian intelligeuce. Not merely believing what we are told, but finding out for
ourselves what, upon reasouable grounds, seems to be true. Able to give good reasons
for the hope that is in us, with meckness and fear. 2. He expects an unmistakable
witness for himself. and for his truth, ‘There should be no hiding our light under a


cH. v. 1—30.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 99


———————————— eee


bushel. No hesitating to confess whose we are, and whom we serve. No acting incon-
sistently with the Christ-name which we bear. 3. He expects abundant fruit of
charitable deeds and devoted labours. The branches on the vine which will most
glorify God are those that hang down low enough for men to pick. His law is, “ Inas+
much as ye did it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye did it unto me.”
4. He looks for holy and beautiful character. These are the grapes that ought to grow
on Christian trees: “ Love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meek-
ness, temperance.” “If these things be in you and abound, they make you that you
shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ;”
“ Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit.” ;
III. THE PAINFUL DISAPPOINTMENT. Nothing but hedgerow dog-roses blossoming on
the budded tree. Nothing but sour, useless, wild grapes hanging on the grafted stock
Grapes like crab-apples, or apples of Sodom, good-looking, but tasteless, The Hebrew
word, indeed, is a very vigorous one, and expresses even the offensive putrefaction of
these grapes. All the loving care, the labouring, and the tending seem to have been
in vain. Brought out from idolatry, the Jews sought and served idols. Separated
from temptations to moral evils, they became utterly depraved. Fenced in to righteouse
ness, over the wall they went, in the dreadful licence of iniquity. Sometimes there
was a fair show of leaf, but it was “nothing but leaves.” Sometimes tliere seemed a
show of fruit. The heavenly husbandman tried it, and it crushed into foul ashes in the
mouth. We may well sympathize with God in his sore disappointmen: at the result
of all his care of his ancient people. Illustrate by the scene of our Lord’s weeping over
Jerusalem. Does England disappoint God, too? At first it seems as if we could say—
Surely not! Think of her spires and towers dotting every landscape; ber hospitals in
every town; her thousands of godly homes, But what shall we say of the awful
procession of her drunkards; the vision of her drunkards’ homes; her outcast children ;
her overcrowded dwellings, where decency cannot find a place; her vin-palaces; her
gaols; her madhouses; her workhouses; her soldiers’ barracks, and sailors’ tempters ;
her “city snares ard town traps”? Do we disappoint our gracious God? What is
the fruitage of our characters, our homes, our places of prayer, our business, our Church
life and relations? Must he say, “‘ Wild grapes, ouly wild grapes; cut it down ”?—R. T.


Vers. 5, 6.—Divine judgments on ingrutitude. The picture presented is one of com-
plete desolation. A miserable sight is the untended vineyard. No desolation is so
complete as that which comes to lands which man has once tilled and then Icft neg-
lected. Hugh Macmillan remarks that this judgment has even heen literally tulfilled.
** No country in the world has such variety and abundance of thorny plants as Palestine
in its present desolation ; there are giant thistles, growing to the heizht of a man on
horseback, impenetrable thickets of buckthorn, and bare hillsides studded with paliurus
and tribulus.” “The absence of the pruning and digging answers to the withdrawal of
the means of moral and spiritual culture. The command given to the clouds implies
the cessation of all gracious spiritual influences.”

I. THE UNGRATEFUL MUST LOSE THEIR PRIVILEGE. The grace of God, and the pro-
visions, defences, and guidings of grace, are the glory of a life and of a nation. No
nation has ever been so favoured as Israel was. Compare Jehovah’s pleadings and
reproaches in Hos, ii.; and also our Lord’s parable of the ‘cumberer of the ground’
(Luke xiii. 6, 9). “ God, in a way of righteous judgment, denies his grace to those that
have long received it in vain. The sum of all is that those who would not bring forth
good fruit shou/d bring forth none. The curse of barrenness is the punishment of the
sin of harrenncss (Mark xi. 14). This has its frequent accomplishment in the departure
of God’s Spirit from those persons who have long resisted him, and striven against him ”
(Matthew Henry).

Il. THE UNGRATEFUL MUST BE LEFT TO THEMSELVES AWHILE. Compare the figure of
the unfaithful wife in Hos. ii., who must be left alone to her wilfulness and its bitter
consequences. Illustrate from the garden let alone. The grass grows rank, the weeds
flourish and seed themselves, the paths are full of green; the place looks neglected and
miserable. So is the man, so is the nation, from which God withdraws his gracious
hand, his special care. [Illustrate the misery 2f David in those months when, because
of his sin, God’s grace was withheld. His “ bones waxed old through his rvaring all


100 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. v. 1—3C.


a


the day long;” and presently he comes to pray, with a great intensity of feeling,
“ Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation.” There is a sense in which, like Jerusalem,
our “day of grace may be passed,” and we may be left to ourselves, to the wve of being
ourselves only.—R. T.


Ver. 7.—The difference between what God asks and what God gets. The original
terms of this verse contain a very striking play upon words, which can but imperfectly
be rendered into English. ‘ He looked for judgment (mishpat), and behold oppres-
sion (mishpach); for righteousness (tsedakah), and behold a ery (tseakah) of the oppressed
for help.” Dr, C. Geikie translates the verse thus: “And he hoped tor deeds of good,
but, behold, there are only deeds of blood; for righteousness, and, lo! there is only the
cry of the oppressed.” The appeal of God is applicable to all the ages, and, taken in
a large sense, may be also applied to us. It should be our exceeding distress that so
often we give to God quite other things than he asks of us.

I. GoD ALWAYS ASKS FOR RIGHTEOUSNESS. ‘The reference in the text is to public
justice; rizht dealing Letween man and man; due considerateness for others; and the
faithful administration of laws, both social and ecclesiastical. ‘The people ought to be
honest in all their dealings, and the magistrates just in all their decisions. But God
asks for “ righteousness ” in a much higher sense than this. The creatures he has made
in his image he wants to be like himself. “Be ye holy, for I am holy;” “Be ye
therefore perfect, even as your Father in heaven is perfect.” The righteousness that
he asks from us he has shown us in the person and the life of his dear Son. It is for
us no vague thing, gathered up into a great and somewhat mysterious word; it is,
plainly and practically, our being changed into Christ’s image, and bringing forth fruits
of goodness like his. This may be fully worked out and illustrated along three lines.
The righteousness God asks of us is (1) loyalty to his revealed truth; (2) obedience to
his declared will; and (8) manifestation, in practical life, of the spirit of heavenly,
Divine charity.

II. Gop orrEN GETS “ OPPRESSION ” AND A “cory.” Here, too, the first suggestion is
of social and national evil; injustice of magistrates, and masterfulness of the strong
and wealthy over the poor. Everything was carried by clamour and noise; wickedness
had usurped the place of judgment. But here, too, the response made to God may be
dealt with in a larger way. ‘The essence of all “oppression ” and “ cry ” is somebody’s
self-seeking spirit and self-secking ways. In this we grieve God. He asks life for
him, and for others in service to him; and we give him life full of se//, that can even
trample over his poor in accomplishing our own self-ends. So we, too, come under the
Divine reproaches and judgments.—R. T.


Ver. 8.— The covetous spirit, and its judgment. The picture presented in this verse
can be matched by the conduct of our English king, who destroyed the villages to
make the New Forest; or by the makers of deer-forests in North Britain, who have
driven away the natives. In Isaiah’s time the wealthy men were buying up the houses
and estates, and destroying the old village life of Palestine. ‘In the place of the small
freeholders, there rose up a class of large proprietors, while the original holders sank
into slavery, or tenants-at-will, paying exorbitant rents in kind or money, and liable
at any moment to be evicted” (Dean Plumptre). Bishop Latimer, in the sixteenth
century, makes a bold protest against the enclosure of commons. Grasping after
property is almost always connected with a neglect of charitable duties and a willingness
to sacrifice the good of others. Such accumulation of landed property was funda-
mentally opposed to the Mosaic regulations. Illustrate by the law of jubilee, which
made all land in Palestine purchaseable only on lease (comp. Numb. xxvii, 1—11;
xxxiii, 54; 1 Kings xxi. 4; Lev. xxv. 8—17).

I, Livine to aur, There are three ways of looking at life; three things which we
may supremely aim at in life. 1. We may live to get. South says, “The covetous
person lives as if the world were made altogether for him, and not he for the world; to
take in everything and part with nothing.” Austin defines covetousness as a “ dishonest
and insatiable desire of gain.” The Prophet Micah describes such persons, “They covet
fields, and take them by violence; and houses, and take them away: so they oppress a
man and his house, even a an and his heritage.” The tenth commandment. wholly


on, v. 1—30.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 101
a ee


forbids our making any personal gain the end and aim of life. Show under what self-
deceiving forms this covetous desire to get ensnares men nowadays. 2. We may live
to be, That is, to culture ourselves, aud win the worship of men for what we are, in
talent, skill, and virtue. This is nobler; and this is, in measure, right and good ; yet
it has this exceeding moral peril, that it keeps us in the self-spheres. It may easily
pass into the degrading thing—covetousness for fame. 3. We may live ¢o serve, This
is the Divine idea of life for us. This is the Christ-like pattern of life for us. This is
the kind of life that suffering, sinning humanity asks for from us. They who can live
to serve are, with Christ, after Christ, and in his strength, the world’s saviours, and the
God-glorifiers.

I. Gop’s JUDGMENTS ON HIM WHO LIVES TO GET. Those judgments will come as
natural agencies, as fixed results of ever-working law, and as circumstances for which
men may think to find easy explanation; but they are none the less direct Divine
judgments. Such judgments on the covetous take two forms. 1. Character is debased
by the constant getting and grasping. This may be effectively illustrated in the case
of the apostate Judas. No moral deterioration is so serious or so certain as that of the
covetous man. Hardening against his fellow-men, he is hardening against God. Crush-
ing out all considerateness and all charity, he loses men’s love and God’s smile, and is
wretched indeed when he has got all, and is “‘ placed alone in the midst of the land.”
If any poor creature of our humanity calls for our supremest pity, it is surely the man
who has lived to get, and made his immortal soul grovel among mere possessions,
“Take heed, and beware of covetousness; for a man’s life consisteth not in the abun-
dance of the things that he possesseth.” 2, The calamities of life will prove utterly
ruinous to the covetous. Because they will touch them at their tenderest point,
destroying their gains. The picture presented in the verses is a most affecting one,
By the insecurity of the land the fine mansions are uninhabited, and the fields are
neglected. Travellers tells us of the humiliating sight of decayed mansions in the
East. War and civil commotion, often the natural result of the masterful ruling of
covetous men, make property valueless, and so the evil brings round its own judgment,
The law works universally, sometimes quickly, at other times slowly, so that men
presume on its delaying, that “ whatsoever a man soweth, that shail he also reap.”
Apply by inquiriug what is the end and aim of life to the hearers. Jacob would get,
and he got years of homelessness, hard toil, and care. Achan would get, and he got an
early and dreadful death. Gehazi would get, and he got the leprosy. Ananias and
Sapphira would get, and they got a sudden destruction, Woe—earth cries for it, and
heaven sends it—woe, sooner or later, for very one who liveth that he may get, and
is utterly unworthy of him who, showing God to us, went about among his fellows as


“ One that serveth.”—R. T.


Vers. 11, 12.—The sin of dissipation. That which is here reproved is not mere
drinking habits ; it is the riotous feasting and wasting which characterizes the sensualist.
Early drinking was considered by the Jews, as it was by the Romans, a mark of the
most degraded sensuality. “In the time of Isaiah, the sensual Jews appear to have
employed musicians, and all kinds of merry-makers, as dancers, mimics, buffoons, etc.,
such as are still common all over the East.” “They shocked public feeling by morning
banquets” (Eccles. x. 16, 17; Acts ii. 14). Morier says, “The Persians, when they
commit a debauch, arise betimes, and esteem the morning as the best time for beginning
to drink wine, by which means they carry on their excess till night.” Dissipation, ir
its comprehensive sense, is the temptation and the sin of our young men, especially
of those belonging to the wealthier classes, The excitement and rioting of it may be
illustrated by the following true incident. When inflamed with wine, a young man
was challenged to eat a five-pound note. Placing it between slices of bread, in wild
foolishness and wickedness, he actually destroyed the note in this way. We fix atten-
tion on the wastcfulness of dissipation, and point out that it isa grievous sin before
God, as abusing his sacred trusts. Lllustrate from (1) the trust of time ; (2) the trust
of property ; (8) the trust of the body ; (4) the trust of the mind ; (5) the trust of the
power to serve others. Show how mischievous is the influence exerted by the familiar
saying, “ Young men must sow their wild oats.” They should have nu wild oats to
sow; and if they have any, the very last thing they should do with them is sovw them,


102 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (us. v. 1—30,
Sunn nn ee


for they will surely spring up, and bear, for their reaping, a harvest of woe unspeakable.
F. W. Robertson says, “There are men who ‘make provision for the flesh, to fulfil the
lusts thereof.’ They whet the appetites by indulgence. They whip the jaded senses
to their work. Whatever the constitutional bias may be—anger, intemperance, epicurism,
indolence, desires—there are societies, conversations, scenes, which supply fuel for the
flame, as well as opposite ones which cut off the nutriment. Such a man is looking
forward to a harvest wherein he may reap the fruit of his present anticipations And
he shull reap it. He has sown to the flesh, and of the flesh he shall reap corruption.
‘his is in his case the ruin of the soul. He shall reap the harvest of disappointment—
the harvest of bitter, useless remorse. His harvest is a soul in flames, and the tongue
that no drop can cool.”—R. T.


: Vers. 18, 20, 21, 28.—Four grievous sins. The ungodly spirit finds very various
modes of expression in wilful and self-pleasing actions. Men’s sins are repeated over
and over again in every age, sometimes taking more open and defiant forms, and some-
times hiding behind a pleasant outward show of delicacy and retinement, but always
the “abominable things which Gud hates.” The coarse sins of Hastern peoples seem
offensive to our sensitive Western nations; but the sins are here amungst us, only in a
disguise which deceives us. Isaiah reproves—

J. THe sIN OF PRESUMPTION. (Vers. 18, 19.) Evil-doers are thought of as harnessing
themselves to the chariot of sin; as bold enough even to scoff at God’s threatened
judgments, and taunt him with his merciful delayings, saying, “ Let Jehovah hasten ;
let him hurry on his work, that we may see i.” Wordsworth paraphrases ver. 18
thus: “ Woe to them that harness themselves as brute beasts to iniquity, with cords
of falsehood, and drag—on the weight of sin, as a waggon, with the ropes of vicious
habits.” Illustrate by the scoffing thief on the cross; and by the parable of the man
who presnmed upon his abundant harvest, and found he was suddenly called away from all
his wealth. Presumption is the evil into which men are led through temporary successes,
See the effect of prosperity on Nebuchadnezzar. It is a constant effect of luxury and
self-indulgence and immorality. It is the brink of utter and irretrievable ruin. For
the presumptuous man there is little hope. He must fall, and be bruised and
crushed, ere he will learn lessons of humility and trust. David knew human nature
well, and he taught us to pray, “ Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins;
let them not have dominion over me.”

Il. ‘HE SIN OF CONFUSING MORAL DISTINCTIONS. (Ver. 20.) ‘Those do a great
deal of wrong to God and religion and conscience—to their own souls, and to the souls
of others who misrepresent [evil and good], and put false colours upon them ; who call
drunkenness good fvllowship, and covetousuess good husbandry, and, when they per-
secute the people of God, think they do him good service; and on the other hand, call
seriousness il] nature, and sober singularity ill breeding, and say all manner of evil
falsely concerning the ways of godliness ” (Matthew Henry). The text well describes the
spirit of our age. In our over-refinements we are losing the sternness of the truth,
caretully polishing off every edge and point and corner that might prick conscience
into activity. We are toning down moral distinctions until they are becoming quite
confused and indistinct; wecan hardly tell for certain what is right and what is wrong,
what is evil and what is good, One of the most thoughtful of American divines, Dr. J.
A. Alexander, writes thus: “ Do not we with one breath assert the inviolable sanctity of
the truth, but with the next breath make provision for benevolent, business, jocose, or
thoughtless falsehood? Do we not, in the abstract, assert the claims of justice, and the
obligation to give every man his own, but, in application to specific cases, think it lawful
to enrich ourselves at other men’s expense, or take advantage of another’s weakness,
ignorance, or error? Do we not admit the paramount importance of religious duties in
general, but in detail dissect away the vital parts as superstition, sanctimony, or
fanaticism? Do we not approve the requisitions of the Law, and the provisions of the
gospel, in so far as they apply to other people, but repudiate or pass them by as
applying to ourselves? What is all this but saying of evil, it is good, and of good, it
is evil ?

Ill. THe sin oF seLF-conceiT, (Ver. 21.) The first reference is to counsellors,
* whose ideal of statesmanship wasa series of shifts and expedients, based on no principle


oH, Vv. 1—30.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 103
a


of righteousness.” This form of sin is too familiar to need much suggestion as to its
treatment. God resisteth those who are conceited of their own wisdom and lean tr
their own understanding, “ Seest thou a man wise in his own eyes? there is more hope
of a fool than of him.”

IV. THE sIN OF coRRUPTING JusTIcE. (Ver. 23.) “Who clear the guilty for a
bribe, and take the rights of worthy men from them.” ‘he idea is that justice is
sacrificed to meet the demands of an expensive luxuriousness, So men now grind the
faces of those who work for them to support their own extiavagances. No greater evil
can come upon a land than the poisoning of the fountains of justice; and there is no
more certain source of national discontent hastening to rebellion. ‘I'he prophet was
himself deeply moved by the picture of the evils of his time which rose up before him,
Nowhere could he look and gain the relief of a hope. Such an utterly wicked people
must suffer, Seaward he looked, but there was not one gleam of light. Landward he
looked, but not ene gleam of light. Such is the end of wickedness. Bold though it
may seem, defiant as it may sound, long as it may appear to hold out, this is the issue
of it—dark, all dark. The very “ light is darkened in the heavens thereof.”—R. T.


Ver. 20.— The importance of adequate impressions of sin. Weseldom hear sin spoken
about now as the old prophets spoke about it. We do not think about sin as the defiance
of God, the attempted overthrow of kis authority, the expression of the soul’s hatred of
God, and therefore calling for terrible vindications of the Divine power and claims. In
reading biographies of very holy and devoted Christians, we have observed that they had
deep and overwhelming impressions of the evil of sin—impressions quite beyond the
reach of our sympathy. Perhaps we have inclined to call them morbid, and to
think such views were the result of diseased imaginations, The truth, however, is that
these holy men and women had visions of the infinite holiness of God. They saw the
‘sapphire throne,” and they trembled and veiled their faces before the exceeding majesty
of the Divine purity. They saw themselves and sin truly and worthily, because they
saw these things in the full clear light of God. We do not so see them, because we do
not live near enough to God. ‘Take as a specimen the following sentences of John
Bunyan—surely as honest and sincere a man before God and his fellows as ever lived:
“My original and inward pollution—that was my plague and affliction. That I saw
at a dreadful rate, always putting forth itself within me. That I had the guilt of to
amazement, By reason of that I was loathsome in my own eyes, and I thought I was
in God’s eyes too. Sin and corruption, I said, would as naturally bubble out of my
heart as water out of a fountain. I thought that every one had a better heart than I
had; I could have changed hearts with anybody. I thought none but the devil himself
could equalize me for inward wickedness and pollution of mind, I fell, therefore, at
the sight of my own vileness, deeply into despair.” Making all allowance for the
quaintness of this language, and for the spirit of the age in which Bunyan lived, do we
not feel that his Christian life became so noble because his foundations had been laid
so low? And we need more worthy apprehensions of the essential hatefulness and evil
of sin to lie as the foundation-stones on which we may rear our godly life. 1. All the
great truths and doctrines of Divine revelation rest upon the fact of human sin, Re-
pentance, justification, atonement, redemption, sanctification, all assume the fact of our
sin. It is too much the habit to discuss these doctrines as if they were merely questions
of science, having a general intellectual interest ; but with the smitings of guilt on our
hearts, and the avenger of blood at our heels, they become intensely real; they are no
less than the conditions of the soul’s safety in the city of refuge. We should under-
stand them so much better if we had more soul-moving impressions of the evil and the
guilt of our state before God. 2, All the Christian graces depend on deep views of sin,
‘That possesses our souls with pity and charity and long-suffering towards others. That
makes aud keeps us humble, ‘he believing man is he who, in his self-helplessness, has
learned to lean wholly. The hopeful man is he who has cried “out of the depths”
unto the Lord. The man who feels for others is he who “ knows the plague of his own
heart.’ 3. All the earnestness and zeal of Christian work depend on worthy views of
sin, Are men perishing in sin? then we must rescue and save them, John Howe
says, “ Shall our Redeemer be left to weep alone over perishing souls? Have we no
tears to spend upon this doleful subject? Oh that our heads were waters, and our eyes


104 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cH. v. 1—30.


———————__— — —  —  —————————————————————— en" OO s=ce _ eee ew


fountains! Is it nothing to us that multitudes are sinking, going down to perdition,
under the name of Christian, from under the means of life and salvation—perishing—
and we can do nothing to prevent it? We know they must perish that do not repent
and turn to God, and love him above all; that do not believe in his Son, and pay him
homage as their rightful Lord.” We are guilty before God in neglecting to keep vivid
in our hearts humbling convictions of sin; and we may trace to this neglect our im-
perfect impressions of the holiness of God, of the majesty of his Law, and of the necessity
for atonement by blood-shedding. We may also trace to this neglect our easy subjection
to the pleasures and vanities of the world; our indifference in the pursuit of Christian
virtues, and our coldness and deadness to the claims of Christian work. To see sin
tightly we uinst see it—

I, Ly THe conseyue NCES TO WHICH IT LEADS. We wonder why these stern writings
of the old prophets are preserved, and make up so large a portion of God’s Word. They
are needed to keep before us the connection between sin and suffering, to show the
wickedness of sin by the bitterness of its consequences. We do not need either old
prophets or new ones to convince us of the fact of sin. Conscience and observation
suffice for that. Nor do we need old prophets or new ones to convince us of the fact of
suffering. But we do need them to convince us of the connection between the two.
And that was just the mission of the old prophets, In vigorous language they describe
dreadful famines, devouring peStilences, the march of myriad locusts, frightful scenes
of battle-felds and siege, the desolation of fair countries, the exile and captivity of
nations. But they never leave us to imagine for a moment that such things are mere
calamities. ‘hey are consequences of sin; the whirlwind which those reap who sow the
wind. They try to make us see behind the apparent order of canse and effect, and they say,
“Ye have provoked the Lord your God to anger, therefore hath all this evil come upon
you.” Sin is invisible. Sin is pleasing to our corrupt nature, and we will not see its
true character. So God writes it up before our eyes in bodily, social, national, hereditary
woes. Illustrate from the end of the avaricious man, the drunkard, the presumptuous,
etc., as given in this chapter.

IL. Ly THE con’rasT OF GOD’8s MERCIFUL DEALINGS WITH Us. It is mostly in this
way that God is accustomed to presevt sin to us. See the opening parable of this
chapter. Sins and vices look hateiul indeed, as staining and debasing poor Africans.
Drunkenness is hideous, corrupting the poor islanders of the Southern Seas. But what
do such things look like, putting to utter shame the enlightened islanders of Christian
Britain? Are not lust, and passion, and greed, and drunkenness, and down-treading
the poor, and neglecting the offered salvation, aggravated immensely by God’s abounding
mercy to us? God pleads his mercy (see Hos. xi. 3,4). We plead thus: Do you think,
if you had lived in Christ’s days, you could have gone on sinning on the very knoll of
Calvary, under the very shadow of the cross on which your Saviour died? Could you
have cast lots fur his raiment with those rough gamesters, danced a merry round about
his cross, and done the deeds beneath his very agony which now stain your life? It
may be that very thing which you are, in spirit, doing now. ‘The shadow of the cross
has never passed away ; it lies right across Christian England to-day. We live through
our daily lives bencath it. It is not really a dark shadow; it is transformed; it is the
Lord’s rainbow of love shining through tears, It arches our whole sky. Its presence
glorifies all goodness; but its presence also aggravates all sin, all self-indulgence, all
neglect of God. The issue, the final issue, for all who sin under the very shadow of
the cross—that no human lips can describe, as no human imagination can conceive.
That must be the woe unspeakable, the dreadful day of God.—R. T.


Vers. 24, 25.—God’s judgments through natural agencies. The Prophet Isaiah lived
in anxious times. He was keenly observant of the social and moral features of his age—
a discerner of the “signs of the times.” He was sent by God to show the people how
national wrong-doing bore its sure fruitage in bad harvests and in national calamities
and to help tllem to see in such fruitage the operation of Divine judgments, In the
text the prophet clearly sees trouble coming on apace, and taking form as scant and
withered harvests, either through unkindly seasons or the visitation of locusts, “Their
root shall ve as rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust.” Ewald well describes
the social conditions which Isaiah observed in their more serious aspects in relation to


cH. v. 1—30.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 105
ee


the Divine will and Law. “The constant increase of the power and security of the
realm, and the profusion of an age rendered prosperous by the development of arts and
distant commerce, were accompanied by an equally vigorous growth of other things ;
the craving for enjoyment and luxury among the people, and especially among the
women of the capital; the foolish predilection for foreign manners and foreign super-
stitions of every kind, and a wantonness of life, from which many, even of the judges,
were not altogether free, and under which the defenceless inhabitants had to suffer with
increasing severity; all of which Isaiah, the great prophet of his age, who lived in
Jerusalem, recognized and depicted in the sharpest outlines.” Dean Stanley gives a yet
more striking picture of that luxurious age. “The luxury and insolence of the nobles
was in a high degree oppressive and scandalous, Bribery was practised in the seats
of judgment, and enormous lauded property was accumulated against the whole spirit of
the Israelite commonwealth. With the determination and, we may add, the avarice
of their race, they laid their deep schemes at night, and carried them out with their first
waking. ‘lhey “did evil with both hands ;” they skinned the poor to the very quick ;
they picked their bones and ground them to powder. The great ladies of Zion were
haughty, and paced along the streets tossing their necks, and leering with their eyes,
walking and mincing as they went, covered with tinkling ornaments, chains, bracelets,
mantles, veils, of all fashions and sizes,” Isaiah declares that Jehovah observed all
these moral and social evils, and that he used the agencies of nature to execute his
judgments on such sinners. They would find, when the harvest came round, that “ten
acres of land would only yield one bath, and the seed of a homer would only yield an
ephah.” God would smite them through the fields. Is Isaiah’s teaching obsolete ?
Does God speak to the men of this age by the voice of nature? Having found out that
the world is ruled by law, have we gained the right to banish the Lawgiver? Whether
men call us superstitious or not, we unhesitatingly say that God is in the harvest still,
and its limitation is the voice of God calling on us to humble ourselves concerning our
social and national iniquities. ‘That this is a right and reasonable view to take will
appear if-we consider—

I. MAN Is SENSITIVE TO NATURE, AND NATURE TO MAN. If we are still thus sensitive,
God can use nature still as a medium by which to communicate his will to us. Nature
has not yet become one of the dead languas+s; God can speak to us in it. We are
affected by the nature-moods of each passing day. Crisp frost braces us to exertion;
glowing sunshine and clear skies are refiected in bright and cheerful feelings; cloudy,
dull days make our work drag heavily. Storm-times fill us with fear. Hverybody
anxiously observes the character of the seasons. The nation alternates between hope
and fear as reports come of rains, or late frosts, or blight, or flood. Nature is ever
bringing to us messages from God, gracious testimonies of his acceptance or of his
reproof. And no voices are so loud or so clear as those of the harvest, which is God’s
yearly replenishing of our exhausted stores, and go the intimation of Divine regard or
Divine distavour. And nature is sensitive to man, and responsive to man’s conditions
and doings. Go into some parts of our land, some metal and mining districts, and
notice how nature, in response to man, has changed her aspect. Her trees cannot live,
Her atmosphere has become damp and chill. See her fields responding to man’s draining.
She now runs off her moisture in sudden and desolating floods. See the thick smoke-
cloud hanging over great towns. Nature responds by breeding fatal diseases beneath it.
God is ever fitting issues to actions, and in the issues revealing the character of the
action, “Sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death.” Visit the Holy Land, now
desolate and barren, once fruitful and cultivated. 1t has but responded to the destruction
of its timber, by the invading armies that have tramped over it again and again, The
prophets seem to have, as one great part of their mission, to show that changes in
seasons, loss of fruitage, bad harvests, fearful storms, locusts and caterpillars, are really
the judgment-responses of nature to the doings, the wrong-doings, of men. Close up
our Scriptures if it is no longer true that God speaks to men through nature ; for St. Panl
says, “God gave them rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with
food and gladness.” Surely the invisible things of God may be clearly understood by
the things that are made.

II. NATURE CAN STILL BE USED AS AN AGENT OF DIvINE JUDGMENT oN MAN. If God
és, then he cannot pass by sin. If God visits the sins of cities and of nations as such,


106 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cH. v1. 1—18


then he must find some instruments of chastisement which will directly affect cities
and nations. His instruments may be the destructive forces of nature—famine, pestilence,
fear, and war—which directly reach corporate and national feeling. Herein is @ curious
thing. Men are ready enough to hear the voice of God when he sends a bountiful
harvest. ‘I'be whole land rings with the harvest-song,and men do not mind our saying
that God sent the harvest. But how blind and deaf men become when harvest fails!
Our blessings come from God; but how we try to make out that our disasters are only
consequences of some unwisdomn, or some neglect of social or agricultural laws! We need
not see God’s hand in them. Let us not, however, be afraid of either side of the great
truth. If God would recognize our faithfulness to him, he can find rich golden corn,
and sunny autumn for its ripening and its ingathering. If he needs to chastise, and
awaken in us the sense of sin, then he can make withered ears stand in the fields,
summer floods damage the shocks, and sunless autumn hinder the ripening, Can it
ever take away from the judement-aspect of national calamity that we are able to explain
how the earth, in its movements through space, has come into a damp region, or into
a cold region; how certain atmospheric conditions lave duveloped the blight; and bow
the current of certain winds has brought the locusts ; aud how a disturbance of nature’s
limiting agencies has developed unduly the caterpillar? But if God speaks to us in
judgment, let us never furget that he really speaks tous in mercy. He ever blends
mercy with judgment; and the response he asks from our hearts will go into the old
words: “ Come, let us return unto the Lord: for he hath torn, and he will heal us; he
hath smitten, and he will bind usup. After two days will he revive us: in the third day
he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight.” “To the Lord our God belonzeth
mercies and furgivenesses, thuugh we have rebelled against him.”—R, ‘T.


Srcrion III. Isaran’s Vision or Gop upon HIS THRONE (CH. VL)


RXPOSITION.


ting upon a throne, high and lifted up. The
imagery is, of course, taken from the prac-
tice of earthly kings. Elaborate thrones
were affected by the great monarchs of
Egypt and Assyria (Li psins, ‘ Deutimaler,’
pt. iil. pls. 2, 76, 100, 121; Layard, ‘ Nine-
veh and Babylon,’ p. 150). Sclomon’s throne
was perhaps even grandcr than any of these
(see | Kings x. 18—20). It was placed at
the summit of “six steps,” so that its oceu-
pant was “high and lifted up” above all
his courtiers. His train. Not his train of
attendants, but “the skirts of his robe.’
Flowing robes were commonly worn by great
monarciis, Filled the teyple; or, the palace.
The sime word is used in Hebrew for both.
Dr, Kay supposes the prophet to be “in
vision gazing on tbe actual temple—to see


CHAPTER VI.

Vers. 1—4.—Tue Vision or Gop SEEN BY
TsaraH. It is thought by some that this
vision, and its sequel, constituce the original
call of Isaiah to the prophetical office, and
in order of time precede all the other con-
tents of the book. But the position of the
“vision” in the book is strongly against
this view. Prophets who relate their
original call naturally place it in the fore-
front of their narrative Jer. i. 10; Ezek, i.
1). It is quite possible, as Bishop Lowth
says, that this was ‘a new designation, to
introduce more solemnly a general declara-


tion of the whole course of God’s dispensa-
tions in regard to his people, and the fates
of the nations,” ‘The vision itself may pro-
fitably be compared with Ezekiel’s first
vision, which it much resembles (Ezek. i.
4—28).

Ver. 1.—In the year that King Uzzish
died. ‘The year B.o. 759, probably. We
cannot determine trom the phrase used
whether the vision was seen before or after
Uzziah’s death. I saw also; rather, then it
was that I saw (comp. Exod. xvi. 6). The
Lord. Not “Jehovah,” as in vers. 3 and 5,
but “ Adonay,” for greater reverence, Sit-


its veils drawn aside, and instead of the
Shechinah enthroned on the cherubim, to
behoid the King of glory, enthroned on
high, the fringes of his royal robe filling
the temple, sg_that @o hujan priest could
inister_t But, as Mr. Cheyne ob-
serves, “palace is more in harmony with
the picture than temple.” It is the heavenly
pilace of the King of kings into which the
prophet’s gaze is ullowed to penetrate,

Ver. 2.—Ab ve it stood the seraphims;
rather, above him were standing seraphim.
The “seriphim” are introduced, not ag
well known, with the article, but without it,
as unknown. ‘be word means * fiery ones '


cH, vi. 1—13.)


and is supposed to denote the burning love
cf the blessed spirits spoken of. They ap-
peared to the prophet as standing above the
King as he sat upou his throne—* standing ”
to show their readiness to minister; but why
“above him” is not so clear. Perhaps,
simply, as those that stand are “ above”
those that sit; perhaps as ready to fly
through infinite space at the bidding of him
who was seated in his palace, as it were
upon the ground. Their form, as seen by
the prophet, appears to have been human,
and only distinguislied from ordinary hu-
manity by the wings. Thus, though in
name they resembled those other “ fiery
ones,” which had punished the Jews in
the wilderness (Num). xxi. 6—9), there is
nothing to siiow that Isaiah in any way
connected the two. Each one had six wings.
Gesenius is mistaken in saying that there
are at Persepolis any six-winged figures
( Thesaurus,’ p. 1342). The Persians not
unfrequently represented their genii with
four wings (‘ Ancient Monarchies,’ vol. iii.
pp. 853, 354); but no six-winged figures
have been found, so far as I know, among
the Persian remains. With twain he covered
his face, etc. The general idea of the six
wings was probably rapid flight, the carry-
ing out of God’s bchests “with speed
swiftly.” But, in tle Divine presence, the
wings were applied to a different use. One
pair veiled the seraph’s head from the in-
tolerable effulgence of the Divine glory ;
another conceuled the feet, soiled in thcir
various ministratious, and unmeet for the
all-pure presence; the third pair alone
sustained the seraph in mid-air, as he
hovered in readiness to depart on any
errand on which Jehovah might send him.
Ver. 3.—One cried; rather, kept crying
(comp. Rev. iy. 8, “They rest not day and
night, saying, Holy, holy, holy”). But the
prophet scarcely gues so far; he describes
only his vision—they did not rest while the
vision wag vouclisafed him. Holy, holy,
holy. The Church on earth has taken
pattern by the Church above; and the
“Trisagion” is ever being repeated in one
part of the earth or another withont ceas-
ing: “ Thou continuest holy, O thou Worship
of Israel.” There is no attribute so essential
to God as this. It is for his holiness, more
than for anything else, that his creatures
worship him. The triple repetition has
been understood in all ages of the Church
as connected with the doctrine of the Trinity.
Holy is he who has created us, and bidden
us worship him in the beauty of holiness !
Holy is he who has redeemed us, and washed
away our sins, and made us by profession
holy! Holy is he who day by day sanctifies
us, and makes us in very deed and truth, go
far as we will permit Lim, holy! Tro whole


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


107


earth is full of his glory. Even in heaven
the seraphic thoughts are turned to earth,
and its relation to its Divine Creator is
made the subject of angelic utterances
(comp. 1 Cor, iv. 9; Heb. xii. 22), The lesson
which they gather frum their contemplation,
even under all the miserable cireunstances
of the time, is a cheering one: “The whole
earth is full of God’s glory.’ Men, whether
they will it or not, are working out God's
purposes, a'lvancing his designs, aceomplish-
ing the ends that he desires (sce Homi-
letics on ch. v. 25—29),

Ver. 4.—The posts of the door moved;
rather, the baggs of the thresholds sheok (com-
pare Revised Version). The shout of the
seraphs sheok the very foundations on
which the thresholds of the gates of heaven
resiid—a testimony to the energy with
which it was uttered. At the voice of him
that oried; 7.e. “at the voice of each and
all.” The house was filled with smoke.
“Smoke” is sometimes the mere sign of the
preseuce of God, as in ch. iv. 5; but more
often it indicates his presence in anger or
judgment (see Exod. xix. 18; xx. 18; Rev.
xv. 8). Here there had been no smoke at
first, and we must suppose it, therefore, a
sign of the anger which finds vent in
ver. 9—12.

Vers. 5—7.—TueE SreQurn or THE VISION
—tTHE PROPHET’s SENSE OF UNWorTHINEss,
The vision of God in this life, whether
natural or ecstatic, cannot but produce in the
beb ‘lder a deep feeling of his unworthiness.
God “is of purer eyes than to behold ini-
quity;” even “the heavens are not clean
in his sight” (Job xv. 15). Man, being
never wholly purged from sin while on
earth, cannot but shrink from contact with
the absolutely Holy. Hence Isaiah’s cry
(ver. 5); and hence, to comfort him, the
symbolic action of the seraph (ver. 6) and
his encouraging words (ver. 7). .

Ver. 5.—I am undone; literally, eyt_off,
destroyed (comp. ch. xv. 1; Jer. xlvii. 5;
Hos. iv. 5, 6, etc.). God once said himself,
“There shall no man see me and lve”
(bxod. xxxiii. 20). Men expected to die
even when they had seen angels of God
(Gen. xxxii. 30; Judg. vi, 22, 45; xiii. 22).
How we are to reconcile Hxod. xxxiii. 20
with this passage, Job xlii. 5, and lzek. i.
26—28, is uncertain. Perhaps the ecstatic
sight was not included in the “seeing” of
which God spoke to Moses. Iam a man of
unclean lips. A man must be indeed “ per-
fect” never to offeud in word (Jas. iii. 2),
Isaiah felt that he had often so offended,
His lips were not “clean” in God’s sight,
and if uot his lips, then not his heart; for


108


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


(ou. vi. 1—18.


“ out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaketh” (Matt. xii. 34). I dwell in the
midst of a people of unclean lips. Men catch
up the phraseology of their time, and use
wrong forms of speech, because they hear
them daily. ‘Evil communications corrupt
good manners” (1 Cor. xv. 33).

Ver. 6.—A live coal; or, a glowing stone,
as Gesenius, Rosenmiiller, Kuobel, and Mr,
Cheyne understand (comp. 1 Kings xix. 6,
where a cognate word is used). Thetongs...
the altar. The presence of an altar in the
heavenly dwelling, with the usual appurte-
nances, is assumed (comp. Rev. vi. 9;
viii. 3). The altar is, no doubt, an altar of
incense, and of guld. not of stone ; but the
incense is burnt upon stones heated to @
glow, and it is one of these stones which the
angel takes with the golden tongs of the
sauctuary (Exod. xxv. 33).

Ver. 7.—He laid it upon my mouth; lite-
rally, he caused it to touch my mouth; i.e.
“he touched my mouth with it,” He brought
it into contact with that part of him which
the prophet had recognized (ver. 5) as the
seat of impurity. Thine iniquity is taken
away. By the contact the prophet’s impurity
is purged, and he is freed trom it. The
symmbolical act showed (1) that sin could
be purged; (2) that the hiyhest angelic
nature could not, alone and of its own furce,
purge it; and (3) that the purging could
come only from that fire which consumes the
incense that is laid upon the altar of God.
Dr. Kay suggests that this fire is “the
Divine love.”

Vers. 8—13.—Tur PROPHET ENTRUSTED
witH A SpeciAL Mission. We do not know
what special call Isaiah had had previously.
Perhaps he had been brought up in the
“schools of the prophets.” Perhaps, when
the “word of the Lord” came to him, he
had accepted the fact as sufficient call. Now,
however, he had, in vision, a clear and dis-
tinct call and mission (vers. 8, 9). He was
told to “go,” and instructed as to what he
was to say (vers. 9,10). As before (ch. i.
—v.), while in the main he was to denounce
woe, he was still to proclaim the survival of
a remnant (vers. 10—12).

Ver. 8—Whom shall I send? (comp.
1 Kings xx. 20). Such questions enable
tllose who wait in the courts of heaven to
show their zeal and readiness. Who will
go for us? Some explain the plural pro-
noun as used of the Almighty and those
with whom he is consulting. But he does
not really “consult” his creatures (infra,
ch. x]. 14; Rev. xi. 34), nor do his messen-
gers do his errands for them. The plural


ver. 3 tlirows on it, as indicative of the doc.
trine of the Trinity (comp. Gen. i. 26).

Ver. 9.—Hear ye indeed. . . see ye indeed;
literally, In'hearing hear... tn seeing see—
with the force of “ Listen and hear; look and
see;” * Attend,” that is, “ with the outward
sense, and catch all that sense can catch, but
without perception of the inward meaning”
(see Matt. xiii. 14; Mark iv. 12, ete.). This
is what they would do. Isaiah is bidden to
exhort them, in grave irony, to do it.

Ver. 10.—Make the heavri of this people fat.
Isaiah is commanded to effect by his preach
ing that which his preaciiing would, in fact,
effect. It would not awaken the people out
of their apathy, it would not stir them to
repentance; therefore it would only harden
and deaden them. The words have a na-
tional, not an individual, application. Shut
their eyes; literally, besmear their eyes; or,
seal them up Such sealing has been em-
ployed by Oriental monarchs as a punish-
ment. And convert; ze. ‘turn to God.”
Our translators have used the word in an
intransitive sense.

Ver. 11.—Then said I, Lord, how long?
Either, ‘How long am I to continue this
preaching ?” or, “ How long is this blindness
and callousness of the people to coutinue ?”
Isaiah assumes tliat he has not heard as yet
God’s final purpose; that thc re is some mer-
ciful intention kept in reserve, which is to
take effect after the close of the period of
judgment. The cities... the houses; rather,
cities . . . houses. An entire desolation of
the whole land, and extermination of its in-
habitants, is not prophesied, and never took
place. Nebuchadnezzar “ left of the poor of
the land to be vinedressers and husband-
men” (2 Kings xxv. 12; Jer. xxxix. 10).
Even when the great mass of these persons
went into Egypt and perished there (Jer.
xliv. 11—27), a certain number escaped and
returned to Palestine (Jer. xliv. 14, 28).
The land; rather, the ground, the soil.

Ver. 12.—And the Lord have removed men
far away. The Assyrian and Babylonian
policy of deportation is pointed at. Pul had
attacked the kingdom of Israel ten or twelve
years before Uzziah’s death, and had perhaps
made the Assyrian policy known, though
he had allowed himself to be bought off
(2 Kings xv. 19,20). And there be a great
forsaking; rather, and the desolution be great;
te Be a great portion of Judah be depopu-

atcd,

Ver. 13.—But yet in it shall be a tenth,
ete.; rather, and? should there still be in it a
tenth; ice. should there still remain, after the
great deportation, a tenth part of the inhabi-
tants, “this again shall be burned up,” ée.
shall be destined to further judgment and
destruction. The trials of the Jewish vation


form is best explaired by the light which | under the Persian, Egyptian, and Syrian


cH. vi, 1—13.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 109


—__—__—_—_—_—_——————————————————eEeeEeEeEEeEeeeeeee


monarchies may be intended. As a teil tree, | their destruction.” So to Judah shall remain,
and as an oak, etc.; rather, as the terebinth | after all, a “holy seed,’ which shall be its
tree and as the oak—trees wiich shoot up | “stem” or “stock,” and from which it shall
again from the stock after being cut down; or, | once more “take root downward, and bear
as the prophet expresses it, “have a stemin | fruit upward ” (ch. xxxvii. 31).


HOMILETICS,


Vers. 1—4.—The vision of God. Sight is a thing of degrees. The healthy eye sees
with infinite shades of distinctness and indistinctness, according to the amount of light
which is vouchsafed it. The diseased eye has an equal variety of vradation in its
powers of seeing, owing to the variations in its own condition. And it is with our
spiritual as with our natural sight. ‘The vision which men have of God varies infinitely
with varying circumstances—from extreme dimness up to perfect distinctness. Amid
this infinitude of gradation, depending m»inly on the internal condition of the visual
power, three main varieties, depending on the circumstances under which the spiritual
sight exerts itself, may be distinguished.

I. THE NATURAL VISION OF GoD IN THIS LIFE. This is, even in the best men, dim
ani unsatisfying. “ Now, we see through a glass darkly ” (1 Cor. xiii. 12). We have
to look within us and without’us ; and, among the confused shadows of things, as sight
and memory and imagination present them to us, we have to piece together a conception
of that mysterious and inscrutable Power which alone exists of itself and has brought
all that is beside itself into existence. How should not the vision be unsatisfactory ?
Agnosticism denies that any conception which we can form can possibly bear any
resemblance at all to the reality, if there be a reality. Agnosticism, to be consistent,
ought not to go so far, but should content itself with saying that we cannot tell whether
there be a resemblance or no. Some conception, however, of God all men form who
reflect at all; and there is so much likeness among the conceptions of men of all times
and countries as to point to some basis of truth underlying them all as the only con-
ceivable ground of the similarity. The conceptions differ less in their essential character
than in their vividness and their continuousness. Most men “see God” dimly and rarely
—by snatches, and as through a cloud or mist. A small number have a somewhat
clearer and more frequent vision. To a few only is it given to “set God always before
their face,” and to see him with something approaching to distinctness,

II. Tue EcsTatic vision oF Gop IN THIS LIFE. It has been the privilege of some
great saints to be lifted up from earth into that condition which is called ecstasy, and
while in that state to have a vision of God. In ecstasy Moses saw “ the glory of God”
from the “cleft in the rock” on his second ascent of Sinai (Exod. xxxiii, 18 —23 ;
xxxiv. 6—8). In ecstasy Isaiah now saw him. In ecstasy Ezekiel saw him “by
the river of Chebar” (Ezek. i. 26—28). So St. John the divine beheld him in the
island of Patmos (Rev. iv. 2—11). The exact nature of such visions we do not know;
but it is only reasonable to suppose that they were, to those favoured with them, reve-
lations of God more distinct, more vivid, more satis/ying, than any which belong to the
ordinary course of nature, even to those which are vouchsafed to the “ pure in heart”
(Matt. v. 8). They fall short in respect of duration; they are transient—some of
them, perhaps, momentary. But their vividness seems to have so impressed them on
the beholders as to have given them a quast-permanency in the recollection, which made
them possessions for life, and gave them an undying influence on the character.

Ill. Tue BEATIFIO VISION OF GOD IN ANOTHER LIFE. What this is no tongue of
man can tell. “Eye hath not seen,” etc. We know only what the Word of God
declares, “Then shall we see him face to face; then shall we know even as we are
known” (1 Cor. xiii.12). That this vision transcends even the ecstatic one is reasonably
concluded, from its being the final reward of God’s saints—the beatitude beyond which
there is none other (Rev. xxii. 4). But it is scarcely reverent to speculate on a theme
so far above human imagining. Even Bishop Butler seems to overstep the just limit,
when he supposes the beatific vision to include the contemplation of the scheme of
the universe in the mind of him who contrived it (‘Sermon on the love of God,’ p.,
146). We shall not know what che beatific vision is until we are admitted to it,


110 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cH v1. 1—13.


Perhaps it will not be the same to all. Probably, as on earth “the eye sees that which
it brings with it the power of secing.” so, in the world beyond the grave, the vision of
God will stand in a certain correlation with the seeing faculty of the beholders, All
will “see his face,” but all will not be capable of receiving from the sight that which
it will convey to some. There are degrees of happiness in the next world no less than
in the present. If we would derive from that blessed sight all that God inten’ed man
to derive from it, we must in this life cultivate the power of “ seeing God” and
delighting in the contemplation of him.


Ver. 5.—Man’s unworthiness brought home to him by nothing so much as “ seeing
God.” The natural man is, for the most part, very well contented with himself. He
does not deal much in self-scrutiny, and is not often troubled with tw inges of conscience.
If at any time le has any misgivings, he compares himself with other men, and readily
persuades himself that he is quite as good, or even very much better than his neighbours,
© God, I thank thee that I am not as other men are,” is his self-satisfied utterance; or,
if he is not quite so arrogant as this, at any rate he thinks himself “quite good
enough ”—as h: nest, industrious, liberal, moral generally, as he needs to be. Occa-
sionally he may be startled a little out of his self-complacency by coming in contact
with persons of a different stamp from himself, whom he sees to have a different rnle of
life, a different conception of their duties to God and man. But it is seidom that he
wakes up to any true conviction of sin until in some way or other, there is revealed to
him some “ vision of God,” some conception of the true nature of that pure and holy
Being who has made and rules the universe. Once let him open the eye of his soul
and see God as he is—perfectly pure, holy, just, immaculate—and he cannot but be
driven by the contrast to recognize his own weakness, wickedness, impurity, unrighteous-
ness, deev ly engrained sinfulness, Some conviction of sin must flash on him. Well
for him if it be deep and strong! Well for him if it brings him, first to confession
(Luke xviii. 13), and then to earnest, heartfelt prayer for pardon! God’s seraph will
then haply bring him such a “ burning coal” from the altar before the throne of God
as he brought to Isaiah, and convey to him the assurance that, for the merits of Christ,
his “ iniquity is taken away, and his sin purged.”


Vers, 11—13.— The loving-kindness of God shown in his judgments. “1 know, O
Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness hast afflicted me,”
says the psalmist (Ps. cxix. 75). No doubt, at last God must simply punish the
obdurate and impenitent; but for the most part he sends his judgment upon men in
mercy, either to turn them from their sins, or to refine and improve their characters.

I, EvEN wuEN GOD SIMPLY PUNISHES, IT I8 IN LOVING-KINDNESS TO MANKIND AT
LARGE. When a nation, like Israel, as distinct from Judah, has persisted in evil-doing
for centuries, in spite of warnings, teaching, remonstrance, knowledge of the truth, its
case is hopeless—“ there is no remedy ” (2 Chron. xxxvi. 16). The blow that then
falls upon the nation is penal and final—the requital of its ill desert. But if the blow
is dealt to the nation itself in mere justice, it is also struck for the benefit of all
neighbouring nations, in mercy. It warns them from their evil ways; it says to them,
in a voice which they can scarcely fail to hear, “Take heed, lest ye too perish.”

II. Most or Gop’s JUDGMENTS ARE CHASTISEMENTS, SENT TO TURN MEN FROM THEIR
sins. “We have had fathers of our flesh who corrected us” (Heb. xii. 9) when we
had done wrong, and strove thereby to deter us from evil. So God acts with his
children. So he chastened Judah, bringing calamity after calamity upon her, until at
last there was a “remnant” which truly turned to him, and became the germ of the
Christian Church, So he has chastened many a nation besides. So, too, he chastens
individuals, sending on them sickness, and poverty, and loss of friends, and other mis-
fortunes, to check them in a career of sin, and cause them to pause, and reflect, and
tremble at his mighty hand, and humble themselves under it, and change their course
of life. In this way he chastencd David by the loss of Bathsheba’s first child, and by
the revolt of Absalom and Adonijah; Hezekiah by war and sickness; Solomon by
“adversaries” at home and abroad. Of this kind again are the natural punishments


Ma he has attached to sins, tha natural tendency of which is to deter men from
them,


cx. vi. 1—13.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 111


TIT. ONE cLAss OF HI8 JUDGMENTS ARE TRIALS, SENT TO PROVE MEN, AND THEREBY
TO PURIFY THEM AND RAISE THEM TO GREATER SAINTLINESS. ‘“ Every branch in me that
beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit” (John xv. 2); “The
trying of your faith worketh patience ” (Jas. i. 3). Christ himself, we are told, was in
his human nature “ made perfect through suffering.” The discipline of affliction is
needed for forming in us many of the highest Christian graces, as patience, resignation,
forgivingness, mildness, long-suffering. The sons of God are taught to expect a chasten-
ing ee shall be “ for their profit, that they may be partakers of bis holineas” (Heb.
xii, 10),


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS,


Vers. 1—13.—The prophet’s call and consecration. There are turning-pvints in life
which give a meaning to the whole of its after-course. A light may be given to the
mind at such moments by which it may have to steer its course for years. In moments
of despondency the man of God will fall back on memory, and encourage himself by
the recollection that, having once received and followed Divine guidance, that guidance
will not desert him in the future. Such was this moment in the history of Isaiah.
Life stood before him like a crowded picture; he foresaw the difficulties with which he
would have to contend, yet that picture did not dismay him. “ Like Christ from the
first beginning of his Messianic labours, he thought of the end, nor did he shrink from
the image of death, so that the fact as it came nearer only confirmed what had not
seemed strange from the beginning ” (Ewald). It is the sense, not of our own faithful-
ness, nor of our own means, but of a Divine destiny working in and through us that
must be our support in weak and lonely hours, To feel that we are moving against the
course of the sun, even in the midst of external comfort or popular applause, is to be
weak and unnerved; while a stern yet sweet joy fills the soul in the prospect of duty
and danger, in which, though we seem to fail, we must be victors for ever. Every true
man has his hours of prophetic revelation ; and well for him whose will is strong, and
who abides by the truth of that revelation through good and through evil report,
unswervingly to the end, ‘

I. Tue vision oF THE Divine masesty. 1. Its date is fixed in memory. “The
year that King Uzziah died.” Dates are the resting-places of memory and fancy,
around which accumulates the lore of our years. ‘The accessions and the deaths of
kings, battles, peaces, revolutions, acts of parliament that wrought weal for the peopie,
—such are the dates of nations. And every soul has its epochs—birth, youthful
events of pleasure, love, struggle, defeat, success; and for each there must be more to
him than the events recorded in the calendar. The most “ uneventful” year, a8 we
speak, is eventful for the hidden sphere of many a spirit. How faint and poor are our
public memorials of history compared with those private recollections which are
written in the invisible ink of memory! Let us own that history means, first and
foremost to every one of us, the history of our own spirit.. By a Divine providence
the fragment of an Isaiah’s, a Jeremiah’s, an Ezckiel’s autobiography is preserved
through the ages, to remind us that the inner life, the contact of God with the soul,
is our real concern, our deepest interest. Between the two dates on the tombstone that
will mark our entrance into the world, our passage from it, what a record must lie,
stored in the archives of eternity—of visions beheld, of voices heard, whether obeyed
or disregarded! ‘In the year that King Uzziah died.” 2. Jt is a vision of the sub-
limity of God. Seated on a high, exalted throne, God in this image is conceived under
the analogy of the Kuler. Father and Ruler—such is the Bible view of God; his rule
based upon his fatherhood, his fatherhood imparting benignancy and tenderness to the
sterner character of the Lawgiver of the universe. But here the Father seems for the
moment absorbed in the awful Sovereign, whose throne is in the heights of heaven, his
footstool earth. It is only his skirts that are visible to the awe-struck gaze of the
prophet. Amidst the most magnificent scenes of external nature, the Alps or the
Atides, we may gain a passing soul-expanding vision of the Highest—still only part
revealed, but much more hidden. The verdure bejewelled with flowers, the forests
glancing with the lustre of dazzling birds of plumage,—these may represent the vesture


112 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. vi. 1—13.


of the great King, hinting an unutterable beauty on which none can look and live.
And so in the inward or moral world. In the bistory of a people or of a man there are
moments when God, in the still more impressive might of his holiness, sweeps by, an
awakening and a purifying Spirit. Orin higher moments of deyotion we may gain a
mgmentary glimpse of that puge loye, so full of tergor yet so full of blessing, which
burns at the core of things, and whose light is reflected in the light of every human
conscience. Yet these are partial revelations, like that to the prophet; glimpses of the
skirts of Jehovah’s majesty, tastés of a “ burning bliss” which in its fulness could not
be endured. It is this sense that there is a beauty all around us, ready at any moment
to break into glowing manifestation, were not our mortal eyes too dim to look upon it;
an eternal music from which this “muddy vesture of decay grossly closing us in”
protects us, which otherwise might paralyze by its thunderous tones ;—it is this sense
which does, or which should, impress an habitual reverence upon the mind. We should
all be able to look back upon moments of our history when we have seen in the inner
chamber of the mind something of what Isaiah saw, and to cherish the recollection as
a lore never to be forgotten. For if we have never known a time when we were
reduced into insignificance in the presence of God, and felt that he was all and we
were nought, and that the best tradition about God must be hushed into silence before
what we personally know of God, we have missed an elementary lesson which, when
once obtained, adds weight and worth to all our after-experience. 3. The seraphs and
their song. “ Seraphs stood high around [or, ‘above’| him.” It is impossible to gain a
true notion of the seraphic figures without consulting works of art. Like thecherubim
and the griffins and the sphinxes, their origin is in the remotest fore-time. All these
were, in fact, among man’s earliest efforts to represent to himself in visible art the
Divine power which he felt to be working in and through nature; in the flash of the
lightning, the thunder’s roar, the might of the blast, and all those mysterious sounds
and sights which usher in the changes of the year. As this is the only place where
the seraphim are named, their character must remain for the most part speculative.
Similar winged figures are, however, found in Oriental sculpture (such as those in the
British Museum) as attributes of a sovereign. And we can hardly be wrong in con-
sidering them as appropriate signs of Jehovah’s sovereignty over nature in the vision of
Isaiah. Wings in art-figures generally denote the wind. If, then, we compare the
passages in the Old Testament whence Jehovah’s power is described as revealed in
storm and wind, e.g. Ps. xviii. 10 (‘He rode upon a cherub, and did fly: yea, he did
fly upon the wings of the wind”) or Ps. civ. 3, 4 (“ Who walketh upon the wings
of the wind; who maketh his messengers spirits, his ministers a flaming fire”),
we may gain a fair understanding of what is meant. The stormy winds at the
turning-points of the year reveal force—the force of the omnipotent Creator. And at
the same time, the Creator is concealed behind, as well as revealed in, these expressions
of his might. And so the seraphic figures are seen by the prophet doubly veiled by
their own wings—in face and feet. For we can neither look upon the face of God nor
follow the viewless track of his footsteps. As the noble verse of Cowper aptly
expresses it— ;
“God moves in a mysterious way, :
His wonders to perform;
He plants his footsteps in the sea,
And rides upon the storm.”


We shall not be far wrong if we find this truth symbolically set forth by the six-
winged seraphic figures of the prophet’s vision, But the wind is full of music as well
as of might, and the seraphs give utterance to a solemn song, which falls into two
members, sung antiphonally by these celestial choristers. ‘ One called to the other,”
just as the priests in the temple-music below. Profound and weighty is the burden of
this alternate chant—


“ Holy, holy, holy, is Jehovah of hosts!
The fulness of the whole earth is his glory)”


How shall we think of the holiness of Jehovah? As height, like that in which the
seraphs sing—a nature and a life so “ far above” our base and grovelling ways? Alas


oH, vi. 1—13.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 113


for us, if we do not ever recollect in our worship that, high as yonder empyrean above
this “dim spot that men call earth,” distinct as the clouds in fleeciest white from the
stagnant and foul spots below, are the thoughts of Jehovah above our thoughts, and
his ways above our ways! Shall we think of holiness as separation? Woe to us if we
know not that purity, which, like the flame, refuses to wed with ought that is alien to
itself ; which, like the light, divides and discriminates the evil from the good wheresoever
it comes! ‘The thrice-holy God is none other than the supremely pure Intelligence,
the perfect chastity of Love. But the infinite glory as well as the holiness of Jehovah
is celebrated. It is the “fulness of the earth,” teeming with life, throbbing with
mysterious forces, covered with a rich robe of rare embroidery, holding rich treasures
in her keeping; which embodies to our thought the nature of God in its vast ewtent,
just as the pure sky represents the intensity of that nature as a principle of holiness.
Silent and inaccessible as sun and stars, he is yet near to us in the throbbing of great
nature’s heart—nay, of our own.


“Speak to him, then! for he hears, and spirit with spirit may meets;
Closer is he than thy breathing, nearer than hands and feet.”


“God in all ”—this was the thought of Paul the apostle, as of Isaiah the prophet.
Incarnate in the flower and in the stem, vocal in the “sound of many waters,” or
in the tinkling of brook or murmur of zephyr; there is nothing in the world in which
he is not revealed.


“Thou art, O God, the Life and Light
Of all this wondrous world we see!
Its glow by day, its smile by night,
Are but reflections caught from thee s
Where’er we turn, thy glories shine,
And all things fair and bright are thine.”


4, The voice of God. A loud cry is heard even above the hymn of the seraphim, and
it causes the t holds to tremble. The thunder was among all ancient nations
listened to as the voice of God. It is the natural expression of supreme and irresistible
power, before which man, in the last height of his own intelligence and power, must
bow. Instantly the smoke soars from the altar, and the temple is filled with smoke.
Worship is man’s answer to God’s voice-—the answer of his conscience, the answer of
his heart. Nor can we truly worship without the sense of being face to face with
unutterable mystery. For behind the most glorious visions remains he “whom no
man hath at any time seen, nor can see;” at the heart of the thunder is that Divine
-emotion which must slay us were it fully discharged into our souls. The rising smoke
may fitly typify that sacred silence, the ‘‘ offspring of the deeper heart,” in which our
worship should begin and end.

II. TH PROPHET’S CONSECRATION. 1. The effect of the revelation on his mind. First,
there is the sense of utter weakness. When the true glory of the spiritual world bursts
upon us, it seems as if we must die. Every difficulty conquered brings us @ new sense
of strength ; every human being we have fairly faced in the consciousness of our own
manhood we may reduce to our own level; for one man is virtually the peer of every
other, the world over. But who can look and live in the presence of the white intense
light of the pure and burning Spirit of God? Already, like Abraham (Gen. xviii.),
man feels himself as if reduced to “ dust and_ashes;” or, like Moses, that he cannot see
the Eternal and live, but must shelter himself in a cleft of the rock, and hide behind the
hand of God (Exod. xxxiii.); or, like Manoah, forebodes a deathful doom as he gazes
into the mystic altar-flame (Judg,. xiii.), In Greek and other Gentile legen1s we read
of children receiving a nightly birth of fire as the condition of immortality, the mean-
ing of which was that none but those destined to divinity could endure the fiery
ordeal. Profound enigma of our nature! that we to whom has been imparted the
longing for life eternal, the dim consciousness of an undying destiny, should yet
know moments when we seem on the verge of “dusty death.” But the man whom
God calls to be mighty in word and deed must pass through the whole gamut and
scale of human emotion, from the lowest mood of self-distrust to that of loftiest


confidence in God, (No note be left unstruck in our own heart} if we are te
I


ISAIAH.


114 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (ca. vi. 1—13.


make it sound in the conscience of others. ater rac eae sc “ Been AR
ingfficieucey. he very calling which already glimmers before Isaiah's miuind as his 18
that for which he finds_himsell_unilt He - to be a nubi, a prophet; that is, a
man of fluent lips and pure, through which the stream@6? Divine eloquence are to
flow. Alas! how can this be? For he isa “ man of unclean lips,” and will not the
truth be muddied passing through them, and so cease to be truth? All this is a
typical experience, The man who has neyerfelt unfit will never be fit for anygreat
thing. Jeremiah, at his call, felt that he was “a child ;” and Moses that he was “ slow
of speech and slow of tongue” (Exod, iv. 10); and John fell at the feet of the Son
of man “ag one dead,” brain and hand _para/yycd, before he took up the pen that
glowed with apocalyptic fire. Who is the fit tan for God’s ends? The self-confident
man? It depends on what we mean by “self-confidence.” Appearances deceive ;
the show of strength is not the same thing with strength itself, nor the demeanour of
weakness a certain index of inefficiency. ‘To read our own hearts is our business.
And heart-experience may teach us that absolute confidence in our resources bodes
humiliation, while trembling self-distrust may hint that something is to be done by
God through us. “Do the very thing you are afraid to do,” is in certain moments the
voice of conscience and of God. So it proved in this instance. 2. Purification and
pardon, Oue of the burning beings flies to the prophet’s side, bearing a heuted stone
(for such seems to be the meaning of the word ritzpdh) forming part of the altar, and
detached witout di ty froma it. With this he touches the lips of the trembling
seer, saying, “ Lo! this hath hiched thy lips, and so will thy guilt depart, and thy
sin may be atoned for.” More meaning can be condensed into a symbolic action than
into any mere words. Fire is the enemy of all impurity; and the idea of a fire
baptism as the means of cléansing is deeply rooted in the lore of olden time. In this
respect it seems nearly allied to the sprinkling of blood. And just as when Moses
sprinkled all the people with the sacri ficial DIeoa Or the priests sprinkled the altar
and other sacred objects, one drop seemed sufficient to diffuse ceremonial cleanness on
the object on which it fell, so the mere touch of the hot coal or stone is enough to
signify the completeness of the purification. It is not the quantity of the fiery element,
but_the quality, which-does the work. A small spark may Kindle a mass | r fuel, or,
falling on the hand, spread a keen pain through all the uerygus network of the kody;
so a glimpse of God, a touch from his hand, may change asia our being for a
lifetime, It may set up a glow which shall not die down till all that is selfish, sensual,
base, in us shall lie in ashes. The sense of guilt lies deep in the miud ; and never is
it so clear and keen as in moments of bodily sickness or mental depression. ‘lhe
moment when we are tempted to say, “I cannot help it,” there rises up the thought
that there is help in God, and therefore that we are not helpless. No sooncr does the
cry_of weakness, the complaint concerning the unclean lips, escape Isaiah, than the
éternal evangel,jin alLits supernatural strength to peal, comes home to hjsbeart. For
this is the eternal gospel in its essence, wlrether borne by lips of seraph, prophet, or
Son of God: “ Thy guilt will depart, thy sin may be atoned for.” And in those blessed
moments when we grasp this message in its fullest meaning, and believe it in its
inmost truth, the heart is set free, and, despite present fetters and prisons in which fact
or fancy holds us bound, we know that it will not ever be thus. ‘Ihen, indeed, the
yoke of duty becomes easy, the burden of toil, for the sake of the love which pardons
and emancipates, light. 38. The call to service. Again the angust and dominant voice
of the Eternal is heard : “ Whom shall I send, ana who will go for us?” A ready
answer, full of devotion, full of self-abandonment, comes from that lately overwhelmed
heart: “Here am 1; send me.” Out of weakness Isaiah has been made strong, and
there is no hesitation now. There is “triumph lingering in his eyes, wide as of some
swimmer’s who descries help from above in his extreme despair.” The foolish
imprudence which cries, “ Here am I; send me,” without having calculated the cost of
the enterprise aud the extent of the resources, is not that of Isaiah. Still less is the
unfaithful trifling with one’s powers and opportunities under the excuse of modesty, or
the delight in dreams of action rather than in action itse:f, seen in him. We see some
men rashly staking their future on the cast of a die, impetuously crossing a Rubicon:
others lingering on the brink, or moving superstitiously in a fancied circle, beyond which
seems to lie the frowning impossible. And we see a third class who have learned the


og. vi.1—13.] THE BOOK OF THE PRUPHET ISAIAH, 115
—————


Divine magic of the word “obey,” and who alone move safely and with high heart to
ends greater than their dreams, The servant’s readiness, his quickness of eye and ear,
is what we need. Can we allege that we have never seen our vision, heard our call
from the unmistakable voice? If the plea be sound, then our mistakes and aberrations
cannot Le charged against us, But can we maintain such plea so long as there is any
meaning in the words “ truth” and “duty”? Truth is ever beckoning to us, duty’s low
clear voice is ever sounding, though the paths to which they guide lie but dimly before.
The call to act is for us all; the call to act greatly but for God’s elected few. Let us
not mistake our wishes for Divine commands, nor in vanity create a destiny which
is only our own fiction. Still less let us treat impressions which have seized us and
shaken ur with awe, and against which reluctant flesh and blood have struggled, as
dreams to be set aside and fancies to be overcome. If, after straining eye and ear, God
seems to leave you through wide tracts of life’s way to struggle with your iznorance
and to work out your problems unaided,—be it so. This is your call. If otherwise
you are the subject of strong and extraordinary impressions, reaching into the reality
behind the shews of things, hearing with open ears where others know but coniused
sounds,—be it so, Your call is more direct. If only we will not indulge the blindness
of those who will not see, the deafness of those who stop their ears, the proud weakness
of those who hate to obey, all may be well.

Ill. Tue mission. 1. It will be thankless and disappointing. Isaiah is to go and waste,
as it. seems, his eloquence upon dull ears, upon intelligences sealed up, and hearts that
are proof against religious feeling. The light of tmth as it streayas from him will
encounter rocks that will not melt in the sun, natures that can neither be softened nor
sweetened. It is the height of a preacher’s joy when every word comes back to him
a silent echo frum the conscience of the people; and his day of mourning is when he
feels himself to be speaking in a valley full of dry bones, or before beinys whe seem
to have life and conscience, yet are but as spectres of men. In his best moments it
seems that all tle eloquence is in the people, and he is “ gathering up in a mist” from
them that which be is to “return upon them in a flood.” In other moments of
discourayement it seems that he is alone in the world, with a sublime cry upon his
lips, now become meaningless, because there are none to whom it has a meaning. We
know the legend of St. Antony preaching to the fishes; and, indeed, is seems better
to talk with the dumb creatures whom we can win to silent sympathy, than to a people
which “does not consider.” The company of the ox or the ass seems bet*er than that
of men who have become as “stocks and stoves, and worse than senseless things.”
The preacher and teacher will know these trials, and let him recollect that it is no
uncou;mon experience. We find its pathos repeated in different ways in all the great
prophets, in Juhn the Baptist, the “ voice in the desert,” and in Christ himself. Are
we to cease crying when the echo ceases? Rather let us go on until we hear once more
the truth coming back tous. Let us believe that what is true to us in our inmost
heart will one day be true for all the world. One of our great countrymen said that
he was wont to iterate the same statement again and again until he heard it on
the tongue of common talk; and this was a statesman to whom the people owed the
greatest material blessings. ‘he test of truth is not the way in which it is received,
but the immediate reflection of it in our own mind. 2. The gloum of the time wiil
deepen. “ How long, O Lord?” ‘The answer describes a prophet shut in by clouds
and mist, or overhung by some all-pervading pall of gloom. Sin is to go on working
out its waste, until there be an empty and depopulated land. ‘Things bad begun
to make themselves strong by ill.” And there are times when evil must be left to
gather to a head and run its full course. It may even be the part of the prephet to
hasten it on its way. But when we say, “ Things are getting worse and worse,” let
us remember that beyqnd the worst remains the best, and after last returns the first ;
for God is the principle of an inexhaustible and unconquerable life. 3. The gleam of
hope. There is now visibie at the close a gleam on the dark horizon, denoting a
coming dawn. A section, an elect few, a tenth, will survive these coming disasters.
The fire of judgment and purification, of which the burning seraphs are symbolic, must
wither the goodly branches of the national tree, and leave the stem all blackened
and charred. StiJl the stump will remain with its root still fastened in the earth.
Just as the trunk of terebinth or oak, deeply and’ ineradicably sunk in the earth,


116 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (on. vi. 1—13.


bears constantly new shoots, an image of eternity and immortality, springing from
an inward “rejuvenating power,” so with the spiritual lite of the nation and the
individual. Here, then, we see how the deepest seriousness and sadness is yet com-
patible with undying hope. (1) The natipn that hopes in the Eternal can nexgr pegjsh.
That terebinth root lives on; all fresh developments of Christianity spring from its
undying life. (2) The man who hopes in the Eternal shall be saved. He may, he
must, pass through the tire of trial; but if he endure to the end, he shall be saved.
Amidst his ashes he will djsgover fresh. life; for there is hope of the tree, and hope
of the man, that though felled, he shallrise again. (3) Holiness is the secret of life.
It is health, it is the sanity of the mind which has made truth its portion, God its
delight, and his service its eternal choice-—J.


Ver. 8.—The call of God. “ Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall
I send, and who will go for us? Then said I, Here am I; send me.” The symbol of
the seraphim had been on the prophet’s head, and the voice of the Lord had come to
his conscience and his heart. The live coal had touched his lips. Prophets, apostles,
teachers, must be sent of God. Other qualifications are appropriate and excellent, but
this is indispensable.

I. Tux Drvrye query. “Whom?” Then God takes thought about Divine govern-
ment in human history. Just as Nature expresses, in all her forms of beauty, his skill
and care, so in grace God is observant of character, and watchful for the wisest means,
He knows the secret places of grace and genius, and he can call them forth at the

appropriate time. Isaiah now; Paul in the great epoch to core.

' I. Tue ELECTIVE HoNouR. “ Whom shall I send?” Here we have the sublime
election to privilege, so far as responsibility is concerned, which, rightly considered,
explains God’s calling of Jews then, and Jews and Gentiles now. It is not an election
to salvation, but to a status of honour and influence in witnessing for him. ‘Send !”
Then God is the great Father of all human spirits, not willing that any should perish.
The Jewish Church was a city set on a hill to enlighten others; the salt to save the
world from death and putrefaction.

Ill. Tue quick REsponsE. There is no hesitation. “Here am I.” Men should fulfil
their own prayers. They ask for grace and strength to work and give. Let them
inquire within whether they cannot turn supplication into consecration. “ Here am I.”
How few say that! They look round and exclaim, “Send others!” ‘Send me!”
says the prophet, fulfilling the commission which makes him the great evangelic spirit
of the Old Testament.— W. M. 8


Ver. 1.—The vision of God. “TI saw... the Lord,” writes the prophet. These
simple, strong words suggest to us—

I, THE VISION WHICH IS IMPOSSIBLE. ‘No man hath seen God at any time,” our
Lord declares ; and his declaration is sustained by the philosophic truth that he who is
a Divine Spirit must be imvisible to mortal eye. So far as our apprehension by sense
is concerned, God must remain, to every human being, “the King eternal, immortal,
invisible.” Himself, in his own essential nature, we cannot look upon.

IL, ‘HE VISION WHICH I8 EXTRAORDINARY. God has, on some few occasions, granted
special and particular manifestations of himself—such that those to whom they were
vouchsafed might say, without impropriety, that they had “ seen the Lord.” Of this
kind were the burning bush (Exod. iii.), the vision granted to Moses on the mount
(Kxod, xxxiv. 5, 6), that of Micaiah (1 Kings xxii. 19), this one narrated in the text,
those of the Apocalypse. In these cases there was a manifestation of Deity in sume
form, temporarily assumed, cognizable by the senses, and bringing the soul into close
communion with the Eternal One himself.

III. THE VISION WHICH IS CONSTANT. It is something more than poetry to think
and speak of God as being in the various objects and operations in nature. It is some-
thing deeper than fanciful sentiment, and truer than Pantheistic thought, to say that
“nature is the robe of God.” For his power is immanent in all living things. The
“forces of nature,” which are working everywhere and in all things, are, in truth, the
outworkings of his own Divine hand, in constant and regular, and therefore in measur=
ahle and reliable activity. When we watch them, we do well to feel that we are near


cH, vi. 1—13.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 117
So ee eee eee


to him; they are directly suggestive of him, and we ought not to be able to regard them
with interest without reaching and resting in him of whose presence and skill and love
they continually speak to us.

IV. ‘THE VIsION WHICH Is HISTORICAL. There are two manifestations of Deity which
stand by themselves, the latter being transcendently the greater and more gracious of
the two. 1, One was in the visible Shechinah, which remained the constant symbol of
the presence of Jehovah for many generations; there in the midst of the camp, visible
to any eye that looked within the veil, but only to be seen by one man or one great day
in the sacred calendar. 2, The other was found in him who was able to say, “ He that
hath seen me hath seen the Father.” They who looked on him in the days of his flesh,
and who heard his voice, might say with peculiar meaning, “I have seen the Lord,”
And we, before whose eyes a once-crucified Saviour has been conspicuously upheld (see
Gal. iii. 1), and who, in him, have presented to our spiritual vision the holy and loving
One, infinitely worthy of our reverent affection, may also say, with profound trutaful-
ness, that we too “ have seen the Lord.”

V. THE VISION WHICH IS OccasIONAL. There are certain exceptions] experiences which
God grants to us now, when he comes very near to us and reveals himself to our souls,
It may be on the occasion of some outward incident, the apparent nearness of death
and the future world, or the passing of some intimate friend or relation into the unseen
realm, or the powerful presentation of the truth by some faithful minister of Christ,
or it may be the sudden illumination of the Spirit of God apart from all special circum-
stances whatsoever; but there are times in individual history when God comes to us,
when he makes his person, his claims upon us, his grace to us in his Son, and with
these, our highest, eternal interests, to assume to our souls their trv, their grand
proportions. ‘Then is it well, indeed, for us so to act that we can thzreafter say, “I
was not disobedient unto the heavenly vision.”—C,


Vers. 2—4.—A sermon from the seraphim. Taking the seraphim of this prophetic
vision as symbols of the “ highest creaturely intelligences,” we gather from the text—

I. THaT THE LOWLIEST REVERENCE BECOMES THE HIGHEST CREATED BEINGS. ‘* With
twain [of his wings] he covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet.” Of the
six wiugs each seraph possessed, foyr_were used_to indicate theiz sense of unworthiness
in the near presence of God ; two_only were in readiness for agtive service. May we not
fairly infer that,as we go upward in the order dt intelligence, we become more impressed
with the majesty and greatness of the Divine, and consequently with our own little-
ness? Elevation in rank does not mean diminution, but increase in reverence of spirit
and in homage of worship. The higher the intelligence, the deeper the sense of low-
liness, and the fuller the devotion of power in the attitude and act of adoration.

II. THAT THE HEAVENLY LIFE IS LARGELY SPENT IN ACTIVE SERVICE. “ With
twain he did fly.” The seraphim are represented as so equipped as to be ready for the
most prompt and speedy service. The heavenly life may be one of sacred song and
peaceful rest; but it certainly is also one of joyous, holy activity. It will be the very
crown of our blessedness that, unclothed of all that hampers and impedes, and clothed
upon with those celestial organs which fit for fleetest and strongest service, we shall do
the King’s behests with untiring wing, with unflagging energy, with unfading love
and joy.

LiL Tear THE CELESTIAL INTELLIGENCES HAVE A KEEN APPRECIATION OF THE
Divine wouiness. “Holy, holy, holy,” etc. It is significant enough that, in this
ascriptive utterance, only one of the attributes of God finds a place. The repetition of
the epithet marks the fulness and clearness of the thought, as also the intensity of the
feeling. In Jesus Christ we rightly magnify the grace and mercy, the gentleness and
considerateness, of the heavenly Father to whom we are reconciled through him ; but
we must see to it that we do not so dwell on the more gracious aspects of the Divine
character as to lose sight of, or even dwarf his other and opposite attributes. As we
draw near to the heavenly world we must take the celestial view, which is one of a
deep and strong conviction of his perfect purity, of his stainless holiness, of his utter
and eternal hostility to every sbade and taint of sin.

IV. THAT THE HIGHEST INTELLIGENCES SEE ALL THINGS IN THEIR RELATION TO
Gop, “The whole earth is full of his glory.” Those who will receive no more helpful


118 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (ca. vi. 1—18.


a


and decisive teaching than that of science and philosophy fall short of this; they
come to the irreverent conclusion that the heavens and the earth declare the glory of
those only who have studied their secrets and discovered their laws. But the highest,
the heavenly intelligences find God everywhere and his glory in everything. The
psalm of the seraphim declares that “the whole earth is full of his glory.” And we, as
we ascend in mental power and spiritual worth, shall let all earthly things speak to
us of God. The multitude of all created things and of all living creatures will speak.
of his power; the intricacy and delicacy and adaptation of all things will tell of his
wisdom; the vast and measnreless amount of happiness scattered over all the earth’s
surface and even in its depths will sing of his beneficence ; the sorrow and the death
which are beneath its skies will chant the righteousness of his holy rule; the upward
struggle and the better life, which grow clearer and stronger age by age, will bear
witness to his regenerating goodness, All things will speak of God, the whole earth
will be full of his ylory.—C.


Vers. 5—7.—Spiritual agitation, The passage depicts the prophet in a condition of
great mental agitation; his state may suggest to us—

I. THE ALARM OF THE HUMAN SPIRIT UNDER THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE DIVINE
presence. Anything which brings us into close contact with the unseen world puwer-
fully affects our spirit and produces an apprehension for which we may not be able to
account. 1. Any visitant, real or imaginary, from the spiritual realm fills us with
fear (see Judg. vi. 22; xiii. 22; Jobiv. 15; Dan. x.8; Lukei. 12; i. 9). We have
not the slightest reason to apprehend any act of hostility from such a being, and may
be said to have a positive interest in knowing that such as they are do exist and do
concern themselves in our welfare. But there are few men who would not be consider-
ably agitated if they believed themselyes_to be_in the presence of a diseybudjed (or
unembuded) spi 2. We are affected with lively apprehension when we think our-
sel¥es to be on the confines of the future, the spiritual world. 38. The conception of
the near presence of the Lord himself awakens the greatest disquietude of soul. So was
it with Isaiah now. “ Woe is me! I am undone,” he exclaim: d. So was it with Peter
when the miraculous draught revealed the presence of his Divine Master. “ Depart
from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord,” was his prayer. And whenever we are
brought into such a spiritual condition that we are ready to say, “ Surely God is in this
place,” whenever the hand of the Lord is felt to be upon our souls and his voice to be
manifestly addressing our hearts, we are awed, agitated, even alarmed, with a peculiar
and inexpressible apprehension.

II. Ivs JUSTIFICATION IN OUR HUMAN GuIl.t. We may not be able to explain our
alarm at the vearness of any created being from the other world, but we can well under-
stand how it is we are affected as we are under the consciousness of the civine presence.
It is that our littleness is abashed at the presence of Divine majesty, our ignorance in
presence of Divine wisdom, our feebleness in presence of Divine power. But this is not
the ex; lanation of our alarm. It is found in the fact that when we find ourselves before
Ged we are conscious that a guilty soul is in the near presence of the thrice-holy One
(see ver. 3). ‘I'he clue to our agitation is in the words, “I am a man of unclean lips;”
“Tama sinful man.” There is a twofold reason wny sinful men should be alarmed at
the felt presence of God: one, that all sin by its very nature shrinks and cowers in the
conscious presence of purity; the other, that the guilty human soul knows well that it
is the province, and is in the power, of the righteous God to inflict the penalty which
is its due; and it knows that the rightful penalty’ of sin is sorrow, shame, death.

II. Irs Divine removat. (Vers. 6, 7.) Under Divine direction (as we may
assume) one of the cherubim took a Fs eth ee clea which God had
caused to be built for the purging of the sins of the people, and-with the coa! he touched
the “unclean lips” of which the prophet had made confession and coniplaint ; so was his
“iniquity taken away,” and, we may conclude, his spirit calmed. The removal of that
spiritual agitation which comes to our soul when we realize that our guilt is in the
full view of the Holy One can only come from God himself. We may bless his Name
that he has made such ample provision for this gracious purpose. 1. He has provided
the sacrifice and the altar ; that is found in him who is the Propitiation for our sins, in
the cross of Calvary. 2. He has provided the messengers of mercy; these are found in


cH. vi. 1—13.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 119


those faithful servants who carry the gospel of his e on the wings of their arden
love. 3. He has provided the means by which the orifice and the aul are oaiicis
and the virtue of the one is made to touch and heal the other; this is found in that
living faith by which the Lamb of God takes away our sin, and our soul, “ being justified
by faith, has peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ.”—(,


Ver. 8.—On God’s errand. Our thought is naturally divided into—

I. Tue Divine pemanp. “ Whom shall | send, and who will go for us?” 1. There
are some demands God makes of us all. He requires that we should hearken when he
speaks; that we should be especially attentive to his Son (Matt. xvii. 5); that we
should accept Jesus Christ as our Lord, Saviour, Friend, Exemplar; that we should
honour him before the world. 2. There are other demands he makes of most of his
children. That they should actively engage in the work of extending his kingdom ;
that they should suffer some kind of persecution for his sake, 3. There remain sume
demands he only makes of a few. Work requiring specially hard toil, or particular pre-
paration in study, or unusual tact and versatility, or exceptional powers of mind or
body. Then he says, “ Whom (of all my servants) shall I send; and who will go?”

Il, Tie INDIVIDUAL REsPonsE. “ Here am 1; send me.” In order to say this wisely
and rivhtly, there must be: 1. Thorough devotedness; half-heartedness will never
succeed on such errands as these. 2. Special qualification, by native faculty or favour-
able antecedents. 3. Freedom from other and more pressing obligations, These
conditions being fulfilled, all the highest considerations—ihe will of Christ, the pitiful
necessities of the sons of want and surrow and shame, the example of the noblest, the
recompense of the righteous—combine to say, “ Gu, and the Lord be with you.”—C.


Vers. 9—13.— The shadow of sucred truth. We may view these words in—

I. Tuer NaTIonAL aspect. Thus revard:d, they point to: 1. Painful and guilty
obduracy. The prophet should speak, but tue people would disregard ; all that was
froward aud perverse in them would repel and reject the Divine message; their reception
of the truth would only end in spiritual deterioration aud greater noral distance than
ever from deliverance (vers. 9, 10). 2. Protracted impenitence and Divine judgment
(vers, 11, 12). 3. Long-lingering mercy ending in partial restoration (ver. 13). But we
shall gain most from these verses by regarding them in—

IL. ‘HEIR INDIVIDUAL aspect. The ninth and tenth verses have the most direct
and serious bearing on our condition now. ‘hey suggest to us that sacred truth not
only sheds a bright light, but casts a de-p shadvw where it falls. 1. It casts the
shadow of solemn responsibility everywhere. Wuoen agreater than Moses leyislates, and
a wiser than Solomon speaks to us, we have more to be responsible fur than they who
received the Law fiom Sinai, and they who lived under the reign of the son of David.
From those to whom much is given will much be required. 2, It casts the shadow of a
heavy condemnation on those who reject it. “Of how much sorer punishment,” ete.! “ It
shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment,” etc.; “ This
is the condemnation, that light is come,” ete.; “ He that knew his Lord’s will and did
it not shall be beaten with many stripes.” 3. But the special lesson from our text is
that it casts the shadow of spiritual deterioration on those who refuse it. “ Make the
heart of this people tat . . . shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes,” etc. The
apparent sense of these words cannot be, aud is not, the one that should be accepted.
They cannot possibly be meant to signify that God desired his prophet deliberately
and intentionally to cause moral obtuseness, spiritual blindness, in order that the people
of Judah might be prevented from repenting and so from being saved. Such a thoueht
not only outraves every reverent idea of the Divine character, but flatly contradicts the
most express statements of the Divine Word (see Ezek. xviii. 23; 1 ‘Tim. ii, 45 2 Pet.
iii, 9; Jas. i. 18). There is one sense of which the words are susceptible, and which is
in accordance with the plainly revealed character of God; it is that the prophet was to
declare such truth as would actually result in spiritual blindness, and therefore in
incapacity for repentance and redemption. Now, it is the solewn duty of the minister
of Christ to do the same thing continually. He knows that, as his Divine Master was
“set for the fall” as well as fur the “rising again of many in Israel” (Luke ii. 34),
and as he had occasion to say, “ For judgment am I come into this world, ... that


120 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. v1. 1—13.


ET


they who see may be made blind” (John ix. 39), that as his gospel was in earliest times
a “stone .of stumbling and a rock of offence” (ch. viii. 14; and see Matt. xxi, 44;
1 Cor. i. 23; 2 Cor. ii. 16), so now the truth of the living God must prove, to those wha
reject it, the occasion of moral and spiritual degeneracy. He must lay his account with
this sad fact, must go forth, like Isaiah, well aware that it is a two-edged sword he
wields. But let the sons of sacred privilege understand what is their peril as well as
their opportunity. Deliberately rejected truth leads down to (1) a diminished sensi-
bility, the lessening of pure religious emotion; (2) loss of spiritual apprehension, an
enfeebled capacity to perceive the mind and meaning of the Divine Teacher; (8)
a vanishing likelihood of personal salvation. When the ear is shut and the eye is
closed, is it likely that the feet will be found in the way of life? Will they not wander
off to the fields of folly, up to and over the precipice of ruin ?—C.


Vers. 1—4.—Symbolic impressions of the Divine holiness. This is the only vision
recorded in Isaiah’s prophecy. It did not come at the beginning of his labours, but as
an inauguration to a higher degree of the prophetic office. rom the tone of the latter
part of the chapter, it is evident that he had found out the rebelliousness and obstinacy
of the people, and perhaps had become, like Elijah, greatly distressed and discouraged ;
needing, therefore, such a reviving and encouragement as this vision was fitted to afford.
It introduces the prophet as outside, near the altar in front of the temple. The doors
are supposed to be open, and the veil hiding the holy of holies to be withdrawn,
unfolding the sight of Jehovah as a Monarch sitting on his throne, and surrounded by
his ministers of state. According to the tradition, Isaiah’s assertion that he had seen
God was the pretext for sawing him asunder, in the reign of Manassch. In the record
of the vision it should be noticed that Isaiah gives only surroundings of God, no descrip-
tion of the Divine Being himself. If this had been the only vision recorded as granted
by God to his people, its explanation would have been difficult. It is, however, but
one of a long series, and it appears to illustrate a recognized mode of Divine dealings.
God takes opportunities of impressing the Divine holiness and claims by symbolic
manifestations. We review the principal illustrations from Bible records.

I, The word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision, saying, “ Fear not, Abram: I
am thy Shield, and thy exceeding great Reward.” And Abram, by Divine direction, took
a heifer, a goat, a ram, a turtle-dove, and a young pigeon, killed them, divided them,
and while a horror of great darkness fell upon him, ‘ behold! a smoking furnace and
a burning lamp”—symbols of Divine holiness—“ passed between the pieces, and the
Lord made a covenant with Abram.”

II. A vision was granted to Jacob, from which the whole tone of his life was
changed, and he began a covenanted, God-fearine carger. As he lay wearily on his
stone pillow, under the clear-shining stars of an Eastérn sky, “ behold a ladder set up
on the earth, and the top of it reached tu heaven: and behold the angels of God ascend-
ing and descending on it. And, behold, the Lord stood above it, and said, lam the
Lord God of Abraham thy father, . . . the land whereon thou liest, to thee and thy
seed will I give it.”

I1I. Moses led the flock ef Jethro, one memorable day, to the back side of the desert,
and “came to the mount of God, even to Horeb, And the angel of the Lord appeared
to him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and, behold, the bush
burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed. And God called unto him out of the
midst of the bush”—symbol of the holiness that consumes and purifies—“ and said,
Moses, Moses. And he said, Here am I.”

IV. When commencing his arduous life-work, a similar impression was wrought upon
Joshua. One day he looked towards Jericho, and lo! “ there stood a man over against
him with his sword drawn in his hand.” In answer to Joshua’s question he said, “As
Captain of the Lord’s host have I come . . . Loose thy shoe from off thy foot; for the
place whereon thou standest is holy.”

V. In the times of the judges Gideon and Manoah beheld angels who delivered
messages, and ascended in the smoke of sacrificial fires. Samuel, when a little lad,
heard the very voice of God speaking his own name, and entrusting him with prophetic
messages. Solomon was honoured by God’s appearing to him in a night-dream, and
offering the bestowment of the best blessings upon him, Elijah, after the lightning,


cH. vi. 1—13.1 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 121
ee eee


and thunder, and earthquake, and wind had passed, heard God in the “still small voice.”
Job exclaims, as in the rapture of a vision, “I have heard of thee by the hearing of the
ear: but now mine eye seeth thee, wherefore I abhor myself.” Jeremiah was directly
set apart for his prophetic work. “The Lord put forth his hand, and touched my
mouth, And the Lord said unto me, Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth.”

VI. In the New Testament records we find similar scenes, Manifestations of angels
to shepherds. A wonderful scene of transfiguration for our Lord himself. The
descending sheet, and its strange contents, for Peter. The overwhelming lisht and
voice on the road to Damascus, and the elevation into the third heavens, to see the
unspeakable, for St. Paul. And the apocalyptic vision for St. John.

Isaiah’s vision is in fullest sympathy with all these. For its explanation, see the
exegetical portion of the Commentary. It bore upon the prophet, through its symbols,
overwhelming impressions (1) of the holiness, (2) of the direct claims of God.—R. T.


Ver. 5.—Seeing God and the sense of sin. “Then said I, Woe is me! for I am
undone; because I am a man of unclean lips.” To Isaiah a work of unusual solemnity
had been entrusted, one that needed to be done in a most serious and reverent spirit.
He was at once the prophet of the Lord’s terror and of the Lord’s mercy. He was to
denounce sin with the solemnity of one who knew what God’s thought of sin was.
He was to produce the conviction of sin before God in the corrupt minds and hearts of the
people, and he was to announce the coming, presently, of the great Messenger of Divine
mercy. Therefore it was necessary for him to have his own soul filled with the infinite
glory and holiness of God, and filled with a very humbling sense of sin. These effects
were wrought by the vision granted to him. It took its form from its design. All about
it is holy. It is the holy place. The seraphim bow before the infinitely Holy. They
ery, “ Holy, holy.” The threshold and the posts tremble before the Holy. And the seul
of the prophet is abased. He is humbled in the sight of his own uncleanness, and the
uncleanness of his people; for how can a man seem pure before his Maker ?

I, A MAN NEEDS VISIONS oF GoD WHO HAS THE WORK OF DENOUNCING SIN. No
man should dare to touch that work whose own soul is not oppressed with the evil of
sin. Denunciation of sin is no flippant, easy work; it involves a tremendous expense
of feeling. We talk about sin so freely, that for many of us it has lost its exceeding
sinfulness, We confess it so often in familiar general terms, that it has lost almost
all its terror. It may have been thus with Isaiah. He may have been so coustantly
talking about sin, that he had exhausted his feeling of its evil, and could even speak
lightly about abomination that it is said “God hateth.” Certainly we need such
visions of God to fill our minds and hearts with seriousness; we well may pray, “‘ Lord,
show me thyself.”

II. WHEN A MAN HAS VISIONS OF GOD, HE AT FIRST FEELS HELPLESS, AND DARES
NOT UNDERTAKE Gop’s work. Compare the feelings of Moses and Jeremiah, after
their visions. The first feeling will be, “I dare aot.” ‘‘ Who is sufficient for these
things?” But this will soon pass into humble dependence on Divine strength, and
patient readiness to go where God sends, and do what God bids. When a man before
God says, “ Woe is me!” etc., he will soon respond to God’s call, saying, “ Here am I;
send me.”—R. T.


Ver. 5.—The true inspiration for workers, “ Mine eyes have seen the King, the
Lord of hosts.” What a scene is presented in this chapter for our imaginations to
reproduce! The throng of worshippers had left the courts of the sacred temple; the
chanting, in alternate parts, of the choir of singers, clothed in white linen, had died
into silence. Other devout Israelites were praying apart, and white-robed priests
silently presented their prayers in the fragrant cloud of incense which rose from the
golden altar of the holy piace; “then the veil of the temple seemed to be withdrawn,
and the holy of holies discovered to the prophet’s eye. He saw the Lord, sitting as
a King upon his throne, actually governing and judging. His train, the symbol of
dignity and glory, filled the holy place, while around him hovered the attendant
seraphim, spirits of purity, zeal, and love, chanting in alternate choirs the holiness of
their Lord. The threshold vibrated with the sound, and the white cloud of the Divine
presence, as if descending te mingle itself with the ascending incense of prayer, filled


122 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. vi. 1—13,


the house. The eternal archetypes of the Hebrew symbolic worship were revealed to
Isaiah ; and, as the centre of them all, his eyes saw the King, the Lord of hosts, of
whom the actual rulers, from David to Uzziah, had been but the temporary and sub-
ordinate viceroys. In that presence, even the spirits of the fire, which consumes all
impurity while none can mix with it, cover their faces and their feet, conscious that
they are not pure in God’s sight, but justly chargeable with imperfection; and much
more does Isaiah shrink from the aspiring thonyhts he had hitherto entertained of
his fitness to be the preacher of that God to his countrymen; he, a man of unclean
lips, sharing the uncleanness of the people among whom he dwells. In utter self-
abasement he realizes the exceeding sinfulness of sin, and the separation it makes
between man and the holy God” (Sir E. Strachey). This was a vision of God granted
toa worker, a man actively engaged in God’s service. and about to enter on more
serious and more arduous duties. Visions have seldom, if ever, been granted to
individuals merely as helps to their private religious lie. They are gracivus aids to
workers ;:and God’s willing servants can only reach adequate convictions, feel worthy
impulses, or gain a suitable and inspiring impression of the diguity of their work,
through some direct manifestation of God himself to their souls. No man can do great,
things save as he is sustained by the cunviction that God has sent him todo them, and
is with him in the duing, The smallness of our aims, our endeavours, and our attain-
ments, reveal how small and how unworthy are our views of God. It is evident that
we cannot yet be said to have seen him. He has not yet overawed us with his glory
and his claims, and swelled our souls with great thonghts, great resolves, and a great
consecration. ‘I"hose only who have seen “ the King in his beauty ” can give their very
noblest powers, cai lay down their lives, in bis service.

I, CAN THERE BE PERSONAL REVELATIONS OF GOD TO HIS WORKERS IN OUR DAY?
We have sadly lost in spiritual power, in self-abuegation, and in holy enthusiasm for
the gl ry of the Lord, because we have so easily setiled this question by answering,
“Certainly not. Gud does not now give visions. Christian workers now need not
expect such. We are left now to the ordinary illuminations of the Holy Spirit.” But
will this answer bear lovking at and thinking about, and testing by the light of actual
experieice ? God’s forms of Divine dealing do indeed difler in different ages, but the
essential \eatures of God’s relationship with men do not change, He can reveal him-
self still to individual souls; and he is not limited to the particular forms of vision
which he has uscd in ancient times. He may adapt his visious to the altered circum-
stances of each age; and if once he appeared in human form to meet the sight of bodily
eyes, he may vow reveal his glory in the spheres that lie open to the vision of the
loving and believing soul. It he be the living God, ruling, guiding, choosing out his
instruments, fashioning them for his purposes, and sending them upon his commissions,
be must still have visions for his servants. ‘They will take less of outward symbolic
shape, they will relate more to thought and less to dreams; but that only makes
them more immediate and direct Divine communications—contacts of the Divine
Spirit with the human spirit without the intervention of any earthly symbols. God
spoke to the boy Samuel with an audible voice, he spoke afterwards to the man
Samuel in a spirit-voice; but both were his voice, The New ‘Testament promise is,
“ Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.”

Il, WHEN IN OUR LIFE MAY WE LOOK FOR SUCH DIVINE VISIONS TO WORKERS ?
Is there auy special time or occasion at which they may be expected? They will
not necessarily come at the beginnings of our special labours, though that might seem
to be the most fitting time. ‘lhey do often come at the outset, but sometimes we are
permitted fora while to “ go the warfare at our own charges ;” we havea period of trial
and of comparative failure, as Isaiah appears to have had, and then we are renewed in our
covsecration by some holy scenes of communion and revelation, Among the visions
of the Old Testament we find several that were granted in the very miust of life’s
work: e.g. Abraham’s, Moses’, Joshua’s, this of Isaiah; compareour Lord’s transfiguration,
and Paul’s ascent to glory. Tbe times for God’s personal disclosures of himself to a man
can never be fixed and anticipated. Like other workings of grace, they are divinely,
sovereignly free; the fitting occasion for them the unsearchable Wisdom alouve can
decide. This only may we say—No Christian man has ever become truly great and
noble and enthusiastic, no man has become utterly self-denying in the Lord’s work,


OH. VI. 1—13,] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 123
a a a


until he has been called and solemnized and prepared by some soul-vision of God. He
may be a Christian worker before, but he is not inspired and spiritually powerful
until then. Life takes on its highest nobility only after we are able to say, “ Mine
eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts.” We may not say that such visions come
only once in a man’s life. ‘hey will be given as often as there is need for them, and
openness to receive them. Christ, our Lord, had visions at his baptism, at the mount,
in the wilderness, and in the garden, The Apostle Paul had visions on the road te
Damascus, of the man from Macedonia, of the third heaven, and amid tle dangers of
shipwreck. We often hear of our dying friends seeing something of which those
around their beds cannot catch the faintest glimpse. And this is true of Christian
souls in life. They have times of insight, times of seeing truth and seeing God; times
when, apart from study and thought, they seem to be plunged in all the glory of
Divine and eternal things; momeuts in which they could not tell whether they were
“in the body or out of the body.” Two or three instances may be given in illustration.
While Luther was laboriously climbing up Pilate’s staircase at Rome, seeking to
win a rizhteousness out of his own works, he heard a voice thundering in his soul
and saying, ‘‘Ihe just shall live by faith.’ That was a New Testameut vision of
the truth, and from that vision Luther’s power began. The following is a testimony
rendered concerning a godly man: “ About a year after his conversion, returning
from a meeting greatly distressed with a sense of his unworthiness, he turned aside
into a lonely barn to wrestle with God, and while kneeling on the threshing-floor
he gained a little light. Shortly after his eyes were opened to see all clearly. He felt
that he was nothing, and Christ was all in all; and from that time commenced a life
of most devoted and successful labour for Christ.” “The holy John Flavel, being alone
in a journey on horseback, and willing to make the best improvement of the day’s
solitude, set himself to a close examination of the state of his soul, and then of the life
to come, and the macner of its being and living in heaven, Going on his way, his
thoughts began to swell, and rise higher and higher, like the waters in Ezekiel’s vision,
till at last they became an overflowiny flood. Such was the intention of bis mind, such
the ravishing taste of heavenly joys, and such the full assurance of his interest therein,
that he utterly lost the sight and sense of this world, and all the concerns thereof ; and
for some hours knew no more where he was than if he had been in a deep sleep in his
bed.” The following passage is taken from the margin of John Howe’s study Bible.
It is the only record of his personal experience preserved for us. ‘“¢ After I had, in my
course of preaching, been largely insisting on 2 Cor. i. 12, this very morning I awoke
out of a most ravishing and delightful dream, that a wonderful and copious stream of
celestial rays, trom the lofty throne of the Divine Majesty, seemed to dart into my
expanded breast. I have often since, with great complacency, retlected on that very
signal pledge of special Divine favour vouchsafed to me on that memorabie day, and
have, with repeate/ fresh pleasure, tasted the delights thereof. But what, on Oct. 22,
1704, of the same kind I sensibly felt, . . . far surpassed the most expressive words
my thoughts can suggest, I then experienced an inexpressibly pleasaut melting of
heart; tears gushing out of mine eyes, for joy that God should shed abroad his love
abundantly through the hearts of men, and that for this very purpose my own should
be so signally possessed of and by his blessed Spirit.” Dr. Bushnell says, ‘‘ We have
vast crowds of witnesses, rising up in every age, who testify, out of their own con-
sciousness, to the work of the Spirit, and the new-creating power of Jesus, who, by
his Spirit, is revealed in their hearts. In nothing do they consent with a more hymn-
like harmony than in the testimony that their inward transformation is a Divine work—
a new revelation of God, by the Spirit, in their human consciousness. So do they all
testify with one voice—Paul, Clement, Origen, St. Bernard, Huss, Gerson, Luther,
Fenelon, Baxter, Flavel, Doddridge, Wesley, Edwards, Brainerd, Taylor, all the
innumerable host of believers that have entered into rest, whether it be the persecuted
saint of the first age, driven home in his chariot of blood, or the saint who died but
yesterday in the arms of his family.” We do well to guard against any fanatical
and superstitious watching for sensible appearances, symbolical manifestations, or the
guidance of our dreams. But this we should better understand—there are delectable
mountains in our Christian pilgrimage nowadays, and we may climb the heights,
and get visions of the far-away celestial city. We are Christians of the plains and the


124 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cx. v1. 1—1¥.


a


low country; we should oftener be breathing the fresh air of the mountain-side.. If we
would open our hearts; if we would have a well-trodden path to the place of prayer;
if we would yearn for it,—God would come nearer to us, and oftener show us his glory.
He is a new man, and a new worker, who can say, ‘‘ Mine eyes have seen the King,
the Lord of hosts.”—R. T.


Vers. 6, 7.—Divine endowment the proof of Divine forgiveness and acceptance.
What occurred must be explained in connection with the vision. One of those
seraphim who stood, with poised wings, ready for an instant and unquestioning
obedience, at the bidding of the King flew down, having taken a live coal from the
sublime altar which formed part of the vision, and with it touched the mouth of the
prophet, speaking also words of gravious assurance. ‘This touch of the mouth of
the prophet was the symbol of the endowment of speaking power; and with it may
be compared the gift of tongues made to the early Christian Church. We note—

I. THE ENDOWED ONFS MUST BE THE FoRGIVEY. It scarcely needed the seraph’s
words to carry home this assurance. Illustrate by the gift of the Holy Ghost—
recognized in the possession of some special talent—to the early believers. It was the
seal of their forgiveness. Compare the case of fretful and desponding Elijah, The
assurance that his sin was forgiven came in the renewal of his prophetic commission.

II. THE ENDOWED ONES MUST BE THE ACCEPTED. God would not honour with a place
of service for him those who were not in gracious relations with him. We may
recognize that God uses ald men, “making eveu the wrath of man praise him, and
restraining the remainder of wrath ;” but so far as his redemption work is concerned, in
all its many branches, the possession of special gifts may be recognized as proof of God’s
acceptance and appointment. It shows that God has chosen and approves the work-
mar. Isaiah was rightly cheered by such an endowment, or re-endowment, to pro-
phetic work.

Ill. THE ENDOWED ONES RESPOND BY SELF-CONSECRATION. When the joy of for-
giveness and acceptance comes, and the solemnity of a Divine trust rests on a man, if
he be a good man, he can but watch for the Divine voice saying, “ Whom shall I
send ?” and at once and heartily respond, “* Here am I; send me.” Compare the hesi-
tation of Moses to take up the trust God would commit to him, and his grieving God
by a hesitation that was based on a false humility ; and see the words Eli put on the
lips of young Samuel: “Speak, Lord; for thy servant heareth.”—R. 'T.


Ver. 9.—A mission of hardening. Dean Plumptre says, “ No harder task, it may
be, was ever given to man. Ardent dreams of reformation and revival, the nation
renewing its strength like the eagle, were scattered to the winds; and he had to face
the prospect of a fruitless labour, of feeling that he did but increase the evil against
which he strove. It was the very opposite mission of that to which St. Paul was sent,
‘to open men’s eyes, and turn them from darkness to light’” (Acts xxvi. 18). Mr.
Hutton, in one of his essays, says, “ When civilization becomes corrupt, and men are
living below their faith, I think it may often be in mercy that God strikes the nations
with blindness ;—that the only remedy lies in thus taking away an influence which
they resist, and leaving them the stern lesson of self-dependence.” This gives the key to
the view we propose to take of Isaiah’s mission. From one point of view a mission of
hardening is a mission of judgment; but, from another point of view, it is a mission of
mercy. From both points of view it is always a most trying mission for him to whom
it is entrusted.

I, A MISSION OF HARDENING I8 A MISSION OF JUDGMENT. Compare Moses’ mission
to Pharaoh. It was a fact that Pharaoh’s heart was hardened. On natural mental laws
we can explain the process of hardening. Yet we are bidden see deeper, and recognize
that, in judgment on his wilfulness, “God hardened his heart.” If a man resists a
gracious influence once, he finds it easier to resist a second time, and gradually the
influence has no persuasive effect on him; he is “hardened.” Illustrate by the Pharisees,
who at first inquired concerning Christ. They resisted the witness of his words and
works, until at last a blindness and hardness came upon them asa judgment, The
Jews are under Divine judgment now; it is a blinding, veiling, hardening, which makes
it impossible for them, as a whole nation, to see the Son of God and Saviour of tha


OH. vil. 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 126
ee


world from sin in Jesus of Nazareth. The man who won’t see shall come into this
judgment—he shall not be able to see. All missions, even Christ’s, have a side of

ardening. Some missions are almost wholly the execution of this Divine judgment.
Blindness is God’s punishment for refusing to see, and spiritual blindness comes through
the very preaching of the truth that saves to unwilling hearts; and‘such preaching-work,
that seems worse than fruitless, may be the mission given by God to some men. To
us they may be ministers of judgment, even in their preaching of the gospel. J. A.
Alexander says, “The thing predicted is judicial blindness, as the natural result and
righteous retribution of the national depravity. This end would be promoted by the
very preaching of the truth, and therefore a command to preach was in effect a com-
mand to blind and harden them.”

II. A MISSION OF HARDENING IS A MISSION OF MERCY. It may be (1) considerateness
for individuals, on whom it will prove the only effective agency. It may be (2) tie
quickest way to secure the humbling of the soul. God may have to let men get hard
in their pride that, through the fall that must surely follow, their pride may be broken ;
just as the mother lets the child, that is conceited with its first attempts to walk,
stumble and fall, in order that henceforth the walking may be less venturesome. The
thought is almost beyond us, but we are permitted even to believe that God works
his work of grace by calamities that we call destructive, and by hardenings that seem to
us hopeless. In Isaiah’s days, “events that were ‘signs of the times,’ calls to repentance
or to action, were taken as things of course. For such a state, after a certain stage,
there is but one treatment. It must run its course, and ‘dree its weird,’ partly as a
righteous retribution, partly as the only remedial process possible.” The evident
results of his mission made Isaiah’s ministry extremely trying and depressing ; his
preaching rocked some to a fatal sleep, and made others outrageous and exasperated.
And the final results of his work, as at heart a work of mercy, could not be revealed
for his cheering during his life. He could only hold that before him as a mysterious
vision of the faraway. But he was nobly faithful; a servant of God who reaped no
results such as he would himself desire, but actually seemed only a mischief-maker,
an increaser of existing evils, and a hardener of hearts. But to none are the words
more fitting than to tried Isaiah, ‘ Well done, good and faithful servant,” executor of
Divine judgment, and ministrant of Divine mercy.—R. T.


Section IV. PRopHECIES CONNECTED WITH THE SyR0-IsRAELITE WB (CH. VIL—x. 4).


EXPOSITION.


B.c. 743 and's.c. 727. The march on Jeru-
salem appears to have fallen somewhat late
in his reign (about B.c. 733). Rezin the King
of Syria. Rezin is mentioned as King of
Damascus by Tiglath-Fileser II. in several
of his inscriptions. In one, which seems to


CHAPTER VII.

Vers. 1—9.—TuHE PROPHECY GIVEN TO
AHAZ AT THE TIME OF THE SyRO-ISRAELITISH
War, The Syro-Israelitish war is touched
‘on both in Kings and Chronicles. In Kings


the alliance between Rezin and Pekah is
distinctly declared, as also the fact that they
conjointly besieged Jerusalem (2 Kings xvi.
5). From Chronicles we learn that, before
the siege, Ahaz was twice defeated with
great loss, once by the Syrians (2 Chron.
xxviii. 5),and once by the Israelites (2 Chron.
xxviii. 6). He was probably, therefore, re-
duced to great straits at the time when
Isaiah received directions to seek an inter-
view with him, and communicate to him a
comforting message from Jehovah.

Ver. 1.—In the days of Ahaz. The reign
of Aliaz covered, probably.the space between


belong to B.c. 732 or 731, he states that he
defeated Rezin and slew him. Pekah the
son of Remaliah (see 2 Kings xv. 25).
Pekah had been an officer under Pekahiah,
the son and successor of Menahem; but
had revolted, put Pekahiah to death in his
palace, and seized the crown. It is probable
that he and Rezin were anxious to form a
confederacy for the purpose of resisting the
advance of the Assyrian power, and, dis
trusting Ahaz, desired to place on the throne
of Judah a person on whom they could
thoroughly depend (see ver. 6). It was not
their design to conquer the Jewish kingdom,
but only to change the sovereign. Toward
Jerusalem; rather, to Jerusalem. The alli:s
reached the city and commenced the sieve
6


126


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


(cu, vit, 1—25.


nn nee EEE aE En ESSENSE ER


(2 Kings xvi. 5). Could not prevail against
it; literally, prevailed not in fighting against
tt.

Ver. 2.—It was told the house of David.
Before the actual siege began, news of the
alliance reached Ahaz. It is said to have
been “ told the house of David,” because the
design was to supersede the family of David
by another—apparently a Syrian—house
(see note on ver. 6). Syria is confederate
with Ephraim; literally, rests upon Ephraim.
Under ordinary circumstances the kingdoms
of Syria and Isracl were hostile the one to
the other (see 1 Kings xv. 20; xx. 1—3;
xxii. 3—36; 2 Kings v. 2; vi. 8—24; viii.
29; x. 82; xiii. 3, 22, 25). But occasion-
ally, under the pressure of a great danger,
the relations were chunged, anda temp rary
league was formed. ‘lhe inscriptions of
Shalmaneser II. s!iow such a league to have
existed in the time of Benhadad II. and
Ahab (‘ Ancient Monarchies,’ vol. ii. pp.
108, 104). The invasion of Pul, and the
threatening attitude of Tiglath-Pileser IL.,
had now once more drawn the two countries
together. On the use of the word “ Ephrai ”
to designate the kingdom of Israel, see
Hosea, pussim. His heart was moved; or,
shook, If the two kings hid each been uble
separately to inflict on him such loss (see
the introductory paragraph), what must he
not expect, now that both were about to
attack him together? Itis not clear whether
Ahaz had as yet applied to Assyria for help
or not.

Ver. 3.—Thonu, and Shear-Jashub thy son.
The name Shear-Jasliub, “a remnant shall
return,” way have been given to Isaiah’s
son by revelation, as Ewald thinks it was;
or Isaiah m y have given it to testify his
faith both in the threats and in the promises
of which he had been made the mouth-piece.
The command to take him with him on the
present occasion was probably given on
account of his name, tnat the attention of
Ahaz might be called to it. The conduit
of the upper pool is mentioned also in
2 Kings xviii. 17. It was probably a sub-
terranean duct which brought water into
the city from the high ground outside the
Damascus gate. Ahaz may have visited it
in order to see that it was made available
for his own use, but not for the enemy’s
(comp. 2 Chron. xxxii, 3, 4, 30; ch. xxii.
9, 11).

Ver. 4.—Take heed, and be quiet; or, see
that thou keep quiet ; i.e. “be not disturbed ;
do not resort to strange and extreme mea-
sures; in quietness and confidence should
be your strenyth ” (see ch. xxx. 15), The
two tails of these smoking firebrands. Rezin
and Pekah are called “ two tails,” or “two
stumps of smoking firebrands,” as persons
who had been dangerous, but whose power


of doing harm was on the point of departing
from them. They could not now kindle a
flame; they could only “smoke.” The son
of Remaliah, Pekah seems to be called
“ Remaliah’s son” in contempt (comp. vers.
5, 9), Remaliah having been a man of no
distinction (2 Kings xv. 25).

Ver. 6.—Make a breach therein. The
word employed means properly * making «
bieach in a city wall” (2 Kings xxv. 4;
2 Chron. xxxii. 1; Jer. xxxix. 2; Ezek.
xxvi. 10), but is used also in a metiphorical
sense for injuring and ruining a country
(see especially 2 Chron. xxi. 17). The son
of Tabeal; or, Tabél. “'Tab-é]” appcars to
be a Syrian name, founded upon the same
pattern as Tab-rimmon (1 Kings xv. 18),
the one meaning “ God is good,” the other
“Rimmon is good.” We cannot, however,
conclude from the name that the family of
Tabeal was monotheistic (Kay), for E] was
one of the many Syrian gods as much as
Rimmon (see Max Miiller, ‘Science of
Religion,’ pp. 177, 178).

Ver. 7.—Thus saith the Lord God; lite-
rally, the Lord Jehovah, as in ch. xxviii. 16;
xl. 10; xlviii. 16, ete. It shall not stand;
ae. “the design shal] not hold good, it shall
not be accomplished.” Rezin and Pekah
have planned to set aside the issue of David,
to which God had promised his throne
(2 Sam. vii. 11—16; Ps. Ixxxix. 27—37),
and to set up a new line of kings uncon-
nected with David. They think to frustrate
the everlasting counsel of God. Such an
attempt was of necessity futile.

Ver. 8.—For the head of Syria is Damas-
cus, etc. Syria and Ephraim have merely
human heads—the one Reziu, tle other
(ver. 9) Pekah; but Judah, it is implied,
has a Divine Head, even Jehovah. How,
then, should mere mortals think to oppose
their will and their designs to God’s? Of
course, their designs must come to nought.
Within threescore and five years shall
Ephraim be broken, etc. If this prophecy
was delivered, as we have sup)oscd, in B.o,
73% (see note on ver. 1), sixty-five years
later would bring us to B.c. 669. ‘This was
the year in which Esar-haddon, having made
his son, Asshur-bani-pal, King of Assyria,
transferred his own residence to Babylon,
and probably the year in which he sent from
Babylonia and the adjacent countries a
number of colonists who occupied Samaria,
and entirely destroyed tlie nationality, which,
fitty-three years earlier, had received a rude
blow from Sargon (comp. Ezra iv. 2, 9, 10,
with 2 Kings xvii. 6—24 und 2 Chron.
xxxili. 11). It is questioned whether, under
the circumstances, the prophet can have
comforted Ahaz with this distant prospect,
aid suggested that in the present chapter
prophecies pronounced at widely distant


OH. Vil, 1—25.)


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


127


periods have been mixed up (Cheyne); but
there is no such appearance of dislocation
in ch. vii., in its present form, as neccssitutes
any such theory; and, while it may be
granted that the comfort of the promise
iven in ver. 8 would be slight, it cannot

said that it would be nil; it may, there-
fore, have been (as it seems to us) without
impropriety added to the main promise,
which is that of ver. 7. The entire clause,
from “and within” to “not a people,” must
be regarded as parenthetic.

Ver. 9.—If ye will not believe, etc.
Translate, If ye_2wi this faith
fast, surely ye will 1 d fast. Full faith
in the promise of ver. 7 would have enabled
Ahaz to dispense with all plans of earthly
policy, and to “stand fast in the Lord,”
without ca'ling in the aid of any “arm of
flesh.” Distrust of the promise would lead
him to take steps which would not tend
to “establish ” him, but would make his
position more insecure (see 2 Kings xvi.
7—18; 2 Chron. xxviii. 16, 20).

Vers. 10—16.—Tue Sicn or IMMANUEL.
The supposition that there was a consider-
able interval between ver. 9 and ver. 10
(Cheyne) is quite gratuitous. Nothing in
the text marks any such interval. God had
sent Ahaz one message by his prophet (vers.
4—9). It had apparently been received in
silence, at any rate without acknowledg-
ment. The faith had seemed to be lacking
which should have embraced with gladness
the promise given (sce the last clause of ver.
9). God, however, will give the unhappy
monarch apother chance. And so he sends
him a second message, the offer of a sign
which should make belief in the first mes-
sage easier to him (ver. 11). Ahaz proudly
rejects this offer (ver. 12). Then tle sign of
“Immanuel” is given—not to Ahaz indivi-
dually, but to the whole “house of David,”
and through them to the entire Jewish
people. “A virgin shall conceive, and bear a
son, whose name shall be called Lmmanuel;
and before this child shall have grown to
the age of moral discernment, God’s people
will have been delivered, and their enemies
made a desolation ” (vers. 14—16). The
exact bearing of the “sign” will be best
discussed in the comment upon ver. 14.

Ver. 10.—The Lord spake again unto Ahaz.
As before (vers. 3,4) by the mouth of his
prophet.

Ver. 11.—Ask thee a sign. Asking fora
sign is right or wrong, praiseworthy or blam-
able, according to the spirit in which the
request is made, ‘he fuarisees in our


Lord’s time ‘‘asked for a sign,” but would
not have believed any the more had they
reccived the sign for which they asked.
Gideon asked for a sign to strengthen his
faith (Judg. vi. 37, 39), and received it, and
in the strength of it went forth boldly
against the Midianites. When God himself
proposed to give a sigu, and allowed his
creature to choose what the sign should be,
there could be no possible wrong-doing in a
ready acceptance of the offer, which should
have culled forth gratitude and thanks.
Ask it either in the depth, or in the height
above; t.e. “Ask any sign thou wilt. either
in hell or in beaven”—nothing shall be
refused thee.

Ver. 12.—I will not ask, neither will I
tempt the Lord. Ahaz, who has no wish for
a sign, because he has no wish to believe in
any other salvation than that which will
follow from the realization of his own schemes,
finds a plausible reason for declining to ask
for one in those passages of the Law which
forbade men to “ tempt God” ‘ Exod. xvii. 7;
Deut. vi. 16). But it could not be “ tempt-
ing God” to comply with a Divine invita-
tion; rather it was tempting him to refuse
compliance.

Ver. 13.—0 house of David (comp. ver. 2).
It is not Ahaz alone, but the “bouse of
David,” which is on its trial. Men are con-
spiring to remove it (ver. 6). If it will not
be saved in God’s way, it will have to be
removed by God himsclf. Is it a small thing
for you to weary men? i.e.“ Are you not
content with wearying men; with disregarde
ing all my warnings and so wearying me?
Must you go further, and weary God” (or,
“wear out his patience”) “by rejecting bis
gracious offers?”” My God. In ver. 11 Isaiah
hid called Jehovah “thy God;” but as
Ahaz, by rejecting Gods offer. had rejected
God, he speaks of him now as “ my God.”

Ver. 14.—Therefore. To show that your
perversity caunot change God’s designs,
which will be accomplished, whether you
hear or whether you forbear. The Lord
himself; 7.e. “the Lord himself, of his own
free will, unasked.’” Will give you a sign.
“Signs ” were of various kinds. They might
be actual miracles perfirmed to attest a
Divine commission (Exod. iv. 3—Y); or
judgments of (od, significative of his power
and justice (Exod. x. 2); or memorials of
something in the past (luxod. xiii. 9, 16); or
pledges of something still future. Signs of
this last-mentioned kind might be miracles
(Judg. vi. 36-—40; 2 Kings xx. 8—11), or
prophetic announcements (Exod. iii. 12;
1 Sam. ii. 34; 2 Kings xix. 20). These last
would only have the effect of signs on those
who witnessed their accomplishment. Be-
hold. “A forewarning of a great event”
(Cheyne). ‘A virgin shall conceive, It is


128


questioned whether the word translated
“virgin,” viz. ’almah, has necessarily that
meaning; but it is admitted that the mean-
ing is borne out by every other place in
which the word occurs in the Old Testa-
ment (Gen. xxiv. 43; Exod. ii.8; Ps. lxviii.
25; Prov. xxx. 19; Cant. i. 3; vi. 8). The
LXX., writing two centuries before the birth
of Christ, translate by map@évos. The render-
ing “virgin” has the support of the best
modern Hebraists,as Lowth, Gesenius, Ewald,
Delitzsch, Kay. It is observed with reason
that unless ’almah is translated “ virgin,”
there is no announcement made worthy of
the grand prelude: “ ‘Ihe Lord himself shall
give you a sign—Behold!” The Hebrew,
however, has not “a virgin,” but “ the vir-
gin” (and so the Septuagint, 7 mapQévos),
which points to some special virgin, pre-
eminent above all others. And shall call;
better than the marginal rendering, thou shalt
call. It was regarded as the privilege of a
mother to determine her child’s name (Gen.
iv. 25; xvi. 11; xxix. 832—35; xxx. 6—13,
18—21, 24; xxxv. 18, etc.), although form-
ally the father gave it (Gen. xvi. 15; 2 Sam.
xii. 24; Luke i. 62, 63). Immanuel. Trans-
lated for us by St. Matthew (i. 23) as “God
with us” (ue@’ judy 6 eds). (Comp. ch.
viii. 8, 10.) :

Ver. 15.—Butter and honey shall he eat.
His fare shall be of the simplest kind (comp.
ver. 22). That he may know; rather, till he
shall know (Ro-enmiiller); ze. till he come
to years of discretion. (The rendering of
the Revisers of 1585, ‘‘ when he knoweth,” is
less satisfactory.)

Ver. 16.—The land, etc. Translate,
The land shall be desolate, before whose two
kings thou art afraid. The “land” must
certainly be that of the two confederate
kings, Rezin and Pekah the Syro-Ephraim-
itic land, or Syria and Samaria. “ Desolate ”
may be used physically or politically, A
land is “ desolate” politically when it loses
ehe last vestige of independence.

Vers. 17—25.—Tur Dancer 10 JUDAH FROM
Assyria, The perversity of Ahaz, already
rebuked in ver. 13, is further punished by a
threat, that upon him, and upon his people,
and upon his father’s house, shall come
shortly a dire calamity. The very power
whose aid he is himself bent on invoking
shall be the scourge to chastise both king
and people (vers. 17—20). The land shall
be made bare as by a razor (ver. 20). Cul-
tivation shall cease; its scant inhabitants
will support themselves by keeping a few
cows and sheep (ver. 21), and will nourish
themselves on dairy produce, and the honey
that the wild bees produce (ver. 22). Briers


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


(cH. vir. 1—25,


and thorns will come up everywhere; wild
beasts will increase; cattle will browse on
the hills that were once carefully cultivated
to their summits (vers. 23—25).

Ver. 17.—The Lord shall bring upon thee,
etc. The transition from promises to threat-
enings is abrupt, and calculated to impress
any one who was to any extent impressible.
But Ahaz seems not to have had “ears te
hear.” From the day that Ephraim departed
from Judah; i.e. from the time of the revolt
under Jeroboam (1 Kings xii. 16—24)—an
evil day, which rankled in the mind of all
true Judeaus. Even the King of Assyria.
The construction is awkward, since “the
King of Assyria” cannot well stand in appo-
sition with “days.” Hence many take the
words for a gloss that has been accidentally
intruded into the text (Lowth, Gesenius,
Hitzig, Knobel, Cheyne). Others, however,
see in the grammatical anomaly a grace of
composition.

Ver. 18.—The Lord shall hiss (see ch. v.
26, and note ad loc.). For the fly that is in
the uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt.
The “fly of Egypt,” like the “bee of As-
syria,” represents the military force of the
nation, which God summons to take part in
the coming affliction of Judea. The pro-
phetic glance may be extended over the
entire period of Judah’s decadence, and the
“ flies” summoned may include those which
clustered about Neco at Megiddo, and car-
ried off Jehoahaz from Jerusalem (2 Kings
xxiii. 29—3+). There may,be allusion also
to Egyptian ravages in the reigns of Sargon,
Sennacherib, and Esar-baddon. In an
general review of the period we shall find
it stated that, from the time of Sargon to
that of Cyrus, Judzea was the battle-ground
upon which the forces of Assyria (or Assyro-
Babylonia) and Egypt contended for the
empire of western Asia. ‘The desolation of
the land during this period was produced
almost as much by the Egyptian “fly” as
by the Assyrian “bee.” The “rivers of
Egypt” are the Nile, its branches, and
perhaps the great canals by which its waters
were distributed. The bee that is in the
land of Assyria. The choice of the terms
“bee” and “fly,” to represent respectively
the hosts of Assyria and Egypt, is not with-
out significance. Egyptian armies were
swarms, liastily levied, and very imperfectly
disciplined. Assyrian were bodies of trained
troops accustomed to war, and almost as well
disciplined as the Romans.

Ver. 19.—And rest; or, settle. In the
desolate valleys. Gesenius and Vance Smith
translate “the precipitous valleys ;” Mr.
Cheyne, “the steeply walled valleys.’ But
the cognate word used in ch. v. 6 can only
mean “ waste,” which supports the rendering


oa, vu. 1—25.]


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


129


SOS


of the Authorized Version. The exact word
used does not occur elsewhere. Upon all
bushes; rather, upon all pastures.

Ver. 20.—Shall the Lord shave with a
rator that is hired; rather, with the hired
razor; i.e. the razor that Alhaz will have
hired (2 Kings xvi. 8). The metaphor well
expresses tlie stripping of the land bare by
plunder and exaction (comp. Ezek. vy. 1, 12,
and 2 Chron. xxviii. 19—21). God would
use Tiglath-Pileser as his instrument to
distress Ahuz. By them beyond the river;
or, in the parts beyond the river (comp.
1. Chron. xix. 16). “The river” is un-
doubtedly the Euphrates, and they who
dwell beyond it the Assyrians. By the King
of Assyria. Once more a gloss is suspected,
as in ver. 17. The meaning would certainly
be suffiviently plain without the clause,
The head... the hair of the feet... the
beard. These three represent all the hair
on any part of the body. Judah is to be
completely stripped.

Ver. 21.—A man shall nourish a young
cow, and two sheep; literally, two ewes. A
stop having been put to cultivation, men
shall return to the pastoral life, but shill not
possess more than two or three head of cattle
apiece, the Assyrians having swept off most
of the beasts. Tiglath-Pileser, in his in-
scriptions, mentions his carrying off horned
cattle and sheep to the amount of many
thousands from the countries: which he
overran or conquered (‘ Records of the Past,’
vol. v. pp. 49, 52).

Ver. 22.—For the abundance of milk that
they shall give. The small number of the
eattle will allow of each having abundant
pasture. Hence they will give an abundance
of milk. He shall eat butter; rather, curds—
the solid food most readily obtained from
milk (comp. above, ver. 15). Curdled milk
and wild honey shouid form the simple diet
of the remnant left in the land. It is, of
course, possible to understand this in a
spiritual sense, of simple doctrine and
“gospel honey out of the flinty rock of the
Law;” but there is no reason to think that
the prophet imtended his words in any but
the most literal sense.

Ver. 23.—A thousand vines at a thousand
silverlings. By “silverlings ” our translators
mean “pieces of silver,” probably shekels.
“A thousand vines at a thousand shekels”
may mean either a thousand vines worth
that amount, or a thousand vines rented at
that sum annually (comp. Cant. vili. 11).
The latter would point to vineyards of un-
usual goodness, since the shekel is at least
eighteenpence, and the present rent of a
vineyard in Palestine is at the rate of a
piastre for each vine, or 23d. The general
meaning would seem to be that not even


the best vineyards would be cultivated, but | otherwise unknown (Cheyne).


ISAIAH.


monks lie waste, and grow only “briers and:
thorns.”

Ver 24.—With arrows and with bows,
Only the hunter will go there, armed with
his weapons of chase, to kill the wild animals
that will haunt the thickets.

Ver. 25.—0n all hills that shall be digged;
rather, that shall have been digged in former
times, wlicther for corn cultivation or for
any other. There shall not come thither the
fear of briers (so Ewald and Kay). But
almost all other commentators translate,
“Thou shalt not come thither for fear of
briers,” ete. Te briers and thorns of the
East tear the clothes and tlie flesh. It shall
be; ¢.e. “each such place shall be.” For
the sending forth of oxen; rather, for the
sending in of oxen. Men shall send their:
cattle into them, as alone able to penetrate
the jungle without hurt.


SUPPLEMENTARY Nore,

Ver. 14.—N.te on the general purport of
the Immanuel prophecy. Few prophecies
have been the subject of so much controversy,
or called forth such a variety of exegesis, as
this prophecy of Immanuel. Rosenmiiller
givesa list of twenty-eight authors who have
written dissertations upon it, and himself
adds a twenty-ninth. Yet the subject is far
from being exhausted. It is still asked.
(1) Were the mother and son persons belong-
ing to the time of Isaiah himself, and if so,
what persons? Or, (2) Were they the Virgin
Mary and her Son Jesus? Or, (3) Had the
prophecy a double fullilinent, first in certain
persons who lived in Isaiah’s time, and
secondly in Jesus and his mother?

I. The first theory is that of the Jewish
commentators. Originally, they suggested
that the mother was Abi, the wife of Ahaz
(2 Kings xviii. 2), and the son Hezekiah,
who delivered Judah from the Assyrian
power (see Justin, ‘ Dial. cum Tryplion.,’
p. 262). But this was early disproved by
showing ti.at, according to the numbers of
Kings (2 Kings xvi. 2; xviii. 2), Hezekiah
was at least nine years old in the first year
of Ahaz, before which this prophecy could
not have been delivered (ch. vii. 1). The
second sugvestion made identified the mother
with Isaiaii’s wife, the “ prophetess ” of ch.
viii. 3, and made the son a child of his, called
actually Immanuel, or else his son Maher-
shalal-hash-baz (ch. viii. 1) under a sym-
bolical designation. But ha-~’almah, “the
virgin,” would be a very strange title for
Isaiah to have given his wife, and the rank
assigned to Immanuel in ch. viii. 8 would
not suit any son of Isaiah’s. It remains to
regard the ’almah as “some young woman
actually present,’ name, rank, and position
uuknowr, and Immanuel as her son, also
But the


x


130


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


(cu. vit. 1—25.


——_——_$—— —— OOOO Or Oo evr TS es re


erand exordium, “ The Lord himself shall
vive you a signan—Bchold!” and the rank of
Immanuel (ch. viii. 8), are alike again-t this.

jl. The purely Messianic theory is main-
tained by Rosenmiiller and Dr. Kay, but
without any consideration of its difficulties.
The birth of Christ was an event more than
seven hundred years distant. In what sense
and to what persons could it be a “sign” of
thecoming deliverance of the land from Rezin
and Pekah? And, upon the purely Messi-
anic theory, what is the meaning of ver. 16?
Syria and Samaria were, in fact, crushed
within a few years of the delivery of the
prophecy. Why is their desolation put off,
apparently, till the coming of the Messiah,
snd even till he has reached a certain age?
Mr. Cheyne meets these difficulties by the
startling s!atement that Isaialb expected the
advent of the Messiah to synchronize with
the Assyrian invasion, and consequently
tought that before Rezin and Pekah were
crushed he would have reuched the age of
discernment. But he does not seem to see
that in this case the sign was altogether dis-
appointing and illusory. Time is an essen-
tial element of a prophecy which turns upon
the word “before” (ver. 16). If this faith
of Isainh’s disciples was aroused and their
hopes raised by the announcement that
Immanuel was just ubout to be born (Mr.
Cheyue translates, “ A virgin is with child”),
what would be the revulsion of feeling when
no Immanuel appeared ?

Ill. May not the true account of the


matter be that suggested by Bishop Lowth
—tliat the prophecy had a double bearing
and # double fulfilment? ‘ The obvious and
literal meaning of the prophecy is this,” he
says: “that within the time that a young
woman, now a virgin, should conceive and
bring forth a child, and that cbild should
arrive at such an age as to distinguish be-
tween good and evil, that is, within a few
years, the enemies of Judah should be
destroyed.” But the prophecy was so
worded, he adds, as to have a further mean-
ing, which was even “the original design
and principal intention of the prophet,” viz.
the Messianic one. All the expressions of
the prophecy do not suit both its intentions
—some are selected with reference to the
first, others with reference to the second
fulfilment—but all suit one or the other,
and some suit both. ‘The first child may
have received the name Immanuel (comp.
Ittiel) from a faithful Jewish mother, who
believed that God was with his people,
whatever danyers threatened, and may have
reaciied years of discretion about the time
that Samaria was carried away captive. The
second child is the true “ Immanuel,” “ God
with us,” the kiug of ch. viii. 8; it is his
mother who is pointed at in the expression,
“ the virgin,” and ou his account is the grand
preamble; through him the people of God,
the true Israel, is delivered from its spiritual
enemies, sin and Satan—two kings who
continually threaten it.


HOMILETICS,


Vers. 1—7.—The designs of the wicked, however well laid, easily brought to nought
by God, It would be difficult to find a scheme, humanly speaking, more prudent and
promising than that now furmed by Rezin and Pekah. They had each measured their
strength against that of Ahaz singly, and tal come off decided victors from the encounter.
What doubt could there be of success when their arms were united? And success
would be a matter of the greatest importance to them. It would enable them to form
a compact alliance of three considerable warlike nations agaiust the aggressive power
which was threatening all Western Asia with subjugation. lt would putan end to the
perpetual little wars in which they had been for centuries wasting their strength, and
weakening themselves for resistance agaiust an alien conqueror, But God speaks the
word: “It shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass;” and the pro:mising scheme
drops through, ends in disaster. Rezin, its framer, instead of triumphiug over Ahaz, is
hiuself attacked by Tiglath-Pileser; his territories are invaded, his capital besieged
aud taken, his people carried away captive, and himself slain (2 Kings xvi. 9). Pekah,
tezin’s aider aud abettor, is then exposed to the full brunt of Assyrian invasion, is
attacked, defeated, loses cities and provinces, and, though not slain by the Assyrians, is
left so weak aud so disgraced, that he is shortly dethroned by a new usurper, Hoshea,
who murders him for his own sccurity (2 Kings xv. 29, 30). The “ house of David,”
threatened with removal by the confederates, escayes the crisis unhurt, and continues
to Owupy the throne of Judah for avother century and a half, while the kingdoms of
Syria and Israel fall within a few years, and their inhabitants are deported to far-distant
regions (2 Kings xvi. 9; xvii. 6; 1 Chron. xv. 26). We may learn from this—

Ll, ‘lus MADNESS oF opposing Gop. Syria aud Ephraim were confederate against


cH, vit. 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 131


Judah. They knew that Judah was in an especial way God’s people. They designed
to set aside the house of David. ‘lhey knew, or at any rate Ephraim knew, that the
throne belonged to the descendants of David by God’s promise. Thus they set them-
selves avainst God knowingly. They thought their wisdom would be greater or their
strength superior to his, But thus to think is utter madness, he “ foolishness of Gud
is wiser than men, and the weakness of God is stronger than men ” (1 Cor, i. 24). In
vain do “the kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together,
against the Lord, and azainst his Anointed, saying, Let us break their bands asunder,
and cast away their cords from us. He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: the
Lord shall have them in derision” (Ps. ii. 2—4). God had only to put it into the
heart of the King of Assyria to make an immediate expedition, and all the fine schemes
of the confederates, which needed time for their execution, came at once to nou_ht, aud
were confounded. The would-be allies were crushed separately ; their victim escaped
them; and “ the house of David ” outlasted both their own.

II. ‘lH WISDOM OF FULL TRUST IN Gop. When once God had sent him the message,
“Tt shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass,” Ahaz might have rested sccurely on
the promise, and have been content simply to “stand still and see the salvation of
God.” But he can only have had a weak and imperfect trust in Isaiah’s words. He
must bethink himseli how he may escape his foes; he must bring in another to help
him besides God. Accordingly, he “goes to Assyria.” He takes the silver and gold
out of the royal palace and out of the temple treasury, and sends them to ‘liglath-
Pileser, with the offer. of becoming his servant (2 Kings xvi. 7, 8), and he probably
flatters himself that he has done well, and owes his escape from Rezin and Pekih to
himself. But he has really taken a step on the downward path which will conduct the
house of David and the people of Judah to ruin. He has placed bimself under an
idolater, and paved the way for new idolatries (2 Kings xvi. lO—16). He has helped to
sweep away two states, which, while they continued, served as a breakwater to keep
the waves of invasion off his own kingdom. He has called in one, who, from the true
point of view, has really “distressed him, and strengthened him not ” (2 Chron. xxviii.
20). How much wiser would he have been to have accepted God’s promise in fuld
le ere et a a it by his own “ inventions ” (v.ccles. vii. 29)! God wotld
have found a way to help bim and save him, which would have invulved no such evil
consequences as those which flowed from his own self-willed action.


Vers. 11—14.— Rightful and wrongful asking for signs. To ask for a sign is sometimes
spoken of in Scripture as indicative of want of faith, and therefore as an uflence to God.
“An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign” (Matt. xii. 39). “This is an
evil generation; they seek a sign ” (Luke xi. 29). “Jesus sighed deeply in his spirit,
and saith, Why doth this generation seek after a sign? Verily I say unto you, There
shall no sign be given to this generation ” (Mark viii. 12). “The Jews require a sign,
and the Greeks seek after wisdom” (1 Cor. i. 22), On the other hand, it is sometimes
spoken of without any dispraise, and seems to be viewed as natural, right/ul, even as a
sort of proof of faith. Ahaz, in the present passage, is bidden to “ask a sign,” and is blamed
for refusing to do so, His refusal “ wearies ” God (ver. 13). The disciples ask our Lord,
unrebuked, “ What shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world?”
(Matt. xxiv. 3). Hezekiah asks Isaiah, “ What shall be the sign that the Lord will
heal me, and that I shall go up into the house of the Lord the third day?” (2 Kings
xx. 8; comp. ch. xxxviii. 22). Can any tests be laid down whereby the right and the
wrong may be distinguished in this matter? We think that some may.

I. Iv Is RIGHT TO ASK FOR A SIGN. 1. When a person comes forward and claims our

’ obedience as a Divine teacher or leader. Moses anticipated that his countrymen in
Ezy pt would refuse to listen to him if he presented himself to them without credentials,
and was given at once the power o! working certain miracles as signs that he was con-
missioned by God (Exod. iv. 1—9). As soon as Jesus came forward to teach and to
preach, he was asked, not unreasonably or improperly, “ What sign Showest thou?”
(John ii. 18), and responded, without blaming those who asked him, by a reference to
the greatest of his miracles, his resurrection, The apostles were authorized to work
miracles as signs of their Divine mission. 2. When we have an invitation from God
through his accredited messenger, as Ahaz had, to ask a sign, 3, When we feel that


132 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.  [cn. vu. 1—25,


ne EEE EEENEIEIEnENE ERED EEEEEE EEE ESERIES SERED


much depends on onr decision in a practical matter—e.g. the lives of others—we may
humbly ask, as Gideon did (Judg. vi. 836—40), that God will, if he so please, give us
some external indication, or else such strength of internal conviction as will assure us
what his will is; only in such cases we must be careful to make our request conditional
on its being acceptable to him, and we must be ready, if it be not granted, to act in the
matter to the best of our ability on such light as is vouchsafed us.

Il. Iv 1s wrone To ASK FoR A SIGN. 1. In a captious spirit, with an intention to
cavil at it, and (if possible) not accept it. This was the condition of mind of the
Pharisees, who would not have believed even had Christ come down from the cross
before their eyes, as they asked him to do (Matt. xxvii. 42). 2. When we have already
had abundant signs given us, and there is no reasonable ground for doubt or hesitation
as to our duty. This was the case of those Jews who still “required a sign” (1 Cor. i.
22) after the Resurrection and Ascension. 8. When we ask for it merely to gratify our
curiosity, as Herod Antipas just before the Crucifixion (Luke xxiii. 8). 4. When we
arbitrarily fix on our own sign, and determine to reyard the result, whatever it be, as a
sign from heaven. This is the case of those who choose to decide a practical matter by
sortes Virgilianee, or sortes Biblicee, or any other appeal to chance. They are not
entitled to ask God for signs of this kind, or to regard such signs as significant of his
will. To trust to them is not faith, but superstition.


Ver. 14.—Jesus our Immanuel. I. REASONS FOR BELIEVING THIS. 1. None but
Jesus was ever born of a pure virgin. 2. None but Jesus was ever “God with us.”
3. None but Jesus ever knew truly “to refuse the evil and choose the good.”

Il. Durres FLOWING FROM THE BELIEF, 1. If Jesus is ‘God with us,” we must
obey him. 2. lf Jesus is “God with us,” we must trust him. 3. If Jesus is
“God with us,” we must strive to imitate him. 4. If Jesus is “ God with us,” we
must continually worship and pray to him. 5. If Jesus is “God with us,” we must
love him.

III. Docrrines INCLUDED IN THE BELIEF. 1. The Divinity of Christ, since he is
“God with us.” 2, His humanity, since he is conceived and born of a woman, and
eats earthly food. 38. His love and pardoning grace, since he is “‘ wth us,” not against
us; on our side, not our adversary. 4, His atonement for our sins, since without
atonement he could not pardon.


Vers, 17—20.— Our pleasant vices whips for our own backs. Ahaz has made up his
mind to “hire” the keen razor that lies beyond the far waters of the Euphrates, in
Mesopotamia and Assyria Proper. He means to meet the danger which he sees to be
impending, by his own wisdom and in his own strength. His ally, Tiglath-Pileser, “ the
creat king, the King of Assyria ” (2 Kings xviii. 28), shall crush the hosts of Pekah and
Rezin, save Judah and Jerusalem from harm, nay, perhaps exalt Judah to the position’
which was his before Israel revolted under Jeroboam. But God has decreed otherwise.
He will endorse Ahaz’s scheme to a certain extent; he will employ the sword of Tiglath-
Pileser to destroy Rezin (2 Kings xvi.9) and chastise Pekah (‘ Records of the Past,’
vol. v. p. 52); but he will then make him a scourge to chastise Ahaz himself. The
razor hired by Ahaz shall shave Judza as clean as Samaria, exhausting the land utterly,
and leaving it with comparatively few inhabitants. Ahaz shall find that he is not
really “ helped” by his ally, but only “ distressed” and injured (2 Chron. xxviii, 20, 21).
In all this we have a specimen of one of the ordinary modes in which God works out
his will, He “hoists us with our own petard,” scourges us with the whip which we
have ourselves made for another purpose. Ambition brings men into places where they
are fain to cry, “ Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.” Avarice indulged makes
them grudge themselves the slightest enjoyment. Successful plotting deprives them of
all feeling of security, putting their lives and liberties into the power of those who may
at any time betray them. ‘he attainment of the highest position at which they have
ever aimed leaves them a prey to ennud and disappointment. Rebekah’s plan for the
advancement of her favourite son succeeds; but it deprives her of her son’s society for
a great nart of her life. Absalom’s rebellion against David raises him to the throne.
but brings him to an untimely end within a few months. Judas carries out his scheme
of betrayal with complete success, and in consequence of his success hangs himself, In


CH. vil. 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 133
°


our youth we forge those fetters of habit which make us miserable in our old age. We
plan, and scheme, and build castles, and laboriously achieve the accomplishment of our
plans to a certain extent, with the result that we are utterly dissatisfied, and would like
to pull all down and begin again. “Our mischief falls on our own head, and our wicked-
ness ou our own pate ” (Ps. vii. 16). God turns our wisdom into foolishness, and crushes
us beneath the structures that our own hands have erected.


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS,


Vers. i—9.—The prophet comforts the king. I. Tue PoLrTIcAL ouTLOOK. The
kings and chieftains of Palestine were in dread of the great Assyrian power. Under the
weak rule of Ahaz Judah had sunk very low, and the King of Damascus, with the King
of Ephraim, thiuk it a favourable opportunity to attack the little kingdom, and so
strengthen themselves against the Assyrians, “ Far down to the gulf of Akaba the
shock of invasion was felt. Elath, the favourite seaport of Jehoshaphat and Uazziah, was
made over to the Edomites” (2 Kings xvi. 6; xv. 37). Jerusalem was now threatened,
and a usurper was to be placed on David’s throne (ver. 6).

Il. THE ALARM OF THE ROYAL FAMILY. (Ver. 2.) News is brought to the palace
“ Aram encampeth in Ephraim; ” the junction of the forces of Syria and Israel had
taken place. A shivering fear, like the wind swaying the trees of the forest, passed
over their hearts. The court went forth to inspect the fortifications and the water-
works, and came to “ the end of the conduit of the upper reservoir, upon the path to
the fuller’s field ”—a well-known spot (cf. ch. xxxvi. 2; 2 Kings xviii.).

Ill. Tue Meetine wits Isataug. At this spot the prophet, with his son, stood before
them. It seems that by Divine intimation the prophet bad called the boy Shear-Jashub,
which means “ Remnant-shall-be-converted,” reminding us of the hope of his calling
(ch. vi.). He would look upon the boy as a living pledge, not only of conjual affection,
but of Divine promise for a nobler Israel. See how he dwells upon the thought in
oh, Se Hee, Inspired by this confidence, he now addresses the king.

IV. Comrort FOR THE FAINT-HEARTED. “Take heed, and be quiet; fear not, and
be not faint-hearted.” A calm, collected mind is a match for any danger. Agitation
and fear magnify the ill; stout resolve reduces it to its true proportions, The worst
is ever in our own fancy.

“Some of your hurts you have cured,
And the sharpest you still have survived}
But what torments of grief you endured
From evils which never arrived!”


The timid king sees a fiery mass of war rolling towards him; the stout heart of the
prophet contemptuously defies the two kings as “two stumps of smoking firebrands.”
If we would comfort men, we must, like the prophet, tell them to draw upon the resources
God has placed in the soul: intelligence, prudence, self-reliance, and self-help. There
is no true self-trust which is not at the same time a trust in God.

TV. THE DEEPEST SOURCE OF STRENGTH AND comFortT. What are the heads of the
Syrian power and of Isracl’s power against Judah’s Head, the Lord? Damascus and
Samaria will rear their fronts in vain against Jerusalem, if Jerusalem only trust in
Jehovah. (Ewald supposes that the words, “ Judah’s head is Jerusalem, and Jerusalem’s
head is Jehovah,” have fallen out of the text, ver. 9.) Only have confidence. There
is a play upon words in the original which we might represent in English by: “ Fear not,
fail not ;” or, “ Firmin faith is free from scathe ; ” or, “If ye confide not, abide ye shall
not.” 1. Confidence, presence of mind, is a duty in times of danger. 2. It may be gained,
if we will fall back upon God as our Leader and Defence, “ ‘he Lord is on my side: I
will not fear what men shall do unto me.”—J.


Vers. 10—17.—Faith triumphing over doubt, Faith in the Eternal personified in
the prophet, to whom all things desirable are to be hoped for, all things to be hoped for
are possible ; and distrust, the weakness of mere flesh and _ blood, represented in the
timid Ahaz. Such is the illusion of appearances. The.outwardly kingly man is the
coward; the real king of men is the plain-looking prophet.


134 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAIL, (cH. vm. 1—25,


I. THE CHALLENGE oF FAITH. In the Name of Jehovah, Isaiah bids the king ask a
sign from above—a sign “ going deep down to hell or high into heaven.” Truth should
be its own evidence to every mind; intuition is better than proof. Isaiah has seen and
listened to Gud in the depths of his own spirit, and no sign in the air above or in the
earth beneath can give him more assurance than he already possess:s. Would any man
but listen and look, he should find the shrine, the oracle, the Shechinah, in his own
heart. Within that awful volume of the heart, it may be said, lies the mystery of
mysteries. Yet not to all is it given to read therein clearly; all other reading, even in
dead tongues, is easier.

“ Happiest they of human race
To whom our God has granted grace
To read, to fear, to hope, to pray,
To lift the latch and force the way !”


The duller eye, untrained to such visions, needs the large bold characters of the visible
sign. ‘‘ It comes in with its palpable meaning to aid human weakness. The prophets
complaineu of the craving for signs, yet were compelled to comply with it. Men trust
their senses more than they trust the ghostly and majestic shape of abstract truth ; and
the appeal to the ear, as the Roman poet said, produces but a sluggish movement in
the mind compared with the appeal to the faithful eye. We must all confess ourselves
weak ; needing to see before we can believe, instead of believing that we may see. Yet
such incidents as this may remind us that there is a Spirit to help our infirmities, and
restore its poise to the mind unhinged by doubt. When Midian threatened Israel in
the days of old, God’s voice was heard by Gideon: ‘‘ The Lord is with thee, thou mighty
man of valour.” Yet the heart of the hero still quailed. ‘“‘O my Lord, if the Lord be
with us, why then is all this befallen us ? and where be all his miracles which our fathers
told us of ?” (Judg. vi. 12, sgg.). Again the voice came: “ Goand save Israel : have not
I sent thee?” And again the diffident reply: “O my Lord, wherewith shall I save
Israel? behold, my family is poor, and I am the least in my father’s clan.” Then the
sign is asked for_and granted; the fire, bursting from the rock, consumes Gideon’s
offering. God, in the strength of an almtghty wisdom, “reasons~togcther” with men.
In our day it is equally hard to “hold on and hope hard in the subtle thing called
spirit ;” and we crave as urgently for signs, though not of the same kind.

II. THe Excuse or mistrust. ‘The king alleges that he dare not “ tempt Jehovah.”
True, this was a deep reproach of old against Israel’s temper. At Rephidim, in the wil-
derness, Moses sti-matized the demand of the people for water by this phrase, “Is the
Lord among us or not?” (Exod. xvii. 2). There lay the canker of guilty scepticism.
In a general way the same thing is seen in our time, in the impatient demand
that the difficulties of the great problem of the universe shall be cleared up to our
private satisfaction. Who gave us the right thus to interrogate and cross-examine him
whose works, as a whole, witness to his goodness and love? God did not copy our puny
schemes in this construction; nor does he manage the universe as we manage a business,
a1. expedition, the government of a state. ‘ Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God,”
means—You shall not weigh him in the scales of your finite intelligence, nor call upon
lim to execute your wishes as if they were the same as his holy will. So difficult is
it to distinguish the plea of honesty and humility from that of dishonesty and disbelief,
it looks as if Ahaz might be right, and Isaiah wrong; the latter too bold, the former more
reverent. Scripture may be made to mean anything and everything; the right heart
alone reads the right meaning for particular time, place, and person. While it is the
mark of presumption to “tempt God,” it is the symptom of unbelief when proffered
light and help are refused.

Ill. Tue perseVeERANCE OF FAITH. With a rebuke of the king’s spirit, charging him
in effect with despising the goodness and tending to weary the patience of God, the
prophet proceeds with his unasked-for message. What are we to learn from the expres-
sion, “ wearying God”? All such poetical figures of Scripture have their deep meaning,
To despise the riches of God’s forbearance, to grieve his Spirit, to quench his Spirit,
—tbese are ways of pointing out and stigmatizing that indifference and Sarena i
the true and Divine which may be a worse symptom than open hostility. We may
either neglect to ask Divine guidance, we may disobey it when we have it intimated,
we may refuse its proffer. Perhaps this last state of mind is the worst, It shows


cH, vi. 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 135
a a es ee


the heart to be already prepossessed and biassed. Ahaz was, in fact, under the influence
of his false prophets and svothsayers. But why should he decline to hear at least what
Isaiah had to sav? He shonld have recoguized that there were “two sides” in the
great question at issue. Ahaz then warns us against listening to ew parte counsels. He
who will only attend to the flattering echoes of his own wishes, is like him who trusteth
in his own heart and who proves a fool. From Isaiah, azain, the lesson comes back of
faithful perseverance in our word and work, in spite of indifference, which threatens to
blunt our edge and paralyze our energy. When a matter is on the conscience, let it
come forth, “ whether men will hear or whether they will forbear.” We calculate
consequences too much; and while few have the courage to risk danger by preaching
unwelcome truth, perhaps fewer still have the faith in its worth to iusist on pressing it
upon reluctant ears.

IV. ‘THE sien From Jenovan. 1. It will be of mixed import. Partly it will confirm
previous expectation, and partly it will intimate what had not been expected, It
proclaims a happy event which Ahaz had not looked for, but also a calamity which
he might have averted had he possessed greater faith and truth. Mysteriously, our
wishes or fears have some creative influence on our future. ‘ Omens follow those who
look to them,” whether for good or evil.

“Man is his own star; and the soul that can
Render a perfect and an honest man,
Commands all] light, all influence, and all fute;
Nothing to him falls early or too late.
Our acts our angels are, or good or ill,
Our fatal shadows that walk by us still.”
(Beaumont and Fletcher.)


2. The Immanuel. Ina “dark saying” the prophet opens his mouth. “Lo! héalmah”
(the maiden, she who is no longer a girl, nor yet an old woman) “ will conceive, and
bear a son, and then call his name With-ws-God.” Time is thus hinted at; it will be
soon, perhaps in a year’s time. Also the certainty and the joy of deliverance, as the
boy’s name betokens. It is the very rallying cry of Israel : “ God with us.” We must
have a watchword in every noble cause, that shall condense its purport and sound the
tocsin to every trne aspiration and energy within. So the Crusaders shouted “ Dieu le
veut!” atthe preaching of Peter the Hermit; so were English warriors heartened in the
olden days by the cry of “ England and St. George!” Notice how this phrase echoes
and re-echoes—“ Immanuel, God-with-us ”—in ch. viii. 8, 10 (cf. ch. ix.6). Every great
man raised up from time to time among us in politics, in religion, to deliver, to lead,
to counsel, is, in his way, an heroic reflection of Israel’s Messiah, To prophetic faith
and hope a Messiah, a Deliverer, is ever at the doors. If the Eternal lives and reigns,
and fulfils himself by the agency of men, we need not fear that when the hour strikes,
the hero, with all the credentials of his anointing, will appear. 3. Speedy help.
“ Jehovah shall help thee, and that right early,” is a chronic promise. When the boy
is approaching years of maturity and of judgment, his food will be curds and honey ;
that is, before he comes to manhood, Ephraim and Damascus will be discomfited, and
a new “golden age” will have set in. No more is known about any particular youth
of Isaiah’s time to whom the mystic prediction could refer thar is known about the
illustrious boy of Virgil’s prophetic Eclogue, who was to restore good King Saturn’s
reign (Ecl. iv.). It is a misunderstanding of the nature of prophecy when we try to fix
its forecasts to place or time. A prophecy is never fulfilled as we expect. It refers to
a world not bounded by our horizons, and to a history which does not fall into our time-
perspective. ‘lhis ideal Immanuel was destined yet to float before the pious hope of
the nation for many centuries, till it was united with the real in the person of Jesus.
4, The chastisement that must precede prosperity. The great Assyrian conquest and
the desolation it brings must come, in punisliment of the unufaithiulness of the royal
house, and the estrangement of the nation from Jehovah’s ways. It is only after long
trial in the fire and thorough regeneration that prosperity can come. It is a doubtful
picture of the future, in which rays of glory strike athwart dark masses of gloom.
Such is ever our outlook, whether for persona: history, as for Isaiah in the precedins
chapter, or for a nation, as here. Never has the hope of Christ been wanting, never
the promise of his coming died out; and never proclaimed without the intimation of


136 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [oxu. vo. 1—25.
SS ee


woes and tribulations first to come. Christ’s own forecasts of the future (see the closing
chapters of Matthew) present the like nalf-veiled, half-revealed perspective. We must
ever look out upon the coming *ime with confidence or with mistrust, according as our
hearts are stayed, like Isaiah’s, upon Jehovah, or weak, because trusting only to the arm
of flesh, or to the irrational dreams of superstition, like Ahaz.—J.


Vers. 18—25.— War-pictures, I. Invapine Hosts. The armies of Egypt and Assyria
are compared to swarms of bees. As the bee-master calls to his winged slaves with a
peculiar sound, so at the call of Jehovah the swarms of Israel’s foes will come on, with
swords that sting, and settle down in the low-lying pastures of the land, in the rock-
clefts, the hedges of thorn, and the pastures. (For the image of the bees, compare
Deut. i. 44; Ps. cxviii.) In Joel ii. we find a splendid picture of locusts as pictorial of
an invading army.

Il. Devastation. Another striking image. The land, devoured by strangers, will
be like a man clean shaven from top to toe of all his manly ornament of hair and beard.
liike a keen razor will be the sweeping penal judgment of Jehovah on the holy land.
‘Nhe rich vineyards will disappear. No pruning nor digging will go forward. Briers
and thorns, quick usurpers of the neglected corn-fields, will flourish, and the courts of
the houses will be weed-grown (cf. ch. v. 6; xxxii. 13). Here and there will be seen
a cow and a sheep or two, grazing as on a great common or desert. The farmer will
disappear, or will return to the wild nomad life, living on the produce of his few cattle
and on honey. ‘Thorns and thistles will replace the vines, and the hunter will wander
with bow and arrow where once the husbandman had been seen busy with spade or
plough. ‘The hoe will cease from its work, for, alas! with hope of fruit the “fear of
thorns and thistles” has ceased; and the ox and the sheep will find free pasture
everywhere. We have seen Landseer’s two striking pictures, “ War” and “ Peace,” in
the National Gallery, and can feel their pathus. To .ork out from peace and plenty
upon a perspective of smoke, bloudshed, and desolation is that to which the prophet
calls the king. Yet amidst the gloom appears the figure, mystically hinted, of the
‘young Messiah. And, indeed, it was in the midst of down-trodden Galilee, over which
armies had so often tramped, that Jesus appeared, and adopted the holy and comforting
mission of the Messiah as his own (Luke iv.),—J.


Ver. Oe Lasthena. fixity. “If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be estab-


‘lished.” [aitiris older than the Law. It is, in fact, the elder principle of all Divine
teachings. Believe. “For he that cometh to God must believe that he is.” Moreover,
it isa living principle. It is not a cold precept, but is vital with trust and confidence.

I, THE PROPHETIO REVELATION. It is very wonderful, and very distinct. See the
succeeding (ver. 14); “‘ Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; Behold, a
virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel.” Well, there-
‘fore, has Isaiah been called “ the evangelical prophet,” seeing that we have in his words
the revelation of an immaculate Messiah anda suffering Messiah.

Il. THe GENERAL PRINCIPLE. That we are not “established ” unless we believe is a
principle, not only of particular but of universal application, We must believe in each
other to have commerce established. Home itself is never secure without Mutual trust,
and there can be no established character in religion unless we have that faith without
which it is impossible to please God, and which gives vital energy to all other graces.

III. Tae aBsoLure conpirion. “ If ye will not believe.” Here is the responsibility
of the-soul. And doubtless weare responsible for our beliefs. We are to weigh, tu
judge, to consider, to prove all things. “Judge, I pray you,” says God in this same
Book of Isaiah (ch.v. 38), “ i vineyard.” The condition must be
absolute. It is not a threat; it is a statement o at which cannot be other than so.
If I do not believe that corn will grow, I shall not plant it. If I do not believe that
God is able and willing to save, I shall not be amongst those who believe to the saving
of their souls, If 1 do not believe that spiritual aid will be given to perfect my graces,
at naan pray for it. “ If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be esvablished,”—


Vers. 1—9.— The establishing power of faith. The practical force of this prophetic


oH. vi. 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 187
a a a


utterance is found in the final words of it: “If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not
be established” (ver. 9). We may see in them a declaration expressly personal.
They intimate to Ahaz that if he, the present King of Judah, does not put his faith in
the minister and in the message of the Lord, his kingdom and his power will suffer
loss, 1. His faith was sorely tried. ‘‘ His heart was moved as the trees of the wood by
the wind” when he heard that two powerful monarchs were confederate against him
(vers, 1,2). It required no little faith to accept, without reserve, the assurances of Isaiah
(vers. 4—9), 2. But he had solid ground on which to build his hope. The history of
his country should have made it perfectly practicable to believe that, whatever the
Lord had decided upon, all the hosts of heathendom would be unable to withstand.
3. His human fears proved too strong for his religious convictions, 4. The prophet
warned him that with the failure of his faith would come material loss. This minatory
prediction was only too painfully fulfilled. Elath, a port on the Red Sea, was lost to
the kingdom (2 Kings xvi. 6); great numbers of the people were slaughtered (2 Chron.
xxviii. 6); many captives were carried away (2 Chron. xxviii. 8); Judah became
tributary to Assyria (2 Kings xvi. 8, 9). “The Lord brought Judah low because
of Ahaz” (2 Chron. xxviii. 19). He was not established; he was enfeebled and
humiliated.

The lesson which the passage, particularly these final words, conveys to us is this,
that WHEN FAITH FAILS, POWER DEPARTS; that faith is the one sustaining power which
will establish us in the spiritual position to which we have attained. We look, therefore,
at this broad principle applicable to every one. 1. As Christian men we enjoy an
excellent estate. We are “kings and priests unto God;” we are made to “sit in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus.” “ Now are we the sons of God,” and all the joys and
privileges of sonship are ours. 2. But our position is threatened by powerful adver-
saries. There come up against us tne foes of our race—worldly allurements, fleshly
indulgences, incitements co spiritual pride and unbelief, temptations to fall into selfish-
ness or into untruthfulness, etc. 3. Only a living faith will uphold us in our integrity.
We must have the faith which (1) enables us to realize the nearness of the living God ;
(2) makes spiritual realities and successes seem to our souls the great things they
are; (3) brings near to our hearts the future world, with its judgment and its reward ;
(4) calls down from above, by believing prayer, Divine direction and support. Without
this living faith, we may expect the evemy to overcome us; with it, we may hope to
be established in our high and blest estate-—C.


Vers. 10—13.—Sin and duty in regard to “signs.” The passage is interesting for
this among other reasons, that Ahaz is charged with guilt for declining that course the
resort to which became the national sin (1 Cor. i. 22), and for using words which were
afterwards employed by the Saviour himself in repelling the attack of the evil one
(Matt. iv. 7). We are, therefore, reminded—

I, THAT THE WORTH OR UNWORTHINESS OF AN ACTION DEPENDS LARGELY ON ITS
ATTENDANT CONDITIONS. The Jews who sought a sign from Christ were rebuked by
nim for so doing (Matt. xii. 38, 39). Ahaz is reproved for not asking for one on this
occasion. The circumstances of the two cases made all the difference. In the case of
the Phariseés, abundant miraculous evidence had already been granted, and they
demanded a work of a particular kind after their own fancy; in the case of Ahaz, he
deliberately refused the special privilege which God offered him. That which is right
and wise under certain circumstances may be wrong and foolish under others. Many
things which are proper to youth are improper to age, and vice versd ; language which is
devotion on the lips of the half-enlightened would be irreverence in the mouth of the -
children of privilege. Clearly instructed by God, the Israelites were simply obedient
and courageous when they expelled the Canaanites from the country and occupied
their land, but an invasion of another’s territory and expulsion or slaughter of its
inhabitants without such express authority from above would be a crime of the greatest
magnitude; etc.

Il. THAT WE DO WELL TO SHRINK HONESTLY AND EARNESTLY FROM TEMPTING Gop.
Honestly ; for an insincere profession of doing so is of no account. Ahaz probably used this
as a mere pretext with which to cover his real unwillingness to have the will of God
unmistakably revealed. And earnestly ; for to tempt God is.a serious sin and a calami-


138 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, (cn. vit. 1—25.


tous mistake. We do tempt him when we neglect our duty as citizens of this world
or as travellers to eternity, or when we deliberately run great risks, whether bodily
or spiritual, unwarrautably presuming on God’s interposing power or inexhaustible
grace, i

II]. THav we SHOULD GRATEFULLY ACCEPT THE LOWER AS WELL AS THE HIGHER
INFLUENCES wuHicH Gop orrERs us. A sign such as Jehovah offered Ahaz was a
privilege of a lower order than the exhortation of his servant Isaiah, A miracle
which appeals to the senses and the imagination is not so high and pure an influence
as a sacred truth which appeals to the conscience and the reason. Yet it had its
own value, and was not to be disregarded or declined. We should fear God, should
exercise faith in Jesus Christ, should serve our race, first and most because it is our
sacred duty so to do; but we may well be animated and impelled by other and less
lofty considerations—by the fear of offending God, by the hope of gaining his favour
and his reward, by a desire to win the gratitude of those we serve, by a wish to please
those to whom we are related. The superfine purity which will not be moved by any
but the very highest considerations does not suit our human nature, and is not sanctioned
in the Divine Word.

IV. THAT THE PATIENCE OF A LONG-SUFFERING GOD MAY BE OUTWORN BY OUR
PERVERSITY. “ Will ye weary my God also?” (ver. 13). Much is saidin Scripture of
the patience of God. He is “slow to anger, and of great mercy” (Ps. cxlv. 8). We
read of “the riches of his forbearance and long-suffering ” (Rom. ii. 4). And they who
are honestly trying to please and serve him may count on his cousiderateness, though
their efforts be imperfect and their mistakes be many. But they who pertinaciously
refuse his yoke, and stubbornly go on their own way when he is calling them to walk
in his paths, may find that it is only too possible to ‘‘ weary him also,” and to bring
down irreparable evil on their souls—C.


Ver. 14.—The presence of God. We naturally ask the question—In what ways is
God our “ Immanuel;” in what respect is he one of whom we can say that he is
“ God with us;” how and where is his presence to be found and to be felt ? There are
many answers to this question; there is—

I. THE ANSWER OF SACRED POETRY. That the presence of God is seen in the results
of his Divine handiwork, in the foundations and pillars of the earth, in the ‘“ meanest
flower that blows,” in the varied forms of life; that it only needs a true imagination to
see him in all the objects and scenes of his creative power; that “every bush’s afire
with God, but only he who sees takes off his shoes.”

II, THE ANSWER OF PHILOSOPHY. That his presence is in all-surrounding nature, in
which he is immanent ; that though all nature does not include Deity, the Divine
power is present in all things, sustaining, energizing, renewing; the “laws of nature ”
are the regular activities of Gud.

III. THE ANSWER OF NATURAL RELIGION. That he is with us in his omnipresent
and observant Spirit; that he fills immensity with his presence, being everywhere and
observing everything, and taking notice of every human soul; that the Infinite One is
he who cannot be absent from any sphere or be ignorant of any action.

IV, THE ANSWER OF THE EARLIER REVELATION. ‘That hin presence is in his over-
ruling providence ; that God is with us, not only “ besetting us behind and before,”
not only “understanding our thought afar off,” but also “laying his hand upon us,”
directing our course, ordering our steps (Ps. xxxvii. 23), making }lain our path before
our face, causing all things to work together for our good, defending us in danger,
delivering us from trouble, establishing us in life and strength and joy (see Gen.
xxxix. 2; 1 Sam. iii. 19; xviii. 12; 2 Kings xviii. 7; Matt. xxviii. 20).

V. THE ANSWER OF THE LATER REVELATION. That his presence was in his Divine
Son. ‘The time came when the words of the text proved to have indeed “a springing
aud germinant fulfilment; ” for a virgin did conceive, and bring forth a Son, and he was
the “Immanuel” of the human race, God with us—that One who dwelt amongst us
and could say, “He that hath seen me hath seen the Father.” They who walked with
him and watched his life, and who understood and appreciated him, recognized the
spirit, the character, the life, of God himself. lu his mind were the thoughts, in his
words the truth, in his deeds the principles, in his death the love, in his mission the


OH. VIL, 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 139


purpose, of God. When “Jesus was here among men,” God was with us as never
before, as never since.

VI. THE aNswER OF OUR OWN consciousNess, That his presence is in and through
his Holy Spirit. God is with us because in us; present, therefore, in the deepest, truest,
most potent, and influential of all ways and forms; in us, enlightening our minds,
subduing our wills, enlarging our hearts, uplifting our souls, strengthening and sancti-
fying our spiritual nature. Then, indeed, is he nearvst to us when he comes unto
us and makes his abode with us, and thus “dwells in us and we in him.” Our
duty, which is our privilege, is (1) to realize, increasingly, the nearness of the living
God ; (2) to rejoice, practically, in the coming of God to man in the presence of the
virgin-born Immanuel; (3) to gain, by believing prayer, the presence of the Divine
Spirit in the sanctuary of our own soul.—C,


Vers. 17—25.—Divine retribution. The reference of these verses is clear]y national! ;
nevertheless they may be pointed so as to bear upon individual men ; for we may be
sure that it is on the same principles on which God governs communities that he rules
the beart aud life of each one of his subjects. We gather concerning Divine retri-
bution—

I. THAT IT MAY BE WROUGHT BY VARIOUS INSTRUMENTALITIES. 1. Sometimes by
unconscivus instruments, (1) lt may be, as here, by men acting blindly. Exzyy;t and
Assyria wonld be wholly unaware that they were employed by God to do his punitive
work. It often happens that men suppose themselves to be simply seeking their own
ends when they are really fulfilling the purpose of the Most Hizh. (2) Or it more fre-
quently is by the regular action of physical or social laws, 2. Sometimes by conscious
agents, As when the parent utters his strong displeasure in the Name of the heavenly
Father, or the Church passes its sentence of reproach or exclusion in the Name of the
Divine Master,

Il. THAT IT MAY TAKE ONE OR MORE OF VARIOUS FORMS. Retribution may assume
the form of: 1. Diminution. (Vers. 21—23.) All diminution is not directly caused by
sin, but sin always tends to despoil ana to diminish. The result of dving wrong is to
come down from the higher estate to the lower, from power to feebleness, from
eminence to obscurity, from influence to nothingness. 2. Dishonour. ‘It shall also
consume the beard” (ver. 20). Whev men have long persisted in folly and in trans-
gression they become the mark of general dishonour. From qualified respect down,
through all stages of ill opinion, to absolute aversion and contempt, does sin conduct
its victims. Sin may start in lofty defiance, but it ends in lowest shame. 3. Deyra-
dation. (Vers. 24, 25.) The country that was once cultivated by the hand of skilful
diligence is left to yield the wretched and useless crop of “ briers and thorns.” The
mind that once produced noble thoughts now yields guilty imaginations; the heart
that was once full of holy love is now crowded with unworthy passions; the spirit
that once soared heavenward with lofty hopes now circles round ignoble aims and
ambitions that are of earth and sense; the life which once brought forth all honourable
and admirable activities has nothing to offer now but selfish schemes or even deeds of


darkness.—C.


Vers. 1, 2.— National calamity with God and without God. The historical circum-
stances connected with this and the following two chapters throw light on tlie object
and meaning of the prophecy. At the close of Jotham’s reign, both the neighbouring
nations of Israel and of Syria invaded the country of Judah, wasting and desolating it.
Now, in the beginning of the reign of Ahaz, they agreed to unite their forces, and x0)
they hoped to take even the chief city, dethrone the reigning king, and partition the
land between them. News of this confederacy reached Ahaz, and produced the
utmost consternation and bewilderment both in him and in the people of Jerusalem.
Hurried efforts were made to furtily the citv, and especially to secure the water-stores,
on which their ability to stand a siege so directly depended. Plans were also formed
to secure the help of the King of Assyria, though tue price of such help would too
surely be the loss of national independence, and the payment of tribute to Assyria.
In those degenerate days few people even thought of secking help from Jehovah, the
wighty God of their fathers. While busy, inspecting the waterworks, and probably


140 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (ca. vi. 1—25,


filled with new anxiety on finding them neglected and out of repair, Ahaz sees the
prophet of Jehovah approach. Isaiah’s message is full of mercy and encouragement.
He would quiet the unreasoning and unreasonable fears of the king; he speaks
slightingly of Rezin and Pekah, as only two tails of smoking firebrands, whose
strength is almost spent; they can only smoke, not biaze, and their kingdoms are
hasting to decay. He bids the king not to think for a moment of leaning on Assyria,
but to trust in the living God. He graciously offers, in God’s Name. a sign for the
confirming of his faith, bidding Ahaz even choose such a one as he felt would con-
vince him. The king stubbornly refuses; and then Isaiah gives one, after sternly
rebuking the false humility of the king. The sign is a figurative and poetical assur-
ance that, within some three or four years, the power of his present enemies would be
utterly broken. And then mercy passes into judgment, and the prophet sternly reveals
the consequences that will follow any leaning upon Assyria. In the text we have a
state of public affairs that might well cause alarm, and we dwell on the spirit in which
times of national peril may and should be met.

I, NaTIONAL CALAMITY WITHOUT THOUGHT oF Gop THE OVERRULER. Just this
we have in the historical connection of the text. Viewed politically, there were grave
and perilous complications. Assyria was pushing its way towards the Mediterranean,
Syria and Israel were in its way. Instead of resisting their more serious Hastern foe,
they confederated to injure the small country of Judah, which blocked their way
southwards towards Egypt. Rezin had seized Elath, Judah’s great commercial port
on the Red Sea, and Pekah had overrun the territory of Judah. There was a general
panic. King and people alike asked—How could they resist this combination of the
neighbouring countries against them? A great fear possessed the king, and drove him
to the most impolitic action he could possibly take. Having no sense of reliance on
God, consciously severed by his wilfulness from God, he sought alliance with Assyria,
and brought ruin on himself and his neighbour-foes. The figure of the trees waving
to and fro confusedly in the wind, is expressive of the man who is not stayed on God,
but left to the uncertainties of a judgment based only on circumstances,

Il. NATIONAL CALAMITY WITH THE THOUGHT OF Gop THE OvERRULER. This is
the contrast suggested in the passage. If Ahaz had been a God-fearing man, how
differently he would have looked on these circumstances! If he had heen a David, or
a Jehoshaphat, or a Hezekiah, a man with the fear of God before his eyes, he would
have met the perilous conditions with calmness, and seen in them an occasion for (1)
special prayer; (2) renewed dependence; (3) and the testing of the sincerity of his
trust ; (4) also a call to watching for the Divine will; (5) and the requirement to set
himself in an attitude of obedience, ready at once, and heartily, to follow the Divine
lead. Apply to modern complexities of party politics and international complications,
as well as to times of national calamity, by disease, or by depressed trade. Show
what a vantage-ground he occupies who believes in God as the God of nations, looks
for his providential rulings and overrulings, and knows that he “makes the wrath of
man praise him, and restrains the remainder of that wrath.” Show how quiet a nation
may be when it knows that national polity is directed in the fear of him who must be
called the “‘ God of the whole earth.”—R. T.


Ver. 7.—Man proposes, God disposes, Recalling the scheme at which Rezin and
Pekah had been so busy, arranging everything so cleverly, and making so sure of a
speedy and triumphant success, Jehovah, sovereign Ruler and Judge, looks from above
upon it all, and says of it, “It shall not stanu, neither shall it be.” “The plan shall
not even take practical shape, much less would it achieve a permanent success.” “They
should neither of them, Syria nor Israel, enlarge their dominions nor push their cons
quests any further; they shall be made to know their own; their bounds are fixed,
and they shall not pass them” (Matthew Henry).

I, Tue LImiTs or MAN’s FREEDOM. He is (1) free to think; (2) free to jucge; (8)
free to plan. There is a sense in which man has dominion over the world in which he is
set, and over the circumstances in which he is placed. God, ina sense, put man, separate
from himself, in the garden of this world, and stands aloof to see what he will do.
Man has the trust of (1) intelligence, so that he may estimate things and the relations
of things; (2) free-will, so that he may choose his course of action, But it is limited


oH, vit, 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 141)
——


intelligence—limited (a) by brain-capacity ; (6) educational opportunity; (c) conditions
of health ; (@) surrounding prejudices; (e) measures and degrees of Divine revelation,
And it is carefully circumscribed free-will—graciously limited because man’s decisions
are‘constantly made upon (a) imperfect knowledge, and (b) upon impulses of biassed
feeling. The will of man is also limited by the condition of its accordance with the
supreme will of God. Man can plan, purpose, and propose; but there he must stop
until he can gain Divine permission to carry out his plans. If he dares to force his
plans into action against God, he will surely find that he does but run “upon the
bosses of Jehovah’s buckler.” Who hath ever resisted God and prospered ?

II, THE ILLIMITABLE CHARACTER OF Gop’s conTRoL. ‘There is the firmest and
most peremptory tone in this declaration, “It shall not stand.” Affirming his authority
over all nations, the Lord of hosts says, “ Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the
work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance ” (ch. xix. 25). God controls (1) the
minds that plan; (2) the bodies that execute; (3) the spheres and circumstances in
which the plan is to be worked. Watching everything, God has the arresting hand,
and can say, “ Thus far shalt thou go, and no further.”—R. T.


Ver. 9.—The faith-condition. “If ye bave no faith, verily ye shall not have con-
tinuance ” (Cheyne’s translation). “If ye hold not fast, verily ye shall not stand fast.”
See the expression illustrated in Jehoshaphat, when going out to meet the army of the
Moabites and Ammonites (2 Chron. xx. 20). Habakkuk gives the same sentiment
in his familiar expression, “The just shall live by his faith.” Faith in him and in
his Word is the one universal condition that God demands, and righteously demands,
in view (1) of what he is; (2) of what he is in relation to us; and (8) of what he has
already done for his people, in the experience of which we have shared. God’s law for
creatures dependent on him is, “Trust me.” God’s grace for his creatures is,
“Response to trust.” He unfolds his best blessings to those who can both trust and
hope in him. The demand for faith, as the condition of receiving Divine blessings,
may be traced in the Divine dealings with men through all the ages and dispensations.

I, Gop REQUIRED FAITH IN THE PATRIARCHS. Enoch was translated as a response
to a life of faith; Noah was saved from the flood because he believed; Abraham’s
faith was ‘‘ counted for righteousness.” They all “died in faith.” The glory on their
lives is the shining of God’s acceptance given to men of faith.

II. GoD REQUIRED FAITH IN THE IsRAELITES. For forty years he was teaching
them the trust-lesson. And if the Divine reproaches and reprovals and chastisements
could be gathered up into a sentence, they would read thus: “ You will not trust me
wholly.” ‘The Lord said unto Moses, How long will this people despise me? and how
long will they not believe, for all the signs which I have showed among them ?” (Numb.
xiv.11). Those Israelites “ could not enter in because of their unbelief” (Heb. iii. 19).

III. Gop REQUIRED FAITH IN THE TIME OF THE KINGS. ‘This was the one demand
made in God’s Name by the prophets; and striking illustrative incidents may be found
in the mission of Elijah, and in the reigns of Asa, Jehoshaphat, and Hezekiah.

IV. GoD REQUIRED FAITH WHEN SPEAKING TO MEN THROUGH CHRIST. Illustrate
(1) his effort to secure faith in sufferers before he healed them ; and (2) his reproaches of
his disciples, again and again saying to them, “O ye of little faith!” “ How is it that
ye have no faith?” Impress that this is God’s necessary condition still, and for us.
‘Whence proceed sterility and unfruitfulness in the knowledge of Christ, and inefficiency
to good works, and the life of righteousness? The answer is—We have not “ faith,
even asa grain of mustard seed.”—R. T.


Ver. 12.— True and false humility. We are to understand that Ahaz had already
made up his mind to resort to Assyria for help; probably he had even already sent his
ambassadors to Tiglath-Pileser, and he would not be deterred from his purpose by any
promise or threatening of Jehovah’s. But he dissembled, and tried to get out of his
difficulty by hypocritically pretending that he was deterred from asking a sign by #
religious fear of tempting the Lord. His words sound as if he were humble and’
reverent ; his heart was strong in its self-willed purposes. He says, “‘ Neither will 1
tempt the Lord,” as if it could be a tempting of God to do that which God directed
and invited him todo. Remember that, in such passages as this, the word “ tempt”


142 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. vi. 1—26.


means, “ Put God to the test, as if yon doubted him.” Dr. Kay, in ‘Speaker’s Com-
mentary,’ says, “In his estranzement of heart Ahaz had come to look on God as his
enemy, ax a dangerous person who was thwarting him in his most cherished plans, and
from whom, therefore, it were best to stand entirely aloof. If he should ask a sign
and it were to be granted him, would he not be bound by his own act and deed to
confess the greatness of his past sins, to give up his politic plans for the future, to
submit to the bonds and fetters of the old cycle of religious teaching from which he
had shaken himself free?” Can we find some searching test by which true humility
can be di-tinguished from false? (It is assumed that humility is explained and enforced
as the proper attitude for man to take, and spirit for man to cherish, in the presence
of God.

MG, Toe HUMILITY SUBMITS AND oBEYs. If Ahaz had been truly humble, he would
have responded at once to the Divine invitation. Illustrate from Moses shrinking from
obedience to the commands which Gud gave him. True humility will always say,
“Tf God has called me to do anything, J must do it; I can do it, and I may be quite
sure his grace will be with me for the doing.” True humility is bold unto obedience.

II. Fase HUMILITY SUBMITS, BUT DOES NOT oBEY. ‘This is precisely the attitude
of Ahaz. He submits; he takes the humble posture; he speaks the humble words;
but he does not obey. His humility is but hypocrisy. Bishop Hall says, “ Art
imitates nature, and the nearer it cones to nature in its effects, it is the more excellent,
Grace is the new nature of a Christian, and hypocrisy that art that counterfeits it; and
the more exquisite it is in imitation it is the more plausible to men, but the more
abominable to God. It may frame a spiritual man in image so to the life that not only
others, but even the hypocrite himself, may admire it, and, favouring his own artifice,
may be deceived so far as to say and to think it lives, and fall in love with it; but he
is no less abhorred by the Searcher of hearts than pleasing to himself.” And Matthew
Henry says, “ A secret disaffection to God is often disguised with the specious colours
of respect to him; and those who are resulved that they will not trust God yet pretend
that they will not tempt him,” It may be impressed that the truly humble man is
more jealous of God’s honour than of his own, and therefore promptly submits and
obeys; but the man who is not really humble is anxious about his own honour, and
only makes a show of being jealous of God’s, Ahaz needed this counsel, and so do we:
“ Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you
in due time.” And the greatest test of this great grace is—Does it lead its possessor to
follow and obey ?—R. T.


Vers. 14—16.—The nature of the Messiante prophecies. This being the first in the
Book of Isaiah recognized as Messianic, the general subject may be illustrated in con-
nection with it. Isaiah here gives a sign. Looking upon some woman in the king’s
presence who at the time was a virgin, he, in effect, says, “You shall know that
Jehovah is the living God, and the all-sufficient Helper of his people, by this.—Before
this woman can bear a son, and that son grow old enough to know good from evil,
your land shall be delivered, and your enemies overthrown.” Many Christian inter-
preters see in this a direct reference to Messiah, as the Virgin’s Son; a reference which
makes them quite indifferent to the connection of the passage with events then tran-
spiring. ‘There are some cases in which we must admit that the prediction almost
wholly concerns the Messiah. It is nearly impossible to exhaust ch. liii., for instance,
by any local and historical references. But in most cases we shall find that the
Messianic meaning of the passage is its second reference, its inner and less evident
teaching. The words immediately relate to some existing condition or national pros-
pects, and through these they have to reveal the higher truth. We ought not to be
surprised at this; we should rather expect it, as in perfect harmony with the idea of
revelation to the Jews, Their history was a series of deliverances and redemptions;
a succession of types of the coming spiritual redemption. Their religion was a set of
complicated signs, all more or less keeping up the expectation of him who was to come
What, then, could be more natural and proper than that the prophecies should do,
what the history and the religion had before done—bear within their external form a
deeper meaning, and help to lift the soul of the nation on towards its great glory, the
coming, as a member of the Isaiah race, of the long-promised “ Seed of the woman ”


OH. vit. 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 143


why slivute "bruise the serpent’s head”? The general fact that many of the prophecies
du refer ww the lite and times of Christ cannot reasonably be doubted ; but difficulties
will be tuund ty the treatment of each particular case. The language must be carefully
weighed, the figures skilfully considered, and the connections adequately explained, ere
auy decisivu cau be arrived at. We illustrate the difficulties by cousidering the very
perplexing passaye now before us.

L The prophet gives a sign by renewing the promise of deliverance, and connecting
wt with the birth of a child, whose significant name is made a symbol] of the Divine
mterpusitiou, and his growth a measure of the subsequent events. Instead of saying
that Gud would be present to deliver them, he says that the child shall be called
* Immanuel,’ God with us, Instead of mentioning a term of years, he says, ‘ Before
the child 1s able to distinguish between good and evil.’ Instead of saying that until
that time the land shall lie waste, he represents the child as eating curds aud honey,
spontanevus products, here put in opposition to the fruits of civilization. In a figura-
tive wauuer, and usiny the large vague figures and metaphors characteristic of prophetic
writing, lsaiah asserts that within some three or four years their deliverance would be
vtfected.

{l. But the question which is found so difficult to answer is this—Of what child does
the pro:iet bere speak? One class of writers saggest a child born in the ordinary
course uf nature, and in Isaiah’s days. Some say it was Hezekiah; others a younger
sou wi Aliaz, by a second marriage; others refer the passage to the birth of the prophet’s
vin son, by a person then present, who is afterwards called “the prophetess.” Another
class of writers affirm that intentional reference is made to two distinct children, and
two births—tlat of Christ, as Immanuel, aud that of Shear-Jashub, the son o} Isaiah;
aud so a double meaning was given to the pissage. Yet another class of writers refer
these thiee verses directly and exclusively to the Messiah. One of this class says,
“lhe passage describes the actual desolations of the early period of Christ’s life.” Another
skilfully paraphrases one of the sentences thus: “ Before the Messiah, ¢f he were born
now, could know to distinguish between good and evil.” And one suggests that Isaiah
had a prophet’s vision of the birth of Messiah, and so spoke of it as though taking
place then.

ILL. Tbe conclusion of a sober and careful examination of this, and other so-called
Messianic prophecies, will probably be that the sign or the figure always relates, more or
less distinctly, to passing events and passing interests; but that no local associations
can exhaust their meaning and mission, ‘lhe spiritually minded will always discern
more in the Bible than appears to those who treat it only as a common book. The
Spirit, who is given to us, ‘searcheth all things,” even the decg things of God, the
hidden references of his revelation.—-R. T,


Ver. 14.—The Immanuel-Child. It is one of the most important facts concerning the
manifestation of Christ, that he was “ born of a virgin,” or, as the “Te Deum” expresses
it, “ He did not abhor the Virgin’s womb.” We dwell on two points.

I. ly tHe Vincin’s CHILD LIES HID THE MYSTERY OF THE INoARNATION. Isaiah could
have had but faint aud shadowy glimpses of those deeper meanings which we can find
in his words. Reading his prophecy in the li-ht of its fulfilment in the wonderful
beginnings of Christianity, we can tell of a virgin unto whom the angel of the Lord
came, saying, “he Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest
shall oversbadow thee: thereture also that holy thing which shall be born uf th.e shall
be called the Son of God.” That was the announcement of the coming uf the one only
true viryzin’s Child, It is surely a surprising thing that we make so much of the great
events o! Christ’s life, and dwell with so much interest upon the circumstances of his
death, and yet pay such comparatively slight attention to the original mystery, the wonder
of his coming to earth at all, the marvel of the woman-born God, The Lucarnation is
the mystury of mysteries, and he who has received right impressions concerning it will
tind no further mysteries in our Redeemer’s life or death over which he will need to
stumble. Men say—Can tliere be such thiugs as miracles? Is there not an antecedent
improbability that the order of nature, as we know it, shonld ever be changed? ‘To
receive th record of Christ’s birth of a virgiu-mother is to sct.le the whole question of
the muaculous. ‘he Iucaruation is put before us at the very begiuning of the gospel


144 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, [cH. vi. 1—25.


history ; it is the vestibule of the temple of the Christ. He who can venture past that
entrance-hall will find no grander mystery in any of the courts or holy places. That
Incarnation is so distinct from the ordinary working of human laws, so manifestly the
operation, in the human sphere, of higher and Divine laws, that he who can receive
Christ as the Child of the virgin-mother and the Divine Father, will find no miracle
wrought during our Lord’s life raise any disturbing doubts. The idea of incarnation
is not, indeed, peculiar to Christianity. It is found in other religions, especially in
those of India and China. But the contrast they present is most significant. In other
religions the incarnation is transient; it is more like the angelophanies of the Old
‘Testament times, than like the living Man, Christ Jesus, of the New Testament. Theirs
is only into the appearance of a man; this is into the reality of human flesh. Theirs is
usually into some monstrous form of man or beast; this is into the simple but perfect
form of a true manhood. Our faith is asked for the incarnate God. Born in accordance
with human times; coming into the world as every member of the race must come ;
nourished for months with a mother’s own life. At once Man and God: born of the
earth, earthy; born of heaven, heavenly and Divine. Deity in the dress of the human
flesh; the Creator become a creature ; the Lord of heaven and earth in the form of a
servant. Infinity pressed into the hour of a mortal life. Immortality submitting to
die. A babe, yet a King. An infant, yet a God. He who was from everlasting con-
senting to begin in time. That being the awful mystery of the Christ, it is no longer
strange that he should heal diseases, feed multitudes, still the raging seas, and waken
the slumbering dead; all difficulties begin to fade before us when we can say, “ This
was the Son of God.”

Il. In THE NAME, IMMANUEL, LIES HID THE MYSTERY OF THE REDEMPTION. If God
is with his creatures, it can only be to bless and save them, to deliver them from evil,
so bring them into full unity with himself, to establish them in all good. If God, who
is love, is with his sinful, rebellious, self-willed children, it can only be that he may
deliver them from the consequences of their transgressions, and recover them from the
degradation of their sinfulness. There is light and hope for humanity in this great
name; the name by which prophecy pointed to him who should come; the name by
which he was called when he came; the name which fits in with Jesus. ‘The full
name is JImmanuel-Jehoshua— God with us, saving us from our sins.”—R, T.


Ver. 16.—The cultwre of conscience. ‘‘ Before the child shall know to refuse the evil,
and choose the good.” Some take this expression as referring to pleasant or unpleasant
food; but it probably is used in a general moral sense. Compare the tree of the know-
ledge of good and evil, in Gen. ii. 9; iii. 5. For the expression as used in reference to
children, see Deut. i. 39. Isaiah evidently intends, by a figure of speech, to indicate two.
or three years, the time when a child may be regarded as getting out of his infancy of
ignorance and innocence. Without discussing philosophically the nature of conscience,
or the sense in which man has innate ideas, and keeping quite within the sphere of
observation and experience in family life, we may say, with Reid, ‘ Conscience, like all
other powers, comes to maturity by insensible degrees, and may be more aided in its
strength and vigour by proper culture.” ‘The following line of thought is given barely
and suggestively, because its detailed treatment must depend on the philosophical and
theological standpoint of the preacher.

I. WE BEGIN LIFE WITH DEsIRES. As soon as Eve was made she looked longingly
on the beautiful fruits of the garden. The infants are crying for something, if it be
only the light. Man wants. He is not sufficient to himself. And the wants are ever
growing,

II, WE FIND THE SUPPLY OF SOME DESIRES BRINGS PLEASURE, and of some brings pain.
So we begin to distinguish things by their attendant consequences in our feeling.

III. Wr CALL THE PAINFUL EVIL, AND THE PLEASANT GOOD; and go establish for our-
selves a standard which will test more than we at first imagine,

IV. PRESENTLY WE FIND THAT WE CONFUSE THINGS, AND CALL THINGS PLEASANT
Nels CONSEQUENCES ARE EVIL. So we discover that our discernment needs educating ;
and—

V. WE ARE BROUGHT TO SEEK A STANDARD BY WHICH TO JUDGE THINGS; that is away
from. and beyond ourselves; and we learn to find the only sure educating force in the


OH. Vi. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 145


‘revealed will of God. Man knows with certainty what is evil and what is good, when
he recognizes that God has set him in this world of sensible relations, and, pointing to
some things, has said, ‘‘Thou mayest ;” and to other things, “Thou shalt not.” Con-
science is truly cultured only when it clearly witnesses to that of which God has. in
his revelation, expressed his approval.—R. T. ;


Vers. 18—25.—WNational judgment for national sins. In this latter part of the
chapter we have one of those highly elaborate, intense, and suggestive pictures which
are peculiar to the books of the prophets. The mighty Assyrian army sweeps over the
land; the people flee before them; they fill every corner; they eat up all the food ;
they carry away all the flocks and herds; a man can barely save one cow and two
sheep; they consume the fruits; they trample down the shrubs; they bear off the
people captive; they leave behind them a wilderness; there is nobody to rent or till
the land; the few scattered inhabitants are content to live on the spontaneous products,
milk and curds and honey; agriculture is entirely stopped, and the wild beasts are
again encroaching on the arable and pasture lands. William Jay, of Bath, was accus-
‘tomed to say, ‘‘ God can punish individuals in this life, and in the next; but he can
only punish nations, as such, in this life”’ This may be further illustrated by reference
to the Roman destruction of Jerusalem, which was a direct national judgment on their
sins as a nation, culminating in the judicial murder of their Messiah. The shout had
risen, “‘ His blood be on us, and on our children;” and so it was, We suggest the
following points for consecutive illustration :-—

I. Some sins are distinctively national. Such as the high-handed dealings of modern
nations with semi-civilized peoples.

IL. Some judgments are distinctly national.
men; or of male population; war, etc.

III. These are directly related, the one to the other, as are sowing and reaping.

IV. They are thus fitted together, as outward and evident illustrations of the relations
between sin and punishment, for the individual.—R. T.


Such as Isaiah refers to: loss of states-


EXPOSITION,


CHAPTER VIII.

Vers. 1—4.—Tue Sian or MAHER-SHALAL-
HASH-BAZ. The sign of Immanuel was re-
condite. In its more spiritual sense it
appealed to faith in an event far distant.
Even in its literal import, it was not calcu-
lated to cheer and encourage more than a
few, since neither the maiden nor the child
was pointed out with any distinctness. A
fresh sign was therefore given by God’s
goodness to reassure the mass of the people
—a sign about which there was nothing
obscure or difficult. Isaiah himself should
have a son born to him almost immediately,
to whom he should give a name indicating
the rapid approach of the spoiler, and before
this child should be able to utter the first
words which childhood ordinarily pro-
nounces, ‘ Father,” ‘“ Mother,” Damascus
and Samaria should be despoiled.

Ver. 1.—Take thee a great roll; rather, a
large tablet. The word is the same as that
used for “ mirror” in ch. iii. 23. Write in
it with a man’s pen; i.e. ‘“‘ write upon it

ISAIAH.


with the pen used by ordinary men”—in
opposition to the implements of an engraver.
The tablet was probably to be hung up to
view in a public place (comp. ch. xxx. 8), so
that all might read, and the writing was
therefore to be such as was in ordinary use.
Concerning Maher-shalal-hash-baz. These
were the words which were to be written on
the tablet, which was to be otherwise left
blank. They would naturally excite curi-
osity, like the strange names placarded in
modern streets. The name is _ literally,
“Plunder speeds, spoil hastens.” It has
been imitated by Goethe in his “ Habebald-
Hilebeute ” (‘ Faust,’ act iv. se. 3).

Ver, 2.—And I took unto me; rather, and
I will have taken for me. It is still God
who is speaking. Uriah the priest. Pro-
bably the high priest of the time, mentioned
in 2 Kings xvi. 10—16, as the ready tool of
Ahaz at a later date. Though a bad man,
he may have been a trustworthy witness to
a fact. Zechariah, Perhaps the father of
Abi or Abijah, Ahaz’s queen (2 Kings xviii.
2; 2 Chron. xxix. 1). It would serve to call
public attention still more to the tablet, if
it bore the names of two such eminent
persons as witnesses.

L


146


Ver. 3.—The prophetess. It is not neces-
sury to suppose that the wife of Isaiah must
have uttered prophecies because she is called
“the prophctess ” Titles were given in the
Rust to the wives, daughters, etc., of officials,
which merely reflected the dignity of their
husbands, fathers, ete. Even Miriam seems
to be called a “ proplietess”? (xod. xv. 20)
from her close reJationship to Moses, rather
than from any supernatural power that she
had. In the Mishna, a priest’s wife or
daughter is called “ priestess” (Cheyne).
Call his name. There is no reason for
doubting that the name was actually given.
Other Israelites had such names as Jushab-
hesed (1 Chron. iii. 20), Haah-ashtari (1
Chron. iv. 6), Romamti-ezer (1 Chron. xxv.4),
Machnadebai (Ezra x. 40), and the like.
Assyrian names were even longer; e.g. As-
shur-bel-nisi-su, Asshur-kinat-ili-kain, ete.
In ordinary parlance, names of this type
were commonly shortened, “ Shalman-eser”
becoming “Shalman” (Hos. x. 14), “ Sen-
nacherib” “Jareb”’ (Hos. x. 6), and the
like.

Ver. 4.—My father... my mother. “Abi,”
“Tmmi,” would have been among the first
utterances of childhood—simple sounds,
combinations of primary vowels with labi-
als, corresponding in easiness of utterance
to “ Pappy,” “ Mammy,” rather than to the
expressions of the text, A child commonly
utters such sounds when it is about a
year old, The riches of Damascus. The
position of Damascus lay in the direct
path of the main trade that was carried on
between the West and East, which was con-
ducted by the merchants of Tyre chicfly,
and passed from the Syrian coast by way of
Damascus and Tadmor to Nineveh and
Babylon. This commerce greatly enriched
the cities lying upon its route. ‘“ Damas-
cus,” says Hzekiel, addressing Tyre, “ was
thy merchant in the multitude of the wares
of thy making, for the multitude of all riches ;
in the wine of Helbon, and white wool”
(xxvii. 18), The “palaces of Benhadad ”
seem to have been noted for their magnifi-
cence (Jer. xlix. 27; Amosi. 4). The spoil
of Samaria shall be taken away before the
King of Assyria. Scripture does not record
the fulfilment of this prophecy, which makes
the same Assyrian king carry off the spoil
of Samaria and the spoil of Damascus,
fixing also the time of the carrying off as
within a few years of the time when the
prophecy was given. But the inscriptions
of Tiglath-Pileser himself supply the de-
ficiency. They state that this monarch
“sent the population, the goods of the
people of Beth-Omri, and their furniture to
the land of Assyria; ” after which he “ap-
pointed Husih (Hoshea) to the dominiou
over them,” and fixed their annual tribute


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


(oH. vit. 1—22,


at two talents of gold and a thousand talents
of silver (see ‘Records of the Past,’ vol. v.
p. 52).

Vers. 5—10.—THE FLoop or ASSYRIAN
INVASION WILL PASS FROM SyrRIA AND Sa-
MARIA INTO JUDMA, BUT WILL THERE BE
ARRESTED. Syria aud Samaria were barriers,
breakwaters, so placed as to stem the tide
of invasion, and be a defence to Judea
against Assyrian attack. When once they
were overwhelmed, the waters would have
free course, and the submersion of Judea
was certain, It might be delayed by the
Divine favour, and would be, so long as the
people, or even a remnant of them, remained
faithful, but only through the might of the
name Immanuel, “ God with us.”


Ver. 6.—Forasmuch as this people. It
is a question which people is intended,
Judah or Israel. Ewald supposes Judah,
and draws the conclusion that there was a
strong party in Jerusalem which favoured
“the son of Tabeal.” Dr. Kay does the
same, but understands the charge against
Judah to be, not that it sympathized with
Rezin, but that it fell into the same sins.
Other commentators suggest that Israel is
the people intended (as in ch. ix. 16), the
sense being carried on from ver. 4, where
the word “Samaria” is suggestive of the
Israelite people. Refuseth the waters of
Shiloah. The “pool of Siloah” (Neh. iii.
15) was the tank or reservoir at the south-
western foot of Ophel, which is supplied
with water by a narrow conduit cut through
the limestone rock for a distance of 1750
feet from the “ Pool of the Virgin” on the
opposite side of Opliel, in the Kedron valley.
This pool itself is fed from reservoirs under
tle temple area, which have not yet been
fully explored. It is probable that Isaiah
uses the expression “ waters of Shiloah ” in
a general sense for the streams, springs,
reservoirs, conduits, which supplied the
temple, and were connected with its service.
“Refusing the waters of Shiloah” would
then be, without any violent metaphor, re-
fusing the temple service and worship, which
was exactly what the Israelites had done
from the time of Jeroboam. That go softly.
In contrast with the “ waters of the river,
strong and many,” of the next verse. They
who refused the mild and gentle govern-
ment of Jehovah should experience the im-
petuous and torrent-like rush of the Assyrian
armies. Rejoice in Rezin; rather, rejoice
with Rezin; ie. sympathize with him, re-
joice when he rejoices.

Ver. 7.—The waters of the river, strong
and many. “The river” is, of course, the
Euphrates, as in ch. vii. 20. In its lower


oH. vu. 1—22.]


course the Euphrates often overflows its
banks, and inunilates the adjacent d stricts,
causing vast damage to crops, and some-
times threatening to break down the walls
of cities (Loftus. ‘Chaldea and Susiana,’
p. 7). It is scarcely likely, however, th it
Isaiah had any acquaintance with this fact.
His experience would probably have been
limited to the “swellings ef Jordan ” (Jer.
xii. 5; comp. Jesh. iii. 15). All his glory
(comp. cli. x. 12, 16. 18, etc.). He shall
come up over all his channels. A graphic
description of the swelling of rivers in the
Kast. These, when they are low, contract
their waters from the many channels, in
which they ordinarily flow, into some one
or two, leaving the others dry. The first
effect of a flood is to fill all the channels,
after which it may proceed further and
overflow the banks.

Ver. 8 —Aud he shall pass through Judah;
rather, he shall pass on into Judah (* He shall
sweep onward into Jwlah,” Revised Version).
The Assyrians will not be content with in-
vading Svr aand Samaria: they will * pass on
into Judea.” It is not clear whether tlus is
to be doue immediately by Tiglatb-Pileser,
or by one of his successors at a later date.
There is reason to believe from ‘iglath
Pileser’s inscriptions that he used the terri-
tory of Aliaz for the passage of his armies
as those of a vassal king, but did not ravage
them. He shall reach even to the neck, The
Assyriau attacks on Judea shall stop short
of destroying it. The flood shall not sub-
merge the head, but only rise as high as the
neck. This prophecy was fulfilled, since it
was not Assyria, but Babylon, which de-
stroyed the Jewish kingdom. The stretching
out of his wings shall fill the breadvh of thy
land. The Assyrian armies shall visit every
part of the land. The sudden change of
metaphor is in the manner of Isaiah (see
ch. i. 30, 31; v. 24, 30, etc.) O Immanuel.
On the importance of this address, as inidi-
eating the kingly, and so (probably) the
Divine character of Immanuel, see the notes
on ch. vii. 14. Isaiah could not speak of
the land as belonging to his own infaut son.

Ver. 9.—Associate yourselves. It is im-
possible to obtain this meaning from the
existing Hebrew text, which must be trans-
lated, “Be angry,” or “ Rage” (“ Make an
uproar,” Revised Version). The prophet
passes from the consideration of the opposi-
tion offered to Jehovah by Israel, Syria, and
Assyria, to a general consideration of all the
nations of the earth. He challenges them
to the combat against Jehovah, and con-
fidently predicts their defeat. O ye people;
rather, O ye peoples (compare the corre-
sponding expression in the next clause, “ All
ye of far countries”).

Ver. 10.—Take rounsel together; literally,


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH,
a ee


147


devise a device; i.e. form some plan, even
the cleverest possible, against God’s people,
and the result will be utter failure. It shall
not stand (comp. ch. vii. 7). For God is with
us. In the Hebrew, kt ’immanu-hl, “ for
with us (is) God,” words declarative of the
true meaning of the name which God had
made a sig. to his people (ch. vii. 14). It
Was lis being * with them” that could
alone save them from their enemies.


Vers. 11—16.—THe Grounbs or Isatan’s
Conrivence. Having declared his absolute
confidence, not only that the attack of Pekah
and Rezin will fail (vers. 1—4), but that
Assyria also (ver. 8), vay, that all the
nations of the earth (ver. 9) will fail, and
bring destruction upon themselves, if they
“devire devices” against God’s true people,
the prophet explains the ground of his con-
fidence by relating a special “ instruction ”
which he had received from God some time
previously, He hail been bidden to separate
himself from the mass of his countrymen in
thought and fcveling, and to cling only to
Jehovah, wlio would “be for a Sanctuary ”
(ver. 14) to his own, but “ for a Stone of
stumbling aud a Rock of offence” to all
others,


Ver. 11.—For the Lord. Mr. Cheyne re-
gards this passage as “a short oracle, com-
plete in itself,’ and entire:'y unconnected
with what has preceded. But the initial i,
“for,” is in that case inexplicable. Spake
thus to me with a strong hand; literally, with
strength of hand—i.e. laying a stroug grasp
upon bim; and, as it were, constraining
him to attend (comp. Ezek. i. 3; iii. 14, 22,
etc.). That I should not walk in the way
of this people. Isaiah was bidden not to
“follow a multitude to evil” (Iixod. xxiii.
2). It was not merly idolatry against
which he was warned, but the whole spirit
and tone of the society of his day. He was
not to entertain their suspicions, or to hope
their hopes, or to fear their fears. He was
to take a line of his own, to fear God and
him only; then God would be “ for a Sunc-
tuary ” to him.

Ver. 12.—Say ye not. The transition from
the singular to the plural is noticeable. It
implies that Isaiah did not stand alone, but
liad followers—a “little flock,” it may be—
but still enough to give him the support of
symputhy (comp. ver. 16). A confederacy ;
rather, treason, or conspiracy (sce 2 Sam. xv.
12; 1 Kings xvi. 20; 2 Kings xi. 12; xii.
20; Jer. xi. 9; Ezek. xxii, 25, ete.). The
command is, not to call a course of conduct
treasunable simply because the people gene-
rally so call it. Jeremiah was charged


148


‘tHE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


(cH. vir. 1—22.


a ee


with treason for preaching the hopelessness
of offering resistance to Nebuchadnezzar
(Jer. xx. 1; xxvi. 8—11). Those who op-
posed an Assyrian alliance were probably
now taxed with treason. To all them to
whom; rather, everything which. Translate
the entire clause thus: Call ye not conspiracy
everything which this people shall call con-
spiracy. Neither fear ye their fear. They
feared man (ch. vii. 2). Isaiah and his dis-
ciples are commanded to fear no one but
God.

Ver. 13.—Sanctify the Lord of hosts. God
was sanctified by being believed in (Numb.
xx. 12). They who feared Rezin and Pekah,
despite of God’s assurances that their design
should fail, did not believe in him, and so
did not “ sanctify ” him.

Ver. 14.—He shall be for a Sanctuary
(comp. Ezek. xi. 16, “ Yet will I be to them
as a little Sanctuary”). A sanctuary is “a
refuge” (Ps. xc. 1; xci. 9), and something
more. It is a holy refuge, a place which is
a refuge because of its holiness. Its material
counterpart in the Mosaic system is, not
“the city of refuge,” but the altar (1 Kings
i. 50; ii. 28). Both the houses of Israel ; 7.e.
“the two reigning houses of Samaria and
Judea,” both of which were Israelite. Both
the “houses” would ultimately forsake
Jehovah, and find in hima “Snare” and a
“ Rock of offence.”

Ver. 15.—Many among them (so the
Vulgate, Ewald, Delitzsch, and Knobel).
But most others translate, “Many shall
stumble thereun,” z.e. on the stone and the
rock (Rosenmiiller, Gesenius, Vance Smith,
Kay, Cheyne). Fall, and be broken. The
effect of stumbling against a stone (Matt.
xxi. 44; Luke xx. 18). Be snared, and be
taken. The effect of being caught in a gin
(Ps. ix. 15, 16).

Ver. 16.—Bind up the testimony, etc.
The words are still those of Jehovah, ad-
dressed to his servant Isaiah. God com-
mands that the prophecy shall be written in
a roll, which is then to be carefully tied with
a string and sealed, for future use. Seal
the Law; rather, the instruction--the advice
given in vers. 12—15 (comp. Dan. xii. 4).

Vers. 17, 18.—ISAIAH DEFINES HIS OWN
ATTITUDE AND THAT OF HIS CHILDREN. It
is questioned whether something has not
fallen out between vers. 16 and 17. The
transition is exceedingly abrupt, undoubt-
edly; but perhaps not more abrupt than
elsewhere in Isaiah and the prophets con-
temporary with him. The Divine “ instruc-
tion”’ comes to an end in yer. 16; and Isaiah
might have been expected to comment on


it, or enforce its teaching; but he does


neither. He simply states what his own
attitude will be under the coming calamity
(ver. 8). He will “wait for the Lord and
look to him” (ver. 17), and consider himself
and his children as doing a work fur God in
being “ signs” (ver. 18)—signs to which the
rest of Israel may look, and from which
they may derive sufficient hope and con-
fidence to carry them through the dark time
which is approaching.

Ver. 17.—I will wait upon the Lord;
rather, I will wait for the Lord; i.e. “ await
the time of his relenting” (see ch. xxx. 18;
lxiv. 4, ete.). That hideth his face from
the house of Jacob (compare tle threats in
Deut. xxxi. 17; xxxii. 20). The light of
God’s countenance is to the spiritual what
that of the sun is to tlhe material world.
All life, health, joy, happiness, proceed from
it. This light was now to be withdrawn
for a time on account of the people’s sins.
But Isaiah would “wait” for its reappear-
ance.

Ver. 18.—I and the children . . . are for
signs. Isaiah’s children seem to have been
“for signs,” especially in respect of their
names. Shear-Jashub meant “ A remnant
shall return” (ch, x. 21), and thus held
out two hopes; one that a remnant of Israel
would return to God and become his true
servants, another that a remnant would
return from the captivity that had been
prophesied (ch. y. 13). Maher-slialal-hash-
baz—* Plunder speeds, spoil hastens ” —was
a “sign” of a different kind. Primarily, his
name referred to the spoiling of Damascus
and Samaria (vers. 3, 4); but it may further
have indicated a time of general disturbance,
plunder, and ravage. It is not quite clear
in what respects Isaiah was a “sign.” Per-
haps he, too, in his name, which meant
“(Our) salvation is Jehovah ’’—certainly
also in his symbolical acts (ch. xx. 3), and
possibly in the firmness of his faith, which
never wavered. From the Lord of hosts;
literally, from by the Lord of hosts—an ex-
pression like the French de chez. God had
supernaturally appointed the sign in one
case (vers. 1—4), but in the other two had
merely brought them about by the secret
working of his providence. But the prophet
treats all three as coming equally from him.
Which dwelleth in Mount Zion. Here, again,
is encouragement. God has not quitted
Zion. The Shechinah still rests between
the cherubim in the holy of holies. While
this is so, God is still with his people
(.mmanuel).

Vers. 19—22.—IsaAl1AH RECOMMENDS LOOK-
£NG TOGOD AND THE REVEALED WorD RATHER
THAN TO NECROMANOY. AFFLICTION WILL


CH. VII. 1—22.]


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISATAH.


149


‘BRING IsrarL To Gop. Isaiah returns, in
ver. 19, to the considerittion of his disciples.
In the terrible times impending, they will
be recommended to have recourse to necro-
mancy; he urges tliat they should look to
God and the Law. He then further suggests
that, in the coming affliction which he de-
seribes (vers. 21, 22), men will generally
turn for relief to the same quarter (ver. 20).


Ver. 19.—Seek unto them that have fa-
miliar spirits. In times of vreat distress
the Israclites seem always to have been
tempted to consult those among them who
pretended to magic and divination. So Saul
in the Philistine war resorted to the witch
of Endor (1 Sam. xxviii. 7—20); Manasseh,
threatened by Esar-haddon, “ used enchant-
ments, and dealt with familiar spirits and
wizards” (2 Kings xxi. 6). Israel geuerally,
oppressed by Syria and Assyria, “ used
divination and enchantments” (2 Kings xvii.
17). There was the same inclination now
on the part of many Jews. The vexed
question of the actual powers possessed by
such persons cannot be discussed within the
limits of a footnote. It has, moreover, al-
ready been treated in the present Com-
mentary, in connection with Ley. xix. 31.
Wizards that peep, and that mutter; rather,
that chirp and mutter. ‘Tricks of the ventri-
loquists, probably, who disguised their voices,
and represented that they were the voices
of ghosts (comp. ch. xxix. 4). The natural
speech of some tribes has been compared
to the “ chirping of birds” (Herod., iv. 183;
Hornemann, ‘ Travels,’ p. 11y). Should not
a people, etc.? Very abrupt and elliptical.
Isaiah means to say, “Do not attend to
them; but answer, Should not a people,”
ete.? For the living. This may either mean
‘‘instead of the living,” or “on behalf of the
living.” The latter meaning is preferable.
The full phrase would be, ** Should a people
on behalf of the living seek to the dead?”
or, Would not that be plainly preposterous ?

Ver. 20.—To the Law and to the testimony.
A sort of watchword or battle-cry, to be used


by the faithful when God’s enemies assailed
them. Compare Gideon’s ery (Judg. vii. 18),
“For the Lord and for Gideon.” If they
speak not according to this word, it is be-
cause there is no light in them; rather,
Surely they will speak according to this word,
when there is no dawn for them; i.e. when
they are plunged in darkness (ver. 22) and
distress, and see no prospect of better days,
surely they—the people generally—will
rally to this ery, and repeat it, “For the
Law wni for the testimony.” They will not
always trust in necromancy,

Vers. 21, 22 are supposed by some to be
out of place, and to belong properly to the
description of the Assyrian invasion, given
in vers. 7, 8. But this bold solution of a
difficulty is scarcely to be commended, there
being uo limit to its use. An order followed
in all the manuscripts should not be dis-
turbed, if it gives any tolerable sense. Such
a sense can, it is thought, be found here by
regarding the two verses as exegetical of
the last clause of ver. 20—‘* when there is
no dawn for them.”

Ver. 21.—They shall pass through it.
“It,” which is feminine, must mean “the
land.” The Jews left in it shall wander
about it (comp. ch. vii. 21—25), seeking pas-
ture for the remnant of their cattle. They
shall fret themselves; rather, they shall be
deeply angered (Cheyne). And curse their
king and their God. As the causcs of their
sufferings. And look upward. Not in hope,
but in rage and defiance.

Ver. 22.—They shall look unto the earth.
For necessary nutriment, or simply as the
place to which downcast and despairing
eyes are turned naturally. They shall be
driven to darkness. So Kay, who thinks the
Captivity is meant; but it seems better to
reuder the whole passage, with Mr. Cheyne,
“They shall look to earth, and behold,
distress and darkness, gloom of affliction,
and thick darkness driven (upon them).”
The darkness is spoken of as if it were a
thing palpable, like rain or snow (comp.
Exod. x. 21).


HOMILETICS.
Ver. 6.— Waters of Shiloah. The waters of Shiloah issued from the rock where God


had set his Name and fixed the symbol of his presence.


They were a copious supply,


ever welling forth from an inscrutable source for the refreshment and delectation of
Israel. Their overplus irrigated numerous gardens in the valley at the base of the
temple hill, and made the desert “blossom like the rose.” Shiloah is the same as
“Shiloh” (Gen, xlix. 10), and “ Shiloh ” means “ sent,” or “he who is sent.” Hence


we may view as “ waters of Shiloah ”—


J, THE TEACHING OF THE TEMPLE AND ITs RITES, which God sent to Israel by the
band of his servant Moses for their refreshment and delight—a stream of living water
to those who accepted the truths which the tempie rites embodied or symbolized; a


150 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cH. vit. 1—22


—


“river” which “made glad the city of God, the holy place of the tabernacle of the
Most High” (Ps. xlvi. 4).

Il. THE TEACHING OF THE PROPHETS, whom God continuully sent, “rising up betimes
and sending” (2 Chron. xxxvi. 15), of which Isaiah said primarily, “ Ho, every one
that thirsteth, come ye to the waters” (ch. lv. 1)—these waters representing the truth
of God which he was commissioned to preach. This teachin: welled forth from the
true “ Rock ;” for it was “ the Spirit of Christ ” which inspired the propliets, and made
them ever approximate more and more toward the standard of evangeiical teaching
which was to be set up later, The prophets’ doctrine was for the refreshment and
comfort of the Jews primarily; but its influence was felt beyond the limits of Judaisin.
In many a pagan wilderness the superfluous waters flowing from this source creaied
gardens, where blossoms bloomed, which, without the “living water” oi revealed truth,
could never have come into being.

Ill. THE TEACHING OF THE EVER-BLESSED Son, the true “Shiloh ”—sent by the
almighty and most merciful Father to redeem the world and reconcile it to \im. He
is “the Fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness” (Zech. xiii. 1); “ the Well-spring
of wisdom ” (Prov. xviii. 4); the inexhaustible aud inscrutable Source, to whom all
may come freely and drink (John vii. 37). His doctrine doth “ drop as the rain,” and
his speech doth ‘distil as the dew ” (Deut. xxxii. 2); he gives to all men to “ take the
water of life freely ” (Rev. xxii. 17). From depths unsearchable in the nature of him
who is “the Ruck of our salvation” flow forth rivers of living water, cleansing, puri-
fying, refreshing, satisfying the soul. He washes us once, in a material way, in
baptism; he washes us ten thousand times spiritually, as often as he cleanses us from
sin; he gives us to drink of a water that is henceforth to us “a well of water springing
up into everlasting life” (John iv. 14). True “ waters of Shiloh ” are these. All may
“take of them treely.” The fountain is absolutely inexhaustible. Nor are its benefits
confined to those only for whose sake especially it was given—baptized members of the
Church; they flow on to others also. Great are the uncovenanted mercies of God.
The child Christ was proclaimed to be “a Light to lighten the Gentiles,” no less than
“the Glory of his people Israel” (Luke ii. 82). And so itis. The stream of Christian
teaching flows on from the Church into the world, if not with sufficieut force to create
a garden, at any rate so as to bring forth amid the arid wastes many a green plant,
many a blooming flower. The washing of atonement is extended, we confidently
believe, to thousands who are not formally within the covenant. And the flow of the
water will never cease. Even in heaven there will be “a pure river of water of life,
clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God, and of the Lamb” (Rey. xxii. 1),
of which the saints of God will drink eternally (Rev. xxii. 17).


Vers. 12, 13.—The fear of man and the fear of God contrasted. These two fears
may be compared (1) in respect of their grounds; (2) in respect ol their results.

I. IN THEIR GROUNDS. Our fear of man rests upon our apprehension of the power of
man to do us hurt. Men may injure us (1) in our reputation, (2) in our property,
(3) in respect of those who are near and dear to us, (4) in respect of our persons. A
certain fear of the supreme civil power in the state under which we live is natural and
proper ; it is one of the elements which bind society together, and could not cease to
exist without disadvantage. Malefactors are restrained by it (Rom, xiii. 4); and even
the mass of well-meaning men are strengthened in their good intentions by the know-
ledge that there is a human authority above them which notes their conduct and will
punish any serious departure from the rules of right behaviour. So far, then, the fear
of man has a sound basis. We also naturally, and almost necessarily, fear our enemies,
if they are powerful, whether public or private, our fear being proportional to our beliet
in their power and malignity. It is this ground of tear which is apt to be unduly
influential upon us, from our exaggerated notions of what man is able to effect. We
too often forget that man can do nothing but what God permits (John xix. 11), that
he is absolutely impotent against God, who can shatter his desizns, or strike him with
sudden death at any moment. Again, we do not always bear in mind the fact that
man can only injure us in respect of temporal things, his utmost punishment being to
* kill the body,” whereas God’s power extends beyond the grave. ‘lhe tear of God has
tor its ground a double apprehension or conviction: (1) uur belief in his power, and


oH. vil. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 151


SS EEE ee eee


(2) our conception of his absolute holiness, These grounds are unassailable, and admit
of no exaggeration, so that we cannot fear God too much, though we may fear bim in a
wrong way. If God’s character be misconceived, if he be viewed as malignant or even as
revengeful, then our fear of him, being based upon a wrong ground, may lead us astray.
Such was the deidamovla of too many in the ancient world, whose deities were objects
of fear, but not of love.

Il, IN THEIR RESULTS. The fear of man has no good effect except upon evil-doers,
and upon those who but for such fear might become evil-doers, These it may in some
degree restrain. But if, so far, it may have a good result, it is apt in other ways tc
have results that are anything but good. 1. Fear of man causes the morally weak to
follow the bad example of the wicked, who would otherwise ridicule or even persecute
them. 2. Fear of man makes feeble aud oppressed classes servile, untruthful, cowardly.
3. Fear of man induces many to keep back their honest convictions, and even appland
the evil courses which in their heart they condemn and dislike. 4. Fear of man has
in some cases led to an absu'ute denial of God and of Christ, making men renegades to
their religion, and professors of a creed which they detest. 5. On the other hand, fear
ol man may sometimes cause men to be hypocrites, to pretend to a faith and a piety
which they do not possess, if those who have power over them require it. Hence the
fear of man is so often condemned in Scripture (ch. xxxv. 4; li. 7; Jer. i. 8; Ezek.
iil. 9; Matt. x. 28; Luke xii. 4; 1 Pet. iii. 14, etc.). The fear of God, if it be of the
kind called above Sero:5a:uovia, may harden men in sin, or lead them to despair of God’s
mercy; but if it be the true tear of God, that is to say, if it have an element of love in
it, the results cannot but be excellent. 1. “The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom ” (Ps. exi. 10); it restrains from evil in early life (Prov. xvi. 6); it deepens
iuto awe as time goes on; it produces hatred of sin (Prov. viii. 13); it becomes “a
fountain of life” (Prov. xiv. 27). 2. They who grow up in the fear of God acquire
a solidity and strength of character that nothing else can give; they have a firm foun-
datiou on which to rest; they “do not fear what flesh can do unto them ” (Ps. lvi. 4);
they are truthful, manly, brave. And, further, they are reverent. The fear of God
checks over-familiarity, begets reserve, produces silence. ‘‘ Keep thy foot when thou
goest into the house of God,” ete. (Eccles. v. 1, 2). 38. Though “ perfect love casteth
out fear” (1 John iv. 18), yet “the fear of the Lord endureth for ever” (Ps. xix. 9).
There is no age, however advanced, that can dispeuse with it; for no man in this life
is ever “ perfect in love.” The beloved apostle even represents the fear of God as con-
tinuing in heaven. ‘They that stood on the sea of glass, having the harps of God, and
sang the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, before God’s
throne, exclaimed, “ Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name?” (Rev. xv.
2—4); and again, when the “ great voice of much people was heard in heaven, saying,
Salvation, and elory, and honour, and power, unto the Lord our God, and the four
and twenty elders and the four beasts fell down and worshipped God that sat on the
throne, saying, Amen, Alleluia, a voice came out of the throne, saying, Praise oul
God, all ye saints, and ye that fear him, both small and great” (Rev. xix. 1—5).


Ver. 17.— Waiting for God. “ Waiting for God” is submitting ourselves to his
good pleasure in respect of time, being content that he should settle the question,
“How long?” and looking still to him from first to last, however extended the term
during which our “ waiting” has to continue. It is important that we wait—

I. PatientLy. “I waited patiently for the Lord,” says holy Vavid, “and he inclined
unto me, and heard my calling” (Ps. xl. 1), A thoxsand years are with God as one
day, and one day as a thousand years— our age is even as nothing in respect of him”
(Ps. xxxix. 5), It is, no doubt, hard for man to be patient, not to weary in well-doing,
not to fret at what seems to him useless and unnecessary delay, not to desire to
expedite matters and bring about the accomplishment of any end which seems to him
good at once. But God’s ways are not as our ways. God is never in a hurry, God
tries his ;eople by delay, and forms in them the temper of patience, and “ lets it have
its perfect work” (Jas. i. 4). God knows that we “have need of patience ” (Heb. x.
36), and makes our lile a discipline of patience, that so we may be the more coufurmed
to his image.

II. CuseRFULLY. It is not enough to wait patiently, unless we also wait cheerfully.


152 THE BOOK UF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cH. vit, 1—22,


--


“ Rejoice in the Lord always,” says the apostle; “and again I say, Rejoice” (Phil. iv. 4).
We should do the will of God “ from the heart.” If he makes our cross to be one of
waiting, we should feel that waiting is what we need, what is best for us; and
we should be thankful that God deals with us so lovingly as to lay this burden
upon us.

tie Farrurutiy. All waiting is a trial of faith. God “hides his face from us.”
Will he ever cease to do'so? Will he ever again cheer us with the livht of his counte-
nance? He does not grant our petitions. Will he ever grant them? Our ghostly
enemy continually suggests these questions, endeavouring to undermine and destroy
our faith and trust in God. It is our part, with Isaiah, to defeat him by continually
“looking for God” and resting upon him. We must “have him always before our
face ;” hold fast by him, cling to him, look to him, and pray to him “ without ceasing ”
for support and strength during the whole weary time of waiting, or our faith may fail,
and our trial prove too much for us. We must, therefore, also wait—

IV. PRAYERFULLY; @.e, with continued earnest supplication to God, both for the end
that we desire and for his help while he keeps us waiting. His help alone will keep us
patient, cheerful, and faithful during the time that our trial lasts, and render it the
blessing that he intends it to be to us.


Ver. 19.—Seeking for the living to the dead. The necromancy of ancient times was
a system of appeal to the dead on behalf of the living. The shades or ghosts of dead
men were supposed to be brought up from Hades by the necromancer, who compelled
them to answer his questions, and was supposed to make their answers useful to the
living. A system not very dissimilar has prevailed of recent years in many parts both
of England and of America, whereby “ spirits” are believed to be brought into commu-
nication with living men for the presumed benefit of the latter. To all such cases the
reproach of the prophet would seem to apply: “Should men seek for the living to the
dead?” What help is it likely that the dead can give more than the living, even if
they can be communicated with, which must always be doubtful? Why appeal to
them when we do not know whether they can hear, nor whether, if they hear, they
can render aid? We can usually appeal for the living to the living, who can certainly
hear, and. in most instances can help to some extent. And there is one living One on
whom it is always possible to call, who always hears, and can always help if he sees fit.
Thus every form of necromancy is folly, since (1) we have no assured ground for
believing that any good can result from it, and (2) we can resort to One who is
certainly able to do all and more than all that we require.


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1—4.—Symbolic utterances. THE PROPHET’S POPULAR METHOD. He wished tc
inspire hope in the people as well as in the king—to expel the panic fear of the two
northern kings, and impress the expectation that the two capitals of these kings would
themselves be taken and sacked. The way in which he set about this was simple yet
remarkable. 1. He took a large tablet, and wrote therein in “ popular characters,” de.
in large text, distinct from the literary character, perhaps a character half pictorial,
the words “ Hasten-booty, Speed-spoil,” or “ Booty-quick, Spoil-speed.” In those days,
there were no newspapers, no puffing placards staring from the walls, and books were only
for the learned. ‘I'his was suggestive to write up a sentiment or suggestion like this for
the public eye. To this day in the East, if you ask the people their reason for believing
this or that, their answer will be, “Is it not written? Men did not write books to deceive
us.” To write this pregnant phrase was, then, to ¢mpress it on the popular imagination.
“Go, write it before them ina table, and note it in a book, that it may be Jor the time to
come for ever and ever” (ch. xxx. 8). “ Write the vision, and make it plain upon tables,
that he may run that readeth it ” (Hab, ii. 2). Then, to fix the solemn act of putting up
the tablet in memory, he takes two witnesses—Uriah the high priest (2 Kings xvi. 10),
and Zechariah, perliaps “ mayor of Jerusalem ” at the time. 2. Next, he vave this same
mystic name to a son born about the same time, so that the boy might be, as it were,
a “living epistle” by means of his significant name, “ known and read of all men,” and


oH. vil. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH: 153


keeping alive in their hearts the hopeful prophecy of his father. Before the boy can
lisp his parents’ names, that prophecy will be fulfilled, and the wealth of Damascus and
the spoil of Simaria will be carried away before the Assyrian king. (1) The lessons
of the teacher need to be addressed to the senses of the multitude. The sign for the
eye, the parable for the imagination, the illustration which “ strikes,” the epigram and
“ winged word” which fastens in the memory,—all may be pressed into the service. (2)
Pith and condensation should be studied. A sermon is not wasted if the text sticks, or
if a single pregnant saying has lodged itself in the mind, as a seed to stir and quicken
thought to purpose.—J.


Vers, 5—15.—* God with us.” The prophet looks out on the troubled prospect as on
a deluge, amidst which the ark of promise carrying the elect, the remnant, the Church
of the faithful and chosen, is seen riding.

I. TemporaL auuusions. 1. The foreign sympathies of the people. Tired of the
inefficient reign of Ahaz, they watch for the approach of the two northern kings with
interest. ‘They have forgotten their patriotism, which once rallied round the house of
David as a political and spiritual centre. he “ softly flowing brook of Siloah” by Jeru-
salem was symbolic of that house. "was the river that made glad the city of God, the
holy place of the Highest’s dwelling (Ps. xlvi.). Small was it compared with the great
flood of Nile or Euphrates, but mild and gentle. “ Nile, with its monstrous crocodile
and behemah, might be the image of the cruel Egyptian rule; and mighty Euphrates,
with its frequent overflowings, that of the Assyrian power and of its swift extension.”
As in ancient folk-lore dragons were supposed to haunt the waters, so the Assyrian
power was like the damon of the great river (cf. ch. xxvii. 1). 2. The wave of Assyrian
conquest. Onward it will come, a magnificent flood, to punish, to purify. The Assyrian
king, with all the “ pomp and circumstance of war,” an awful array, will, as the river
breaking its bounds and overflowing all banks, rush into Judah, overflowing and rolling,
till the flood reaches to men’s necks; or, as with the outspread wings of the flying
dragon, the foe will cover all the breadth of the land—land of the passionately hoped-
for Immanuel.

II. Victorious sPIRITUAL Hopes. The name of the Messiah, “God with us,” acts
like a charm on the troubled spirit of the seer. His discourse suddenly becomes a bold
menace against all heathendom. 1. Material power defied. Let the nations rage and
let them—despair! Let them fit out their armaments and—despair / exclaims the
prophet. Let them form their plans—they shall be broken; speak their words—they
shall not stand. For “ with us is God!” What magic in a name, in a phrase! Carry-
ing our thought forward through the centuries, we recall what powers were defied,
what wonders wrought, what force reduced to impotence, what counsels reduced to folly,
by the magic of the Name of Jesus. Yet it is not the mere name, but the reality
denoted by the name, believed and felt to be operating through the human spirit, which
is the source of energy. 2. Personal inspiration. Idle had been these defiances, if the
prophet did not know of a secret warranty for them in his own breast, in his own
spiritual record, ‘ Thus said Jehovah unto me in the ecstasy.” He had heard a voice
which all could not hear, and had cleared his vision in a light not vouchsafed to the
vulgar. It was a discriminating light. He was taught to see that not all the multitude
called rebellious was really such, nor all that it feared was really to be dreaded. The
allusion is somewhat obscure. Probably under the guise of fear the people were secretly
rejoicing, and meditating the dethronement of Ahaz. The language strikes a side-
blow at the pusillanimity of the time. The prophet has learned that Jehovah is the
true Object of fear; that noble and steadfast reverence which, a mighter passion, expels
the feebler and baser.

“Fear him, ye saints, and you will then
Have nothing else to fear.”


If this condition be fulfilled, Jehovah will be found an inviolable Sanctuary, a Shelter
from all coming trials. We find the same thought in Ezek. xi. 16. He will be a “little
Sanctuary” to the fugitive and dispersed among the nations. Fleeing from the pursuer,
men laid hold of the “ horns of the altar.” These things are to us a parable. Religion
is the spirit’s asylum from all distress. In times’when the newspaper teems with war,


154 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cx. vam. 1—22.


a


revolution, rumours of dread, or the evils of social life srem intolerable, we may go into
our chamber, shut to the door, pray to our Father in secret, flee to the steps of the altar
that slopes through darkness uj; to God, and lo! a new scenery unfolds, and from the
secret place of the Most High fear vanishes, and reverential contemplation reigns in the
spirit.

"TIL SotemN warntncs. He who will ever prove an Asylum to the faithful and an
Altar of refuge, will be to the faithless a Stone of stumbling, a Rock of otience, a Trap,
anda Snare. We know how these thoughts were applied to the coming Christ, and
how they were fulfilled. Set ‘ for the fall and rising again of many in Israel,” and for
the “ revealing of the thoughts of many hearts,” he is to them that believe precious—
“a Stone, a tried Stone; and he that believeth on him shall not be confounded.” 1.
The Name of God is an object of dread or of delight to us accorjing to the state of our
own affections, 2. Truth isa touchstone. Hither we recognize in it the “ pearl of great
price,” and are willing to sacrifice all to possess it, or it is like a certsin stone of which
Plutarch tells, found in the river Inachos, which turned black in the hand of the false
witness, Truth seems like falsehood to the debased imagination and depraved will.—J.


Vers. 16—22.— The helplessness of superstition. Here a mass of thought is found,
struggling for expression as the new-lighted fuel struggles into flame.

I. | HE ORACLE SEALED. “lis time to make an end. Let what has been written
remain, rolled up and sealed and kept, until the day when those taciturn letters shall
find their tongue and burst into flame. And, indeed, every true thing may be said to
be “ written down for the time to come, for ever and ever.” It may be lost sight of for
a time, but only to be recovered. For though the records of human thought, nay, the
human mind itself, is a palimpsest, oft scribbled over, the eternal writing of God upon
the conscience is indelible, and will be seen, despite wilful blindness and pedantic
glosses. ‘lhe testimony we bear is first and last for the eyes of God. The Roman pvet
(Hor., ‘ Ep.,’ i. 20) seenis to dread the fate of oblivion for his verse at certain moments—
cannot brook the thought that his roll shall be packed into its case and left unread.
But such was not to be the fate of the poetry of Horace, nor of any true poetry. God
can read through the closed pages of true lives, and taitlful utterauces fiud audience in
the court of angels, in the halls of eternity.

Il. PLEDGES oF FUTURE Goop. “I and the children whom Jehovah hath given me are
signs and omens in Israel on the part of Jehovah of hosts, who dwelleth on the Ziou-
mount.” His own name meant “God’s salvation;” those of his children, as we have
seen, “ The remnant will return” (or, “be converted”), and “ Hasten-booty, Speed-spo'l.”
For the soul that is strong in faith is also strong in hope, aud it makes its own omens,
or finds omens where others can see none.

ILI. MaGicaL suGGESTIONS REPUDIATED. The wizard, the magician, the “medium,”
as he is now called, was in great vogue in the days of Ahaz. Just as at modern séances,
these media would imitate the supposed voices of ghosts in some low chirping or
muttering tone. What keener satire could be launched against such practices than
that of the prophet! It is indeed turning to the dead, instead of to the living and the
true God. Where the taste for truth is spoiled, the appetite for the e,traordinary and
marvellous springs up; and men will fall headlong into the greatest follies, provided
they flatter their self-conceit, though wide awake to their interest, and keen to detect
the impositions of others in general,

IV, ‘lou-LaTE REPENTANCE. The language is condensed, the thought fused in a mass.
Bat the meaning seems to be—too late will the weak and wicked apply to the true
oracles they had forsaken for the false. ‘In extreme distress, and afflicted with the
pangs of starvation, the man rushes as a maniac through the land, curses in the moment
of his terrible distress and exasperation his god and lord whom he vainly and slavishly
served, and directs his eyes upwards to the true God. But when he looks down to the
earth again because he had discerned no light above, he sees there the must dreadful
darkness and distress, without any ray of light, without any hope breaking through
it, and thus he is hunted forth again into the darkness to perish therein (cf. Job xv.
22, 23; xvill, 5, 13)” (Hwald).—J.


Ver. 17.— Waiting and looking. “ And I will wait upon the Lord, that hideth his


OH, VIII, 1—22.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 155


—_—_—_———— CCC eee


face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him.” There is life in a look. It
is so true that the eye is the window of the soul, even as speech is the door of the
soul, ‘ Look unto him, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth,” teaches us how the
whole nature of man can concentrate itself in a look.

I. Dark Hours. The Lord “hides his face.” This expression is used, because the face
is the expression of character and feeling. It reveals our emotions of love and anyer, of
confidence and distrust. ‘lo hide it, is to turn away in disgust, in sorrow, in shame.
God is ashamed of his people Israel, whom he had set apart for his glory. A hidden
face is a terrible punishment. The child feels that, and lonys for the returning smile of
approval and love. How beautiful is the prayer, “God be merciful unto us, and bless
us; and cause his face to shine upon us”!

II. Divine suppuication, “1 will wait upon the Lord.” Not with hurried petition
does the prophet come, but with an attitude of soul that shall show depth of desire
and earnestness of purpose. Prayer is a sign of renewed life. We cannot long con-
tinue to ask for blessings that we do not really desire. Hypocrisy soon fatigues, even
where it is not found out; and our poor human nature, sinful as it is, wearies of
subterfuges. In waiting upon God we have the surest evidence that our penitence is
sincere and our faith vital.

Ill. Upuirrep vision. “TI will look for him.” Men look for so much, and not for
God. For human approval, fur earthly success, for ambition’s tinsel crown. In looking
for God his Saviour, the prophet is looking for all that the house of Jacob needs. It
is a wistful eye that we read of here. Anxious, but yet hopeful. Some had “sought
unto familiar spirits, and wizards that peep and mutter ;” and it seems as if the world
had not yet grown wise enough to forsake all that kind of seeking to-day! “ Should
not a people seek unto their God ?” asks the prophet; and in every age those who look
alone unto him have never been disappointed. When the eyes are opened, and the
heart is full, even if the lips be not eloquent, God can read deep meaning in the earnest
gaze of faith; and he will return and bless his people Israel, according to his Word.—
W.M.S


Vers. 1—4.—Orders of service. We may serve God in more ways than one.
There is—

I. UnwItirine service. We may conclude, from 2 Kings xvi. 10, 11, that Uriah the
priest (ver. Z) had no real interest in the service of Jehovah; that he did what Isaiah
requested of him with an indifferent, if not a positively reluctant mind. We may
be “ requisitioned ” by the great King in the long wartare he is conducting. He who
is rebelliously refusing to place his intelligence, his spiritual nature, his resources, at
the command of the Divine Saviour, need not be surprised if he finds himself constrained
to serve his generation against his will. By violent excesscs sinful men have made
their own cause odious; by shameful cruelty, calling out heroic endurance, they have
made the cause of truth most honourable in the eyes of men. God can make the wrath
and the foolishness and even the stubbornness (e.g. Pharaoh) of men to praise him,

Il. Unconscious service. The little infant was a “sign” to the prophet and the
people; it rendered a service in its own way, but it must have been an entirely
unconscious one, It is a painful, and should be a preserving thought, that when we do
wrong we “ know not what we do,”—how heinous is our offence, or how large and long
will prove to be its issues. On the other hand, it is a pleasant and inspiring thonght,
that when we are doing right, in our several spheres and according to our various
powers and opportunities, we do not know what service we are rendering. It may be
one much more highly esteemed than we imagine at the time (see Matt. xxv. 37—40).
]t may be one that has far more valuable and lasting results than we could possibly
calculate. Especially is it true of the little child, that he is unconsciously serving his
kind. ‘The infant in the family has a softening, sweetening, humanizing influence of
which it knows nothing, but which is very beautiful and valuable. Ever and every-
where will it be found that “ the little child shall lead” them whom no other force will
either draw or drive.

III. AccepTaBLE sERVICE. This is: 1. Jntelligent. Whatever the exact signifi-
cance of “ writing with a man’s pen” (ver. 1), it is suggestive of the double truth that,
in working for God, we should (1) put out all our powers in their fulness and in their


‘156 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.  [en. vit. 1—22.


‘maturity, and should (2) speak (or write) words adapted to the capacity of those whom
we address. Many who seck to serve throw away their opportuuity, because they do
not the fitting as well as the excellent thing; only too often “ the’ best is the enemy
of the good.” 2. Prudent. (Ver. 2.) The prophet placed his prophecy beyond reach of
cavil by securing two unexceptionable witnesses, one of them being the more convincing
because his sympathies were on the other side; his testimony, therefore, none could
challenge. Though conscious of the most complete integrity, it is often wise and well
to be fortified by the evidence of others. Prudence as well as zeal has its place in the
catalogue of Christian graces. 3. Faithful. It was no smooth message which the
prophet was to deliver (ver. 4). The very name of the child was to be a standing
threat of impending evil (ver. 8). Not only he who now speaks for God, but every
Christian man, is bound to render this faithful service: his words and his life are to
testify against the vice, the levity, the worldliness, the ungodliness, of his age; they
are also to bear witness to the excellency and beauty of unselfish and loyal service—C.


Vers. 5—8.—The false standard and the fatal issue. The cardinal error into which
Israel fell was that of judging by appearances instead of by the reality. The “softly
flowing waters” of the Davidic kingdom seemed far less reliable than the “strong and
many waters” of Syria and of Assyria, and therefore Ephraim trusted in the one and
Judah in the other of these great “powers.” But they were utterly misplacing their
confidence. Those waters that “ went softly” and seemed so strengthless, were the
river of God, and held healiny virtues in their waves; thvse strong, tumultuous rivers
which seemed so mighty contained no remedy for the stricken and declining nation.
Often has it been proved that it is not the apparently insufficient which is to be
despised, and as often that it is not the apparently irresistible which is to be trusted.

I. THE FALSE STANDARD. ‘The world has always teen witnessing illustrations of
this error. The history of the Hebrew nation supplied many such: Noah and the
mocking world that laughed at him; Abrabam and the (Canaanites; Moses and
Pharaoh; David and Goliath ; Joseph and his persecuting brethren; Elijah and Ahab,
etc. The apparently weak man (or nation) had the strength of the Divine arm to
sustain him (it); the apparently strong one was essentially weak and unreliable. We
may see the same thing in: 1. Christ/anity itself, which in its first beginnings was a
“softly going” stream as compared with the strong tumultuous waters of Jewish
(fanaticism and Roman militarism. 2. Divine truth, which sometimes goes so softly
that it may almost be said of it that ‘there is no speech nor language, its voice is not
heard ;” that it “does not strive nor cry,” etc., as compared with the complicated
organizations of men. 38. Holy love, which flows on unseen, unheard, “like subter-
ranean rivers,” as compared with noisy vehemence and untempcred zeal. 4. The
promises of (tod, which flow so quietly and graciously through the sacred Scriptures
from the beginning even to the end, as compared with the pretentious securities of
worldly wisdom. If we wish to know whether we may commit the keeping of our soul,
or even of our earthly interests, to those men who (or those things which) offer them-
selves to our choice, we must not be satisfied with the shows and semblances; we must
look to the heart of things; we must ask whether there is soundness, rectitude, within ;
we must ask, above all other questions—Have they the approval of God with them, and
the power of God behind them? For without that the strong river is to be shunned,
‘and with that the softly going stream is to be sought.

II]. Tue ravan issuz. 1. Roman imperialism passed away, dragging down many
thousands with it in its fall. 2. Splendid but corrupt organizations have overflowed
the land, even as the ‘ waters of the strong river” were to cover Immanuel’s land, and
beneath their deathful influence multitudes have perished. 3. Rampant zealotry has
slain its thousands, not only of those whom it ruthlessly assailed, but of those who
wielded its weapon, and were partakers of its evil spirit. 4, Earthly properties and
possessions have buried innumerable souls beneath their destructive weight. It is a
fatal thing to trust that which is not worthy of our confidence: for that on which we
lean falls on us and slays us; the river to whose waters we resort, instead of fertilizing
and saving, floods and drowns us. ‘The peril here is one which threatens the Church
as well as the world. The overflowing river “fills the breadth of thy land, O
Immanuel,”—C. ;


OH, VII, 1—22.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 157


Vers. 9, 10.—The impotence of ungodliness. We learn—

I. THAT SIN SOMETIMES APPEARS IN IMPOSING ASPECTS. There were four aspects,
not to say elements, of power in these world-kingdoms—conf-deration, preparatinn
(gird yourselves), consultution (take counsel together), authority (speak ‘he word).
Sin, which is the great enemy conducting a long campaign against the Church of
Christ, certainly seems as superior in strenzth to its present foe as did these great
kingdoms of tne East to Judah and to Israel; indeed, far more so. Sin has on its
side: 1, Vastly preponderating numbers. 2. Rank and authority. 3. The greater
material resources, including military power and money. 4. Ancient tradition and
inveterate habit. 5. An apparently impre:nable seat; it is defended by the strong
fortresses of worldly interests, animal appetite, spiritual pride, moral indifference.

II. THaT THE PROPHETIC EYE SEES ITS UTTER OVERTHROW. “ Ye shall be broken
in pieces ;” “ it shall come to nought; ” “it shall not stand.” .Under the shadow of
the first promise we see the head of the serpeut bruised ((ten. iii, 15), At the feet ol
the prophet we see the “ little stone ” “ break in pieces and consume all these (earthly)
kingdoms,” itself “ standing for ever” (lan. ii. 44). Standing at our Master’s side, we
“behold Satan as lightning fall from heaven” (Luke x. 18). With apostolic hope, we
look on the time when Christ “will have put down all rule, and all authority, and
power,” all his enemies being “ under his feet ” (1 Cor. xv. 24, 25). The world-power
shall be utterly broken, aud on its ruins shall rise “the kingdom which cannot be
moved.”

III. THaT oUR CONFIDENCE I8 IN THE PRESENCE OF THE INVINCIBLE SAVIOUR.
“ For God is with us.” We may rejoice to reckon our trophies already gained; we
may point, with congratulation, to the growing intelligence and enthusiasm of the
army of the Lord; we may hail signs of decay in ancient, enfeebled systems; but this
1s our confideuce: we have with us, working in us and for us, the Holy Spirit of the
Divine Redeemer: “ For Immanuel.”—C.


Vers. 11—15.— Our personal relation to God. It is clearly insufficient to know that
we are on the same side as that of the majority of the good. The voice of God’s peo) le
is not always his voice; their way not always his way (ver.11). They may call for “a
confederacy ” when he disapproves of it. They may cry “ peace” when he sees only
present confusion and future disaster. They may be shaken with fear whvn they ought
to be calin and trustiul (ver. 12). They may be full of complacency when they ought
to be overwlielined with shame. We shall not be to God that which he demands of
us, exccpt we come into distinct, direct relation to himself.

I, THatT GoD SOMETIMES ACTS UPON US WITH CONSTRAINING POWER. “The Lord
spake with a strong hand” (ver, 11; see Ezek. iii. 14). ‘Ihe Divine impulse was one
that the proph:t felt he must not resist. Not that it was absolutely irresistible, but
one that a faithful man knew that he must not hesitate to obey. Goi often acts upon
the soul of men with strong and urgent power to constrain or to restrain. He
approaches and influences us thus by (1) his Divine providence; (2) one or other of
the privlejes he has provided for us; (8) his Holy Spirit.

Il. Twat Gop HIMSELF Is THE TRUE REFUGE OF THE HUMAN sovL. (Vers, 13, 14.)
Here is: 1. Our duty. We are to fear God, tu pay a reverential regard to his will, to
shrink from that which grieves him, to “dread” his wrath. 2. Its recompense. “ He
shall be fur a Sanctuary.” In him, as in a pavilion, we shall hide. He will either
deliver us from trouble by saving us from our enemies or im trouble, by granting us
the sustaining grace which makes us “ more than conquerors” in the midst of i. I
we who are his “ saints” will but “ fear him” with obedient reverence, we shall tlev
“ have nothing else to fear.”


“ How was it, lovers of your kind,
Though ye were mocked and hated,
That ye, with clear and patient mind,
Truth’s holy doctrine stated ?
In God as in an ark ye kept;
Around, and not above you, swept
The flood till it abated.”


158 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (ca. vin. 1—22


III. THat To RESIST Gop Is TO WALK IN THE WAY OF WRONG AND RUIN. God is, to
the perverse and the rebellious, “a Stone of stumbling and a Rock o! offence ” (ver. 14).
God must be everything to us, for life or death. If our relation to him is not to us the
fountain of everlasting joy, then it will be to us the source of unspeakable sorrow.
The rejection of bis truth and of himself will be our sin on earth, our condemnation in
judgment, the subject aud source of our remorse and retribution in the long hereafter.
Our God is One whom it is infinitely worth while to make our Friend, and One whom
we must not wake our Enemy, if we have any love for ourselves, any interest in our
own destiny.—C.


Vers. 16—18.— The teacher’s distress and his consolation. Those who have taken
positions of prominence or of influence in the Church of Christ have to bear their own
peculiar burdens as ti ey are gladdened with their own especial joys. Tie teacher of
Divine truth, in whatever particular sphere he may be engaged, whether it be a high
or a humble one, is subject to his own discouragements and encourayements. If we ask
what are—

|. His spectAL TRIALS, the answer to that question is this: Apparent failure in
his work, with all the sorrows such discomfiture involves. It is an intensely bitter experi-
ence for a human soul to pass through. What can be more distressing to one who
earnestly lonzs for, and is striving to promote, “ the kingdom of God,” than to look on
and see faitliful labours break down and issue in nothing ? Such was the keen sorrow
of Isaiah. It seemed to him as if God were “ hiding his face from the house of Jacob ”
(ver. 17); for the jeople would not welcome his truth, would uot walk in his ways,
would not trust in his mighty power. So was it with the preacher of righteousness
(2 Pet. ii, 5—8), and with the psalmist (Ps. cxix. 136), and with Elijah (1 Kings
xix. 10), and with Paul (Gal. i. 6; iii. 1; Phil. ii. 21; Acts xx. 29, 80); and so was
it with the Mast-r himseli (John vi. 66, 67). The human teacher at such times is
grievously troubled, for he is apt to conclude (1) that God may be dissatisfied with his
testimony ; or (2) that he himself has not been as wise or as faithful as he might have
been; or (8) that those whom he has been addressing have incurred serious guilt. But
let us ask what are—

Il. His consoarions. They are such as these: 1. There are disciples who learn
the truth and love it. “Bind up the testimony... among my disciples ” (ver. 16).
Isaiat) was not without some who received his word, and for whom he could pray that
it would be engraveu on their hearts, Elijah and Paul had their disciples; the Master,
we know, had his. If we will look further, we shall find that there are fruits on the
bough, though many branches be barren; ood results are not invisible, though they are
not so apparcnt as we could wish, 2. Zhe God of all truth is with us, and his ear is open
to our appeal. “I will wait upon the Lord” (ver. 17). Al! hearts are in his hand; he
is earnesily desirous of blessing his children; his promisea aid is a stroug assurance.
3. The human teacher is the oryan of Divine truth. “Iand the children are for signs
and wonders... from the Lord of hosts” (ver. 18). Even their very names were
significant of some truth which came from Jehovah himself. Everytiing about the
prophet, down to his children’s names, was ordered from above. ‘lhe prophet only
taught that which he was inspired to teach, and the truth of the everlasting God must
ultimately prevail. God will not let the words of him who speaks faiihfully “ fall to
the ground ” (1 Sam. iii. 19). Even as the word of him who was “ the Truth ” should
never pass away, so shall the words of his faithful disciples abide, doing their work in
unsuspected ) laces and in unimagined ways. The truth we have received from the
Lord of hosts may loug be hidden, but it will not be lost.—C,


Vers, 19—22.— The confession of ungodliness, etc. The prevalence of the evil and
sinister arts of necromancy is exceedingly significant. The attempt to supply know-
ledge for the living by appealing to the dead (ver. 19) has been made in every latitude
and longitude, in every age, in every condition of society. What is the significance of
this fact? We have here—

I, THE CONFESSION OF UNGODLINESS AND ITS DEGRADATION. When men have
thrown off their allegiance to God, when they have denied the existence of their
Creator, when they have explicitly refused to seek and to serve him “in whom they


oH. vitt. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 15!


eee — —


live and move and have their being,” they may imagine themselves to be free from all
spiritual bonds; but they are miserably mistaken. They forsake a homage which is
honourable and a service which is ennobling, to fall into a superstition which is con-
temptible and degrading. So closely, sv inseparably is man associated with the spiritual
world, that, try how he may, he cannot escape from it. He that will not serve God
must honour demons or consult spirits, or enzage in some “ cultus” which is discredit-
able to his intelligence and injurious to his moral nature. It is notorious that Rome
never sank so low as when, losing its faith in the gods, it sank into debasing super-
stitions of this kind. And in this respect a corrupted civilization and an unredeemed
barbarism “ meet together.” The penalty of ungodliness is terrible. Corruptio optimi
pesstma.

IJ. THE DEMAND OF INTELLIGENT PIETY. “Should not a people seek unto their
God? ... To the Law and to the testimony ” (vers. 19, 20). A right-minded, rational
people, possessed of that fear of God which is the beginning and also the end of wisdom,
will ask— What does God say? For they will consider that: 1. He who made them
knows, as they cannot know, what are the capacities of their nature, and what is the
purpose of their lif. 2. He who has all power in his hand, and who makes large
requirements of his creatures, both can and will bless those whom he approves, and
ban those whom he condemns. 8. Therefore it is infinitely desirable to secure his
approbation and his help. Such a people will, consequently, ask— What does his Word ©
state? What can we gather from his “ Law” as to his will concerning us? An intelli-
gent piety will resort to “ the Law and to the testimony,” not that it may find minute
correspondences and detailed injunctions, but that it may light on living principles
which it may itself apply to all new lorms and changing conditions.

II. THE HOPELESSNESS OF SIN. If we read the prophet thus, “There is no light
in them,” we reach the truth that sin brings men down to a condition in which the
light that has shone from reason, conscience, revelation, has gone out; in that case
the sources of enlightenment are stopped, and our Lord’s graphic and painful picture
is realized (Matt. vi. 22, 23). But if we take the words of the text thus, “ They area
people for whom no morning dawns,” then we arrive at another, though a kindred
truth, that sin leads down to utter spiritual hopelessness, to evil without prospect of
amendment, to death without hope of life, to darkness without gleam of morning light.
Men do, by the path of refusal and delay, reach a moral condition in which: 1. Privilege
does not benefit tnem; additional services only add to their accountability without
touching their soul. 2. Chastisement does not awaken, but only aggravate them
(see ch. i. 5). 3. Direct Divine influence fails to lead them into the path of life. The
night of spiritual death only deepens and darkens; there dawns no morning of the
eternal life which is in Christ Jesus.—C.


Vers. 1, 3.—Prophecy in a name. The interpretation of this name demands some
acquaintance with the history of the times, and with the views ol political parties
in the city of Jerusalem. The great danger immediately pressing was the combined
attack of Rezin and Pekah, representing the neighbour-kingdoms of Syria and Israel.
Isaiah ha prophesied the fall of these nations, and, so, encouraged Judah to hold on,
and keep trust in Jehovah’s protection. But time passed on, and there were no siyns
of calamity overtaking Rezin and Pekah. On the other hand, they seemed to be only
too successful. They had overrun the country, taking many away captive. Rezin
had captured Elath, the Red Sea port. And, taking advantage of Judah’s time of
weakness, the Edomites were harassing the north-eastern frontier. To politicians the
state of affairs was hopelessly dark ; and they could see no way out of the difficulty,
save by seeking alliance with the growing power of Assyria, which was pressing its
conquests toward the Mediterranean. But to do this was to declare their unbelief
in Isaiah’s assurances, and to put public dishonour upon him as the servant of Jehovah.
So he repeats his prophecy. In order that the people might know it and understand
it, he puts it into one word, one aame; he writes it 1m large letters, sets it up in a public
place, and so testifies against the perilous policy which fear of the national eneiiies
was dictating. ‘“ The tablet was to be large, and the writing was not to be with the
sharp point of the artist, or learned scribe, but with a ‘man’s pen,’ te. such as the
pexsmcn workmen used for sign-boards, that might fix the gaze of the careless passcr-


160 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. vii. 1—22.


by, and on that tablet, as though it were the heading of a proclamation or dedication,
he was to write ‘to Maher-shalal-hash-baz.’” This name recalls the prophecy which
Isaiah had already given (ch. vii. 14—16). The word actually and precisely means
“Speed plunder, haste spoil.” It refers to the Assyrians whom Isaiah sees hurrying
to spoil both Syria and Samaria. First the public sign, and then the child, bearing the
prophetic name, were to be a constant testimony to the truth of Isaiah’s words, and
a means of keeping the cheering prophecy ever before the people. The passage
reminds us of the value attached to, and the use made of, Old Testament names. On
this subject F. W. Robertson has a very suggestive passage (vol. i. 41, 42): “In the
Hebrew history are discernible three periods distinctly marked, in which ames and
words bore very different characters. These three, it has been observed by acute
philologists, correspond to the periods in which the nation bore the three different
appellations of Hebrews, Israelites, and Jews. In the first of these periods names
meant truths, and words were the symbols of realities. The characteistics of the
names given then were simplicity and sincerity. The second period begins about the
time of the departure from Egypt, and it is characterized by unabated simplicity, with
the addition of sublimer thought, and feeling more intensely religious. Words mean
realities, but they are impregnated with deeper religious thought. The third period
was at its zenith in the time of Christ; words had lost their meaning, and sl:ared the
hollow unreal state of all things.” Keeping in mind how convenicntly and etticiently
Isaiah wraps up his prophecy into a name which will at once arrest attention, this use
of names may be illustrated: 1. In relation to families. We recall to mind loved
relatives, or acts of kindness done to us, or persons whose heroic lives we admire,
by giving to our children some significant name. 2. In relation to the sule of articles.
The skill of the advertiser is shown in the discovery of some taking name, which will
draw public attention to the article offered. 3. In relation to science and invention.
The results of research and discovery do not become public property until they can
be fixed in a name; even men’s theorizings getting thus labelled for use 4. In relation
to doctrines. Statements of Divine revelation do not become public property until they
get a name, which is a sort of handle, by which the ordinary mind may grasp them.
By such illustrations the practical wisdom of Isaiah’s act may be shown, and then the
truth which he sought thus to keep before the minds of the people may he impressed,
The staring name, calling the attention of all the passers-by, said plainly, “ Trust God,
not man.” “Fear nobody but God; nothing but God.’ ‘His word 1s surely true:
though you see it-not, it is hurrying even now to its accomplishment.” That name
said, “'Trust in the Lord for ever.” “He maketh the wrath of man praise him, and
restrains the remainder of wrath.”—R. T.


Ver. 6.—Jehovah like the waters of Shiloah. The fountain of Siloam, at the mouth
of the Tyro) wan valley, and so at the roots of both Zion and Moriah, is fed with
water which flows through a narrow subterranean conduit from the “ Pool of the
Virgin.” he point of the comparison presented by Isaiah cannot be better stated
than in the following passage: “'lhese waters of Shiloah, the sacred waters that came
forth from the holy mountain, seemed poor and ignoble in comparison with tie Abana
and Pharpar of Syria, or the Jordan of Ephraim; how much more, then, with the
Euphrates and Tigris! Calm and tranquil faith in the prophetic word which God sent
them, in the gently flowing current of his providential dealings (springing out of the
depths of his eternal wisdom and goodness),—this was not to their mind. They must
have something that appealed to eye and ear, that gratified the fancy with its ambi-
tious cravings” (Dr. Ka\). Henderson applies the figure of the text to the house of
David, but Cheyne properly argues that it is better to take the phrase as s\ mbolizing
the temple, and its almighty and gracious Lord; and he remarks that the figure is not
an unfamiliar one. he psalmist says (Ps. xlvi. 4, 5), “There is a river, the streams
whereof shall make glad the city of God. ... God is in the midst of her.” And Jeremiah
speaks of the people having “forsaken the Lord, the Fountain of living waters” (Jer.
xvi. 13). ‘Taking these waters of Shiloah as the figure for Jehovah, they may be
shown to illustrate—

I, THE GENTLENESS OF JEHOVAH. His kingdom “cometh not with observation.”
There is no cry, no lilting up of voice, He never rolleth like a desolating flood, save


OH, vill. 1 —22.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 161


eee


in times of special judgment. He bubbleth gently as a fountain; and those who read
their lives aright learn to say, “Thy gentleness hath made me great.” This cha-
racteristic comes out strongly in the ministry of the Lord Jesus Christ, which was
a gentle persuasion of truth, and a gentle example of righteousness. And _ still it
is true that the regenerative force, in individual lile and in society, “ flows softly,” like
the waters of Shiloah.

Il. ‘hE constancy or Jenovan. A fountain is fed from unfailing sources; it is
always flowing, ready with its supplies at all times; no enemies can limit it or cut
it off; in the secret places of the earth it has its storehouse, and it is ready with its
help for every time of need. These suegest what God ever has been and is to his
people. We have never to search for him ; he is always here. We have never to force
him ; he is always ready—* A very present Help;” “A Refuge and Strength.”

Il]. Tue surraBitiry or Jesovan. This may not be the best term for the thought,
which is, that the perennial fountain, at constant command, was better adapted to the
circumstances of Judah than the river of Euphrates, which, if turned towards them,
could only rush over them in desolating flood. Jehovah was more precisely adapted
to their conditions. He could more fittingly mcet their demands thin any “arm
of flesh,” however strong it might seem to be. The thought may be enlarged upon
under the guidance of the following passage (2 Cor. ix. 8): “ And God is able to make
all grace abound toward you; that ye, always having all sufficiency in all things, may
abound to every good work.”

IV. Tue surriciency or Jenovan. The fountain flows on, day and night, pouring
forth its fulness of blessing; whosoever will may drink and live. We are never
‘*straitened in God.” He can do abundantly for us, above all that we ask or think.
Judah could only be dissatisfied with Jehovah because they did not prove his faith-
fulness and mercy; they did not cast themselves upon bim. “ ‘Trust in the Lord
for ever; for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.’ Advance to show how this
figure of the waters of Shilouah gained new form in the teachings of the Lord Jesus,
who said, “ Whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst again: but whosoever
drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that
I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting
life.”—R. AV


Ver. 8.—Immanuel’s land. The figure used in this text is that of an overflowirg
river, sweeping along in desolating flood, and the great stretches of water, covering the
cultivated lands on either side of the stream, are poetically likened to the outspread
wings of a flying bird. The first reference of the expression, “Thy land, O Immanuel,”
may be to the prophetic child that was to be born in the land (ch. vii. 14), The
distant reference may be to the coming of the Lord Jesus, as Immanuel, to the land of
Judah, or rather of Canaan. But probably the name should be translated, and used as
a succinct description of Palestine. ‘This is its great and characteristic peculiarity ;
it is the “God with us” land. This may be illustrated, and the lesson from it
enforced, under the following divisions.

J. Iv 1s THE LAND PREPARED FOR IMMANUEL. It was selected, and other countries
were set in relation to it, so that it might be the “ God with us,” land, in which a special
manifestation and relationship of God might be tried, in the face of the whole world.
The country was remarkably isolated geographically. Aud it was as remarkably
centred, These corrected each other. Israel had the best opportunities for preserving
the great truths of the unity and spirituality of God which were entrusted to it.
And at the same titne it was set in the “eye of the world,” so that all nations could
watch the singular experiment of the theocracy.

Il. Iv 1s THE LAND HONOURED BY THE ABIDING oF ImmaNUEL. That direct and
sensible presence of God which was the condition of the covenant was indicated by the
Shechinah-symbol in tabernacle and temple. The glory of Israel wandermg was God
present. ‘The glory of Israei settled was God abiding and ruling. The presence of
God with us, as we know it, is Christ, the Temple-body, apprehended by our
senses: and the Holy Ghost, the Temple-spirit, apprehended as wituessing and
workiuy within us.

LI. Iv 1s THE LAND THAT MUST BE WORTHY OF IMMANUEL. It was the fundamental

ISALAH. M


162 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. vir, 1—22,


a


idea of Judaism that the land was holy, because God walked to and fro in it; and,
therefore, tlle people must be holy. And stili this is the persuasion, ie Be ye holy ; for
Iam holy.” ‘he figure may stand for the land of each man’s life. That ought to be
a “God with us” land.—R. T.


Ver. 14.—God’s twofold relations with men, To some, a “Sanctuary ;” to others
a “Rock of offence.” For the Christian form of the same truth, comp. 2 Cor. ii, 1, 6,
“To the one we are the savour of death unto death, and to the other the savour of life
unto lite. And who is sufficient for these things?” God is to men as men are to
nim (see Ps, xviii. 25, 26). But is this saying anything strange? Surely it is the
secret of good motherhood and fatherhood. They who order their households well are
wisely responsive to the various states of the children, adapting and adjusting conduct
to the dispositions and circumstances of each member of the home. No skillul parent
treats all the children alike, and differing modes of treatment are no indications of
varying degrees of love. He who loves us all must deal with each upon his perfect
understanding of each one. He must be, he had better be, a “ Rock of offence” to some.
To the trustful child he can bea “Sanctuary ;” but to the wilful child he must be a
Severity. His dealings will, at first, cause offence. There is a very deep and searching
truth indicated here, which may be illustrated from God’s dealings with his people, and
with individuals from among his people, through all the ages. It is that a man may
compel God to be vtherwise towards him than he would be. The passage which clearly
states this, and will be a key to many other passages and illustrations, is the following:
“ Have | any pleasure at all that the wicked should die? saith the Lord God” (Hzek.
xviii. 23). It is difficult to realize, but it is not beyond belief, that the same infinite
goodness makes God both a “Sanctuary ” and a “ Rock of offence.” In very grave
measiires—souietimes we feel in overwhelming measures—the responsibilities of our
life-issnes, and even the character of Divine relations with us, rests upon ourselves.
Alter the wilful ones, burrying to their doom, God, hastening, pleads thus: “ Why will
ye die? O house of Israel, why will ye die? ”—R. T.


Ver. 17.—The hiding of God’s face. Jehovah is here spoken of as “ the Lord, that
hideth his face from the house of Jacob; ” and Jeremiah uses a similar figure in one of
his prayers: “ Thou bast covered thyself with a cloud, that our prayer should not pass
through” (Lam. iii. 44). Aside from the historical associations of the text, the expres-
sion itself is a suggestive one, and may be made the basis of meditation. Whatever
may be the fact concerning God, this at least is the fact of the pious man’s experience
—it feels to him as if God had hidden his face and covered himself with a cloud. Two
thouglits are-ssuge: sted by the figure.

I. THE TWILIGHT GLOOM OF THE CHRISTIAN OFTEN ARISES FROM THE SENSE OF
CHANGE IN HIMSELF. ‘lhere are more twilight-times than night-times in the circle of
the year, and in the circle of a religious life. Isaac Taylor reminds us that, in a whole
year, there are only two or three absolutely dark nights. Nature gets a great blessing
out of those two or three, but could not bear more. And in a religious life there are
many things large enoush to dim the rays of hope, and cast long and dark shadows
over the spirit, but very few things strong enough to blot out the sun and stars, and
make a midnight for the soul, Now, we need to see clearly that the gloom of spirit we
fee] usually comes from changes in ourselves, We are so ready to settle our twilight
glooms upon God, as though in his sovereignty he had thus dealt with us; and then
we fail to see our own mistakes, and we make no efforts to remedy the evils which are
the immediate occasion of our fears. 1. Much inward trouble comes from the state of
our bodies, he action and reaction of body and mind are exceedingly subtle. 2.
Much of our inward distress comes from wnwatchfuiness. \Ve may easily pass
through most important changes of circumstances unhcedinuly. We often are in new
circumstances befure we are at all prepared for them, and then their influence may
prove -epressing or overwhelming. Life is to be for us all a succession of surprises,
and yet we are never to be taken unawares. Our bodily weakness, our unwatchful-
ness, our indulgence in sin, hides God’s lace from us by putting a cloud across it. It
is hidden, but we must see that we ourselves are the vccasion and cause of the hiding,
It lies with us to get the cloud away.


oH. vil. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 162
ee


II. THE MIDNIGHT GLOOM OF THE CHRISTIAN OFTEN ARISES FROM THE IDEA OF
CHANGE IN Gop. Christian joy comes from a clear consciousness of the Divine near-
ness—“ the fice of God shining upon his servant.” Christian woe comes when God
seems to be afar off, hidden ; it is as thou:h the sun had passed in behind a cloud;
the face that made heaven for us shows trowns, It may well be cailed midnight dark-
ness when the soul has conceived the idea of chanved relations in God. One or two
comforting consid rations may be dwelt on. 1. Change in God only comes as a
cons’quence of change in the Christian. He is the unchangeable One; but in his rule
he adjusts relations to those whom he would bless. To the sinner, he is a God of
holy indignations. To the penitent, he is a God of saving mercies. ‘To the earth-
child, trying to live a godly life, he is a watching, guiding Father. To the Christian
in trouble or pain, he is a tender, comforting Mother. He is not varying aud uncer-
tain; that would make him untrustworthy. He is adaptir.g himself to us, so that if
ever God seems to have changed towards us, we may be quite sure that the truth is
we have changed towards him. If he hides himself, there must be some cherished
wrong in us, as certainly as there was in the Israel of Isaiah’s times. 2. Chanve in
God is never change in his feelings, only in sensible relations. It should be settled, as
one of our immovable truths, that there can be no real change in God, whatever
appearances we may discern. Look long with our human eves, and the firmest steeple
will seem to be trembling and tottering to a fall; but the trembling is only in our
vision. For a “little moment God may hide his face from you, but with great loving-
kindness he will gather you.” Change in sensible relations there may be. The joy of
his love we may lose, not his love. The impulse of his grace we may lose, not the
grace. ‘I'he comfort of his presence we may lose, not the presence. It should, indeed,
humble us that we may lose so much, but even in our soul’s midnight hours we need
not despair. As the child in the dark whispers “ Father!” and is at neace when the
father-arms press closer, so we, in the night, may find that if our Father’s face is
hidden, our Father himself is near.—R. T.


Ver. 18.—Man every way God’s instrument. “ Behold, I and the children whom
Jehovah hath given me are for signs and for omens in Israel from Jehovah Sabaoth,
who dwelleth on Mount Zion” (Cheyne’s translation). ‘The thought here is very
simple and very familiar, and no more than the statement of divisions, for the ordering
of thought, can be necessary. Take St. Paul’s figure of the “ living sacrifice,” as
including body, soul, spirit, and relationships, ali consecrated to God’s service, and
illustrate—

I. How a man’s body may be consecrated to God.

II. How a man’s health may be consecrated to God.

III. How a man’s gifts may be consecrated to God.

IV. How a man’s possessions may be consecrated to God.

V. How a man’s personal friendships may be consecrated to God.

VI. How a man’s family life may be consecrated to God.

VII. How a man’s social influences may be consecrated to God.—R, T.


Ver. 20.—The standard of truth and morals. This text is not merely a Divine
declaration. It rests upon the great fact that man can never be satisfied until he gets
a standard of truth and duty outside of and apart from himself. No man anywhere
can reach an intelligent satisfaction by becoming wholly a law unto himself. The
moral sense in every man is vitiated, and its attestations are uncertain. The testi-
mony of conscience is variable; it is not now always prompt, decided, and faithful in
its judgments. It may appear at first sight as if there were many men who are living
entirely according to their own will, following wholly the ‘devices and desires of their
own hearts.” But, if we look a little dveper, we shall find that they are all striving
after conformity to some standard, bad or good, that is outside them. It is often
custom, etiquette, society, the moral level of the age in which they hapjen to live,
There are common fallacies which tone the lives of some, and multitudes are content
to make a standard of the teachings of an authoritative priesthood. Even the hermit,
dwelling aj art, separated from the associations of his fellow-men, cainot be satistied
with his own standard; he even finds an ideal outside himself, ia the life, endurance,


164 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cH. vin. 1—-22
EEE


and suffering of some more saintly fellow-creature. God has graciously considered
this common human necessity. He has not left his creatures to search for such a
standard in their blindness. In every age, in forms and terms such as at the time
they could understand, God has given models of truth and duty. He has never left
men to mere abstract speculations; in some kind of ordinarily understood human
teaching, by word, or act, or example, God has always set forth a standard; and so in
every age he can make his appeal and say, “To the Law and to the testimony.” In
the first ages of the world the standard was given in personal chwracters, such as Enoch,
Methuselah, Noah, Abraham. To this was by-and-by added the revelation of the
Divine will in written and spoken words, for which advancing civilization and culture
prepared men, At the very beginning, as the written revelation could not get into
the bands and use of all men, it was presented for a time in the pictures of an elaborate
ceremonial. Later on it was expressed in the free speech of prophets and teachers,
and then the pictnred ceremonials might fade away. At the very last the Divine
standard of truth and morals for humanity was exhibited, in its completeness and per-
fection, in the person of the Lord Jesus Christ. Truth, duty, virtue, were here among
men. Christ was the perfect realization of God’s idea of a moral being. ‘The standard
man is not on earth now, but his record remains. That record is in all our hands; it
is as if we lived our daily life in the presence of the Divine ideal. We have in our
Bible Gou’s vreat rule of truth and duty. Consciously or unconsciously we do test
every action by our standard; all the questions arising in connection with our moral
life are brought to the test of the “ Law anc the testimony.”

I. Tue [IBLE EXERTS ITS MORAL FORCE UPON US BY THE TRUTHS WHICH IT CON-
TAINS AND REVEALS. ‘These truths test all received opinions, Kach man really is
according to his opinions and beliefs; the whole temper and conduct are toned by the
truths received, If they are according to the “ Law and testimony,” their fruit will be
righteousness and mercy. The Bible does not, indeed, contain any formulated system
of theology or of morals, but it does contain such an harmonious setting forth of all
necessary truth as, in fact, constitutes a complete system both of doctrine and of duty.
The bible has its own sphere; within this it is inlallible. It is the sphere of character ;
it is no standard of appeal for geographers, or arithmeticians, or astronomers, or
ethnologists, or literati, or philosophers. For all such the Bible is a book of the age
in which it was written, and it embodies the thought which was the common pro-
perty of the men of the time. Man does not want a written revelation of science, for
he has not lost the key which enables him to unlock its mysteries for himself. Man
does need a written revelation of standard morals, because he flung away his key in
Eden, and, wi h ages of painful searching, he has failed to find it again.

II. Tue BisLE EXERTS ITS MORAL FOKCE BY THE PRINCIPLES WHICH IT EMBODIES,
The structure of the Bible compels us to search out its principles. They do not lie on
the surtace, like seeds on beaten paths, ready for every passing bird to pick up. They
are given to us embodied in history, illustrated in incidents of individual lives, and in
phases of personal experience. Nothing seems to be said in the New Testament about
ecclesiastical politics, or orders of Church government; but there are to be found great
principles, which can be wisely adapted in their practical expression to the varying
conditions of men in different ages. There are no announcements concerning social
manners; there is nothing tanght in a direct way concerning monarchy or slavery,
for instance; but the Bible gives principles which, gradually gaining sway over the
minds of men, constitutionally attemper monarchy, and will after a while banish
slavery from the earth. A principle is more searching than a maxim. Men may
think they could have done better with a Bible like the books of Confucius, full of
maxims, shaping into order the whole minutia of life. Such a Bible could only make
automata, not living men. God gives a Bible full of quick effective principles; these,
getting into the soul, are the seeds whence come flowerings and fruitings of rightcous-
ness. A maxim will guide us in one case, a principle will put us right in ten thousand.
Circumstances may always limit the application of an express commandment; a
principle fits and shapes itself to every new occasion, as the rising tide into every bay
and nook and ercek of the winding stream.

lll. THe BiBLE EXERTS ITS MCRAL FORCE BY THE EXAMPLE WHICH IT PRESENTS,
Its men, except the Lord Christ, are fallible, struggling men, Their wrong-doing is


cH. Ix. 1—21.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 165


never covered over. You never get the impression of a character painted rose-colour,
The moral quality of a man’s action is never confused. Evil is always evil. Wrong-
doing in a good man is only worse wrong-dving in view of his goodness; and it is never
palliated. here is found in the Bible virtue to incite us and evil to warn us; a great
“cloud of witnesses” putting to shame our meaner lives. But the great standard
example is the earthly life of our Lord Jesus Christ. He “ tries every man that cometh
into the world.” The final test of moral conduct for us all is the Lord Jesus Christ,
Full acceptance with God can come only [rom being perfectly like Christ. And if the
suggestion makes us feel that we are far down below him, only just climbing the first
ridge of the mountain-side, this is our encouraging assurance, “Then shall ye know, if
ye follow on to know the Lord.”—R, TT.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER IX.


Vers. 1—7.—Tue Trovusies oF ISRAEL
SHALL END THROUGH THE LirtTH OF A Mar-
VELLOUs CHILD. The section of the pro-
phecy commencing with ch. vii. 1 terminates
in this glorious burst of glad and gracious
promise. The gist of the whole section is:
“Tsrael shall not suffer from Pekah and
Rezin ; her oppressors shall be Assyria and
Egypt, more especially the former; Assyria
shall overwhelm her, crush her, lay her low;
she shall remain awhile in glogm and dyrk-
ness; but at length the darkness shall be
dispelled ; a ‘ great light’ shall shine forth,
first in the north, then over all the land:
‘the rod of the oppressor’ shall be broken ;
a Child shall be born, who shall bear mar-
vellous names, and shall rule over the full
kingdom of David in justice and rightvous-
ness for ever.” God has spoken, and God
will perform this.

Ver. 1.—Nevertheless the dimness shall
not be such as was in her vexation, when,
etc. Our translators have misconcvived the
construction, and consequently missed the
sense. The first two clauses, which they run
together, are entirely separate and distinct.
Translate, Nevertheless there shall beno (more)
darkness to her who was in affliction, As at
the former time he brought contempt upon the
land of Zebulon, ete. Contempt was brought
on the more northern part of the Holy
Land, first when it was ovessin and rayayed
by the Syzjans (1 Kings xv. 20) under Ben-
hadad, and more recently when it bore the
brunt of the Assyrian attack (2 Kings xv.
29) under Tiglath-Pileser. At the first
... and afterward; rather, at the former
time... in the latter tine. The contrast
is between two periods of Israel’s history,
the existing periodand tle Messianic. And
afterward did more grievously afflict her.
This is altogether wrong. ‘Translate, So in


the latter time he hath brought honour on the
way of the sea. The perfec: isa “ prophetic
perfect,” and the reference is to the honour
that would be done to the northern districts,
“the land of Zebulon and the laud of Nuph-
tali,” by the Messiah dwelling there (comp.
Matt. iv. 14—16). The way of the sea;
de. the district about- the sea of Tiberias,
called “the sea of Kinncrctl” (equivalent
to “Gennesareth”) in Numb. xxxiv. IL,
and “the sea of Galilee” in Jolim. vi. 1,
Beyond Jordan; i7.e. the tract east of the
sea and of the upper Jordan, where the
five tllousand were fel, and where our Lord
was transfigured Galilee of the nations.
The name “ Galilee” seems to lave been
given to the outlying circuit, or zone, on
the north, which was debiutable ground
between the Israelites and their neighbours
(see 1 Kings ix. 10; Josh. xx. 7; xxi. 32).
The word means “circuit,” or “ring.”
Though claimed as theirs by the Israelites,
it was largely peopled by “ Gentiles.”

Ver. 2.—The people that waiked in dark-
ness (comp. ch. viii, 22). All the world
was “in dagkness” when Chuist came; but
here the Jews especially seem to be intended.
It was truly a durk time with them when
Christ came (see D6llinger’s *‘ Judenthum
and Heidenthum,’ vol. ii. pp. 801-335). Have
seen; rather, saw. The “ proplietic” pre-
terite is used throughout the whole pas-age.
A great light. “The Light of the world,”
“the Sun of righteousness,” “ the true Light,
which lighteth every man that cometh into
the world,” first broke on man in that
northern tract “by the way of the sea,”
when Jesus came forward to terch and to
preach in “Galilee of the Gentiles.” For
thirty years he had dwelt at Nazareth, in
Zebulon. There he had first come forward
to teach in a synagogue (Luke iv. 16—21);
in Galilee he had done his first miracles
(John ii. 11; iv. 54); at Capernaum, * upon
the sea coast, in tle borders of Zabulon and
Nephthalim,” he commenced his preaching
of repentance (Matt. iv. 13—17) The
“ight,” first streamed forth in this quarter,


166


glorifying the region on which contempt
had long been poured.

Ver. 3.—Thou hast multiplied the nation,
and not inereased the joy. Dr. Kay defends
this reading, and supposes a contrast of
time between this clause and the next; he
renders, “ Tuou didst multipiy the nation”
(i.e, in the days of Solomon and aga‘n in those
of Uzziah) “ and not increase the joy; but
now,” etc. The objection is that the verbs are
all in the same tense, the simple preterite,
and that there is nothing in the original
corresponding to “but now.” Almost all
other recent commentators accept the solu-
tion offered by the Masoretic reading (15 for
x5), which makes the passage simple and
easy: “Thou hast multiplied the nation ;
its joy thou hast increased; tley joy before
thee,” etc. (So many Hebrew manuscripts,
the Alexandrine Septuagint, the Syriac,
Gesenius, Knolel, Cheyne, ete.) According
to the joyin harvest. “The joy in harvest”
was to the Jews the joy of the Feast of
Tabernacles, or Inguthering (Exod. xxiii. 16),
held when the last fruits were brought in.
But the prophet is perhaps taking a wider
view, and thinking of the many harvest
festivals prevailing throughont Western
Asia, all of them originating in gratitude
to the Giver of all good, and many of them
comprising manifestations of joy more jubi-
lant than those habitual to his sedater
countrymen.

Ver. 4.—Thou hast broken the yoke of his
burden, etc. The coming of the Messiah sets
the Israelites free, removes the yoke from off
their neck, breaks the rod wherewith their
shoulders were beaten, delivers them from
bondage into the “glorious liberty of the
ehildren of God.” Not, however, in an
earthly sense, since the Messiah’s kingdom
was not of this world. The “yoke” is that
of sin, the “oppressor” is that prince of
darkness, who had well-nigh brought all
maukind under his dominion when Christ
came. His oppressor; literally, his task-
master—the samv word which is used of the
Egyptian taskmasters in Exod. v. 6. As in
the day of Midian. ‘he “day of Midian”
is probably the time of Israel’s deliverance
from the Midianite oppression by Gideon
(Judg. vii. 19 —25), The special character-
istic of the (leliverance was, as Dr. Kay well
observes, “ that it was accomplished without
military prowess by a small body of men
selected out of Israel, selected expressly in
order that Israel might not vaunt itself
against the Lord, suyimg, My own hand hath
saved me (Judy. vii. 2).”

Ver. 5.—For every battle of the warrior
is with coniused noise; rather, for all the
armour of him that armeth noisily (Knobel,
Vance Smith); or, perhaps, “every hoof of
nim that tiampeth noisily” (Gesenius,


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


{on. Ix. 1—21.


Cheyne). The noun and participle, which
are cognate words, occur only in this pas-
sage. And garments, ete. Translate, And
every garment that is rolled in blool, shill be
for burning, even fuel for fire. All military
accoutrements shall be committed to the
flames, that the reign of peace and justice
may commence (comp. ch. ii. 4; Ps. xlvi. 9).

Ver. 6.—Unato us a child is born (comp. ch.
vii. 14—16, where the promise of ‘a child,” “a
son,” is first made—a child who was, like this
Child, to be “God with us”). The govern-
ment shall be upon his shoulder. The word
translated “ government” (misrah) occurs
only here and in ver. 7. It is probably to
be conuected with sar, “ prince,” and Isra-el.
Government was regarded as a burden, to be
borne on the back or sioulders, and was
sometimes symbolized by a key laid upon
the shoulder (ch. xxii. 22). Vizier means
“burdened.” The Latin writers often
speak of the civil power as borne on the
shoulders of magistrates (Cic., ‘ Orat. pro
Flacc.,’ § 94; Plin., ‘ Paneg.,’ §10). As God,
our Lord governed ail things from the be-
ginning; as ian, he set up a “ kingdom ”—
which he still governs—upon the eurth.
His name shail be called. It is perhaps not
very important wheter we view what fol-
lows as one name or several. Isaiah doen
not really mean that the “Child” should
bear as a name, or namics, any of the expres.
sions, but only that they should be truly
applicable to him. Wonderiul, Counsellor
It has been proposed to unite these two
expressions and translate, ‘“* Wondrous Coun-
selior” (compare “ wonderful in counsel,”
ch. xxvii, 29). But Dr. Kay is probably
right in saying that, if this had been the
meaning, it would have been expressed
differently. | Gesenius, Rosenmiiller, De-
litzsch, and Vance Smith agree with Dr.
Kay in taking the words separately.  Won-
derful. The Messiah would be “ wonderful ”
in his nature_as Giod-Man; in his teaching,
which “astonished” those who hcard it
(Matt. vii. 28); in his doings (ch. xxv. 1);
in the citgumstances of his hath and death ;
in his resurrection, and in his ascension.
“Wonder” would be the first sentiment
which his manifestation would provoke, and
hence this descriptive epithet is placed
first. As the Word, as Wisdom itself, as
he who says, “Counsel is mine, and sound
wisdom: 1am Understanding” (Prov. viii.


14), he is well named “Counsellor.”
None will ever seek his counsel in yain,
much less repent of following it. The


mighty God; rather, perhaps, Mighty God ;
but the difference is not great, since £l,
God, contains within itself the notion of
singularity, which is given to ordinary
nouns by the article. The term El, God,
had been previously applied to the Messiah


OH. Ix. 1—21.]


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


167


only in Ps. xlv. 6. It denotes in Isaiah
always (as Mr. Cheyne observes) “ divinity
in an absolute sense; it *is never used
hyperbolicaliy or metaphorically.” The
Everlasting Father; rather, Hverlasting or
Eternal Father. But here, again, there is a
singularity in the idea, which makes the
omission of the article unimportant; for how
could there be more than one Everlasting
Father, one Creator, Preserver, Protector of
mankind who was absolutely eternal? If
the term “ Father,” applied to our Lord,
grates on our ears, we must remember that
the distinction of Persons in the Godhead
had not yet been revealed. The Prince of
Peace; literally, Prince of Peace. A “ Prince
of Peace ” had been long siiadowed forth, as
in Melchizedek, “ King of Salem,” i.e. * of
Peace; ” aud again in Solomon, “ the peace-
ful one;” and Isaiah himself had already
prophesied the peacefulness of the Messiah’s
kingdom (ch. ii. 4). Compare the song of
the angels at our Lord’s birth (Luke ii. 14).
If the peacefulness has not yet very clearly
shown itself, the reason would seem to be
that our Lord’s kingdom has yet to come
into the hearts of most men.

Ver. 7.—Of the increase of his government
and peace there shall be no end. ‘The
Messiah’s kingdom shall ever increase more
and more; there shall be no limits to it;
ultimately it shall fill the world (comp.
Matt. xxviii. 18,19). The continual spread
of Christianity tends to the accomplishment
of this prophecy. Upon the throne of David,
and upon his kingdom. That the Messiah
is to sit on the throne of David, suggests,
but does not absolutely imply, his Davidic
descent. That descent is, however, an-
nounced with sufficient clearness in ch. xi.
1,10. To order it, and to establish it. A
gradual establishment of the kingdom would
seem to be implied, such as is taught also
in the parables of the mustard seed and the
leaven. From henceforth even for ever.
The kingdom is to be both universal in
respect of extent (see the first note on the
verse), and in respect of duration eternal.
The zeal; or, jealousy. God’s jealousy of
his own honour, which is bound up with the
prosperity and final triumph of his people
over all their enemies, will assure the per-
formance of all that is here prophesied.


Vers. 8—21.—THe PROPHET RETURNS TO
THREATS AND WARNINGS, ADDRESSED CHIEFLY
ro THE Kinepom or IsragL. The remainder
of this chapter, together with the first four
verses of the next, seems to have formed
originally a distinct and separate prophecy.
The passage is a poem in four stanzas, with
the same refrain at the end of each: “ For
ail this his anger is not turned away, but his


hand is stretched out still.” A somewhat
early date has been assigned to the pro-
phecy, as, for instance, “some period in the
reign of Jotham” (Cheyne); but the in-
ternal evidence only proves that it was
written before the destruction of Samaria by
the Assyrians,

Ver. 8.—Jacob . . . Israel. These words
do not show that the propiecy is directed
against the kingdom of Israel only.
“ Jacob” designates Judiuh rather than
Israel in ch. ii. 3, 5, 6; and the expression,
“both the houses of Israel,” in ch. viii. 14,
shows that the term “Israel” embraces both
kingloms. The distinctive names by which
Isaiah ordinarily designates the northern
kingdom are “ Ephraim” and “ Samaria.”

Ver. 9.—Even Ephraim ; rather, especially
Ephraim. The prophecy is no doubt mainly
directed against the northern kingdom.
That say in the pride and stoutness of
heart; rather, in the pride and stoutness of
heart, wherein they say

Ver. 10.—The bricks are fallen down,
ete.; we. we have suff'rd a moderate
damage, but we will more than make up for
it; ull our losses we will replace with some-
thing better. Bricks were the ordinary
material for the poorer class of houses in
Palestine; stone was reserved for the dwell-
ings of the rich and vreat (Amos vy, 11).
Sycomore wood was the commonest sort of
timber, cedar the scarcest and most pre-
cious, having to be imported from Phoenicia
(1 Kings v. 6; 2 Chron, ii. 3; Ezra iii. 7).
(On the contrast between cedar and sycomore
wood, comp. 2 Chron. i. 15.) Cut down.
The Israelites probibly alluded to damage
done by Tiglath-Pileser in his first invasion.
The Assyrians were in the habit of actually
cutting down trees in foreign countries, in
order to injure and weaken them; but the
present passage is, perhaps, rather intended
to be figurative.

Ver. 11.—Therefore the Lord shall set
up the adversaries of Rezin against him.
“ Against him” means ‘against Ephraim,”
or the kingdom of Israel. “ The adversiries
of Rezin” could only be the Assyrians;
but these seem precluded by the next
verse, which mentions only “Syrians” and
Philistines.” Henee many critics accept
the variant reading of several manuscripts
— sarey for tsarey—which gives the sense of
“the princes of Rezin” (so Lowth, Ewald,
Houbigant, Weir, Cheyne).

Ver. 12.—The Syrians before, and the
Philistines behind; or, the Syrians from the
east, and the Philistines from the west
Tiie Semitic races regarded the world as
looking to the rising sun, and used for the
east the preposition signifying “in front,”


168


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


(cu. rx. 1—21.


for the west that signifying ‘ behind.”
Syria seems to have been hostile to Samaria
until thy league was formed between Rezin
and Pekah, and may have become hostile
again after Pekah’s death (2 Chron. xxviii.
23). We read of a Puilistine invasion of
Judah in Chronicles (2 Chron. xxviii. 18),
but not of their attacking Israel. Still, it
was as easy for them to attack the one as
the other. They abutted on the territory
of Israel] towards the south-west, as Syria
did towards the north-east. For all this his
anger is not turned away; since Israel
coutinned impenitent. It would have cea-ed
had they repented and turned to God (see
ver. 13). His hand is stretched out; not
to save, but to smite.

Ver. 13.—The people. The people of
Israel, as distinct from the people of Judah.
The particular judgment announced in
vers. 11, 12 is clearly to fall on them.
Neither do they seek the Lord of hosts.
Israel had sct itself to seek after Baal from
the time of Ahab (1 Kings xvi. 31). The
reform of Jcebu (2 Kings x. 28) had gone
but skin-dvep. Baal was still “sought to,”
rather than Jehovah, when the final judg-
ment came (2 Kings xvii. 16; Hos. ii. 13).

Ver. 14 —Head and tail, branch and rush;
i.e. the whole nation, from the highest to
the lowest. The“ branch” intended is the
“palm branch,” at once lofty in position
and the most glorious form of vegvtable life
(Ps. xcii. 12; Cant. vii. 7, 8, ete.); the
“rush” is the simple “sedge” that grows,
not only low on the ground, but iu the
“mire” (Job viii. 11). The same expres-
sion occurs again in ch. xix. 15,

Ver. 15.—some suppose this verse to be
a gloss, or marginal note, which has crept
into the text; but it is too pointed and
sarca-tic for a mere gloss. here is no
reason to doubt its being [saiah’s. Having
spoken of “the tail,” he takes the oppor-
tunity of lashing the false prophet, who
claimed to be among the * honouruble,” but
was really the lowest of the low, worse than
his dupes, the true “ tail” (comp, ch. xxviii.
(eXSixe 0 exxxe 10);

Ver. 16.—The leaders of this people cause
them to err (comp. ch. iii, 12). Both the
peoples were led into idolatry by their
rulers, but Israel especially. Jcroboam, the
first king, introduced the calf-worship, and
his successors from first to last persisted
in his sin. Ahab added the still grosser
idolatry of Bual. Those who held high
position under the kings were equally bad
examples to the people (see above, ch, i. 23).
Are destroyed. First, morally corrupted
and debased, then physically given over
to destruction—slaughtered by Philistines,
Syrians, aud Assyrians.

Ver. 17.—The Lord shall have no joy in


their young men. “The Lord taketh plea-
sure in them that fear him, in those that
hope in his mérey” (Ps. exlvii. 11). He
can have no joy or delight in evil-doers,
or idolaters, or in those whose speech is
profanity. Neither shall have mercy on


their fatherless and widows. The widow
and the orphan are objocits of God’s
tenderest love and comyjassion (Hxod.


xxii -27 Dent. xa lS exiveZosmieheis 17.
etc.); but when the wicked .1ess of a land
provokes him to send any ore of bis “ four
sore judgments ” upon it, the widow and the
fatherless must suffer with the other in-
habitants. God pitics them, doubtless, but
his justice and his righteous anger force
him to restrain his pity, and carry out his
judgment in spite of it. Every one is an
hypocrite; or, corrupt; compare, ‘ They are
all gone aside, they are all together become
filthy; there is none that doeth good, no,
not one” (Ps. xiv. 3). A certain allowance
must be made for the natural hyperbole of
stroug feelimg. Every mouth speaketh folly.
The word translated here (and generally)
“folly” is rendered “ villauy ” in ch. xxxii.
6 and Jer. xxix. 23. Its proper meaning
seems to be “ lewduess” or “ protliguey.”

Ver. 18.—Wickedness burneth as the fire;
i.e. the contagion of wickeduess overspreads
a whole nation in the same rapid way that
fire spreads over a field of stubble or
a forest. They shall mount up like the
lifting up of smoke; rather, they—i.e. the
forest thickets—shall he whirled upward
with the uplifting of smoke. Vhe burning
thickets shall mount up with the volumes
of smoke into the air, and hang there ag
a murky but lurid pall. The flames of
wick: dness give no light to a land, but
plunge it in heavy, hopeless glooin.

Ver. 19.—Is the land darkened; rather,
burnt up (ovyiéxavta, LXX.). The root
used occurs in Arabic in this sense. It is
not used elsewhere in Scripture. The people
shali be as the fuel of the fire. Though
the general ravage, devastatiou, and deso-
lation of the land, with its buildings, its
trees, and its other vegetable products, is
included in the image of the fire devouring
the thorny brakes and tangled thickets of
a dense forest, yet the threat is intended
still more agaiust tlie Israelite people, who
were the true “fuel of the fire,” since the
ravage would go on until the land should
be depopulated. No man shall spare his
brother, We have here a new feature.
Not only shall foreign enemies—Syrians and
Philistines—devour Israel, but the plague
of civil war will also be let loose upon
them (comp. ver. 21, and see 2 Kings xv. 30,
where we find that Pekah fell a victim to
a conspiracy headed by Hoshea),

Ver. 20.—He shall snatch; rather, ene


OH. Ix. 1—21.]


shall devour, A man, i.e. shall plunder and
ravage in one quurter, and yet not be satis-
fied ; tien he shall do the same in another,
and still desire more. “ Increase of appetite
shall grow by what it feeds on.” There
shall be no sense of satiety anywhere. The
flesh of his own arm. In a civil war, or
& time of anarchy, each man is always
“eating the flesh of his own arm ”—i.e.
injuring his neighbour, who is his own
natural protector and defender.


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


ST


169


Ver. 21.—Manasseh, Ephraim. These
two are mentioned as the two principal
tribes of the northern kingdom (comp.
1 Chron. ix. 3; 2 Chron. xxx. 1, 10, 18;
xxxi. 1; xxxiv. 9). It is not to be sup-
posed that civil discord was confined te
them. Probably there was a general dis-
organization. Siill, all the tribes would at
any time willingly unite “together against
Judah” (see 2 Kings xv. 37; 2 Chron.
XXvili. 6—8),


HOMILETICS.


Ver. 6.—The significancy of the names of Christ. Five names of the Redeemer are
here declared by Isaiah, in addition to the name given him in ch. vii—viii., viz.
Immanuel. Names of Christ are always worthy of the deepest and most attentive
consideration, lor each reveals some portion of his nature, each exhibits some aspect of
him, so to speak, which is distinct from other aspects; and it is only by meditating
upon all, that we approximate to a full and complete conception of his manifold
excellences. Very specially worthy of consideration are the five names here put forth,
which may be viewed either separately or in their connection. And first separately—

I. Toe name or “ Wonperru.” 1. Wonderful is the Son in his etegyal relation
to the Almighty Father, an unchanging relation of mutual love and tenderness,
differenced by the fact of derivation, and the sense on the one hand of bestowal, and
on the other of acceptance and dependence. Wonderful, wholly transcending our
utmost_reach of thought, is that eternity of pre-existence which he enjoyed with the
Father and the Holy Spirit, not only before the world was, but before it had pleased
the Divine Nature to bring into existence any other being besides itself. 2. Wonderful,
again, is he in that repeated act of creation, so clearly assigned to him (John i. 31; Heb.
i, 2), whereby he brought out of nothing (Heb. xi. 3) the entire existing universe—
angels and archangels, principalities and pgwers, cherybim and serayhim; matter
arranged and unarranged; sun, moon, stars, planets, satellites, nebule; man, animals ;
—all of them “the work of his hans,” created by him out of nop-exigtence. 3.
Even more wonderful is he in his dealings with the children of men—in his patience
with them, his regard for them, his mediatorial office towards them, his inward
revelation of himself to them, his constant presence with them, his sacramental
communication of himself te them, all unworthy as they are. 4. Wonderful is he in
his life on earth, which even unbelievers cannot but admire; wonderful in his triumph
over death and the grave; wonderful in his ascension into heaven in the sight of men ;
wonderful in his appearances to St. Paul and St. Stephen; wonderful in the might
wherewith he still sustains his Church, so that even the very “gates of hell” cannot
prevail against it.

Il. Tue Name oF “CounseLior.” As the “ Logos,” or “ Reason,” no less than the
“ Word” of God, the Son was identified by the ancient Fathers With the “ Wisdom ”
of the Buok of Proverbs, of whom it is said, “1 Wisdom dwell with prudence, and find
out knowledge. . . . Counsel_is mine, and sound_wisdam; I am understanding... .
The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old. I was set
up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was... . When he appointed
the fou..dations of the earth, then I was by him, as one brought up with him; and I
was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him” (Prov. viii. 12—30). He was
thus, in some sort, the Counsellor of the Triune Synod which presided over the world
and directed ail its affairs. But, further, he was the Counsellor of man, The Logos was
“the true Light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world” (John i. 9).
Our natural reason and conscience come from him, for he has implanted them in us,
to counsel us aright. All revealed light is also from him, for he is the Word and the
Truth. He counsels us from wii, by the inward moyitor who tells us what is right ;
he counsels us from without, by “his apostles, his evangelists, his Church, his living
ministers. Do we lack w*-?™ generally ? let us ask of him, and he will pour ‘light


170 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (on. 1x. 1—21,


into our souls. Do we need counsel on any special matter? let us take it to him, and
he will show us the wisest and best course.

Ill. Tue name or “Miaury Gop.” The Son of Gud is himself God, and if God,
then certainly “ mighty ”—nay, “alinighty.” What the Messiah was to do, could be
done by none less than God. He was to redeem mankind; he was to vanquish degth
and sin; he was to triumph over Satan; he was to be a meritorious Sacrifice. “ God
with us” had already been declared to be one of his names (ch. vii. 14). Now he is
announced as “God the Mighty One.” It is to the last degree uncritical to compare
this assignment of so august a name, coming from the mouth of an intense theist,
with the ascription of Divine titles to the Eyyptian kings by themselves, or by their
subjects, when both king and subjects were polytheists. Isaiah could not have
intended to call a mere man “God ;” he must have recognized, as David had done
(Ps. xlv. 6), that the Messiah would be more than man, would in some way or other
be a partaker of the Divine nature. Jeremiah did the same when he announced the
Messiah as “Jehovah our Righteousness.” The prophets may not have been aware
of the doctrine of the Trinity, but they could conceive an incarnation of God. The
name of “ Mighty God” in Isaiah’s list must be accepted as a distinct announcement
of the true Divinity of the Messiah, just as the words “ child” and “son,” which had
been previously applied to him (ver. 6), were announcements of his true humanity.

IV. THe name or “ Everiastinc Faruer.” When the Messiah is called a
“‘Wather,’ we must understand the word as meaning primarily “ Protector.” So Job
was a “ father to the poor” (Job xxix. 16), and Eliakim a “‘ather to the Ber rs
of Jerusalem ” (ch. xxii, 11). The idea of protection, however, implied in “ lathér ”
does not exhaust the connotation of the word. It contains also the notions of
“Creator” and “ Preserver,” of one whom we are bound to love, honour, and obey.
“ Have we not all one father?” says Malachi. “Hath not one God created us?” “ If
I be a Father,” says Jehovah by his mouth, ‘‘ where is my honour ?” Tne Messiah was
to be “ Father ” in all these senses. As the Second Person in the Holy ‘l'riuity, he created
man; as “ God with us,” he preserves him ; as the typical Man, the Head of the redeemed
human race, he will ever keep and protect him. ‘The prophet calls him “ Everlasting
Father,” first, to show that he is no mere human protector, like Job or Mliakim; but
also, further, to indicate by an additional phrase his Divinity, since God alone is
“ everlasting,” or “eternal.” His people are assured by the epithet that he will
never cease to be their Protector, will never desert them, or weary of interposing for
them. No; “he ever liveth to make intercession for us ” (Heb. vii. 25). He is
“ Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the Ending, the First and the Last ” (Rev. i. 8).
He “ will not fail us, nor forsake us” (Deut. xxxi. 6).

V. THE NAME or “Prince oF Pace.” So long as there is evil, there must be war
between good and evil. The Messiah is “ Prince of Peace,” especially, because he comes
to convert the world; to “ turn men from darkness to light, and frum the power of Satan
unto God;” to destroy siu, and “ bring in everlasting righteousness ” (Ian. ix. 24),
When there is universal righteousness, there will be universal peace. Certainly, the
time is not yet come. The Prince of a peaceful kingdom, whose servants may not
seek to advance his kingdom by violence, has not annihilated evil, has not swept all the
wicked from the world. And so the fizht goes on; evil men still stir up wars and
tumults, and good men are forced to resist them. But the “ Prince of Peace” shows
his power and justifies his name, (1) in the peace that he introduces intv the hearts
that love him ; (2) in the peace found wherever the Spirit of Christ prevails, as in pious
households, in brotherhoods and sisterhoods, in assemblies of Christian men like our
convocations, etc.; (3) in the comparative peace that obtains in Christian lands, the
growrre desire for peace and hatred of war, the readiness to resort to arbitration, and
the like,

Taken in connection, the five names would seem to teach (1) the mysteriousness of
Christ’s-nature, which lies at the very basis of Christianity, and upon whicr-att chee
built; (2) the wisdom of his teaching, which makes him our only safe “ Counsellor ; ”
(3) the power which he has, as “‘ Mighty God,” to accomplish all his desi-ns in his
own good time; (4) the love which leads him to exert this power continually in the
protection of his Church; and (5) the peaceful condition to which he will in the end
bring his Church, when its probation is accomplished and he comes to reign over it aa


OH. Ix. 1—21.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 171


Se eee


its visible King. The names begin in the past, advance to the present, and end in the
far future. They first bespeak our reverence and awe, the foundations of religious
feeling. They then call forth our trust, showing Christ to us all-wise, almighty. ‘They


end by eliciting our love towards him as a protecting “ Father,” who will at last
conduct us to perfect peace.


Vers. 8—21.—Persistent impenitence brings repeated chastisements. One would
naturally expect that so weak a creature as man, when chastised by the Divine anger,
would readily and at once “ humble himself under the almighty hand of (iod,” accept
the chastisement as deserved, and entreat for mercy and forgiveness. But, weak as he
is, man is unwilling to acknowledge his weakness, and, faulty as he is, dislikes nothing
so much as acknowledging his faults. God’s judgments he will not allow to be
judgments, but attributes them to any cause but God; as, for instance, (1) to his own
mistakes; (2) to accident or chance; (8) to fate; (4) to some combination of circum-
stances not likely to recur. God brought upon Israel four great chastisements, placing
intervals between them, so that after each they might have repented and turned to
him, had they so willed. But they would not. These chastisements were—

I. Tus AssyRisN INVASION UNDER TIeLaTH-PiLEeser. This was a comparatively
“light affliction,” as God’s earlier judgments commonly are. It fell, not on the whole
land, but only on a portion—* the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali;” and it
resulted in the loss, not of national life or national independence, but only of a province
or two not very highly valued. ‘‘ Galilee of the Gentiles ” was overrun and annexed
by Assyria; but Ephraim and Manasseh, the great tribes which formed the heart of
the nation, were untouched. Still, the invasion was a warning which a wise nation
would have taken to heart. When dismemberment begins, it is apt to be continued;
each fresh act of spoliation is easier than the last. And the agzressor is encouraged
by his success, and tempted to repeat his aggression. But Israel was not wise. She
consoled herself by “ pride and stoutness of heart,” making light of her losses, and
boasting that she would easily repair them (ver. 10). Her pride and impenitence
provoked God to inflict a second chastisement.

I. THe coMBINED PHILISTINE AND SyRiAN aTTack. Of this we know no more
than what is told us in the present chapter. Attack was mide “ before ” and “ behind ”
—from the east and from the west. Jehovah “joined the enemies o! Israel together ”
(ver. 11), and caused them to make a combined, or at any rate a simultaneous, invasion.
Both enemies were formidable, and Israel was unable to meet either with her full force.
Consequently they were successful, and “devoured Israel with open mouth.” Could
not this second chastisement arouse the nation from its mistaken feeling of security,
and bring it to cast itself down before God? Alas! no. The people “ turned not to
him that had smitten them, neither did they seek the Lord of hosts” (ver. 13). The
result was that a third chastisement fell.

IIl. THe iNTERNAL ANARCHY AND DISTURBANCE. Hostility to the kindred tribe ot
Judah lay at the base of Israel’s existence as a nation, and was cherished by statesmen
as a patriotic feeling. But it was impossible to keep the feeling as closely confived as
statesmen would have wished. Within Israel itself one tribe grew jealous of another ;
and, under the diminished strength of the central autiority caused by the external
troubles of the time, jealousy led on to open conflict, “no man sparing his brother ”
(ver. 19). As Rome perished by her own strength, when faction became arrayed
avainst faction in the forum and the field, so it seems to have been with Israel.
Internal quarrel supervened upon foreign attack; and the weakened state, when a
fresh assault from without came, necessarily succumbed to it. Repentance, even at
this advanced hour, might have caused God to avert the danger and turn the current
of Assyrian conquest in some other direction; but once more, there was no sub-
mission, no sign of any change of heart. And at last the dread fiat went forth for
Samaria’s final destruction. ‘he fourth and last chastisement was —

IV. THE CONQUEST OF SAMARIA, AND CARRYING AWAY OF ISRAEL INTO CAPTIVITY,
BY THE ASSYRIANS UNDER SHALMANESER AND Sarcon. The same instrument,
Assyria, was employed tor the first chastisement and the last. Shalmaneser, the
successor of Tiglath-Pileser, towards the middle of his short reign, having found
conspiracy in Hoshea”—who had murdered Pekah and succeeded him—“came up


172 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. ix. 1—21.


throughout all the land of Israel, and went up to Samaria, and besieged it three years”
(2 Kines xvii. 5). At the end of the three years the city fell, about the same time
(p.c. 722) that Sargon, having murdered Shalimaneser at Nineveh, caused himself to
be proclaimed supreme ruler of the Assyrian empire. Sargon, following a recognized
Assyrian practice, deported the principal part of the population, and scttled it partly
in Upper Mesopotamia, partly in the cities of Media (2 Kings xvii. 6). The life of the
nation thus came to an end. God had borne with it for two centuries and a half—tried
it, tested it, sent it prophets and scers (2 Kinzs xvii, 13), chastened it, corrected it;
but all in vain. Notwithstanding all that be could do and did, “ they would not hear,
but hardened their necks, like to the neck of their fathers, and rejected his statutes,
and his covenant that he made with their fathers, and his testimouies which he
testified avainst them; and lollowed vanity, and became vain, and went alter the
heathen that were round about them, and left all the commandments of the Lord their
God, and sould themselves to do evil in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger”
(2 Kings xvii. 14—17). Nothing, therefore, remained but to “ remove them out of his
sight ’—to sweep them away with the besom of destruction,

The fate of Israel isa warniny, primarily, to nations; but also, secondarily, to indi-
viduals. God lays his chastisements on them too, for the purpose of bringing them to
repentance. If they resist and are impenitent, he follows up blow with blow. If
they remain obdurate, he breaks their pride and crushes them.


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1—7.— Vision of future glory. In bright contrast to the preceding gloomy
outlook, bursts the enrapturing view of future glory on the prophet’s soul.

J. CoMPENSATION FOR PAST SUFFERING. Not for ever is the land to lie darkened.
A great livhtof deliverance is to appear. The prophet’s glance rests on the northern
and eastern portions of the kingdom of I‘phraim. They had been conquered by Assyria,
and the people carried away captive (2 Kings xv. 29), But “as the former time brought
shame to Zebulon and Naphtali, the latter also bringeth honour towards the sea, beyond
the Jordan, towards the heathen-march.” The depopulated land will bask in the
sunshine of restored prosperity. Asseibing “ before Jehovah,” ze. in his sacred place,
they will rejvice as at a harvest ingathering, or at a division of spoil after victory. For
the Assyrian yoke will be broken, and crushing will be the defeat of the foes of the
nation, like that of Midian in days of yore. Every trace of war and barbarity will be
placed under a ban, and be destroyed by fire—the boot that had clanked on the heel
of the forcign soldier, and the red battle-garment.

Il. THE EVERLASTING KINGDOM oF PEACE. The pledge of its establishment is the
promise of the wondrous Child. 1. //és names. Not ouly Immanuel, God with us, is
he to be called; but other names bes}xak his attributes as a great Prince. Wonderful
Counsellor : against whose deep providence no plots can contend, and conspiracies of
short-sichted craft will be in vain. Hero- God: invincible in battle. Hverlasting Father:
maiutaining and fostering his people, educating them by law and by love. Prince of
peace: who will cause wars to cease to the ends of the earth, “The empire is peace,”
was the noted word of a potentate of one time, that charmed the ear for the moment,
only to deceive men’s hopes. None but the Messiah can assure peace to the nations, ag
nothing but the fellowship of the truth and of justice can disincline the nations to war.
2. The nuture of his yovernment. It is for “endless weal.” It is to resume, in the
deepest and best sense, the weli-remembered glories of David’s kingdom. It is to be
supported, not by countless battalions (“The Lord delighteth not in the legs of a man”
but by “justice and righteousness hencetorth and for ever.” Its spread will include
the spread of true religion. Hence it may be confidently expected that the “zeal of
Jehovah,” the ever-burning energy of Divine love, will bring to pass these happy
results,

“The great Shepherd reigns,
And his unsuffering kingdom yet will come.” J.


Ver. 7—ch. x. 4.—Oracles concerning Samaria. I. ConcERNING ITS INFATUATED
PRIDE. (Vers. 8—12.) The word of menace is to fall like a heavy weight upon the


cH. rx, 1—21.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 173


ee er nn —


nation, a “ burden” especially to be felt by the kingdom of the ten tribes (cf. Zech.
ix.1). It has been made tributary to the Assyrians, yet imagines it will recover its
former power by violence and predatory raids, In their bravado they exclaim, “Though
the bricks fall down, we will build with freestone; and though sycomores are
felled, we will make cedars spring up instead!” ‘To punish this insolence, Jehovah
has armed its smaller enemies against it—Syrians in the north-east, Philistines in the
south-west ; and severer judgments are to follow. The cup is not yet full; the avenging
hand is still stretched out. ‘The strophe gives us a picture of infatuation, leading to
obstinate resistance and incurring accumulation of punishment. We may be reminded
of that fine picture in Homer of Até, the spirit of error or bewilderment, who with soft
feet walks above men’s heads, and who would lead all astray to their ruin (‘ Iliad,
xix. 91, sqq.). Yet neither the nation nor the individual falls a prey to such tempta-
tions without guilt, though where the guilt begins it may be difficult to trace. The
temper of insolence and bravado is a s)mjtom of this aberration creepiny on. What
need have we to pray that the “eyes of our mind may be opened,” that we may never
have the livht of discernment between the “spirit of truth and the spirit of error” put
out in our bosom!

II. ConcerNING ITS OBSTINATE IMPENITENCE. The nation “turns not to him that
smote it.” It hears not the rod and who hath appointed it. Suffering either changes
the disposition and bends the will upon new objects, or it rouses the temper to deter-
mined perseverance in the evil course. Men must know the time to retreat and turn
back no less than to go forward in a given course. For, as patient continuance in well-
doing is blessed with highest promises, the harshness of the impenitent heart treasures
up against itself a store of wrath. In this case a visible destruction has come upon
Israel. A day of battle has taken place; “head and tail, palm and rush,” officers
and privates in the army alike, have been cut off. For the leaders of Israel have
proved misleaders, and their blind followers have perished. And the prophet represents
Jehovah as looking sternly on, neither rejoicing in the youth of the nation, nor pity-
ing its disasters. Suffering unrelieved by pity, woes over which Heaven frowns
rather than expands with infinite smiles of hope,—such things follow impenitence and
wilfulness.

IL]. CoNcERNING ITS FLAGRANT INIQUITIES. We say flagrant, and this word exactly
fits the prophet’s description: “ Wrong burning like fire, devouring thorn and thistle,
and kindling the thickets of the forest, so that they curl up in columns of smoke.”
Covetousni'ss devours and ravages like a famine or a pest. Every one begins to devour
his own arm in insatiate greed; that is, one tribe its brother-tribe. Not content with
mutual rapacity, Manasseh against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasseh, the two
turn against Judah. And so again and avain the deep warning reverberates: “ His
anger is not turned away; his hand is stretched out still.”

IV. ConcERNING JUDICIAL WICKEDNESS AND THE FINAL Issue. Here the prophet
seems to turn to Judah. As one of Jehovah’s noblest attributes is that o! Father of the
fatherless, and as justice is his delight, so nothing can more darkly desiznate offence
against him than the spoliation of the widow and the orphan. Here, then, the climax
of denunciation is reached. And the prophet has now ouly to hint the future judgment
and overthrow. What will they do in the day of visitation? What refuge will be
open? What retreat in which a false glory may be hidden? They will crinze as
prisoners, and as slain they will fall. Better to have the troubled heart, which never-
theless finds its refuge in God, than the reckless self-confidence which invites his
anger. Poverty of spirit—ayainst this no prophetic doom is hurled; and adversity
with honesty is no real adversity, for the hand of Jehovah is here stretched out, not
to smite, but to help.—J.


Ver. 2.—The dawn of gospel day. “The people that walked in darkness have
seen a great light; they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them
bath the light shined.” ‘he glory which God reveal:d thew through the prophet was
but a prelude to that greater glory which the Incarnation made manifest. So much so
that these words are used in Matt, iv. 16, and relate to Jesus leaving Nazareth and
coming to Capernaum, upon the sea coast, in the borders of Zabulon and Nephthalim,
that so the prophecy might be ful illed.


174 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. rx. 1—2L


ee ee


L Tax Great parkness. History attests that of which prophecy foretells. There
was moral darkness. Look at Corinth—so much so that to Corinthianize was to play
the wanton. Look at Ephesus. Look at Rome, with its lust and licence; its terrible
realism in the cruel sports of the amphitheat e, stained with the massacre of beasts
and with the gladiators’ blood. Think of the intcll ctual darkness, when even the city
of philosophy, proud Athens, erected an altar—which was a monument of its failure
in the search after wisdom—* to the unknown God.”

I. Tue sompre sHapow. “The land of the shadow of death.” This language does
not apply aloue to the article of death itself. Every hopeless sorrow is a shadow of the
grave. Death reigned supreme over human thouzht. There was no “looking for-
ward” which could comfort the weary heart of man in its bereavements and griefs,
Over city and throne, over the groves of phiiosophy and the gardeus of pleasure, the same
shadow brooded. So that the gloom came not alone when life drew near to its close,
but the lone dark shadow fell over all the pursuits and hopes of human life. As we
think of all this we shall understand what the prophet means by a “great” light. For
the wondrous vlory of the Saviour’s revelation of “life and immortality ” none of us can
overestimate. It changed the face of society, and turned the weeping eyes of a weary
world to glory, honour, immortality, and eterual life.

Ill. Toe wetcome tient, Light makes all things beautiful. And light from
“above ” transhzures the lot of man. It turns his afflictions into momentary tribu-
lations, aid makes him to look, not on the things which are seen and temporal, but on
those which are unseen and eternal. It is related, therefore, to human life as weil as
spiritual lile. Heaven is not only “the rest that remaineth;” its spirit pervades the
entire sphere of our earthly history. Everywhere that blessed light shines; and whilst
it makes us patievt ard hopeful in adversity, it gives cheerfuluess to our pursuits and
sacredness to our friendships—inasmuch as we are his disciples who said, “ Let not your
heart be troubled . . . I go to prepare a place for you.,—W. M.S.


Vers. 1, 2.— Great light in deep darkness. In wrath God remembers mercy; he
makes us to “sing of mercy and of judgment.” He “will not always chide, nor keep
his anger for ever.” Even unto disobedient and perverse Israel he will maniiest his
Divine pity, his redeeming power, Respecting this promise we may note-—

I. Its nisToRIcAL FULFILMENT. ‘This, in the literal and primary sense, is involved
in no slight obscurity (see Exposition). The difficulty in determining the period when

* these regions saw the licht of liberty and plenty alter the time of darkness and desola-
tion is pai: fully sugzestive of the fact that it is a very difficult thing to find any
instances o! a nation that has once lost its place and power recovering its position.
Ziven those which have had the best opportunities of so doing have failed to use them;
witness Egypt, Greece, Rome. It seems as if nations could “find no place of repent~
ance.” ‘Ihe fact may well stir every patriotic feeling in our breasts, and make us
resolute to iniuse into all our laws, customs, institutions, the purifying and preserving
influences of Christian truth.

Il, Ivs supREME ILLUSTRATION. (Matt. iv. 15, 16.) Undoubtedly this passage finds
its culminating fulfilment in the advent and the work of Christ. “ That was the true
Light which, coming into the world, enlighteneth every one.” 1. The era when Jesus
was born was one of peculiar darkness. Iynorance, vice, superstition, violence, lanati-
cism, unbelief, despair,—these abounded as never before. 2. He became tne Light of
the world, (1) His truth illumined the dark valleys of error; (2) his live shed a
bright light on the life of man; (8) his redeeming death opened and made clear to al!
mankind the way of return and restoration to God.

Il. Its REALIZATION IN THE CHRISTIAN ERA. 1. Among peoples. Many are the
communities, larger or lesser, which, found in gross darkness, have been enlightened by
the gospel of the grace of God. Beside the various European nations and our own
islands, there are such places as Greenland, the islands of Polynesia, Madagascar, ete.
2. In individual men. Down into the human soul, into the mind dark with unbelief
or crusted over with worldliness, or blinded by prejudice and consequent misconception
or bezuiled and led astray by evil passion or some strong, spiritual hallucination there
has shone the light of Christian truth, a “healing ray fiom heaven;” and he that
walked “in the shadow of death” now dwells in the light of God, and will dwell in hig


cu. rx. L—21.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 175


SS | esi


glory. (1) We may all open our hearts to its shining; (2) we have the fatal
power of rk a them if we choose; (3) we are all invited to reflect and multiply its
beams.— C,


Ver. 6.—Spiritwal empire. “ And the government shall_be upon his shoulder.”

I, THE ACHIEVEMENT WHICH LAY OUTSIDE THE PURPOSE OF THE Son oF Gop. For
what end was that wondrous Child born, that holy Son given? He came not to
restore a fallen human dy~asty. The most ardent and eager hopes of his countrymen
were directed to the overthrow of the Roman power and to the re-establishment of the
kingdom of David in all, and more than all, its pristine glory, Jesus Christ distinctly
disavowed any such purpose as this. His kingdom, he said, was not “of this world.”

Il. THE SPIRITUAL EMPIRE WHICH HE CAME TO ESTABLISH. We shall see what and
how truly great this was if we consider: 1. In what condition Christ found the world
when he came, He found it (1) with its mind full_of fatal error—the favoured people
having sunk into a dreary, witheriny fo ism, and the whole Gentile world into
idolatry or unbelief; (2) with its heart full of pride, selfishness, and hatred; (3) with
its life full of unrighteousness and impurity. 2. What he came to accomplish in regard
to it. He came to undo all this; to expel this blighting error; to uproot this pride,
cruelty, and selfishness ; to abolish this iniquity and enormity; to plant and nourish
in the mind and heart and life of man the beautiful and admirable opposites of all this
—truth, humility, love, richteousness; and so to exercise a beneficent and transcendent
power, and so to take the government of the world upon his shoulder. 3. he only
way by which he could gain his end. Christ knew that the one way to exert this
renovating power, to wield this victorious influence, was by winning the world’s devotion
to himself through his own dying love. Therefore he deliberately entered and deter-
minately pursued the path which led to Gethsemane and to Calvary. Lilted up before
the eyes of a wondering and believing world, he would draw all men unto himself, and
thus to truth, to holiness, to God. 4. The extent to which he has succeeded. In spite
of the miserable corruptions which have dishonoured and enfeebled his Church, and in
spite of the lauguor and inactivity by which large periods of its history have been
marked, we find that (1) error is dying and truth reviving under every sky; the
heathen temple is being closed; the hoary systems of misbelief, pierced and penetrated
by modern science and assailed by Christian truth, are shaking to their fall; (2) pride
is being humbled; (3) philanthropy—a pitiful, generous, self-sacrificing regard for the
unfortunate and the abandoned—is taking the place of hard-hearted indifference ;
(4) the Prince of Peace is being honoured where the god of war was once worshipped.
(5) Righteousness and purity are returning to human life. Slavery, lust, drunkenness,
profanity, are not yet dead, but their death-warrant has been signed and they are doomed
io die. The thought of Jesus Christ is taking possession of the human mind; his prin-
ciples are reaching and regulating human life; his Spirit is changing the human world ;
the government is being laid upon his shoulder. (1) Let us rejoice in the growiny power of
that Son that was born to our race. ‘The empire of the Cesars, of the Pharaohs, of the
Napoleons, is nothing but a memory, a history; the rule of Jesus Christ is a benign, a
mighty, a growing power, an abiding and extending influence. That is a fruitless, sapless
stump; this is a tree of life, bearing all manner of fruits, “ and the leaves of the tree are for
the healing of the natious.” (2) Let us take care that we are among the subjects of his
spiritual realm. His is the future of the world; to be separated from him is to lose
the heritage, to forfeit the citizenship which will soon be the one thing worth possess-
ing. (8) Let us recognize the true wisdom ; not to strive after outward grandeur In
this attempt we may fall and be bruised or even broken, or we may succeed and be
satiated and thirst again. ‘I'he true wisdom is found in shedding a sweet and sanctifying
influence over all whom we can reach and bless.—C.


Ver. 6.—The wonderful Lord. “His name shall be called Wonderful.” And well
may he have been named Wonderful, whose words, whose works, and whose love were
such as those of Jesus Christ. We look at—

L THE MARVEL OF HIS TEACHING. 1. It struck his contemporaries with awe and
with astonishment (see Matt. v. 28, 29; xiii.54; xxii. 22), 2. It strikes us with wonder
still, ‘Lhat a Jew, brought up at Nazareth, receiving a very slight education, having


176 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cH. Ix. 1—2i.


a


no intercourse with men of other nations, acted upon by the narrowing and stiffening
influences which were prevalent and powerful in his land and time, should teach as he
taught about (L) the fatherhood of God ; (2) the spirituality of Divine worship and sacred
service; (3) the openness of the outcast and the abandoned to return to the favour and
likeness of God; (4) the spiritual and universal character of the kingdom of God;
(5) the needfulness of the child-spirit and of humility for entrance into the kingdom
of truth and righteousness; (6) the attainment of life through death, etc. ;—all this is
not only surprising, marvellous; it is positively unaccountable on any other theory
than that God dwelt in him and he in God.

Il. THE woNDER OF HIS powER. 1. This also excited the astonishment of his
contemporaries (see Matt. vii. 27; Mark i. 27; vii. 87; Luke v. 26, etc.). 2. It calls
forth our reverent admiration still. We wonder and adore as we realize that (1) he
compelled the carpest attention of his countrymen; (2) he has commanded the atten-
tion of all the ages and of most of the pevples ever since; (3) he has been, and is
regarded as the Saviour, the Lord, the Friend of millions of individual souls, and has
brightened, comforted, transformed innumerable human lives; (4) he has produced a
manifest chan,e—often amounting to a revolution—in the sentiment, the principles,
and the institutions of mankind.

Ill. His KNOWLEDGE-PASSING LOVE, (See Eph. iii. 19.) 1. On one occasion, at
least, the people were powerfully impressed with the fervour of his love (John xi. 36;
see also Juobn xiii. 1). 2. The love of Christ is far more astonishing to us who can
hetter recognize its greatness, Now that the facts of the Incarnation and the purpose
of his sufferinys and his death have been illumined by the teaching of the Divine
Spirit, we kuow how surpassingly great, how wonderful, were (1) his sacrificial love to
our race—not sparing himself, but delivering himself up for us all, and pursuing that
path of sacrifice even to the very end; (2) his distinguishing love to the individual
soul. So that, with Paul, every one may say, “ He loved me;” may, indeed, say, ‘“ He
loves me ”—is seeking my salvation, has borne with my sin and shortcoming, extends to
me his pardoning love, is dealing patiently and tenderly with me, is leading me by the
right aud wise way to the heavenly city.—C.


Ver. 6.—Chief counsels of Christ...“ His name shall be called Counsellor.” If we
approach Jesus Christ as a Divine elleg ¢.e. as One that has unerring wisdom to
impart to us respecting the chief good of human life, the secret of true success, the
way to reach the goal and secure the prize, we shall find from him these principal
counsels—

I, THaT IF WE WOULD FIND THE TRUTHH WE SEEK WE MUST COME AS A CHILD TO
rs soukcE, Into the “kingdom of God,” which is the kingdom of truth and joy, he
tells us emphatically and repeatedly we must enter as alittle child, that has everything
to learn, and is willing to be taught by its heavenly Father, by its one great ‘l'eacher
(see Matt. xviii. 84; Mark x. 15; Luke xviii, 14; cf. 1 Cor. iii. 18),

Il, HAY NOT HUMAN HONOUR AND WORLDLY WEAL''H, BUT THE LIKENESS AND THE
FAVOUR OF GOD ARE THE TRUE OBJECTS OF PURSUIT. (See Matt. v. 45; vi. 19, 20;
Luke xii. 15; iv. 4; John v. 44; xiv. 23.)

IIL. ‘luar NOT BY SELF-ASSERTION, BUT BY SELF-RENUNCIATION ARE OUR REAL
INTERESTS SECURED, (See Matt, x. 37—389; John xii. 25.)

JV. ‘Har IN CLOSE AND LIVING UNION WITH HIMSELF WE ATTAIN OUR HIGHEST
HERITAGE, The chief counsel of Christ was that, with our sins, our sorrows, out
struggles, our aspirations, we should come into intimate union with himself, the
Saviour, the Friend, the Master, the Leader, of mankind. In clearest, strongest,
teuderest tones he says ever to us all, “Come unto me; abide in me; follow me; and
ye shall not walk in darkness, but have the light of life."—C.


Ver. 6.—Christ in relation to time. “The Everlasting Father.” If we take the
words in their literal rendering, “the Father of Eternity,” we gain a meaning which ig
more consovant with the scriptural teaching respecting the Messiah, the Son of man.
lle is One wao has much to do with eternity; he is an (or the) Eternal One. This
altribution to Jesus Christ suggests to us—

I, THE BRIEF SPACE OF TIME WHICH HIS LIFE OCCUPIES AS A MATTER OF HISTORY


cH. Ix. 1—21.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 177
————


Only “a little while” had they the Light of the world with them. Parts of three
years, a space of time to be counted by mont''s,—this was all the interval between hig
coming and bis going; it was a lightning-Hash between the loug spaces of darkness,

Il, Ivs Lone BackwarD Look. It looks back (1) through all human history: for all
the lines of national lile (Hebrew, Roman, Grecian, etc.) converged and met at his
birth ; all that had existed had been leading up to, had been prepariny tor, his advent;
(2) to the reimotest ages, even to the beginuing. “ Before Abraham was, I am;” “ He
was before all thinus;” “In the bezinniug was the Word.”

III. Irs tone rorwarp Loox. The scribes and Pharisees thought, when they saw
him die on the cross, that his would be but an ephemeral career; that his influence
would quickly die, and his name be soon forgotten. But we know that (1) he has
commanded the attention of the world for eighteen centuries; (2) he has been by far
the greatest Power therein; (3) he is now recognized and honoured by his Uhurch as
its living, reigning Lurd; (4) he will appear as its Judge; (5) he will be for ever the
Object of our heavenly worship and servic. [leis the “ Father of eternity.” Therefore :
1. Let us reverence him while we trust and love him. Our Friend with whom we have
such happy fellowship is One in very closest connection with the Divine; he is the
“ Father of et rnity,” thouzh manifested in time, and with us for so brief a day. 2.
Let us trust hin while we work for him. We way be disappointed at the smallness of
results, at the ajparent distance of the goal; we may be impatient in spiiit, and we
may be hurried or even unchristian in the methods we adopt, in the weapons we
employ. let us be steadied, calmed, righted, as we remember that he whom we serve
is not one who is shut up to a few years or decades, or even a few centuries, in which to
work out his mission of love; he is the ‘‘ Father of Eternity ;” he is Lord of all future
time; he will caus bis Word to be fulfilled; we may patiently wait, while we earnestly
and faithfully work.—C.


Ver. 6.—Christian peace. “The Prince of Peace.” Before considering what is the
peace which is distinctively Christian, it may be well to remark: 1. That the first,
incidental result of the coming of Christ is pet jgace, but discord (see Matt. x. 34—36),
Vhe first consequence of the introduction or the revival of Christian truth is per-
secution. lor tunis the Christian faith is not responsible; it is due to the fact that
error is so blind, bigotry so pitiless, sin so cruel. 2, That everything 1s not gained for
Christ when a superticial smoothness has been secured. It will take wuch more than a
cessation of “ war,” a dismantling of forts and a disbanding of troops, to arrive at the
peace which is of Christ. It is a Christian poet who writes—


“T love no peace which is not fellowship,
And which includes not merey; I would have,
Rather, the raking of the guus across
The world.”


Better, in Christ’s name and in his cause, the stern and even the sanguinary struggle
which seeks to establish righteousness than the hollow peace which is satisfied with
slavery, seridym, or servility. 8, That the peace which the Messiah came to bring
was not that o! the conquering sword, but the prevailing Spirit; that which is won, not
on the baitle-ficld, but in the depths of the human heart—first in the heart of the Son
of man hiniself, and then in the souls of all the children of men, Of this spiritual rest
which the Prince of Peace imparts, we may say that it includes—

I. Peace with Gop. Sin separates between us aud our Divine Father; it produces
condemnation on his part, dread on our part; it ends in an unnatural and deplorable
alienation. In Christ is mercy, restoration, peace. “ Being justified by faith, we have
peace with Goi,” ete. (Rom. v. 1; see Rom, viii. 1).

I. Inwarp rest. Sin is the great disturber, the constant troubler of the human
heart. It is the source of all disorder, and therefore of all distress, It casts down
that which should be uppermost—conscicnce, reason, holy aspiration, ele. ; it enthrones
that which should be in subjection—passion, self, temporal interests, etc. The Prince
of Peace secures to the human soul its right condition; he restores the true order; he
redresses, re-establishes, revolutionizes ; he “ makes all things new ” within, And when
the spiritual nature is thus reset, all its powers taking their proper place and eee

F@AT AH,


178 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. rx. 1—2L,


Es


their rightful functions, there is a “ great calm” within; they who repair to the Son of
God, the Prince of Peace, have “rest unto their souls” (Matt. xi. 28—380).

III. Soctan concorp. Christian love (John xiii. 34, 85), Christian magnanimity
(Matt. v. 43—48; Rom. xii, 18—20); Christian reconciliation (Matt. v. 25), Christian
generosity (Rom. xii. 10; Eph. v. 21; Phil. ii, 3), Christian courtesy (1 Pet. iti, 8;
1 Pet. v. 5), Curistian pavierce (1 Thess. v. 14),—these are the conditions and the
sources of true and abiding peace amoug men.—C.


Vers. 8—12.— The evil spirit of defiance. The spirit which is here rebuked is that
uf a guilty defiance of God. Jehovah had visited Israel with the sigus of his dis-
jleasure—had humbled and impoverished her. What attitude should she now assume ?
‘Yhat of humility and amendment? Nothing was further from her mind. She would
contend in her own strength a_ainst her fate, agaist the Lord who had abased her;
she would show to him the futility of his correction, The bricks might be fallen down;
it was of no consequence—they would build with hewn stones. The sycomores were
felled ; it was all the better—they would put cedars in their place (ver. 10). They
would, in their proud independence, convert Divine chastisements into a national
advantage, Thus they breathed the very spirit of defiance. Respecting this arrogant
temper, we mark—

I. Irs common coursz. 1. First comes some serious departure from God or from his
service on the part of the nation, the Church, the family, or the individual man. 2.
Then comes the Divine correction. ‘This may be in the form of prophetic, or parental,
or pastoral rebuke, or of some serious reverse in temporal affairs, or of bodily sickness,
or of painful bereavement. 3. Then comes the resentment aud revolt of the human
will against the Divine. Instead of hearkeuing, heeding, and repenting, the nation (or
the individual) determines to act in a spirit of defiance. In its (his) own strength, it
will rise above its present circumstances; it will make good its position; it will brave
the worst perils; it will endure extremest hardships, the greatest losses; it will turn its
fallen bricks into massive stones that will uot fall; it will exchange its feeble sycomores
that are cut down for strong cedars which the wildest gales will spare.

IL. Irs euitt. The guilt of cherishing such a spirit is of a very aggravated character.
1. It goes beyond the ordinary sin of inattention, To be heedless when God is speaking,
by whatever voice he may address us, is surely iniquitous enoueh; but to act in
deliberate defiance of the Almighty is, by many degrees, worse. 2. It amounts to a
positive rebelliousness on the part of the human will against that of the Divine. It is
man resolving that, with his puny strength, he will match himself against his Maker
and will prevail. It is sin which contains the elements of insubmission, determined
opposition, arrogance.

III. Irs rouuy. In the case of Israel it was to be followed with fearful penalty.
That guilty nation was (1) to be pressed on every hand by its enemies (ver. 12); (2)
to be devoured by them (ver. 12); (8) to be prepared for still impending miseries: ‘ For
all this,” etc. (ver. 12), The nation (or the individual) that indulges in this evil spirit
of defiance will find, in time, what a disastrous mistake it (he) bas made. For the
defiance of God (1) shuts out immeasurable good—whvso hearkens when God reproves,
and, heeding his voice, returns in penitence to his side and his service, begins an upward
path which leads to the heavenly hills; but it also (2) shuts in to unimaginable woes.
We may let the words of the text (ver. 12) suegest the form they take. 1. Jnextricudle
dificulty. The being surrounded on every hand by enemies; for sin leads on and down
to cruel captivities o| many kinds, from which the soul struggles vainly to disengage
itself, 2. Waste. The being devoured by adversaries ; time lost; strength impaired ;
the soul ravaged; reputation despoiled. 38. Hear of the future. A dread of the out-
stretched hand of Divine retribution which has more strokes to deal—QC,


Vers. 14—17.—Man in God’s view. There are three classes among mankind in
reference to whom we here learn the thought and feeling of God. We infer from what
is stated in the text—

1, His sreclAL INTEREST IN THE youn@. Things had come to such a state, the natural
order of things was so reversed, that “the Lord would bave no joy in their young men”
(ver. 17). Hence we may fairly argue that the common aad normal condition is that


oH, Ix. 1—21.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 179


in which God has joy in the young. It isa strange and unnatural thing to him, that
which is altogether alien to his own disposition, to take no deep and Divine interest in
them. God has the young people in his thought, in his affection; they are the objects.
of his peculiar regard and tender interest. He is seeking their true welfare; he is
addressing himself to them in the terms and the tones of fatherly love. There is
nothing more pleasing in his eyes than the response which the young heart makes to
his inviting voice.

I]. Hts PECULIAR TENDERNESS TOWARD THE AFFLICTED. It is a sign of the very
extremity of the Divine displeasure that the Lord will not even “have mercy on the
fatherless and widows,” The rebelliousness of Israel must have been great indeed, her
iniquity heinovs and aggravated indeed, to bring about a conclusion so startling and
so stran-e as that. For it is the most wide departure from the constant thought and
habit of the Most Hich. It is in his heart of pity to show peculiar kindness to his
afflicted children. Those who are in sorrow commonly receive the precious sympathy
of their fellow-men ; this may fail, but it is certainly insufficient. Then the wounded
spirit finds refuge in the sympathy of Christ; it has the strongest assurance of his
presence, his pity, his succour (Ps. ciii. 13; Heb. iv. 15, etc.).

III, His seVeRITY TOWARD THE FALSE. The prophet regarded himself as being at
the head of the nation, and expected to be so regarded by others. But not so did the
Lord regard him if he were false to his vocation. In the Divine view he was not the
distinguished bough waving from the top o! the palm tree; he was the coarse reed that
grew in the rank marshes (see vers, 14, 15). 1. Any and every dissembler is hateful
to God. He denounces the hypocrite, wherever he is found (ver. 17). 2. But the false
teacher is the object of especial Divine displeasure. ‘The prophet that teacheth lies
is the tail.” Be it remembered that the prophet is now, what he was then, the man
who prof: sses to speak for God ; that if, making this profession, we publish that which
is error rather than truth, we do two things which are most deplorable. In the first
place we draw down on ourselves the awfil anger of the righteous Ruler; and in the
second place we slay those whom we pretend to heal; they “ that are led (misled) of us
are destroye’” (ver. 16). To receive relivious error into the soul is to be poisoned
with a dead'y druz; guilty indeed is the hand that administers it.—C.


Vers. 18—21.—Sin suicidal. From this declaration of judgment against a guilty
nation we may gather some principles which are applicable to men as well as nations
elsewhere, and indeed everywhere. We learn—

I. THAT sIN IS A WasTING PowER. ‘ Wickedness burneth as a fire” (ver. 18).
Where sin abounds there desolation abounds. The longer a man (or nation) has lived
under its dominion the more has power withered and possession decreased, the more
has heritave been wasted and lost. 1. Sin first destroys the less valuable. “The brier
and the thorn it shall consume ”—the visible, the temporal, the pecuniary, the material,
the fleshly. 2. Then the more valuable. “It shall kindle in the thickets of the vrove.”
The reputation, the intelligence, the character, the influence for good,—these disappear
under the consuming fires of sin. 38. Then it amounts to a conspicuous disuster. “They
shall mount up in volumes of rising smoke.” The ruin is so striking that attention is
commanded ; all surrounding nations must observe it; all neighbours must remark it.

Il. THaT IT TURNS ITS HAND UPON ITSELF. OI the fire of human sin humanity itself
is the fuel (ver. 19). This is palpably and painfully true: 1. Of the individual. He
that sins avainst God wrongs his own soul, first and most (Prov. viii, 36). It is not
only the drunkard and the debauchee who injure themselves by their iniquities, Look
on far enough, or look down deep enough, and you will find that every transgressor is
putting his «wn most precious interests, as fuel, into the devouring flame ; every such
man “eats the flesh of his own arm” (ver. 20). 2. Of the community. It is sin, the
departure from the Divine will, which brings about (1) faction im the state ; (2) con-
tention in the Church ; (8) discord in the family. Often, in its ultimate outworkines,
it becomes remorscless and insatiable. ‘‘ No man will spare his brother; ” he “eats and
is not satisfied ” (ver. 19; see Gal. v. 15).

TIL. THaT THE WASTE OF SIN IS ITS DIVINELY APPOINTED PeNALTY. “Through the
wrath of the Lord of hosts is the land darkened.” Jt seems to be in the very nature of
things that sin, whether in the individual or the community, should consume and


180 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. rx. 1—21.
a


destroy ; but so much has the Lord of hosts to do with the nature of things that those
who thus suffer the consequences of their guilt may well feel that the punitive hand
of God is lit upon them. And they wiil also do well to feel—

IV. Tuat Gop Has SOMETHING MORE TO 8AY THAN HE HAS YET SPOKEN. “ For all


this,” ete.—C,


Ver. 2.—Light in darkness. Cheyne’s translation brings out the meaning and
reference of this passage. “Surely there is (now) no (more) gloom to her whuse lot
was affliction. At the former time she brouglit shame on the land of Zcbulun, and on
the land ot Naphtali, but in the latter he Lath bronght honour on the way by the sea,
the other side ol! Jordan, the district of the nations.” ‘he historical ficts to which
allusion is made are: 1. The despoiling of Upper and Lower Galilee by Tiglath-Pileser
(2 Kings xv. 29; comp. Zech. x. 10). This part of the country was attacked first, and
it suffered most and longest. 2. The Messiah, the Saviour, the great Light shining on
the darkness, came in the part of Galilee belonging to Zebulun, It is here noted, as a
characteristic of the Divine dealings, that those who suffer most are graciously con-
sidered first, and that Divine restorinzs come most tenderly where there have been
Divine woundings and smitings.

I. THE DARKNESS OF BONDAGE MAKES BEAUTIFUL THE LIGHT OF LIBERTY. This
district had been the first to fall under the yoke of Assyria. As the border country, its
sufferinus under bondage had been extreme. ‘This may be taken to represent the
bondage of men under sin, “ Whosoever committeth sin is the bond-slave of sin.”
Christ came to bring liberty for such captives. And the more bitterly the yoke of sin
is felt, the more glorious seems that breaking of bonds and letting prisoners go free,
which was the work of the spiritual Ri deemer,

Il. THE DARKNESS OF SUFFERING SHOWS UP THE LIGHT OF LIFE. The distress of the-
country resulted in prevailing diseases of singularly painful types, such as the
demoniacal possessions. In view of these how gracious was his work who came
healing all the diseases of the people, and casting out the evil spirits! Life for the
stricken! Life for the maimed, blind, deat, dumb, dead! Life even for those “ dead
in tres; asses and sins.” ‘In him was life, and the life was the light of men.”

Ill. THE DARKNESS OF LONELINESS GLORIFIES THE LIGHT OF LOVE. Galilee was a
despised, nevlected region. Can any good thing come out of Galilee?” Christ, the
Lord of love, finds out the neglected one and comes first to it; honours it, briugs to it
the joy unspeakable of being cared for and loved. The sinner, in the sense o! his sin,
feels lonely—nobody cares for him, It is lizht, hope, the dawn of bliss, when it comes
right home to a sinuer’s heart, “Jesus cares for me.” he light has risen on your dark
Galilee; but the grave question is—Have you seen the light? Have you welcomed the
light? Are you walking in the light ?—R. T,


Ver. 3.— The joy of men in a Redeemer. “They joy before thee,” in view of the
Redeemer thou hast sent. ‘There can be no joy like that men feel in the acce; tance of
God’s “ unspeakable gilt.*  Ilustrate by the song and chorus of the angels at Bethlehem:
“Unto you is born a Saviour ;” “Glory to God in the highest.” And by the triumph-
song of the redeemed ones in the glory: “ Unto him that loved us, and washed us from
our sins in his own blood,” ete. ‘There had been times of great rejoicing in the history
of Israel, such as in the days of Solomon (2 Kings iv. 20; xxii. 18); and of riotous
feasting, as in days of Uzziah (ch. v. 11—14), But such joy was mercly passing
excitement ; it was as the “crackling of thorns under a pot” compared with the deep,
lasting joy of the time when Jesus, the Redeemer from sin and all its consequences,
bowed the heavens, came down, and dwelt among men. We ask (1) why men should
chiefly rejoice in a Redeemer; and (2) what kind of joy theirs should be who have
proved how he can redeem.

I, Wiy MEN SHOULD CHIEFLY REJotcE IN A Repeemer. 1, Becanse the one thing
man needs above all others is redemption; not science, not revelation, not civilization,
not morality, not social elevation, Man is in one condition whose interests are, to him,
siipreme—he is a sinner, and so his supreme need is a Saviour. With the necd and
the su, ply the Word of God fully deals, It is the Divine message to man, the sinner,
Its voice may be translated thus: “QO Israel, thou hast destroyed thyself; but in me is


VH. Ix. 1—21.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 181
a


thy help found.” 2. Because this one thing, redemption, is wholly beyond man’s
attainment. We are amazed at what man can do, in overcoming material obstacles
and yoking to his service the giant forces of nature. But at redeniption from sin man is
arrested; there his power ceases. “No man can redeem his brother, or give to God a
ransom for him.” God is represented as saying, “I looked, and there was no man...
therefore mine own arm brought salvation.” 3. Because man had no rason to expect
redemption, and could make no claim to Diviue intervention. Redemption is a
sovereign device, @ display of infinite mercy, a work of unbought love. Its root is,
* God is love.”

Il, Wuat KIND OF JOY THEIRS SHOULD BE WHO HAVE PROVED HOW HE CAN REDEEM,
There are two figures blended in the text. Joy of harvest. Joy of victors on dividing
the spgil of batue-filds. ‘Vhey suggest: 1. The joy of possession—a harvest of supply
for coming needs, spoil from the tents of the foe. 2. The joy of triumph. To possess
the enemy’s camp is proof that the foe is wh lly vanquished. Jesus, as our Redeemer,
has “led captivity captive, and received gifts for men.”—R. T.


Ver. 6.—The futherhood of God revealed in Messiah. The word “ Everlasting
Father,” or “ Father of Eternity,” is applied to Messiah as the Revealer of God to men,
That the passage can only refer to Messiah is agreed by all devout students. God
designed to reveal himself at last and fully to bis ercatures throwsh w man’s earthly life.
God can only reveal himself to a creature in the lines of that nature which he has
given to the creature. When God was dealing with man, he st forth the manhood of
his Messiali most prominently ; but when man comes to know his gift, he finds he has
received his God, and learned the nanve by which he may be called. Arguing may not
always covviice of the Deity of Christ. It is rather like trying to prove to a man that
it is the spring-time of the year. Spring is in the atmosphere—in the balmy breathing
of the air, in the quickening power of the sunsline, in the lengthening days, and in the
bursting life of leaf and flower everywhere around us, So the very atmosphere of
Garist ls the atmysphere of God. Everywhere, and in everything, we feel that he is

od. Our text is striking in the contrasts it presents—coutrasts which were realized in
the humin life of the Messiah, Everywhere in his story we find the bended God and
man. He was the outcast babe for whom there was no room in the inn,and yet angels
heralded his birth, and Magi offered to him the worship due to a king. He was a
simple child of twelve years old, and yet the temple doctors were astonished at his
understanding and answers. He submits to John’s baptism of water, and yet the Holy
Ghost desceuds upon him, and the voice of “most exceeding peace” gives testimony
to him as the Divine Son. He weeps the tears of human friendship at the grave of
Lazarus, and yet he speaks the words which call the dead to life. He dies in agony and
shame, as only a man could die; he rises in triumph and glory, as only a God could
rise. So in this prophecy of Isaiah. The “coming One” ig_a child, but the “ key of
government is_upup his shoulder.” He is a child, and yet he is “ Wonder-Counsellor,
God-Mighity-One, |'rimce of Peace.” He is the Son, and yet it can be said of him that
he is the “ Everlasting Father.” This last assertion seems to be the most astonishing of
them all. “The Son is the Father.” Christ sustained this view: “ He that hath seen
me hath seen the Father.” Every man’s work is to find the Father in Christ. No mau
has truly seen Christ who has not found in him the Father, aud learned from him the
fatherhoud of God.

J. May we THINK oF Gop as Fatuer? To show himself to man, God must come
into man’s sphere, not as a cherub or as an anvel, but asa man. “ Verily, he took not
on him the nature of angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham.” He must also
show himself in some particular form of mun. Men are kings, or prophets, or judges,
or husbands, or fathers, or sons, or brothers, and God must make choice of the form
that may most worthily represent him, Some say we must think of God chiefly as a
King. But few of us are stirred at heart by the relations of a king. He is a person to
be feared, obe\ ed, and served. If he is to be loved it is only with a patriotic, it is not
with a personal, affection. In the pages of history we can scarcely find a king whose
character and career help us to a worthy idea of God. ‘Think of the kings of astern
nations. Think of so-called Christian kings. There rise before the mind scvnes of
barbarity, blood-guiltiness, tyranny, devaucbery, and cruelty which make us ashamed to


182 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [ou. 1x. 1—2L
ee eee


set the thought of God and of earthly kings together. On the other hand, there never
has been age or nation in which the dearest thoughts and tenderest associations and most
reverent feelings did not ga her round the word “father.” Everywhere, even in benighted
heathendom, fathers have been men’s ideals of the pure, the revered, aud the good. God
comes nearest to men if he can be shown to them as the “ Everlasting Father.” Love
is the supreme glory of fatherhood; but it is only primus inter pares, the equals of
“authority,” “ justice,” “ holiness.” It would not be fair to say of any good earthly
father, “ He is all love, all indulgence; there is in him no justice, no reverence, no
government.” We never want to bolster up the authority of our earthly father by
deluding ourselves into the notion that he is a king; and we can yield our fullest
allegiance to God as our “ Everlasting Father.” We need not force ourselves to conceive
of him as that mysterious thing, a moral Governor, for which we can find no human
model, What is God to you when you can fully receive the revelation that he is the
Father? Is there any less reverence for him? Is your sense of justice, righteousness,
law, or authority weakened when you call him “ Father”? Let Christ teach us the
true God and the eternal life. He shows us a weeping prodigal child pressing his face
inte afathe’s bosom, heart beating to heart, the nett “atithe anguish of penitence, the
other in all the anguish of pitying, fatherly love. The father’s arms are round the
restored boy; and who shall say that all bighest law is not vindicated when that
father wipes away the tears, and calls for music and dancing, the best robe, and the fatted
call’? Who ever saw weepinyrebels on kings’ bosoms? Who ever saw kings shedding
tears over returning s1bjects? We must go degper, far deeper, into the very heart of
the truth about Gcd when we say, “ He is our Father.”

II. MesstaH sHows Gop To us as “‘ EverLaAstinG Fatuer.” The Epistle to the
Hebrews opens with a very striking statement: “ God, who at sundry times and in
divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last


days spokev unto us by Son.” God had spoken by creation of a Creator, by prophets of
a God, by ambassadors of a King, and now by Son of a Father. Messiah is represented
as Son, and Son of Gud, to enable us to concelive-Of God as Father. The very person
of our Lord Jesus Christ is itself a revelation of the Father. The gospels show us that
his supreme effort was to make men know and think well of the Father. He wasa
Jew, and yet his originality is nowhere felt more than in the word which he uses for
God. We find very seldom, almost never, any of the recognized Hebrew terms—El,
Klohim, Shaddai, or Jah; Jehovah or God; his word is always “ Father.” On every
pave we find the term recurring. Illustrate from the sermon on mount; address on
sending the disciples forth for their trial-mission, ete. Conclude by commending this
view of God as the first and foundation-truth of the Messianic revelaifen. We need not
be anxious to set it under limitations and restrictions. Christ never fenced it off. He
never limited itsapplications. He never hesitated to preach it everywhere. He expected
to waken a new spirit in men, the child-spirit, by telling them of their Father in
heaven. If we simply follow Christ, we shall show men the Father-God everywhere in


Messiah’s life and teaching, seen even in Messiah’s death and atonement and sacrifice.
—R. T.


Ver. 7.—The continuity of a kingdom founded on righteousness. “ A King shall
reign in righteousness.” “ Of the increase of his government and prosperity there shall
be noend .. . To establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth even for
ever.” David’s reign, as that of the first and most faithful theocratic king, is the
imperfect earthly type of the ideal kingdom, founded on righteousness, and ruled in
rizhteousness. Whatever may have been the personal infirmities of David, officially he
was thoroughly loyal and true to the Divine supremacy, and, speaking in human
measures, it may be said of him, “Righteousness was the girdle of his loins, and
faithfulness the girdle of his reins.” Messiah’s spiritual reign is the complete antitype
and realization of the righteous kingdom. His people are, ideally, “all holy ;” they
are called to be holy, pledged to strive after holiness, and Messiah rules them in
righteousness.

I, Tue FOUNDATION OF THE RIGHTEOUS KINGDOM. That is, the vindication and
manifestation of the Divine righteousness, in the obedience, submission, life, and death
of the Lord Jesus, He “magnified the Law and made it honourable.” In him


cH. 1x, 1—21.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 183


“ righteousness and peace kissed each other.” The spiritual kingdom could have nc
other basis than God’s righteousness, and Jesus must clear that righteousness of all
misapprehension, and show men how it lies as the corner-stone of the kingdom which
he built up. "

Il. Tus INCREASE OF THE RIGHTEOUS KINGDOM. It must be progressive, because it
has vitality, which necessarily involves increase and growth; it must be aggressive,
because there is a_war-spirit in all righteousness; it cannot abide quiet, vil, or
rest until all evil is conquered and won. It is as light, and must SBOE
It must be universal ; for, being the kingdom of the one God, it is the king !om of all
men everywhere. There is no end to the labours of the servants of this kingdom,
until the very utmost limits of the earth are reached. Men must know the name of
God the Saviour, from “the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same.”

III, THe sTABILITY OF THE RIGHTEOUS KINGDOM. It is the kingdom of God, the
good, the right; and it is kin with him, and stable as he is, ‘Who shall harm you, if
ye be followers of that which is good?” Evil can never become so strong as good. Good
has always God “at the back of it.” And security means peace and prosperity. The
first and essential work of all governments is to obtain perfect security for life and for
property. Then commerce will flourish, and civilization will advance. Men can trust
the government, and adventure their wealth in business enterprise. ‘he righteous
kingdom of Messiah gives absolute security to its members. No man in it ever wants
to wrong his brother, so no disturbances come to shake its stability.

IV. THE PERPETUITY OF THE RIGHTEOUS KINGDOM. No forces can ever arise in any
age to stop it. National sins bring on the destruction of nations. Right must be
eternal. It can never be replaced by a better. “ Against it the gates of hell cannoz
prevail.” It may, in conclusion, be shown that the rule of righteousness ensures peace,
power, prosperity, universal piety towards God, and universal brotherhood amongst
men.—R. T.


Ver. 12.—The Divine anger. “For all this his anger is not turned away.” The
reference of the previous verses is to the calamities which are surely overtaking Rezin
of Syria, and Pekah of Israel, as judgments on them, signs of Divine indignation, for
their schemes against Judah. Rezin was threatened by Assyria; Pekah was threatened
both by his former ally, Israel, and on the other side by the Philistines. As yet,
however, these judgments had not proved effectual in humbling Rezin and Pekah, or in
leading them to forsake their self-willed wa\s and seek the help and guidance of
Jehovah ; so yet more and heavier judgments must come on them, and they must not
think, because there seemed a little lull in the storm, that Divine wrath was abated,
Divine judgments were exhausted, or,God’s outstretched hand drawn back.

J. DrvinE ANGER, BEING THAT OF AN INFINITE BEING, CAN NEVER BE AT A LOSS FOR
MODES OF EXPRESSION. There are always fresh arrows in his quiver. This should check
all carnal security. Clear heavens may but mean gathering storms. Hush in the
evening air may but indicate approaching earthquake. The seemingly secure house of
prosperity may be within a moment of the lightuing-flash. God can always find out
how best to sniite.

II. Diving ANGER, BEING A REMEDIAL FORCE, WILL NOT CEASE UNTIL ITS PURPOSES
ARE WRouGHT ouT. It proposed the humbling of Syria and Israel, and the conviction
of the sin of their wilfulness and ungodliness. Therefore, if Syria and Israel resisted
one expression of the anger, another must be found. Since the anyzer works only
towards good, we may well say, “ Blessed be God, that he will never cease to be angry
until he is enabled to forgive.”

TI]. Divine ANGER, BEING TEE STERN SIDE OF LOVE, SPENDS ITSELF IN CORRECTIVE
DISPENSATIONS. If we ask what Divine love would do for sinners, for rebellious, for

rgistent sinners, then the answer will tell us what Divine anyer would do for them.

‘0 the resistant and wilful God’s dealinvs take form as anger. To the submissive and
humble God's dealings take form as chastisement. ‘lhe features prominent in Divine
dealings we ourselves determine by the response which we make to those dealings.—R. T.


Ver. 16.—The sin of leading others astray. The point of the expression is, that the
leatara of tha nation are really mislaiders, The persons referred to are described im


‘*


184 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. x. 1—34,


eT


ver. 15 as “the ancient and honourable,” and as “the prophet that teacheth lies,”
evidently including those having influence by reason of their social status, and having
influence by reason of their official positions. It is well for us to remember the
responsibility of positions as well as of talents. Society is directly affected by the
morality. the prevailing tone, the intelligence, and the religiousness of the upper and
the learned classes. Leadership is also a talent or endowment, given by God to
individual men and women, and so it is to be regarded as, and used as, a Divine trust.
A man’s power of leadership among his fellow-men is to be laid on God’s altar, and


used in God’s service.


l. Everynopy HAS SOME INFLUENCE ON oTHERS; by virtue of: 1. Relationship, as


masters, husbands, fathers, ete.
class below them.
knowledge and mental control.


2. Position, oue class of society becoming ideuls to the
2, Character, natural and trained. 4, Aducction, involving superior


Il. Some HAVE VERY SPECIAL POWERS OF LEADERSHIP. Illustrate by the first Napoleon.
Some men scem to master our wills, aid conipel us to do what they wish. We find


such persons in all spheres of lite.
business.


The power is one of the secrets of snecess in
It is often the genius of secretaries, and of teachers.


Illustrate from


'!’, Moore’s poem m ‘ Lalla Rookh,’ “The Veiled Prophet of Khorassan.”


Ill. SucH INFLUENCE MAY BE MADE A CURSE.


wrong-doing.


example of righteousness and obedience.


Christ-like, and so a leading towards yvoodness and God.


Leadership may cover and excuse


Personal relations may disturb mora] distinctions.
IV. Sucu INFLUENCE MAY BE MADE A BLESSING,


Leadership may present the
Personal relations with others may be
Special Divine judgments


come on those who determinedly lead others astray. The enticer aud s: ducer who wile


ito the ways that lead down to the pit, God surely hateth and watcheth.


will be heavy on them some day.—R. T.


His hand


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER X.


Vers. 1—4.—The prophecy begun in ch.
1x. 8 terminates with this stanza, which con-
tains a warning against injustice and op-
pression, addressed to Israel and Judah
equally, and accompanied by the threat of
a “day of desolation,” when those who have
refused to make God their Refuge will have
no resource, but to go into captivity with the
“ prisoners,” or to perish with the “slain.”
A foreign conquest, accompanied by slaughter,
and the deportation of captives, is not ob-
scurely intimated.

Ver. 1.—Woe unto them that decree un-
righteous decrees (comp. ch. i. 17, 20, 26;
v. 23 etc.) The perversion of judgment
from the judyment-seat is the sin rebuked.
It was certainly prevalent in Judah, it may
also have been practised in Israel. And
that write grievousness, ete. Translate, and
unto the writers that enregister oppression.
The decrces of courts were, it is clear, care-
fully engrossed by the officials, probably
upon parchment, every outward formality
being observed, while justice itself was set
at nouglit.

Ver. 2.—The poor... the widow...
the fatherless. These were the classes who


were the chief sufferers by the perversion of
justice (comp. ch. i. 17, 23). They were
exactly the classes for whom God had most
compassion, and whom he had commended
in the Law to the tender care of his people
(sce note on ch. ix. 17).


Ver. 3.—What will ye do in the day of
visitation? ‘The day of visitation” is the
day when God reckons witl his servants,
and demands an account from each of the
work done in his vineyird, being prepared
to recompense the good and punish the
bad (comp. Hos. ix. 7). It is oftenest used
in a bad sense because, unhappily, so many
more are found to deserve punishment than
reward. The desolation wlich shall come
from far; rather, the crashing ruin (Cheyne).
It is sudden, and complete destruction,
rather than mere desolateness, that is threat-
encd. Previous prophecies, especially ch.
vii. 17—20, had informed the Jews that it
was to “come from far,” “by them that
were beyond the river.” To whom will ye
flee? The prophet speaks in bitter irony.
Is there any one to whom ye can flee? any one
who can protect you from the wrath of God?
Ye well know there is no one. Where will
ye leave your glory? With whom will ye
deposit your riches, your magnificence, your
jewels, your grand apparel? You cannot
save them, ‘They will all make to them-


oH. x. 1—-34.]


selves wings, and “fly away like a bird”
(Hos, ix. 11).

Ver. 4.—Without me. That this is a
possible rendering of the word used seems
proved by Hos. xiii. 4. But here it scarcely
suits the context. God does not sp ak
directly, in tle first person, elsewhere in the
entire prophecy (ch. ix. 8—x. 4), but is
spoken of in the third person throughout, as
even in the prsent verse, where we have
“his anger,” “his hand.” It is better, there-
fore, to give the word its ordinary meaning—
“unless,” “except.” Have they anywhere
to flee to, unless they shall crouch amid
the captives that are being carried off, or
fall amid the slain? In other words, there


Section V.


Vers. 5—19.—AssyRIA, AFTER BEING Gop’s
INSTRUMENT TO PUNISH ISRAEL, SHALL HER-
SELF BE PUNISHED IN HER TURN. The wicked
are a sword inthe hand of God (Ps. xvii. 13),
wherewith he executes his judgments; but
this fact is hid from them, and they imagine
that they are successful through their own
strength and might. So it was with Assyria
(vers. 5—14), which its long career of
victory had made proud and arrogant above
measure. God now, by the mouth of Isaiah,
makes known his intention of bringing down
the pride of Assyri:, and laying her glory in
the dust, by a sudden and great destruction
(vers. 15—19), after she has served his
purposes.


Ver. 5.—0 Assyrian; literally, Ho! Asshur.
“ Asshur” is the nation personified, and is
here addressed as an individual. The tran-
sition from vers. 1—4 is abrupt, and may
be taken to indicate an accidental juxta-
position of two entirely distinct prophecies.
Or Assyria may be supposed to have been
in the prophet’s thought, though not in his
words, when he spoke of “ prisoners” and
“slain” in the first clause of ver. 4. The
rod of mine anger (comp. Jer. li. 20, where
it is said of Bubylon, “ Thou art my battle-
axe and weapons of war; for with ¢! ee will
I break in picces the nations, and with thee
will I destroy the kingdoms”). So Assyria
was now the “rod” wherewith God clias-
tised his enemies. The true “staff” in the
hand of Assyria, wherewith she smote the
peoples, was “ God’s indignation.”

Ver. 6.—I will send him against an hypo-
critical nation; or, against a corrupt nation.
Israel in the wider sense, inclusive of Judah,
seems to be intended. The people of my
wrath; ¢.e. “the people who are the object
of my wrath.” Will I give him a charge.
In 2 Kings xviii. 25 Sennacherib says, ‘‘ Am


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


185


is no escape for them; they must either
submit to captivity or death. For all this,
ete. Even when the two kingdoms were
destroyed, and the captivity of both was
complete, God’s wrath was not fully ap-
peased, his anger was not wholly turned
away. Both peoples suffered grievous things
in their captivity, as appears from the Book
of Daniel (ch. iii., vi.) and other placcs. It
took seventy years for God's anger to be
appcased in the case of Judah (2 Chron.
xxxvi. 21), while in the case of Isracl it was
never appeased. Crushed beneath the iron
heel of their conquerors, Israel ceased to
exist as a nation.


Propiecies oF Wor uron Forreian Nations (cH. x. 5—xxm1.)


I come up w'thout the Lord (Jehovah)
avainst this place, to destroy it? The Lord
(Jehoval:) said to me, Go up against this
land, and destroy it” (compare below, ch.
xxxvi. 10). It has been usual to consider
Sennacherib’s words a vain boast; but if
God instructed Nebuchadnezzar through
dreams, may he not also by tie same means
lave “given charges” to Assyrian monarchs?
To take the spoil, and to take the prey;
rather, to gather spoil, and seize prey. The
terms used carry the thoughts back to ch,
viii. 1—4, and to the symbolic name. Maher-
shalal-hash-baz. And to tread them down;
literally, to make it a trampling. “It”
refers to “nation” in the first clause.

Ver. 7.—Howbeit he meaneth not so,
“ Assyria,” ¢.e., “ does not view the matter in
this light—is not aware that she is merely
God’s instrument in working out his will.
On the contrary, it is in her heart to destroy
the nations for her own advantage, and she
imagines that she is doing it by her own
strength.”

Ver. 8.—Are not my princes altogether
kings? One mark of the superiority of
Assyria to other countries was to be seen in
the fact that her king had not mere officers,
but vassal kings under him. Hence the
title “king of kings” assumed by so many
Assyrian monarchs. While conquered ter-
ritorics were by degrees and to a certain
extent absorbed into the empire an! placed
under prefects (see the ‘Kponym Canon’),
an outer zone of more loosely organized de-
pendencies was always maintiined by the
Assyrians; and these dependencies con-
tinued ordinarily to be administered by their
native monarchs (see ‘ Ancient Monarchies,’
vol. ii. pp.524—526). These arc the“ princes”
wno were “ altogether kings.”

Ver. 9.—Is not Calno as Carchemish? A
further proof of superiority, and ground of
confidence, lay in the further fact, that the
strongest cities had, one and all, succumbed


186


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


[cH. x. 1—d4.


to the Assyrian arms, and been laid in ruins
to punish them for offering resistance. Six
such cities are mentioned—Calneh, probably
Niffer, in Lower Mesopotamia ; Carchemish,
on the right bank of the Euphrates in Lat.
36° 30' nearly; Humath, the “great Ha-
math” of Amos (vi. 2), in Coelesyria on the
Orontes; Arpad, perhaps Tel-Erfad, near
Aleppo; Damascus, and Samaria, Calneh
was one of the cities of Nimrod (Gen. x. 10),
and, according to the LXX., was “the
place where the tower was built.” It may
have been taken by Tiglath-Pileser in one
of his expeditiois into Babylonia. Amos
(vi. 2) speaks of it as desolate in his day.
Carchemish (Assyrian Gargumis) was a chief
city of the Hittites, and has been called
“their northern capital.” Long confounded
by geographers with Circesium at the junc-
tion of the Khabour with the Euphrates, it
has recently been proved to have occupied a
far more northern position, and is now gene-
rally identified with the ruins discovered by
Mr. George Smith at Jerubis or Jerablus.
It was conquered by Sargon in B.o. 717, when
“its people were led captive, and scattered
over the Assyrian empire, while Assyrian
colonists were brought to people the city in
their place; Carchemish being formally
annexed to Assyria, aud placed under an
Assyrian governor” (G. Smith, ‘ Assyria,’
p. 97). Hamath was originally a Canaanite
city (Gen. x. 18). By the time of David it
had become the seat of an independent
monarchy (2 Sam. viii. 9, 10), and so con-
tinued until its reduction by the Assyrians.
We find it leagued with the Hittites, the
Syrians of Damascus, and the Israelites
against Assyria about B.c. 850 (* Ancient
Monarchies,’ vol. ii. pp. 361—363). About
BO. 720 it was taken by Sargon, who be-
headed its king, and probably reduced it to
tuins (ibid., p. 411; comp. Amos vi. 2), The
name remains in the modern Hamah, where
many curious inscriptions have been recently
dug up. Arpad was attacked by Tiglatn-
Pileser in the early part of his reign, and
reduced to subjection. It revolted in con-
junction with Hamath from Sargon, and was
severely punished (‘ Ancient Monarchies,’
i. 8. c.). Is not Samaria as Damascus? This
mention of Samaria among the subjugated
and ruined cities may u:doubtedly be pro-
phetic ; but the connection with Carchemish,
Hamath, and Arpad—all of them towns re-
duced by Sargon within the years B.c. 720—
717—p ints rather to the verse being
historical, and would seem to indicate that
the date of the entire prophecy—-vers. 5—19
—is subs quent to the capture of the cities,
and so not earlier than B.c. 716.


Ver. 10.—As my hand hath found the
kingdoms of the idols. “Found” here
means “reached.” “punished,” “ subju-


gated.” It is quite in accordance with As-
syrian ideas that the conquered countries
should be called “kingdoms of the idols”
(literally, “no gods”). The Assyrian
monarchs regarded their own gods as alone
really deserving of the name, and made war
very much with the object of proving the
superiority of their deities over those of their
neigiibours. Hence their practice of carry-
ing off the idols from the various cities
which they conquered, or else of inscribing
on them “the praises of Asshur.”’ And
whose graven images; rather, and their
graven images. Did excel. In preciousness
of material or in workmanship, or both.
The Assyrians went near to identifying the
idols with the gods themselves. Those of
Jerusalem and of Samaria. Tie chief Sa-
maritan idols were the golden calves at Dan
and Bethel; but, in addition to these,
“images and groves were set up in every high
hill and under every green tree” (2 Kings
xvii. 10), images of Baal, and Ashtoreth,
and perhaps Beltis, and Chemosh, and
Moloch. Even in Judah and in Jerusalem
itself there were idols. Ahaz “made molten
images for Baalim” (2 Chron. xxviii. 2).
The brazen serpent was worshipped as an
idol at Jerusalein until Hezekiah destroyed
it; and probably, even after the reformation
of Hezekiah (2 Kings xviii. 4), many Jews
retained privately the images which he re-
quired them to destroy (2 Chron. xxxi. 1).
Isaiah had already ¢eclared, speiking of
Judah rather than of Israel, “ Their land is
full of idols; they worship the work of their
own hands, that which their own fingers
have made” (ch. ii. 8).

_ Ver.11.—Shall I not... so do to Jerusa-
lem and her idols? The speaker ignores
the fact of any difference in kind between
the religion of Judea and that of the neigh-
bouring countries. He speaks as if he knew
nothing of any religion without idols. No
doubt Assyrian ideas on the subject of the
religion of the Jews were at this time, as
they were even later (2 Kings xviii. 22),
exceedingly vague and incorrect.

Ver. 12.—Wherefore; rather, but. The
final result shall be such as “ the Assyrian’
little expected. When the Lord hath per-
formed his whole work. The “work” as-
signed to Assyria was the destruction of the
kingdom of Israel, and a share in the trial,
punishment, and discipline of Judah. The
last task seems to have been the humiliation
of Manasseh, which brought about his re-
pentance (2 Chron. xxxiii. 11—13). Soon
after this the troubles began which led to
her destruction. Iwill punish, The sudden
change from the third to the first person is
harsh and abnormal, but not without paral-
lels in other passages of Isaiah (see ch
iii, 1—4; v. 3, 4, etc.) The fruit of the


oH. x. 1—34.]


stout heart; ¢.e. the actions, language, etc.,
which fiowed from the stoutness of heart—
such lauguage, e.g., as that of vers. 8—1l
end 13, 14. Of the King of Assyria. The
menace is not levelled against any one par-
ticular king, as Sargon, or Sennacherib; but
against the monarciy itself, which from first
to last was actuated by tie same spirit, and
breathed the same tone, of pride, selfishners,
and cruelty. (See the royal inscriptions,
passim, which become more revolting as
time goes on.)

Ver. 13.—For he saith. Neither this
speech nor that in vers. 8—11, nor again that
given in ch. xxxvii. 24, 25, is to be regarded
as historical in tlie sense of being the actual
utterance of any Assyrian monarch. All
are imaginary speeches, compused by the
prophet, whereby he expresses in his own
language the thougits which Assyrian kings
enturtained in their hearts, I have removed
the bounds of the people; rather, of peoples.
Assyrian monaichs take as one of tieir
titles “the remover of boundaries and land-
marks” (G. Smith's ‘ Assyrian Discoveries,’
pp. 243, 244). And have robbed their trea-
sures (comp. 2 Kings xv. 19; xviii. 14—16).
The plunder of conquered countries is con-
stantly recorded by the Assyrian monarcis
as one of the most important results of each
successful expeiition. It is not unfrequently
represented in the sculptures (see ‘ Ancient
Monarchies, vol. ii. p. 85). Ihave put down
the inhabitants like a valiant man. The
passage is obscure; and many different
renderings have been given. Perhaps the
best is that of Mr. Cheyne, “ I have brougat
down, like a mighty one, those that sat on
thrones.” <Albir, however, the word trans-
lated “a mighty one,” as often means “a
bull” (see Ps. xxii. 12; 1, 13; ILxviii. 30;
ch. xxxiv. 7; Jer. 1. 11).

Ver. 14.—My hand hath found as a nest
the riches of the people; rather, of the peoples.
The Assyrians are fond of comparing their
enemies to birds (* Reevords of the Past,’
vol. vii. pp. 36, 62, ete.); but the exact
metaphor here used does not, I believe, oveur
in the inscriptions. The nations’ treasures
are like eggs found in deserted nests, which
the hunter gatuers without any, even the
sligiitest, risk. All the earth. Oriental
hyperbole. Assyrian monarchs often say that
they “ have subdued all the races of men,” or
“carried the glory of their name to the ends
of the earth,” or “ overthrown the armies of
the whole world in battle.” Peeped; rather,
chirped (see note on ch. viii. 19). None of
the inhabitants offered even such feeble re-
sistance as a bird makes when its nest is
robbed.

Ver. 15.—Shall the axe boast itself? Here
the prophet takes the word, and rebukes
Aasyria for her folly in forgetting, or not


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


187


perceiving, that she is a mere instrument,
like an axe, a saw, a rod, or a staff. The
saw... him that shaketh it; rather, him
that moveth it to and fro. The action of
sawing is alluded to. Asif the rod should
shake itself against them that lift it up;
rather, as if a rod were to move them to and
Jro that lift it wp. For Assyria to assert
herself as if she were independent of God is
like a red attempting to sway the hand that
holds it. It is a complet: inversion of the
uatural order of things. Or as if the staff
should lift up itself, as if it were no woed.
Translate, or as if a staff should lift wp that
which is not wood ; i.e. “tas if a staff should
take action and lift up its holder, who is not
wood, but flesh and blood.”

Ver. 16.—Therefore shall the Lord...
send among his fat ones leanness. A con-
tinuation of ver. 12, showing whut the nature
of Assyria’s punishment shall be. The
prophet expresses it by two images—first,
that of a wasting sickness; and secondly, that
of a fire. The first image expresses that
gradual decay of national spirit which saps
the vital strength of an tion; the second ig
more suited to denote some extcrual attack
under which the weakened nation should
succumb, There are traccvs, in the later
history of Assyria, both of increasing internal
weakness through luxury and etf-minacy,
and of violent external attacks culminating
in the combined Median and Babylonian
invasion, before which ler power collapsed
(Abyden, ap. Euseb., ‘ Ciiron. Can.,’ pars i.
ec. ix.; Syneell., *Chronogiaph.,’ p. 210, B;
Tolit xiv. 15).

Ver. 17,—The light of Israel. A new
name of God. The idea on w. ih it is based
may be found in the Psulms (xxvii. 13
Ixxxiv. 11), and again in Isaiab (lx. 19),
God enliglitens his people, ¢ eers them,
comforts them spiritualiy, us the light of the
sun enlightens, cheers, and culmlorts men
physically. Christ, as true God, is “the
true Light, which lightetl every man that
cometh into the world” (Johu i. 9). Shall
be for a fire. As the same material fire
which gives light, warmti, and comfort
may burn and destroy, so tie spiritual light,
finding fit material, scorches and consumes.
The fire which devours Ass ria is to be
kindled by God. His Holy One; é.e. “the
Holy One of Israel” (see ch. i. 4). It shall
burn and devour his thurns and his briers.
The destruction of Assyria shall resemble
that of Israel, in which Assyria was the
instrument (ch. ix. 18). It shall be as com-
plete, as terrible, and as finil. In one day.
Scarcely “in one battle” (Cheyne); for the
destruction of Assyria was etlected by
many battles, many sieges, and much exe
hausting ravage. “In one day” rather
means “at one and the same time,”


188


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


(cH. x. 1—34,


oe


“ within a brief space.” Itis not to be taken
literally.

Ver. 18.—Forest . . . fruitful field.
“Forest” and “ fruitful field” (carmel) are
sometimes united together, soinetimes con-
trasted. Literally, they denote wild and
cultivated woodland. Used symbolically, as
here, they are not so much intended to desig-
nate different parts of Assyria’s glory, as to


convey the idva that the destruction wil) be |


universal. Both soul and body. Here meta-
phor is suddenly dropped, and Isaiah shows
that he is speaking of the Assyrian people,
not of the laad or its products. Their de-
struction wicked as they were, would be one
both of body and soul. As when a standard-
bearer fainteth; rather, as when one that is
faint fuintcth. Utter prostiation and ex-
haustion is indicated, whichever way the
passaze is translated.

Ver. 19.—The rest of the trees; 7.e. those
that escape the bu:ning—shall be few;
literally, a number; i.e. so few that their
number shill be apparent.

Vers, 20—34.—CONSOLATION FOR THE
Fairurvn in Isracu. The destruction of
Assyria -hall be followed—how soon, is not
said—by the return of a “ remnant of Isracl,”
not so much to their own land, as to God
(vers. 20, 21). The remnant, however, shall
be but a r mnant—judgment shall have over-
taken the bulk of the people (vers. 22, 23).
Still, there is reason for the faithful to take
courage and be of good heart; Assyria will
shortly reecive a check (vers. 24—27)—wlen
her armies swoop upon Jerusalem, God will
swoop down on lier (vers. 28—34).

Ver. 20.—In that day; ze. “at that time”
—the time of the destruction of Assyria.
The remnant of Israel (see ch. i.9), Isaiah
had indicated his firm belicf in the existence
of this faithful remnant and its return, in
the name which he had given to his son,
Shear-Jashub (see note on ch. vii. 3). The
escaped. Those who escape from the de-
struction to he caused by the Assyrian in-
vasion. Shall no more again stay upon him
that smote them. Weare told in the Second
Book of Chronicles (xxviii. 23) that Alaz
“sacrificed to the gods of Damascus which
smote him”—and we know that lhe also
trusied to Tivlath-Pileser, who “distressed
him and strengthened him not” (2 Chron.
xxviii. 21). Among the “remnant” there
shall be no such mistaken confidences. But
shal] stay upon the Lord; de. “shall put
their trust in God, and him only” (comp.
2 Sam. xxii. 19; Ps. xviii. 18).

Ver 91.—The mighty God (comp. ch.
ix. 6). The name is not, however, Messianic
in this place.


Vers. 22, 23.—These verses are exegetical
of the term “remnant,” and bring out ite
full force. The promise had been made to
Abraham that his seed should be “ like the
sand of the sea for multitude” (Gen, xxii.
17). This promise had been fulfilled (1 Kings
iv. 20); but now the sins of the people
would produce a reversal of it. It would be
a remnant, and only a remnant, of the nation
that would escape. Judah would have to
mike a fresh start as from a uew beginning
(see Ezra ii. 64).

Ver. 22. The consumption decreed shall
overflow with righteousness; rather, the
consummation (Dan. ix. 27) determined on is
one that overflows with righteousness (comp.
ch. xxviii. 22). The prophet means that
God is about to visit the land in such a spirit
of severe justice that it cimnot be expected
that more than a remnant will survive the
awful visitation.

Ver. 23.—The Lord... shall make a con-
sumption; rather, a consummation—a final
and decisive end of things. Even deter-
mined; i.e. “determined on betorehand.”
In the midst of all the land. “ Throughout
the entire land,” not merely in some portions
of it.

Ver. 24.—0 my people... be not afraid,
God now addresses those who are faitliful to
him among the people; they have no need to
fear—he will bring them safely through all
the coming troubles. He shall smite thee;
rather, if he smite thee; or, though he smite
thee. After the manner of Egypt; i.e. as the
Egyptians did in the oppression that pre-
ceded the Exodus. The yoke of Assyria
was heavy even upon the nations that sub-
mitted to her. She claimed to march her
armies through t! eir territuries at her plea-
sure, and probably pressed men and cattle
into her service. She exacted a heavy
tribute, and otherwise “distressed” her
many vassals.

Ver. 25.—The indignation shall cease;
rather, there shall be un end of wrath; i.e
“my wrath against Israel shall come to
an end”—Israel having been sutfticiently
punished. And mine anger in their destrue-
tion; rather, and my anger shall be to their
destruction; i.e. to the destruction of the
Assyrians (see the margin of the Revised
Version). :

Ver. 26.—The Lord... shall stir up a
scourge for him; or, lift up a scourge over
him. Isaiah uses the metaphor of the
“scourge ” again in ch. xxviii. 16, 18. It is
rare in Scripiure, though common among
the Greek and Latin writers. According to
the slaughter of Midian at the rock of Oreb
(comp. ch. ix. 4). The “slanghter of Midian
at the rock of Oreb” was that grent destruc.
tion of the Midianites which was begun by
the three hundred under Gideon, and com.


ou. x. 1—34.]


yee by the men of Ephraim, whereof we
ave an account in Judg. vii. 19—25. Its
counterpart in Assyrian history would seem
to be the destruction of Sennacherib’s army,
as related in 2 Kings xix. 35. As his rod
was upon the sea. An allusion to the
drowning of Pharaoh’s bost in the Red Sea.
This was a nearer parallel to the destruction
of Sennacherib’s army than the slaughter of
the Midianites, since it was wholly miracu-
lons. By “his rod” we may understand the
rod of Moses, endued by God witi miracu-
lous powers (Exod. iv. 3, 4; xiv. 16, 27).
After the manner of Egypt; i.e. “after the
manner of his action in Egypt.”

Ver. 27.—The yoke shail be destroyed be-
cause of the anointing; literally, before the
otl; ie. “the Anointed One ”—primarily
Hezekiah, “the anointed of the Lord”
(2 Sam. xix. 21; 2 Kings xi. 12; Lam. iv. 20)
for the time being, but with a further refer-
ence to the Messiah, who breaks all the
bands of the wicked asunder, and casts away
their cords from him (Ps. ii. 2, 3); and who
is represented by each prince of the house of
David, as he was by David himself.

Vers. 28—32.—This graphic portraiture of
the march ofan Assyrian army on Jerusalem
is probably not historic, but prophetic.
Isaiali sees it in vision (ch. i. 1), and de-
scribus it like an eye-witness. There are at
present vo sufficient means of deciding to
what particular attack it refers, or indeed
whether the march is one conducted by
Sennaclicrib or Sargon. Sargon calls him-
self in one inscription “ conqueror of the land
of Judah ” (Layard, ‘ Inscriptions,’ xxxiil. 8),
and the details of the present prophecy,
especially ver. 9, suit the reign of Sargon
rather than that of his son, so that on the
whole it is perhaps most probable that some
expedition of Sargon’s is portrayed.

Ver. 28.—He is come to Aiath. “ Aiath”
is probably Ai (Josh. viii. 1—28), with a
feminine termination. It lay about three
miles south of Bethel, which had become
Assyrian with the conquest of Samaria. If
an Assyrian army mustered at Bethel, it
would naturally enter Judean territory at
Ai. He is passed to Migron; rather, he has
passed through Migron, “ Migron” is men-
tioned as a village in the territory of Gibeah
of Benjamin (1 Sum. xiv. 2) ; but the Migron
of this oassage must have been further to
the north. He hath laid up his carriages;
t.e. “has left his baggage-train.” Michmash
was about seven miles nearly due north of
Jerusalem. ‘The heavy baggage might con-
veniently be left there, especially as it was
difficult of attack (1 Sam. xiv. 4—13),
while a liglitly equipped body of troops
made a dash at Jerusalem.

Ver. 29.—They are gone over the passage.


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.
a


189


The “passage of Michmash” (1 Sam. xiii,
23)—the deeply sunken valley, called now
the Wady Suweinit, between Michmash
(Mukkmas) and Geba (Jeba). They have
taken up their lodging at Geba; or. at Geba
they rest for the night. Having crossed the
wady, they bivouac on the crest of the hills
enclosing it on the southh Ramah...
Gibeth ofSaul. Ramahis, no doubt, Hr-Ram,
a village on an eminence, as tue nime im-
plies, about six miles north of Jerusalem,
and on the direct road from Beitin. Giveah
of Saul is thought to have occupied the site
of the modern Tuleil-el-Ful, two miles nearer
Jerusalem. It ig certainly a distinct plaice
from Geba. The inhabitants evacuate these
two places during the night.

Ver. 30.—Lift up thy voice, 0 daughter of
Gallim. Gallim and Laish must have been
villages between Geba and Jerusalem; but
it is impossible to fix their site, Aniathoth
(now Anata) obtains mention in Joshua
as a city of refuge in the territory of Benja-
min (Josh. xxi. 18). It was Jeremiah’s birth-
place (Jer. i. 1). Gallim was the birthplace
of the man who became tlie second husband
of Michal, Saul’s daughter. Laish is not
elsewhere mentioned. Cause it to be heard
unto Laish; rather, hearken, O Laisha.

Ver. 31.—Madmenah ...Gebim. These
are, like Gallim and Laisha, villayes other-
wise unknown. ‘They must have been witnin
a mile or two of Jerusalem, towards the
north. Their inhabitants fly as the As-
syrians approach.

Ver, 32.—As yet shall he remain at Nob
that day; literally, yet that day (7s he) at
Nob to halt. The Assyrians pitch their camp
at Nob, the priestly city destroyed by Saul
(1 Sam. xxii. 19), which was evidently
within sight of Jerusalem. Major Wilson’s
conjecture, that it occupied the site of the
later Scopus, is probable.

Ver, 33.—Tne Lord... shall lop the
bough with terror. A check to the As-
syrian arms is intended, but of what nature
is not clear. The “lopping of the bough
with terror” might indicate a panic, such as
that which seized the Syrians and made
Benhalad IL. raise the siege of Samaria
(2 Kings vii. 6, 7). But the expressions
used later on, “hewn down,” “‘ cu. down,”
“shall fall,” rather imply a defeat.

Ver. 34.—He shall cut dowa; or, one shall
cut down; Jehovah being, no doubt, intended.
Lebanon (comp. Ezek. xxxi. 3, “ Behold, the
Assyrian was a ccdur in Lebanon”). Here
the comparison is enlarged, and Assyria ap-
pears as Lebanon itself with all its cedar
woods. By a mighty one; rather, a glorious
one (comp. ch, xxxiii. 21, where the word
here used—adir—is an epithet of Jehovah).


8


190 THE BOOK OF TI’E PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. x. 1—34


HOMILETICS.


Ver. 3.—God ts »nan’s only sure Refuge in the day of calamity. “ God is our Refuge
and Strength, a very present Help in trouble. Therefore will we not fear, though the
earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried into th: midst of the sea;
though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, ‘hough the mountains shake with the
swelling thereof” (Ps. xlvi, 1—8). So sany the psalmist, and so Israel and Judah felt,
so long as they clung to the worship of Jehovah, and served him, and strove to keep
his laws. As their fidelity wavered, and they grew cold in his service, and allowed
themselves to be attracted by the sensuous relisions of the nations around them, their
trust in Jehovah departed, and they could no longer look to him asa Refuge. Whither,
then, should they look? Should it be to the gods of the nations? or to foreign
alliances? or to their own strong arms and dauntless hearts ?

I. FALSE GODS NO SURE REFUGE. Ahaz at one time “sacrificed to the gods of
Damascus which smote him ” (2 Chron. xxviii. 23), thinking to obrain help from them ;
but “they were the ruin of him, and of all Israel.” Other kings of Judah and Israel
trusted in Baal, or Chemosh, or Moloch, or Beltis, or Ashtoreth. But none found any
of them a“ sure refuge.” Indeed, how should false gods help, when they are either
fictions of the imagination, mere nonentities, or else evil spirits, rebels avainst the
Almizhty, cast down by him from heaven? If the former, they can have no power at
all, for how should something come out of nothing? If the latter, they are powerless,
at any rate against God, who has proved their inability to resist him, and could at any
time annihilate them by a word.

Il. ‘HE KINGS OF THE EARTH NO SURE REFUGE. “Put not your trust in princes,
nor in any child o! man, for there is no help in them” (Ps. exlvi. 3). Hoshea trusted
in Shebek of Evypt (S.), Hezekiah in Tirhaknh, Zedekiah in Pharaoh-Hophra (Apries) ;
but all were equally disappointed. Even Ahaz obtained no real advantave from his
appeal to Tiglath-Pileser, who “distressed him, but strengthened him not” (2 Chron.
xxviii. 20). Foreign aid is always a poor thing to trust to; for tle foreigner necessarily
consults mainly his own interest, which he may find to conflict with ours at any
moment. Let all go well, and an obligation is incurred, which it may cost us more
than we bargained for to repay. Let things vo ill, and we experience perhaps the fate
of the horse when he called in man’s aid against the stag. In the best case, foreign
powers can help us only against man, not against God. They can never be a “sure
refuge.” ‘Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils: for wherein is he to be
accounted of ?” (ch. ii. 22).

III. Men’s OWN STRONG ARMS AND STOUT HEARTS NO 8URE REFUGE. Better
certainly to trust to these than to false gods or fickle princes. In many a strait, these
will help us a long way. But let there come a time of serious trouble, of overpowering
hostile force pressing upon a nation, or deep grief or dangerous sickness upon an indi-
vidual, and their weakness and insufficiency is at once shown. In the one case, tho
strong man has met with a stronger, and all his struggles do but add to his sufferingn.
In the other, the heart and hands fail when the call is made on them. ‘The stalwart
frame is bowed down with grief or illness; the heart is “ withered like grass ” (Ps. cii. 4),
or become “like wax that is melted” (Ps. xxii. 14). Man discovers under these cireum-
stances that he has no strength in himself, and, unless he can find an external refuge,
is lost absolutely. Happy they who at such times can feel with David, “The Lord is
my Rock, and my Fortress, and my Deliverer; my God, my Strength, in whom I will
trust; my Buckler, and the Horn of my salvation, and my high ‘lower ” (Ps. xviii 2).
“The Lord is my Shepherd; I shall not want. He maketh me to lie down in green
pastures: he leadeth me beside the still waters. He restoreth my soul: he leadeth me
in the paths of righteousness for his Name’s sake, Yea, thuugh I walk through the
valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thow art with me; thy rod and
thy staff they comfort me” (1’s. xxiii. 1—4),


Vers. 5—19.— Assyria, a notable example of pride and its punishment. History
furnishes no better example of pride and its punishment than that of Assyria. The
pride of the Assyrians is equally apparent in Scnpture and on the native monuments.


| 0, X, 1—34.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 191


ss


I. Assyria’s PRIDE AS SHOWN FoRTH IN SonrprurE. 1. In Rabshakeh’s embassy
{2 Kings xviii. 1Y—35). Rabshakeh not only scoffs at the military power of Judxa
and Egypt, but ridicules the idea that Jehovah can deliver Jerusalem if the Assyrians
attack it. “ Hearken not unto Hezekiah,” he says, “ when he persuadeth you, saying,
The Lord will deliver us. Hath any of the gods of the nations dclivered at all his land
out of the hand of the King of Assyria? Where are the gods of Hamath, and of Arpad ?
where are the gods of Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivah? have they delivered Samaria out
of mine hand? Who are they among all the gods of the countries, that have delivered
their country out of mine hand, that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem out of mine
hand?” 2. In the words by which Isaiah expresses what was in the heart of Assyrian
kings, in ch. x. 8—11, 18, 14, and ch. xxxvii. 24, 25.

Il, Assyria’8 PRIDE AS INDICATED BY THE MONUMENTS. Here we may note: 1. The
titles assumed by the kings, which are such as the tollowing: “the great king” (comp.
2 Kings xviii. 19, 28), “the powerful king,” “the king of kings,” “the lord of lords,”
“the supreme monarch of monarchs,” “ the favourite of the great gods,” “ the illustrious
chief who is armed with the sceptre and girt with the girdle of power over mankind,”
and the like. 2. The contemjt poured upon adversaries, who are “wicked people,”
“impious heretics,” “ enemies of Asshur,” “traitors,” and “rebels.” 8. The claim toa
series of uninterrupted successes, without notification of a single defeat, or even check,
as ever sutiered by the Assyrian arms. ‘Their pride forbids the monarchs to allow that
they ever experience a reverse.

Il]. Assyria’s PUNISHMENT. The downfall of Assyria is sudden, strange, abnormal.
She seems at the zenith of her power, stretching out her arm on the one side to
Ethiopia, on the other to Lydia and the coasts of the ANgean, when, almost without
warning, her glory suffers eclipse. A wild vation from the north, previously almost
unknown, invades her land, devastates her fields, threatens her towns, destroys her
material prosperity. Scarcely has this visitation passed by, when she is attacked from
the east. An old enemy, long contended with and long despised, has in some wonderful
way increased in strenzth, and assumes a menacing attitude. She trembles, but she
puts on a bold face and confronts the danger. Summoning to her aid the forces of her
subject allies, she retires within the strong walls of her capital city, and there awaits
attack. But the chief of the subject allies deserts her standard, leagues itself with her
main enemy, and joins in the siege of Nineveh. After a stubborn defence the city falls,
and wit!) it the empire, which has lasted nearly seven centuries. The downfall is
strange, sudden, tragic, astonishing. Scripture alone reveals its cause. Scripture puts
it before us as God’s doing—his judgment on Assyria’s pride, his predetermined and
distinctly predicted punishment, Because “the axe boasted itself against him that
hewed therewith, and the saw magnified itself against him that moved it” (ver. 15),
“therefore the Lord, the Lord of hosts, sent among Assyria’s fat ones leanness, and
under her glory kindled a burning like the burning of a fire,” and she was consumed,
“soul and body,” aud ceased to be a nation.

The warning may well be taken to heart by modern countries, which set themselves
against God; by modern scientists, who in the pride of their intellect deny God; and
by the irreligious generally, who practically deny and defy him.


Ver. 27.—Blessings through the anointing. Blessings come to men “through the
anointing ” ina twofold way: (1) indirectly, through the anoiuting of Jesus ; (2) directly,
through their own anointing.

J. THRouGH THE ANOINTING oF JESUS. The anointing of Jesus was that complete
sanctification of his human nature by the Holy Spirit, which resulted from his most
close and perfect union with the other Persons of the ever-blessed Trinity, whereby his
human nature was never left an instant without the Spirit’s gracious influence, but was
ever, as it developed itself, sanctified in every part to the highest degree possible. 1.
Hence comes to us the blessing of having a perfect Pattern, and that a personal one.
Abstract standards of virtue are all more or less imperfect, and are weak to move us ;
they create no enthusiasm ; they draw forth no love. We need a personal standard—
an example whom we may imitate, a master whom we may admire, a friend whom we
may cherish in our heart of hearts. Ancient philosophers told men who were striving
to be good, to look out for the most virtuous man whouw they could find, and then


192 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (on. x. 1—34


—_


imitate him. But every merely human model was imperfect; each led his followers
more or less astray. It is our happiness to have a perfect Model—a real Person; One
whose character is so clearly depicted that we cannot mistake it; One whom we may feel
to be indeed a Friend; One whom we may at once revere and love. 2. We have, further,
through the anointing of Jesus, the blessing of a full and complete satisfaction and
atonément for all our sins, No atonement for the sins of others could be made but by
a spotless sacrifice. Jesus was spotless, “ through the anointing.” It is thus “ through
the anointing” only that we have our perfect confidence in reconciliation having been
made for us, our sins blotted out, and our pardon obtained from an offended God, whe
will receive us in his Son and for his Son’s merits.

II. THROUGH MEN’s OWN ANOINTING. “We have an unction from the Holy One”
(1 John ii. 20), if we are Christians at all, and through that unction obtain more bless-
ings than we can enumerate; as (1) comfort and encouragement from him who is “ the
Comforter” (Juhn xiv. 26), wbo encourages humble souls, and cheers up those who are
depressed, and infuses hope into those who are ready to despair of their salvation ; (2)
strength fiom One who is stronger than man, who can enter into our hearts, and give
us the power both to will and to do of his good pleasure; (3) release from the bondage
of sin through the “ free Spirit,” who is able to overcome Satan, and release us from
slavery to evil habits, and make us free and willing servants of God; (4) light and
knowledge of the truth trom him who is “ the Spirit of truth,” among whose gilts are
wisdom, and knowledge, and faith, and discerning of spirits, and prophecy (1 Cor. xii.
8—10); (5) holiness from “ the Sanctifier,” the Holy Spirit—the “Spirit of holiness ”
(Rom. i. 4), The anointing of the Holy Spirit once received through the mercy of God,
naturally and almost necessarily, unless we grieve and vex the Spirit by our perversity,
abides in us (1 Juhn ii. 27), and teaches us, and guides us, and strengthens and sustains
us, aud purifies our hearts and lives, and enables us to grow in grace, and press un ever
towards the mark of our high calling in Christ, and become more and more conformed
to the image of him to whom God gave not his Spirit “ by measure” (John iii. 34).


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 5—15.— Assyria the rod of Jehovah, I. A WARLIKE POWER MAY BE THE PENAL
INSTRUMENT OF PRovIDENCE. Assyria is here described as the “staff of Jehovah’s
anger,” the “rod of his wrath,” appointed to march against a people who have excited
the Divine indignation. As he plunders and spoils, and proceeds on his devastating
way, he may be in effect like Attila, the “scourge of God,” destined like a wholesome
tempest to purify the moral air of a corrupt age, and to prepare for a better sauitary
state.

lI. YET HE WHO IS BUT AN INSTRUMENT OF ANOTHER WILL MAY IGNORE HIS OFFICE
AND woRK, ‘lhe Assyrian’s thoughts are bent on destruction. His motive is personal
ambition. In haughty pride he not only vvervalues his power, but mistakes its nature.
His courtiers, he vaunts, are equal to kings, All foreign lands without distinction are
to meet the same doom from him, As the heathen kingdoms of the north have been
subdued by him, powerful and many as the gods had been, so the little kingdom of
Judah, with its few gods or iduls, will not be able to withstand him. As a heathen, the
Assyrian recognizes, though in a mistaken way, the power of religion as the mainstay
of a state. ‘I'he idols or fetishes are to him the signs of a real supernatural power
residing in the nation.

111. Divine DENUNCIATION OF VAIN-GLORY. When Jehovah executes his judgments
at the right time, this insolent pride will be punished. 1. Jts folly exposed. Vie prophet
reads the heart of the vain-glorious conqueror. He is saying to himself, “ 1t was the
strength of my hand, it was the clearness of my own intelligeuce, that accomplished
these victories, that cast down my powerful foes. I was like a boy pillaging a deserted
nest.” 2. Jts fallacy rebuked. It isas it the axe should boast that it does the work of
the hewer, or as if the saw were to brag against the sawyer, or the staff were to boast
that it swings the hand of him who holds it—that the lifeless instrument raises the
living hand. How deeply do these thoughts run through the lore of Israel down to
Paul, who uses the image of the potter and the clay in a similar manner! Says Lerd


On, X. 1—34.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 193


Bacon, “It was prettily devised of Asop; the fly sat upon the axletree of the chariot-
wheel, and said, ‘ What a dust do I raise!’ So there are some vain persons, that what-
soever goeth alone or moveth upon greater means, if they have ever so little hand in it,
they think it is they that carry it.” But


“ All service ranks the same with God—
With God, whose puppets, best and worst,
Are we; there is no last nor first.”


3.


Vers. 165—23.—Judgment and conversion, I. Figures oF JUDGMENT. The Assyrian is
viewed under the image via stout, well-fed body, into which a wasting disease eomes by
Divine judgment. Again, that judgment is depicted asa flaming fire, kindling and
devouring thorns and making a swift end to the towering beauty of the forest trees, the
smiling pleasantuess of the fruitful field. The remnant of the host will soun be counted
“on one’s fingers,” as a boy might count the still s:anding stems in a wood devastated by
the fiery element. The decline of a sick man, lastly, may represent the falling away of a
nation’s power. At best, what is humanity but a flower fading in its pride? As we read
in the ‘Prometheus’ of Aeschylus, “ Its streneth, isit strong ; its beauty, isit fair? What
hope have they, these dying briers, living one day long? How like adreain they go, this
poor blind manhood, drifted from its end!” And in the light of moral disapproval, of
Divine judgment, a declining uation seems to be under_a blight, whose ravages cannot
be checked. Where are the ancient civilizations, Assyria, Babylonia, Egypt, Greece,
Rome? Their root was long peocansered, and their blossom went up as dust. The
explorer, digging out a statue here, or there deciphering an inscription, helps us to
construct the picture of cities that were magnificent poems in stone, of a life to which
no secret of pleasure or of power was denied. Were such heights in vain reached tor
mankind? Were yonder works of mighty kings the efforts of giants who lought against
God? Rather let us say that it is he who both raises up and sets down—raises up
to illustrate the greatness of the spirit of man, his breath ; casts down to show the bitter-
ness of human pride and the vanity of human ambitions. As we survey the remains
of the “ cloud-ca)»p’d towers and gorgeous palaces” of Nineveh and Persepolis, we are
reminded that all earth’s splendour is but a dream, from which we must again and
again awake anew, to find in the spiritual the only eternal; in the right the only
enduring throne of potentates; in the sweet happiness of millions, not in the multitude
of armed men, the mirror o! God’s will on earth.

II. ConvERSION THROUGH JUDGMENT. It was false reliances that corrupted Judah
and Israel. As faith in the true objects of faith is nothing but strength, so the illusion
which tempts us to trust where there is nothing in reality to lean on, must betray us.
Men under such illusions will confide in their deadly enemy as a bosom friend; will
invite the point of the weapon aimed at the heart; will “stay themselves upon them
that smite them.” We are limp, drooping creatures, Rare is he who walks with head
quite erect, with eye undauntedly fixed on the unseen, with heart bound up in principle
alone. If we crave countenance in our foibles, much more in our serious projects. And
never was there craze, weakness, silliness, or sin, for which abettors may not be found.
Never have we so sought confirmation in views that should never have been entertained,
but the hour of disenchantment has come, soon or late. The reed breaks, the cistern
leaks; the soft foundation gives, and the ominous crack appears in our dwelling. And
then we return to “stay ourselves on the Holy One of Israel with faithfuluess.” Orso the
prophet forecasts the effect of his people’s disenchautment. “The remnant will return,
the remnant of Jacob to the Hero-Gud.” He the only Head, the only Battle-leader,
as the only Prince-of Peace, will be found again in the day of adversity, at least by a
few. As in the olden time but a few were saved in the ark from the great flood, so
from these overflowing judgments which are to descend, a few, though only a few, will
be able to escape. A public end and decision of these controversies between Jehovah
and his people is to be made, and it cannot be delayed nor averted. 1, To the prophetic
consciousness it seems, at any epoch, that “the whole world lies in wickedness,” and
that the righteous are but a very small remnant. 2. Historically, such a view seems
two hold good. At critical epochs, England has probably been saved by the virtuous,

ISAIAH, 0


194 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. x. 1—34


the Christian, the self-denying few. 3, But history is too profound for any mortal
reading or rendering. If natios have passed away notwithstanding that they had a
core of true hearts among them; if Israel still remains, though her lamp has been
removed from its stand, there is, doubtless, a deeper meaning in the prophet’s words.
It is the “ remnant ” which has given us our Hebrew Scriptures. From the caidron of
suffering, exile, external sorrow, came forth the fine gold of the great prophet of the
Captivity, and of many of the psalmists. Every nation that leaves noble and Divine
thoughts for the possession of mankind for ever; every individual who, out of the
wreck of life’s mistakes, bequeaths some l-gacy of truth to posterity, fulfils in a way
the prophecies of the recovery of the remnaut.—J.


Vers. 24—34.—The mighty laid low. I. EXcoURAGEMENT AGAINST FEAR. Let not
Judah fear the Assyrian, who, like the Egyptian in the days of yore, wields over her
the rod of the slave-iriver. In a short time, the hot tide of Divine wrath will pass
from Israel, and the Assyrians will in turn feel it. ‘he scourve that was laid in the
ancieut time on the back of the Egyptian oppressor will be brandished over the heads
of the Assyrians, Their burden will fall from Judah’s shoulder, from Judah’s neck
the yoke. ‘lhe proverb says, “ A youth is ruived by fat,” and so will the swollen bulk
of the Assyrian body melt away. ‘There isa play in the Hebrew on the words “ yoke”
and “youth.” The prophet in a word-picture ;aints the onward march of the great host.
Swiftly he comes on, spreading trembling and causing flight before him. Panic-struck
clamours sound through the vales, and {rom hill to hill the alarum is given. Fugitives
pour in through the gates of the city. Already the invader is at Nob, near Jerusalem,
and has his hand lifted on high, as it were, to smite the sacred hill with a fatal blow.
‘hen suddenly his own crowu is cleft by the hand of Jehovah; the lofty crested
warriors fall as the trees in the forest before the woodman’s axe. This Lebanon of
warlike spears, this moles lelli, is prostrate before the “ majestical One” whose seat
is on Zion.

Il, Generat Lessons, There was an anointed king in Zion, the representation of
Jehovah’s majesty, then; there are spiritual forces, representative of Divine might and
will, ruling in the world now. There were moments of prophetic insight in which the
hollowness of worldly might, the doom of kin.doms that were not kingdoms of
righteousness, were clearly seen. There are such moments now. What is force without
justice, numbers without principle? One breath from the lips of eternal ‘ruth shall
suffice to drive them away. All that has fixed the eye of the people in fascinated
terror, filled their ears with tumult, their hearts with commotion, dismayed not the
prophet. He seems to look above, his feet securely planted upon a cliff, on the boiling
surge below. ‘There is a hand that can stay these waves, a voice that can command,
“Thus far and no further; here shall thy proud billows be stayed.” hen shall these
hosts become such “stuff as dreams are made of,” these onwaid-rolling columns melt
into wreaths of cloud, become thin air, and “ leave not a wrack behind.”


“The might of the Gentile, unsmote by the sword,
Hath melted like snow in the glance of the Lord!”


Our cares and troubles may be to us personally as the invasion of an Assyrian host.
If we would know the prophetic confidence, we must live the prophetic lile; the ear
attent, the heart obedient—“ fixed, trusting in the Lord.” Nothing can briug us peace,
lift us out of the degradation of fears that unman, but faith in our principles, They
must triumph in the end; in them alone is strength, freedom, victory.—J.


Vers. 1—4.—The helplessness of man wnder the wrath of God. The anger of the
Lord is here expressly declared against tle oppressor. We are again reminded: 1.
That God judges those who are in authority over men; that however these may be
placed above the reach of human justice, they will not escape Divine retribution, 2,
That God especially requires an account of our treatment of the suffering and the
dependent. Whoso wrongs the widow or the orphan must expect a fearful reckoning
with the pitiful and righteous One (Matt. xviii. 6). But the special truth which is
provided for us in this passage is the utter impotence of man, and the certainty and
severity of his doom when God “arises to judgment.” We learn—


ou. x. 1—34,] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 195


; I. Tar sIN Is MOVING ON TO A DAY oF DivINE gupeMENT. “The day of visita-
tion” (ver. 3) is sure to come, The desolation that is in store may have to “come
from far;” it may be out of sight now; it may come “as one that travelleth,” may be
hidden by intervening days and weeks; but it is on its way. Not more surely does the
sun move to the western sky, does the spring move toward the summer, does youth
move toward manhood and manhood toward age and death, than does sin move on to
a day of wrath, of Divine visitation. All sin takes this sad course; not only such
daring and presumptuous sin as that of the text—cruel wrong at the hand of those
appointed to administer justice —but all departure from the revealed will of God, and
also the deliberate and persistent refusal to enter his service.

I]. THAT IN THAT DAY SIN WILL LEAN IN VAIN ON ITS OLD suPpoRTS. Not only
will national alliances fail the nation which God is visiting with his displeasure, but all
the supports and consolations with which individual souls have surrounded themselves
will prove to be of no avail then. “To whom will ye flee for help?” (ver. 3). What
human arm will arrest the uplifted hand of God? Of what avail then human friend-
ships, abundant “ resources,” maguificent estates, royal or princely patronage, the
devices of the cunning counsellor? How will these be brushed away by the tempest
of his holy indignation !

Ill. THAT sIN WILL THEN BE EXPOSED TO A THREEFOLD PENALTY. 1, Irreparuble
loss. “Where will ye leave your glory?” (ver. 3), Our earthly treasures, our bodily
powers, our worldly honours and positions,—these are things which God’s punitive
providence will take away from us; and where is the custodian to whose hands we can
confide them? Who will receive them from us and restore them to us? 2. Spiritual
bondage. “They shall bow down under the prisoners,” or “bow down among the
captives” (ver. 4). Sin leads down to a cruel bondage. Evil dispositions, bad habits,
shameful lusts, “have dominion over us” (Rom. vi. 16). 3. Spirituul death. “ 'Vhey
shall fall under the slain.” We add the welcome truth, not stated or even hinted here,
but elsewhere revealed—

IV. THAT THERE IS AN UNFAILING REFUGE NOW FOR THE PENITENT AND BELIEVING
SPIRIT.—C.


Vers. 5—19.—WMan in his folly and God in his righteousness. We have a graphic
picture here of—

I. Man in ois Fouuy. Under the dominion of the folly which is born of sin, man:
1. Indulges in designs which are beyond his strength. (Ver.7.) It is “in his heart ” to
do much greater things, often to work much greater wickedness, than he has power to
execute. Under sin, men indulge in great and even gross self-exagveration; guilt is
an infatuating thing. 2. Looks with dangerous complacency on his little triumphs.
(Vers. 8, 9.) He has the “stout heart” and the “high looks” (ver. 12) which come
from a consciousness of success, and which are the sure precursors of further folly.
Few men can stand even the smaller triumphs, and still fewer the greater ones. When
a man finds himself indulging the spirit of complacency he had better question himself
severely, for he is walking on a “ slippery place.” 38. Attributes to himself what is his
only in a very slight degree. (Ver. 13; vide 1 Cor. iv. 7.) Man can only work with
the materials which he has received from God, under the conditions which God deter-
mines, within the limits which God imposes. “ All our springs are in him.” The
attitude of arrogant authorship is as preposterous as it is offensive. 4. Comes to hasty
and tynorant conclusions. (Vers. 10, 11,14.) The blind Assyrian ignorantly asso-
ciated the idols of other lands with “the idols of Jerusalem.” He was either ignorant
of Jehovah’s Name, or he placed him on a level with other gods. He was going torth
in a blind confidence that should be rudely shaken, that shouid be completely
shattered. Man in his guilty folly assumes many things to be true which are absolutely
false; he fails to make inquiry, aud his ignorance utterly and fatally misleads hin.
And there is nothing in regard to which this is so true as the nature, the character,
and the will of God. 5. Is blind to the end and issue of his doings. “ He meaneth not
go,” ete. (ver. 7). Under the sway of sin man moves along a path which he thinks
will lead to honour, enjoyment, success, triumph; but “ the end of that way is death.
Selfishness has its own purpose in view, and confidently reckons on achieving its
end; but behind or above it is a Power which it is unable to resist, and which turns
it to another and very different end,


196 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. x, 1—34.


Il. Gop In His rIGHTEOUSNESS, Everywhere present, sleeplessly watching, mightily
interposing, is the righteous Ruler of all. 1. He punishes his own people when they go
astray. “1 will send him against a hypocritical nation,” etc. (ver. 6); “ When the
Lord hath performed his whole work upon Mount Zion” (ver. 12), Judgment often
“begins at the house of God,” with the people of God. Whom the Lord loves he
chastens. God bas a gracious purpose in his visitations; he desires and designs
repentance and restoration, but he does not spare. He speaks of his own people as
“the people of his wrath ” (ver. 6). Let no “ Christian nation,” or “ Christian Church,”
or Christian man wrap itself (himself) up in imaginary security. God may have a
rod in his hand even for Judah as well as for Assyria, 2. He will overwhelm with
humiliation those who impiously oppose themselves to his holy will. (Vers. 15—19.)
3. He will use the ungodly us instruments in his hand of riyhteousness and power.
(Vers. 5—7.) Sennacierib should be the rod with which the band of God would
smite. God can make and will make the wrath and the ambition of men to serve the
high purpose which he has in his mind. Thus he used Pharaoh, Cyrus, Pilate, and
many others, who thought that their own aims were the ultimate issue that was
being wrought out. (1) How unspeakably humiliating is the involuntary tribute God
may compel us to render! (2) How immeasurably preferable is the willing service he
invites us to offer!—C.


Vers. 20—23.— Departure and return. The passage snegests—

I, THAT THOSE WHO KNow GoD WELL MAY BE INDUCED TO FORSAKE HIM. Israel
had been well taught of God; had been carefully and constantly instructed in Divine
truth; had reccived some lessons which might well have been deeply planted in the
mind. Yet Israe] forsook Jehovah ; ceased to trust in his delivering arm, and sought
alhance with Assyria. So we, who should know much better, forsake the Lord, of
whose power, faithfulness, and love we have learned so much. Instead of finding our
joy and our heritage in his service and friendship, we resort to the fascinations of a
seductive world; instead of relying on his promised succour, we have recourse to
human help or to material securities.

Il. THaT EVERY EARTHLY REFUGE PROVES TO BE PRECARIOUS. Resting on Assyria,
Israel was only “ staying upon him that smote them,” ‘lhe statf on which they leaned
proved to be a rod that bruised them. So has it been, again and again, with national
and political alliances. So is it with our individual confidences in earth rather than
in heaven. The muterial securities fail us; the ship sinks, the bank breaks, the mine
is exhausted, the company is defrauded and has to be wound up, trade declines, and
our earthly prop is gone. The human help we built upon disappears; our friend
sickens, or he is killed in the fatal accident, or he is himself stripped and helpless, or
he is estranged from us and discards us. Our hope becomes our disappointment, our
pride becomes our shame; we have been staying on that which smites us (see Jer.
xvii. 5; Ps. cxviii. 6—9; ch. xxxi. 1).

111. nar Gob AWAITS THE RETURN OF HIS PEOPLE TO HIMSELF. “They shall
stay upon the Lord;” “The remnant shall return unto the mighty God ” (vers, 20, 21).
Not only was God not unwilling that his people should return unto him, but he sent
them their adversity in order that they might see their folly and incline their hearts
unto himself. 1, God is yrieved at our departure from himself, but he is willing to
welcome us back. 2. He sends the adversity which is suggestive of our return. When
the dark hour comes, when the soul sits desolate, when our heart is wounded by the
very hand which we hoped would help and heal us, in that day may we hear the voice
of the Father we have forsaken, calling to us and saying, “ Return unto me;” “I will
heal your backslidings, I will love you freely.”—C,


Vers, 24—34.—Rout and re-establishment : Divine interposition. I, THE APPEAR-
ANCE OF OVERWHELMING POWER ON THE SIDE OF SIN. The prophet gives a vivid
description in vers. 23—38 of the triumphant march of the Asevrian. Everybody
and everything yields at his approach ; opposition melts beiore him; his adversary is
in his power; already his hand is on the prize he seeks. Sin often seems to be on
a march that is irresistible, and to be secure of victory. Numbers, wealth, learning,
rank, riches, custom, habit,—the most powerful forces make up its conquering host.


on. x. 1—34.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 197
a


Must not truth, virtue, piety, capitulate at its summons and leave their treasures to ita
impious hands? So was it with sin generally when the Saviour appeared, to lilt up the
standard of the cross against its power. So has it been, again and again, with the
forces of superstition, scepticism, vice, ungodliness, as these have assailed some Church
of Christ or some servant of God.

Il. Ivs arrest AND OveRTHROW BY Divine power. Irresistible as the invading army
seemed, its victorious course should be arrested and its confident anticipations dashed
(vers. 26, 33, 34). The hand of the boastful warrior, outstretched in scornful threatens
ing (ver. 3”), should be smitten down and hang helpless. ‘The smiter should himself be
scourged, the proud palm disbranched, the great forest felled, Arrogant impiety should
be humiliated, and “ by the way that he came he should return.” So has it been and
thus shall it be, on still more serious and critical occasions. God will say to the
spiritual adversaries, “Thus far . . . and no further.” He will raise up the prophet—
the Samuel, the Elijah, the John, the Paul, the Luther, the Wesley—or he will iutro-
duce the spiritual awakening and moral power which will encounter and deteat the
worst efforts of sin and wrong, and impending deteat shall be changed into glorious
victory.

We ‘THE RE-ESTABLISHMENT OF RIGHTEOUSNESS, (Ver. 27.) The burden shall be
removed from the shoulder, the voke taken from the neck; there shall be comfort and
freedom for the people of God, that they may walk ayain in the paths ot righteousness,
that they may serve again in the vineyard of the Lord. We learn three lessons: 1.
That successful sin may well hesitate on its way and tremble for the issue. However
appearances may lavour it, and though the spoils may seem already in its hand, there is
a Power to be reckoned with whicl will arrest its march and consume its hopes, 2.
That threatened uprightness may be reassured. It need not be afraid of any Assyrian
(ver. 24), il it continue in or return to its spiritual integrity. God’s love for the
faithful will remain ; his indignation toward the erring who are the penitent will cease
(ver. 25). 3. Thut the removal of sinful servitude must be contemporary with the
acceptance of holy and happy service. (Matt. xi. 283—30).—C,


Ver. 2.— The Divine avenger of the poor. The idea of a goel, or avenger, belongs to
the primitive conditions of society. When there was no settled government, no police,
and no magistracy, each individual had to guard his life, liberty, and property as best he
could, The first and simplest form that mutual protection took was “ the family,” and
the principle was established that the nearest of kin to an injured or murdered person
should avenge the injury or death. As this led to feuds among families and tribes
lasting for generations, and as it was a kind of rough justice which often became
injustice, Moses set the old custom under limitations, appointing proper courts for the
settlement of disputes, and protecting the manslayer from the avenger until due exami-
nation could be made into the circumstances of his crime. In fully civilized society
a regular system of law and magistracy is organized ; the individual commits his right
of personal avengement to the recoynized authorities. It is, therefore, of supreme
importance to the welfare of any nation that justice should be free to all, should be
perfectly fair, aud should be a practical avenger of the poor, the distressed, and the
wronged, The picture which Isaiah sets before us in this passage reveals a most
perilous condition of society. “ All the formalities of justice were observed punctili-
ously. The decision of the unjust judge was duly viven and recorded, but the outcome
of it all was that the poor, the widow, and the fatherless got no redress.” “ No people
had statutes and jud:ments so righteous as they had, and yet corrupt judges found
ways ‘to turn aside the needy from judgment,’ to hinder them from coming at their
right and recovering what was their due, because they were needy and poor, and such
as they could get uvthing by nor expect any bribes from.” “ There is no surer sign of
the misery of a people than is found in the corrupt administration of justice.” And it
may be added that a country is on the borders of revolution, or of calamity, when
righteousness has forsaken its judgment-seats, and there are no avengers ol social
wrongs.

I, THE STATE GF SOCIETY [N WHICH THE POOR FIND NO HELP IN MAN. Two cases
are sugvested. 1, Failure to obtain just judgment. 2, The painful condition of
widows, Where there is wealth and luxury there is sure to be poverty in marked and


198 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. x. 1—34.
a


terrible features close beside it, as may be illustrated from the great and rich European
cities of our day. Wealth has a tendency to go in the direction of classes; it drains away
from some classes, and so alienates and embitters them, especially as the result of self-
indulgence is to harden a man’s heart against his neighbour. The condition of widows
in the East is an extremely painful one, because they have no rights in their husband’s
property, uo sccial status, and are the prey of designing and wicked men. The retired
life they lead unfits them for contending on behalf of their own rights, or those of their
children. The picture of a national life in which the wronged have no judge, the poor
no helpers, and the widows no friends, is an exceedingly painful one. Self-seeking,
luxury, and class prejudice must have eaten the heart out of such a kingdom.

Il. In svucH A STATE OF SOCIETY THE POOR HAVE HELP IN Gop. ‘This may be
illustrated along the following lines. God will help them by: 1. Vhe working of his
judgment-laws. In Greece despised helots multiply, and become at last a destructive
force, for a time breaking up society. Slaves learn at last to combine, and take their
own avengements on their persecutors. Down-trodden races heave awhile, like slum-
bering earthquakes, and presently burst forth in revolutions that are, in reality, Divine
judgments. 2. By the orderings of Divine providence, which bring the nation into
such a condition that reformation of its wrongs becomes immediately necessary to
secure its continued existence. 3. By the raising up of human helpers. Men who
plead the cause of the poor, and make their voice and their condition to be heard even
in the high places of a land. At once thought turns to such men as Wilberforce, the
friend of the slave, and Howard, the friend of the prisoner. 4. By special Divine con-
solations. The poor have their ameliorations, and even their superior advantazes;
and not the least of them is this—they have little prejudice hiudering the reception of
Divine truth, ‘To “the poor the gospel is preached,” and in every age it is found true
that ‘the common peuple heard Christ,” and hear of Christ, ‘‘ gladly.”—R. T.


Vers. 5—7.— The Divine overrulings. The figure of Assyria as an avgrandizing
power is here set before us. “ About B.o. 1100, the rule of Assyria, under Tiglath-
Pileser I., had stretched from Kurdistan to the Grecian Archipelayo, including the
whole of Lebanon and Pheenicia. But a strong league of the Hittite kings of Syria
had effectually humbled it, and torn away from the successors of the great kiny all his
dominions on this side the Euphrates. After a hundred and fifty years of obscurity,
Assyria once more, in the middle of the ninth century B.c., under its warlike king,
Assur-Nazirhabal, entered on a career of conquest, and cleared its home territories of
their Babylonish garrisons. He was succeeded by his son, Shalmaneser IL., who proved
the Napoleon of his day. After conquerig Babylonia, he marched in triumph to the
shores of the Persian Gulf, and exacted tribute {rom the petty kings of Chaldwa. But
these triumphs only kindled his military ardour. He now determined to extend his
empire to the ancient grandeur it had obtained under Tiglath-Pileser I. The kingdom
of Damascus and the states of Palestine were thus in inminent danger. A new era of
mortal struggle had come to them—a strug le only to end, after an avony of more than
a hundred years, in the destruction of Damascus and Samaria, and the degrading vas-
salage of all the nations from the Euphrates to the Levant, Henceforth all Western Asia
trembled at the name of Assyria. The heavens were black with tempests, driving, with
only momentary lulls, across the whole sweep of Syria and Palestine” (Dr. Geikie),
Fixing attention on Assyria, we observe—

I, SELF-WILLED ASSYRIA, CARRYING OUT ITS OWN PLANS. Describe the historical
facts. ‘The poet seems to be watching this aggrandizing king determined to push his
conquests to the Mediterranean, and become master of the world, The career and spirit
of the first Napoleon are full of effective comparisons. The lust of conquest ever grows
with success, and the Assyrian king had no more thought of God than Napoleon had.
He simply meant to serve his own ends. These great world-conquerors are prominent
examples of “ taking life into our own ordering, and resolutely fashioning it to our own
ends ;” and they are examples, too, of the curse to all around, aud the ruin to the man
himself, of every self-willed life.

II. OverruLeD AssyRIA CARRYING ouT Gop’s pLANs. What a supreme humilia-
tion for conquering Assyria was this prophetic declaration! Assyria was, in actual fact,
only carrying out the purpose of Jehovah, who was known to the Assyrians but as the


oH. x, 1—34,] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 199


—_——


God of one of the little states which they would be obliged to overrun. Assyria and
its proud king were only Jehovah’s rod and staff, executing for him the fierceness of his
indignation. Assyria was now as much tle servant of God judging and punishing
Syria and Israel, as the Hebrews had been the servants of God in exterminating the
Canaanites, whose cup of iviquity had become full, and was running over. God makes
“the wrath of man praise him, and the remainder of wrath he restrains.”

Ill. THERE IS EVER CONSOLATION FoR Gop’s PEOPLE 1N Gop’s OvERRULINGS, We
should always try to look beyond man’s litile plan, and see how things fit into God’s
great plan. We may never be satisfied with what things look like, we should ask God
to teach us what they are. There are no forces working in the moral or intellectual
world of to-day which are out of God’s range. We need never be despondent, The
purposes of grace are overmastering purposes. It is always true that “man proposes,
and God disposes.” As practical appeal, show how important for us it is that we should
be kin with God, fit into his purposes, and do his will, not just by his overruling and
mastery, but by our own spirit of surrender, submission, aud joyous service; never
saying, “ What shall I do?” but ever looking up to God and saying, “ Lord what wilt
thou have me to do?”—R, T,


Vers. 12—14.— God’s judgments on pride. ‘These are the sentiments and boastings
of Sennacherib, a proud Assyrian monarch, who viewed and treated cities just as we in
Africa viewed and treated ostrich-nests, when they fell in our way; we seized the eggs
as if they had been our own, because we had found them, and because there was no
power that could prevent us. So did Sennacherib seize and plunder cities with as little
compunction as we seized the eggs of the absent ostrich; never thinking of the misery
for lite which he thereby brought on many peaceable families, who had done nothing
to injure or offend him” (Campbell). Assyria did more than other conquering king-
doms in merging independent nationalities into one great empire. ‘To be a “ remover
of boundaries and landmarks ” was the title in which an Assyrian king most exulted.

J. THE PERIL OF SUCCESS IN LIFE Is PRIDE. Illustrated in Nebuchadnezzar,
Solomon, etc. Sce the boastings in this passage.

Jl. Prive, KEPT WITHIN LIMITS, MAY BE CORRECTED BY ORDINARY AGENCIES. Such
as failure, disappointment, falls into temptation, seasons of afiliction. ‘There is some
measure of pride in us all, bringing us under God’s chastening land.

II]. WHEN PRIDE COMES TO TAKE THE HONOUR THAT IS DUE TO GOD ALONE, IT
MUST BE OPENLY HUMB.LED. As in the cases of Nebnchadnezzar, Herod at Tyre, ete.
And if God seems to delay in his humblings, we may be sure it is only that the proud
man may get finished the work which, all unknown to himself, God is making him
do. ‘Then we may well learn to be always thankful for grace received, talents entrusted,
opportunities given, and achievements won; but never bvast, never either think or say,
“1 have done it; ” “ My arm hath gotten me this victory.” Boast, if you must boast,
like Paul, of what God has wrought in you and by you; but never boast of what you
have wroug!it, for it is an ever-working and necessary law that “ pride must have a
fall,” and the “ Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.”—R. T.


Ver. 15.—Man, the instrument of God. This passage is most humbling to that
pride of man which leads him to say, “ Iam my own; | can do as | please with my
own powers and life.” That pride it breaks down by saying, “ Not so; you are not
your own; you are God’s; he made you; he gives you all; he uses you for his own
high purposes.” ‘The proudest, wealthiest, mightiest man on earth may seem to be
something. In reality, what is he? An axe, a saw,a staff in the hands of God, to
work out his will. How foolish for the axe to boast against the workman, or the staff
to resist the living man who uses it! The truth which we propose to illustrate is,
that man can never be other than the instrument of God, used by him for the accom-
plishment of his Divine purposes. We can find nothing else that God has created
which is without a purpose and end for its being. Winds and waters, metals and
rocks, flowers and trees, sunshine and showers, summer and winter, day and night,
disease and death, all are God’s tools. Not one insect hums in the summer evening
but has received its commission from the Lord of heaven and earth. Not a flower
opens its tinted bosom in the hedgerow but is obeyins the voice of God, Not @


200 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on, x. 1—34


pird fans the air with its waving wing but hastens to do the Lord’s bidding. The
world is full of tools in the hands of God. As we ascend in the scale of creation we
only find that higher beings have higher work to do; they are more subtle tools, set
to do more skilful work, but they never cease to be tools. Man may be the crown of
creation, but he is only a creature, and set to do God’s most delicate and particular
work. So far as we can understand the history of our world, we can see that great
nations have been raised up to do certain thines for God, and they have done them,
either with their wills or against them. Egypt was raised up to educate the child-
hood of God’s chosen people. Assyria was raised up, as we see in this chapter, to be
the rod of God wherewith he might punish his people for their sin. Babylon was
commissioned to guard the years of Jewish captivity. Greece was exalted to show
the world that “the beautiful ” is not, of necessity, “ the good.” Rome proved to the
world that “ restraint of law ” can never take the place of the “ liberty of righteousness.”
The Gothic nations were commissioned to overthrow a debased and worn-out civiliza-
tion. France shows how the passion for “vlory” can lead men astray. America
illustrates the principles of self-government. England tells what can be achieved under
the inspiration of duty. Every prominent man, who stands conspicuously out from
his fellows, 1s a tool of God. Of Pharaoh it is said, “ For this cause have I raised thee
up, to make known my power in thee.” Of Cyrus, who was appointed to arrange the
return fiom captivity, it is said, “I girded thee, though thou hast not known me.”
Every man’s individuality is precisely arranged for God’s purpose in him, It becomes
a most oppressive thought that each one of us is not only a tool, but a tool of a specific
kind, and shape, and weigit, and force, and keenness, adapted aud attempered for that
precise work which God wants to do by vs. What, then, shall we do with this fact,
that mav is the instrument ot God? In what relation shall we stand to it?

1, We MAY DENY THE FACT, AND MAKE THIS SUPPORT OUR REBELLION. Perhaps
uo one ever did, soberly and thoughtfully, say, “There is no God.” Men say it in the
bragging of their pride, as excuse for their wrong-dving; and by the self-pleasing of
their lives; but Scripture reveals their secret when it says, “They do not lke to
retain God in their thoughts.” ‘The difficulty is moral, not intellectual. Even a bad
man would hardly dare to say, “ Even if there be a God, he has no rights in me; [
am my own; | rule myself; I shall take care of myself for ever.” And yet many
a mau’s liie docs, in effect, say, “I am no axe, no saw, no staff, of God’s; I will not
be.” “The axe boasteth itself against him that heweth therewith, and the saw
magnifies itself against him that shaketh it.” Scripture refers to such men. Nebu-
chadnezzar; Jonah; Assyria; Herod at Tyre. And what must always follow when
the “ potsherd strives against its Maker”?

i]. We MAY ACCEPT THE FACT, BUT PERVERT IT, AND 80 MAKE OURSELVES
INDIFFERENT TO MORAL DisTEINCTIONS. A man may say, “ Yes, [am a tool of God’s;
my life is all planned out for me; it is all fore-ordained where I shall be, what I shall
do; therefore there can be no real difference between right and wrong; whatever I
do 1 cannot help doing, 1 was intended to do; Iam only the axe or the saw; the virtue
livs only in him who uses me, and whose power I cannot resist.” We are all exposed
tc the temptation of treating this sublime fact of God’s relation to us in this most
mournful and mistaken way. Losing the distinction between right and wrong out of
our lives, we are in peril of losing God altogether as a moral Being, and transforming
him into the “ cloud-compelling Jove” of whom the pagans dreamed. Cannot we s¢e
that when God speaks of men as his axe or his saw, it is as using a symbol, which
@nswers only in part? Man is not according to the nature of the axe or the saw; but
his intelligence, bis powers, his will, come into a relation of dependence on God and
service to hii, just-as the saw does to man. God’s higher will takes into account
man’s will, and would even work out its gracious plans through that human will.

Hil We MAY RECEIVE THIS FACT, AND MAKE IT NOURISH A DAILY OBEDIENCE.
Was the life of the Apostle Paul a free, noble, blessed life? He was but a tool in the
hands of God. “Go thy way; thou art a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my Name
before the Gentiles.” He did not resist; he did not let the fact that he was God’s
tool lead him to indifference. He cheerfully accepted God’s will for him; he fitted
his will to God’s will, and said, “ Yes, the very best thing for me is just the thing
that God requires of me, that I should go and preach to the Gentiles.” Is there moral


oH. x. 1—34.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 201
a


glory in the life of the Lord Jesus Christ on the earth? It comes out of the fact that
even he, in his earthly manifestation, was a tool in the hands of God, and liked to be a
tool, He fitted his mind into the mind of God so as to say, “ Lo, I come to do thy will,
O God ;” “ My meat and my drink is to do the will of my Father who is in heaven,”
The truth before us, in this our text, staggers and crushes us if we attempt to resist
it. It is one rich indeed in comfort and help if we will accept it, fit our will and
pleasure into God’s will and pleasure for us, and say, “God’s plan for me is my plan
for myself. God's place, God’s work, God’s difficulties, God’s sorrows, God’s helps for
me, are the very things that I would have chosen for myself, if I had wisdom enongh
to choose.” The truth of the text will be a stumbling-block to us until we truly know
God. Then it becomes to us a glory and a boasting. Why should the infant of a day
be set to steer the vessel when the Lord of winds and seas is on board? Why should
a stranger lead himself through the trackless forests of life when the all-seeing, all-
knowing Father-God offers the guiding hand? What can be better for us than to be
axe, saw, staff, in the hands of him who is good, wise, loving, strong, our Almighty
Father ?—R. T.


Ver. 20.—Staying upon the Holy One. “The remnant of Israel, and the escaped of
the house of Jacob, shall no longer rely upon smiter, but shall rely upon Jehovah,
Israel’s Holy One, in faithfulness ” (Cheyne’s translation). The point of the verse is
that the remnant of Israel is thoroughly weaned from its false contid-nces, and returns
to the true God. The only hope for preserving the liberties of Judah, Israel, and
Syria was for them to combine against the growing power of Assyria. But, instead of
that, Israel and Syria combined against Judah, and so both weakened their own hands,
and drove Judah to seek the help of Assyria, which inevitably hastened the overthrow
of all the three kingdoms. However politic the appeal of Judah to Assyria mizht seem
' to be, it was utterly unworthy of the people of Jeliovah, who had so often proved his
faithfulness and power; so they had, by bitter experience, to learn that they should
“cease from man,” and trust wholly in the living God (Jer. xvii. 5—8). “Their
experience of the failure of that false policy should lead them to see that faith in God
was, after all, the truest wisdom.” From this we learn for ourselves that tle sanctified
experiences of our life will bring about the same results; self-trusts, and trusts in man,
will be wholly broken down, and trust in God will be fully established. We may
dwell on the following stages in the experience of life.

I. I can. This expresses the spirit of confidence, conscious strength, and hopeful-
ness which characterizes youth. Nothing seems to be impossible. Life must yield its
best to energy.

II. I wim. This is man’s first effort to meet the sense of failure. Things will not
go just as he wishes. He cannot attain all he can desire. But at first he will not
admit this. So he calls on will to buttress ability, and make united effort to master
disability. The very energy of man’s will is a half-cunfession of man’s weakness.

Ill. I cannot, This is the issue of the strife, sooner or later, for every man.
Strength and will try hard to shape life otherwise than Gud appoints; and however
cheering temporary successes may prove, every year brings its disajpointments and its
distresses, aud at last the cry rises, more or less bitterly, “It is not in man that walketh
to direct his steps.”

IV. I can, THROUGH HIM WHO STRENGTHENETH ME. This is the right issue of human
experience. The great lile-lesson. The teaching of God’s Spirit. The meetness for
the heavenly service. Untried trust is only profession, Experience brings us to
“ staying upon the Holy One.”—R, T.


Ver. 27.—The power of the anointing. This verse is an exceedingly difficult one,
because containing a poetical figure which modern associations do not readily explain.
Literally, it seems to read, “The yoke shall be destroyed {rom before the oil,” or J‘ the

.” For various explanations see the Expository portion of the‘Commeéntary. What
is clear is, that the yoke referred to is the bondage of Assyria laid on the house of
David, This yoke shall be presently removed. ‘he deep reason for the removal is
that on the house of David lies the oil, the anointing oil which consecrated it to
Jehovah, Jehovah will surely deliver those who are in covenant relations with him


202 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. xi 1—16,


Scie ihc ce TA a ea ae ee


(comp. ch. xxxvii. 35). The reference may be (1) for Hezekiah’s sake; (2) for David’s
sake; (3) for his people’s sake; (4) for Messiah’s sake. The passage which best
explains the figure of the text is 1 John ii. 27: “ But the anointing which ye have
received of him abideth in you, and ye need not that any man teach you: but as the
same anointing teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it
hath taught you, ye shall abide in him.” Taking the above as the view of the passage,
the subject set before us is this: A man’s consecration to God_is_a constant: considera-
tion shaping the Divine dealings. Israel was an anointed tage, the house of David
was an anointed family, therefore for them no galamity could be overwhelming; all
must be subject to gracious Divine mitiyations, and all must be made remediul in their
influence.

I. To THE “ANOINTED” BURDENS AND YOKES MUST come. 1. Because they are not
perfect. 2. Because they are being perfected. 3, Because such burdens and yokes are
precise and efficient moral agencies in the work of perfecting. (For the Christian


setting of this truth, see Heb. xii. 4—11.)
Il. On THE “


are all in strict Divine control.


” (BURDENS? AND
definite object, they have also a limited time.
useless evils if they remained after their mgr:
be applied to all the calamities and afflictions of life.


In fact, all affliction is “ but for a moment.”


Goxus) €anno? Stay) Because, having a


They would become unmitigated and
ad been wrought. ‘This may
The degree, the time, the form,


fil. For THe “ANOINTED” THERE IS HELP IN BEARING BURDENS AND YOKES WHILE
4


THEY MUST STAY.


“my grace is.suflicient tor thee.”


God is with all loyal Hebrew youths when they are in the fires,
“ When thou passest through the water, I will be with thee.”
“Therefore we may boldly say, The Lord is my


When thorns pierce,


»


Helper; I will not fear what man gap do unto me.”—l. T,


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER XI.


Vers. 1—9.—A RrneweD PROPHECY OF
MessIaH AND OF HIs Kincpom. This chapter
is closely connected with the preceding.
With the final destruction of Assyria, which,
being cut down, sends out no shoot (ch. x.
33, 34), is contrasted the recuperative energy
of Israel, which, though equally levelled
with the ground (ch. ix. 18, 19), shall spring
afresh into life, and “renew its youth.”
The recovery is connected—or rather identi-
fied—with the coming of Messiah, whose
character is beautifully portrayed (vers.
2—5). An elaborate description of Messiah’s
kingdom follows (vers.6—10)—an expansion
of the briefer one in ch. ii. 3, 4.

Ver. 1.—There shall come forth a rod out
ofthe stem of Jesse. The blasted and ruined
“stem” or stock of Jesse, cut down, and for
ages hidden from sight, shall suddenly put
forth a sprout—a young green sapling,
tender yet vigorous, weak seemingly, yet
full of life (comp. Job xiv. 7—9, “ There is
hope of a tree, if it be cut down, that it will
sprout again, and that the tender branch
thereof will not cease. Though the root
thereof wax old in the earth, and the
stock thereof die in the ground; yet through


the scent of water it will bud, and bring
forth boughs like a plant”). “The stem of
Jesse” must mean the house of David, for
there is but one Jesse (Isha) in Scripture—
David’s father. A Branch shall grow out
of his roots. That which is at first a sapling
gains strength and grows into a “ branch ”
(see ch, iv. 2, where the word used, though
different, is synonymous).

Ver, 2.—The Spirit of the Lord shall rest
upon him (comp. Matt. iii. 16; Luke ii. 40;
iv. 1, 14, 18; Jobn iii. 34, etc.). The
human nature of our Lord required, and
received abundantly, the sanctifying and
enlightening influences of the Holy Spirit.
These influences were not in him transient
or occasional, as in too many men, who
more or less “resist the Spirit,” but perma-
nent and enduring. They “rested upon”
him; from first to last never quitted, and
never will quit, him. The spirit of wisdom
and understanding. The influences of the
Holy Spirit are manifold, affecting the
entire counlex nature of man (see | Cor.
xii. 8—11), ere, three pairs of graces are
set forth as specially manifested in the
Messiah through the power of the Spirit:
(1) “ Wisdom and understanding,” or intel-
lectual and moral apprehension (edcvvecta),
the ability to perceive moral and abstract
truth; (2) “counsel and mizit,’ or the
power at once to scheme and originate, and


on. x1. 1—16.]


also to carry out thought into act; (3)
“The knowl: dge and the fear of the Lord,”
or acquaintance with the true will of God,
combined with the determination to carry
out that will to the full (John iv. 34; Luke
xxii. 42; Heb. x. 7). It is needless to say
that all tlese qualities existed in the
greatest perfection in our blessed Lord.

Ver. 3.—And shall make him of quick
understanding. This rendering of the
original, though defended by Dr. Kay, is
quite without support from any other pas-
sage where tlie same woid is used. Modern
writers almost all translate, either “ the
Spo ean pew eft shill be in the fear
of the Lord” (lierder, Ewald, Meier,
Cheyne), or “ aswect savour shall he find in
the fear of the Lord ” (Gescnius, Delitzsch,
Rosenwiiller, Knotel). He shall not judge
after the sight of his eyes. ‘“ God seeth the
heart.” Gur Lord * knew men’s thoughts”
(Matt. ix. 4, ete.), an i therefore did not need
to “judge according tu the appearance”
(John vii. 24). Thus his judgments were
always righteous.

Ver. 4.—With righteousness shall he
judge the poor (comp. ch. xxxii. 1, “A
king shall reign in righteousness”). It
would be churacteristic of the Messiah’s
rule that the poor should be car-d for, that
oppression should cease, and judgment be
no more perverte! in favour of the rich.
There is an intended contrast between
the Messiah’s rule in this respect, and tliat
of the princes of Judab (ch. i. 23; iii. 15;
x. 1, 2). Christian countries still, for the
most part, follow their Lord’s example in
this particular, if in no other, having Judges
that are incorruptible, and tribunals that
are free from any leaning against the poor.
Reprove ; or, plead (as in Job xvi. 21). The
meek of the earth; rather, the humble, or
afiicted. Low condition, not meekness of
spirit, is what the word used expresses.
He shall smite the earth. A slight altera-
tion of the text produces tle meaning, he
shall smite the terrible one (comp. chi. xxix.
20), which improves the parallelism of the
clauses. But there is no need of any
alteration, parallelism in Isaiah being often
ine mplete. The Messiah at his coming
will “smite the earth” generally (see Mal.
iv. 6, and comp. Matt. x. 34, “I came not
to send peace on tlie earth, but a sword”),
and will also especially chastise “the
wicked.” The rod of his mouth... the
breath of his lips. “The Word of God is
quick, and powerful, and sharper than any
two-edged sword, piercing even to the divid-
ing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the
joints and marrow, and is a discerner of
the thoughts and intents of tle heart ” (Heb.
iv. 12). The sayings of Christ pierce the
ponscience and penetrate the soul as no


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


208


other words that ever came from a human
mouth. In tlie last day words from his
mouth will consign to everlasting life or to
everlasting destruction. t

Ver. 5.—Righteousness shall be the girdle
of his loins, etc.; i.e. “righteousness shall
be ever with him, ever ready for active use,
ever (as it were) bracing lim for action.”
Assuredly, he was “righteous in all his
ways, aid holy in all his worss” (Ps. cxlv.
17). Faithfulness (comp. Eph. vi. 14,
“ Having your loins girt about with truth”),

Vers. 6—9.—Messiah’s kingdom, when
fully realized, shail be one of perfect peace.
“ They shall neither hurt nor destroy in all
his holy mountain.” Primarily, no doubt,
the passage is fiyurative, and points to
harmony among men, who, in Messiah’s
kingdom, shall no longer prey one upon
another (see especially ver 9). But, from
the highest spiritual standpoint, the figure
itself becomes a reality, and it is seen that,
if in the “new heavens and new earth”
there is an animal creation, it will be fitting
that there harmony should equally prevail
among the inferior creation. Human sin
may not have intioduced rapine and violence
among the heasts—at least, geologists tell
us that animals preyed one upun another
long betore the earth was the habitation of
man—but still man’s influence may prevail
to eradicate the beasts’ natural im)ulses
and educate them to something higher.
Already domestication produces an accord
and harmony that is in a certain sense
against nature. May not this be carried
further in the course of ages, and [saiah’s
picture have a literal fulfilment? Jerome’s
scorn of the notion as a poetic dream hag
about it something harsh and untender,
Will not God realize all, and more than all,
of love and happiness that poets’ dreams can
reuch to?

Ver. 6.—The wolf... the leopard...
the young lion... the bear are the only
ferocious animals of Pulestine, where the
tiger, the crocodile, the alligator, and the
jaguar are unknown. That the Palestinian
bear was carnivorous, and a danger to man,
appears by Lam. iii. 10; Dan. vii. 5; Amos
v.19. A little child shall leadthem. Man’s
superiority over the brute creation shall
continue, and even be augmented. The
most powerful beasts shall submit to the
control of a child.

Ver. 7.—The lion shall eat straw (comp.
ch. lxv. 25). There is nothing impossible
in this. Cats are fond of some kinds of
vegetable food.

Ver. 8.—The sucking child shall play on
the hole of the asp; rather, by the hole—near
it. The “asp” is probably the Coluber
Naje of Egypt, whose bite is very deadly.
The cockatrice’ den. The “ cockatrice” is


204


another déadly serpent, perhaps the Daboia
zanthina (Tristram, ‘Natural Hist. of the


Bible’).
Ver. 9.—My holy mountain. As the


Jewish Church is always bound up with the
“holy hill of Zion,” so the Messianic one
receives the designation of “ the mountain
of the Lord” (ch. 1.3; xxx. 29; Micah iv.
2), or “the holy mountain” (Zech. viii. 3).
What was physically true of the type is
transferred to the antitype, which is “a city
set upon a hill” in a certain sense. The
earth shall be full of the knowledge of the
Lord (comp. Hab. ii. 14; Joel ii. 28; Matt.
xxviii. 29). A fruitful knowledge, guiding
and influencing conduct, seems to be in-
tended (see below, ch. liv. 13, “All thy
children shall be taught of the Lord, and
great shall be the peace of thy children”).
As the waters cover the sea; z.e. “as the
ocean covers and fills the bed prepared for
it.”

Vers. 10—13.—TuE Jews AND GENTILES
SHALL BE GATHERED TOGETHER INTO Mgs-
SsIAH’s Kinapom. It is characteristic of
“the evangelical prophet” that he dwells
earnestly and frequently on the calling of
the Gentiles (see ch. ii, 2; xix. 22—25;
xxv. 6; xxvii. 13, ete.). The prophecies to
Abraham had repeatedly declared that “in
him,” or “in his seed,” “ all the families of
the earth should be blessed” (Gen. xii. 3;
xviii 18; xxii. 18; xxvi. 4); and some of
the psalmists had echoed the glid sound
and spoken of God as worshipped generally
by “ the nations” (Ps. exvii. 1; cxlviii, 11).
But the idea had taken little hold upon the
chosen people generally; and was practi-
cally new to them when Isaiah was in-
spired to preach it afresh. To render it
the more palatable, he unites with it the
promise of a great gathering of the dispersed
Israelites from all quarters to the banner of
Messiah, when it is set up.

Ver. 10.—There shall be a root of Jesse.
The “root” of this place is the same as the
“rod” and “branch” of ver. 1. The
“rod” springs up out of a “root,” and is
inseparably connected with it. Which shall
stand for an ensign of the people; ratlier,


of the peoples. The “rod” shall lift itself
up, and become an ensign, seen from afar,


and attracting to itself the attention of
“the peoples ’ or “nations” generally. The
Acts and Kpistles show how speedily this
prophecy was fulfilled. Greeks, Romans,
Galatians, Cappadocians, Babylonians (1
Pet. v. 13), saw the ensign, and sought to
it. His rest shall be glorious; rather, his
resting-place; ie. his Church, with which


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


(cu. x1. 1—16.


he abides for ever (Matt. xviii. 20). The
Shechinah of his presence makes the Church
“ slorious” (literally, “a glory”) through-
out all ages; but the glory will not fully
appear till the time of the “ uew heavens
and new earth” (ch. Ixv. 17; Rev. xxi,
xxii.), when he will dwell visibly with it.


Ver. 11.—The Lord shall set his hand
again the second time to recover, etc. The
first recovery was from the servitude in
Egypt. Isaiah now foresees that there will
be a dispersion of the Israelites through
several distant lands, inst-ad of a mere
transference of them from one land to
another, as in Jacob’s time (Gen. xlvi. I—
29). God, who brought them out of Kgypt,
will likewise some day “set his hand” to
recover them from the various countries
through which they will have been dis-
persed, and resture them to their own land
once more. The first fulfilment of the
prophecy was undoubtedly the return from
the Babylonian captivity. A secondary
fulfilment may have been the gitiering of
so many Jews from all quarters into the
Christian Church (Acts ii, 9—+1). It is
possible that there may be ultimately a
further fulfilment in a final gathering
together of Israel into their own land.
From Assyria. Assyria is placed first be-
cause already the bulk of the Israelites, as
distinct from the Jews, had been carried
into Assyria by Tiglath-Pileser (2 Kings
xv. 29) and Sargon (2 Kings xvii. 6; xvili,
11), and were captives there at the time
when Isaiah wrote. The transportation of
Israelites to the other places mentioned
was subsequent to his day. Egypt...
Pathros. ‘here was a great migration of
Jews into Egypt in the time of Jeremiah
(xlili. 7; xliv. 1), and a steady influx
for some generations under the early
Ptolemies. ‘Chere was also a second large
migration in the time of Onias. ‘The
Jewish element in Alexandria for some
centuries both before and after Christ was
very considerable. Pathros was probably
a portion of Upper Egypt, perhaps the
Phaturite nome, which was the district
about Thebes. It is mentioned as the
residence of certain Jews in the time of
Jeremiah (xliv. 1, 15). From Cush,
“Cush” here may be either the African
or the Asiatic. It is slightly in favour of
the African that we hear in the Acts of an
Ethiopian eunuch who was a Jew in the
service of Candace, Queen of the African
Ethiopia (Acts viii. 27). And it is against
the Asiatic that it was so remote. It ad-
joined, however, upon Elam. From Elam,
and from Shinar. “ lklam” was the fertile
tract of alluvial land to the east of the
Tigris, between that stream and the moun-
tains, parallel with Babylonia. Its capital


on. x1. 1—16.]


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


205


was Susa, and in Isaiah’s time it was an
important country, freyuently at war with
Assyria, Shinar was an ancient name of
Babylonia (Gen. x. 10; xi.1—9). The word
is used also by Daniel (i. 2) and Zechariah
(vy 11). Some regard it as meaning “ the
land of the two rivers.’ From Hamath.
(On this town, see note to ch. x.9.) From
the islands of the sea; te. the islands
and coasts of the Mcditerranean. During
the Maccabee period, there was a gradual
spread of Jews over the Western world.
Alliances were made with Rome and Spurta
(1 Mace. viii. 1; xii. 2=21; xiy. 20—23,
etc.), and Jews became familiar with both
Greece and Italy. St. Paul finds numerous
Jews at Rome, and in almost every city of
Greece.

Ver. 12.—He shall set up an ensign for
the nations (comp. ver. 10). Christ is the
Ensign. God sets it up to draw the nations
to his standard. The outcasts of Israel...
the dispersed of Judah. ‘ Outcasts” is mas-
culine, “the dispersed” feminine. The
meaning is, “ He shall gather together the
outcasts and dispersed of both Israel and
Judah, both male and female.”

Ver. 13.—The envy also of Ephraim
shall depart. In the kingdom of the Prince
of Peace there sliall no longer be quarrels
or jealousies among the members. Old
feuds shall be put aside; the northern and
southern tribes shall agree together, and
there shull be peace and harmony through-
out the entire Church. Adversaries of
Judah. If any such remain among the
Ephraimites, Divine vengeance shall “ cut
them off,” that there be no open disturbance
of the harmony.

Vers. 14—16.—Tue Unitep CuxurcH
SHALL TRIUMPH OVER ITS ENEMIES. Puxsi-
OAL OBsTACLES TO ITs UNION GoD WILL
REMOVE. Israel’s most persistent enemies
had been the border-nations of the Philis-
tines, the Edomites, the Arabs, Moab and
Ammon. These are now taken as types
of the enemies of the Church, and victory
over them is promised (ver. 14), A further


promise is made that physical difficulties


—w


shall not prevent the return of the Jewish
exiles from distant countries (vers. 15, 16),


Ver. 14.—They shall fly upon the
shoulders of the Philistines. It is not to be
supposed that actual war is intended. The
subjects of the Prince of Peace will not
draw the sword. But the Church wil) for
many centuries be confronted by enemies,
and must contend with them with legiti-
mate weapons. It is this warfare of which
Isuiah now speaks. The united Church
will be strong enough to assail ler enemies
on all sides, and will “swoop” upon the
border-country of the Philistines like a bird
of prey. They shall spoil them of the east;
or, the Beni Kedem. The plirase is com-
monly used in an ethnic sense of the
nomadic Arabs inhabiting the deserts east
of Jordan, beyond the Ammonite and
Moabite country. from whose raids Palestine
frequently suffered (see Jer. xlix. 28, 29;
lizek, xxv. 4, 10).

Ver. 15.—The Lord shall utterly destroy;
rather, shall lay under a curse (Aquila,
dvabcuatioe:). The tongue of the Egyptian
sea. Either the Gulf of Suez or that of
Akabah. God shall do away with those
obstacles which keep the nations apart and
prevent ready intercourse. Both gulfs are
thought to have extended anciently con-
siderably further inland than they do at
present. With his mighty wind; rather, with
the might of his breath (in fortitudine spiritus
sui, Vulgate). Shall he shake his hand.
A gesture of menace (comp. ch. x. 32).
Over the river, “The river” (han-nuhar)
is, as usually, the Euphrates, the great river
of Western Asia. And smite it in the seven
streams; rather, and smite it into seven
streams; i.e. divide its waters among seven
channels, so that it may be readily forded,
and cease to be a barrier. Dry-shod;
literally, in their shoes; i.e. without taking
them off.

Ver. 16.—There shall be an highway.
This is the object in view—the free and
unhindered passage of his people from the
variuus regions where they are scattered
(ver. 11) to their resting-place in Palestine.


HOMILETICS.


Vers. 1—5.—The spiritual nature of Messiah’s perfections. It was certainly n&
from Isaiah that the Jews derived their notion that the Messiah would be a mighty
temporal prince, the leader of armies, who would break the yoke of Rome from off
their shoulders, and give them dominion over all the nations of the earth, Isaiah
does, indeed, announce him as a King (ch. xxxii. 1), and could do no less, since he was


indeed “ King of kings, and Lord of lords.”


But he ever puts forward his spiritual


character, his influence over men as a Teacher, his moral and mental excellences.
Messiah’s qualifications for his high office (as here enumerated) are—
L His possession or wispom. ‘ Wisdom” here may be that transcendental quality


206 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. x1. 1—16.


whereby God “established the heavens ” (Prov. iii. 19; viii. 27); or possibly that still
more recondite faculty which Jehovah “ possessed in the beginning of his way, before
his works of old” (Prov. viii. 22). Being distinguished trom “ understanding,’
“counsel,” and “ knowledge of God,” it must apparently be supra-mundane and abstract
—a power of which it is difficult for man to torm a conception, Its sphere cannot be
human life or mundane affairs, but the purely intellectual world of supra-sensuous ideas
and concepts.

II, His possession OF UNDERSTANDING. By “understanding” seems to be meant
moral intelligence—the power of appreciating the moral character, and judging aright
the moral conduct of others. Our Lord possessed this quality in the most emient
degree, never misjudging the character or conduct of any one. His unerring insight
gave him an absolute fitness to be the final Judge of men, but was far beyond what is
needed by any earthly ruler or king.

III. His possession OF THE SPIRIT OF COUNSEL. Here, no doubt, is a quality ot
which a temporal ruler has need; but it was not as a temporal ruler, or for the most
part in temporal matters, that our Lord’s counsel was given. The maxims of his lips
were not maxims of worldly policy, but such as these: “Seek ye first the kingdom of
God, and his righteousness; ” “Take no thought for the morrow ;” “Sell all that thou
hast, and give to the poor,” and the like. He counselled men for their spiritual rather
than for their worldly good, with a view to a spiritual and not a temporal kingdom,

IV. His possession or micut. ‘“ Might,” or ability to execute his designs, is, again,
a quality of high value to an earthly ruler; and had our Lord used his might for earthly
ends, he might easily have been all, and more than all, that the Jews expect:d. But
he ever restrained himself from any exhibition of physical strength, or power of
organization, or even of persuasive eloquence, exhibiting his might only for spiritual
ends, in miracles of mercy, whereby he sought to win men’s souls to himself, or once
and again in miracles of power, shown forth as evidences of his mission.

V. His PossESSION OF KNOWLEDGE OF Gop. None could know God’s will so well
as he, who “ was in the beginning with God, and was God” (John i. 1). Partaker from
everlasting of his Father’s counsels, the instrument whereby the Father worked in
bringing all things into being (Heb. i. 2), he had sounded all the depths of that
nature which he had in common with the Father, and knew even as he was known.
This was spiritual knowledye of the highest kind, and enabled him to be man’s perfect
spiritual Guide, capable of setting before him the true and “ perfect will of God”
(Rom. xii. 2) as none other ever was, or will be, capable.

VI. His possession OF THE FEAR OF Gop. “Fear” in the Son is doubtless so
mingled with love as to be something very different even from the fear which the angels
feel, when they veil their faces before the throne. But the words “ Father” and “ Son”
imply authority and submission, awfulness and reverence. And the human nature of
Christ had the same experience of the “ fear of God ” as belonys to his perfected saints,
whether in earth or heaven (Ps. xix. 9; xxxiv. 9; Eccles. xii. 13, etc.). “ Who shall
not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name?” Messiah’s “fear” brought forth that
perfect obedience which made him “ holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners”
Sa vii. 26), and constituted him at once our perlect Pattern and our meritorious

acrifice,


Vers. 10, 12.—G'od’s mercy in bringing the Gentiles into his kingdom. In the old
world, when “all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth,” God sent forth a fierce
destruction, and swept away the entire human race, excepting eight persons. Alter the
Flood he promised, of his own free grace, that he would never so destroy mankind
again (Gen, ix. 11—15). But it was open to him to have sent upon the world some
other equally severe visitation, and to have once more rid the earth of “a seed of evil«
doers.” The general corruption of the Gentile world, when Christ came, was excessive
It is scarcely possible that the corruption of the antediluvians can have been vreater,
As a modern historian sums up his account of heathendom at the comin: of Christ,
“Corruption had attained its full tide at the commencement of the second century.
Vices gnawed at the marrow of nations, and, above all, of the Romans: their nationa:
existence was more than menaced; the moral sickness had become a physical one ik
its effects—a subtle poison penetrating into the vitals of the state; and, as before in thw


oH. xL 1—16.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 207


sanguinary civil wars, so now the lords of the world seemed minded to destroy them-
selves by their vices. Men were denuded of all that was really good, and, surrounded
on all sides by the thick clouds of a blinded conscience, they caught with wild eagerness
at the grossest sensual enjoyments, in the wild tumult of which they plunged to intoxica
tion” (Dollinger, ‘Jew and Gentile,’ vol. ii. pp. 284, 285, Eng. ‘T'rans.). Or take St.
Paul’s account of the condition of the heathen when he began his preaching: “ As men
did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind,
to do those thins which are not convenient ; being filled with all unrighteousness, forni-
cation, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder, deceit, debate,
malignity ; whispcrers, backbiters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors
of evil things, disobedient to parents, without understanding, covenant-breakers, without
natural affection, implacable, unmerciful: who knowing the judgment of God, that
they which commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have
pleasure in them that do them” (Rom. i, 28—32). Yet, instead of destroying this
polluted race, God had compassion on them, and went out of his way to seek them.

I. HE LIFTED UP CHRIST TO THEM AS AN ENSIGN FROM AFAR. By the manifes-
tation of Christ’s character in the Gospels, he set them up a Pattern which they could
not but admire, which drew them irresistibly by its purity and loveliness, made them
hate themselves, and brought them low on their knees before his footstool.

IJ. HE OFFERED HIS GOSPEL FREELY TO THEM FROM THE First. “Go, disciple ye
all nations, baptizing them;” “Preach the gospel to every creature;” “He that
believeth and is baptized shall be saved.” ‘There was no limit, no favouritism; no offer
of salvation only to those who had acted up to their previous light.

III. HE RaIsED UP A SPECIAL TEACHER, SPECIALLY QUALIFIED, TO BE “ THE
APOSTLE OF THE GENTILES.” What impression Christianity would have made on the
Gentile world without St. Paul, or some one similarly qualified, it is difficult to say.
Conceivably, it might have taken merely the dimensions of a Jewish sect, which believed
that the Messiah had come. St. Paul, raised up for the purpose, lifted it above the
sphere of Jewish controversy into world-wide consideration, ‘Teaching personally at
Antioch, at Ephesus, at Athens, at Corinth, at Rome, disputing with philosuphers,
converting meuibers of Czesar’s household, he gave it a position among the religions of
the world which could not be ignored by later educated inquirers. ‘The apostle of the
Gentiles spread Christianity from Syria to Rome, perhaps to Spain, and gave it that
hold upon the attention of the educated classes which secured, under God’s blessing, its.
ultimate triumph.


Ver. 14.— The Church’s triwmph over its enemies. The Church of God willalways have
its enemies, both internal and external, and its external enemies will from time to time
gather their hosts, and unite themselves together, and threaten it with destruction. Great
was Isracl’s peril, and great her fear, when her enemies “consulted together with one
consent, and were confederate azainst her: the tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmael-
ites; of Moab, and the Hagareves; Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek; the Philistines
with the inhabitants of Tyre; Asshur also joining them, and helping the children of
Lot” (Ps. Ixxxiii. 5—8). Yet the danger passed, the confederacy failed, the various
nations were “confounded and troubled; they were put to shame and perished” (Ps.
Ixxxiii. 17). So it is with the Church. Our Lord has promised that “the gates of hell
shall not prevail against it” (Mait. xvi. 18); and consequently its enemies labour in
vain to effect its destruction. ‘lhe Church may have confidence—

I. Since Curist 1s HER Heap. She is “his Church,” “built by him,” “ upon a
Rock,” ae. himself; purchased by him with his own blood; loved and cherished and
purified by him, that she may be presented to him “ without spot, or wrinkle, or any
such thing ”—his city, his body, his bride.

Ii. SINcE sHE HAS A SURE WORD OF PROMISE. 1. In the statement, “ Lo, I am with
you always, even unto the end of the world” (Matt. xxviii. 20). 2. In the passage
concerning the gates of hell. 3. In the clear declarations of the apocalyptic vision,
which show her ultimate triumph.

III. Since sHE HAS PASSED THROUGH PERILS AS GREAT AS ANY THAT CAN HEREAFTER
ABSAIL HER. 1. The peril of the imperial persecutions (Nero, Diocletian, Galerius,
Fulian), 2. The peril of the barbarian invasions (Goths, Huns, Vandals, etc.) 4%. The


208 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cH. x1. 1—16.


peril of Mohammedanism. 4. The peril of the dark ages, 5. The peril involved in
unlimited private judyment. 6, The peril of the French Revolution, Half a score of
times has she seemed on the point of succumbing; but each time that she is struck te
the ground, she rises, like Antaus, refreshed and reinvigorated,


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1—9.— The coming of the Messiah. I. His ornterxn. “ From Ishai’s worn stem
a shoot wil] sprout forth, and a green branch burst forth from his roots.” From the
stock of David, now fallen very low, the coming Deliverer will arise in all the vigour
of youth. Seldom does the great man come but of some pure and generous strain of
blood. Like some stream which, long hidden underground, reappears avain in the
daylight, or some vein of precious ore, recovered after some extensive “ fault,” so it was
believed the roval race and the spiritual prowess of David mizht be obscured for ages,
but must be illustrated before the world again. As God saves and blesses the world by
means of great men, so in a measure is this true of houses, families, tribes, and uations.
There is a principle of providential selection running through life. Though men be of
one blood in all their tribes, it is not to be denied that there are different qualities in
that blood. Hence noblesse oblige, and great endowments make great expectations and
imply great responsibilities. The thought of the seeming extinction, yet destined
revival of David’s house, may remind us of the imperishableness of the gernis of good.
David’s house was never rstored to the throne in the visible sense. Yet the memory
of David persisted, begot hope, inspired patience, and was gradually converted into one
of the mightiest of spiritual forces in the conscience of the nation. An idea may pass
through many changes of form, but it dies not so long as the faith and passion of the
heart in which it sprung are living.

Il. His spirit. In the religious mode of thought a true temper of the mind is to be
traced to Divine inspiration, no less than the great physical or mental ability. What
meaning lies in our common expressions, ‘a gift,” “an endowment,” “a talent,” “an
influence”! None of them but is deeply religious, if we trace them to their primary
felt significance. Uy) on this chosen one tliere “ rests the Spirit of Jehovah.” And three
characters, in the iterative idiom of the Hebrew, are given of this spirit. It is that (1)
of wisdom, (2) of couraze, (3) of reverence. The qualities of the statesman, the soldier
the man of God. “ His breathing is in Jehovah’s fear.’ There can be no simpler nor
stronger expression of a man thoroughly “ animated,” as we say, by religious principle.
And (4) he has the attributes of the just judge. Prompt to redress the injuries of the
oppressed and suffering, his rule of conduct is not the pleasure of his eyes and ears, but
the eterial equity of him who is no respecter of persons. As the consequence of thus
vitally living in communion with God as in the common and necessary air he breathes
he poss: sses irresistible strength. His mere word of judginent smites the earth more
powerlully than the despot’s sceptre, while his mere breath destroys the wicked like
a pestilence. In a word, it isa sublime picture of moral majesty. his King needs not
the weapons of ordinary warfare. He has a better defence of his throne than swords
and spears, a better battle-array than the suit of armour. Justice and faithfulness
themselves are his best, his only preparations.

ILl. THe BLESSINGS OF HIS RULE. ‘There will be a marvellous growth of peace and
prosperity. ‘I'he progress of true culture is marked by the subduing of savagery. The
wild animals change their nature and become harmless to mankind. Wickedness is
ferocious ; men’s untamed passions are like the wolf, the bear, and the deadly serpent.
There will be no sin nor sinners in Zion, because the knowledge of the true God will
be all-diffused and all-inexhaustible as the ocean. ‘l'o what state of life do these pre-
dictions reler? To the advent of Christ and his kingdom? Certainly; and yet when
Christ came, not only did not universal peace set in, but the light of Zion and the
glories of the sacred city were quenched in blood, And Christ himsell opened up a
gloomy perspective of the future in hisclosing prophecies. Where, then, and when this
scene of bliss? Let us content ourselves with believing that the prophecy refers to
some state to us unknown, Earth will be earth, and not heaven. This heaven is in
the soul first; there we dream of it, nay, we realize it as we listen to the prophet’s


cH. xi 1—16.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 209
EE eee


glowing words, and believe that but a step may carry us into a world where it is realized
by all. The prophecy is already fulfilled for us if Gud bas made a heaven of hope in
our hearts.—J.


Vers. 10—16.—Judah and the nations. 1, Honour To Tie RooT oF JupAB. The
scion from the ancient trunk will be honoured far and wide among the heathen, because
of those viitues already described in the preceding section. It will be a banner to
which they will flock, a centre of light and living oracles,

II, RepEmprion oF THE REMNANT. ‘The mivhty hand of Jehovah will be stretched
forth to gather the scattered ones from all the four quarters of their dispersion. When
the banner is raised, the heathen will own its power aid the captives will be released.

Ill. InrernaL unity. ‘The two great tribes will remain side by side, but then
enmity will cease. ‘Ihe recent destruction of Samaria had been caused by that enmity ;
which ceasing, it will be found that union is strength, and the nations will submit on
the West and East. And those great threatening neighbours, Egypt aud Assyria, will
feel the weiyht of Jehovah’s hand and the punishment which the word of his mouth
inflicts. And as the great river is smitten into seven fordable streams, the company of
pilgrims will flow back, a way made for them by the hand of their God, as in the days
of their forefathers, and the exodus from Egypt. The scion from the old stump may be
taken as a figure of the revival of true religion in times of decay. And such revival
means the union of long-sundered hearts, the recovnition of an internal unity among
all the faithful, the restoration of influence, and the dismay of the ungudly world,—J.


Ver. 10.—The rest of Christ. ‘And his rest shall be glorious.” This chapter
commences with the full Messianic strain. “ There shall come forth a rod out of the
stem of Jesse; ” and the music swells, in the Hebrewrhythm of thought, into a sublime
prophecy of the reign of Christ. This “root of Jesse” is to be “an ensign of the
people,” and “to it shall the Gentiles seek.” We are thus led to understand the words,
“his rest,” as applying to the triumph of the Saviour.

J. MANy IDEAS OR FORMS OF REST ARE INGLORIOUS. They are connected with mere
military conquest. There is the peace of subjection, or there is the peace of compromise,
or there is the peace which belongs to the desert and the wilderness, when they are simply
let alone. But Christ’s peace is his own beautilul peace of nature. ‘“ My peace I give
unto you.” His rest is not artificial. It is the rest of holy expectation, He sees of
the travail of his soul, and is satisfied.

II. ‘1 HIS GLORY IS PROSPECTIVE AS WELL AS PRESENT. It “shall be glorious.” The
golden age of the wospel is in the future. “ From henceforth expecting ;” “ He must
reign.” It will be a glorious rest. For truth will conquer error, Right will conquer
might. Love will have victory over all forms of division and hate. It shall be; for
Christ hath spvken it. It shall be; for he has all power in heaven and earth. It shall
be on spiritual grounds; for the mightiest moral force ever and always triumphs in
the end.

Ill. Tuts rest oF CuristT Is ouR REST Too. We have not only received forgiveness
through the cross, but newness of life as well. We have rest now, not in its fulness,
but in its ideal; for we have the mind of Christ. We have within us the kingdom and
patience of Christ; we are one with the Father through Christ. “I in them, and
thou in me, that they may be made perlect in one.”—W. M.S.


Vers. 1—5.— Characteristics of Jesus Christ. The expression of the prophet, “ The
Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him,” has a very close correspondence with the New
Testament references to Jesus Christ (Matt. iii. 16; Luke iv. 1, 14, 18; John iii. 34),
This full possession by our Lord of the Spirit of God revealed itself, and is still found,
in these particulars which tlhe prophecy indicates,

J. His perrecr pivry. In him dwelt the “fear of the Lord” without measure
(ver. 2), and he “delighted in the fear of Jehovah ;” “ the fcar ot Jehovah was fragrance
to him” (emended readings tor, “and shall make him of quick understanding,” ete.,
ver. 3). He could say, “1 delight to do thy will... yea, thy Law is within my
heart” (Ps. xl. 8). ‘I'o reverence, to please, to obey God, to consult his will and be
subject to it, was the law of his life and the refreshment of his spirit.

ISAIAH. P


210 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [ou. x1. 1—16.
ee ee SS SS SS


II. Ass INTUITIVE PERCEPTION OF THE BEST AND HIGHEST. In “him was the spirit of
wisdom and understanding.” He distinguished at once the false from the true, the
glittering show from the genuine good, the passing pleasure from the abiding joy,
the fictitious gain from the invaluable heritage, the vanity of earthly honours from the
blessedness of the Divine favour. Christ saw all things on which he looked in their
actual and essential nature, and in their true proportions. Hence— :

III. His excELLENCY as our Guipe. In him was “ the spirit of counsel” (see Homily
on ‘Chief counsels of Christ,’ ch. ix. 6).

IV. His KNOWLEDGE oF THE DivINE AND OF THE FUTURE. Fallen, degenerate man,
with conscience defiled and reason depraved, could know nothing certainly of these
two supreme subjects: he wanted, urgently and imperatively, one who had “ the spirit
of knowledge” in him, and could tell him distinctly and finallv, not what he guessed
or what he hoped, but what he knew. This Jesus did. He revealed the Divine
Father unto men (Matt. xi. 27; John i. 18; x. 15), And he made known to us the
truth as tothe future; he brought life and immortality out into the light (John v.
28, 29; xi. 25, 26; 2 Tim. i. 10).

V. His PROFOUND KNOWLEDGE OF THE HUMAN HEART. He judged men, “not by the
outward appearance,” not “ by the sight of his eyes or the hearing of his ears,” but by
looking down through the coverlet of the flesh, through the armoury of speech, into
the secret chambers of the soul. He not only saw through the fig tree, but through
the flesh, and knew Nathanael’s simplicity of spirit. ‘He knew what was in man,”
and knows now, discerning the hollowness of some men’s pretensions, appreciating the
excellency beneath some men’s doubts and diffidences.

VI. His aBsoLurTe IMPARTIALITY. (Ver. 4.) He had one measure for the rich and
the poor, for the mighty and the meek; he showed unvarying kindness towards the
humblest, and he showed a constant readiness to receive those who were euriched with
worldly wealth, or endowed with social honour. ‘The testimony of his enemies was
true enough; he “regarded not the person of men” (Mark xii. 14). Such is the
genius of his gospel—‘‘the common salvation ” (see 1 Cor. iii. 11; Gal. iii. 28; v. 6;
Eph. vi. 8).

VII. His R1GoRous RIGHTEOUSNESS. (Vers. 4, 5.) Christ, in his righteousness,
demanded the spiritual service of all men, and he condemned all that withheld it. He
showed himself the determined enemy of evil. 1. He denounced it in scathing terms
when he was with us (see Matt. xxiii.). 2. He announces himself as the Judge of all,
who will punish the impenitent according to their deeds (see Matt. xxv.).

VIL. His ratruruuness. (Ver. 5.) “ Having loved his own, he loved them to the
end.” He “never leaves nor forsakes” those who serve him. Throughout our fidelity
to him his love to us is constant; in the time of our slackness or departure he visits us
in his faithfulness with his kind correction, in order to attach us to himself, or to call
us back to his side; in the hour of our suffering he makes good his presence of Divine
support ; when everything earthly fails us, the faithful Promiser will fulfil his word,
and receive us to himself, that we may dwell in bis glory.—C.


Vers. 6—9.—The intensive and extensive power of the gospel. I. THE INTENSIVE
POWER OF Divine TRuTH. More power is needful (1) to act on any living thing than
on lifeless, inert matter ; (2) to act on a sentient creature than on life without sensa-
tion; (3) to act on intelligence and will (on man) than on the irrational and irre-
sponsible animal; (4) on man sunk into the lowest moral condition (with seared
conscience, mastering passions and habits fixed in vice) than on one who has nat
yet chosen his course, or who has been trained in the ways of virtue. The very
highest instance of power with which we are familiar is that spiritual influence which
transforms those who have gone furthest away from God, from truth, and from
righteousness—those who are to the moral world what the tiger, the lion, or the asp is
to the animal world. The gospel of Jesus Christ has this power. With such wonderful
intensity does it work on those on whom its truth is brought to bear, that it redeems
and renews the worst, so changing them in life and in s)irit that it may be said of
them that the wolf dwells with the lamb, ete.; so transformed do they become, under
its benignant influence, that the must innocent and helpless have nothing to fear,
though they be placed completely within their power (ver. 8). 1. Individual instances


OH, xi. 1-—16.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 211


abound of the conversion of notorious drunkards, of savage prize-fichters, of shameless
courtesans, of ribald atheists, of those who were abandoned by all, and who abandoned
themselves to hopeless sin, of men who were the terror of their tribe or of their district,
etc. Therefore we need not and we should not despair of those who are living
amongst us, and who are at present a long way off from truth and righteousness. The
gospel of Christ can change the very nature of these—can tame the most fervcious, can
raise the most fallen, can liberate the most enslaved, can make beautiiul the most
deformed of the children of men; it can do so by the power of the truth and of the
Spirit of God. 2. Families, societies, communities have undergone as complete a
transformation.

ll. THE EXTENSIVE RANGE OF THE GOSPEL oF Curist. (Ver. 9.) What a vast void
would there be if the waters were withdrawn! Into what profound depths should we
look down! What mizhty stretches of sand and clay and rock would be disclosed !
What lencths and breadths are covered, what depths are now filled up by the abounding
waters of the sca! As containing the element of life to millions of living creatures, as
supplying a hixhway for the nations of the earth, and as providing scope for the
ambition, couraze, and enterprise of man, what a grand sufficiency do we see in the
waters of the oceap! S$o shall it prove to be with Divine truth. There shall be seen to
be a sufficiency, in the gospel of the Saviour, to cover the entire earth, to meet the
wants of the whole population of the globe. No land so remote, no clime so rigorously
cold or scorchingly hot, no interior so impenetrable, no barbarism so rude, no prejucice
so inveterate, but that the gospel of Christ shall cover it with its benignant power. 1.
Let us rejoice in the earnest of its fulfilment; great things have been already done
towards the realization of this glorious estate. 2. Let us resolve to have our share in
its execution (1) as a Church, and (2) as individual souls, to each of whom God has
committed some word to be spoken, some work to be doue.-—C.


Ver. 6.— The leading of a little child: Sunday school sermon. “ And a little child
shall lead them.” The reduction of the fierceness of wild animals to such tameness
that a little child may lead them is a very beautiful, poetical picture of the transfor-
mation of the worst of the wicked to the excellency of the Christian spirit. We
may, without impropriety, allow these words to suggest thoughts on tle way in which
the regeneration and perfecting of human character is brought about by the leading of
the little child. God is training us all; we are all at his great school. Christ is the
great Teacher; the Word of God is our “book of reference.” But there are other
sources of instruction at his command. Of these is the family life which he has
instituted, and where we may al] learn most valuable lessons. We may consider how
we are led by the little child—leading sometimes from bad to good, and at other times
from good to better things. The little child sometimes leads—

I. FROM THE FAR DISTANCE OF FLAGRANT WRONG TOWARDS THE KINGDOM OF CHRIST.
We have often read of the dissipated, or ungodly, or unbelieving parent, who has
separated himself (herself) from all sacred privileges, and, it may be, gone far in
forbidden paths, when all other influences have failed, being led by the soft, pleading
accents of the little child to the safe precincts of the home, or to the services of the
sanctuary, or to the path and practice of sobriety, and so to the kingdom of Christ,
Sometimes it is not the living voice, but the remembered pleadings of the departed
child coming from the other side the veil, which lead the distant wanderer to “come
to himself,” and then to “arise and go to the Father.”

II. From OUTSIDE INTO THE SPIRITUAL KINGDoM. And this: 1. As a model. When
the disciples were discussing amongst then.selves which of them should be the greatest
in the kingdom, Jesus Christ took a child and set him in the midst of them, and said
that, except they were wholly changed and became as little children in their spirit, they
could not so much as enter that kingdom at all. It is the ch/ld-spirit which introduces
us into the kingdom of Christ. They who are kept outside by difficulties which
they cannot solve, and they also who are excluded from faith and peace by a sense
of unworthiness from which they cannot rise, need but to have the simple, unquestion-
ing spirit of childhood; they need but to realize that they are God’s very little children,
and should take his word even as they expect their own little ones to take theirs, and
they will “come in” and be blessed, 2. 4s a motive. Weare moved by many motives,


212 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [ou. xr. 1—16.


en ee EEEEEEEEEEE EEE


and our serious decisions are usually determined by more considerations than one.
There are many strong and urgent reasons why a man should yield himself to God;
but if all these fail to move him, let him remember the little child (children) beneath
his roof for whom he is responsible, who will almost certainly imbibe his spirit, and
grow up to be such as he is; and for his (their) sake, if not for his own, let him live the
life which is right and worthy and wise.

III. ON, IN THE KINGDOM, TOWARD THE GOAL AND THE PRIZE. 1. The little child
continually reminds us of those graces which our heavenly Father looks to see in us.
As we are pleased with the docility, the trustfulness, the obedience, the affection of our
children, and are pained when we witness the reverse, so is he affected by our attitude
towards him. 2. The little child leads us into the field of Christian usefulness. The
Christian Church saw the little child ignorant, unenlightened, neglected, in danger of
growing up to manhood far from truth and God, and it let him put his hand into its
arm and Jead it into the school where it should receive the knowledge and the influence
which it needed, And the child having thus, by its very weakness and simplicity and
necessity, led the Church into the school, it is for the Church to lead the chitd into the
ways of heavenly wisdom, into the kingdom of Jesus Christ, into the path of use-
fulness and holy service.—C.


Vers. 11, 12.—The refuge of the remnant. Allusion is here made again to “the
remnant” (see ch. x. 20—22), who are spoken of in the following verse (ver. 12) as
“the outcasts” and “the dispersed.” The remnant of a thing or of a community
is not the choice part, but rather that which is left when everything (every one) else
has been chosen—the shapeless scraps which remain when all else has been selected and
appropriated ; the broken-off ends which are flung aside as of no account; the scattered
men who fall out of rank, dispirited or disabled, ete. It signifies that which is
of least regard among men. The remnant of Israel was that part of the community
that was left when kings had lost their throne, and nobles their nobility, and priests
their function, and the country was wasted. However despised and rebuffed of man
this remnant might be, it should still have a place in the thought and in the purpose
of God. He would remember it, would “recover” it, would “ gather it together,”
would manifest his favour toward it in the eyes of all the nations. We may let God’s
treatment of the remnant of Israel remind us—

I, THAT HUMAN SOCIETY ALWAYS CONTAINS ITS REMNANTS, those of very small account
jn its estimate. We can always find, if we look for them, those who seem to be
abandoned, to be helpless, to have “ no future,” to be beyond recovery ; those for whom
there is nothing but resignation, if not, indeed, despair; those whose cause no man
espouses, and who do not expect to be recovered or restored. Of these are: 1. The hope-
lessly sick—those who inherit a constitution or receive injuries which disqualify them
for the battle of life, and place them at the mercy of the community of which they are
members. 2. Those who have broken down—who went up eagerly to the battle and
struck some good stroke, but have been sore wounded; who have overtaxed their
strength, and who find themselves unnerved and incapable, obliged to resign their
duties tv other hands, their post to other aspirants. 38. Zhose who have mistaken their
calling—who have pursued a line of action beyond their capacity, or for which they were
not fitted ; who have, consequently, been halting and stumbling all along their course,
and have come into ill repute and condemnation, 4. Those who have been signally
unfortunate—who have embarked all their resources in one scheme which has broken
down, or who have entered into some most serious (perhaps the supreme human)
relationship which has proved to be a disastrous mistake; whose heart is well-nigh
broken, and whose hopes are quite blighted.

IL. ‘HAT THESE ARE THE OBJECTS OF PECULIAR DIVINE REGARD. Some of these are
near to us; they are the poor whom “we have always with us,” living hard by us,
worshipping in our sanctuaries, walking in our strects. As we have opportunity,
we should assure them that they must not take the negligence or disregard of man ag
in any way indicating the mind of God. As the human mother lavishes the wealth
of her tenderness and love on that one of her children who is the frailest and the most
dependent of her family, so does the Divine Parent care most for those of his children
who are most in need of his special kinduess, Was it not the “little ones,” é.e. the


ox, x1. 1—16.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 213


el  — — —


weak, the disregarded, the despised, the unbefriended, whom our Lord treated most
graciously, and whom he specially commended to our sympathy and succour (see
Matt. xii. 20)? Unto such, if they are his disciples, he will multiply his favours, and
on them pour out his richest and most abounding grace. There are “ remnants,” “ out-
casts,” of another kind—those who have gone down in the battle of temptation; who
are bowed down with a sense of shame and dishonour, and who are cast off by their
fellows as worsted and useless. Is there any hope for them in God? Yes, there
is ample room in the promises, because in the heart of the Divine Saviour, for these. In
his thought they are not remnants to be flung into the fire; driftwood on the river
of fate, for which there is nothing but to be carried down the stream and cast over the
cataracts; disinherited sons for whom there is nothing better than to forget the family
to which they belong, and make themselves happy with the husks in the far country.
No; in the heart and in the hope of Jesus Christ these are gold for his crown ; they are
ships that, with chart and compass, may yet sail gallantly down the river of life,
and out into the shoreless seas of a blessed immortality ; they are sons and daughters
that will be most warmly welcomed beneath the Father’s roof, and seated at the
Father’s table. In this best sense may the remnant be restored.—C.


Vers. 13—16.—Conditions of victory. These verses probably point to the time
when all Israel shall be gathered into the fold of the gospel, and when “ their fulness ”
shall contribute largely to the conversion of the Gentile world (see Rom. xi.). But
we may take a more practical view of the subject if we regard it thus; we have
pictures of—

J. PRESENT SPIRITUAL ANARCHY. The people of God everywhere dispersed, the
theocracy broken up, the temple destroyed, the Law unobserved, the heathen trium-
phant,—all this a vivid picture of the “ kingdom of God” in a state of dissolution : truth
unrecognized, commandments disobeyed, conscience perverted, the Divine will dis-
regarded, God himself unknown in the world.

Il. THe ULTIMATE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE Divine KINepoM. The restoration of
Israel as depicted here, whether it be to their own land and their ancient institutions
or whether it be to their true place in the spiritual purpose of God, may speak to
us of that grand consummation of human hope, when the kingdom of our God shall
be re-established upon earth; when that kingdom, which is not the enforcement of
any ecclesiastical régime, or the observance of any rules of diet or of devotion, but
“ righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost” (Rom. xiv. 17), shall take
the j lace of “ the kingdom of this world,” which is iniquity, unrest, and death.

ILL. THE conpviTions OF 178 ATTAINMENT, These are threefold. 1. The désap-
pearance of fratricidul strife. (Ver. 3.) What Judah and Ephraim were in old theo-
cratic times, that neighbouring Churches or Christian comrades have been to one
another all through these “Christian centuries.” Sadly must the Lord of love have
looked down on his heritage, the purchase of his sorrow and his death, and have seen
the envies and the jealousies, the hatreds and the cruelties, which have marked and
marred the intercourse of his disciples. No progress of his blessed kingdom can be
expected in any community when they whose relations should be beautificd by concord
are all disfigured by enmity and strife. Let Christian Churches cease to hope for any
results from their preaching or their praying, so long as bitterness blights the heart,
and contention characterizes the Church (see Matt. v. 24). ‘There is no effort, there
is no sacrifice, which it is not worth while for any Christian society to make in order
shat it may wrench out “ the root of bitterness” which, while it remains, will neutralize
ail devotion, and make all zeal to be “ nothing worth.” 2, Active co-operation among
the people of God. “They [Ephraim and Judah together] shall fly ... they shall
spoil... they shall lay their hand,” ete. (ver. 14). Their united forces were to
prevail over the bands of the enemy, and to secure victory on every side. So shall
it be in the spiritual campaign. It will be when all the Churches of Christ unite, not
indeed in any one visible amalgam, but in well-concerted action, joining heartily
against the common foe, going out together against ignorance, unbelief, ungodliness,
vice, iudecision, and all the long train of sin; it will then be found that the enemy will
be subdued, and victory be secu-ed. 8. Divine energy working on the side of truth.
(Vers. 15, 16.) As the Lord interposed on behalf ot [srael in one deliverance, and


214 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. xx 1—16.


eee


would do so in another, by his overcoming might making the pathway from Egypt
and the highway from Assyria, so will he interpose on behalf of the spiritual forces
which are duing his work in the world. He will make that possible and practicable
which seems impossible and impracticable; will enable the cham) ions of his cause
to go where it seems hop:less for them to penetrate, and to conquer where victory
seems utterly out of reach. Therefore (1) let prayer be earnest, (2) let the heart be
bopeful, (8) let effort be energetic and persistent.—C,.


Ver. 1.—Christ the Branch. “ But ashoot shall come forth from the stem of Jesse,
and a {ruitful sprout shall grow up from his roots” (Heuderson’s translation; see
ch. iv. 2). ‘lhe idea is of a sucker springing up from a hewn stump. The word used
(netser) is singularly suggestive of despised Nazareth, with which place the early life of
Messiah was associated, aud of which it could jeeringly be said, ‘‘Can any good thing
come out of Nazareth?” Wordsworth remarks on the sublime contrast in this prophecy
and the foregoing, “‘Vhe mizhty and haughty worldly power of Assyria—the type of
impiety and antichristianism—will be hewn down, like a great forest, in the pride of
its strenyth and glory, never to rise again; but the spirit of prophecy here reveals,
that when the house of |)avid seemed like a tree hewn down to a stump in the earth,
then a sucker would spring up from the stump, and a branch shooting forth from its
roots would bear irnit and overshadow the earth. And so it came to pass. Ata time
when the house of David seemed to be reduced to the lowest estate, when the Virgin
was a poor maiden in a village of despised Galilee, then by God’s miraculous agency
the Branch sprouted up from the hewn-down stump, aid grew up into a mizhty ‘l'ree,
and brought forth much fruit, and received the world under its shade.” It bas been
cleverly suggested that “the celar of Lebanon, the symbol of the Assyrian power, was
tu be cut down, and, being of the pine genus, which sends forth no suckers, its fall was
irretrievable. But the oak, the symbol of Israel, and of the monarchy of the house of
David, had a life remaining in it after it had been cut down, and the rod or sucker that
was to spring from its roots should flourish once again in greater glory thau before.”
We fix attention on the sentiment entertained respecting suckers, which are usually
despised, thought to be weak and frail things, from which nothing of value is ever to be
expected.

I. THE sURPRISE OF CHRIST’s LOWLY BEGINNINGS. Born into a poor family, at a
time when David’s race was at its lowest humiliation; born, as one crowded out by the
hurry of life, in the courtyard of an inn; brought up in a despised village. There were
but a few gleams of glory resting on his intancy. Angels heralded the tidings of his
birth ; Magi offered worship to him at the Bethlehem cottage. But Herod would, if
he could, have broken off that sucker, almost ere it began to show its greenness. It
would take a great power of imagination to picture a splendid career and a world-wide
renown for that poor Bethlehem babe. ‘He came to his own, and his own received
him not.

Il. ‘le Hopr or CuRIsT’s EARLY YEARS. We need not accept the strange and foolish
levends of Apocryphal Gospels concerning the infancy and childhood of Jesus. We
have one all-suflicient historical incident, presenting the boy of twelve years, and con-
vincing us that a wonderful manhood was in its unfolding. His mother observed much,
and poudered over many things in her heart, and the story of Christianity has verified
every hope which that good mother cherished,

Ill. Tum Beauty or Curisi’s GrowTH. The sucker became strong, grew into
a branch, began to put forth branches of its own, became a tree whose beauty
attracted the attention of all men. ‘l'wo passages suggest illustration and detail :
“ And the Child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom; and the grace of
God was upon him;” “Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with
God and man.” Other suggestions come from the statements, “ All that heard him
were astonished at his understanding and answers;” and, “ He went down with them,
and came to Nazareth, and was subject unto them.” Intelligence, submissiveness,
obedience, were the beautiful features of his child-time—the splendid promise of after-
years.

IV. THE AMAZING RICHNESS OF CuRIST’s FRUIT. When the sucker came to bearing-
time, it altogether surpassed the old tree of David. Lllustrate its fruitage (1) of holy


OH. x1. 1—16 ] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 215
Ee ee


example; (2) of wise teaching; (3) of gracious healings; (4) of heroic sufferings; (5)
of eternal triumph over sin. Moral and spiritual fruitage answering to the needs of
thirsting and hungry men. Fruit which was the “ Bread of life.’ The despised tree
of David at last sent forth a sucker, which swiftly grew into a tree, whose leaves were
for the healing of all the nations, and whose fruit was for the spiritual quickening of a
world that was “ dead in trespasses and sins.”—R. T.


Ver. 2.—Christ’s enduements by the Spirit. The prophetic conception of Messiah is
of a man, specially endowed and fitted for his mission by God’s Spirit. The figures that
nelp prophetic vision are David, endowed with the spirit of rule and of song; and
Solomon, endowed with the spirit of wisdom. And the New Testament bids us think
of Christ as having the Spirit, not by measure, but without measure—the fulness of God
dwelling in him (Col. i. 19; ii. 9). Compare the bevinning of our Lord’s sermon at
Nazareth : “The Spirit of the Lord is upon me” (Luke iv. 18). ‘The point sugested
is that God’s enduements are always in precise adaptation to a man’s work. Here, in
relation to Christ, the “ qualities are arranged in three pairs, but all spring from one
Source, the Spirit of Jehovah, which rests permanently upon him. They are (1) moral
and intellectual clearness of perception ; (2) the wisdom and bravery which be-fit a ruler ;
(8) a knowledge of the requirements of Jehovah, and the will to act avreeably to this
knowledge” (Cheyne). Christ was a Teacher, Healer, Example, Saviour, Head of a
spiritual kingdom. As fitting him for these positions and offices, he was endued with—

{, Wispom. The special gilts of the ruler, as called to judge difficult, complex cases,
In its highest form implying comprehension of the secret things of Gud,

I. Unpersranpine. Or keen, quick discernment; the sagacity which discovers the
right thing to do, and the right word to say, in all human relationships.

II. Counsen. The power to form wise plans; the clear purpose which fits a king
for the exercise of sovereignty. ‘He shall know how to administer the affairs of his
spiritual kingdom in all the branches of it, so as effectually to answer the two great
ends of it—the glory of God, and the welfare of the children of men.”

IV. Mieut. The ability to carry plans into execution. With men we often find a
divorce between the skill to plan and the power to execute.

VY. Fear or Gop. The dis)osition which keeps us ever anxiously watching for, and
resolved to do, God’s will. ‘The reverence and faith which is the beginning of all
wisdom.

lllustrations of each may readily be found in the life of the Lord Jesus; and it may
be urged that all these enduements brought him the power that lies in righteousness—
the power (1) to wither all evil; (2) to nourish all good.—R, T.


Vers. 3—5.—The principles of Messianic rule. These are exemplified in the actual
administration of the head of the Messianic kingdom. ‘The picture presented here is
designed to be in sharp contrast with that of the unjust judges referred to in ch. i, 23;
ii. 14,15; x. 1,2. he figure of clothing one’s self, or being clothed, with moral
attributes is not unfrequent in the Scriptures. The virdle is mentioned as an essential
part of Oriental dress, and that which keeps the other garments ia tieir proper place and
qualifies the wearer for exertion, The rules, or characteristics, of the Messianic or
spiritual kingdom may be illustrated under the following headings.

I. Ricurnousness AS BEFORE Gop. The absolutely right is to be sought; and it will
be found in what (1) God is; (2) what God commands; (3) what God approves,
Matthew tleury says, “ He shall be righteous in the administration of his government,
and his righteousness shall be his girdle; it shall constantly compass him and cleave
to him, shall be his ornament and honour; he shall gird bimself for every action, shall
gird on his sword for war in righteousness ; his righteousness shall be his strength, and
shall make him expeditious in his undertakinzs, as a man with his loins yirt.” Com-
pare the kingdom ruled by considerations of righteousness with the kingdoms ruled by
considerations of expediency.

Il. Kqurry BETWEEN MAN AND MAN. The determination that every man shall get
his due, and bear his due. Many cases arise in which strict justice must be toned by
consideration of circumstances. In view of human infirmity, the equitable must some-


times be put instead of the right,


216 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. ([ou. x1. 1—16.


III. ErricienT PUNISHMENT OF THE WICKED. The strong hand on the wrong-doer
is ever an essential of good government.

IV. Farrurutness To purty. Duty being distinguished from right in this, that it
is something we are bound to do, upon the authority of some one who has the right te
command us. “Faithfulness” is closely kin with “loyalty.” And Messiah is 9
theocratic King, a Vicegerent of Jehovah.

VY. PEACE EVERYWHERE. Because, if righteousness prevails, nobody will wrong
others, and nobody will have wrongs to avenge. Jealousies, envyings, violence,
covetings, all fade before advancing righteousness ; and when Jesus, the righteous King,
reigns over mind and heart and life, then the glory-day will have come, and “no war
or battle-sound ” will then be “ heard the world around.”—R. T.


Ver. 9.—The Christian “golden year.” Isaiah’s relief, from the burdens, sins, and
sorrows of his times, is his anticipation of the coming days of Messiah, which were to
ancient Jews their “golden year.” Isaiah’s visions break in on his records of evil and
prophetic denunciations, and lie like pools of blue in a cloudy sky, or stand like an oasis
of palm-trees in a dreary desert. The general thought of this chapter is, that when
righteousness can really and fully reign, then peace will be attained. As soon as the
righteous King can reach the throne of universal dominion, the world shall be at peace
from all its miseries, and not from war alone. When the perfect King is universally
acknowledged, then there will be established the perfect kingdom.

I, PropHetic ScRIPTURES SET FORTH A PERFECT BEING, AN IDEAL Krn@. Men have
always been on the outlook for a glorious future—“a good time coming.” But poetic
imagery has been vague, and generalization has meant weakness. Bible prophecy sets
before us: 1. A Person—a Son; and the actual incidents of his life, as a veritable
human being, are foretold. 2. A perfect Person. Observe the statements of this chapter,
and the idea that was formed of Messiah. 3. A Person with kingly authority. If he
be a perfect man, he must be a king among men. This kingly idea was set forth (1) in
the theocracy founded by Moses; (2) in David’s reign; (3) in Daniel’s vision. In the
times of Jewish captivity the promise of such a leader and deliverer was needed to keep
men from utter despair. The conception of a perfect person is as utterly beyond us as
the conception of a perfect age. Before Christ came neither had been realized. New
one has. ‘he perfect Person has come, and we have a right to say that “ with God all
things are possible,” secing that the one so-called impossible has been overcome. The
historical Christ is the realization of what men thought to be the impossible.

II. PropHetio SorIpTruRES SET BEFORE US A PERFECT AGE, AN IDEAL KINGDOM,
Observe the figures of the chapter; and such expressions as “ He shall have dominion
also from sea to sea,” and Dan. vii. 13, 14. Poetry has its “ golden age,” for the most
part, in the past. Scripture has it in the future. Towards it we are moving. For it
we are working. In olden time men failed in faith that the perfect King would come,
and now we fail in faith that the perfect kingdom will ever come, because we canuot
quite explain the when, the how, and the why. It may be said—Have we any seemingly
good reasons for our failing faith? And it may be urged that (1) the golden age has
never yet been reached in part, anywhere ; (2) there are no signs of its nearing approach ;
and (3) we cannot clearly mark even our own growing mcetness for it. The perfect
age has scarcely even a faint beginuing in us. But who can discern victory through
the smoke of battle? And yet the victory may, in effect, be won, With cleared eyesight
we might see many hopeful signs; such as these: 1. The King has come, and is con-
flicting for his rights. 2. The perfect kinzdom is sometimes nearly reached by the
saintly believers. 3. In limited measure it is realized in the Church of Christ. 4. In
its wider form, as a kingdom of righteousness, it is extending over all the earth. And
if God could give the world the perfect King, he can also give the perfect age. The
practical question is—What are we doing to hurry its on-coming ? The world’s hope
lies in the spreading of the knowledge of the Lord. Everywhere the heralds must go
until the earth is full, as full as the sea-basin is with the waters. We must, for our-
selves, know the Lord, and we must speak of him, and witness concerning him, to
others ; ne a act of godly living and godly labouring is bringing near the “ golden
year.”—


ow. XI. 1—16.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 217
ee


Ver. 10.—The centre of attraction for the whole world. “ An ensign of the people ;
to it shall the Geutiles seek.” In prophetic furm we have here expressed the truth
which Messiah himself expressed when he said, “ And I, if I be lifted up, will draw
all men unto me.” All humanity is figured as turning to look on the crucified One,
and responding to an irresistible attraction which makes all gather round him, as armies
gather about an ensign or standard, and as clans gather to the appointed meeting-place,
Our Lord spoke, on three separate occasions, of the attractive power that would come
from his “ uplifting.” (1) John iii. 14. Hore the idea is a general one. Lifted up in
the sense of being set in sight of men, as the brazen serpent was when set up on the
pole in the middle of the camp. (2) John viii. 28. Here the idea is that his Messiah-
ship would be evident when his life was complete, and that would not be until he
was lifted up in death. (3) John xii, 32, Here we find Greek proselytes anxious to
see Jesus. Such pressing into the kingdom was premature. The “corn of wheat
must fall into the ground and die.” Greeks and Gentiles must wait just a little while
longer. The ensign would soon be lifted up; then to it they may seek. It is interest-
ing to notice that the Syriac word for “ crucify ” means “ to raise,” “to lift up,” as
men set up a standard. Christ’s power from his cross—Christ’s attraction as an
Ensign—is our subject, and we note—

I. CHRIST, ON HIS CROSS, ATTRACTIVELY REVEALS HIMSELF TO THE MINDS OF MEN.
We can only get imperfect and unsatisfactory views by limiting our attention to Clirist’s
work. In that way we can only hope to formulate cold and lifeless doctrines. But
our views are equally imperfect if we limit our attention to Christ’s person. Then we
can do no more than nourish sentiment, or set before ourselves an example for imitation.
We must combine both, and let each illuminate the other. Illustrate the splendour of
the combined oxy-hydrogen light. How much Christ made of himself! In a man it
would be painful egotism ; why isit not in him ? Because it was his mission to manifest
God te men; so he must point to himself. All his life, speech, doing, suffering, was a
gradual disclosing of himself, of the deep mystery of his origin, his claim, of God in
him. But what we need to see more fully than we do is that, apart from his death, as
he died, his life could not have efficiently revealed him. Death only completes the
test. If he had failed in that supreme hour, an imperfect sonship could never have
shown to us the perfect Father-God. We can see that only the story of his life could
not have sufficed, for: 1. His enemies misrepresented that life, and said, “ He hath a
devil.” 2. Disciples misunderstood it, and only saw its meaning after his death. 38.
Critics now can explain the life, but are hopelessly puzzled by the mystery of his death.
Lifted up, Christ is set before us (1) as the model Man; (2) as not a mere man; (3) as
the Son of God with power. And if religion demands personal love to and trust in
the Lord Jesus Christ, then we must know him, we must know him fully; and we can
only thus know him as he is “ lifted up.”

II. Curist, ON HIS CROSS, ATTRACTIVELY SHOWS HIMSELF TO THE HEARTS OF MEN.
Men may be driven or drawn to goodness. The gospel has its majesty of driving, its
““ whip of small cords.” “ Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men.”
But its great power is its drawing power; its moral influence; its constraint of the
affections, and of the will. A voice from the “ Ensign,” from Jesus lifted up, is ever
calling to us and saying, “Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by ? behold, and see.”
Suffering has a strange power on human hearts, Self-sacrificing suffering moves us
strangely. Crucifixion was curse and shame, but it set Christ in the world’s eye. No
kind of death could so lift him up and compel the dying world to look. And Christ
crucified is still the supreme persuasion, the irresistible attraction, to men. Jesus lifted
up, an Ensign for the gathering of the people, may be an old and worn story, and it
may have lost something of its drawing power for you. Ah! that can only be because
men, and men’s words, have stood in front of him, and taken your eyes off him. See
him only, Look to the Ensign, and then you will find your soul asking itself—


* Bor whom, for whom, my soul,
Were all these sorrows borne?”


and you too will feel “ the strong attractive power.”—R. T.


Ver, 11.—The untty of the race in Messiah’s kingdom. This unity is the great dream


218 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cH. xu. 1—6.


bee


and hope of humanity. It can never be attained in any temporal kingdom, and it
could be only a formal and outward unity if it were. No uuities of mind or of govern-
ment are possible; but unity of heart is. Men can be one in God; and one in that
spiritual kingdom in which God rules. This verse is used as an argument for what is
known as the second coming of Christ. Its force and value in that relation we do not
now discuss. ‘Tlie spiritual suggestion of the passage is now before us, and we are to
see that Christ is the bond of unity for the world, which never can be one save in his
love, in the life he gives, and in the Father-God he reveals. How this unity is to be
secured we may fully see by considering the following points concerning Christ’s
influence.

I. He arrracts aun. (See the previous Homily.)

Il. He BREAKS DOWN ALL SEPARATIONS. -Of race, class, age, prejudice, religious
forms, etc. In him there is “ neither Jew nor Greek, bond nor free, male nor female.
He is all and in all.”

Ill. Hz Is SUPERIOR TO ALL PHYSICAL DIFFICULTIES. They come to him from all
parts. The Spirit 0! Christ triumphs over mountaius and over seas. It goes into the
fever-lands, aud gains influence in the frozen zones. Missionaries go everywhere
preaching Christ, and his Spirit in them is their heroic mastery otf all disabilities,

IV. He oan SATISFY ALL HEARTS. Glad hearts and sorrowful ones. Empty hearts
and full ones. Lonel) hearts and satisfied ones. Dead hearts and yearning ones. He has
life, love, truth, rest, hope, peace, at his command; and of this grace he giveth to all
men liberally. He can perfect the unity of the race by winning the universal love, the
supreme love, which is the life of humanity, and the ensuring of the brotherhood, All


men can be sons of the one Father in their love.
Christ is God, and he wins us for God, and he wins


the love of their common sonship.
us as God. —R. T.


All men can be brothers, indeed, by


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER XII.

Vers. 1—6.—Tux Sone or THANKSGIVING
or THE UNITED CuurcH. On each of her
deliverances the Church is bound to praise
God. In some parts of the Church it is
customary on every such cuccusion to sing a
“Te Deum.” Tie ordinary Israelite hymn
of praise appears to have been the hundred
and thirty-sixth psalm (1 Chron. xvi. 34,41;
2 Chron. v.13; vii. 3; Bzra iii. 11; Jer.
Xxxlii. 11; 1 Mace. iv. 24); but on extraor-
dinary occasions special thanksgivings were
sung (Exod. xv. 1—21; 1 Sam. vii. 18—29,
etc.). Isaiah is now inspired to give a pat-
tern song, suitable for the Church to sing
when she is reunited, enlarged, and restored
to favour.

Ver. 1.—In that day. In the day of
deliverance and restoration. Though thou
wast angry; literally, because thou wast
angry. Kay understands an actual thank-
fulness for the severe discipline, which had
enecked them, and not allowed them to
glide on smoothly to ruin. But perhaps
the idiom is rather that of the passage,
“Father, I thank thee that thou hast hid
these things from the wise and prudent, and |


hast revealed them unto babes” (Matt. xi
25), where it is only the last clause that ex-
presses the true object of the thanksgiving.
Comfortedst; rather, hast comforted, since the
effect continued.

Ver. 2.—God is my salvation (comp.
Ps. xxvii. 1; xxxviii. 22, etc.). The em--
ployment of the abstract “salvation” for
the concrete “Saviour” is extremely com-
mon. The Lord Jehovah; literally, Jah
Jehovah—a combination which occurs only
here and in ch. xxvi. 4, where it is again
used as an encouragement to perfect con-
fidence and trust. Is my strength...
salvation, This is quoted from the song of
Moses (Ixod. xv. 2), which the prophet hag
throughout in his thoughts.

Ver. 3.—Wi.h joy shall ye draw water.
The prophet interrupts the song to give
a comforting promise. The “ salvation ”
granted to the Church shall be as an inexe
haustible well, from which all comers may
draw continually. Compare our Lord’s pro-
mise to the woman of Samaria in Jolin iv. 14,

Ver. 4.—Declare his doings among the
people; literally, among the peoples (comp.
Ps.ix. 112? ixxviiy 12); cyl. 22% exvii 17).
It is always regarded as one of man’s chief
duties to testify of God’s goodness to others.
Here Israel is called upon to pullish God’s
mercies and great deeds to the Gentiles.


OH. x11. 1—6.]


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH,


219


eee


His name is exalted. God is in his Name,
and his Name expresses his nature. As there
is nothing so exalted in all the universe as
God, so there is no name so exulted as his
Name. Hence his Name is protected by an
express commandment,

Ver. 5.—Sing unto the Lord; for he hath
done excellent things. This is another
quotation, very slightly moditied, from the
song of Mosvs, in which these words were
part of the refrain (Ixod. xv. 1, 21). This
is known; rather, let this be known; i.e.
publish it—noise it abroad.


of Zion; te. raise a “cry” that may be
heard far and wide—a cry that shall be a
“shout” of rejoicing. The word translated
“inhabitant” is feminine, and designates
the entire community or Church that dwells
on the holy hill. For great is the Holy
One of Israel in the midst of thee. The
crowning glory of the Church is the pre-
sence of her Lord in the midst of her—
a pre-ence continuous (“I am with you
always’), efficacious (John xv. 4—6), yet
invisible (1 Pct. i. 8). Tie Church is ever
to proclaim this presence and rejvice in it,


Ver. 6.—Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant


HOMILETICS.


Vers. 1—6.— Christian thanksgiving—its principal characteristics. There is so much
allusion in this thanksgiving song to the “ song of Moses,” that Isaiah cannot but be
supposed to intend some comparison between the two. The occasion, however, of their
utterance is so different, and their scale and method of construction so far apart, that
it is difficult to draw out in detail any comparison between the two that would not
appear forced and unnatural. Moses’s song is a burst of gratitude for a particular
temporal mercy; the Church’s thanksgiving is a constant outpour of thanks and praise
for continuous spiritual benefits. The song may, therefore, better be considered in itself,
as a mole] to be borne in mind, and in its main points followed, by the Church in all
ages. We may regard separately (1) its form; (2) its matter; (3) its tone and spirit.

I. THE FORM APPROPRIATE FOR THANKSGIVING. The form employed by Isaiah is poetical.
His song consists of two stanzas—one of six, the other of seven lines. The lines are of
nearly equal length, varying, however, between three and four feet. The preduminant
foot is the iambic; but there is an admixture of anapests and trochees. The details
of the form are unimportant, and not readily transferable from poetry so peculiar as
the Hebrew to the poetry of modern times and countries. What is mainly important
is the simple fact of the thanksgiving being a poem. It does not, of course, bind
the Church to express thanksgiving in no other way, but it is a strong argument for
the predominant use of poetry for such expression. And the instinct of the Church
has been in accordance. From the first she has made the Psalms of David her
especial “ book of praise.” She has found in other parts of Scripture a number of
“canticles” framed upon the same Hebrew model, and has adopted them into her
She has accepted from one of her noblest saints the glorious poem of the


services.
“Te Deum.” She has found one hymn of praise, worthy of freyuent use, in the
Apocrypha. And further, she has been prolific herself of hundreds and thousands of


sacred songs, written in a score of languages, and in more varieties of metre than can be
counted, with which her members delight to praise God in the congregation.

Il. THE MATTER APPROPRIATE FOR THANKsGIvING. Thanksgiving is for blessings
or benefits received; and the main matter fur thankssiving must always be a mention,
more or less full, of the particular blessings or benefits for which the thankfulness is
felt. Moses in his “song” dwells at some length on the passaye of the Red Sea by
Israel, and the destruction of Pharaoh’s host which followed (Exod. xv. 1, 4—10, 12).
The Church, according to Isaiah, commemorates her deliverance from the wrath of
God (ver. 1), her possession of salvation (ver. 2), and the presence of the Holy One
of Israel in her midst (ver.6). In her deliverance are included all the spiritual benefits
of the past, in her salvation all the joys and blessings of the future; in the presence of
the Holy One is her continual actual delight and happiness—a delight and happiness
that words are feeble to paint. What is most remarkable in Isaiah’s representation
is the absence of all reference to temporal blessings, The spiritual benefits absorb all
the thouvht and attention of the Church’s members, and are alone celebrated in their
song of rejoicing.


Ill. Taz TONE AND SPIRIT PROPER FOR THANKSGIVING. Thanksgiving may be


220 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cH. xn. 1—6,


formal, cold, and perfunctory, or it may be heartfelt, warm, and full of earnestness.
Isaiah’s thanksgiving song is a model of hearty, zealous, earnest praise. It expresses
(1) gratitude for past favours; (2) joy in present salvation; (8) confidence and trust
in God’s protecting care for the future: (4) anxiety to make known his mercies and
cause his Name to be praised more widely; (5) admiration of his works; (6) adora-
tion of his majesty. The abruptness that characterizes it is a sign of vehemence;
the repeated calls upon others to join in indicate a strong craving for sympathy.
Altogether the tone resembles that of some of the later psalms, which were, perhaps,
written about the same period (see Ps. cxiii., cxvii., cxxxiv., cxlix.).


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1—6.—A hymn of praise. Some critics say that the language and the tone of
thought are so different here from that of Isaiah, that the hymn cannot be from his pen.
Vhe theory seem~ probable enough that “a copyist or reader, who beheld with joy
a fulfilment of the words in ch. xi. 1», 16, on the deliverance from the Babylonian
exile, supjlemented the oracle with these jubilant words.”

I. THE FULL HEART SEEKS RELIEF IN RELI@Ious sone. If burdened with the sense
of guilt, it must have its litany of grief and deprecation. Pain in the mind, the
sense of lonely suffering, readily translates itself into the image of the anger of God.
As Madanie de Staél justly remarks, “ When we suffer, we easily persuade ourselves
that we are guilty, and violent griefs carry trouble even into the conscience.” And
when the suffering ceases, it seems as if a cloud had passed from the sky, and the
anger of Gud were allayed. He who had been the Judge now appears as tlie Saviour;
the beart that had been trembling as the bruised reed is now strong as if the feet were
based on eternal rock. Awhile dejected in the extreme, “ writing ‘bitter things against
itself,” presently it is filled with boasting aud triumph in the sense of possessing God,
nay, of being possessed by God. There is a long gamut of religious feeling ; in critical
monients the heart may run through every tone in the scale. In the simple life of
feeling the religions spirit expatiates. The habit of flower, of bird, of child, opening to
the sun, singing in the spring-time, is the reflection of that of the soul. We do not
suffer our memories of a long and dreary winter to mar our enjoyment of the genial
breath, the odours, sights, and sounds of spring-time. Nor should the sense of the
‘ong strugles, doubly wintry seasons of the hiding of God’s face from the soul, linger in
those moments when the Sun of righteousness returns with healing in his wings, and
aalvation is for the present a fact, no longer a hope.

1]. THE FITNESS AND BEAUTY OF THANKsGIVéNG. To withhold thanks from an earthly
benefactor, whoxe hand has extracted us from a state of peril or need, is to show a
deformed soul. To seal the fount of joyous religious expression, is the way to have
presently nothing to express. For if expression follows naturally on feeling, so the
cultivation of religious expression tends to form and to enrich the feeling itself.
Nothing artificial is recommended ; but it is well to recognize that sentiment, no less
than thought, remains poorer than it need be without training and tillage. This
psalm probably belongs to the period to which the last section of the psalter belongs ;
they are songs of deliverance, songs of return from exile, as those which immediately
precede them refer to the dispersion. If the latter soothe us by the profound insight
into suffering and sympathy with the soul in its seeming loneliness and exile from God,
no less, maybe, the psalms of the return educate us in hope, reminding us that we are
on our way to God, that our spiritual exile draws to its close, aud “every winter yields
to spring.” —J.


Ver. 3.—A religion of blessedness, “Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out
of the wells of salvation.” Religion is not only safety, it is blesscdness—the very
highest blessedness, We are not to be ever in fear and trembling about “ our state,”
but to remember that “ perfect love casteih out fear.” A really religious man finds that
he cannot do without the gospel as satisfying his entire being, He is not religious


because he “ought to be,” or must be, to be saved; he is religious because also it ip
truest lov.


oH. x11, 1—6.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 221


I. WaTER MUST BE DRAWN. Certainly. The wells of truth are deep and clear, but
we must come hither in one sense to draw. It is quite true that the woman of Samaria
at Jacob’s well said to the Saviour, “ Give me this water, that I thirst not, neither come
hither to draw,” and that Jesus told her the water he should vive her should be in her
“4 well of water springing up into everlasting life.” But at the same time, we must
remember that Jesus spake a parable about “the treasure hid in a field.” The ideas are
both true. For the Christian there is a hidden blessedness, but it needs discovering by
the Word and the Spirit of God. Every quiet meditation, every prayerful perusal of
the sacred page,—this is a drawing of water out of the wells of salvation.

li, WaTER WILL BE JOYFULLY DRAwN. Not “must be,” but “will be.’ You
cannot command “ pleasure ;” you can “duty.” You can make the child or the man
read Scripture, but only life within will lead them to draw water “with joy.” ‘Ihe
art-student loves to wander in the foreign galleries and to gaze upon the highest ideals
of art. We listen to music so differently when we love and delight in it. And a
quickened soul loves religion for its own sake.

Il]. WaTER MUST BE DISTRIBUTED WHEN DRAWN. We can “give” the cup as well
as drink of the cup. It is the water that is so precious, not the wooden cu) or the
golden chalice that contains it. It is not new “ theories ” and “ views ” and “ opinions”
that are precious, but the Word of the living God, which is the pure water of life, and
of which whoso drink shall live; for the written Word all leads to the living Word—
Jesus Christ, the Saviour of men.

IV. THE MANY WELLS ARE FED BY ONE FOUNTAIN. History or prophecy; Gospel or
Epistle; precept or promise; the record of Paradise lost, in Genesis; or the story of
Paradise regained, in the Apocalypse ;—all tiese are filled from the same Divine
fountain. I1¢ is the Spirit that testifies of Christ; for “the testimony of Jesus”’ is
the theme of history and “the spirit of prophecy.” Many wells! Yes; but “all my
springs are in thee.”—W. M. 5.


Ver. 1.—Reconciliation with God. These words may have—

I, A NATIONAL FULFILMENT. ‘The Jews might have taken these words into their
lips after the discomfiture of Sennacherib, or, with fuller meaning later on, after
the return from captivity and the rebuilding of the walls of Jerusalem (Neh. vi. 15, 16).
Other nations, after retributive sufferinys and signal deliverances or resturations, may
appropriately use this reverent language.

I]. THEIR FULFILMENT IN THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF MANY AN INDIVIDUAL LIFE.
1. There ts spiritual declension. A man has been living professedly in the service of
God, but his devotion has been dying down, his obedience has been growing lax, his
usefulness has been diminishing and may have come down to noth.ng. 2. Zhen comes
Divine correction. Gui speaks to him in chastening love; he sends the affliction that
is intended to awaken him from his half-heartedness in the service and cause of Christ.
38. Then comes conviction and amendment on his part; a return to the higher and
worthier life he lived before. 4. And then the chastisement is removed. (Ps. ciii. 8, 9.)
God’s anger is visibly, sensibly, consciously “turned away;” the heavenly Father
“comforts ” him with his loving favour; and there follows: 5, The grateful and joyous
song of praise.

Ill. Taeir FULFILMENT IN THE EXPERIENCE OF EVERY GOOD MAN. In the case of
every one who enters into the full heritage of those Messianic blessings which are the
subject of prophecy in this chapter, there will be found: 1. A sense of Divine dis-
pleasure ; reason enough for saying, “O Lord, thou art angry with me.” The word
“anger ” in its honourable sense is certainly referable to the Divine mind. We are not
to identify the faulty irritation of which we are too often conscious with the “ anger ”
which is liere and elsewhere applied to the Supreme. ‘That feeling, at once holy and
painful, which a laithful father feels towards his son when he has done something
which is shamefully wrong, is the feeling, deepened, refined, ennobled by divinity,
which the heavenly Father and righteous Ruler feels toward us when we sin avainst
him and avainst his holy Law. We may call it by that name which is most significant
vr appropriate to our own thought, but, however it may be denoted, it becomes us to
recognize the fact, to be affected and to be afflicted by the fact, that God, the holy and
loving One, feels towards those who have wilfully broken his laws or who BEET


TUE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cH. xu. 1—&


reject his overtures of mercy, a serious Divine displeasure. He is pained, grieved,
angry. He blames us, he condemns us, he holds us to be deserving of retribution.
2. The removal of God’s wrath. Two things are needed for this: (1) repentance and
(2) faith (see Acts xx. 21); the turning of the heart, and therefore of the life, from
selfishness and sin; and the cordial acceptance of Jesus Christ as the Propitiation for
our sin and the Sovereign of our soul. Without these we have no right to look for the
turning away of God’s anger; with these we may be perfectly assured of it. 3. An
abiding sense of the Divine favour, “Thou comfortedst me.” Gud’s “comfort” ia
not always simultaneous with the exercise of his mercy ; there may be an interva
of no short duration between the act of |ivine forziviness and that blessed sense of
reconciliation which we call “assurance of salvation” (Ps. xxxii. 1, 2,7, 11). Let ne
one despond because he does not find himself possessed of inward peace and sacred joy
as goon as his heart turns to God and to his salvation. Let such a one continue tc
ask, to seek, to trust, tu hope, and in due time the light will shine into the soul. It
does not always come as the lightning-flash—ne moment the blackness of darkness
and the next a dazzling light—but often as comes the returning day; first a few streaks
of mourning, then the darkness turning into grey, then the deepening light as the hours
advance, at length the full brilliancy of noon. 4. A life of songful gratitude. “ At
that day,” and through all remaining days, until the night of death shall usher in the
endless morning of immortality, the comforted heart will say, “O Lord, I will praise
thee.”—C,


Ver. 2.—The greatness of God’s goodness, We have in these words the very exube-
rance of holy feeling. They refer us to—

I. THE suUPREME acT oF Gop’s GoopnEss. ‘God is my Salvation.” He has been
wonderfully gracious to us in besfowul—in the gifts of our being, of our spiritual uature
with its varied capacities, of our physical nature with all its organs of activity and
enjoyment, of our human relationships, of a rich and beautiful dwelling-place, ete.
But his greatest kindness is felt by us to be in deliverance, in that which is called
“salvation.” Here, again, there is an ascent in the scale of Iivine goodness; for
higher than salvation from trouble, from sickness, from death, trom personal captivity
or political servitude, stands salvation from sin ; and in the Messianic era this spiritual
deliverance reaches its highest point; ‘or it includes not only the negative side of rescue
from preseut evil, but also the positive side of enrichment with corresponding good. It
embraces: 1. Redemption from sin—its pena/ty and its power (its thraliom and its
defilement). 2. Restoration to God—to his favour and to his likeness, 3. The hope of
a higher and endless life in another world.

I, THE CONTINUANCE OF HIS GREATEST GIFT IN IMPARTING SPIRITUAL 8TRENGTH.
He “ forsakes not the work of his own hands.” Having redeemed us from the power
and cond: mnation of sin, and lifted us up into the state of sonship and heirship, he
sustains us in our new and blessed life. “The Lord Jehovah is our Strength.” He
imparts the needful strength for maintenance in our course by (1) the privileges of
the gospel; (2) the discipline of his holy providence; (3) the direct influences of his
own Spirit.

IL]. THE RESPONSE OF OUR HEARTS TO THE Divine Love. 1. The gratitude which
finds utterance tn sacred song. “The Lord... is my Song” (see Ps. cxix. 54),
The Christian man should carry in his heart such a sense of God’s reieemming love that
\e should be always ready to break forth into praise; his life should be a song of grati-
tude for the salvation of the Lord. 2. The confidence which excludes anxiety “TI will
trust, and not be afraid.” (1) Many are the occasions of human fear and anxiety—the
honourable mainteuance of the family ; the preservation of our personal integrity, both
moral and spiritual; the faithful discharge of duty in the post we have undertaken to
fill; the adorning of our Christian profession; our passage through the gateway of
death, etc. (2) We are wholly insufficient of ourselves to meet these, and to triumph
over them (2 Cor. iii. 5). (8) But, confiding in God, we may go forth without anxiety,
yal his Divine help (Ps. xxvii, 1; lvi, 11—13; cxviiii 6—8; Heb xiii

]


Ver. 8.—The joy of Christ’s salvation, These words of prophecy must have been


oH. x11. 1—8.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 223


re ae


peculiarly precious to those who first heard them. They sound very musical to us, but
they must seem more melodious still to the Oriental ear. We know that water is an
invaluable thing. but it is only they who have lived or travelled in tropical countries:
that appreciate all that is meant by burning drought or by refreshing streams, And as
words gather sweetness and excellency to the ear as they become associated with that
which we most prize, so we may be sure that the words “ water ” and “ wells” had a
most inviting sound to the people of Palestine, and that this passage had (as we should
say) a “golden ring” in the hearing of the Jews. It may bring before us the joy
which springs from the salvation of Jesus Christ in the several stages of our
experience.

I, PRoFOUND AND MOST BLESSED PEACE. It is said that the most exquisite sensation
that mortal man enjoys is experienced in the sudden cessation of excruciating pain,
Similarly we may truly say that the most profound satisfaction of the soul is felt in
a blessed consciousness of the removal of Divine condenination; in other words, in a
sense of forziven sin. The “ peace of God” not only “ passeth understanding,” but it is
a truer and a deeper calm than any other which is born of outward circumstance or
human favour. ‘This frequently passes into—

Il. ‘HE JOY WHICH RISES INTO HOLY RAPTURE. “ Being justified by faith, we have
peace with God; . . . and not only so, but we also joy in God through our Lord Jesus
Christ” (Rom. v. 1, 11). The sense of God’s fatherly love, the couviction that sin,
condemnation, death, hell—all the really evil and harmful things—are left behind for
ever, and that belore us is an ever-ascending path of wisdom, righteousness, and joy,
will awaken in the soul a rapturous delight compared with which the excitements and
delectations of earth are very poor affairs.

IIL. THE JoYoUS ACTIVITIES OF THE SOUL THROUGHOUT ALL ITS CHRISTIAN COURSE.
With joy we “draw water.” In the activities that are dis'inctively Christian we find a
positive delight—a source of satisfaction which dves not injurc, but ennuble; which does
not pall and fade, but abide and deepen. In the course of our Christian experience we
have: 1. The joy of praise; of pouring forth our trust and gratitude in strains of
sacred song, “singing and making melody in the heart.” 2. The joy of fellowship;
holding glad communion with the heavenly Father, with the Divine Friend of our
spirits; holding reverent and rejoicing intercourse with him hoth in social worship
and in the hour of solitude; havins, also, happy and heart-gladdening “ fellowship
one with another.” 3. The joy of hope; the eager anticipation of a blesseiuess and
glory which will follow the strife and suffering of this present time. Learn (1) the
folly of refusing this heritage of joy; (2) the serious and mischievous mistake of
giving a joyless impression of Christian service.—C.


Vers. 4—6.—FHanltation and activity. There is a jubilant strain throughout these
verses; not, however, without a sense of some sacred duty to be perfurmed. We
learn—

I, Tuat THE CHURCH oF CHRIST MAY WELL SPEAK IN TIIE ACCENTS OF EXULTATION.
The terms of the prophecy do not seem to be satisfied with anything less than
Messianic blessinvs; they fit perfectly the estate to which Christ has called us; they
belong to that “kingdom of heaven” of which the Sun of man had so much to
say (see Matt. xiii.). The Church may exult in that: 1. God has done such great
things for her, in (1) the large and long preparation, through many ages, for her
redemption; (”) the supreme act of Divine revelation in the person of his Son;
(3) the wonderful sacrifice of himself he made on its behalf (2 Cor. viii. 9); (4) the
lofty privile:es to which he has summoned it—holy service, affectionate sonship,
eager-hearted heirship. 2. God himself, the miyhty and victorious One, is dwelling
in the midst of it. ‘Great is the Holy One.” If the family is proud of its
honoured father, the army of its invincible captain, the nation of its illustrious
sovereign, how much more shall the Church exult in its almighty and victorious
Lord! He is great in all the elements of greatuess—in external majesty, in intrinsic
excellency, in overcoming energy, in transcendent beauty, in the everlasting character
of his kingdom.

IL. THAT EXULTATION DOES WELL TO PASS SOON INTO HOLY AND BENEFICENT ACTIVITY.
Blending with these accents of triumph, and harmonizing with them, is the voice of


224 THE BOOK OF 'THE PROPHET ISALAIL — LOH. xm, 1—6.


a a ea


exhortation, the summons to useful activity: ‘Praise the Lord ;” “Call upon his
Name ;” “ Declare his duings;” “ Be this kuown [let this be known] in all the earth.”
Jehovah’s greatness could only be ‘known among the nations by the united and
continuous testimony of the people of Gud. The glories of his grace, as they shine
in the face of Jesus Christ, are to be beheld by all peoples; but they must be reflected
from the lives and published by the lips of his faithiul servants. It is the privilege
and the duty of the Church to carry the knowledge of his Narae and truth to the
utmost ends of the earth. It is well to rejoice, “to sing for joy,” to indulge in
pious exultation; it is better to act in such a way that neighbouring nations (cities,
districts, streets, homes) shall draw from the wells of this vreat salvation the waters
of eternal life; better, both because (1) we communicate blessing thereby, and because
(2) we gain increase of spiritual worth by so doing.—C.


Ver. 2.—Holy joy in God. In each national history there is some one surpassingly
great event. A Thermopyle for Greece; a Leipsic for Germany ; a Moscow for Russia ;
a Waterloo for England. ‘I'he Jews had one great event, supreme in its influence on
their national life. By his relation to that event God would even be known. “I am
the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of
bondage.” All other deliverances, accomplished afterwards, were treated but as
reminders of this. All songs of thanksgiving, sung over subsequent redemptions, were
modelled after the “song of Moses,” of which the chorus was sung by tens of thousands,
led by the timbrels and dances of the women, on the further shores of the sea. And there
was much in that event which fitted it to hold such a place in the thoughts of generations.
It was the deliverance which, once and for ever, assured the world of the fact that God
—the One, living, and true God—was the God of the Jewish race. One can hardly
imagine the excitement and the triumph of that time. The mightiest nation of that
day roused itself, in a paroxysm of furious revenge, to pursue and to destroy what it
regarded as a crowd of fleeing slaves. What nope could there be for such a multitude,
when the king himself, a host of armed warriors, prancing horses, mighty chariots,
pressed on after them; when the pathless waters of a great sea waved and rolled before
them, and the mountains hemmed them in on the further side? If we were reading
common human history, such a story could only have ended somewhat in this way:
“ And the frightened crowds of fugitives were pressed on and on into the pitiless waters,
or were ruthlessly cut down and slain by the advancing hosts.” But we are reading a
page out of sacred history. There are the words, ‘‘ Stand still, and see the salvation of
God; ” and, behold, those waters are arrested in their flowing; they roll back in swelling
heaps; the ocean bed lies bare; and those “slaves” step steadily across the siranvest
pathway ever made for mortal feet to tread. Pharaoh’s chariots and horsemen dash
boldly forward into the way that was not made for them. The Red Sea was bright
with the banners, and flashed with the shields of warriors ; and then—dragging wheels
softening sands, hurrying waves, and the pride of Egypt is broken: “ Pharaoh’s chariots
and horsemen hath he cast into the sea.” God was magnified that day, magnified in
deliverance, and magnified in judgment. He was that day the Salvation of his people,
and they stood upon the shores of that flood, uniting in one triumphant shout, and
saying, “Sing ye to the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously.” ‘I'he verses preceding
the text allude to this scene. The spiritual blessings of Messiah’s reign are described
under the figure of this passage of the sea. From all spiritual scatterings and bondages
and captivities, Messiah shall bring his people. The text is part of a song to be sung
by the spiritually ransomed—a song formed, partly, upon the model of that older song
of Moses, We gather from it that a spirit of humble and trustful joy in God is the
proper spirit for redeemed souls to cherish.

_I. REASONS FOR MAINTAINING A SPIRIT OF HOLY JOY IN Gop. Too often the sombre
sides of Christian expericnce are dwelt on, and young people take needlessly dark
notions of the pious life. he model of the Christliness is not the calm sister of mercy
but the self-denying mother, the gentle, thoughtful, active elder sister, the strong man,
whose bright face and cheery words and sinless laugh can kindle the gladness of those
around him. ‘The bible is full of song. Its face can, indeed, settle into the severest
gravity, into the sternness of righteous indignation, into a tenderness of sympathy ; but
the face of the Bible can also break into smiles. Ripples cross ripples, and waves leap


cH. xiI. i—6.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 225
—————


over waves, on the surface of its sea; it can waken our faculty of song, it can fill our
life with its joy in God. It is well, however, for us to distinguish between “ happiness”
and “joy.” It would be true to say that religion does not promise happiness, 11 promises
joy. It would even be true to say, that religion does not promise happiness because it
promises joy. “Joy” is so much deeper, so much more satisfying and blessed, that he
who has it will never ask for happiness. Observe the distinction in the meaning of the
words, “ Happiness” is pleasure in something that may “hap,” or “ happen ; ” pleasure
in things outside us—in circumstances, in excitements—and so it cannot be abiding
and unchancing. All days cannot be sunny. All lives cannot be painless and sor-
rowless. All circumstances cannot please. He who wants happiness has to depend on
the variable conditions of a sin-stricken and, therefore, sorrow-filled earth. Mere happi-
ness too often proves only “as the crackling of thorns under a pot.” But “joy ” means
“leaping out,” pleasure that gushes forth from a fountain within us, in streams ever
refreshing the desert circumstances around us, and making them “ blossom as a rose.”
Pleasure that beams out its holy rays, as from a central sun of bliss dwelling in our
heart, and gilding everything about us, making the very light brighter, the clouds to
scatter, or to be flushed with crimson glories, and turning even the night to day. The
Christian man has no security of mere happiness, He must share the common mingled
heritage of sunshine and shadow, health and sickness, friendship and loss, pleasures and
disappointments, success and failure. But he may be secure of joy. “ He that believeth
on me,” said the Lord Jesus, “ out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water.” And
close by our text we read, “‘ With joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation.”
The one great reason for joy is stated to be that “God is become our Salvation.” We
joy in God (1) as the unchanging One; (2) as the almighty One; (3) as the all-loving
One; (4) as the redeeming One. It is, we have seen, a memory of deliverances which
calls forth into expression the trustful joy of our text. And what have we to say ot
gifts bestowed, sicknesses healed, broken hearts comforted, bondages of evil broken up?
We keep the word “salvation” too exclusively for the forgiveness of sins and recon-
ciliation with God ; we want it to include all the multiplied and ever-repeated deliver-
ances and rescuings and recoverings of God. Matthew Henry says, “God is my
Salvation; not my Saviour only, by whom I am saved, but my ‘Salvation,’ in whom I
am safe. He shall have the glory of all the salvations which have been wrought in me,
and from him only will I expect all the future salvations I may need.” The salvation
of God’s ancient people was not the deliverance from Egypt only, but that together
with a thousand other deliverances scattered over their history. And so we joy in God
because he saves us from a// our bondages. He saves us from pride, from inward lusts,
from outward evils. He saves us from greed, and covetousness, and clinging to the
world, and envyings, and backbitings, and unforgivings, and failing charity. Souls
can never sing that have such fetters on them; but he proclaims “ liberty to the captive,
and opening of the prison to them that are bound.”

II. THE HALLOWING INFLUENCE WHICH A SPIRIT OF HOLY JOY IN GOD WOULD EXERT
ON OURSELVES, AND ON THOSE AROUND vs. In ordinary life the men of sanguine, hopeful
temperament are usually the successful men. Despondent, doubting men accomplish
but little. The invigorating of hope makes men mightier than their difficulties. It is
the same in Christian life. Doubt and fear hinder. ope cheers. Joy puts song into
work. Ought a Christian to live in a minor key? Songs pitched thus will never
cheer himself, or any one about him. Joyful Christians are a joy to themselves, and to
all around them. The homes are brightened by them ; the children learn to watch their
faces, and to listen for their words; our Churches rejoice in the sunny-souled members
Everybody is glad in the man whose very presence seems to say, “Sing unto the Lord
a new song.” Such Christians let us all seek to be.

“ Ye pilgrims on the road
To Zion’s city, sing;
Sirg on, rejoicing every day
In Christ th’ eternal King.”
R. T.


Ver. 2.—Faith and fear. “I will trust, and not be afraid.” This expression reminds
us (1) of our liability to fear, and (2) of the power of faith to overcome fear.
ISAIAH. q


226 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [ou. xx. 1—6,


SE EaEEEEEEEEEEER


I. Our LIABILITY To FEAR. 1. As dependent creatures, 2. Because of the great
mysteries of existence that are around us—mysteries of God ; of self; of sin; of provi-
dence; of judgment; of the future. 38. In view of the possibility of our own failure
from goodness.

Il. THE POWER OF FAITH TO OVERCOME FEAR. Trust can (1) keep hold of the pro-
mises ; (2) see satisfying visions ot God himself. He who is “for us is more than all
they that can be against us.” “This faith—this simple believing trust in God—will
keep the soul in quietness in view of all the mysteries, and of all the dark possibilities
of life and death. When reason is at fault, when wisdom gropes for the way and falls
into the ditch, when strength trembles and sinks into feebleness, fucth keeps the heart
in quietness and confidence. Whence has it this power? Because it rests on Divine
declarations, deeper and wider than natural laws; on Divine promises, surer than the
hills; on Divine power, stronger than gravitation and the sweep of ten thousand
worlds; nay, on a livine Person, in whom all faithfulness, power, and love for ever
dwell” (Dr. A. Raleigh).—R. T.


Ver. 3.— The wells of salvation.. A very expressive image in a hot country. Wells
are treated in contrast with cisterns, which only store the drainage of the ground. Wells
are fed from springs and storehouses treasured in the heart of the earth. Inside Caris-
brooke Castle is a deep well, which ensured constant supply for the garrison, however
closely the castle might be besieged. Salvation is like a well; forth from it ever comes
“living water.” It is vot like a man-made cistern, which only holds a limited quantity,
and is apt to fail in the supreme hour of need. There may be a reference to the custom
associated with ove of the great feasts. On the last day of the Feast of Tabernacles—
some say on each day—the Jews used to bring water in a golden pitcher from the fountain
ot Siloam, and pour it, mingled with wine, on the sacrifice on the altar, with great
rejoicing. Illustrating the joy of finding fresh and living water in hot countries, “it is
said that while the French engineers were boring for water in the African desert, the
Arabs looked on in silent wonder, until they saw the precious stream actually gushing
forth, and then their joy knew no bounds; and sweet and precious as the cooling waters
are now to the weary labouring child of the desert, so precious were they to the people
to whom the words of tle prophet were ori inally addressed; and the promise to them
of an indefinite supply of that element would be highly appreciated by them, and well
calculated to inspire their gratitude and joy.” The idea of the text may be thus given:
Out of the wells of salvation in God, who is the Fountain of all good to his people, you
shall draw water with joy. Matthew Henry snggests three good topics for meditation.
“1. God’s promises, revealed, ratified, and given out to us in his ordinances, are wells
of salvation ; wells of the Saviour (so some read it), for in them the Saviour and sal-
vation are made known to us and made over to us, 2. It is our duty by faith to draw
water out of these wells, to take to ourselves the benefit and comfort that are treasured
up for us in them, as those that acknowledge all our fresh springs to be there, and all
our fresh streams to be thence (Ps. lxxxvii.7). 38. Water is to be drawn out of the wells
of salvation with a great deal of pleasure and satisfaction. It is the will of God that
we sliould rejoice before him, and rejoice in him (Deut. xxvi. 11); be joyful in his house
of prayer (ch. lvi, 7), and keep his feasts with gladness (Acts ii. 46).” Like well-water,
salvation is— |

I. Ever rresn. And so ever pleasant.

II. Ever asunpant, Fulness for whosoever will. Compare cisterns, or wadys of
dessa Salvation is a perennial fount, a “ perpetual tide ; it flows for you, for me, for

III, Ever Free. Nobody can seal up this fountain,

IV. Ever neautu-civing. Restoring, requickening: It is healing for the sick,
streugth for the disabled, life for those “dead in trespasses and sins.” What can
surpass in power to bring us joy our sense of the fitness and the fulness of the “ great,”
the “common” sa)\ation ?—R. Ty ‘


Ver. 4.—God’s new name the old one glorified. “Call upon his Name,” which is, in
Messiah, “Jehovah Jesus,” “Immanuel Jesus,” or “ God with us saving us from our
sins.” ‘To call upon God’s Nawe is to publicly give him the glory that is his due.


oH. x1. 1—22.) THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


———— “{- - eer


227


I. THE o1p name 18 Gop THE Proviper. The God who meets and supplies all
ordinary human wants. “God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.” The God of whom Jacob
could say,“ He fed me all my life long.” The God “in whose hand our breath is,
and whose are all our ways.” “ Who giveth to each his meat in due season.” “ Who
crowneth us with loving-kindnesses and tender mercies: who satisfieth our mouth with


good things.”


II. ‘tHE New NAME 1s Gop THE SAVIOUR.


tion.”


Who “delivers from going down to the pit.”


Who “redeemeth our life from destruc-
Who “ gave himself a Ransom


for us.” Who brought “ deliverance for the captives, and opening of the prison to them


that are bound.”


Who is “able to save unto the uttermost.”


Who is “exalted a


Prince and a Saviour, to give repentance unto Israel, and remission of sins.”
lll. THE NEW NAME ONLY TELLS OF GOD PROVIDING FOR MAN’S SOREST NEED AND


SADDEST CONDITION.


He is not just in trouble; he is tn sin.
with it, desraded by it, in peril through it, made helpless by it.


Stained with it, bruised
‘he man in sin cannot


save himself; no fellow-man can save him. The Hero from Bozrah, who speaks in
righteousness, alone is “ mighty te save” (cb. lxiii. 1).—R. T.


Ver. 5.—God honoured through his mercies.


excellent things.”
people throuzh the long ages.
hath triumphed gloriously.”
them from three points of view.


«Sing unto the Lord; for he hath done


A comprehensive term, summing up all that God had done for his
The Hebrew indicates an echo from Exod. xv. 1, “ He
Reviewing God’s wondrous workings, we may regard


J. THEY ARE THINGS WHICH WE OUGHT TO ADMIRE.
IJ. THreY ARE THINGS WHICH WE OUGHT TO STUDY.


Ill. THEY ARE THINGS WHICH WE OUGHT TO FEEL.
to us as frail, and their mercifulness to us as sinners.
mercy. Christ is the embodiment of mercy.
his goodness, and for his wonderful works towards the sons of men!”


“ endureth for ever.”—R. T,


Because of their graciousness
The great glory of God is his
“Oh that men woul: praise the Lord for
Thy mercy


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER XIII.

Tur BurpEeNn or Baxpyion. The series of
prophecies which commences with this chapter
and continues to the close of ch. xxiii., is
connected together by the word massa,
burden. It has been argued that the term
“burden ” is an incorrect translation of massa,
as used by Isaiah and later prophets (Nah.
i. 1; Hab. i. 1; Zech. ix. 1; xii 1; Mal.i. 1);
and that “ utterance,” or “ prophecy,” would
be more suitable (comp. Prov. xxx. 1; xxxi. 1,
where massa is thus rendered in the Autho-
rized Version). But the facts remain that
massa means a “burden” in the ordinary
sense, and that the prophecies to which it
is prefixed are generally (in Isaiah always)
of a denunciatory character. The translation
may therefore be allowed to stand—at any
rate in the present chapter.

It is remarkable that Babylon heads the
list of the Church’s enemies in the present
catalogue. Dr. Kay supposes the term
“ Babel” to be equivalent to “Asshur-Babel,”


and to designate “the Assyro-Babylonian
Empire.” He thinks that ‘* Babel” heads
the list on account of Assyria’s position,
under Tiglath-Pileser and Shalmaneser, in
the van of Israel’s adversaries. Lut neither
Isaiah nor any other sacred writer knows of
an Assyro-Labylonian kingdom or empire,
Assyria and Babylonia are distinct kingdoms
in Genesis (x. 8—12),in 2 Kings (xviii.—xx.),
in 2 Chron. (xxxii.), in Isaiah (xxx vi.—xxxix.)
and in Wzekiel (xxiii. and xxx., xxxi.). They
had been at war almost continuously for
above seven centuries before the time of
Isaiah (‘Records of the Past,’ vol. v. pp.
81—104). Assyria had, on the whole, proved
the stronger of the two, and had from time
to time for a longer or a shorter period held
Babylonia in subjection. But the two
countries were never more one than Rugsia
and Poland, and, until Tiglath-Pileser as-
sumed the crown of Babylon in 729 B.o., they
had always been under separate monarchs,
Individually, I can only account for the high
position here given to Babylon by the prophet,


228


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


(on. xu. 1—22,


a  ———


on the supposition that it was thus early(about
725 B.0.) revealed to him that Babylonia
was the great enemy to be feared—the ulti-
mate destroyer of Judah and Jerusalem, the
power that would carry the Jewish perple
into captivity.

Ver. 1.—Which Isaiah . . . did see (comp.
ch. i. 1; ii. 1, etc.). Isaiah always “sees ”
his prophecies, whether they are of the
nature of visions (as ch. vi.) or the contrary.
The word is probably used to express the
strong conviction that he has of their abso-
lute certainty.

Ver. 2.—Lift ye up a banner; rather, a
standard—“ an ensign,” as in ch. y. 26:
xi. 12.“ Ensigns” were used both by the
Assyrians and the Egyptians. ‘ Banners,”
or flags, do not seem to have been employed
in the ancient world. Upon the high moun-
tain; rather, wpon a bare mountain—one
that was clear of trees, so that the signal
might be the better seen from it. God’s
army having to be summoned against Baby-
lon, the summons is made in three ways:
(1) by a signal or ensign lifted up on a high
hill; (2) by a loud call or shout; and (3) by
waving or beckoning with the hand. The
whole description is, of course, pure meta-
phor. That they may go into the gates of
the nobles. Hither that they may enter
into the palaces of the grandees in Babylon,
or that they may take the towns of the tribu-
tary princes.

Ver. 3.—I have commanded my sanctified
ones. The pronoun “I” is emphatic—“I
myself” Not only will an extcrnal sum-
mons go forth, but God will lay his own
orders on them whom he chooses for his
instruments, and bid them come to the
muster. Al] who carry out his purposes are,
in a certain sense, “ sanctified ones” (comp.
Jer xxii. 7; li 27; Zeph. i. 7, ete.). Here
the Medes and Persians are specially in-
tended (see ver. 17). For mine anger; i.e.
“for the purpose of executing my anger.”
Even them that rejoice in my highness;
rather, my proudly eaxultant ones (Cheyne,
Rosenmiiller, Gesenius), Adschylus calls
the Persians brepkdumous (* Perse,’ 1. 827);
Herodotus, oBpirrds (i. 41). ‘The high spirits,
however, natural to gallant soldiers on going
out to war, rather than any special haughti-
ness or arrogancy, are intended.

Ver. 4.—The noise of a multitude in the
mountains. I do not know why Isaiah
should not have been “thinking of his
geography” (Cheyne). As soon as the
Greeks knew anything of the Persians, they
knew of them as a mountain people, and
attributed their valour and their hardy
habits to the physical character of their
country (Herod., ix. ad fin.), Jeremiah con-
nects the invading army which destroyed


Babylon with mountains, when he derives it
from Ararat (comp. Gen. viii. 4), Minni
(Armenia), and Ashchenaz (Jer. li. 27). At
any rate, the mention of “mountains”
here is very appropriate, both Media and
Persia being, in the main, mountainous
countries. A great people; or, much people
— not necessarily of one nation only. The
host of the battle; rather, a host of war;
i.e. a multitude of men, armed and prepared
for war.

Ver. 5.—They come from a far country
(comp. ch. xlvi.11). Both Media and Persia
were “ far countries ” to the Hebrews, Persia
especially. ‘There is no indication that they
knew of any countries more remote towards
the East. Hence the expression which fol-
lows, “ from the end of heaven ””—the heaven
being supposed to end where the earth ended.
Isaiah, like the other sacred writers, conforms
his language on cosmical subjects to the
opinions of his day. Even the Lord. With
a most effective anthropomorphism, Jehovah
is made to march with the army that he has
mustered (ver. 4) against the land that has
provoked his wrath—i.e. Babylonia. The
weapons (comp, ch. x. 15; Jer. 1. 25; li. 20).
To destroy the whole land. Many critics
would render ha-drets by “ the earth” here
It may be granted that the language of the
prophecy goes beyond the occasion in places
(especially vers. 11 and 13), and passes from
Babylon to that wicked world of which
Babylon is a type; but, where the context
permits, it seems better to restrict than to
expand the meaning of the words employed.

Ver. 6.—Howl ye; for the day of the Lord
is at hand (comp. Joel i. 15); literally, the
expression used in both passages is a day of
Jehovah. The idiom would not, however,
allow the use of the article, so that the phrase
is ambiguous. “The day of Jehovah” is
properly “that crisis in the history of the
world when Jehoval will interpose to rectify
the evils of the present, bringing joy and
glory to the humble believer, and misery
and shame to the proud and disobedient”
(Cheyne). But any great occasion when
God passes judgment on a nation is called in
Scripture “a day of the Lord.” “a coming of
Christ.” And so here the day of the judg-
ment upon Babylon seems to be intended.
It shall come as a destruction from the
Almighty. Isaiah is thougiit to quote from
Joel (i. 15) here; but perhaps both prophets
quoted from an earlier author. Shaddai
(equivalent to “ Almighty”) is an ancient
name of God, most rarely used by the pro-
phetical writers (only here, and in Ezek. i. 24;
x. 5; Joel i. 15), and never elsewhere by either
Isaiah or Joel. It has generally been said to
mean “the Strong One;” but recently the
theory has found favour that it meant origi-
nally “ the Sender of storms,” from the Arabie


CH. xm. 1—22. |


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


229


sh’dé—Jecit, effudit. However this may be,
the word is certainly used in the later times
mainly to express Gods power to visit and
punish, and the present passage might per-
haps be best translated, “It shall come as a
destruction from the Destroyer (k’shéd mish-
Shaddai yabo’).”

Ver. 7.—Therefore shall all hands be faint
(comp. Jer. 1. 43; Ezek. vii. 17; Zeph. iii.
16). There shall be a general inaction and
apathy. Recently discovered accounts of the
capture of Babylon by Cyrus show a great
want of activity and vigour on the part of
the defenders. Every man’s heart shall melt
(comp. Deut. xx. 8; Josh. ii. 11; v. 1, etc.).
The general inaction will spring from a
general despondency. This statement agrees
much better with the recently discovered
documents than does the statement of Hero-
dotus, that, safe within their walls, the
Babylonians despised their assailants, and
regarded themselves as perfectly secure.

Ver. 8.—They shall be afraid; rather, dis-
mayed. Pangs and sorrows shall take hold
of them; literally, they shall take hold of
pangs and sorrows. They shall be amazed;
rather, look aghast. Their faces shall be as
flames. I know no better explanation than
that of Dr. Kay, that a sudden transition is
intended from despondency to extreme ex-
citement.

Ver. 9.—The day of the Lord (see the com-
ment on ver. 6). Cruel; i.e. severe and painful,
not really “cruel.” To lay the land desolate.
As in ver. 5, so here, many would translite
hd-drets by “the earth,” and understand a
desolation extending far beyond Babylonia.
But this is not necessary. :

Ver. 10.—The stars of heaven... shall
not give their light. Nature sympathizes
with her Lord. When he is angry, the light
of the heavens grows dark. So it was at the
crucifixion of Christ (Matt. xxvii. 45); so it
will be at the end of the world (Matt. xxiv.
29). So it is often, if not always, at the
time of great judgments. The constellations;
literally, the Orions. Kesil, the Fool, was
the Hebrew name of the constellation of
Orion, who was identified with Nimrod, the
type of that impious folly which contends
against God. From its application to this
particular group of stars (Job ix. 9; xxxviil.
31; Amos v. 8), the word came to be applied
to constellations in general. The Baby-
lonians very early marked out the sky into
constellations.

Ver. 11.—I will punish the world for their
evil. Here the prophcey certainly goes be-
yond the destruction of Babylon, and becomes
a general warning to the wicked of all coun-
tries. Each country is to feel that its turn
will come. Punishment will fall especially
on the unjust, the proud, and the haughty
(comp. ch. i. 28; ii. 11—17, etc.).


Ver. 12.—I will make a man more precious
than fine gold (comp. ch. iv.1). Population
shall be so diminished that man shall be the
most highly esteemed of commodities. The
more scanty the supply of a thing, the greater
its value. The golden wedge of Ophir; rather,
pure gold of Ophir. Ophir is mentioned as
a gold-region in 1 Kings ix. 28; x. 11; xxii
48; 1 Chron. xxix. 4; 2 Chron. viii. 18; ix.
10; Job xxii. 24; xxviii. 16; Ps. xlv. 9,
Its locality is uncertain. Gold of Ophir ap-
pears to have been considered especially
pure.

Ver. 138.—I will shake the heavens (comp.
Joel iii. 16; Hag. ii. 7; Matt. xxiv. 29). In
general, this sign is mentioned in connection
with the end of the world, when a “new
heaven and a new earth” are to supersede
the old (ch. lxv. 17; Ixvi. 22; Rev. xxi. 1).
Isaiah may, perhaps, pass here from signs
connected with the fall of Babylon to those
which will announce the last day — each
“day of the Lord” being, as already ob-
served, a type of the final and great day (see
the comment on ver. 6). Or, possibly, the
allusion may be to some “shaking ” by God
of a supra-mundane kingdom as preliminary
to his passing judgment on Babylon (so Dr.
Kay; comp. ch. xxiv. 21).

Ver. 14.—It shall be as the chased roe.
When the visitation comes on Babylon, there
shall be a loosening of all ties between her
and the subject nations. Her armies shall
disband themselves, the pressed soldiers
from foreign countries deserting, and hasten-
ing with all speed to their several homes.
A flight of the foreign traders and visitors
may also be glanced at. As a sheep that no
man taketh up; rather, as sheep with none to
guther them,

Ver. 15.—Every one that is found...
every one that is joined unto them; ée. all
the population, both native and foreign.

Ver. 16.—Their children also shall be
dashed to pieces. In the barbarous warfare
of the time, even children were not spared
(see Ps. cxxxvii. 9; Nah. iii. 10; Hos. xiii,
16). When a town was taken by assault,
they were ruthlessly slaugiitered. When
spared, it was only to be dragged off as
captives, and to become the slaves of their
captors in a foreign land. Assyrian sculp-
tures often illustrate this latter practice,
Their wives ravished (comp. Lam. vy. 11;
Zech. xiv. 2).

Ver. 17.—Behold, I will stir up the Medes
against them. Isaiah’s knowledge that the
Medes should take a leading part in the
destruction of Babylon is, no doubt, as sur-
prising a fact as almost any other in the
entire range of prophetic foresight, or in-
sight, as set before us in Scripture, The
Medes were known to Moses as an ancient
nation cf some importance (Gen. x. 2); but


230


THE BOUK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH,


(cH. xin, 1—22


Sia nn es eee eI ee


since his time had been unmentioned by any
sacred writer; and, as a living nation, had
only just come within the range of Israelite
vision, by the fact that, when Sargon de-
ported the Samaritans from Samaria, he
laced some of them ‘tin the cities of the
Medes ” (2 Kings xvii. 6). The Assyrians
had become acquainted with them some-
what more than a century earlier, and
had made fr quent incursions into their
country, finding them a weak and divided
people, under the government of a large
number of petty chiefs. Sargon had con-
quercd a portion of the tribes, and placed
prefects in the cities; at the same time
planting colonists in them from other parts
of the empire. That, when the weakness of
Media was being thus made apparent, Isaiah
should have foreseen its coming greatness
ean only be accounted for by his having re-
ceived a Divine communication on the sub-
ject. Subsequently, he had a still more
exact and complete communication (ch. xxi.
2). Which shall not regard silver, The
Medes were not a particularly disinterested
people; but in the attuck on Babylon, made
by Cyrus, the object was not p.under, but
conygucst and the extension of dominion.
The main treasures of BabyJon—those in
the great temple of Belus—were not carried
otf by Cyrus, us appears both from bis own
inscriptions, aud from Herodotus (i. 1831—
183,
18.—Their bows (comp. Jer. 1. 9,
14) Both the Medes anil the Persians were
skilied archers. Herodotus tells us that
every Persian youth was taught three things
— to ride, to draw the bow, und to speak the
truth” (i. 136). At Persepolis, Medcs and
Persians are alike represented as carrying
bowtr and quivers. Alschylus regards the
contest between the Persians and the Greeks
as one between the arrow and the spear
(‘ Perse,’ Il. 135, 136).

Ver 19.—Babylon, the glory of kingdoms.
Yhe “glory” of Babylon consisted: 1. In
tes antiquity. She had been the head of a
gicat empire long before Ass\ria rose to
pewer. 2%. In her origination of literature,
architecture, and the other arts, which all
passed from her to Assyria, and thence to
the other nations of Asia. 3. In her mag-
nificence and the magnificence of her kines,
which provoked the admiration of the As-
syrians themselves (‘ Records of the Past,”
vol. ix. p. 15). As time went on, she grew
in wealth and splenduur. Perhaps it was
granted to Isaiah to see her in ecstatic vision,
not merely such as she was in the. time of
Sargon under Meroduch-Baladan, but such
as she became under Nebuchadnezzar, tle
greatest of her kings, who raised her to
the highest pitch of glory and eminence.
The beauty of the Chaldees’ excellency. The


Kaldi appear to have been originally one of
the many tribes by which Babylonia was
peopled at an early date. From the ex-
pression, “ Ur of the Chaldees,” which occurs
more than once in Genesis (xi. 28, 31), we
may gather that they were inhabitants of
the more southern part of the ccuntry, near
the coast. The same conclusion may be
drawn from the Assyrian inscriptions, espe-
cially those of Shalmaneser I1.—the Black
Obelisk king. The term never became a
general name for the Babylonian people
among themselves or among the Assyrians;
but, somehow or other, it was accepted in
that sense by the Jews, and is so used, not
only by Isaiah, but also by the writers of
Kings and Chronicles, by Jeremiah, Ezekiel,
Danicl, and Habakkuk. As when God over-
threw Sodom. Equally sudden aud complete
as that destruction.

Ver. 20.—It shall never be inhabited.
This part of the prophecy did not receive
its fulfilment till many centuries had gone
by. From the time of Cyrus to that of
Alexander the Great, Babylon was one of
the chief cities of the Persian empire.
Alexander was so struck with it, and with
the excellence of its situation, that he de-
sizned to make it his capital. It tirst began
seriously to decline under the Seleucida,
who built Seleucia on the Tigris as a rival
to it, and still further injured it by fixing
the seat of government at Antioc:. But it had
still a large population in the first century
after our era (Josephus, ‘ Ant. Jud.,’ xviii
9, § 8); and is mentioned as a place of some
consequence in the time of Trajan (Dio
Cass., Ixviii. 27), and even in that of Seve-
rus (Dio Cass., Ixxy. 9). But after this it
went rapidly to decay. Under the Sas-
sanians it disappears from sight; and when
Beujamin of Tudela, in the twelfth century,
visited the spot, there was nothing to be
seen of the mighty city but those ruins of
the Kasr, or palace, which still arrest the
traveller’s attention. The site had become,
and has ever since remained, “ without in-
habitant.” Neither shall the Arabian pitch
tent there. A superstitious feeling prevents
the Arabs from encamping on the mounds
of Babylon, which are believed to be the
haunts of evil spirits (Rich, ‘First Memoir
on Babylon,’ p. 67; Ker Porter, * Travels,’
vol, ii. p. 371). Neither shall the shepherds
make their fold there. The nitrous soil of
the Babylonian mounds allows them to pro-
duce nothing but the coarsest and most
unpalatable vegetation. The shepherds con-
sequently do not feed their flocks on them,

Ver. 21.—Wild beasts of the desert shall
lie there. It is not quite clear what par-
ticular wild beasts are intended. Those
actually noted on the site of Babylon are
lions, jackals, and porcupines. These some-


CH. XI, 1—22.]


TUK BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


231


times make their lairs in the ruins (Rich,
* First Memoir,’ p. 69; Ker Porter, ‘Travels,’
vol. ii. p. 342). Doleful creatures; in the
original, ékhim. What animal is meant we
cannot say, as the word occurs only in this
passage. Mr. Cheyne translates it by
“hyenas.” Owls shall dwell there; literally,
daughters of the owl (asin Lev. xi. 16; Deut.
xiv. 15; Job xxx. 29; Jer.1.39; Micahi. 8;
and infra, ch. xxxiv. 13; xliii. 20). Mr.
Rich says, “In most of the cavities of the
Babil Mound there are numbers of owls and
bats.” Sir A. Layard, “A large grey owl
is found in great numbers, fiequently in
flocks of nearly a hundred, in the low shrubs
among the ruins of Babylon” (‘ Nin. and
Bab.,’ p. 484, note). Satyrs shall dance there.
The word translated “satyr ” is, etymologi-
cally, “ hairy one,” and ordinarily means “a
goat.” Some have supposed “wild goats”
to be here intended, but they are not found


defended by many, who think Isaiah might
draw upon current beliefs for some features
of his description. Dr. Kay gives ‘“ baboons,”
since the Moko—a kind of baboon—is known
in Babylonia.

Ver. 22.—Wild beasts of the islands. In
the Hebrew, tyyim, which means “ wailers”
or “ howlers,” probably “ jackals.” The Re-
vised Version gives “wolves.” In their
desolate houses; or, én their castles (Cheyne),
And dragons; i.e. “serpents.”” These have
not been observed recently; but one of our
old travellers notes that ‘the lande of Baby-
lone,” in his day, “ wis fulle of drayons and
grete serpentes, and dyverse other veney-
mouse bestes alle abouten” (Mandeville,
quoted by Ker Porter, ‘ Travels,’ vol. ii. p.
336). Near to come. About one hundred and
eighty years elapsed between the utterance
of this prophecy and the fall of Babylon—a
short period in the lifetime of a nation.


in Babylonia. The translation “satyr” is


HOMILETICS.


Vers. 1—18.— The fall of Pabylon a type of the general punishment of the wicked.
Scripture deals with history altogether in the way of example. Whether the subject
be Assyria, or Syria, or Egypt, or Babylon, or even the “ peculiar people o! God,” the
object is to teach men by the facts adduced what they have to expect themselves.
In ch. x. Assyria, here Babylon, is held up as a warning to sinners. The absolute
certainty that punishment will overtake them at God’s hands is the main lesson
taught ; but, beyond this, something is also taught concerning the method and (so
to speak) economy of the Divine punishments; as, for example, the following :—

I. THAT GoD PUNISHES BY MEANS OF INSTRUMENTS, WHICH ARE GENERALLY PERSONS.
God has two sets of instruments—natural agents, such as storm, lightning, blight,
pestileuce, etc.; and intellectual and moral agents, or persons, It depends entirely on
his own will whether he will employ a:,ents of the one kind or of the other. In dis-
pensing good to mau he employs largely natural agents, “ making his sun to rise on
the evil and on the good, and sending rain on the just and on the unjust” (Matt. v. 45).
But in punishing men he seems to make use, to a greater extent, of persons, Now
he raises up a tyrannical and oppressive king, like Rameses II. or Nebuchadnezzar, to
carry out his sentence of suffering; now he allows a democratic assembly to establish
a reivn of terror in a sinful land; anon he uses the arrows of savave hordes, or the
guns and bayonets of disciplined hosts, to chastise an offending people. Ouce only
has he ever used his power to strike with sudden death on a large scale, and even
there he employed a spiritnal agent; it was “the angel of the Lord,” who “ went out
and smote in the camp of the Assyrians one hundred and fourscore and five thousand ”
(2 Kings xix. 35).

Il. ‘HAT THE INSTRUMENTS ARE FOR THE MOST PART QUITE UNCONSCIOUS THAT
Gop 1s usine THEM. We are told this distinctly of Assyria. “I will vive him a
charge . . . howbeit he meaneth not so, neither doth his heart think so” (ch. x. 6, 1).
And it was, no doubt, equally true of Babylon. The “ hammer of the whole earth
(Jer. 1. 23) did not know that she was being used to “ break in pieces the nations, and
to destroy kingdoms” (Jer. li. 20). She too “ meant not so,” but was only seeking
her own aggraudizement. Even the Medes and the Persiaus, though “called from a
far country to execute God’s counsel ” (ch. xlvii. 11), were unconscious of their call—
blind instruments in the hand of Jehovah, as much as if they had been an army of
locusts. But this only shows the power of God the more, who can make not only
good men serve him, but bad ; not only angels, but devils,

UL Tuar Gop’s PUNISHMENTS COME SUDDENLY AND FAKE MEN BY SURPRISE,


232 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.  [cu. xm 1—22
ee eS ee ee


Neither Assyria nor Babylon had much warning of their fate. Each seemed well-nigh
at the zenith of its power when the final blow came. “I have laid a snare for thee, and
thou art also taken, O Babylon,” says Jehovah, “and thou wast not aware” (Jer. 1. 24);
and again we are told, “ Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed” (Jer. li. 8). God’s
punishments are apt to come, even on individuals, suddenly. When a man says to his
soul, “ Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink,
and be merry,” then comes the sentence of God, “Thou fool, this niyht thy soul shall
be required of thee ” (Luke xii. 19, 20). Job’s example is an extreme one (Job i. 13—19);
Yut modified instances of men crushed by quick blows of unexpected calamity are
within every one’s experience. Destruction comes upon God’s enemies generally “ at
unawares” (1's. sxvv 8).

IV. THAT ON FiNuis) THEMSELVES THE OBJECTS OF DIVINE PUNISHMENT, MEN ARE
FILLED WITH TERROR AND DESPONDENCY. ‘The terror and despondency of the Baby-
lonians are strongly marked in the descriptions both of Isaiah and Jeremiah; e.g.
“ Therefore shall all hands be faint, and every man’s heart shall melt: and they shall
be afraid: pangs and sorrow shall take hold of them; they shall be in pain as a woman
that travaileth: they shall be amazed one at another” (ch. xiii. 7,8). “The land shall
tremble and sorrow. . . The mighty men of Babylon have forborne to fight; they have
remained in their holds . . . they became as women ” (Jer. li. 29, 30). Some such
feelings come upon all who are conscious that the hand of God is laid upon them, not for
chastise: ent, but for punishment.

V. THat DIvINE PUNISHMENTS SELDOM STOP AT THEIR IMMEDIATE OBJECTS, BUT
PASS ON AND AFFECT OTHERS ALSO. Partly, this would seem to be inevitable from
the interconnection of man with man, and of nation with nation; but partly, also, it
appears to be the result of the Divine will, which is set on punishing sin, and wherever
it finds sin must punish it. Let Israel have to be punished for certain sins, Judah
will be found to have committed the same sins; Judah must therefore participate in
the punishment. When God arises to judge one nation, he, in a certain sense, arises to
judge the whole earth; there must be equity in his dealings. If he has punished
Babylonia, and Egypt is as bad, he must punish Egypt; if Egypt is no worse than
Ethiopia, he must punish Ethiopia. ‘The sin of Sodom brought destruction on all the
cities of the plain—that of the Canaanitish nations on them, and on many of their
neighbours. A Jehoram provokes God by his idolatry, and is deservedly smitten
(2 Kings ix. 24). An Ahaziah, far less guilty, but still guilty, shares his fate (2 Kings
ix. 27). The punishment of Babylon led on to the punishment of the “ world for its
evil” (ch, xiii. 11), and to such a general depopulation of Western Asia as made a man
more precious tian the gold of Ophir (ch. xiii. 12),

VI. THar Divine PUNISHMENTS ARE OFTEN COMPLETE AND FINAL. It was said of
Assyria, “There is no healing of thy bruise” (Nah. iii. 19). And a similar finality
attaches to most judgments upon nations. Babylonia, though she made some desperate
efforts to throw off the Persian yoke, never recovered herself. Egypt, a few years later,
sank finally under foreign dominion. The ten tribes lost their separate existence after
their captivity, and became merged in Judah, Judah’s nationality was obliterated by
Titus, ‘The history of the world is a history of nations whom God has punished for
their sins by final destruction. And the punishment of individuals, too, is often final.
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram “ went down quick into hell” (Numb. xvi. 30). Uzzah
was smitten with sudden death for touching the ark (2 Sam. vi. 7). Ananias and
Sapphira tell dead for uttering lies (Acts v. 5, 10). The question of punishments im
another world is not here at issue. What the example of Babylon teaches is, that God’s
punishments, so far as this world is concerned, are oiten final.


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1—22.— Oracle concerning Babylon. I. APPROACH OF THE WARRIORS OF
Jenovan. On the bare mountain the banner is upraised, and with loud cry and com-
mai.ding gesture of the hand a host of warriors is summoned from all sides. As in
ver. 26, Jehovah is viewee by the poet as a mighty Battle-Leader, Lord of hosts. His
voice is heard, “ I have given commission to my anointed ones, have called my heroes


OH, XIIL, 1—22,] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 233


—_—_—_-eererr i


for my work of punishment, my proudly rejoicing ones!” And then a noise is heard
in the mountains as of a great multitude, for Jehovah is mustering his forces from the
remotest parts, and preparing with the weapons of his wrath to destroy the earth.
A cry of terror will be heard through the land; men’s hands will droop, their hearts
will melt, for the day of judgment is near. Horror will be depicted on every face.
The lizhtning, the fire that burns up the stubble (Joel ii. 6), will be flashed back, as it
seems, from the amazed eyes. In prophetic thought every great epoch of calamity and
ruin is a judgment, a “day of Jehovah.” For wrath and clemency are the two opposite
sides of the unity of his being and character. No spring-time is ushered in without
storms; no epoch of fruitful manhood is gained without struggles, within or without ;
no mischief departs from society, no false power is overthrown, without violence. Well
for us if, stayed by religious faith, we can see the day of Jehovah shown amidst the
darkest times, and when nations are perplexed with fear of change to be able to say,
“The Lord reizneth.” If he is a living God, then his will must be felt in political
change. Nothing good can pass away; only falsehood must be overthrown.

If, Toe pay or JEHovAH. Its description is borrowed: 1. From the most fearful
phenomena of nature. The stars are hidden, the sunrise is overclouded, the light of the
moon is withdrawn. A universal trembling seems to fill the air, while the earth would
bound from its place. So close is the sympathy of the human spirit with nature, its
dark or bright aspects seem to be the aspect of the God of nature in wrath or.in kind-
ness toman. 2. From the most fearful scenes of war. Ina few bold lines the picture
is struck out. Fugitives are seen flying in every direction, like frightened gazelles, or
like a flock of sheep without its shepherd. Those overtaken are pierced by the spear,
or struck down by the sword. Children at the breast are dashed to pieces, houses
plundered, women outraged. More horrible is the spectacle of a battle-field than that
of Nature inher wildsst-uprosr, It is the opening of the hellin the heart_of man.
8. Its moral purpose defined. There is, then, some light to be found even here. The
God of justice and hiliness is “searching home for evil on the face of the earth, and for
the guilt of the unrighteous,”


“Ever and anon some bricht white shaft
Burned thro’ the pine-tree roof—here burned and there,
As if God’s messenger thro’ the close wood screen
Plunged and replunged his weapon at a venture,
Feeling for guilty thee and me.”


The thought that God holds inquisition for evil and evil-doers is deeply stamped in
Bible lore. There are heresies which he cannot and will not tolerate. They are not
identical with what some call heresies. These are often departures from owr tashions of
life and of thought; but it is only disagreement with him and his law of inward right
that is the condemnable dissent. Again, it is his object to bring down the pride and
arrogance of the hanghty. How deeply marked, again, is this thought of overstepping
our proper limits as the essence of sin, from the Fall onwards! It is fixed in the word
“transgression.” The “lust to seem the thing we are not” is at the root of display, of
ambition, of domineering over others. The prophets saw in the bloated dominion of
great states like Egypt and Assyria the effects of these unbalanced lusts, which must
sooner or laier topple the tyrants into ruin. And thus the purpose of judgment resolves
itself into that of sifting mankind—to make the people “rarer than fine gold, and men
than Ophir’s treasures.” When ill weeds are cleared away, there is a chance for good
plants to flourish ; and when a mass of human evil has disappeared, room is made for
something of another quality, to renew the tradition of the Divine in man,

III. Tae FinaL Devastation. (Vers. 17—22.) Here is a picture of the Medes—
a horde of savages, who despise civilization, and who will pour in upon Babylon, as in
later days Attila came with his hosts to tread on the necks of the Romans. ‘The dread
memory of the cities of the plain can alone furnish a paralle) to what will be seen on
the site of Babylon. Where now the sounds of luxury and mirth are heard in proud
palaces, soon not a nomad tent will be pitched, nor a shepherd’s fold; but only the cries
of wild creatures will be heard, and satyrs hold their obscene dances, This magnificent
picture of the overthrow of human greatness and pride springs, let us observe, from
conscience. And none can study such pictures or visit the ruins of ancient cities


234 THE BOOK OF THE PROPULT ISAIAH. [ow. x11. 1—22.


nee EEE Ean UEESEInEEESSIESSS SS SUSSnE SS RSE


without a quickening of the pulse of conscience. Such glimpses as we can gain of
ancient life in those proud cities of the Orient bear out the views of the prophet. It
was a life which overpassed life’s restrictions, and which ended in death. Mournful is
the inscription on Sardanapalus’s tomb, “ Let us eat, drink, aud love; for the rest is of
little worth.” We may learn the lesson that, when men so speak of life, they have
abused it; and while we believe that there is a sacredness in human life and in the
grand products of human life, this is only soas long as they reflect the purposes of God.
Out of such scenes as those the prophet depicts, a solemn voice seems to speak,
declaring that human life and glory are held cheap in comparison with those profound
and, from us, half-hidden, half-evealed ends towards which the whole creation
moves.—J.


Ver. 7.—Mental depression. “Faint.” A common experience enough this. Some
people pride themselves on the speciality of their experiences, just as they consider their
physical ailments to be altogether peculiar and unique. Faint! Who amongst us does
not understand that? Why, we do not know. Care is like the atmosphere; its
pressure is enormous, but the thing itself is invisible. ‘“ Light as air,” some say ; but
many temperaments could say, “ heavy as air,” which depresses all the nerve-functions
of the body. Faint! We like to know not only that it is common, but that greatly
hercic spiritual natures have felt it! Read at your leisure Luther’s letter where he says
of the evil one, “He lies closer to me than my Catharine,” and where in one part
of his diary he is so desolate and disheartened that he suggests, if Gud wishes the
Reformation to go on, he must come and take it in hand himself. Faint! If busy
men feel it, women feel it sometimes nore—thinking about the children; having the
worry of household management; finding it so dificult to preserve elevation of thought
amid the cares of common life.

l. We ARE FAINT IN OUR FAILURES TO REACH OUR OWN IDEAL OF THE DIVINE
Lirsk. Our ideals have been beautiful. They have charmed our meditation, inspired
our purposes. I am not speaking of spiritual excitements or emotions. No, my friend!
Rather quiet and meditative hours. When we verily aud indeed feel that piety is more
than safety, when we feel that we woul not do without religion if we could, we are ful-
filling all the noblest aspirations within us. And these have been noble. In gazing on
the image of Christ we have desire to be conformed to that image. But our condition
here, you say, is one in which we have to do with such mean things—it is sich a battle
to live at all! Mean things? No, my friend. Nothing is mean that Christ can shine
through. We can dignify common life, or God would not have given us common life
to dignify. Christian life is beautiful, but it is difficult. It is detail that casts down
men and women too. When we read Stanley’s last journey through the dark continent,
we find a week’s desolation is crowded into ten lines of print; but it must have been
very wearisome sometimes, and now and then all seemed nearly over. Yet the motto
was “Onward!” You may have an idea or two—but try and write a book. It is
completeness that tries. You may have looked at the Christian life with esthetic
admiration. But now you are in it. God help you, as he will. Be diligent. Gird up
the loins of your mind. Be sober. Hope to the end. The ideal shall be realized some
day. Not destroyed. Yow will be without fault before the throne.

I], We ARE FAINT IN RELATION TO THE MORAL STATE OF THE WORLD. Jesus
wept over Jerusalem as he gazed on the city that was doomed, for its own denial and
rejection of himself. We are not one whit nearer solving the mystery of moral evil.
No one can give us the why of sin. Some of the Germans have tried hard at a philo-
sophy of that, but have failed. It cannot be educational only, or we should never have
the sense of guilt. But here it is, and we have it tz ourselves. Even now sin exists,
if it does not reign, And here it is around us everywhere. We have a mighty Saviour,
and we want men to love him, to trust him, But they are often so besotted, so blinded,
so hardened, that they prefer their slavery. What wonder we are faint-hearted! You
tell us that Christ is the same in heaven that he was on earth—the same in all sensitive
care and love and desire. Yes. And I believe that the world’s sin grieves him still—
pains him always. “ Ye crucify the Son of God afresh” is not to be frittered away as
amere metaphor! What did Christ say after his ascension to the persecuting Saul?
“ Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?” Not “My Chwch” merely. The Head felt


«


@H. x11. 1—22.]} THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 235


———


with the members. Faint! I spoke of great men just now. Did not Moses shatter
the tables of the Law in sad and bitter disappointment ? Did not Paul tind fickleness
in his converts? Did not the Judaizers hamper his work? Did not some of his com-
panions desert him? Was not sin still mighty within him, as well as around him ?
But Christ, the Conqueror of sin and death, was his Lord. The Holy Ghost gave him
inner might.

IIL. Faint IN RELATION TO THE DISCIPLINE OF sorROw. We need it. But “no
affliction for the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous.” Faint! You may have
left one at home who used to come and drink of the brook by the way at church, who is
frail and ill now. You remember some who have had a dire discipline of trial through
kith and kin, who have cast the crown of honour into the dust. You would not
think much of them if they had not been cast down. Superficial people who say,
“ Make an effort!” “Cheer up!” only worry the nerves; they do not really ease trouble,
because we cannot be “merry ” with a heavy heart. You niust lift up with a wise
hope, a real trust, a child’s confidence. “Show us the Father,” then we ca endure;
then we can “rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him.” But you say, “ Faintness
depresses us” Mind what you say, because you reveal character. It is just like
saying, “‘ Music must always be made for me; I won’t be made sad; I won’t enter an
atmosphere of depression.” Human hearts cannot always smile. Faint people must be
in a world like :his, but it will be only for a season; it will lead them to him whw can
raise up, who wiil lay beneath them his own everlasting arms, who will “ not destroy.”
Never. ‘“Chastened, but not destroyed ”—tested, but not destroyed. At such times do
not rest in “moods” or feelings, but look out of yourselves to Christ.

IV. We ARE FAINT IN RELATION TO OUR INFLUENCE OVER OTHERS. We had hoped
so much to send such bright rays over the dark sea from the lighthouse of our faith;
to give the emerald beauty of a new spring to so many sterile places. We have not
been such guides, such comforters, as we hoped to be. And the fault has been, not in
lack of doing, but in want of being. To live has not been Christ. We have not been
watchful enough either, against inimical forces in our fields. The Red Indians come
when we are asleep or on a journey, and stamp out our corn. Weare “ faint” too because
arrest will so soon be laid on our powers. But is it not right to rejoice that we have been
able to do some good? Certainly. We have been unprofitable servants at the best,
but it would be not only unreal, but wrong, to forget what God may have accomplished
through us. Paul said, “ Now thanks be unto God, which alway causeth us to triumph
in Christ.” We are uot as the men of this world, cast down into the loxs of joy and
hope—and in despair. No, it is only for a season. We are Christ’s, ‘“ Weeping may
endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning.” —W. M. 8.


Ver. 1.— The burden of the Lord. ‘The burden of Babylon” (see ch. xv.1; xvii. 1;
xix. 1, etc.). The use of the word “ burden,” to signify a message and its subsequent
expansion into the phrase “the burden of the Lord” (see Jer. xxiii. 33), sugyest
to us—

I. THAT TO ALL MEN EVERYWHERE BELONGS THE SACRED DUTY OF CARRYING THE
mMessaGes oF Gop. ‘The term here used may simply signify this—the bearing of the
Wore of God to those for whom it was intended. This is a work which belongs to
every filial son, to every faithful servant. Possessed of it oursvlves, and experiencing
its exceeding precicusness, we are to convey it to all who are in necd of it. We
can all carry to the souls of men “the will of God concerning them in Christ
Jesus,” his Divine desire that they should turn from all iniquity, should believe in his
Son, their Saviour and Lord, and should follow him in every path of purity, integrity,
love.

IL THAT ON SOME MEN THERE SOMETIMES DEVOLVES THE PAINFUL DUTY OF DELIVER-
ING BURDENSOME MESSAGES FROM Gop. ‘Ihis was notably the case with the Hebrew
prophets. “‘I'hey were frequently commissioned to convey unpleasant, unpalatable truths
to men and nations, such as few cared to announce and none liked to receive; e.g. the
message of Moses to Pharaoh, of Nathan to Davia, and of Elijah to Ahab; such, aiso,
as these *“ burdens” to Babylon, Moab, Egypt. The faithful parent, teacher, minister,
has often a message to make known which is a burden in this sense; it is that which
is likely to weigh heavy on the heart of him that receives it; it is (1) the condem-


236 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cH. x1m. 1—22Z


vation by the Righteous One of some form of sin and wrong; (2) it is the purpose of
him who is the ‘True One to visit persistent folly and impenitence with the marks of his
Divine displeasure both in the body and in the spirit, both here and hereafter.

LI]. THAT ON THOSE IN WHOM I8 THE SPIRIT OF CHRIST, SACRED TRUTH RESTS AS
A BURDEN, from which they can only be delivered by fa:thiul utterance. So was it with
the Saviour himself (Luke xii, 50); and so with the prophets (Ps. xxxix. 3; Job
xxxii. 18; Jer. xx. 9); and so with the apostles (1 Cor. ix. 16). So should it be with
us. We ought tu feel burdened with a sense of the sin and sorrow of the world, together
with the fact that we have in our minds the knowledge of those truths which are
divinely suited to destroy that sin and to disperse that sorrow. This is “the burden
of the Lord,” resting on the man in whom is much of the Spirit of Christ—a burden
which will only be lifted from him when he has spoken his must earnest word and done
his most devoted work, to teach, to heal, to save.-—C.


Vers. 2—5.—The kingdom of God. These stirring, eloquent words of the prophet
describing the gathering of the hosts at the summons of Jehovah speak to us of—

I] THE EXCEEDING BREADTH OF THE Divine cLaIM. All things, all nations, are
Jehovah’s; all these hosts that are to be gathered together are “ my sanctifiea ones; ”
they are “my mighty ones.” They did not know him, but, notwithstanding, God
claims them as belonging to himself. He does claim all nations and peoples as his own ;
not only those who own their allegiance, but those also who are ignorant of his Name,
and are worshippers at other shrines.

ll. HE COMPREHENSIVENESS OF THE DIVINE PURPOSE. God has his purposes (1)
recarding the various nations of the earth. He had a certain work for his own people,
Isracl, to accomplish. But his “ wise designs” covered a far wider area than any Holy
Land; they embraced Syria, Assyria, Babylonia, Media, Persia, gypt, Rome, Greece,
etc He arranged for them a part to play in his great redemptive scheme. But though
this large aspect is a trae one, and Isaiah, in prophetic vision, heard the “noise of a
multitude... like as of a great people,... a noise of the kingdoms of nations
gathered together,” coming “from a far country,” yet is it equally true, and it is a
truth of at least equal value, that God has his purposes (2) respecting each humble
dividual life. The Christian minister has the right, without special vision, to declare
to every man that God has a purpose to be fulfilled in his particular life, and that he
is ma shalling events and mustering “ forces” in order that it may be ca:med out. It
ought to raise our estimate of the sacredness and value of the life God has given us to
live on the earth when we remember that “every man’s life is a plan of God,” and
that by it he desires and designs to accomplish some especial end.

Ill ‘Tne @ReaTNEss OF Divine powER. 1. We understand that God has unlimited
power over unresisting, inert matter. 2. We have a larger view of his omnipotence
when we realize that he controls all sentient life, making every living creature to praise
and serve him, 3. Our thought rises far higher as we consider how he is directing the
activities of his obedient children, his voluntary servants, in all worlds. 4. We reach
the largest and loftiest conception of Divine wisdom and power, in marvellous co-
operation, when we dwell on his overruling energy. Jehovah so turns the selfish and
ungodly projects of kings and armics to his own Divine account, that he can speak of
Meder and Persians as “his sanctified ones,” or as those set apart by him for this
especial work; that he can represent them as “rejoicing in his highness” when they
were eageriy bent on their own purposes; that he can designate them “ the weapons of
his indignation.” (1) We little think how, under Divine interposition, we are contri-
buting to one cause when we are absorbed in another. (2) How immeasurably
preferable is the service which is voluntary and conscious to that which is involuntary
and unco: scious! It is only the former which gives pleasure to the Supreme, and
which wili secure approval and reward for the human worker.—O,


Ver. 6.—“ The day of the Lord.” We may trulv speak of every day as a “day of the
Lord.” For when docs tie morning come on which we cannot say, “This is the day
which the Lord has made” (Ps. exviii. 24)? Every day brings with it fresh tokens of
his presence, uew provfs of his power. The refreshment and invigoration of sleep, the
provisions of the table, the eu joyment of the hearth, the activities of outward life, the


oH. x1. 1—-22,.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 237


continuance of mental power, etc.,—do not all these daily mercies make each returning
portion of our time a “day of the Lord”? But there is a peculiar sense in which the
time of special visitation is to be so regarded. For that is the day on which—

I. GoD REVEALS HIS NEARNESS TO US AND HIS INTEREST IN Us. We are in danger
of imagining that God has withdrawn into a remote solitude, in which he takes no
heed ot the passing events of his outlying creation; that he is too great and high to
concern himself with our “ poor affairs.” It is a conception unworthy of him and most
injurious to us. When God “arises to judgment,” so that it is as if all visible nature
were disturbed and disordered (vers. 10, 13), and the hearts of men are filled with
consternation (vers. 7,8), ‘‘in the day of his fierce anger” (ver. 13), these false imagin-
ings are scattered, and God is found and is felt to be a God at hand and not afar off—
a God who has much to do with us, and with whom we have everything to do
(Heb. iv. 13).

II, GoD REVEALS HIS RIGHTEOUSNESS To Us. Such events as these (vers. 9—11) are
“terrible thinvs in riyhteousness.” ‘the anger or “wrath” of the Lord (vers. 9, 18)
is thus revealed “against all anrighteousness” (Rom. i. 18). God is “destroying the
sinners” (ver. ¥) in order that he may set his seal against the sin which they have
committed ; he is humbling the proud that their “ arrogancy may cease” (ver. 11), and
that human hanghtiness may receive his powerful condemnation. In such a “day” as
this, the Lord is making his thought concerning iniquity very clear to the children of
men.

II]. Gop MANIFESTS HIS POWER To Us. Sin is apt to think itself triumphant; it is
arrogant, hauchty (ver. 11); it says, “‘ Who is the Lord ?” etc. (Exod. v. 2); it says,
“ How does God know ?” (Ps. Ixxiii. 11); it says, “ Let us break asander the bands of
the Lord” (Vs. ii. 8). In “the day of the Lord,” the nation, the confederacy, the
individual man, sees that human bands are nothing but thinnest thread in the hands
of almighty power. Then man kuows his nothingness in the presence of his Maker;
his spirit is subdued (ver. 8), and he acknowledges that God is greater than he
(Dan, vi. 26).

IV, GoD ATTESTS HIS FAITHFULNESS AND HIS GOODNESS. God has given many
promises to his people that he will appear some day on their behalf. Often his coming
seems to be long delayed (Rev. vi. 10). But “in the day of the Lord” this his Divine
word is redeemed; then the enslaved nation is freed from its bondage; then the per-
secuted Church is delivered from its oppressor ; then the wronged family or the injured
man is saved from the wrong-doer, and walks in peace and in prosperity. Hence the
many utterances of thanksgiving for the “judgments” of the Lord. The outpouring
of his wrath, which seems “ cruel” (ver. 9) to the guilty, shows itself to his suffering
people as the long-awaited proof of his fidelity to his word and pity for his people. 1.
Let the afflicted wait in hope; their cause will be espoused, their prayers heard and
answered, 2. Let the guilty tremble; the day of the Lord will come, a day of dark-
ness and confusion, a day o! terror and overthrow for them; even when they may be
most confident of continuance in power and sin, the coming of God in judgment may
be “at hand.”—C.


Ver. 12.— The price of a man.’ The aim of the prophet is to show the extent of the
disaster which, in the indignation of God (ver. 5), should overtake the guilty city. One
feature of the ruin should be wholesale slaughter (ver. 15), And the result of this
would be a terrible reduction of the male population. Men, usually so prevalent, so
“cheap” in Babylon, should become scarce and precious; so precious should they be
that it might be said, speaking figuratively, that a man would be more precious than
gold, even than “the golden wedge of Ophir.” What might thus be affirmed of man,
in figurative language, in the day of God’s wrath, shall become true of man, in simple
fact and truth, in the day of Divine grace. Under Christ the day will come when the
worth of a man shall be felt to be wholly irreducible to terms of gold and silver; that
“no mention shall be made of pearls” when it is attempted to form an estimate of the
value of a human spirit.

I. UNDER THE INFLUENCE AND DOMINION OF SIN WE HAVE SADLY LOWERED OUR
ESTIMATE OF OURSELVES, 1. Men have treated their fellows as nothing worth. They
bave either treated their sufferings with callous indifference, or they have looked on


238 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [ou. xu1 1—2z.


their neighbours as related in no other way than through the wages market; or they
have actually bought and sold them—their sinews, their intelligence, their honour—
for so much gold. 2. Men have pitifully undervalued themselves. They have acted as
if they were nothing better than intelligent machines for making money, or than
creatures capable of so much enjoyment, or than office-holders who might attain to
certain dignities for a few passing years,

Il. Unper Curisr THE VALUE OF A HUMAN BEIXG HAS BEEN IMMEASURABLY
RAISED. Jesus Christ by his teaching (see especially Mark viii. 36, 37), by the illus-
tration in his own person of what a Son of man can be, by the great purpose of his
life and death, has lifted up to an altogether different level our conception of mankind.
Now, we know: 1. That God made every man for himself—for his favour, his triend-
ship, his likeness, his service. 2, That God is earnestly desirous that every child of
his, however far he may have wandered from his side, should return to the Father's
home (Luke xv.). 3. That for every child of man a Divine Saviour suffered and died
(Heb. ii. 9). 4. That before every man who will accept Jesus Christ as his Khedeemer
there is a lol, life on earth and a blissful, glorious immortality. Instructed, inspired
by these high truths, we have come, or are coming, to look on every human spirit as
possessed of a value which money does not in any degree represent, which cannot be
told in “golden wedges.” It behoves us all (1) to recognize our own individual
worth, and to act on that true Christian estimate; (2) to recognize in every one around
us, into whatsoever depths of evil he or she may have fallen, one who may be
reclaimed and restored, and who may become inexpressibly dear to the Father and
Saviour of men.—C,


Vers. 19—22.—The overthrow of evil. The minuteness of detail with which this
prophecy has been fulfilled goes far to prove that holy men of old did speak ‘as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost.” The prediction is profoundly interesting in this
light; it is also instructive as foretelling the entire extinction of a world-power which,
at the hour of utterance, appeared to rest on immovable foundations. ‘There are great
powers—national, «ecclesiastical, dynastic, institutional, social—which are as Babylon
0 Isaiah’s time, and which need to be extinguished for the happiness and well-being of
the race. Resjecting the overthrow of evil, we see—

I. v8 APPARENT IMPOSSIBILITY OR DISHEARTENING DISTANCE. How utterly impos-
sible, or at lcast how hopelessly remote, must the day of Babylon’s overthrow have
seemed to the Jews in the time of the prophet! ‘Io those of a scoffing spirit, or to the
constitutionally incredulous or despondent, the words of Isaiah doubtless seemed
visionary, if not altogether wild and vain. So vain may seem to us now the hopes
which are held out of the fall and ultimate extinction of existing evils—the despotic
empire; the usurping and corrupt Church; the huge, wasteful, war-inciting military
and naval organizations; strongly entrenched social habits which dishonour and
enfeeble the community; venerable systems of erroneous belief which have lasted for
centuries and deluded millions of minds, ete. It seems to us desirable, beyond all
reckoning, that these things should receive their death-blow, and should be numbered
among the things of the past. But how can we venture to expect their defeat and
their disajpearance? All strong things are in their tavour; the majority of mankind
favour thei; pecuniary interests, deep-rooted habits, social customs, inveterate pre-
judices, powerlul societies, are sustaining them, How hopeless it seems that powers 80
fortified can be successfully assailed and absolutely demolished!

Il. Ivs argivaL IN DUE cours. Babylon did fall; it was taken and re-taken and
taken again, and finally deserted, until it became what is here foretold. Every evil
thing shall share its fate, Mverything which exalts itself against God, everything
which is hostile to the truth, everything which is actually harmful to mankind, shall
one day be defeated aud destroyed, As the little living seeds dropped into the crack
of the huze temple become the upspringing plants which push their way through the
strong masoury and at length overturn the tall columns and the massive walls and lay
the whole structure on the ground ; so the seed of Divine truth, inserted in the temple
of error, of vice, of tyranny, of idolatry, of iniquity, shall spring and grow, and thrust
and overturn, until the frowning walls have fallen and the structure of sin isa harmless
rum, The great Babylon of sin itself shall one day lie waste and have no inhabitant,


OH. x1m. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 239


_—_—_—_—_OO


III. Irs Moran. 1. Jt is a wretched thing to be on the side of wrong. First and most
of all, because it 7s the wrong side we are espousing, and it ought to be an insufferable
thing to us that we are thinking, speaking, working on behalf of that which is evil in
the sight of God and hurtful to the truer interests of man. But also because we are
certain to be defeated in the end. 2. Jt ts a blessed thing to be engaged on the side of
righteousness. First and most, because it ts the cause of God, of man, of truth, on
which we are leagued ; and also because we are sure to win at last. The wise and the
good may meet with many a check, but they will gain the victory; the unholy aud
the evil-minded may snatch many an advantage, but the end shall be a miserable
disaster, an utter overthrow, @ dragon-haunted desert. Let us see to it that we are
fighting on God’s side, and, once sure that we are, let us strike our blow for truth and
wisdom, confident that, however strong and high stand the towers of sin, its citadel
will be taken, its day will descend into darkness, its million-peopled streets become
a doleful desert.—O,


Ver. 3.—The Lord's sanctified ones. This term is used of an army, regarded as being
consecrated by the sacrifices which were offered at the beginning of the campaign
(comp. 2 Sam, xiii. 9). The assertion made by the prophet is that the Persian army
was not really consecrated to Ahura-Mazda, but to Jehovah. Whatever might seem to
be the fact, the fact really was that the Persians would fulfil Jehovah’s will and carry
out Jehovah’s judgments, A “sanctified one” is, properly, one separated from eelf-
interests and from other people’s concerns, in order that he might carry out God’s will.
“Set apart by the purposes aud providence of God, disengaged from other projects, that
they might wholly apply themselves to something God would have done: such as were
qualified for that to which they were called, ior what God employs men in, he does in
some measure fit them for.” We learn from this expression, and its connection, that
we too may be set apart for God, we may be the Lord’s sanctified ones; and yet, on the
one han, the fact may be unrecognized, or, on the other, the fact may bring to us
impulse and honour and the unspeakable joy of service.

I, Ser apart ror Gop WITHOUT OUR KNowiIne IT. As of Cyrus, the Lord’s anointed,
it is said, “ I girded thee, though thou hast not known me.” But in this case there can
be no proper rewards, since the will of the man is not in harmony with the Divine
will. God may use his creature man, just as he uses clouds and winds and waves, to
fulfil his purposes, and there is no more to be said about it. We are the Lord’s tools,
his rod, his staff. Willingly or unwillingly man must do the Lord’s bidding.

Il. Ser APART FoR GoD WITH OUR OWN GLAD CONSENT. Then we come into the
position of willing, loving servants; and then there can be rewards which take three
forms. Such willingly sanctified ones (1) are honoured with yet further and higher
trusts ; (2) are personally cultured by the doing of their life-work under such conditions ;
and (8) are sure to receive, now in their hearts, and by-and-by in some open manner,
the Master’s “ Well done, good and faithful servants,” the smile and the word of
gracious approval. And such rewards are altogether independent of the particular
character of the work for which we are set apart. It may be most trying and painful
work, even work of judgment or retribution, No matter; the Divine recognition is
ever of willingness and faithfulness. God rewards the true man, not the particular
form the man’s service must take.—R, T.


Ver. 6.—* The day of the Lord.” This expression is employed for that crisis in the
history of the world when Jchovah will in'erpuse to correct tle evils of the present,
Such great crises are called “days” in antithesis to the ages of livine long-suffering,
In Christian thought the term is associated with the coming day or time of judgment,
and mainly with that in view we dwell on the words. Isaiah was one of a class of
prophets to whom God disclosed, in visions, the scenes of the ever-nearing future,
Maybe in the quictness of their homes, as they meditated on the condition of the
world, and the purposes of God concerning men, they were rapt in vision, and, with
various degrees of dimness or of clearness, they saw pass before their entranced, view,
pow the scenes of battle and bloodshed, now the scenes of famine and pestilence; now
they beheld the desolation of those nations that oppressed their own peo)le—Nineveh
and Babylon buried out of sight, Tyre a place for the fisher’s nets; and now they


240 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, [ou. xu. 1—22.


LR


seemed to hear the wild shout of the foes of Israel, as they burst through into the
sacred city; and soon, in smoke and flames, they watched her very temple perish. And
yet again, in dimmer lines, as though further on in the march of ages, they seemed to
see the last great scene of human history—a world arraigned, the thrones set, the books
opened. These visions often prostrated those prophets in the intensity uf excitement ;
but they were given to them that they might set them on record, for the sake of their
own people and the whole Church of the redeemed, that we all might learn to live in
the view of that future, with the infallible decisions of the future ever in our thought,
and reminding us that “he which soweth to the flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption,
but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.” There is much
that is most solemnizing in the expression, “ the day of the Lord,” if we read it from
the Christian standpoint, and see it to mean the day of the Lord Jesus.

I. Our Lorp Has HAD: 1. His day of humiliation, when he stepped down from his
heavenly throne, laid aside “‘ his most Divine array,” and entered our world as the poor
man’s babe, born in a stable, laid in a manger, because there was no room for him in
the inn, 2. He has had many a day of toil, and patience, and pleading, and prayer
among men. Year after year he tarried in the flesh, proving his Divine power to save,
and winning men to himself by the tender sacrificings of his love. 3. He has had a day
of suffering and anguish for men, “ Behold, and see if there ever was sorrow like unto
bis sorrow, wherewith the Lord hath afflicted him” for our sakes. 4, He has had
many a day of inviting grace, when, in the power of his Spirit, he has called us to
yield ourselves unto him ; when, in the leadings of his providence and the ministry of
his Word, he has cried, “ My son, give me thy heart;” “Come unto me... and I
will give you rest.” He has had many a day of patience, of waiting, of long-suffering
to us-ward, not willing that any should perish.

II. Bur tne Day or THE LORD, THE DAY OF DAYS, IS YET TO coME. 1. The day of
the Lord’s glory, when the multitudes of the redeemed shall crown him with many
crowns—shall crown him Lord of all. 2. The day of the Lord’s vindication, when he
shall break down the rebellion of lost souls with the proofs of his forbearance and the
memory of his reeated calls. 38. The day when the “wrath of the Lamb” must be
revealed, and he shall come in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not
God, and that obey not the gospel of his Son. ‘There must be an end of this dispensa-
tio. ef redemption, there must be a closing up of it; there must be the “ day of the
Lore ” For us all that day cometh as a thief in the nicht.

TJ) ‘Hr DECISIONS OF THE DAY OF TEE Lorp. ‘lhe Scriptures do not satisfy our
questionings upon the terms of decision on that day. So far as we can gather, there
wi) be » general term, and a more particular one. The more general term may be
chur expressed: “ No condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus.” “Condemned
alseady, because ye believe not on the Son of God. The more particular term is thus
expressed; ‘‘ We must all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ, that every one
may reccive the things done in his body, according to that he hath done, whether it be
good or bad.” How these are to fit into each other it is beyond any human power to
explain, because the Bible docs not afford us the means of explanation. We can,
however, settle two separate facts very clearly. Our life, in its minutest acts, carries
eternal issues. Everything we do, beyond its bearing on our present character, has its
beasing on our eternal destiny, because on our eternal character. And we are tested by
ou relation to Christ. The test of the great coming day is first this—In Christ, or
out ef Christ. The answer to that settles all else—whether you shall be in the fold or
out of it, in the everlasting peace or out of it, in heaven or out of it.—R. T,


Ver. 6.—God as El Shaddai, It will at once come to mind that this is the name
used for God by John Bunyan in his ‘Holy War,’ but it is an unfamiliar one, and one
that needs explanation. It is translated in Scripture by the term “the Almighty,” but
that properly represents the Hebrew El Gibbér. Cheyne says, “ Wherever it occurs
(Joel i. 15; Ezek. i, 24; x. 5), it appears to express the more severe and awful side of
the Divine nature. ‘Though used as a mere synonym for El, or Elohim, it must at
least be clear that force, and specially force as exhibited in a dangerous aspect in some
natural phenumena, is the original meaning of the word, a meaning suitable enough te
the earliest stage of biblical religion (see Exod. vi. 3).” Gesenius thinks that, originally,


oH. xin. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 241


SS


before it was adopted into biblical religion, Shaddai meant, “God the Sender of storms.”
The connection of this physical figure with the term “ Almighty” is very plain, for the
Controller of the neavenly forces can surely do everything: the greater implies the less,
and the great of which we know is so great that the mastery of it assures to us that
there must be ability to master what we do not know.

I. Tae TERM “ MOST MIGHTY” AS APPLIED TO EARTHLY KINGS. It is quite the usual
form in which the worth-ship of subjects is presented, and it was especially used of the
monarchs of vast Eastern kingdoms, who ruled by an absolute authority. It was not,
however, a mere high-sounding title; it gathered up the very various sides of kingly
greatness, and put them into a single term. We may illustrate how it found expression
for (1) supreme rank, (2) exalted dignity, (3) vast extent of dominion, (4) ready and
hearty allegiance of subjects, (5) strenzth of forces, (6) and absoluteness of will. It
may also have embraced administration of august character.

Il. THE TerRM “ ALL-MIGHTY” AS APPLIED TO THE Kine oF KINas, The term
‘almighty ” rises above “ most mighty,” and can be truly applied to God alone. The
above divisions may be taken, in which great earthly kings are said to be “ most
mighty,” and, as applied to God, they may help us to realize the senses in which he is
“all-mighty.” And occasion may be made for urging the reverence which is due to
him; the awe he claims, which should make “all the earth keep silence before him.”
It may be well also to meet the difficulty, that God cannot do absolutely everything,
by showing that he can do everything which is not, under the conditions of human
thought, absurd in the statement, such as make two straight lines enclose a space, or
two and two count five—R. T.


Ver. 12.—The preciousness of man. Matthew Henry gives very clearly the first
ideas and associations of the passage. ‘“ ‘here shall be so great a slaughter as will
produce a scarcity of men. You could not have a man to be employed in any of the
affairs of state, not a man to be enlisted in the army, not a man to match a daughter
to, for the building up of a family, if you would give any money for one.” Such a
comparison of man with gold would only be suggested to persons familiar with the sale
and purchase of slaves, The irony, or satire, in the comparison lies in the over-estimate
of gold in a luxurious age. It is a sad sign for any nation when its “ gold of Ophir” is
valued more than its men. The second clause having the more general term ‘‘ human
being,” we are reminded that it is man as man, and not man in view of his learning,
position, manners, or wealth, that the prophet regards as of incomparable value. The
position of Ophir is disputed, but J. A. Alexander points out that “whether the place
meant be Ceylon, or some part of continental India, or of Arabia, or of Africa, it is here
named simply as an Eldorado, as a place where gold abounded, either as a native pro-
duct or an article of commerce.” The older idea of the word rendered “ precious” was
making dear or costly; the modern idea is making rare or scarce, The expression
may fittingly introduce the general topic of the value of men, for only in view of their
value can their scarcity be treated as a matter of anxiety. That value may be set forth
as to be recoynized—

I. In HIs MoRAL NaTURE. He differs essentially from the material and animal crea-
tions. Not in possession of mind, but in capacity to apprehend the distinction between
right and wrong, and in power to will the right and refuse the wrong. This is what
we mean by a moral nature. The animal may decide its action upon some sort of
consideration of the consequences, pleasurable or painful, that may attend on its conduct.
Man does not merely act in view of consequences; he estimates the character of the
action, judging it in the light of what he apprehends of God, as, to him, the ideal of
righteousness. Asa moral being, then, man transcends all creatures, and there can be
no possible comparison of him with any material thing, even the finest gold of Ophir.
‘his moral nature belongs to all men everywhere, and cannot be overlaid, or crushed
wholly out, by any poverty, ignorance, or debasement of vice. The man is always a
man, and to his moral nature God, and his fellow moral beings, may always hopefully
appeal.

‘ . IN HI8 POSSIBILITIES FOR GOOD oR EVIL. He must be a precious being who can
rise to be as saintly as some have become, and can sink to be as Satanic as others have
become. Dr. Horace Bushnell has a fine sermon in ‘ New Life,’ p. 16, entitled, “The

ISAIAH. R


242 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cH. x11. 1—22


5555555 GG


Dignity of Human Nature shown from its Ruins.” After speaking of many who
“magnify the dignity of human nature, by tracing its capabilities, and the tokens it
reveals of a natural aftinity with God and truth. They distinguish lovely instincts,
powers, and proyerties allicd to God, aspirations reaching after God,” he undertakes to
“ show the essential greatness and dignity of man from the ruin itself which he
becomes ;” and then he says, “ Nor is it anything new, or a turn more ingenious than
just, that we undertake to raise our conceptions of human nature in this manner, for it
is in just this way that we are accustomed tu get our measures and form our conceptions
of many things; of the power, for example, of ancient dynasties, and the magnificence
of ancient works and cities, such, for example, as Egypt, Rome, Thebes, Karnac, Luxor,
or Nineveh. So it is with man. Our most veritable, though saddest, im)ressions of
his greatness, as a creature, we shall derive from the magnificent ruin he displayed. In
that ruin we shall distinguish fallen powers that lie as broken pillars on the ground ;
temples of beauty, whose scarred and shattered walls still indicate their ancient, original
glory ; summits covered with broken stones, infested by asps, where the palaces of high
thoucht and great aspiration stuod, and righteous courage went up to maintain the
citadel of the mind—all a ruin now—archanvel ruined.” We estimate the value of raw
material by “what can be made of it.” On that condition man is seen to be more
precious than aught else; he may be changed into the Divine image, from glory to glory.

Ill. In nts immMortTauiTy. Man’s natural immortality is gravely disputed in these
days, but an opinion on that difficult subject is not necessary in the treatment of this
subject from our present point of view. It is possible for man to become immortal, and
that stamps his incomparable value. Continuity is a common sign of value; but,
further than that, the being who can be immortal must have capacity for immortal
spheres. In conclusion, it may be shown that the preciousness of man, or the sanctity
of human life, is the foundation of social order, and the inspiration of human brother-
hood and self-denial.—R. T.


Ver. 19.—The fall of pride. The type of pride, in Scripture, is Babylon; to the
grandeur of it the Chaldees pointed in self-admiring triumph. “The words of this
text paint the impression which the great city, even in Isaiah’s time, made upon all
who saw it. So Nebuchadnezzar, though his work was mainly that of a restorer,
exulted in his pride in the greatness of the city of which he claimed to be the builder
(Dan. iv. 80). So Herodotus describes it as the most famous and strongest of all the
cities of Assyria, adorned beyond any other city on which his eyes lad ever looked.”
God’s dealings with nations are illustrations, in the large, of his dealings with families
and individuals. The evil recognized as characteristic of a nation may be equally
characteristic of a family and of an individual, on whom, therefore, the appropriate
Divine judgments will be sure to fall. Nations stand forth prominently in the world’s
eye, and keep their lessons in history for the instruction of all the ages. This may be
illustrated from the Babylonian kingdom of the ancient days, and from Napoleonic
France of modern times. The following points will readily suggest iliustration from
history, and from the circle of our actual experience.

1, PRIDE OF CONQUEST HAS NEVER PROVED LASTING. Sce the stories of Sennacherib,
Nebuchadnezzar, Alexander, Tamerlane, Charlemagne, Buonaparte, and others. It is
equally true of cases of private acquisition, The man who grasps his neivhbour’s
property, and joius field to field, has to learn that God hateth the proud. The riches
gathered fly away, or the son that follows him squanders it all.

I], PRIDE OF SOCIAL GRANDEUR HAS NEVER PROVED LASTING, Beckford thought to
outrival all country mansions with his Fonthill Abbey, and it fell, and great was the
fall thereof, Grant thought to build a palace in the west of London, grander than all
around him, and it has passed under the hammer of the auctioneer,

Ill. PRiDE OF COMMERCIAL PROSPERITY HAS NEVER PROVED LASTING. Venice and
Genoa and the Holland ports illustrate this, God’s providence brings round the judg-
ment when the pride has become overwhelming. God holds a limit beyond which he
never permits a nation, a family, or an individual to go. As soon as pride begins to
take the honour jue to God, stability is over, our foundations begin to shift, and the
aight of the first wild storm all that we have raised so anxiously lies about us in ruins,
There is a day of God always near at hand for the proud.—R. T.


OH. XIV. 1—32.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 233


__ Vers. 21, 22.—Literal fulfilment of prophecy. The language of modern travellers
illustrates the fulfilment of the prediction. Layard says, “Owls start from the scanty
thickets, and the foul jackal stalks among the furrows.” “It is a naked and hideous
waste.” Dr. Plumptre says, “The work was, however, accompanied by slow degrees
and was not, like the destruction of Nineveh, the result of a single overthrow. Darius
dismantled its walls, Xerxes pulled down the temple of Belus. Alexander contem-
plated its restoration, but his designs were frustrated by his early death. Susa and
Ecbatana, Seleucia and Antioch, Ctesiphon and la:dad, became successively the centres
Oo! commerce and of government.” By the time of Strabo (B.o. 20) the work was accom-
plished, and the “vast city” had become a “vast desolation.” In illustrating the
literal fulfilment of this prophecy, the dean further says, “'l'he Bedouins theiselves,
partly because the place is desolate, partly from a superstitious horior, shrink from
encamping on the sites of the ancient temples and palaces, and they are left to lions,
aud other beasts of prey. On the other hand, Joseph Wolff, the missionary, describes
& strange weird scene—pilgrims of the Yezidis, or devil-worshippers, dancing and howl-
ing like dervishes amid the ruins of Babylon.” It is interesting to note the following
passage from the ‘Itinerary’ of Benjamin Bar-jona, given by Matthew Henry. “ This
is that Babel which was of old thirty miles in breadth; it is now laid waste. There
are yet to be seen the ruins of a palace of Neluchadnezzar, but the sons of men dare
not enter in, for fear of serpents and scorpions, which possess the place.” For further
indications «f the precision of fulfilment, encyclopedias and books of Eastern travel
should be studied. We point out here that prophecy is usually poetic, and, rather,
vaguely ‘escriptive and sugzestive, thai precise or minute. Sometimes, however, tor
the verifying of all prophecies, some portions are made precise, and are literally ‘ulfilled,
as in the case of Babylon; and the two following poi:ts may be usefully illustrated :—

I. LivgraL FULFILMENT OF PROPHECY CONFIRMING THE Diving Worp.

JI. GeNEKAL FULFILMENTS THEREBY SHOWN TO BE EQUALLY CONFIRMATORY. When
once the principle is established, we are freed from all bondage to demands for exact
and miiute asrecments, and can freely read Scripture prophecy as full of poetical
figure and imazery.—R, T.


EXPOSITION.
their position as a favoured race —God’s


CHAPTER XIV.


Vers. 1—23.—Tue ResToraTION OF ISRAEL
AND HER Sonc oF TRIUMPH OVER BABYLON,
The destruction of Babylon is to be followed
by the restoration of Israel, with the good
will of the nations, and by their exercising
rule over their late oppressors (vers. 1, 2).
In this time of rest and refreshment they
will sing a song of triumph over Babylon.
The song extends from ver. 4 to ver. 23. It
consists of five stanzas, or strophes, each com-
prising seven long lines, after which there
is a brief epode, or epilogue, of a different
character. This epode is comprised in vers.
22 and 23.

Ver. 1.—For the Lord will have mercy on
Jacob. God’s purpose of mercy upon Israel
requires, as its preliminary, tle destruction
of Babylon, and may be considered as the
final cause of that destruction. His desire
to have mercy on Israel soon is the reason
wiiy the days of Babylon are not prolonged
(see ch. xiii. 22). Will yet choose Israel.
The Captivity was a rejection of Israel from


peculiar people; their restoration was a
fresh “choice” of them out of all the nations
of the world, a free act of grace on his part,
to which they had no claim or right whatso-
ever. And set them in their own land; or,
on their own ground. The land that once
was thc irs, but which they had forfeited by
their disobedience, could only become “their
own” again by a fresh gilt from God, The
strangers shall be joined with them; rather,
the stranger shall join himself to them. On
the return from the Captivity, there would be
an influx of proselytes from the nations, who
would voluntarily join tlemselves to those
whom they saw favoured both by God and
man (comp. Hsth. viii. 17). Though the
Jews did nut commonly seek proselytes, they
readily reecived such as offered themselves.
A further fulfilment of the prophecy took
plece when the Gentiles flocked into the
Church of God after the coming of Christ.
Ver. 2.—And the people shall take them;
rather, peoples shull take them. The heathen
nations among whom they have dwelt shall
rejoice at the restoration of Israel to their
own land, aud even escort them in a friendly
spirit to their borders (comp. Ezra i. 4, 6;


244


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


(cH. xv. i—-32.


ee a ae


Neh. ii. 7—9). Some shall go so far as
voluntarily to become their bondservants in
Palestine, They shall take them captive,
whose captives they were. This can scarcely
have been intended literally. The Jews were
at no time a conquering people, nor one that
set itself to “take captives.” The true
meaning is that Jewish ideas shall pene-
trate and subdue the nations generally, and
among them those with whom Israel had
dwelt as captives. The Jews did become
very powerful and numerous hoth in Assyria
and Babylonia about the first century after
Christ, and Christian Churches were early
formed in Mesopotamia, Adiabene, and even
Babylon.

Ver. 3.—The hard bondage wherein thou
wast made to serve (comp. cli. xlvii. 6). We
have no detailed account of the Babylonian,
as we have of the Egyptian, servitude; but
it was probably well-nigh as grievous. A
few, of royal descent, might be eunuchs in
the palace of the great king (2 Kings xx.
18; Dan. i. 8), and hold offices of trust; but
with the bulk of the nation it was otherwise.
Ps. exxxvii. has the plaintive ring which
marks it as the utterance of a sorely op-
pressed people. And thvre are passages of
Ezekiel which point in the same direction
(sce especially xxxiv. 27—29).

Ver. 4.—Thou shalt take up this proverb;
rather, this parable, as the word is translated
in Numb. xxiii. and xxiy.; in Job xxvi. 1;
XX1x. 1; Ps. xlix. 4; Ixxviii. 2; Ezek. xvii. 2;
xx. 49; xxi.5; xxiv.3; Micah ii.4; Hab. ii.
6; or “this tannting speech,” as our trans-
lutors render in the margin (see Cheyne,
ad loc. ; and comp. Hab. ii. 6). The golden
city. There are two readings here—mad-
hébah and marhébah. The latter reading was
preferred ancicently, and is followed by the
LXX., the Syriae and Chaldee Versions,
the Targums, Ewald, Gesenius, and Mr.
Cheyne. It would give the meaning of * the
raving one.” Madhébah, however, is pre-
ferred by Rosenmiiller, Vitringa, and Dr.
Kay It is supposed to mean “ golden,”
from @’hab, the Cualdee form of the Hebrew
zahub, gold. But the question is pertinent
—Why should a Chaldee form have been
used by a Hebrew writer ignorant of Chaldee
and Chaldea ?

Ver. 5.—The staff . . . the sceptre. Sym-
bols of Babylonian power (comp. ch. x. 5).

Ver. 6.—Ke who smote the people; rather,
which smote the peoples. The participle trans-
lated “he who smote” refers to “staff” or
“seeptre.” With a continual stroke; 7.e. in-
cessantly, one war following another without
pause or stop. He that ruled, etc.; rather,
which ruled the nations in anger with a perse-
cution that held not back.

Ver, 7.-—At rest ... singing. The first
result of the tall of Babylon is general peace,


rest, and quiet; then the nations, recog
nizing the blessedness of the change, burst
out into a song of rejoicing. The peace did
not really continue very long; for Persia
took up the ré/e of conquvror which Babylon
had been forced to drop, and, under Cam-
byses and Darius Hystaspis, produced as
much stir and disturbance as hid been
caused by Babylon. Still, there was an in-
terval of about eleven years between the
conquest of Babylon by Cyrus (8.c. 538), and
the expedition by Cambyses against Kgypt
(B.C. 527).

Ver. 8.—Fir trees ... cedars. We may
detect a double meaning here—one literal,
the other metaphorical, Literally, the trees
of Lebanon and the other mountain ranges
would be spared, since, while both the As-
syrian and Babylonian kings cut timber in
the Syrian forests for building purposes,
the Persians had no such practice; m ta-
phorically, the firs and cedurs are the kings
and nobles of the countries (comp. Ezek.
xxxi. 16), who likewise had a respite. Since
thou art laid down; ratuer, since thou liest
low. The first stanza here ends, and the
second begins with the next verse.

Ver. 9.—Hell from beneath. The Hebrew
Sheél corresponded nearly to the Greek
Hades, and the Latin Inferi. It was a dis-
mal region in the centre of the earth, whither
departed souls descended, and where they
remained thenceforth. There were various
depths in it, each apparently more dismal
than the preceding; but tliere is no evidence
that it was considered to contain any place
of happiness, until after the return from the
Captivity. The prophet here represents Sheél
as disturbed by the advent of the Babylonian
monarch, and as rousing itself to receive him,
The great ones of the earth, and the kings,
who are kings even in Hades, and sit upon
thrones, are especially moved by the occa-
sion, and prepare to meet and greet their
brother. Personal identity and continued
consciousness of it after death are assumed ;
and the former earthly rank of the inmates
secms to be recognized and maintained. It
stirreth up the dead. Hell in the aggregate
—the place personified—proceeds to arouse
the individual inmates, who ave called re-
phaim —the word commonly translated
“ giants” (Deut. ii. 11, 20; xiii. 12; Josh. xii.
4; xili, 12, ete.), but meaning properly “ feeble
ones.” ‘I'he shades or ghosts of the departed
were regarded as weak and nerveless, in
comparison with living men (compare the
Homeric eSwAa kaudytwyv). All the chief
ones; literally, the he-goats (comp. Jer. 1.
8; li. 40; Zech. x.3). Raised up from their
thrones; ¢.¢. “caused tu rise up from their
thrones,” and stand in eager expectation of
what was about to happen.

Ver. 10.—Art thou also become weak as


OH. xIv. 1—32.]


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


245


SD


wet rather, So thou also art made weak as
we! (On the supposed weakness of the dead,
see the comment on ver. 9.)

Ver. 11.—The noise of thy viols. (On the
fondness of the Babylonians for music, and
the number and variety of their musical in-
struments, see Dan. iii. 7, 10, ete.) The
word here translated “ viol” is more com-
monly rendered ‘“‘psaltery.” (On the probable
character of the instrument intended, see
note on ch. y. 12.) The worm is spread under
thee, etc.; rather, beneath thee is spread the
maggot, and the worm covereth thee. The
thought of the grave brings the thought of
corruption with it. For cushion and for
coverlet the royal corpse has only the loath-
some creatures which come with putrescence,
At this point the second stanza terminates.

Ver. 12.—How art thou fallen from heaven,
0 Lucifer! Babylon’s sudden fall is com-
pared, with great force and beauty, to the
(seeming) fall of a star from heaven. The
word translated “ Lucifer ” means properly
“shining one,” and no doubt here desig-
nates a star; but whether any particular
star or no is uncertain. The LXX. trans-
lated by éws@dpos, whence our “ Lucifer.”
The subjoined epithet, “son of the morning”
or “of the dawn,” accords well with this
rendering. How art thou cut down to the
ground! One of Isuaial’s favourite changes
of metaphor. It is a favourite metaphor also
to which he reverts—that of representing
the destruction of a nation by the felling ofa
tree or of a forest (comp. ch. ii. 12, 13; x. 33,
34, etce.). Which didst weaken the nations;
rather, which didst prostrate the nations.
The word used is one of great force (comp.
Exod. xvii. 13; Job xiv. 10).

Ver. 13.—For thou hast said; rather, and
thou — thou saidst; i.e. weak as thou art
now shown to have been, it was thou that
didst dare to say, I will ascend into heaven,
etc. (comp. ch. x. 13, 14; xxxvii. 24, 25).
Isaiah represents rather the thoughts of the
Babylonian monarch than his actual words.
The Babylonian inscriptions are full of
boasting egotism; but they do not contain
anything approaching to impiety. The king
may regard himself as, in a certain sense,
Divine ; but still he entertains a deep respect
and reverence for those gods whom he res
gars as tle most exalted, as Merodach, Bel,
Nebo, Sin, Shamas. He is their worshipper,
their devotee, their suppliant (see ‘ Records
of the Past,’ vol. v. pp. 111—148). The
Babylonian monarchs may have believed
that after death they would mount up to
heaven and join the “assembly of the great
gods” (ibid., vol. iii. p. 83); but we scarcely
know enough as vet of the religious opinions
of the Babylonians to state positively what
their belief was on the subject of a future life.
I will sit also upon the mount of the con-


gregation. The early commentators ex-
plained this of Mount Zion, especially on
account of the phrase, “in the sides of the
north,” which is used of the temple-hill in
Ps. xlviii. 2. But it is well objected that
Mount Zion was a place of no grandeur or
dignity or holiness to the Babylonians, who
had made it a desolation; and that no Baby-
lonian monarch would have desired to “ sit?
there. Moreover, the ‘“* mountain” of this
passage must be one which is “above the
heights of the clouds” and ‘above the
stars of God,” which the most imaginative
poet could not have said of Mount Zion. A
mythic mountain, belonging to the Baby-
lonian theosophy, was therefore seen to be
intended, even before the times of cunei-
form decipherment (Rosenmiiller, Michaelis,
Knobel). Now that the Babylonian inscrip-
tions can be read, it is found that there was
such a mountain, called “ Im-Kharsak,” or
“ Kharsak-Kurra,” which is described as
“the mighty mountain of Bel, whose head
rivals heaven, whose root is the holy deep,”
and which “ was regarded as the spot where
the ark had rested, and where the gods had
their seat” (‘ Records of the Past,’ vol. xi.
p- 131, with the comment of Mr. Sayce, p.
130). In Babylonian geography this moun-
tain was identified, either with the peak of
Rowandiz, or with Mount Elwend, near Ec-
batana. In the sides of thenorth. Both El-
wend and Rowandiz are situated to the
north-east of Babylon—a position which, ac-
cording to ancient ideas, might be described
indifferently as “ north” or “east.”

Ver. 14.—I will be like the Most High
(comp. ch. xlvii. 8). It is a mistake to say
that “the Assyrians gave the name of God
to their monarchs” (Kay), or, at any rate,
there is no evidence that they did. Nor
does any king, either Assyrian or Babylonian,
ever assume a Divine title. There is a
marked difference in this respect between
the Egyptian and the Assyro-Babylonian
religions. Probably Isaiah only means that
Babylonian monarchs thought of themselves
as gods, worked their own wills,were wrapped
up in them-:elves, did not in heart bow down
to a higher Power.

Ver. 15.—Thou shalt be brought down;
rather, thou art brought down (comp. vers
9—11). Thesides of the pit; or, the recesses
—the “lowest parts” of the pit. With these
words the third stanza terminates.

Ver. 16.—They that see thee. Dr. Kay
well observes that “here the scene of the
parable is changed back to earth. The
corpse of the mighty conqueror is lying un-
buried.” Shall narrowly look upon thee.
Like the inhabitants of hell (ver. 10), thoso
of earth also shall scarcely believe their
eyes. They shall look close to see if it is
indeed the great king that is slain.


246


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


[uH. xIv. 1—32.


SS SS ee ee


Ver. 17.—That opened not the house of
his prisoners; literally, that loosed not his

isoners homewards. The long imprison-
ment of Jehoiachin by Nebuchadnezzar
(thirty-six years, 2 Kings xxv. 27) is an
illustration; but perhaps it is rather the
retention in captivity of the entire Jewish
people that ia brought to the prophet’s
cognizance.

Ver. |8.—All the kings of the nations, etc. ;
i.e. the otier kings, speaking generally, died
in peace, and had an honourable burial,
eacli one in the sepul:-hre that he had pre-
pared for himsclf as his final abode or
“house” (comp. ch xxii. 16). The care
taken to prepare tombs was not confined to
Egypt, though there obtaining its greatest
development. Among others, the Persian
kings certainly prepared their own  se-
pulchres; and probably the practice was
general.

Ver. 19.— But thou art cast out (see
ver. 13). Again “thou” is emphatic.
Translate, But thou—thou art cast out. ‘The
Babylonian monarch did not rest in the
tomb which be had prepared for himself.
His body was “cast out’ —left, apparently,
where it fell in batile. If there is allusion
to any individual, it is probably to B.l-
shazzur (Dan. v. 30), Like an abominable
branch. As a shoot from a tree, whici is
disipproved and so condemned and cut
away. As the raiment of those that are
slain. The garments of the slain, soaked
in blood (ch. ix. 5), were useless, and were
consequently flung away or left to rot un-
eared for. So was it with the corpse of the
great king. That go down to the stones of
the pit This clause is thought to be mis-
placed, It dcranges tle metre and damig:s
the sense. Corpses were not interred on
fields of battle in the East (Herod., iii. 26).
They were left to be “ trodden underfoot.”
It is best, with Kwal] and Mr. Cheyne, to
trunsfer the clause to the commencement of
the next verse. Thus the fourth stanza is re-
lieved, .nd the fiftii properly filled out.

Ver. 20.—If we make the alteration sug-
die in the preceding note, this verse will

cgin as follows: “They that have gone
down to the stones of the pit, with these
thou shalt not be joined in burial” —a repe-
tition certainly of the first clause of ver. 19,
but with amplification, and with the reason
appended. Thou hast destroyed thy land;
t.e. © brought ruin on it by displeasing God,
and causing him to visit it with a judgment.”
The seed of evil-doers shall never be re-
nowned; rather, shall not be named for ever
(comp. Ps cix. 13). The meaning is that
they sliall have no seed, or, if they have any,
that it sliall be early cut off, and the whole
race blotted out. Pretenders rose up under
Darius Hystaspis, claiming descent from


Belshazzar’s father, Nabonidus; but the
claim is characterized as false, and a false
claim would scarcely have been set up had
rea! descendants survived.

Ver. 21.—Prepare slaughter for his chil-
dren. Belshazzar had “ wives and concu-
bines” (Dan. v. 2), and therefore probably
children. The magnanimity of Cyrus may
have spared them; but neither Cambyses
nor Darius Hystaspis had the same merci-
ful disposition. As soon as there was seen
to be danger of Babylon revolting, they
would almost certainly be put to death.
For the iniquity of their fathers (comp.
Exod. xx. 5). The destruction of their pos-
terity was a part’ of the punishment of the
fathers. That they do not rise; te. “that
they do not recover themselves and become
great monarchs once more, and once more
build great cities,” such as thos: which they
were famous for — Babel, Erech, Accad,
Calneh, Ur, Sepharvaim, Bursippa, Opis,
Teredon, etc. It was as city-builders that
the Babylonians were especially celebrated
(Gen. x. 10; Dan. iv. 30 ; Herod., i. 178, ete.)

Vers. 22, 23.—These verses constitute the
epode of the poem. Their main object is
to make it clear that the punishment about
to fall on Babylon comes from none other
than Jehovah, whose Nume occurs twice in
ver. 22, and emphatically closes ver. 23.
The lines are much more irregular than
those of the strophes, or stanzas.


Ver. 22.— And out off from Babylon the
name. Itis not quite clear in what sense
her “name ” was to be “cut off” from Baby-
lon. One of the main masses of ruin still
bears the old name almost unc: anged (Babil),
and can scarcely be supposed to hive lost
it and afterwards recovered it. Perhaps
“name” here means “ fame” or “ celebrity ”
(comp. Deut. xxvi. 19; Zeph. iii. 20). Son
and nephew; rather, son and grandson, or
issue and descendants. The same phrase
occurs in the same sense in Gen. xxi. 23 and
Job xviii. 19.

Ver. 23.—A possession for the bittern.
Some water-bird or other is probably in-
tended, since the word used is joined in ch.
xxxvi. 11 with the names of three other
birds, and is also certainly a bird’s name in
Zeph. ii. 14; but the identification with the
“bittern” is a mere guess, and rests on no
authority, And pools of water. The swampy
character of the country about the ruins of
Babylon is generally noticed by travellers.
It arises from neglect of the dams along the
course of the Euphrates. Ker Porter says
that “large deposits of the t.uphrates water
are left stagnant in the hollows between the
ruins” (* Travels,’ vol. ii. p. 389).

Vers, 24—27.—A FurTuxr PROPHECY oF
DELIVERANCE FROM AssyRIA. From the dis-


OH. XIV. 1—32.)


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH,


247


a


tant prospect of an ultimate deliverance from
the power of Babylon, the prophet turns
his gaze toa nearer, if not a greater, deli-
verance. The present enemy is Assyria. It
is she who has carried Samaria into capti-
vity, and who now threatens the indepen-
dence of Judah. Deliverance from her has
already been promised more than once (ch.
x. 16—19, 25—27, 33, 34); but apparently
the people are not reassured—they still
dread the foe who is so near, and who seems
so irresistible. God, therefore, condescends
to give them a fresh prophecy, a fresh assur-
ance, and to confirm it to them by an oath
(ver. 24). The Assyrian power shall be
broken—her yoke shall be cast off (ver. 25);
God has declared lis purpose, and nothing
can hinder it (ver. 27).

Ver. 24.—Hath sworn. This is the em-
phatic word—the new thing in the prophecy.
God but seldum dcclares his purposes with
an oath—never but in condescension to tlie
weakness of his crvatures, who, though they
misdoubt his word, can feel the immuta-
bility of an oath (Heb. vi. 17), and yield it
the credence and tle confidence which they
refuse to a bare assertion. AsI have thought
. .. a8I have purposed. A reference to the
prophecies pr viously given in ch. x. So shall
it come to pass; literally, so it hath been
—a striking instance of the “ preterite of
prophetic ce tainty.’ So shall it stand;
literally, as I have purposed, that shall stand.

Ver. 25 —I will break the Assyrian in my
land. This is reterred by some critics to the
miraculous destruction of Sennacherib’s
army, and regarded as a proof that the scene
of that destruction was Judwa. But it is
possible that a lisaster to the forces of Sar-
gon imay be inte ded (see the comment on
ch, x. 28—32). His yoke shall depart from
off them (comp. ch. x. 27). The Assyrian
yoke, imposed by Viglath-Pileser (2 Kings
xvi. 7—10), and (according to his own in-
scriptions) again by Sargon, was thrown off
by Hezekiah, who “rebelled against the
King of Assyria, and served him not” (2
Kings xviii. 7). It was this rebellion that
provoked the expedition of Sennacherib,
describid in 2 Kings xviii. 13—16; and it
may be this rejection of the yoke which is
here prophesied.

Ver. 26.—The whole earth... all the
nations. Blows struck against Assyria or
Babylonia affected all the then known na-
tions. Eacn, in its turn, was “the hammer
of the whole earth ” (Jer. 1. 23), and a check
received by either caused world-wile dis-
turbance. No sooner did one subject nation
recover her freedom, than an electric shock
ran through all the rest—plots were laid,


confederacies formed, revolts planned, em-
bassies sent hither and thither. The com-
plete destruction of Assyria involved a
complete change in the relations, not only
of the principal powers—Egypt, Assyria,
Babylonia, Media, Elam, but even of the
minor ones—Philistia, Edom, Moab, Syria,
Phenicia, Ammon.

Ver. 27.—His hand is stretched out; lite-
rally, his #8 the outstretched hand, which is
more emphatic.

Vers. 28—32.—Tus Burven or Paiiistta.
The Philistines had suffered grievously at
the hands of Judah in the reign of Uzziah
(2 Chron. xxvi. 6), and liad retaliated in the
reign of Ahaz (2 Chron. xxviii. 18). It
would seem that after this they were in-
vaded by ‘Tiglath-Pileser, who penetrated
as far as Gaza, which he took (‘ Records of
the Past,’ vol. v. p. 51) and made tributary,
as he also did Ascalon (‘ Ancient Monar-
chies,’ vol. ii. p. 399). Tiglath-Pileser died
shortly before Alaz, and the present “ bur-
den ” seems to have been uttered in connec.
tion with his death. Isaiah warns Philistia
(equivalent to “ Palestina”) that her re-
joicing is premature; Tiglath-Pileser will
have successors a8 powerful and as cruel
as himself, and these successors will carry
destruction and ravage over the whole land.

Ver. 28.- In the year that King Ahaz
died was this burden. These words intro-
duce the ‘burden of Philistia,” and shows
that it is chronologically out of place, since
the prophecies from ch. x. to ch. xiv. 1—27
have belonged to the reign of Hezekiah.
Ahaz appears to bave died early in B.o, 725.


Ver. 29.—Whole Palestina. The Grecks
ealled Philistia ryv Madaorlyny Supiay, or
“ Syria of the Philistines,” whence the Litin
“Palestina” and our “ Palestine.” Isaiah
adidrcsses the country as “ whole Palestine,”
because, while it was made up of a number
of principalities (1 Sam. vi. 18), his message
coucerned it in its entirety. The rod of him
that smote thee is broken. This can scarcely
refer to the death of Abhaz, since Alhaz did
not smite the Philistines, but was smitten
by them (2 Chron. xxviii. 18). It may,
however, refer to the death of Tiglath-
Pileser, which took place only a year or two
previously. Out of the serpent’s root shall
come forth a cockatrice; #.e. a more polson-
ous serpent (see note on ch. xi. 8). Shal-
maneser can scarcely be meant, since he does
not appear to have attucked the Philistines,
Probably Sargon is intended, who “took
Ashdod ” (ch. xx. 1), made Khanun, King of
Gaza, prisoner (‘ Records of the Past,’ vol.
ix. p. 5), and reduced Philistia generally to


248


subjection. And his fruit shall be a fiery
flying serpent. The fruit of the cockatrice
will be even more terrible and venomous.
He will resemble the “ fiery flying serpent ”
of the wilderness (Numb. xxi. 6). Senna-
cherib is, perhaps, this “ fruit.” He con-
quered Ascalon (‘ Ancient Monarcliies,’ vol.
ii, p. 432) and Ekron (ibid., p. 433), and
had the kings of Gaza and Ashdod among
his tributaries (ibid., p. 438, note 11).

Ver. 30.—The firstborn of the poor shall
feed. ‘Ihe “firstborn of the poor” are the
very poor (Jarchi, Rosenmiiller). The refer-
ence is to the poor Israelites, who will
“feed” and “lie down in safety”? when
Philistia is held in subjection, I will kiil
thy root with famine, and he shall slay thy
remnant. God kilis with famine, man with
the sword (see 2 Sam. xxiv. 13, 14). When
the Philistines had resisted behind their
strong walls till hunger had done its work
by thinning their ranks, the Assyrian con-
queror would storm their strongholds and
slaughter “the remnant.”

Ver. 31.—Howl, 0 gate; cry, O city. Each


THE BUOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


i,


LCH. x1v. 1—32,


city of Philistia is bidden to howl and
lament. All will suffer; not one will be
spared. Art dissolved; literally, art melted;
ie. “faintest through fear” (comp. Josh. ii.
9; Jer. xlix. 23). There shall come from
the north a smoke. The “smoke” is the
Assyrian host, which ravages the country as
it advances, burning towns, and villages, and
peasants’ cots, and watchmen’s towers. It
enters the country “from the north,” as @
matter of course, where it adjoins upon Ju-
dwa. The coast route, which led through
the Plain of Sharon, was that commonly
followed by Egyptian armies. None shall
be alone in his appointed times; rather, there
shall be no straggler at the rendezvous.

Ver, 32.—What shall one then answer,
etc.? What answer shall be made to the
Philistine ambassadors, when they come to
Jerusalem and entreat for aid? Simply
this—that God has founded and will protect
Zion, and that the poor and weak among
God’s people—whether Jews or Philistines
—had better betake themselves to the shelter
of the “ city of the great King.”


HOMILETICS.


Vers. 4—23.—Triumph over enemies. ‘he “taunt-song” of Israel, as it has been
called (Cheyne), like the “song of Deborah” in the Book of Judges (v.), raises the
question how far triumph over a national enemy is a feeling that can be indulged with
propriety. There can be no doubt that it is—

I. A NATURAL FEELING. “'‘l'he song of Deborah and Barak” expresses the feelings
which have usually animated the victors in national contests from the beginning of
the world to the present day. ‘The poems of Homer show us the great warriors of the
heroic age giving the freest possible vent to their passions of scorn and hatred on such
occasions. ‘lhe heroes of Germany and Iceland indulge in the same strain. Norih
American Indians are said to have been equally outspoken. The “natural man ”
would, beyond all question, on every occasion of the kind, give free and unfettered
expression to his feclings of triumph and delight, nor would he see any reason for
checking his feelings, or making any effort to moderate them, ‘There is also a good
side to the feeling, inasmuch as it is—

II, ConNECTED WITH THANKFULNESS TO GOD FOR DELIVERANCE. In the song of
Deborah and Barak, and again in the song of Moses (Exod. xv. 1—21), this is very
marked, “Praise ye the Lord for the avenging of Israel, when the people willingly
offered themselves, Hear, O ye kings; give ear, O ye princes; I, even I, will sing
unto the Lord; | will sing praise to the Lord God of Israel” (Judg. v. 2,3). “The
Lord is my Strength and Song, and is become my Salvation: he is my God, and I will
prepare him an habitation; my father’s God, and I will exalt him. ‘The Lord is a
man of war: the Lord is his Name” (Exod. xv. 2, 8). “Sing ye to the Lord, for he
bath triumphed gloriously ; the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea”
(Exod, xv. 21), lt is not their own valour, or strength, or prudence, and warlike skill
that the Hebrew leaders vaunt in their songs of triumph, but the greatness and
strength and wisdom of the God who has given to them the victory over their enemies.
And so the Christian song of joy for a victory has ever been the “Te Deum "—* We
praise thee, God; we acknowledge thee to be the Lord.” So long as wars continue,
so long as swords are not beaten into ploughshares, or spears into pruningshooxs
(ch. ii. 4), it must be right for the combatants to look to the God of battles for aid and
countenance and success; and if so, it must be right for them to return him thanks
for his aid given, which can best be done by songs of praise and psalms of thanks-


“H. xiv. 1—32.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 249


giving. On the other hand, there can be no doubt that the feeling of triumph is one
which ought to be very carefully watched and kept under control, since it is—

III, LiaBLE TO DEGENERATE INTO SELF-GLORIFICATION. When Assyria was vic-
torious, her song of triumph was as follows: “By the strength of my hand I have
fone it, and by my wisdom; for I am prudent: and I have removed the bounds of the
people, and have robbed their treasures, and I have put down the inhabitants like a
valiant man: and my hand hath found as a nest the riches of the people; and as one
gathereth eggs that are left, have I gathered all the earth; and there was none that
moved the wing, or opened the mouth, or chirped” (ch. x. 18, 14). There is some-
thing of the same spirit in the song of Deborah and Barak: “The inhabitants of the
villages ceased, they ceased in Israel, wntil that I Deborah arose, that I arose @
mother in Israel” (Judg. v. 7). “ Awake, awake, Deborah: awake, awake, utter a
song; arise, Barak, and lead thy captivity captive, thou son of Abinoam ” (Judg. v. 12).
Weak human nature is apt to have its head turned by success, and to attribute the
result to its own prowess, instead of the mercy and goodness of God.

IV. LiaBLE TO DEGENERATE INTO SCORN OF, AND INSULTATION OVER, THE ENEMY.
Scorn and insult are utterly unchristian, and a Christian “ song of triumph” should
most carefully avoid them; but they are very dear to the “natural man,” and very
apt to show themselves in the outpourings of a human heart on the occasion of a
triumph. The closing passage of the song of Deborah is of the nature of insult, and so
is a considerable portion of Isaiah’s “taunt-song.” The “evangelical prophet” was
not himself fully possessed of the evangelical spirit. In his time the precept had not
yet gone forth, “‘ Love your enemies ” (Matt. v. 44), and men believed it to be natural
and right to hate them (see Ps. cxxxix. 22), Insult and scorn were but indications of
hate, or of hate mingled with contempt for those who had been proved weak, and so
seemed to be legitimately bestowed on beaten foes, But the Christian may hate no
man, may despise no man, knowing that each human soul is in God’s sight of price-
less value. Consequently, although he may rejoice in victory, and even compose songs
of triumph, he is bound to avoid anything like insultation over the defeated. They
are his brethren, they are souls for whom Christ died; they may be amung those with
whom he will hold sweet converse in the world to come,


Ver. 24.—God’s condescension in confirming promises by oath. It is a weakness on
the part of man to need any confirmation of a promise which God makes, “ God
cannot lie” (Titus ii. 18); “He keepeth his promise for ever” (Ps. cxlvi. 6). When
he condescends to swear that his promise shall hold good, it does not really add to the
certainty of the thing promised, since the certainty was absolute from the first. But
man is so accustomed to misdoubt his fellows that he will even misdoubt God, as
though with him were “variableuess or shadow of turning.” And God, knowing
man’s heart and compassiouating his weakness, does sometimes, though but rarely,
add to his promises, for man’s greater contentment, the confirmation of an oath. After
the Flood God covenanted with mankind that he would never again destroy the earth
by water (Gen. ix. 11), and confirmed the covenant by oath (ch. lxv. 9). On the call
of Abraham, he swore that he would give the land of Canaan to his posterity (Gen.
xxiv. 7), and afterwards that in his seed should all the nations of the earth be blessed.
With David he made a covenant, and swore to it, that he would “ establish his seed
for ever, and build up his throne to all generations” (Ps. lxxxix. 3, 4). To his own
Son he swore, at what time we know not, “Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order
ot Melchizedek ” (Ps. cx. 4). And here we find that he condescended to swear tu
Israel that the Assyrians should “be broken,” and their yoke “depart off them.”
Wonderful condescension of him whose word is truth! Not merely not to punish
those who doubt him, but to compassionate them, to make allowance for them, to yield
compliance to their weakness, and give them such an assurance as compels their belief.
“God, willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the immutability of
his counsel, confirmed it by an oath, that by two immutable things, in which it was
impossible for God to lie, they might have a strong consolation ””—a hope on which to
auchor their soul (Heb. vi. 17—19).


Ver. 32.—No sure refuge but Zion. When danger threatens men commonly invoke


250 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [ou xiv. 1—32.


a


human aid—* trust in Egypt, fly to Assyria "—think to be safe if some great king, or
powerful statesman, or important country, will take them under protection. But every
such refuge is untrustworthy. States prove themselves ‘‘ brnised reeds” in the time
of trouble, “ piercing the hand which leans on them” (2 Kings xviii. 21). Princes
disappoint expectation, and show that “there is no help in them” (Ps. exlvi. 3).
Statesmen find it inconvenient to redeem the pledges which they have given, and turn
a deaf ear to the appeals for aid addressed to them. But the ear of God is always open
to men’s cries. ‘They may appeal with confidence to him either in—

I, Tne garTHLy Zion, his holy mountain, the “city set upon an hill” (Matt. v.
14), in which he has promised that there shall dwell his presence for ever. The Church
of God, founded upon the sure rock of faith in Christ, is a refuge from the assaults of
doubt and unbelief, from the wiles of Satan, from the seductions of evil men. When
the great army of unbelief advances, like a smoke from the north (ver. 31), and
threatens to obscure the whole world with the dark mantle of agnosticism, marshalling
its hosts with military precision, so that “there is not one straggler at the rendez-
vous,” let men remember one thing, “The Lord hath founded Zion, and the poor of
his people may trust in it” (ver. 32). The poor of his people, such as feel themselves
“ wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked ” (Rev. iii, 17), may find in
the Church of Christ—the Church with which he continues always, “even unto the
end of the world ”—a refuge, a defence, a rallying-point, from which they may defy
the dark host of their enemies. Against the Church the gates of hell shall not prevail.
Her Lord is her l’efender, and will give her victory over all her foes, The Lord’s
people may safely trust in her. Or, if this does not suffice, if (as happens to men in
some moods) every earthly stay seems vain, they may go ‘“ boldly to the throne of
grace” (Hcb. iv. 16), and address themselves directly to God in—

Il. Tue weaveNLY Zion—the “heaven of heavens”—the sphere where he sits
enthroned above angels and archangels, yet from which he is ever lending an attentive
ear to the cry of all his creatures. The earthly Zion is but a temporary abiding-place
for individuals; the heavenly Zion is alone their true home. In the heavenly Zion
alone are they wholly safe—saved, garnered, gathered in, secure for ever. There is
the throne of God and of the Lamb (Rev. xxii. 1); there is “the river of the water
of life, clear as crystal” (Rev. xxii. 1); there is the “ tree of lite,” with its “twelve
manner of fruits,” and its leaves which are “ for the healing of the nations” (Rev. xxii.
2). The earthly Zion is but a type of the heavenly; it is on the heavenly that our
thoughts should rest, our minds dwell, our spirits stay themselves (Uol. ili, 1—3).


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS,


Vers. 1—23.—Song of redeemed Israel. I. THE OCCASION OF THE 80NG. (Vers.
1—3.) The immediate purpose of that awful convulsion of the nations described in
the preceding cha ‘ter was judgment; but beyond this lies the purpose of mercy. The
inspired song of Israel is ever of “mercy and judgment.” One loving purpose works,
whether through the hiding of the cloud and the storm, or in the manifest brightness
of the calm summer day. Whether he makes himself known to us amidst terror and
trembling, or in peace and tranquilly flowing hours, “ God’s in his heaven, all’s right
with the world.” After the storm comes the still small voice, heard in the sanctuary,
echoed in the heart, “ Fear not; 1am with thee”’ Jehovah will give his people rest 1p
their land from the cruel sufferings of slavery. The heathen will look on, astonished
at the deliverance of I+racl, and will be convinced that there is a truth in the religion
of Israel superior to that of their own. They will escort the people of Jehovah to the
sacred place, and there become attached to their service as dependents. To the pro-
phetic conscience it seems that this is but in accordance with the law of compensation,
It seems preposterous, nothing less than an invasion of the true order of things, for
a community which holds the purest principles to be enslaved to one whose power is
built on falsehood. The conscience of the prophet teaches him that as God is right,
so there must be a rectification of the world’s wrong. ‘The present first must become
the last, and the last first, and the world must be turned upside down, that Israel may
obtain and retain her destined lead among the nations, This is a leading ideal ot


OH. XIv. 1—32.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 261
a eee


prophecy, and we find it reappearing in the days of Christ. We may, indeed, without
straining a point, say that such predictions, born of the profoundest religious con-
victions, have been fulfilled in the course of our religion. It will hardly be denied
that the great spiritual principles summed up in the phrase, “the kingdom of God
upon earth,” have grown upon the world, have obtained a larger and more commanding
recognition with every great change among the nations, Israel, Greece, broke up as
nations only to resign their deposit of truth to a larger stewardship; and Rome’s work
was fulfilled when she became the vehicle of Christianity to the wide Western world.
The forms of Divine fulfilment seen by the prophets in their forecast may not have
been always the truest forms, limited as they were by conditions of space and time.
The substance and spirit of their message was of eternal truth.

Il. THE CONTENTS OF THE sonG. (Vers, 4—8.) 1. The picture of rest from
tyranny. ‘lhe Babylonian oppressor shall be quelled; his lordly pride and wrath shall
cease. For the staff of authority wielded by impious hands shall be broken, the
tyrant’s sceptre dashed from his hand. His part will be reversed; having incessantly
smitten the people in his cruel rage, and trodden them beneath his feet in the exercise of
arbitrary and unchecked power, he will himself be powerless, as all injustice must be,
disjoined trom physical force. See the critical notes for the discussion of the meaning -
of the words, and the strong imag:s of violence, inspired by tyrannic caprice and
cruelty, which they call up in the imagination. ‘“ ‘lhe oppressor’s scorn, the proud man’s
contumely,” are enumerated by our gr. at pvets among those conditions which tempt men
to doubt the worth of existence. ‘Take away the freedom of religious life, the placid
enjoyment of old customs of family aud social life, from a people, and you extract from
them the relish for life.

“Tis liberty, fair liberty alone,
That gives the fieeting flower of life its sweetness and perfume.”


There is no deeper passion, nor one more just, than the hatred of tyranny, in the human
breast. If we look at the question from the point of view of the tyrant himself, bis
lot is odious. Xenophon represents Hiero of Syracuse lamenting to the poet Simonides
his unhappiness. He must surround himself with guards whom he cannot trust.
Intimate friendship, such as blesses the meanest of his subjects, must be to him den‘ed.
He cannot close the sleepless eye of suspicion. Amiable he may be aud sympathetic
by nature, yet his heart may not expand in the chilling atmosphere which surrounds
him. ‘lhe cruel necessities of power may even render the lot of the oppressor less
enviable than that of the ojpressed. The heart of the people in every land and age
cries out against tyranny as an abuse of the moral order, a violence done to the nature
of things. And the true prophet, ever fecling in unison with that heart, translating its
dim yearnings into articulate oracles, denounces and predicts the downfall of tyranny
as inevitable, if the kinsdom of Jehovah on earth is areality. “There remaineth
a rest for the people of God.” “'lhe empire is peace.” These words, once uttered
vainly by a pote tate in our time, and soon sternly refuted by the roar of artillery
from around the wails of his fair city and from a score of battle-fields throughout his
pleasant land, contain the policy of the kingdom of the Messiah. Selfishness, ambition,
tyranny of individual wills,—these are the most constant causes of restlessness and war.
When “all man’s good ” shall be “ each man’s rule,” such evils will be impossible; the
“unsuffering kingdom ” of the Messiah will come, and the meek will inherit tle earth.
2. The sympathy of nature with man. How exquisite is the poetic feeling for nature
in the next verses (7, 8)! Like all the imagery of Hebrew poesy, they are full of sim-
plicity, sublimity, ;athos. ‘ Now resteth, now is quiet all the earth; songs of jubilation
break forth. The cypresses rejuice on thy account, the cedars of Lebanon. Since thou
liest low (they say) none will come up to lay the axe against us.” The Chaldean used
the wood of these trees, of great durability, for his buildings, his besieging apparatus,
his ships. A small remnant, heirs of those magnificent trees on Lebanon of the pro-
phet’s time, still stands on the spot. They seem, in their robust and beautiful torms,
the very type of human life in the ideal freedom and independence of its growth.
There is a strong poetic feeling for the tree in the Hebrew psalmists and prophets.
The just man is like the tree planted by the flowinz stream, or like the palm flourishing
in the desert, the image of outward suffering and deprivation, We all yearn for the


252 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cua. xiv. 1—382.


sight of the trees, We cannot see their leaves fall in autumn without something of a
pang. We hail the returning blush on the beech woods of our own land in the spring-
time, and the dimly deepening green of the hedgerows. A silent sense of sympathy
steals to our heart, as if sickness, old age, and death were illusions, life the only reality.
The dimpling reflections of the sunlight on the leaves are as smiles, and as a whisper
from the spiritual world the rustle of the wind among them. We can understand how
in olden time men felt the trees to be oracular, and believed, or half believed them to be
tenanted by superaatural beings. A landscape without a tree, like a sea without a
sail, is a sight we cannot long endure without pain. Such feelings have undoubtedly
a religious meaning and value. As we listen to them and cultivate them, the faith
grows stronger that a Divine love and sympathy is stirring at the very heart of things.
It is an ill thing if we permit on every occasion our cold scientific conscience to chide
us out of such a mood. In the present exalted mood of the prophet, the trees seem not
merely to offer a sileit sympathy, but to find tongue and to break forth into articulate
triumph. Still more boldly, in ch. lv. 12, they are conceived as clapping their handr
in joy. Here the cypresses and cedars, appropriated by the patriotic eagerness of the
prophet, as it were, exult in deliverance from the axe of the alien feller, as he exults in
the breaking of the alien sceptre.

III. Lesson ON THE SYMPATHY OF MIND WITH NATURE. Let us not be tempted to
idle words in speaking of that high faculty of poetic fancy exercised upon the objects
and scenes of nature, and illustrated in this passage. A great spiritual poet of our age
—Wordsworth—hax taught us religiously to cherish it. We accept the teaching, but
not in its exagge ol forms. It has been asserted as a principle of primary and
universal import, that “it has pleased God to educate mankind from the beginning
through impressions derived from the phenomena of the natural world.” A sounder
theology and a juster theory of the imagination teaches otherwise. The home, the
school, the Church, the state, society,—these are the scenes of our spirit’s training in
religion and in morals, for time and for eternity. We cast upon the forms of the
external wor.d reflections of sentiments and truths we could not divine from that world.
We know the physical cosmos through the moral cosmos, not vice versd. As to poets
of the highest order, all have been at home in the grandeurs of the spiritual world, not
all have been affected by the forms of nature. This has been especially remarked of
Dante. This observation is fixed almost exclusively upon the Divine and human world.
And, indeed, it must be admitted that the noblest objects of contemplation are God
and man himself. ‘The universe and all its fair and glorious forms is indeed included
in the wide empire of imagination; but she has placed her home and her sanctuary
amidst the inexhaustible varieties and impenetrable mysteries of the human mind... .
Is it not the fact that external objects never strongly excite our feelings but when they
are contem) lated with reference to man, as illustrating his destiny or as influencing
his character?” (Macaulay), We can tind in Nature only what we take to her. ‘The
key to her mystical meanings is to be found in the awakened conscience, the heart
made pure. Petrarch, unlike Dante, loved the face of nature. But on one occasion,
in the midst of a glow of delight in a glorious prospect, he remembered that he had a
volume of St. Augustine in his pocket. Opening the book at random, he read these
words : “ Men go to admire the lofty mountains, the mighty sea-billows, the broad
courses of the rivers, the circuit of the ocean, the orbit of the stars, and they neglect
themselves ” He closed the book and reproached himself. Even the heathen philo-
sophers might have taught him a deeper truth. Doubtless. Socrates said that “trees
did not teach him anything, but man.” Let us adapt the saying to religious feeling.
The trees will yield no oracles but those which have been first heard in the inmost
conscience, And if there are times when they seem to whisper of gladness, or to smile
and clap their hands for joy, it is because God has already opened a fountain of
perennial trust and hope within the soul. Then “ fruitful trees and all cedars” will
praise the Lord, when the heart is filled with praise, ‘“ The outward face of nature is
a relivious communication to those who come to it with the religious element already
in them, but no man can get a religion out of the beauty of nature. Those who have
first made the knowledge of themselves and their own souls their care, its glory has
ever turned to light and hope. They have read in nature an augury and a presage ;
‘hey have found in it a language and a revelation ” (Mozley),—J. -


ou. xiv. 1—32.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 253


Vers. 9—23.—Song of redeemed Israel: the scene in Hades. I. ENTRANCE OF THE
TYRANT INTO THE UNDERWORLD. (Vers. 9—11.) ‘The realm of the departed trembles
with the excitement of expectation as the great potentate of Babylonia approaches
to take up his abode in those gloomy regions. ‘lhe shades of departed chiefs and
kings bestir themselves, and rise from their thrones in amazement to greet the new-
comer, “Hast thou also become weak like us? Art thou become one of us?” His
pomp and splendour is cast down to the lowest depth, the sound of his festive harp
is silenced in that joyless place. Instead of his costly rugs, maggots are now his bed-
clothes, and his counterpane worms.

II. IpEAs OF THE UNDERWORLD. These pictures reach far back into antiquity, and
represent a deep and universal belief in the heart of mankind. Sheél among the
Hebrews, Hades and Tartaros among the Greeks, the realm of Dis or Pluto among
the Komans, are different representations of the same ideas of conscience. But with the
Hebrew it is connected more sublimely and simply with the faith in the one supreme
and righteous God. 1. Zé is viewed us a state of physical exhaustion. In Homer
(‘ Odyssey,’ xi.) the departed are described as faint, helpless ghosts, who recover not
memory and consciousness till they have drunk of the blood poured by Odysseus into
the tcench. Aad when his mother has thus revived and has spoken to hin—


“Thrice in my arms I strove her shade to bind;
Thrice through my arms she slipp’d like empty wind,
Or dreams, the vain illusion of the mind....

All, all are such when life the body leaves!
No more the substance of the man remains,
Nor bounds the blood along the purple veins.”


Pale and wan beneath those “ nether skies,” their lot is in extreme contrast to that
of their friends who still “ breathe in realms of cheerful day.” 2. It ts a piace of
profound sadness und regret. Who can forget the piercing pathos of Achilles’ words
when Odysseus hails him as a king among the shades, even as on earth he had heer
@ guardian divinity to his countrymen—


“Talk not of ruling in this dolorous gloom,
Nor think vain words (he cried) can ease my doom,
Rather ['d choose laboriously to bear
A weight of woes and breathe the vital air,
A slave to some poor hind that toils for bread,
Than reign the sceptred monarch of the dead.”


Oh, how gladly, exclaims Virgil, in describing the suicides in hell, would they now
endure poverty aid toil beneath the deep sky! But vain the wish; justice forbids,
and they must remain confined in the horrid swamp, with its melancholy waters, shut
in by the ninefold stream of Styx. A sullen discontent is the mood of others, like
Aiax, brooding over the loss of the prize of arms. It is a scene of hopelessness,
The descent is easy ; but to retrace the steps—the Roman poet admits the possibility
only to a few, sons of gods, favoured by Jupiter, or inspired by superhuman virtue.
Says the gloomy Italian, “ All hope abandon, ye who enter here.” In the soul, where
all these dread events must happen, first and last, what is this weakness, this
unavailing regret, this void of hope, but the reaction of powers abused, of passions
indulged beyond their proper bound? According to our sowing must be our reaping,
and our daily deeds must be reflecting their colour upon the wall of the inner chamber
of the mind, till it becomes to us either prison or palace, a hell or a heaven,

Ill. THe CONTEMPLATION OF PAST GREATNESS. From the depth of sorrow men
learn to measure past blessings, from the lowest point of abject humilation the
height of previous greatness. ‘Iwo things, in all history, in all legend, in the
experience of daily life, impress the imagination, and through the imagination the
moral conscience—the rise of the obscure into glory, and the fall of the great inte
ignominy. Such changes hint at a great law, the prince ple of which is cne, the effects
of whose cperation are dual and diverse. The King of Babel had been as the morning
star, the type of the Orient in all its splendour of intellectual light, heralding the
dawn and the onward march of the sun, How true a proposition is it in rtereuce

10


254 THE BOUK OF ''HE PROPHET ISAIAH. (ca. xiv. 1—32


© human culture, “Light comes from the East”! Babylonia was an early centre
of such culture; and dimly through the records of the past we may there discern
all those passions and energies at work in that great kingdom which lead first to
external greatness, then to moral corruption, finally to external ruin. The remains of
Oriental architecture, as significant to those who understand the e'hica] meaning of
art as a whole literature could have been, speak of a towering ambition, such as the
prophet here describes. In no way can we be more astonished at the vastness of the
passions of man’s little heart, than in contemplaiing those colossal tombs and temples
and palaces of ancient lands. ‘They seem a visible challenge to time, a defiance
of death, an arrozation of divinity and of immortality. To the prophet they, with
other accompaniments of despotic power, appeared as the attempt of vain man to
measure himself with heaven. The secret tiiought he detects in the heart of the
tyrant is, “To heaven I will ascend, beyond Gcd’s stars I will raise my throne, and sit
down on the mount of all the gods, in the extreme north; will ascend to the heights
of the clouds, and make myself like the Most Hi_b.” ‘The north was in ancient thought
generally the sacred quarter. Zeus dwelt in lympus, on the north borders of Greece.
Apollo came from the Hyperboreans, the people beyond the north wind, Zion is “on
the sides of the north, the city of the great king.” And in lis epiphany in the tempest,
Jehovah comes in majesty from the north. The maguificent heathen would then
have rivalled him. He said in his heart as he looked on his palaces and hanying
gardens, a8 he reviewed his troops, as he listened to the echoes of Wesiern alarms,
“By the strength of my hand I have done it;” “ As one gathereth deserted eggs, J
have gathered all the earth” (ch. x. 11, 14). He felt himself to be like a magnificent
tree, deftly striking his roots through the whole succulence of the earth, overtopping
all other growths, sheltering all fowls in his branches, all beasts, yea, all nations, in his
shade. All other trees, the cedar in the garden of God, the firtree and the chestnut,
seemed to envy him (Ezek, xxx.). And now! Oh, tragic change! his boughs are
broken, his branches scattered on the earth, his shade deserted; the birds and beasts
remain, but only as bhaunters of a ruin. ‘Now thou art cast into hell, mto the
lowest depth.”

IV. ASTONISHMENT AT PRESENT IGNomMINY. 1. The world looks on. “Is this the
man who made the earth tremble through and through, who shook the kinedoms
tc their base? wio made the world as a desert, and destroyed its cities, and let not
his captives return home?” The sceve is changed from Hades; no louger is the
monarch viewed even as in the underworid, to which only the buried conid pass. It
is an outcast corpse the spectators look upon, and no sight could to ancient feeling
be more abhorrent, or signify more deeply the curse of a hero’s end. ‘lhe other kings
of the peojles rest each in his magnificent mausoleum; he lies amongst the meanest
corpses of those slain upon the battle-ficld; not even hastily interred in a hole filled
with stones, but liable to be trampled underfoot by the victor. He who would have
grasped the earth in his ambitious embrace, cannot now find six feet of it to shelter his
remains. The lurid light of such an end is cast back upon the beginning. To a
prophetic eye false greatness is already smitten by the Divine judgment, the effects
of which will be one day the amazement and the horror of men. 2. The pro; het reads
the moral. Such an end of the waster of lands and fierce murderer of peoples must
serve as example aid prototype to all times. It is no mere personal, but a dyuastic
doom, ‘the seed of evil-doers, the tyrant’s progeny, will pass into oblivion; his song
will expiate his offences in a bath of blood, so that the very species of human savages
called “ tyrants” siall no more be propagated. Every general truth has its particular
application to a given time and condition; so every particular catastrophe that fills the
nations with amaze is to be traced up to some grat central ever-working cause. And
for good or for evil, there is organic sympatliy.in the lives and fates of individuals,
If we wrench ourselves not free from the family vice, what can we expect but the
family doom? If we are partakers, by the force of custom or example, of the sins of
our party, profession, class, we may not be exempt from tle moral disgrace which
must sooner or later overtake it.

Vv. Cosine ORACLE. It uses images of the utmost energy and tragic vehemence.
Jehovah will root out of Babylon name and remnant, sprout and shoot. It shall
become the heritage of “hedgehogs and swamps,” shall be swept with the besom


OH. XIv. 1—32.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 255


rE


of destruction. The doom of great cities—what is it but the doom of individuals
“writ large”? In that doom may be seen eternal justice; can we find mixing with
it eternal mercy, eternal love? In these scenes of horror on earth, in the reflected
miseries of Hades? Must history ever pursue its spiral course, and epicycle upon
epicycle of sin and damnation eternally succeed? Let us fall back upon our deepest
hopes, and think that the yearning of the creature cannot exceed that of the Creator,
and that at the foundation of hell’s floor must still be Divine justice and love. So
Dante sang—


“Justice the founder of my fabric moved ;
To rear me was the task of power Divine,
Supremest wisdom, and primeval love.”


J.


Vers. 24—28.—Oracle concerning Asshur. The fate of Sennacherib and his host
appears to be introduced in order to confirm the solemn oracle just delivered con-
cerning Bab lon (see Exposition).

I, THE sTRONG ASSURANCES OF JEHOVAH. He is represented here and in other
passages as taking an oath that he will fulfil his Word. But in such oaths he can
appeal to no mightier name, he can invoke no power more awful than his own.
Homer makes Zeus swear by the Styx, the dark river of the underworld. And Zeus
is himself subject to necessity, to fate. But the God of the Hebrews comprises in
himself all the associations of woeful necessity, of irresistible fate; in a word, of law, of
intellizence at one with will, of will equa] to the execution of all the designs of
intelligence. Where men are weak it is that the brain is separated from the band and
the foot. The thoughts that rise before them, they either cannot or they dare not
translate immediately into fact. A chain of means, of secondary causes, lies between
them and their ends. And so we have the great thinkers who cannot act, and the
great actors who fail in thought. Magnificent poets, philosophers, drea ers, on the one
side; on the other, magnificent couquerors—Alexanders, Napoleons ; both stupendous
failures. In God are unitid omniscience and omnipotence—the All-Thinker, the All-
Doer. His purposes are equivalent to deeds; his deeds are living and visible thoughts.

Il. THe pooM oF THE AssYRIAN. (See ch. x.) The prophetic tense and the pro-
phetic mode of contem) lation may refer to the past; so here. ‘lhe thought is expressed
in Jer. |. 18, 19, “ Behold, I will punish the King of Babylon and his land, as I have
punished tlie King of Assyria.” ‘The one eveut was a pledge of the other (Delitzsch).
Asshur had been bioken in Canaan, had been subdued upon the mountains of the Holy
Land, and the people been released froin his yoke and his burdens.


“Like the leaves of the forest when summer is green,
The host with their banners at sunset were seen;
Like the leaves of the forest when autumn hath blown,
That host on the morrow lay wither’d and strown. . « «


® And the widows of Asshur were loud in their wail,
And tiie idols were broke in the temple of Baal ;
And the might of the Gentil:, unsmote by the sword,
Hath melted like snow in the glauce of the Lord!”


IVI. THe rwmMvuTas.e counset or JEHovaH. 1. Jts contents. It is earth-embracing,
and its symbol is the “ hand stretched out over all the heathen.” Assyria and Babylon
destroyed, heathendom must vibrate through all its extent, and totter to its fall,
Turning from the particular to the yeneral—for only in this way can we reap the full
instruction of such oracles—and standing amidst the ruins of fallen, or on the ground
of now shaking empires, we may listen in awe to the ever-living voice of him who saith,
“J will shake all nations, till their Desire come.” About a thousand years later, and
we find Rome shaking beneath that outstretched hand. We may see the mementoes of
that shock to-day, in the ruins of the Palatine and the Forum and the Sacred Way.
Yet a thousand years, and avain she shakes, this time to her inmost couscience, beneath
that hand, that voice of judgment, At the Reformation it might seem that the
Almighty was about to make a short work in the earth. But a thousand years are in


256 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [ou. x1v. 1—82.


ee Le


his sight but a day. “The mills of God grind slowly, yet they grind exceeding small.”
Let us remember that the great cycles of history are repeated in small iu the round of
each man’s life. The great world, the macrocosmos, is mirrored in the microcosmos, the
small world of each conscience. Above every one of us the hand is outstretched—shall
it be to bless or to curse? “ To-day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.”
2. Its inflewibili’y. Who can break this counsel, who hinder or turn back that hand?
And what people or confederacy of peoples, knit in closest alliance of arms and girt with
all the furniture of war, can resist dissolution, when once his thought is against them,
his hand upraised? “ Take counsel together, and it shall come to nonght; speak the
word, and it shall not stand: for God is with us” (ch. viii. 10). So may the lovers of
the truth and the right confidently exclaim, “ God is with us.” What the superstitious
man calls his luck or fortune, what the metaphysician obscurely designates as necessity,
or the nature of things, or the supremacy of the moral Law, is to the religious man the
inflexible will of a personal Being. The duty, the art, the wisdom, the salvation of life,
is ix obedience to that will. It is to know that we are here to be acted upon by that
wil rather than to act from our own self-centre. We are “God’s puppets.” He gives
tw n.en and to nations a certain space wherein to learn what freedom is, and what its
soou-reached limits. Then comes the higher lesson, to know that freedom can only be
secured by obedience; that in the choice of the supreme will for our own will, we
recover that better freedom in which is strength and peace and stability for ever.—J.


Vers. 28—32.— Oracle concerning Philistia. I. THE HISTORICAL OCCASION. It dates
from about the time of the death of Ahaz, and was on his death incorporated with the
book. The Edomites and the Philistines, who had given way before the powers of
David, had taken advantage of the weakness of Ahaz’s government to invade Judah
‘They had taken possession of several towns in the south of the land (2 Chron. xxviii.
17,18). The Syrians in the front and the Philistines in the rear seemed to threaten and
devour the land with open mouth (ch. ix. 12). But the year of the death of Ahaz
brought Hezekiah to the throne, who successfully resisted Assyria and smote the
Philistines to Gaza (2 Kings xviii. 8), not only recovering the cities, but deieating them
in their own land. To this eventful time, then, the oracle belongs.

Il, Warnine To Paiuistia. 1. The might of the Davidic house. Its symbols are
a rod, a staff, a serpent, a cerastes or basilisk, and a flying dragon. The “rod that
smote Philistia ” was the sceptre of David and of Solomon, later wielded py Azariah or
Uzziah (2 Kings xv. 1—7; 2 Chron. xxvi. 1), who broke down the wall of Gath and
of Gabneh and of Ashdod. But the conflict with Syria and Ephraim had brought the
power of Judah low; the rod was broken in pieces. But the power of Judah is no
mere rod; a root is the fitting symbol of its inexhaustible vigour. The terebinth oak
is not perished when its leafy honours have fallen (ch. vi. 13), and from the root of
Jesse a young sucker shall yet spring (ch. xi. 1). With this symbol is connected that
of the serpent, also widely viewed in antiquity as a chthonic symbol, é.e. as representing
the powers supposed to be seated in the heart of the earth. The serpent is a “son of
earth,” and this significance may be scen illustrated in the story of the appearance of
the serpents, which were devoured by horses, to Croesus. The horses symbolized the
invading enemy, under Cyrus (Herod., i. 78). The Greek legends of the slaying of a
serpent or dragon by a hero, seem in several cases to denote the taking possession of a
land—or of a sanctuary—Apollo, Perseus, Bellerophon. If such be the meaning of the
serpent here, then, says the prophet, so far from destroying the serpent of Judah, its
power in the land, the Philistine will encounter a more dangerous and deadly form of
that power. A cerastes or basilisk shall arise in the person of Hezekiah; nay, a flying
dragon shall be the ripe fruit from the indestructible root. The flying dragon is
explained by the ‘'arzum to be vhe Messiah, so that the reference would be to the
Davidie government of the ‘r.ediate future under Hezekiah, and that of the ultimate
future under the coming Anointed (Delitzsch), Ewald, however, refers to the Assyrian.
In religious sy nboiism the dragon stands for the foul fiend; in historical symbolism
he may stand for the avenger, as here. The tribal ensign of Dan was in like manner
the serpeut (Gen. xlix. 17), whose deadly hatred to the Philistines appeared in the
deeds of the hero Samson, 2, Hffects of the Davidic rule. The poor will feed upon
Jehovah’s pasture, and the helpless lie down in peace. Deeply depressed, menaced on


cH. x1v.1—22.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 257


——


every hand, they shall nevertheless fin1, under the care of the good Shepherd, nourish-
ment and tranquillity unbroken by fears (cf. Zeph. iii, 12, 18). The foe will be
eradicated by starvation or put to the sword. The picture may be regarded, as other
similar pictures, as an allegory of the rule of the eternal Messiah, the enjoyment of the
eternal sabbath. For historical relations ever vive back some reflection of eternal
verities, and these verities enter iuto and govern the events of every epoch. From
every time of national distress, of personal trouble, the spiritual song, undying in its
truth and assurance, may be heard arising, “ Jehovah is my Shepherd ; I shall not want
- . . He prepareth for me a table in the presence of mine enemies,”

III, Caum amipst THE storms. Let the strong cities of Philistia lift up the ery of
wailing. A smoke, and behind the smoke dense unbroken ranks of men are rolling
from the north. Firm is their discipline, united and invincible their army. What,
then, will be Judah’s fate? Shall she, too, melt away in the fire? What answer do
the messengers of the nations bring? “ That Jehovah hath founded Zion, and upon it
the sufferers of my people trust.” Nothing can bring us triumph but the adherence to
principle; nothing should dismay us where that adherence is constant. ‘ Reverence
the Lord of hosts himself, aud let him be your Fear, and let him be your Dread; and
he shall be for a Sanctuary ” (ch. viii. 13). “ |’ehold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a
Stone, a tried Stone, a precious Corner-stone, a sure Foundation: he that believeth shall
not make haste” (ch. xxviii. 16). The “ poor of the flock” (Zech. xi. 7), the despised,
suffering, and persecuted in every age, are welcome to the sanctuary and to the heart of
the g:eat God. While the tempest rages without and his judgments are abroad in the
earth, they are shcltered in his pavilion, concealed in the secret place of the Most High.
The lowly heart, looking up te vhat hand, so awlul in menace towards all that is “high
and lifted up,” sees it relax, expand, become as a canopy of protecting tenderness, The
suffering are stronger than they seem; they know a way of escape from the worst;
they can flee to the Name of Jehovah as a strong Tower; tliey can enter thcir closet and
shut to the door; they can pray to the Father in secret. ‘be thought of eternal Love
is itself a “little sanctuary,” whose walls, as they tarry there, recede, open, and afford
the prospect of eternal day.—J.


Ver. 5.—The false staff. “The Lord hath broken the staff of the wicked.” True of
the King of Babylon, this is true also of every evil man. It was a sentence that God
commanded to be taken up as a proverb against him, and it may be illustrated as a
universal proverb in all ages and nations. Men lean on a staff; and unless God be
the Rod and the Staff, assuredly it will be broken.

J. HEALTH Is a STAFF. Men lean on that. A well-organized frame end a well-
strung nervous system cause men to mistake the tranquil composure of good spirits for
the peace which only religion can bestow. Then comes the season of affliction; the
silver cord, if not loosened, is weakened ; the golden bowl, symbol of the brain, if not
broken, is sadly shaken; and with broken health, all else seems broken too. The spirits
fail, the inspirations of enterprise and endeavour are weakened, and the proud staff is
broken.

Il. Weatrta 1s a sTAFF. Wicked men find that money “answereth all things.” It is
the key that unlocks the gates of art and travel, and the loadstone that draws genius and
beanty to their festivals. It seems a strong support, and, leaning on it, many are tempted
to pity the noblest hero if he be poor, and the rarest intellect if it be liuked with low
estate. But riches take to themselves wings and flee away. The bank breaks, the
factory burns, the funds fall, the mines are exhausted ; and then, with the departure of
riches, departs also feigned affection and the flattere:’s praise, “ How hath the golden
city ceased |”

III. Power 1s 4 starr. They shall say (ver. 4), “‘ How hath the oppressor ceased!”
ite. For wicked men often have such power over others that they can use them for
their evil schemes, and bribe them so that they tell no tales that shall bring shame and
dishonour. But this does not last. Some “ revealing hour” comes. The man that has
been “lifted up” is laid low; he can no longer use his old power. Lost character has
left him discrowned. Even worldly men will not trust him now. ‘The Josephs are
honoured ; the Daniels are trusted. The Mordecais are doomed. No staff will support
ip 'ife or death but the old staff: “ Thy rod and thy stall they comfort me.”—W. M.8.

ISAIAH. 8


258 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.  [cn. xiv. 1—82.


a


Vers. 1—3.— The reign of sin and the rest of God. Taking the period of exile as
a picture of the condition of the human soul when it is in a foreign land, under the
sway of the enemy, apart and afar from its true heritage, and regarding the return and
the “rest” (ver. 3) in their own land as a picture of the soul’s condition when it has
been brought back to God and has re-entered ou his service, we have here some valuable
sugve-tions,

I. OuR SPIRITUAL CONDITION UNDER THE REIGN OF SIN. 1. Jt is one in which we
may look for sorrow, and sorrow unreiieved by those alleviations in which godliness
finds its solace (ver. 8), Sin and sorrow go hand-in-hand, or, if not thus conjoined,
the latter follows surely and steadily on the steps of the former. ‘The grosser trans-
gressious bring the sterner miseries, but all departure from God and from rectitude
leads down to trouble, to dissatisfaction, to sadness of spirit. 2. Jt ts one in which
avaxiety is alwiys appropriate. “Thy fear” (ver. 3). For it is a condition in which
the Divine Disposer of everything is unreconciled to us, is decidedly and seriously dis-
pleased with us, is warning us of an evil doom; in which we have no right to reckon
on the continuance of his kindness for another hour, and in which the termination of
our earthly course places us hefore a judgment-bar at which we are not prepared to stand,
3. It is one of spiritual bondaye. “Thy hard bondage” (ver. 3). How truly sin is
a slavery we sce when we regard it in its more flagrant forms. We see the drunkard,
the opium-eater, the liar, so enslaved by their respective vices, that, try how they may
to tree themselves, they are held down as by an unseverable chain. The children of
folly are its pitiable victims, held in a “hard bondage” from which they strive to
escape, and ofien strive in vain. All sin, that of omission as well as commission, is
enslaving. The withholding from God that which he claims leas the soul down into
a coufirmed habit of neglect, of indifference, of procrastination, which holds it fast in its
evil toils. 4. /¢ 7s one of exile. Vhey who are living in sin are living in a country
which, emphatically, is not “ their own land” (ver. 1). They were created to live with
God, consciously near to him, rejoicing in him, engaged per;etually in his service;
under the sway of sin, human souls are living afar off, in a fureign country, in a “strange
land ” (Ps. cxxxvii. 4).

Il. THE REST WHICH GOD GIVES US HERE. 1. He sets his heart on us to deliver us.
He “ has mercy oa us; he cliouses us” (ver 1). He looks upon cach one of us with dis-
tinguishing interest, aflection, yearning. He “ earnestly remembers ” us, that he may
save us. 2. Heleads us back to himsel/. By different ways he leads us home, and “ sets
us in our own land.” He so acts upon our souls, in his grace and in his provideuce,
that we are led to penitence and faith, and thus find ourselves back in his favour and
his service. 3. Tie condition to which God restores us is one of spiritual rest. (1)
We rest from sorrow in the possession of inward peace and abiding joy. (2) We rest
from fear in the enjoyment of well-grounded érust, and a hope which will never make
ashamed. (3) We rest from bondage in the heritage of a spiritual freedom (John
viii. 86; Rom. viii. 21; Gal.v.1, 13). 4. The rest which we have from him is consistent
with a large meusure of holy usefulness. The children of Israel were to take back with
them to their own land these “ straugers,” who were thenceforth to be their servants
instead of their oppressors (vers. 1, 2). So are the children of God, by patient,
strenuous activity, to win their adversaries to the faith and love of Christ; to make
them possessors of the privileges of the kingdom of God even with themselves, and to
secure their active help in the conquests they have still to make.—C,


Vers. 4—23.—Sin and its humiliations, This strong, poetical utterance of Isaiah
though primarily directed against one particular city and, probably, one individual king,
may convey to us all some serviceable lessons respecting sin generally, and more
especially the humiliations which are in its train. We gather therefrom—

I, ‘HAT THE OPPRESSIVENESS OF SIN, THOUGH LONG CONTINUED, WILL CERTAINLY
BE BROKEN DowN. (Vers, 4—7.) Sin is constantly, naturally, oppressive. It grasps
at power that it may wield it to its own satisfaction, irrespective of the rights of the
weak and the helpless, Often its usurjation, like that of Babylon, is very long con-
tinued, The oppressed are weary under their affliction; they cry patiently to Heaven
ior deliverance and redress; they are sometimes apt to think that they are forgotten bv
the righteous and merciful One, But they are not unobserved by him (Hxod. iii. 7).


oH. xIv. 1—32.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 259


He hears their cry ; he determines on their relicf; at the right moment he intervenes.
“The staff of the wicked is bruken.” “ He who smote” is smitten down, and “ the
whole earth is at rest.”

Il, THaT 8IN MAKES NO TRUE FRIENDS, Adversity is the test of faithfulness. Until
the dark hour comes we cannot be quite sure whether our acquaintances are, or are not,
our friends ; then we “ know the proof” of them. In the hour of Babylou’s discomfi-
ture there would be found “ none to hinder ” (ver. & her destruction. Her allies would
fail her then; her dependencies would make no effort to save her; she would be “ alone
when she fell” (Eccles. iv. 10). The “ friends” whom sinners make are not “ friends in
deed,” for they will not prove to be “ friends in need.” If financial ruin, the loss of his
good name, overwhelming bereavement, protracted sickness, the near prospect of death,
should overtake a man, it is not to his ungodly companions he would resort, for to them
he would look in vain. The man of God will not be without those who will graciously
and generously intervene to “hinder” the calamity which impends, to alleviate the
sorrows which are wounding the spirit.

\I1. THaT THE REACH OF SIN, IN ITS EFFECTS, I8 EXCEEDINGLY WIDE. (Ver. 8 )
The trees of the mountain forest rejoice in the downfall of Babylon. The requirements
of that selfish and remorseless power extended even so far as to the cedars of Lebanon.
They felt the weight of its tyranny, the edve of its exactions. The evil vousequences of
the unlawful exercise of power are never confined within a narrow compass; they spread
far and wide; they reach places, people, g-nerations, which we miglit have supposed
they would nor touch, No man who uses his powers wrongiully can calculate how
far the evil will extend, or how many will be glad when there is “no more strength in
his right hand.” The most striking lesson in this vivid and eloquent passave is—

1V. THAT SIN CARRIES SAD HUMILIATIONS IN ITS EVIL TRAIN. (Vers. 9, 19.) The
humiliation to which the proud monarch of Balylon is subjected is painted in rich and
glowing colours (see Exposition). From the loftiest height of honour he is cast down
to the lowest depth of shame; from the softest bed of luxury to the “ narrow house
of death,” where the worm will be his couch and his coverlet (ver. 11). God abases
the sinner; to whatever height he climbs, from that sumiiit he must come duwn to the
ground and suffer the painful smart of humiliation, 1. It may be from the point of
impious assumption. (Vers. 13—15, 18, 19; see Dan, v. 22, 23, 80; Acts xii, 21—23.
2. It may be trom the summit of human authority and power. (Vers. 9—12, 16, 17.
3. It may be trom the position of the common heritage of man. ‘They who have
climbed the highest must fall the furthest, but inasmuch as we have all sinned we must
all pay one of the invariable penalties of sin. We cannot continuously ascend, we
cannot maintain our position at a certain height. The hour comes when we must
decline. Even if there be not for usa sudd n and precipitous fall—as to most of the
vain-glorious and oppressive there will be—there must come the gradual descent: the
fading of faculty, the diminution of strength, the waning of influence, the advance of
conscious fvebleness, increasing dependence on others, the sick-chamber, death, and the
dark, lonely grave. Nothiug can save us from this declension, this dishonour, But
there are in the gospel of Christ blessed and glorious compensations, Instead of death,
is life eternal; instead of humiliation, everlasting glory.—U.


Ver. 20.—Tie children of the ungodly; or, parental responsibility. “The seed of
evil-doers shall never be renowned.” We must not insist on a litera] fulfilment of these
words. It is not intended that there has never been an instance in which the children
of wicked parents have attained to celebrity. Here, as elsewhere, the spirit, not the
letter, “ giveth life.” The ill fortune which attends the sons of the guilty may be
regarded as—

I. A DISTINCT, DIVINELY ORDERED PENALTY. Under the old dispensation it certainly
was this, ‘hat was a dispensation in which temporal rewards and punishments were
almost everything; then the spiritual and the eternal were only faintly felt as wotives
to action. And one of the most potent considerations which could be brousht to bear
was the effect of a man’s behaviour on the fortunes of his children; consequently we
continually meet with the prospects of “ thy seed,” for good or for evil, as a powerful
incentive to rivhteousness, or dissuasion from sin. There can hardly be a stroneer
force than this; where everything else would fail, this might succeed. ‘There is nothing


260 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cn, xiv. 1—82.


LE  —————————————————


that reaches us so surely, that moves us so mightily, as an argument in which our
children’s fortunes are concerned. Whatever “touches them touches the apple of our
eye.” And here God is sa\ing to those who were showing signs of wandering from his
service, “ If you fall into great sin and grievous condemnation, you not only do your-
selves irreparable wrong, but you involve your children also in misery andshame, The
penalty of your guilt will go down to them.”

Il. THE INEVITABLE RESULT OF RIGHTEOUS LAW. It is likely, in avery high degree,
that the children of evil-doers will follow in the steps of their parents, and stoop to the
shame to which they fall. All things are against them. 1. They are without the
incentive which comes {rom inheriting a good name and the natural desire to perpetuate
it. 2. They are weighted with the positive and most serious disadvantage of bearing
a name which is dishonoured. 3, They are depressed by a positive and disheartening
sense of shame, if they have not imbibed the spirit and acquired the habits of their
parents. In the latter case (which is by far the worse of the two): 4. They suffer in
their character, and therefore in their career, from the degenerating influences to which
they are subjected. And without the preserving and directing principles which make
life a true success, impelled by the passions, the prejudices, the ambitions which con-
stitute it a lamentable failure, they do not rise to “‘renown;” they sink down into
disregard, into actual disrepute, into open shame. (1) This is not positively inevitable.
A determination to pursue a holy course, under the guidance of God, in the service of
Jesus Christ, will redeem the unlikeliest life from failure, and lift it up to honour and
usefulness, (2) If not for other reasons, then for the sake of our children, let us walk
in the ways of godliness; for their present and lasting interests are bound up in the
choice we make as to the path we will ourselves pursue.—C,


Vers, 24—27.—Divine purpose and Divine power. We have our thoughts directed
in this passage to—

I, THE Divine purposE. “TI have thought ... I have purposed .. . this is the
purpose . . . upon the whole earth,” etc. God had a special purpose respecting Assyria,
and he may have had a distinct purpose in inspiring Isaiah to pronounce at this especial]
time what it was, viz. that, in the dark days of Babylonian captivity, his people might
remember its fulfilment, aud be assured of an accomplishment for which they had still
to wait. But these expressions suggest to us the existence of Divine purposes in the
mind of God, dating from the remote past and stretching on into the far future. God’s
purposes in regard to his creatures have been or are: 1. Creative. In the “ far back-
ward and abysm of time” he determiued to call worlds, beings, intelligent and immortal
spirits, into existence, to be the objects of his thonght, care, love; to many of whom he
himself should be the Object of worship, affection, service. 2. Ministrative. His purpose
was that of boundless benefaction—of conferring on multitudes and millions of sentient
beings a lile of happiness and, to a vast number, that of true dignity and worth. 8.
Punitive. His purpose has been to punish, never indeed under the impulse of mere
resentment, but always iu the interests of righteousness and, ultimately, in that of true
happiness also. 4. /testorative. He has purposed, and does purpose, to restore ; either
(1) his people to a heritage they have forfeited, or (2) those who have wandered from
his service to the spiritual and moral integrity from which thev have fallen.

II. Tue Divine power. “So shall it come to pass . .. so shall it stand ... I will
break . . . I will tread under foot . . . Thisis the hand that is stretched out . . . Who
shall disannul . . . who shall turn back” (his hand)? It is true that: 1. God has
taken time to effect his purpose; eg. the building of this world for man’s residence,
the preparation of the world for Christ’s coming. 2. God has permitted his rebellious
children to lessen the sum of happiness and worth they would otherwise have possessed.
3. Gud’s beneficent design for the redemption of the world by the gospel has been
hindered by external opposition and by internal shortcoming. Yet it remains true
and this is the larger as it 1s the brighter half of the truth. that: (1) God’s purpose of
beneficence, it it can be said to have been checked, has not been def-ated: from his
strong and bountiful hand he bas been bestowing life, joy, blesseduess, excellency, which
is quite incalculable, which entirely baffles our imagination as it is beyond our reckon-
ing. (2) God’s purpose of punishment has been and will be fulfilled ; witness the Flood
the outcasting of the guilty Canaanites, the destruction of “the cities of the plain,” the


on. xiv. 1—32.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 261


decimation of Sennacherib’s army and “the breaking of the Assyrian,” the extinction of
Babylon, ete. And now, though impiety holds up its head for years, and though vice
staves off the evil day of disease and death, and though crime long eludes the pursuer,
yet the hand of God does come down in retribution; his holy purpose cannot be dis-
annulled. ‘ Let sinners look to it” (see Numb, xxxii. 23; Prov. xi, 21; Ps. xxxvii.
35, 36). 3. God’s purpose of restoration will one day be accomplished. This is the
purpose which is purposed wpon the whole eirth,” and “ this is the hand that is stretched
out upon all the nations.” “ The Lord of hosts hath purposed.” There may be many
obstacles in the way. Difficulties may, to the eye of human calculation, seem actually
insurmountable; the estimable forces of truth may appear unequal to cope with the
overwhelming agencies of error and evil. Lut this our great hope is not a bold enterprise
of man; it is the purpose of the living God, the Lord of hosts. “ His hand is stretched
out, and who shall turn it back ?” Let the Christian worshipper offer expectant prayer ;
let the Christian workman vo up to his post with holy confilence; for the purpose of
God, though it be long delayed, shall assuredly be fulfilled.—C.


Vers. 29—32.—A truth, a test, and a solution. We have here—

I. A TRUTH RESPECTING AN INDIVIDUAL DEATH; viz. that we may hope or may
fear too much from the death of one man. Philistia was evidently inclined to hope
too much from the death of a Jewish king; another was arising (Hezekiah) who would
be to his predecessor what a cockatrice was to a serpent—a still more formidable enemy.
(2 Kings xviii. 8). The wicked nation, or the unprincipled party, or the unscrupulous
man that indulges a feeling of security becanse some strong opponent is dead may,
probably wa//, find itself (himseif) miserably disappointed. The resources of a righteous
providence are not exhausted, thouvh a very pillar of justice be fallen. Or, on the other
hand, the righteous may fear too much from the death of a powerful friend. Will not
the good cause perish now that the tongue of its most able advocate is silent in
death? Christianity did not perish with the departure of Christ or with the death of
the apostles. The Father of spirits will not let righteousness expire for want of righteous
men, whom he can create and endow and send forth into the world.

Il. A TEST FoR THE commuNITyY. Is the nation, is the Church, doing its work, ful-
filling its Master’s will concerning it? One good, if not faultless, test is found in the
answer to the question—J/s it caring for its humblest members? If nothing better
can be said for the nation than that its monarch is living in magnificence, or that its
rulers or nobles are possessed of great wealth and rejoicing in splendid luxury, then is
that nation rapidly descending to ruin. If nothing better can be said for the Church
than that its hierarchy is powerful or its mini-ters well sustained, then is that Church
a long way from its Lord’s ideal. It is when it can be said of the one that “ the first-
born (the poorest) of the poor feed, and the needy lie down in safety ” (ver. 30), and of
the other that “the poor of the people trust in it,” or “ betake themselves unto it ”
(ver. 32),—it is then that the end of their existence is answered. ‘The “community ”
exists for “ the common people,” and especialiy the Church exists for the “ little ones,”
the poor, the needy, the unbefriended, the young, the dependent.

IlI. THe soLturion or prosperity. What should be the answer given to the “ mes-
sengers of the nation” inquiring about the deliverance of Jerusalem? This: “ The
Lord hath founded Zion ” (ver. 32). This is the best account we can give to others,
as it is the best we can cive to ourselves, of any deliverance or of any prosperity we
may be enjoying. ‘To refer it to good fortune is shallow and irreverent. To ascribe it
to our own ability or energy, or to that of our friends, is insufficient and, it may be,
spiritually harmful. We are safe and wise in attributing it to God (Ps. Ixxxvii. 75
Ixxxix. 17; exv. 1; 1 Cor. iv. 7). Our faculties, our resources, our opportunities, are al.
of him, and from him come the energizing force and the overruling power without
which all our efforts must be in vain. The reverent and religious spirit (1) gladly
dedicates to the cause of Christ and of his Church all that it can yield, and (2) thank-
fully refers all prosperity enjoyed to his guiding finger, his protecting power, his life-
giving Spirit.—C.


Ver. 1.—God’s mercy may delay, it does not fail. The captivity in Babylon seems
to be ix the thought of the prophet, and it would be a long and weary time, during


262 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (ou. xiv. 1—32,


which the people, even the faithful among the people, might think God had “ forgotten
to be gracious,” or “ delayed his coming ;” so assurances are viven that, however it may
please God to tarry, holding back the fulfilment of his promises, they are always “ yea
and amen,” and at the last it will be found that “ not one word hath failed of all that
the Lord hath spoken.” The historical connection of the passage is that the fail
of Babylon, to which previous reference has been made, was to be designed, overruled,
by Jehovah for the fulfilment of his promise and the restoration of his people. Gud
is said to “yet choose Israel,” because permitting them to go into captivity was an
appearance of having temporarily cast them off. In illustration of the topic suggested
by the passage, we note—

I. Mercy can promIszE. Judgment is always blended with mercy. Mercy must
get in its gracious and comforting word. Judgment without mercy is only crushiig.
Mercy holds before us the hope that enables us to endure the judgment, and learn the
lessons of it. Show what the Captivity would have been to Israel without the promises,
and the hope of return when the juigmeut had wrought its work.

Il. Mercy CAN HOLD BACK FULFILMENT OF PROMISE. Illustrated in the forty
years of wandering in the desert: an unexpected holding back, necessitated by the
wilfulness and murmuring of the people. Or by David, promised the kingdom, but
required to wait for it, even after the death of Saul.

lll. Mercy cAN KEEP FIRM TO CONDITIONS OF PROMISE. This is the real reason
of the delay. All promises are conditivnal; and it could be neither wisdom nor
kindness ou God’s part to show indifference to the conditions. Our not meeting
couditions is the real reason for prolonged and renewed dclays. God never reaily
tarries. His deliverances and benedictions always come at the first possible moment.
This may be shown in relation to the Captivity; and the promised Messiah only
appeared ‘“ when the fulness of time was come.”

1V. Mercy CANNOT BE SATISFIED WITHOUT FULFILLING PROMISES AT LAST. We
are to think of God’s mercy as a most active attribute. It is watching for its oppor-
tunity; determined not to be frustrated; working to secure its euds; and, sooner or
later, accomplishing its gracivus purpose. Mcrey will be finally triumphant.—R. T.


Ver. 3.—The Lord’s rest. “The Lord shall give thee rest.” The word “rest ”
summarizes God’s deliverances, and God’s protections, and God’s provisions, for his
captive people. Assurbanipal boasts that he made his Arabian prisoners carry heavy
burdens and build brickwork. And the wearied Hebrews in Egypt were promised the
Lord’s rest in Canaan. Treating the topic in a comprehensive manner, we may say
that the rest which God provides for his creatures must be like himself, and it must Le
adapted to the deepest and best in them.

I. Wuart Gop’s restr Is, 1t must stand related to character, not to mere attributes,
nor to mere conditions, God must, indeed, be thought of as feeling the differences
of outward conditions; the varied states of his creatures do move him to pity,
sympathy, anger, or grief. “In all their affliction he is afflicted.” But he is always
at rest, because the changes in circumstances never imperil the basis-principles of lus
characier. “ Justice and judgment are always the habitation of his throne.” We are
“restless unquiet sprites,” as Keble calls us, not because we are in the midst of variable
tonditions and circumstances, or because these affect our feeling, but because the
varying circumstances put in peril the principles of our character. God has eternal
rest, because if “the elements melted with fervent heat, the earth and all therein were
burned up,” God would never question the perfect fairness and righteousness of his
rule, Or we may put it in this way. Rest comes from the dominion of one faculty in
us; under that dominion all the various powers of our nature fall into order, take th: ir
place, keep the peace, and secure for us rest. War may be a thing of the soul as weil
ax of the circumstances, and the inward war consists in the conflict of motives. Mind,
and will, and judgment, and affections are out of harmony, and make the war in tlie
soul. But we can conceive of nothing like this in God. He is at rest because in his
Divine nature, which is the true aficr which we are imaged, there is the order aii
harmony that follow upon the rule of the highest faculty. And what, for God, may
we think is the highest faculty? This surely is the fullest revelation of God— God
is love.” Ruling love secures rest. And if, for God, the highest is “love,” what is


oH. xIv. 1—32.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 263


the highest for man? Surely it must be “trust.” Then the rest of God is the rest
of churacter and of love; and the rest for man is the rest of character and of trust—of
that character which grows up out of the root “trust.” But, treating the subject in
another way, we may see what is involved in saying that God’s rest, as provided for
man, must be adapted to man, to the deepest and best in him. Rest is the great
longing of every heart. All men everywhcre have this for their supreme quest.
1. Man, as man, is ever seeking rest. It is his “good time coming.” 2. Man, as
a sinner, is ever seeking rest. 3. Man, as redeemed, is ever seckiny rest. God’s rest
for man is a glorious whole, beginning within us, in the faith we set on God, spreading
through all the forces of our being its hallowing influence, and bringing the quietness
and peace of settled, centred character; reaching even to the circumstances in which
we are placed, modifying them, bringing them into its obedience, and so growing from
the rest of the soul to the sublime, eternal, all-embracing rest of heaven.

IJ. Wo MAY WIN THE Lorp’s REST? It is very easy to say that, since it is the
rest of faith, only believers win it. But we have come to talk about “ laith” and
“ believing” in such a way that they are rather magical words to conjure with, than
deep, full, rich expressions whose divinest meanings we grasp and use. Are believers
only those who accept a particular creed, and have a common intellectual conception
of the “ plan of salvation”? Or is the true believer the man who possesses the spirit
of trust; whose heart leans on God; whose loving reliances are on the heavenly
Father? Surely tie faith that saves is the yieliling of the self to God; it is the heait’s
grasp of the righteousness and mercy which are revealed in Jesus Christ. This we can
all win, and this is the Lord’s rest.

Ill. How FaR MAY THIS REST BE A PRESENT CONSCIOUS Possession? It is a
mistaken notion that all the facts aud processes of the religious life must come into
conscious recognition. Our Lord taught us that the growth of souls was like that
of the plants. It goes on secretly, no man knoweth how; no man can trace all the
processes of change from seed to blade, from blade to ear, from ear to full corn in
the ear. Rest may be ours, and we may not think about it. It will never be won
merely by seeking tor it. It will be won by doing our duty, by simple obedieuce, by
living iu the grace of Christ, by perseverance in well-doing, by “ holding fast the pro-
fession of our faith without wavering.” Be ‘steadfast, uninovable, always abounding
in the work of the Lord,” and it will be plain to others that you have reached the
Lord’s rest , and it may be that sometimes the joy of that rest will come into your own
consciousness, and you will feel that “peace passing understanding” which is the
foretaste of the “sweet rest of heaven.”—R. T.


Ver. 4.—God’s judgments on other nations than our own. The “ burdens” are given
as a series of prophetic visions; events pass before the prophet’s mind as in a moving
panorama, and he notes down just the things that more particularly arrested his
attention. A prophetical description of an event will differ from an historical account
of the same event, by being a lare cutline, or else a vigorous word-painting of certain
salient features, rather than a circumstantial detail, Prophetical work is akin to
poetical work, and its due apprehension depends on spiritual sympathy rather than ou
logical precision, The passage commencing with ver, 4 is perhaps the most striking
passage in this series of burdens. It is an ode of triumph on the fall of the Babylouian
monarch, Bishop Lowth says of it that he “ knows not a single instance, in the whole
compass of Greek and Roman poetry, which in every excellence of composition can be
said to equal or even approach it. It may with truth be affirmed tliat there is no
poem of its kind extant in any language, in which the subject is so well laid out, and
so happily conducted, with such variety of images, persons, and distinct actions, with
such rapidity and ease of transition, in so small a compass, as in this ode of [sainh.
For beauty of disposition, strength of colouring, greatness of sentiment, brevity,
perspicuity, and force of expression, it stands among all the monuments of antiquity
unrivalled.” Babylon may be treated as a representative of all the nations surrounding
and related to Israel. They are the great nations of the ancient world, but they
fringed round the land of Canaan on the north, the east, and the south. The prophet
denounces Babylon, and Moab, and Syria, and Egypt, and Tyre, and solemnly warns


Edom,


264 THE BOOK OF THE PROPLIET ISAIAH.  [cuH. xv. 1—3z,


a


I. As NEIGHBOURING NATIONS, THEIR PROPHESIED DESOLATION BECAME A POWER ON
tag Jew. At the time that Isaiah wrvte his first prophecy the uation of Israel
was in a perilous and painful position. The consequences of prolonge! vational self-
will and idolatry were pressing heavily upon it. The great Asiatic nation, which was
to be the Divine agent in their punishment, was coming nearer and uearer to them,
swallowing up, in its irresistible progriss, the intervening kingdoms. ‘he northern
portion, that called Israel in distinction from Judah, was about this time subdued by
Shalmaneser, King of Assyria, and its people were carried away captive. The kings of
Judah only secured a temporary respite by paying a beavy tribute, and the one or two
good kings of the period, such as Hez-kiah and Josiah, did but, as it were, make the
dying taper flare up for a while ere it suidenly went out in darkness, It must have
been a hard thing for a godly man to live in such a time, and in the midst of such
surroundings. We can imagine the pious Jew in such an age saying, “ Are we not the
govenant people of God? [lave we not been, through long years, the special objects
of his guidance, defence, and care? Yet it seerns now as if God had forgotten us.
‘These surrounding nations are in the beight of ;rosperity. Sce Babylon the magni-
ficent! See Damascus the wealthy! Sce Tyre the commercial!” To such as these,
in Jerusalem and in Judea, the prophecies of Isaiah, charged with the “ burdens” of
these prosperous nations, would come as a Divine consolation, and would say to them,
“ Do not confine your thoughts to that only which you can at present see; take in the
future; view things in the larger liyht of him who has all men and nations in his
control, and the long ages in which to work his purposes.” Isaiah shows them that sin
is sin everywhere, it carries its tremendous consequences everywhere. Delays are,
everywhere, but the lony-sulfering patience of God that loudly calls to repentance.
For the unrepentant everywhere—call him Gentile or call him Jew, be he covenanted
- or be he uncovenanted—there is only a “ fearful looking for of judgment and fiery
indignation, which shall devour the adversaries.” But these prophecies were intended
to be a power upon the many as well as upon the few. The many were heedless and
blind, puffed up with their apparent security. For long years the warninys of their
ewrlier national history had been nevlected. In their self-security they had even ceased
to tcar the “Judge of all the earth.” ‘lo them there came the voice as of a man rapt
in sublime vision: “I see the burden of Babylon. Exalted to heaven in privilege;
thrust down to hell in disgrace, | see the place of Baby!on. Behold, it is not: the
haud of the Lord hath swept it away.” ‘ fowl ye, for the day of the Lord is at hand:
it shall come as a destruction from the Almighty.”

Il, AS GREAT AND PROMINENT NATIONS, Gov’s DEALINGS WITH HEM CARRY LESSONS
FOR ALL AFTER GENERATIONS. In order to reach us with helpful moral influences,
God finds it necessary to set the little matters concerning the provress of our little life
in large before us in the histories of nations, A nation is, as it were, a man whose
entire life-course can be watched through from childhood to decay. he invisible
things of morals may be made manilest iu the visible scenes of history. An old
divine has the following remark: “ God can punish nations in this world, but for the
punishment of individuals he wants both this world and the next.” We live such
brief lives here on earth that we cannot get exteusive and worthy ideas of the issues
of sin from studying merely our own experiepees, Nor can we, even from the most
striking cases of individual sutlering, as a result of sin, discern the full majesty of the
Divine indignation. But the life of a nation can be set forth in its completeness ; it is
a finished whole. We can read the story of Babylon and ‘Tyre, from cradle to grave.
The life of a nation is long enough for us to trace im its history its growth, ita sin, its
fall, and its woe. And the calamities that come at last upon sinful nations are figured
in such aspects of terror as to create the profoundest impression on us. ‘his may be
illustrated by the Persian overthrow of Babylon, er the Roman siege of Jerusalem, or
the manifest decay of the ‘lurkish empire in our own times. 1. From this subject we
lcarn to have faith in God about the nations of the earth. God has set England in
the very midst of the world-kingdoms, very much as he set old Canaan in the centre
of the great ancient empires, on purpose that we might be a gracious power on them,
and learn wise lessons from them. God is painting truth for us in his dealings with
them, And God's ways, whether in the small for individuals, or in the large for
nations, are ways of chastisement, are instinct with love; are mtended to do them good


ou. xIv. 1—32.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 265
ea


in their latter end. So we may have faith in God concerning the nations of the earth.
2. And we learn to have faith in God about a true and godly life. If we only see
lives in the little, as Asaph did, who wailed out the seventy-third psalm, we may easily
be bewildered. But see lives in the large, in the mass, and then we are assured that
iniquity never flourishes through; at the last it always “biteth like a serpent, and
stingeth like an adder.” Many a man dies without the suffering and punishment
exhausting itself. But a nation never dies without the sin-degradations and the
sin-judzments being plain to view upon it. It is true, for ever true, that “ righteous-
ness tendeth unto life.” Sin is simply a tremendous, awful burden, more than any man
can bear, such as no man can bear away. Kept, it must crush unto wounding and woe.
Somehow, somewhere, outside ourselves, we must find a sin-bearer, who can carry our
sin away.—R. T.


Ver. 9.—The Ilebrew conception of She6l. Henderson says, “ In this verse the state
of the dead is represented as thrown into great agitation, on its being announced that
the mighty King of Babylon is about to enter. Personages of the same rank, as the
fittest to conduct the ceremony of his reception, and the most likely to sympathize
with him, are selected to present themselves and address him on the occasion. They
rise from their thrones of state on which they had b-en sitting—perpetnating in mock
majesty the pageant which they had exhibited while on earth.” ‘ Shedl is here used
collectively of the entire population of shades. The word means first a grave, or
individual sepulchre, and then the grave as a general receptacle, indiscriminately
occupied by all the dead without respect to character.” In its further siynification it
means the abode of disembodied souls, and these are regarded poetically as retaining
not only a form, but a position also, analogous to that which they had on earth. It is
an interesting and important, though a difficult question, how far we may regard
Holy Scripture as coloured by the common conceptions of a future state in ancient
times. We need not regard such conceptions as true, because they belonged rather
to the imaginations of men than to the revelations of God. The subject may profitably
be discussed under the following headings; but little or no treatmzat is suvgesti d,
because different conclusions are reached by different schools of theolovians.

I. On the nature and occupations of the future state, or condition of the dead, no
precise revelations were made in olden times.

II. Men seem to have been left to fashion the future by their own imaginations.
The general line of thought seems to have been started by Egy)tian notions concerning
the dead; but eack nation put its characteristic seal upon its eschatology.

III. There is a very real sense in which “ life and immortality have becn brought to
light” by Jesus Christ.

IV. But the light he sheds falls rather on the character of the future than on the
form of it. He meets all that man actually requires to know; he satisfies man in
nothing that he too curiously seeks to know. The essence of Christ's revelation of the
future is, that moral goodness is crowned with everlasting blessedness.—R. 'T,


Ver. 12.—The ambitious spirit in man. The word “ Lucifer” means the “ light-
bringer,” and so has been in modern times associated with our matches. As standing
in this text, it has often beeu taken as a synonym for Satan; but it really is a highly
poetical description of the King of Babylon, and the Babylonian empire is in Scripture
represented as the type of the ambitions, aspiring, tyrannical, and self-idolizing power.
Ver. 13 gives the supreme boasting of this king: “I will ascend into heaven, I will
exalt my throne above the stars of God.” “Babylon had shone forth in the dawn of
the world’s history with surprising lustre, but was perverted by self-adiniration.” It
should be remembered that the ancient Oriental notion was that kings were incarnations
of the Divine, and everything was done to sustain this sentiment. We have evidence
of this as regards Egypt, Assyria, and Babylonia, Such a sentiment must have
fostered national ambitiun to an extravagant height. Treating the King of Babylon as
a type, we consider the veneral subject of the “ ambitious spirit in man,” observing—

J. THAT IT IS THE SPRING OF ENTERPRISE. ‘The *vue spring of human enterprise
should be loyalty and devotion to God. Next to that we place supreme desire for the
well-being of others, the “enthusiasm of humanity.” But these have been made to


266 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.  [on, xrv. 1—32.


ee  ——————


give place, and self-interests have fashioned the ambitions which have inspired men to
heroic and persevering deeds, in all the various spheres of life. Ilustrate, from com-
merce, science, travel, literature, and extension of kingdoms. Ambition has been the
source of achievement and the spirit of progress. It may be shown how far it has
thus proved an element in the well-being of the race. Without ambition the world
could never have been won for man.

IL. Ir 18 ALSO A CONDITION OF INDIVIDUAL GRowTH. Without it a man remains
in the educational and intellectual range of his class, and the social sphere in which he
was born. Illustrate from the farm-labourer, who, through a long life, plods on his
simple way, attaining nothing, because utterly lacking the inspiration of ambition.
The spread of education is chiefly important for this—it shows higher levels, and starts
ambition. A man ceases to grow when he ceaxes to aspire. And the infinite perfection
of God is the sublime height set before us. We may all grow on uutil we have become
like him,

ILL. Iv 18 TNE SPIRIT IN MAN TO WHICH RELIGION APPEALS. Religion finds it
crushed down into hopelessness, and it touches it, quickening it into new vigour and
hope. Relivion finds it diverted to base and merely sell-seeking ends, and it brings it
back to the right lines, and makes it noble and self-denying. Man, made in the image
of God, and made for God, must want to reach God. Relizion sets God before him—
so attractively in the person of the Lord Jesus—that the ambitions are drawn iv, and
become one supreme ambition to be worthy sons and devoted servants of the Lord
God Almighty. The Christian ought to be the most ambitious of all men. A
Christian withont his sacred ambitions does no honour to his name.

IV. Ir Is THE SPIRIT IN MAN WHICH MUST BE KEPT UNDER STRICT LIMITATIONS.
Because ambition so soon and so easily gets beyond self-coutrol—the control of the
sanctified self—and becomes self-willed, self-seeking; a mere striving to attain, whether
God will have us attain or not. Then ambition is like that of the King of babylon,
and it must bring us under Divine arrestings, checkings, and judgments. The law of
limitation is, “ Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness.” There is no
fear for the influence of any ambitions that come after this first and supreme one. The
sin and folly of men’s usual ambitions lie in their putting God last. It is with them
“ali of selt, and none of thee.”—R, T.


Ver. 21.—Children suffering for the fathers. The idea finding poetical expression
here is, that the judgments of God necessarily fall on the last members—the children—
of a corrupt and wicked dynasty. It is in the public and open administrations of
providence, it is in the events and circumstances and history of this world, and not
in the secret dealings of God with each individual soul, that the law of this text
applies. For the sake of moral influence upon the whole race, children are seen to
suffer for their parents’ wrong-doing. But no children can bear, before Gud, the burden
of their parents’ guilt. The law of the children suffering, generation alter generation,
belongs to the solidarity of the race. But that is a purely material conception. Souls
are individual, and every soul must bear entirely its own burden. It may share, it
can share, no one else’s. “So, then, each one of us must give account of himself to
God.” This truth may be fully illustrated along the following line.

I. CHILDREN SUFFERING FOR THE FATHERS IS A PHYSICAL LAW. Much has
recently been discovered concerning the law of heredity, but only the fringe of a great
subject has yet been touched. No greater calamity rests on men than the bodily bias
and tendency viven by diseased or degraded parentage. The familiar illustration is
drunkenness ; the fact equally applies to other sins.

IL, CuILpREN SUFFERING FOR THE FATHERS I8 A MORAL CONDITION. That is, as
an established and recognized fact it is designed to be a moral power on parents. It
is a persuasion to righteousness for the children’s sake. No higher moral force on
affectionate natures can be provided than this consideration, “ You physically injure
those whom you love best, if you are self-indulgent.”

III, CHILDREN SUFFERING FOR THE FATHERS 18 A Divine supement. Striking
men in one of their tenderest places. Men would bear an extreme of suffering, if they
might bear it all themselves; buat it is terrible to think that they drag their children
under, and the weight will crush them. Only let us see quite clearly, that it is the


OH. xv. 1—9.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 261


ae EE EEE eee


disability and the suffering of sin, but not the guilt of it, which thus passes from
generation to generation.—R. T.


Ver. 24.—The security of the Divine Word. Cheyne translates, ‘Sworn has
Jehovah Sabaoth, saying, Surely, according as I nave planned, so shall it be; and
according as I have purposed, that shall stand” God here declares that it is his fixed
and unalt-rable purpose to destroy Assyria, And who cau stop the fulfilment of the
Divine Word? In answer to this question, we say—

I. Can waTuraL Forces? No, or that was settled when the Red Sea parted
asunder, and made a highway for God’s people.

Il. Can NaTuRAL EVENTS? No, for that was settled in the wilderness. Such
commonplace things as murmurings and rebellions could destroy a particular
generation, but could not keep Israel out of Canaan.

111. Can INpivipuaL MEN? No, for that was settled in Nebuchadnezzar, who had
to learn, by humiliation, that God’s will would have to be done.

IV. Can comBiNED MAN? No, for that was settled when the kings of Canaan
joined to oppose God’s advancing hosts, and were swept away before them, like a
summer cloud before the sun,

Nobody and nothing can stop the fulfilment of God’s Word, We may go with it,
the flood will carry us with it, like helpless logs, if we strugyle to oppose. But the
Word and will «f God are always rightevus, beneticent, and good; so it is well that they
should abide.—R. T.


Ver. 32.—Zion a safety for the poor. Take Zion as a type of Christ’s Church in all
the ages. It should be a shelter for the poor in the following five senses which may be
attached to the word.

I. In the sense of the ignorant.

Il. In the sense of the meek.

IIl. In the sense of the young.

IV. In the sense of the persecuted.

V. In the sense of the doubting.

Every age is, in one form or another, a troublous age for all earnest souls. The
Church is ever the abiding earth-shelter, type and suvvestion of that soul-rest in God
which the poor—in every seuse—may always find.—R, T.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER XV. threatened Philistia, Israel’s nearest enemy
The | Upon the west, he turns to Muab, her nearest


Vers. 1—9.—T'HEe Burpen or Moas. feel aw araat thei ean:


present chapter and the next are very closely oy
connected, and may be regarded as together | _ Ver. pene au Sipe mae

itutine “ the ” ning. r. Cheyne supposes ‘bh
Cecrashnaes Bd <toes pee ee ee words as “ Lameut for Moab,” or “ Alas for
been argued on critical grounds that the Mecbl” to bare teen nthe writers mind
bulk of the prophecy is quoted by Iswiah | put to have been omitted through “ lyric]
from an earlier writer, and that he has | excitement.” In the night, This is best
merely modified the wording and added a | taken literally. Nizht attacke, though not
few touches here and there (so Gesenius, | Common in antiquity, were not unknown.


: Sac Mesha, King of Moab, boasts that he * went
Rosenmiiller, Hitzig, Maurer, Ewald, Kno- a the night” avail, Nebo candeassantied


bel, and Cheyne). Jeremiah is thought to | j¢ at early dawn (Moabite Stone, 1. 15)
have also based his “judgment of Moab” | Ar of Moab; or, Ar-Moab. An ancient city,
(Jer, xiviii.) on the same early writing. wentioned among those taken from the
But speculations of this kind are in the | Moabites by Sihon (Numb. xxi. 28). Ac-

‘ . jl em icad cording to Jcrome, it was called in Roman
pee aon Sab igs times Areopolis, or Rabbath-Moab. Modern
to no results of the slightest importance. | geygraphers identify it with abla, a place
{t is best, therefore, to regard Isaiah as ' oy the old Roman road between Nerak aud
the author of these two chapters. Having | Arair, south of the Arnon, where there are


268


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH,


[cu. xv. 1—9,


Se eer ees


some ancient remains, though they are not
very extensive (Burckhardt, ‘Travels,’ p.
377). Is laid waste, and brought to silence;
rather, is stormed, is ruined. Kir of Moab.
“Kir of Moab” is reasonably identified
with Kerak, a place very strongly situated
on a mountain peak, about ten miles from
the south-eastern corner of the Dead Sea.

Ver. 2.—He is gone to Bajith; rather, he
is gone to the temple. Probably the temple
of Baal at Beti-baal-meon is intended,
Beth-baal-meon is mentioned in close con-
nection with Dibon in Josh. xiii. 17. And to
Dibon, Dibon is mentioned in Numb. xxi.
30; xxxii. 3, 34; Josh. xiii. 9, 17; Jer.
xlvili. 18, 22. Jt was an ancient Moabite
town of considerable importance, and has
recently been identified with the site called
Dilén, where the Moabite Stone was
found, This place is situated in the country
east of the Dead Sea, about three miles
north of tiie river Arnon, on the old Roman
road connecting Rabbath-Moab with Hesh-
bon. The town seems to have gained in
importance from the fact that it was the
birthplace of Chemosh-Gad, Mesha’s father
(Moabite Stone, 1.2). Mesha added to its
territory (ibid., 1.21). It is extremely prob-
able that it was the site of ove of the
Moabite “ high places,” and was therefore
naturally one of the places whereto the
Moabites, when afflicted, went up “ to weep.”
Over Nebo, and over Medeba. Nebo and
Medeba were also ancient Moabite towns.
Nebo is mentioned in Numb. xxxii. 3, 38;
xxxili. 47; 1 Chron. v. 8; Jer. xlviii. 1, 22.
It seems to have lain almost midway between
Beth-baal-meon (Main) and Medeba, about
three or four miles south-east of Heshbon.
Medeba obtains notice in Numb. xxi. 30;
Josh, xiii. 9, 16; 1 Chron. xix. 7. Mesha
says that it was taken from the Moabites by
Omri, King of Israel, but recovered by him-
self at the end of forty years (Moahite
Stone, ll. 7—9). It lay south-east of Hesh-
bon, at the spot which still retains the old
name—Mdadeba. It has been suggested that
there was at Nebo a shrine of the Baby-
lonian god so named; but this is to assume
a resemblance which the facts at present
known do not indicate, between the Moab-
ite and Babylonian religions. On all their
heads shall be baldness. The practice of
cutting off the hair in mourning was com-
mon to the Jews (ch. xxii. 12; Micah i. 16)
with various other nations; e.g. the Persiins
(Herod., ix. 24), the Greeks, the Mace-
donians (Plut., ‘ Vit. Pelop.,’ § 34), the primi-
tive Arabs (Krehl, ‘Religion der voris-
lamit. Araber,’ p. 33, note 1), and the North
American Indians (Bancroft, ‘Native Races
of America’). It was probably intended,
like lacerations, and ashes on the head, as
a mere disfigurement.


Ver. 3.—In their streets; literally, én hia
streets ; i.e. the streets of Moab. They shall
gird themselves with sackcloth. Another
widely spread custom, known to the As-
syrians (Jonah iii. 5), the Syrians (1 Kings
xx. 31), the Persians (Esth. iv. 1, 2), the
Israelites (Neh. ix. 1), and, as we see here,
to the Moabites. The modern wearing of
black garments, especially crape, is repre-
sentative of the old practice. Every one
shall howl. “ JIowling” remains one of the
chief tokens of mourning in the East. It
was a practice of the Egyptians (Herod., ii.
79), of the Persians (ibid., viii. 99; ix. 24),
of the Babylonians (Jer. li. 8), and probably
of the Orientals generally. Weeping abun-
dantly ; or, runniny down with tears (comp.
Jer. ix. 18; xiii. 17; Herod., viii. 99).

Ver. 4.--Heshbon shall ery. Heshbon,
now LHesbdén, lay about twenty miles east
of the Jorlan, nearly on the parallel of its
embouchure into the Dead Sea. It was the
capital city of Sihon (Numb. xxi. 21), whe
took it from the Moabites. On the partition
of I’atestina. among the tribes of Israel, it
was assivucd to Reuben (Numb. xxxii. 37;
Josh. xiii, 17); but at a later time we find
it reckoned to Gad (1 Chiron. vi. 81). We
do not know at what time Moab recovered
Heshbon, but may conjecture that it was
one of the conquests of Mesha, though it is
not mentioned on the Moabite Stone. And
Elealeh. Elealeh is commonly united with
Heshbon (Numb, xxxii. 3, 37; ch. xvi. 9;
Jer. xlviii. 34). It is probably identical
with the modern /l-A’al, a ruined town on
the top of a rounded hill, little more than a
mile north of J7esbén. Kven unto Jahaz.
Jahaz lay considerably to the south of Hesh-
bon, probably not very far north of the
Arnon. It must have been in the vicinity
of Dibon, since Mesha, on taking it from the
Israelites, annexed it to the territory of that
city (Muabite Stone, ll. 19—21). It was
the scene of the great battle between Sihon
and the Israelites under Moses (Numb. xxi.
23). His life shall be grievous unto him;
rather, his soul shall be grieved within him.
The Moabite people is personified (Cheyne).

Ver. 5.—My heart shall cry out for Moab
(comp. ch. xvi. 9, 11). The prophet sympa-
thizes with the sufferings of Moab, as a
kindred people (Gen. xix. 37), and perhaps
as having, in the person of Ruth, furnished
an ancestress to the Messiah (Matt. i. 5),
His fugitives; literally, her fugitices. The
country is here personified, instead of the
people, the former heing feminine, the latter
masculine, Shall tlee unto Zoar. Zoar, the
“little” town, spared for Lot’s sake (Gen.
xix. 20—22), is placed by some at the nor-
thern, by others at the southern, extremity
of the Dead Sea. The present passage
makes in favour of the more southern site.


oH. xv. 1—9,]


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


269


———_—_—_——— eee


An heifer of three years old. Those who
defend this rendering refvr the simile e ther
to Zoar, or to Moab, or to the fugitives.
Having regard to the parallel passage of
Jeremiah (xlviii. 34), we may pronounce
the last explanation to be the best. The
resemblance to the heifer will consist in
the cries uttered. To many critics, how-
ever, this idea appears harsh, and the alter-
native is proposed of regarding Hylath—
the word translated “ heifer”—as a place,
and the epithet, “of three years old,” as
really meaning “the third.” Attempts are
made to show the existence of three Kglaths
in these parts; but they are not very suc-
cessful; nor is any instance adduced of a
city being distinguished from others of the
same name by a numerical suffix. The
rendering of the Authcrized Version may
therafore stand, the comparison being re-
garded as one of the fugitive Moabites to a
heifer in its third year, “ rushing along with
loud, hopeless bellowings’”’ (Kay). By the
mounting up of Luhith. This ascent has not
been idlentitied. It should have been on the
way from Moab proper to Zoar. The way
of Horonaim. On the Moabite Stone
Horonaim is mentioned as a town of the
Edomites attacked and taken by Mvcsha
(IL 31—83). It lay probably south or south-
east of the Dead Sea. The Moihbites, flying
from their invaders, seek a refuge in the
territories of Hdom and Judah, weeping and
wailing as they go.

Ver. 6.—The waters of Nimrim shall be
desolate. The Wady Numeira is a water-
course running into the Dead Sea from the
east, half-way between the promontory called
the “ Lisan” and the sea’s southern ex-
tremity. It is fed by “six or seven springs”
(‘Quarterly Statement’ of Palest. Hxpl.
Fund, October, 1880, p. 254)—“ plenteous
brooks gusuing from the lofty hills” (‘I'ris-
tram), and boasts along its banks a number
of “well-watered gardens.” ‘There is no
reason to doubt the identity of this stream


with “the waters of Nimrim.” Their
“desolation” was probably caused by the
enemy stopping up the sources (2 Kings iii.
19, 25; 2 Chron. xxxii. 8, 4). The hay is
withered away. There is luxuriant vege-
tation in the wadys and ghors at the southern
end of the Dead Sea, especially in the Ghor-
es-Siufiyeh. the Wady Numeira, and the
Wady el-Mantara (‘Quarterly Statement’
of Palest. Expl. Fund, October, 1880, pp.
252, 254).

Ver. 7.—The abundance, etc.; f.e. “the
property which they have been able to
save and carry off with them.” This, find-
ing no place of refuge in their own territory,
they convey to their southern border, where
“the brook of the willows” separates their
country from Edom, with the intention, no
doubt, of transporting it across the brook.

Ver. 8.—Eglaim... Beer-Elim. Unknown
sites on the borders of Moab, both probably
towards the south. The enemy has come in
from the north, and has driven the popula-
tion southwards. A hope has been enter-
tained of the pursuit slackening; but it is
disappointed. ‘The enemy causes grief and
“howling ” in every part of the territory.

Ver. 9.—The waters of Dimon. It is
thought that “Dimon” is here put for
“Dibon,” in order to assimilate the sound
to that of dam, blood. St. Jerome says
that in his day the place was called indif-
ferently by either name. If we accept this
view, “the waters of Dimon” will probably
be those of the Arnon, near which Dibon
was situated (see tlie comment on ver. 2).
I will bring more; literally, I will bring
additions; 1.e. additional calamities, which
will cause the stream of the Aruon to flow
with blood. Lions; or, a lion. Perhps
Nebuchadnezzar (Jer. iv. 7), who is said by
Josephus to have conquered the Moabites, or
possibiy Asshur-bani-pal, who overran the
country about B.c. 645 (G. Smith, * History
of Asshur-bani-pal,’ p. 209).


HOMILETICS,


Ver. 5.—Denunciations of God’s wrath upon sinners compatible with the deepest pity
for them. It is sometimes assumed that those who exert themselves earnestly to set
before men the severer aspects of relizion, who, like Paul before Felix, “reason of
righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come ” (Acts xxiv. 25), must be persons of
harsh, stera, and pitiless tempers, devoid of the gentler feelines, or at any rate without
keen sympathy with their fellow-men, ‘The advocates of universal salvation claim to
be more tender-hearted than their opponents, and brand the latter with epithets
denoting a want of humanity and kindliness, But true tenderness and kindness will
not lead men to conceal unpleasant truths, but to state them with the utmost clearness
and distinctness—to press them upon men, insist upon them, compel attention to them.
Their outspokenness is no sign of want of sympathy, but rather an indication of the
contrary. It sprinzs trom the deepest love, from the most earnest desire to save souls.
‘Three great examples may ve alleged in proof of this.


270 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, [cx. xv. 1—9.


a


I. Tue exampie or Isatan. Nowhere do we find more unreserved denun lations
of God’s wrath avainst sinners than in the writings of “ the evangelical projhet.” All
the enemies of God are in their turn arraigned, condemned, and sentenced to the severest
sufferines. But can it be said that Isaiah is cold, or barsh, or unsympatietic? No.
Far otherwise. His “heart cries out fur Moab” (ch. xv. 5). He “bewails with the
weeping of Jazer the vine of Sibinah” (ch. xvi. 9); he “ waters Heshbon and Elealeh
with his tears” (ch. xvi. 9); his “ bowels sound like an harp for Moab,” and his
“inward parts for Kir-Haresh” (ch xvi. 11). Nor is it only the k:udied nauon of Moab
which draws forth such feelings. A vision of the siege oi Babylon causes him to cry
vat, “ Therefore are my loins filled wib pain: pangs have taken hold upon me, as the
anus of a woman that travaileth; 1 was bowed down at the hearing of it; I was
usmayed at the seeing of it. My, heart panted, fearfulness affrighted me: the night
of my pleasure hath he turned into fear unto me” (ch. xxi. 3, 4).

II. Tue exampuLe or St. Pau. No sacred writer is more direct in his warnings
against sin, or more plain in his denunciations of eternal death to sinners, than St. Paul.
“As mary as lave siuucd without Law shall also perish without Law: and as many as
have sinned in the |.aw shall be yudyed by the Law ” (Rom, ii. 12), “ The wages of sin
is death” (Rom. vi. 23). “The works of the flesh are manifest, which are these;
Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance,
emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings,
and suc like: of the which I tell you betore, as I have also told you in time past, that
they who do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God” (ial. v. 19—21), Yet
what writer shows greater tenderness towards those whom he warns, or 8 more affec-
tionate concern for thei, than the great ajostle of the Gentiles? “ Brethren, my heait’s
desire aud prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved” (Rom. x. 1). “I say
the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also biaring me witness in the Holy Ghost,
that I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart. For I could wish that
myself were accursed from Christ for my brethren, my kinstolk according to the flesh ”
(Rom. ix. L—s).

lll. ‘lHe BxaMPLE oF ouR Lorp. The tenderness of Christ is without a parallel
in the history of man. Not ouly did he die for men, but throuzhout his life he showed
at every turn a love for them surpassing human love. For their sake becoming poor
and dispi-ed, for their sake unwearied in works of mercy, moved with compassion if he
saw the: faint or weary, grievin- bitterly, even weeping, when he found them impeui-
tent, never breaking the bruised recd nor quenching the smoking flax, on his way to his
death of shame praying for his murderers. it is yet he who delivers the warnings con-
cerning final judgment, which are most awful and most impossible to explain away.
“Kivery tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire ”
(Matt. vii. 19). “ As the tares are gathered and burned in the fire, so shall it be in
the end of the world. The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather
out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity ; and shail cast
them into a furnace of fire: there shall be weepiug and gnashing of te-th ” (Matt. xiii.
40—42), “‘lhen shall he say to them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed,
into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. . . . And these shall go away
into everlasting punishment: but the rizhteous into life eternal” (Matt. xxv. 41, 46).
“It is better for thee to enter into life maimed, than having two hands to go into hell,
into the fire that never shall be queuched: where their worm dieth not, and the fire is
yot quenched” (Murk ix, 43, 44).


HOMILIES 3Y VARIOUS AUTHORS,


Vers. 1—9.— Oracle concerning Moab. I. Hisrory or Moan. Zoar was the cradle
of the race, the house of the tribal lather Lot. While the brother-tribe of Ammon
wardered to the pastures of the north-east, Moab remained nearer the original seat.
They were confined to a narrower district by the invasion of the Amorites (Numb,
xx', 26—30; Deut. ii. 10,11). Their long teud with the tribe of Benjamin lasted to
the tiie of Saul, But in the Book of Ruth we havea pleasant glimpse of the inter-
course between the people of Moab aud those of Judah; avd Davia, by descent frou


on. xv. 1—9.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 271


rr


Ruth, had Moabite blood in his veins. Eglaim, a Moabite king, had reigned at Jericho;
but a fearful war, the last of David’s, had crushed, almost extirpated, Moab (2 Sam.
viii. ; 1 Chron. xviii.). On the division of the kingdom, Moab fell under the dominion of
Israel, and paid its kings an enormous tribute (2 Kings iii. 21). On the death of Ahab
this tribute was refused, and Moab, in alliance with the Ammonites and otlers, attacked
the kingdom of Judah (2 Chron, xx.). A fearful disaster followed, and Israel, Judah,
and Edom united in an attack upon the Moabites, who, deceived by a stratagem, were
overcome with fearful carnage. And then, to crown these horrors, the king Mesha, having
retreated to the strong place of Kir-Hareseth, was seen vy the host of Israel sacrificing
his own son upon the walls, as an extreme nieasure, with a view to obtain deliverance
from the gods of the land. rom that time we know little of the fortunes of Moab
until the date of this prophecy, about a century and a half later, B.c. 726. She had
regained the lost ground, and was settled in the territory north of the Arnon, when this
disaster overtook her. Ewald thinks that three prophets were concerned in this
prophecy, and that it is preserved in Jer. xlviii. more nearly in its original torm.

Il. Tue parnos or Moas’s rate. The whole description is characterized by a tone
of deep sympathy. The prophet’s heart is torn by sorrow and compassion; it melts
with tenderness. The mood is elegiac rather than prophetic. The tragment is unique
among the elder prophets; even in Hosea there is nothing quite like it (Ewald). “In
a night ’Ar-Moab is laid waste, destroy:d; for in a night Kir-Moab is laid waste,
destroyed.” Perhaps the ruins of the capital and the fortress may be identified by
antiquarians; perhaps not. But what is mure important to us to notice is the pathos
of ruined cities. What are they but the speaking symbols of man’s efforts and man’s
failures, his soaring ambition, his profound disappointment and humiliation? So the
poet in our own time amidst the colossal ruins of Keypt: ‘1 surveyed the generations
of man from Rameses the Great and Mcmnon the beautiful, to the solitary pilgrim
whose presence now violated the sanctity of those gorzeous sepulchres. And I found that
the history of my race was but one tale of rapid destruction and gradual decay. And
in the anguish of my heart I lifted up my hands to the blue ether, and | said, ‘ ls there no
hope? What is knowledge and what 1s truth ? How shall I gain wisdom ?’” (Disraeli).
A city is to the passionate fancy of prophet and poet as a living person, a woman
glorious in her beauty, and extortiny tears from the onlooker in her full. He sees the
people going up to the central temple of the land, not to rejoice, but to weep. [very
head is bald, and every beard is torn in sign of mourning for the depaited. Figures
move about in the market-places, not in holiday attire, but in sackcloth; on the roots
and in the streets universal wailing is heard, and there is beheld as it were a deluge of
tears. The hill Heshbon cries, and Kleaieh returns a hollow sound, ana from far-off Jahaz
an echo comes. ‘I’he heroes’ hearts are paralyzed; they cry out with the women in
helpless lamentation. ‘lhe very heart of the land trembles; it is an earthquake of woe,
In sudden calamities, the sudden deaths of mdividuals, the sudden fall of cities, there
is an expression of the mystery of destiny which overwhelms the soul. Guvethe, after
describing the awful earthquake of Lisbon in 1755, which “spread a vast horror over a
world already accustomed to peace and rest,” speaks of his own feelings as a boy on
hearing the details often repeated. “ He was no little moved. God the Creator and
Upholder of heaven and earth, whom the explanation of the first article of belief repre-
sented as so wise and generous, had, in dealing out like destruction to the just and the
unjust, by no means acted as a father. In vain his young spirit strove to recover from
these impressions; and it was the less possible, because the wise men and the doctors
could not agree on the manner in which the phenomenon should be viewed.” Without
attempting to unravel the tra-ic enigmas of existence, it may be well to note how deep
is the abyss of thought and passion in our own hearts opened by the tale of snch horrors ;
and thus to learn somethiny of that Divine sympathy which broods over nature and
over men, and to be reminded of those tears shed over Jerusalem, already seen by Jesus
in the lurid light of its approaching doom.

Ill. THe syMPATHY OF THE PROPHET. It is expressed in appropriate figures. His
heart cries out with passionate yearning towards Moab. The city of Zoar seems to him
as a heifer of three years old, in all the unexhausted fulness of its strength. ‘I'his is an
ima_e of a fair and fertile land, applicd also to Egypt and to Babylon (Jer. xlvi. 20,
xlviil. 34; L11; cf. Hos. iv. 16; x. 11). The roads are filled with fugitives, weeping


272 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xv. 1—9.


—


and raising the cries of death and despair. At Nimrim, the “ fair waters,” the springs
have been filled up with rubbish, and will probably be a waste for ever. ‘I'he greenness
of the spot has vanished beneath the hand of the conqueror, and the fugitives, with
their savings and stores, are seen hurrying across the brook of the willows into the
territory of Edom. From south to north, from Eglaim to Beer-Elim, there is wailing,
there is wailing! Dimon or Dibon’s (perhaps the Arnon) waters are full of blood.
And yeta further perspective of evil opens. A lion is to be brought upon the fugitives
and the survivors; probably Judah, as this animal was Judah’s tribal ensign (Gen.
xlix. 9). But we must be content to leave the passage obscure.

1V. Musines AMONG THE RUINS OF Moas. ‘Ihe land has been but seldom visited by
Europeans, and their descriptions vary; but all agree in stating that the country is
covered with an extraordinary number of ruins. Of the language we do not know very
much, but the Moabite Stone shows that it was closely akin to Hebrew. Of the religion
we know still less. Of what nature was their great god Chemosh, whose worship
S:lomon introduced into and Josiah expelled from Judah? Here almost all is con-
jectural, and imagination has free course and unchecked play amidst the ruins of Moab.
The ruins are symbolic of human greatness, of human diseuses and decay.


“ All things have their end;
Temples and cities, which have diseases like to man,
Must have like death that we have.”


The mouldering stones sermonize with silent eloquence on the old text, “ Vanity of
vanities; all is vanity.” ‘They remind us of man’s short life and lony hopes. He builds
for a thousand years, though he may have but as many months to live. hus, bearing
their witness to the aspiration for immortality, the passion to create the beautiful that
shall not die, venerable ruins of remote antiquity have a lofty spiritual expression,


“There is given
Unto the things ef earth, wnich time hath bent,
A spirit’ feeling; and where he hath leant
His hand, but broke his scythe, there is a power
And magic in the ruined battlement,
For which the palace of the present hour
Must yield its pomp, and wait till ages are its dower.”


They remind us, by contrast of that which falls not into ruin—the edifice of God in the
human spirit; the shrine not to be found on the mounts of Moab or of Judah; the living
altar on which the fire goes not out from age to age; the element in life which abides
for ever, when this world and the lust thereof hath passed away.—J.


Vers. 1—9.—National distress. In these very vigorous touches we have—

J. A FINE BUT FEARFUL PICTURE OF NATIONAL DISTRESS. We see two of the
principal cities attacked, unexpectedly, in the night, taken by assault and ravaged with
the merciless crueliies of ancient war (ver. 1); we see the inhabitants flocking to their
national temples to weep, “with lamentable voice,” over their humiliation ; we see
them resorting to the last indignities, self-inflicted, in order to express more forcibly
than words can do the extremity of their woe (ver. 2); we see them neglecting their
daily labour and going up to their house-tops, there to pour forth their loud laments
(ver. 3); we see the very army dispossessed 0! its manliness and weeping like a com-
pany of women (ver. 4); we see fugitives hastening into exile with bitter cries, more
resembling the lowing of the kine for their calves than the voice of man or woman
(ver. 5); we see the land afflicted with drought and white with famine (ver. 6); we see
those who had wealth to lose stealing away with their precious thinvs, hoping they may
secrete and save them (ver. 7); we see the waters of the land red with the blood of her
slaughtered sons and daughters (ver. 9); and in the background, where we might hope
to find some break in the blackness of the vision, we see the wild beasts that haunt the
depopulated land hungry for their prey (ver. 9).

II. AN INTIMATION OF COLLECTIVE RESPONSIBILITY. It cannot be doubted that this
fearful fate was a judgment from Heaven, otherwise it would not have been thus fore-
told by the mouth of God’s prophet. Moab was to be brought low, to be wasted, to be


oH. xv. 1—9.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 273
a


terribly afflicted because it was guilty, because the nation had incurred the condem-
nation of God. In the first instance, individual souls are responsible for their thoughts,
words, lives. But responsibility does not end here; it extends to the family, to the
Church, to the society, to the island population, to the great kingdom or empire. For
the action which it takes, for the influence it exerts, for the priuciples on which it is
shaping its course and living its life, God holds it responsible, and he will reward or
punish it some day according to his judgment concerning it. There is no community
too small to be disregarded by him; none too large to be beyoud the exercise of his
righteous government.

III, AN INFERENCE AS TO PRIVILEGE AND GUILT. Moab stood outside the circle
of sacred privileze. Goi had not been speaking daily, weekly, monthly, annually, by
priest and rite, by prophet and prophecy, to her. Yet was she held responsible for her
sin and punished for her transeressions. If the unprivilezed Moab was thus accountable
how much more the people to whom were committed the oracles of God, and in the
midst of whom dwelt the Most High himself? And how much more yet those peoples
of the earth to whom has been vouchsaled the gos;el of the Son of God? “ For if the
word spoken by angels,” ete. (Heb. ii. 2, 3); aud “if he that despised Moses’ Law,” etc
(Heb. x. 28, 29). Moab “sinned without Law” and perished (Rom. ii. 12). Israel
“ sinned in the Law” and “ was judged by the Law,” and was condemned (Rom. ii. 12),
If England sins under the gospel, she will be judged by the rizhteous principle, that
“from them to whom much is given men expect the more,” and from them God
requires the more. It must be that the briyhter the light of privilege and opportunity,
the deeper the shadow of disobedience and condemnation. 1. Realize the responsibility
that devolves upon citizenship, upon membership of a society or of the Church, and
use all the power that can be exercised upon the community to preserve it from wrong
courses, to incite it to wise aud worthy measures. 2, Remember that the larger and
also the smaller communities rest upon the basis of the family and, ultimately, the
individual. Let every man see that God is honoured in bis own home and in his own
heart, and then will the rectitude and thus the prosperity of the whole Church, of the
entire kingdom, be assured.—C.


Ver. 1.—Moab a national type. Of late years attention has been directed to
Moab, throuch the discovery of what is known as the Moabite Stone, which contains
the earliest inscrijtion we have wholly in alphabetical characters. ‘lhis stone was found
at Diban, about three miles north of the ccutral part of the Arnon. Its inscription
remarkably confirms the Scripture record. The original territory of Moab seems to
have been divided into three portions: 1. What was known as the “ land of Moab ’—
the open rolling country north of the Arnon, opposite Jericho, reaching to Gilead on
the north. 2. The “ field of Moab”—upland undulating plains, extending {rom the
precipitous mountains overlooking the Arabah and the Dead Sea on the west, to the
Arabian desert on the east; from the deep chasm of the Arnon on the north, to Edom
on the south. 8. The “ Arboth-Moab,” or dry tropical regions in the Arabah on the
east of the Jordan. The peculiarity of Moab, so far as indicated, seems to have been
that for many years it had been undisturbed and prosperous, not affected by invasions
or famines; and so, lacking experiences of calamity and suffering, social and moral
evils had so grown that at last terrible and almost overwhelming Divine chastise-
nents seemed necessary; and these would cause unusual grief and distress. The
Prophet Jeremiah indicates the special characteristic of Moab in a very striking passage
(xlviii. 11): “Moab hath been at ease from his youth, and he hath ‘Scttled on his
lees, and hath not been emptied from vessel to vessel, neither hath he gone into
captivity : therefore his taste remained in him, and his scent is not changed.” A
contrast is suggested between the national ex) eriences of Israel and of Moab. Israel
had known no easy restful periods in ber history; she had been “shaken loose or
unsettled every few years by some great change or adversity—by a state of slavery in
Egypt, by a forty years’ roving and fighting in the wilderness, by a time of dreadful
anarchy under the judges, by a revolt and separation of the kingdom, and then by a
captivity. Moab had been at ease from the first, shaken by no great overturnings or
defeats, humbled and broken by no captivities, ventilated by no surprising changes or
adversities. He has lived on, trom age to age, su com arative security, settled on his

IsalAd T


274 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cx. xv. 1—9,


—— TEETER ae


lees; and therefore he has made no improvement” (Bushnell). Moab is thus a type
of those nations that have long periods of peace and prospeiity, and of those families
and individuals who have for years few experiences of trouble. From Moab, as a
type, we may learn such lessons as these.

1. Gop 18 IN OUR TIMES OF RESTFULNESS AND EASE. It is a fact of common
human experience that our relations with God are recognized in our times of trouble,
but lost sight of in our times of prosperity. It is woe to us when all men speak well of
us, and it is woe to us when all things go well with us. Nothing so easily hides God
from our view as success attending our own sell-endeavours. And yet God is in our
times of prosperity, a8 truly sending them, presiding over them, and working his
purpose through them, as he is sending and using times of suffering. No truth needs
more constant and varied reassertion than this—God is in prosperity and success,

I]. SucH TIMES OF RESTFULNESS AND EASE ARE SEARCHING TESTS OF CHARACTER.
The common sentiment is that troubles alone test us. The truth is, that removal of
tiouble tests; that holding off of trouble tests ; and that bestowments and benedictions
test. These, indeed, become most searching tests, under which many of us utterly fail
afier coming well through our times of tribulation. What is thought of as the inequality
of life—the disproportionate allotment of joy and sorrow, success and failure—finds a
partial explanation, if we apprehend that a man’s success and ease are his moral testings,
and that, before God, thousands more fail under life’s ‘prosperities than fail under life’s
adversities. Man, looking at Israel and at Moab, would at once say that Moab, in his
quietness, was the best off. ‘lhe issue plainly shows that the lot of Israel was the more
desirabie.

1II SucH TIMES OF RESTFULNESS AND EASE DEVELOP PARTICULAR FORMS OF
uvit. Not the same forms tliat are developed by adversities, but more subtle and
aore vital evils. All those which come out of centering thought on se//—involving
heart-separation from God; self-conceit; contempt of others; over-estimate of the
material and temporal ; luxury of self-indulgence; and those aggravated an degrading
forms of immorality which attend unchecked civilization and over-swift development
of wealth. We know the moral evils of war-times; we fail to estiniate the more per-
vading moral evils of peace-times.

IV. Suc EVILS, SOONER OR LATER, BRING ON SPECIAL DIVINE JUDGMENTS. As
with Moab. When the judgment comes, it needs to be so severe as to seem a gathering
up of all the testing sufferings of years, And though it is still only chastisement, it
takes a form that looks like overwhelming judgment. , In this chapter the prophet


seems to be amazed at the terrible character of the Divine judgment on Moab when it
did fall—R. T.


Ver. 3.—National distress. The particular trouble causing snch extreme grief was
the destruction of the two chief cities of Moab, Ar and Kir. To destroy the capital of
a kingdom is to strike the nation at its very heart. Conquerors can dictate peace when
the chief city lies at their mercy. Illustrate from the recent German siege of Paris.
This chapter vigorously pictures the distress throughout the land when Ar was taken,
the rush of people to the border districts, the alarm of those whose property was
imperilled, the wail of those who had lost their friends in the strife. Howling, weeping,
plucking off the hair, covering with sackcloth, and other signs of despairing grief, were
found everywhere; and the cries were all the more bitter because for so many genera-
tions Moab had dwelt secure. Here one kind of national distress brings before us that
general subject, and sets upon considering—

Il. ITs BEARING oN THE POOR. They are always the first to suffer from political
or international conditions which affect manufacture, trade, or agriculture, Living
upon daily wage, and, when thrifty, only able to provide in limited degrees for
depressed times, the poor are most dependent on the preservation of peace, security,
order, and mutual confidence. Demagogues urge the poor to a disturbance of social
relations, with the promise of material advantage, In the interests of the poor them-
selves we plead that war, disturbance, revolutionary change, never even temporarily
serve their interest. So grievous is the effect of political convulsions on the poor, that
no class of. the community should more intensely demand the knitting of land to land
by commerce and brotherhood, and the correction of social ad political evils by


oH. xv, 1—9,] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 275
ca ee ee ee


processes which do not disturb the sense of national security. Of the poor the words
may well be used, “ In quietness and confidence shall be your strength.”

Il. Ivs BEARING ON THE RICH. They are always the aim of attack in lawless times,
whether the evil come through aggressive enemies outside the nation, or through
turbulent people inside the natiou. ‘lhe one wants “booty,” and the other wants
excuse for robbery. ‘The rich need national security (1) for the retention of what they
have; (2) for the increase of what they have; (3) and for the enjoyment of what they
have. National distress becomes especially aftlictive to the rich, because by training
and association they are unfitted for self-belp when their riches are taken away.

Ill. Irs mission a8 SENT BY Gop. It is olten that which we find illustrated in the
case of Moab. National distress, circunistances that unite the whole laid in a common
grief, and in a common sense of helplessness, is the Divine corrective of the evils which
attend prolonged peace, security, and luxury. Those evils may be traced: 1. In the
sphere of men’s thought. The material is exagyerated, the unseen and spiritual are at
disadvantage, and cannot hold their due place and proportion. 2. In the sphere of
social life. In jrolonved times of peace and prosperity, the separations between classes
of society are grievously widened, and there grows up a painful contrast between the
few who are unduly rich and the many who are miserably poor. National distiess
brings rich and poor together, in mutual dependence and service. 3. In the spheres of
reliyion, Like the voyager, men can easily dismiss the thought of God when, for long
tines together, seas are calm and heavens are clear; but when the skies are black, and
the wild waves shake tle trail ship, and fear whitens every face, the soul begins to cry
for a sight of Ged and atouch of his protecting hand. We are with Gud as our
little clildren are with their mothers. They run about and play, taking little heed of
her, unti] the head aches, and the pulse is hizh, and pain wearies; and tien there is
nobody in all the world will do but their mother. National distress brings nations
back to the thought and love of God. The atheist, the aznostic, and the secularist
have their chance when the sun shines; nobody wants such vain helpers when the
tempests rage. ‘lhen nobody will do but the God of our fathers.

LV. Ivs SHAME, IF CAUSED BY MAN’S WILFULNESS OR MANS NEGLECT. And these
are too olten the immediate canses of national distress. War is almost always the
issue of somebody’s wilfulness or masterfulness. Nobody would need to go to war if
they did not hanker after something to which they had no right, or were not com-
pelled tu resist these envious, mastertul fulk. And such distresses as come by prevailing
disease are usually traceable to men’s neglectings of social and family and household
duty. God makes even mau’s errors and sins serve his purpose, but he never ceases to
declare woe unto him by whom the offence cometh.—R. T.


Ver. 6.—Dtvine judgments in precise adaptations. The point which arrests atten-
tion here is that Mvuab, being so largely a sheep-feeding country, was dependent on its
pastures, and these were dependent on the dews, and rays, and fountains, and streams.
To a grazing country no greater calamity, no more precisely adapted calamity, could
come tban is described in this verse: “'l he waters of Nimrim sball be desolate: for
the hay is withered away, the grass faileth, there is no green thing.” Possibly the
mischief was wrought in part by the malicious act of the invaders in stopping the
wells and defiling the streams. If one thing more than another is impressed on devont
minds by a review of lile, it is the marvellous way in which Divine wisdom has fouud
the best, most adapted forms for judgment and chastisement to take, Chastisement
sent by the Divine Father is always precisely corrective of the evil which has called
for it, and always precisely corrective to the individual and to the particular nation.
This general subject may be opened out thus—

I. Divine JUDGMENTS HAVE PRECISE AIMS. The aim expressed in general terms is—
humiliation with a view to exaltation.

IJ. Divixe JUDGMENTS ARE DIRECTED TO SECURE THOSE Aims, And this decides
the form and the degree of the humiliation that is found to be necessary.

Ill. Divine JUDGMENTS ARE ADAPTED IN WAYS THAT MAY ESCAPE PRESENT NOTICE.
And this occasions sume of the gravest perplexities, aud sternest struggles of lile.

1V. THE ADAPTATION OF ALL DIVINE JUDGMENTS, TO THE SECURING OF THEIR
PREUISE AIMS, WILL BE THE DELIGHTFUL DISCOVERY OF THE FUTURE, I will be ow


276 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. xvi 1—14.


reading of our own history, and of the world’s history, when we have learned how to
read aright.—R. T.


Ver. 7.—The insecurity of worldly possessions. The picture is a striking one. Tn
the national fright, the people are seen picking up what they can of their treasures,
and escaping for life to the border districts; learning the lesson that “riches take to
themselves wings, and flee away.” The word “ abundance,” in the text, should be
replaced by the word “remainder ;” and the most probable meaning of the verse is that
the Moabites shall carry what they can save of their possessions into the land of
Edom. The picture suggests two topics.

I, THe INSECURITY OF THE MAN WHO IS RICH IN WHAT HE Has. Illustrate from
riches (1) in land; (2) in money ; (3) in houses; (4) in goods, How dependent he is on
a thousand things for the retention and use of all! The lesson of Job is that no form
of earthly possession can possibly be secure. Land is unlet; money cannot be profitably
exchanged; houses get out of repair, and eat up rentals; and goods deteriorate in the
warehouses. When ordinary forces leave our property alone, the heavens can send
tire; the earth can heave and quake; and by mysterious influences we can be made to
learn our lesson, that “ this is not our rest.”

Il, THe SECURITY OF THE MAN WHO IS RICH IN WHAT HE I8. No human and no
supernatural forces, here or hereafter, can deprive a man of his possessions in what he
is. Character, piety, are beyond reach of moth, or worm, or rust, or storm, or earth-
quake, or death. It is said of knowl-dge that a man “only possesses what he under-
stands.” It might be said of a man’s wealth that he “only has what he ts.” When
calamities come, the man of character never has to gather his treasures hurriedly
together and make off for the border-land. W herever he is, he has his riches with him.
Stripped of all his so-called wealth, he is not deprived ofone grain, He holds it all, and
his riches none can take away. The Lord Jesus men called poor. He was the only
truly and perfectly rich man that ever lived; and such as he was we would desire to
be.—R. TT


EXPOSITION.


into Assyria. From Sela. Either Moab is
regarded as having taken refuge in Edom,
and is therefore bidden to send her tribute
frora the Edomite capital, Sela (equivalent
to “ Petra”), or “Sela,” here is not a proper
name, but a collective used to designate the


CHAPTER XVI
Vers. 1—14.—Tue Burpen or Moas
(CONTINUED). This poxtjon of the “ burden ”
is divided into three sections. In section 1


(from ver. 1 to the end of ver. 5) an offer of
mercy is made to Moab on certain con-
ditions, viz. that she retzrn to her allegiance
to the house of David, and show kindness
to fugitive Israelites; In section 2 (vers.
6—12) she is supposed to have rejected this
offer, and is threateued (as in ch. xv.) with
severe punishment. In section 3 (which
consists of vers. 13 and 14) the time is
fixed for the main visitation to fall upon her.

Ver. 1.—Send ye the lamb to the ruler of
the land; rather, the lamb of the ruler of
the lamwi—the lamb (or lambs, kar being
used collectively) due to the ruler as a mark
of subjection. In the time of Ahab Mesha
had paid a tribute to Israel of a hundred
thousand lambs and a hundred thousand
rams annually (2' Kings iii. 4). The pro-
phet recommends that this, or some similar,
tribute should now be paid to the King of
Judah instead, Israel having been absorbed


rocky parts of Moab, to which she had
betaken herself (as in Jer. xlviii. 28). The
latter supposition is, on the whole, the
more probable. To the wilderness ; literally,
wildernesswards; i.e. by the way of the
wilderness. The enemy being regarded as
in possession of the northern end of the
Dead Sea, Moab is recommended to send
her tribute round the southern end, and go
by way of “the wilderness of Judah,” to
Jerusalem.

Ver. 2.—For it shall be; rather, and it
shall be. The tribute having been paid,
Moab will regain some confidence. Her
fluttered population will return, and collect
at the fords of the Arnon, ready to recross
it. As a wandering bird cast out of the
nest; rather, as a@ wandering bird (or,
wandering birds)—“as a scattered nest” (or,
“brood of nestlings”), The daughters of
Moab. The population of Moab generally,
as “the daughter of Zion” (ver. 1) is the
population of Jerusalem generally.


cH. xvi. 1—14.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


277


Ver. 3.—Take counsel, execute judgment,
etc. According to most critics, these are
the words of the Moabites, or of a Mouabite
ambassador at Jerusalem, and-are a call on
Judea to give sheltcr to the fugitives from
Moab. Some, however, as Dr. Kay, main-
tain that the words are the prophet’s, ad-
dressed to Moab, calling on her to treat
kindly fugitives from Judea. Make thy
shadow a e night (comp. ch. iv. 6).
In the hot land of Moab the sun is an
enemy, and “the shadow of a great rock” a
welcome refuge.

Ver. 4.—Let mine outcasts dwell with
thee, Moab. The change of one accent will
allow of this passage being translated, Let
the outcasts of Moab dwell with thee; and
so it is rendered by the LXX., the Syriac,
by Lowth, Gesenius, Hitzig, Ewald, and Mr.
Cheyne. Delitzsch and Dr. Kay agree with
the Authorized Version. For the extor-
tioner is at an end. This seems to be uryed
as a reason why the protection asked should
be given: it will not be for long—the op-
pressor is about to receive chastisement.
He is called *‘ the extortioner,” as exacting
the utmost possible tribute fiom conquered
lands. Snuvh exaction was characteristic of
Assyria (2 Kings xv. 19; xviii. 14; ‘ As-
syrian Inscriptions, passim). The spoiler
ceaseih; literally, devastation ceaseth.

Ver. 5.—And in mercy shall the throne
be estabiished; rather, and there shall be a
throne established in merey. A Messianic
vision comes upon the prophct in connection
with the disappearance of the oppressor.
There shall be one day—he knows not how
soon or how late—a throne established in
mercy, and “ One shall be seated upon it in
truth, who shali oceupy the tent (or, ‘ house ”]
of David, as one who judges, and sceks
justice, and hastens on [the reign of]
righteousness.”

Ver. 6.—We have heard of the pride of
Moab. A new section commences. Moab
has not accepted the offer of mercy mae
in vers. 1—5, and is therefore deuounced
afresh. Her “pride” prevented her from
renewing her subjection to the house of
David, and therefore it is her pride which
is specially condemned. His lies shall not
be so; rather, of no worth are his boast-
ings. The result will not correspond with
them.

Ver. 7.—Every one shall how\; rather,
the whole of it shall howl; i.e. the entire
nation collectively (comp. Herod., viii. 99;
ix. 24). For the foundations of Kir-Hareseth
shall ye mourn. The word here translited
“foundations” is elsewhere always ren-
dered “flagons” or “flagons of wine”
(2 Sam. vi. 19; Cant. ii. 5; Hos. iii. 1).
And this rendering is more agreeable to
the context than “foundations,” since it is


the loss of the products of the soil which is
threatened in the next three verses. “ Kir-
Hareseth” is probably the same place as
the “ Kir-Moab” of ch. xv. 1. It was one
of the principal cities of Moab (see 2 Kings
iii. 25).

Ver. 8.—The fields of Heshbon (see the
comment on ch. xv. 4). The whole of the
Mishor, or Belka, on the edge of which
Hesbdan stands, is cultivable and capable of
producing good crops. The Moabites stored
water in reservoirs (Cant. vii. 4), and made
their country a garden. The vine of Sib-
mah, “Sibmah” is mentioned in Numb.
xxxii. 8 and Josh. xiii. 19 among the
towns of the Reubenites. According to
Jerome (‘Comment. in Esaiam’), it was
less than half a mile distant from Heshbou,
Jeremiah follows Isaiah in lamenting the
destruction of its vines (Jer. xlviii. 32). The
lords of the heathen have broken down the
principal plants thereof. “The lords of
the heathen” are probably the Assyrians,
who made a practice of destroying the fruit
trees in an enemy’s country, for the mere
purpose of doing mischief (‘ Ancient Mo-
narchies,’ vol. li. p. 84). It is wanton to
discard this very satisfactory sense for the
strange one that “the choice plants have
broken down—z.e. made drunk—the lords
of the heathen” (Cheyne). The rendering
of the Authorized Version is supported
by Gesenius, Ewald, Roseumiiller, Meicr,
and Dr. Kay. They are come even unto
Jazer; rather, they (the vines) reached to
Jazer; i.e. the vine of Sibmah was eculti-
vated as far as Jazer, Jazer lay about
twelve miles north of Heslbon, in the ter-
ritory of Gad (Numb. xxxii. 35). It is
probably identified with Hs Szir, which is
in tlie required position, and retains a trace
of the name (Scetzen, ‘ Reisen,’ vol. i. pp.
397, 398). They wandered through the
wilderness; rather, they strayed into the
wilderness ; i.e. the cultivation was pushed
eastward into the actual midbar, or desert.
Her branches are stretched out; or, her off-
shoots are spread abroad ; i.e. the young
shoots or slips are taken by the cultivators
and spread further and further. They are
even carriid across the DUDead Sea, and
planted on its western shore. Mr. Cheyne
supposes the proph:t to refer to the “ vine-
yards of En-gedi” (Cant. i. 14).

Ver. 9.—Therefore I will bewail (comp.
eh. xv. 5, and see the Homiletics on that
verse). With the weeping of Jazer. “ With
tears as genuine as Jazer’s own” (Kay). 0
Heshbon and Elealeh (on the close con-
nection of these two cities, see the com-
ment on ch. xv. 4). For the shouting, ctc.;
rather, for on thy summer fruits and on thy
harvest a shouting is fallen. The “shout:


ing” intended is that of the invadine


278 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.  [on. Xvi 1—14.


enemy, which replaces the ordinary joy- | his inscription, speaks of having rebuilt a
song of the vintugers (see ver. 10). city called “ Beth-Baméth ” (1. 27), which
Ver. 10.—The plentiful field; Hebrew, | must have been a “city of ligh places ;”
Carmel. The word carmel scems to desig- | and he even calls the stélé which he dedi-
nate “ arden,” or “orchard ground” gene- | cates to Clhemosh, whereon his inscription
rally, without reference to the degree of | is written, a bamah, or ‘“hizh place.”
fertility. It is generally rendered by our | That he shall come to his sanctuary .. . but
translators “fruitful field,” which is right, | he shall not, etc.; rather,and hax come into
if we regard “fruitful” as equivalent to | his sanctuary, that he shall not prevail.
“ fruit-producing.” No singing .. . no Ver. 13.—This is the word, ete. The
shouting. Those who have heard the vin- | third and concluding section begins here.
tage-songs in the uorth of Italy and else- | This prophecy, Isaiah says, is one, not now
where will appreciate the sadiess of this | delivered for the first time, but existent
silence. The treaders shall tread out no | previously. How long previously, he leaves
wine in their presses. Wine-presses were | quite v: gue.
in or near the vineyards. They consisted Ver. 14.—But now. “Now ”—an addition
of two vats, or two reservoirs cut in the | has been male to the prophecy. Isaiah is
rock, one above the other, with a passage of | authorized to announce that in three years’
communication between them. The grapes | time, counted as strictly as possible, the
were placed in the upper vat or reservoir, | judgment pronounced shall fall on Moab;
and were crushed by the naked feet of the | her ¢ glory” shall be turned into shame,
vintagers. Sometimes as many as seven | ber “multitude” shall be cut off, and only
persons ‘“¢trod the wine-press” together | a‘ remnant” shall be left, weak, small, and
(Wilkinson, ‘Ancient Egvptians,’ vol. i. p. | powerless. As the years of an_hireling.
45). It was usual for them to sing as they | Counted with the utmost exactness. A
trod (Jer. xxv. 30; xviii. 33). I have | hire ing would not conscut to serve a day
made thir viniage shouting to cease. The | longer than his contract bound him, nor
prophct is the mouthpiece of God. Acci- | would his master consent that he should
dentally, as it were, he here betrays the | serve» day short of it. With all that great
personality which is behind him. It is not | multitude. We have no means of accurately
he, but God. who has caused the invasion | estimating the population of Moab The
which has reduced the vintagers to silence. | entire urea of the regi n which the Moabites
Ver. 11.—My bowels shall sound like an | inhabit:d seems to have been not more
harp for Moab; i.e. they shall vibrate with | than fifteen hundred square miles. The
thrills of grief (Kay). greiter part of it was, however, exceed-
Ver. 12.—When it is seen that Moab is ingly fertile; and we are, perhaps, justified
weary; rather, when Moab shows himself, in allowing it a population of two hundred
and hax wearted himself. The heathen to the square mil, which is about that of
“thought to be heard for their much speik- Geimany. This would give tliree hundred
ing” (Matt. vi. 7). They endeavoured to thousand inhabitants, of whom the adult
weary their gods into granting thvir prayers ; males would be seventy five thousand.
(1 Kings xviii. 26), and frequently suc- | Feeble; literally, not powerful ; i.e. very
ceeded in weary ng themselves. On the © much the contrary, very weak. Moab seems
high place, “Hivh places” (haméth) were | to have offered a very slight resistance to
common to the Monbites, with the other  Asshur-bani-pal (G. Smith, ‘History of
nations of Syria and Pulestine. Mesla, in  Asshur-buni-pal,’ p. 259).


HOMILETICS.


Vers, 1—5.—God’s offer of mercy to the sinner. Scarcely ever does God punish sin
by a sudden unannounced visitation, or without previous warning to the sinner of
what is coming upon him, And this warning is almost always accompanied by an
offer of mercy. God has “no pleasure in the death of him that dieth ” (hack, xviii. 32);
he “ would not that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance” (2 Pet.
iii. 9). And therefore he warus men, He warned even the ungodly world before the
Flood by the preaching of Noah; he warned the Ninevites by Jonah; he now warned
the Moabites by Isaiah ; he warned the Jews of later times by John the Baptist, by
his Son, by the apostles. And all equally in vain. How often do we not see in cases
of this kind—

I, ‘THE OFFER MADE. Sometimes by an inward awakening of the conscience, more
often by preaching or teaching from without, the sinner is startled, alarmed, made to
see his sin and feel his danger. Mercy is offered to him, if he will repent and amend;


oH, xvL 1—14.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 279


a


a course of conduct is placed before him by which he may recover himself. But the
course is unpleasing; it involves pain and trouble. Pride_has to be humbled in the
dust, confession and restitution have to be made, pet gins have to be surrendered,
ee ene —vas f0_ba.attempted, often the whole course of the life hitherto lived has to
be"altered, and a new departure made from a new bevinning, To the natural man this
seems hard, as to Moab the resumption of a tributary position; it seems intolerable,
impossible, not to be thought of. And, after a longer or a shorter struggle, the second
stage is reached—

Il, THE orFER spuRNED. The sinner desires mercy and forgiveness, but he will not
sonsent to pay the price. Immediate suffering, though not of any great severity, seems
harder to bear than the prospect of future intense suffering. Or perhaps he flatters
himself that the future suffering may be escaped. He thinks that he may repent later ;
or he doubts whether God will punish so severely as he bas threatened; or he even
doubts whether there is any God at all. On one ground or another he spurns the offer
made him—puts it aside, ceases to think of it, practically rejects it. Aud then comes
the final result—

ill. THe sPURNING OF THE OFFER PUNISHED. Punishment may be in this life or in
the next. That of natious must be in this life; that of individuals may be in either, or
in both. Usually—it is in both. Onr sin finds us out. Unpleasant physical con-
sequences follow upon most sinful indulgences. Others bring loss of character and of
men’s respect. Others, again, lead to pc verty and earthly ruin. All are liable to be
followed by never-cuding regret and remorse, feelings as painful as any known to man.
Further, the consciousness of ill desert cannt but arouse a fear of judynient to come—
a fear which, as death approaches, becomes o/ten a constant agonizing dread. ‘lo all
this has to be added the punishment that in another world awaits those who have
spurned God’s offers in this—punishment shadowed out to us in Scripture under the
images of the “ undying worm,” and the “fire that never shall be quenched.” It is
surely worth while for sinuers to ask themselvey whether the enjoyment which they
derive from their sins is really of sufficient value to them to compensate for all this
weight of alter suilering. Would they not act more prudently, as well as more virtuously,
if they acce; ted Gou’s offer of mercy as soou as it is placed before them, and forsook
their sins at once, and repented and turned to Gud ?


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1—6.— The King in Zion. “I have set my King upon my holy hill of Zion”
(Ps. ii.). The destined Ruler of the world, he shal] spread the wing of his mild govern-
ment and protection over the nations in their harassment and despair, as now over
Moab. 2

J, THE cALL to THE FUGITIVES. They have fled into Edom, as far as to Petra, near
Mount Hor. It was a region surrounded by rocky cliffs. Sela itself means rock or
cliff. Between Petra—whose ruins the Arab guide of Scetzen said he must weep over
every time he saw them—aad Jerusalem lies a desert, through which the tribute flocks
must pass. 1. Demand of tribute. “Send ye the lambs of the prince of the land from
Sela desert-wards to the mount of the daughter of Zion.” In furmer days Mesha, the
King of Moab, was said to be a “ shee;-masrer,” and he rendered a yearly tribute of a
hundred thousand lambs, and a hundred thousand rams, with the wool, to the King
of Israel till the death of Abab (2 Kines iii. 4). What was then sent to Samaria must
now be sent to Jerusalem. Under the form of this demand is signified an appeal to the
people of Moab to submit to the house of David as their only hope of safety, Spinta-
ally, the appeal may be construed as the call to nations and to men to siibinit to the
spiritual rule of the Messiah, as anointed King and Saviour of the world. 2. Ljfee! «/
the summons. The “daughters” of Moab, te. its cities and villages, are seen in
commotion. They flutter about, like birds driven from thcir nests, at the fords of the
Arnon, Moab’s chief river. The first effect of the “ loug-drawn trumpet blast” Is \ea
and agitation, ‘Che name of Judah is a spell of terror; the hand of Jehovah is felt te
be held owt and to be shaken in menace over the nations, and they become like
women (cf,ch. xix. 16). He demands of their flocks and their merchandise. Will they


,


280 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. xvi. 1—14.


obey? In obedience only will be their salvation. Will these trembling fugitives,
seeking escape on the banks of Arnon, hear the timely voice of counsel? How readily
do these historical pictures suggest a spiritual application! The first impression of the
Divine voice is that of fear; next there is hesitation; next the critical choice, accept-
ance of the Divine offers, or recalcitrat on and refusal. The merciful God, the Saviour
of men, would gather us fugitives from: the world’s troubles to his arms. Shall we rup.
to him as a strong Tower and be safe, or seek by perilous »aths another course, only to
rush upon fresh woes? ‘To-day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.”

Il. tue reety or Moas. 1. They appeal to Zion for counsel and arbitrament.
The powerful neighbour and suzerain is asked to intervene between the contending
parties as an umpire, so that the unjustly oppressed may be succoured. And here is
a sublime image of the Judge and Pivtector, May he be “a shadow like night at high
moon.” In our cold northern clime our poets chiefly borrow imazves from the wintry
season to represent distress. We speak of the wintry trost of calamity, the cruel wind,
the snows of adversity, etc. Not so the Hebrew; to him the hot season is typical of
all that is most cruel in physical or mental suffering. Hence, by opposition, the
shadow of the great rock, or the shadow deep as niglit, remind of all that is most
grateful in deliverance and repose. Of a great man it is proverbially said, in the East,
“Like the sun, he warmed in the cold, and when Sirius shone, then was he coolness
and shade.” And in the Sunna seven classes of good men are enumerated, whom
“the Lord will overshadow with his shade, when no shade will be like his” (cf. ch.
xxx, 2, 8; xxxii, 2). So may the outcasts be hidden, the wanderers faithfully pro-
tected, and Zion throw her egis over the land of Moab, and guard it from the spoiler.
2. They extol the government of Judah. “Oppression has ceased, the spoiling is at
end, the tormentors have vanished from the land.” We see what good administration
is in the light of the bitter experience of tyranny and its attendant evils. Notice the
strong images of harsh rule: pressure, applied so as to press out the marrow from the
bones of the people, as it were; preying and spoiling (cf. ch. x. 6); trumpling and
treading down of the multitude of the poor. ‘hese tyrauts exhibit all “ the proud
man’s scorn, the oppressor’s contumely.” Iniquity is their pastime, their game. ‘They
‘watch for it, they lay snares and gins for good men, as the hunter does for wild beasts.
The liberty of speech is denied, and men are made offenders for a word” (ch. xxix.
20, 21). They are faithless to the faithful, they break treaties, they despise cities,
they regard no man (ch. xxxi. 1, 8). Nature seems to mourn beneath the infliction, and
society and commerce languish. ‘The highways are deserted of the merchant and the
traveller. The glories of Lebanon, the loveliness of Sharon, the fruitful giades of
Bashan and Carmel, are dishonoured, and seen to weep in sympathy with man. Is
there a more odious offence on God’s earth than the tyrant—than despotism and all its
horrible selfishness? ‘ Man’s inhumanity to man makes countless myriads mourn.”
But these things have passed, are passing, or shall pass away. A new era dawns with
the establishment of the throne of David. This throne is symbolic of : (1) Grace, or gra-
ciousness. ‘The word stands for all that is good in principle, benevolent in purpose, benign
and healing in administrative effort. No king truly rules except Dei gratia, by the
favour of God, nor is kingly unless he illustrates the benignant spirit of the Divine
rule. (2) Faithfulness, or truth. He is the extreme opposite to those treacherous
covenant-breakers, who have made tyranny odious and contemptible. His words are
kingly because true, and the expression of a truthful character. The character of the
liar and the hypocrite sullies the crown more than any blot. (3) Justice. “A judge
both seeking right and expert in justice.” A burning zeal in his temper for the right,
and the habit of making it prevail. Such are the signs of Messianic times—the dawn
of God’s kingdom vpon earth. The tent of David which had failen and been ruined is
indeed raised up again, and built as in the days of old (Amos ix. 11). And it shelters
a king in whom the ideal of Jehovah is realized.

III, Resuxe or Moss. It seems best to take what follows as the utterance of the
prophet, pursuing the thread of meditation. We have heard what Moab micht have
said, and should have said; but alas! her accustomed pride and haughtiness will be her
bane. Her insolence and insincerity are also stigmatized, as in Jer. xlviii. 30, 31
“7 know his wrath, saith the Lord; but it shall not be so; his lies shall not effect it.
Therefore I will how] for Moab, and will ery out for all Moab; my heart sha!} mourn


cH. xvI.1—14.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 281
ee ee


for the men of Kir-Heres.” Some take the words as given from the throne in reply.
“Tf Moab continues to show so little penitence, it cannot be assisted; and therefore
the prophet, however it grieves him, must leave Moab to her further chastisements ”
(Ewald). It seems intended that we should look upon Moab’s language here as insin-
cere, and therefore unacceptable. We may remind ourselves of the spiritual lesson,
“God draws near to the lowly, but recognizes the proud afar off.” It is pride which
keeps us alvof from blessings that might be had by stooping; it is pride which makes
us blind to opportunity, insensible to the bitter lessons of experience, and lays us open
to further chastisements.—J.


Vers. 7—14.—Lament over Moab. I. Moas’s SELF-LAMENTATION. “Moab will wail
for Moab; everything will wail.” In her misery and distress, she reflects on her
beauty. A fair land is like a fair maiden, and her desolation excites the like poignant
self-pity. “I know not a greater grief,” said Dante, “ than to recall the happy time in
the midst of distress.” The picture of Muvab's former happiness. ‘The vinevard and all
its gladdening associations represent the endearing charms of the land. These are no
more to be enjoyed in the smitten and drooping fields of Kir-Hareseth and Heshbon.
Once a splendid vine threw its noble branches and its trailing shoots far over the
borders of the land to the north, to Jazer, near the Dead Sea. ‘he lords of the
heathen have beaten it down.

II, THE PROPHET’S SYMPATHY WITH THE LAMENT. He, too, will bewail the noble
vine of Sibmah; he will water Heshbon and Elealeh with his tears, as he thinks of the
wild wproar that fell upon the midst of the harvest of truit and corn. In the irony of
grief he uses a figure of speech very expressive. The /édad was the shout raised by the
treaders of the grapes. It was a mighty heaven-rending cry, giving forth in Tull volume
the jay and thankfulness of the rustic heart of the tillers (ct. Jer. xxv. 30). There-was
another shout of different import, one that fell like a knell upon the ear—the yell of a
s i of invaders, of Jer. li. 14, bursting in upon the summer fruits and the
vintage (Jer. xlviii. 32). Then, instead of the rich flow of the trodden grape, there will
be “the red rain that makes the battle-harvest grow.” The silence of desolation succeeds
to the sounds of rejoicing. ‘There is a silence “ more dreadful than severest sounds.”
It is the silence of scenes once thronged with life, and resounding with cheerful songs


and cries. The prophet, as he muses, finds


“ Remembrance wake with all her busy train,
Swell at his heart and turn the past to pain.”


Joy and exultation is withdrawn from the fruit-fields, and in the vineyards there is no
jubilation or shouting; no treader treads wine in the presses, and the shout of the
vintagers is at end.
“The sounds of population fail;

No cheerful murmurs fluctuate in the gale... .

Thy sports are fled, and all thy charms withdrawn 3

Amidst thy bowers the tyrant’s hand is seen,

And desolation saddens all thy green.”


The prophet’s inmost heart is touched, his feelings vibrate like the strings of a harp
at the sound of Moab’s woes. In like manner Jeremiah compares his heart to the
flute. The poet and the prophet are indeed organs of the world’s sorrows, And indeed
these sorrows turn to music even at the worst, when interpreted by the heart of him
who is in sympathy with the universal and eternal love. ‘They are “tears most
sacred ” which are “shed for others’ pain,” and athwart them the rainbow of hope
seldom fails to glimmer. So here.

Ill, A qurmpse or Horr. He sorrows over Moab, because Moab does not know the
living God. But “when Moab, in the pressure of the further calamities of the future,
again appears, as now in his idol-temple, or wearies himself, vainly wringing his hands,
and in utter despair, then he will be ashamed of his god Chemosh, and learn true
humility in Jehovah.” So Ewald, who thinks that the last words, necessary to com-
plete the sense, have been lost. Like the priests of Baal calling upon their god from
morning to noon, and saying, “O Baal, hear us!” and when there was no voice, nor any


282 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAiad.  [cu. xvi. 1—14.


that answered, leaping upon the altar, crying and gashing themselves with knives,
so will the Moabites, in the extremity of their despair, appeal to Chemosh, What is
more sad in the life of superstition than this passionate resort to any means, however
irrational, to wring a favour from the deitics of special shrines and sanctuaries? As if
the true hel; were not ever near; as if, that being neglected, there could be hope else-
where! Calvin observes, “ While idolaters have their ordinary tem; les and places of
worship, if any uncommon calamity befalls them, they so to another temple more
sacred than the rest, expecting that there they will be more abundantly favoured with the
presence of their god. In like manner, the Papists of the present day, when they are
reduced to any uncommon danger (for this fault has existed in all aves), think that they
will more readily obtain their wish by running to St. Claude, or to Mary of Loretto, or
to any other celebrated idol, than if they assembled in some neighbouring church. They
resolve that their extraordinary prayers sliall be offered up in a church at a great dis-
tance. It is in this sense that the prophet applies the term sanctuary to that most
highly celebrated among the Monbites, and says they will go to it without any advan-
tage.” One cannot help thinking of those melancholy pilgrimages to Lourdes, that
focus of super-tition in our own times. So do men continue to hew out to themselves
cisterns that hold no water; and so necessary still is the living word of prupliecy, to
remind the world that ouly in a genuine spiritual relation to the Eternal, only in a faith
and worship which is independent of place, because ever fixed in the heart, can true
comfort and help be found,

IV. Raviricavion OF THE PROPHECY. It is the word spoken long ago by Jehovah
concerning Moab. And now he speaks to solemn effect, that in three years, like the
years of a hireling, the glory of Moab will be disgraced, together with all the multitude
of the great; only a very sinall remnant will be left. he days or years of the day-
labourer or hireliug, are those strictly measured, neither more nor less (so in ch. xxi. 16;
cf. xx. 3). “Of working time the birer remits nothing, and the labourer gives nothing
in.” The statement is to be taken in its exactness. As the labourer knows that his
time is appointed, and may look for an end of his toil when the shadow comes (Job vii.
1, 2), as life itself must surely come to its close (Jub xiv. 6), so with the lon y-suffering
of God, so with the iniquity of nations and men, so with every abuse and oppression ;
nay, so with every nation and institution.


“They have their day and cease to be;
But thou, O Lord, art more than they.”


“ After the lapse of almost three thousand years,” says Barnes, “every successive tra-
veller who visits Moab, Iduniea, or Palestine, does something to confirm the accuracy
of Isaiah. Towns bearing tle same name, or the ruins of towns, are located in the
same relative position he said they were; and the ruins of once splendid cities, broken
columns, dilapidated walls, trodden-down vineyards, half-demolished temples, and fra2-
ments broken and consumed by time, proclaim to the world that those cities are
what he sait they would be, and that he was under the inspiration of God.” And
how powerfully come back to us from such secnes those “ truths which wake, to perish
never!” Arndst the gloom the word of prophecy shines as a light in a dark place.
Its voice prevails over time; imparts warmth to the heart amidst the rigours of Provi-
dence; calls to mind with its persuasive strain long-slighted truths; teaches that while


“ Trade’s proud empire hastes to swift decay,
As oceans sweep the labour’d mule away,”


the state or the individual that is possessed of moral strength may be blessed in
poverty; that there is a good which is not dependent on the fertility of a land, or the
strength of its fortresses—which will survive the desolation of its fields, the downfall of
its kings, the overthrow of its idols —J.


Ver. 10.—A harvest failure. “TI have made their vintage shouting to cease.”
Why? Because the harvest is fallen, In the vineyards there is no shouting, for
all the fruits are blighted and withered. Thus is it with every harvest which is evil,
rie leet much, and lo! it often comes to mothing. The glory departs if God is
orgotten,


oH. Xv1.1—14.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 283


CC A TLL A SE


I. We LIVE FoR THE FUTURE. Few live in the present hour alone. Some amass
property, looking forward to days of retirement and ease; some go to far-away fields
of war to gather the laurels of victory, and to win what the world calls fame; and some
seek stores of intellectual wealth, so as to secure the far-off coronet of scholarship and
learned renown. [ut the harvest fails. Jealousy and envy do their work; and the
ambassador is recalled, or the mind becomes feeble; through weariness or weakness the
anticipated victory becomes a defeat. Somehow or other, either through events with-
out or experience within, when God dves not live in the heart and his glory is for
gotten, the vintage fails.

Il, We Loox For Joy IN HARVEST. That is the time for music and joy, or, as the
prophet says, for singinuy and shouting. It is a time of stretched-out branches and purple
groves. And God intended us to have joy in harvest. All innocent pursuits end in
blessing, if we seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness. But if not, then there
is dulness and «loom and failure; for the Lord of harvest is not there. The vintage fails,
because he is the true Vine, and we are the branches, and every branch separated from
him is cut down and withered.

Il]. WE Look FOR FRUIT AS WELL AS LEAFAGE. That is a remarkable sentence,
“The treaders shall tread out no wine in their presses.” Nothing but leaves! What a
significant sentence! Everything seemed to promise well. here was the tender green
of spring and the rich foliage of sunmer, but no blossoms hide under the luxuriant foliage.
So it is with all mere couvictions and resolves, with all passing sensations and excited
feelings. We need ever to remember that the end of religion is fruit. Fruitful service,
fruitful sacrifice. And without these, whatever else there be, the vintage fails —
W.M.5.


Vers. 1—4.—The wisdom of the weaker. The prophet counsels Moab to “ make
submission meet” to Judah (ver, 1), and to show her sich kindness in the day of her
distress (vers. 3, 4) as will be remembered in the day when prosperity and power will
be again her portion.

I. ‘HE WISDOM OF THE WEAKER COMMUNITY. 1. Submission to the greater power under
tts lawful cluum. “Send ye the lamb to the ruler of the land ”—pay the tribute which
is due, and which will be accepted as an offering appropriate for the weaker to preset
and for the stronzer to claim. In those days it was generally acknowledged that
“mivht was right,” aid that the stronver potentate might properly exact tribute from
the weaker, rendering a certain protectorate in return. Even in these days, when
there have been happily established some ideas of international righteousness, it is
generally acknowledyed that a strong nation cannot afford to have a small province
in its immediate neigibourhood in a condition of absolute independence of it. It
considers that it has a rizht to claim its submission, receiving protection in return. It
is undoubtedly the wisdom of the weaker comiuunity, in every realm, to submit itself
to the stronger, to make terms wih it, to sive what it demands and accept what it
offers. 2. K/ndness to the greater power in the day of its trial. (Vers. 3, 4.) A short-
sighted policy would advise rebellion, would recommend that the hour of its
neighbour’s depression should be used to strike a mortal blow and throw off the
yoke; but very often a deeper wisdom and a truer sagacity will perceive that the
strong power will bend, but cannot be broken—tiat the day will come (ver. 4) when
it will shake off its oppressors and regain its supremacy, and that, therefore, the right
course to pursue is to render every possible kindness in its dark and distressing dour,
being a shadow from the heat, a refuge for the outcast, a home for the exile. Be quite
sure that your rival or your enemy is attacked with a mortal sickness before you defy
him, even on the low ground of policy; on the higher ground of rectitude, render aid to
the nobier power when it is stricken down, and your magnanimity shall not be forzottea
in the day of its revival.

Ll. THE WISDOM OF THE WEAKER MAN. This corresponds closely with that of the
community. 1. Met at once ery claim that is honestly preferred, It is, no doubt,
right to resist claims tliat are unjustly made. The judye, the magistrate, is an
authority ordained of God, and to his tribunal we may appeal. But if we cannot dis-
pute aclaim that is made, we do well to “ send the lanib,” to pay the tribute at once.
Otherwise we opep the sluices through which mary waters of suffering will flow in


284 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.  [cu. xvz. 1—14,


upon us (see Matt. v. 25). 2. Gain the favour of the strong in the day of her distress.
A foolish man will rejoice over the great when he falls—will say, “ He is become
one of ourselves,” and will treat him with indignity. A wise man will only welcome
such a day of discomfiture because it enables him to offer succour to the unfortunate, to
open wide the door of his hospitality, to be a shadow from the heat to him on whom
the scorching rays are falling; and the time will come when he who is thus helped will
be able to offer welcome recompense, and in return for the temporary shelter will
“ receive to everlasting habitations” (Luke xvi. 9).

II]. THe wispoM oF THE HUMAN SOUL IN ITs RELATION To Carist. This is: 1. To
meet his righteous cluim; not, indeed, to send a lamb to Zion, as in ancient days, for
such offerings he asks not of us. “ The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit.” Humility
of heart; faith in the Son of God, the Divine Redeemer ; the presentation of our heart
and life to his holy service; the offering of the obedient and submissive spirit ;—this
is the tribute to bring to his fect. And also: 2. To show kindness to his people. Our
Lord is urgent with us that we should show kindness to all them that bear his Name,
especially to the weak, the poor, and the despised, the downcast and the outcast, the
“little ones” of his flock. Any deed of love we may do for any one of them will
be acconnted as an act of kindness shown direct to the Lord himself (Matt. xxv.
34—40).—C.


Ver. 5.—The foundations of power. On what foundation does power rest? What
will secure it to those who have gained it, or into whose hands it falls? We look
at the foundations of—

1, HuMAN SOVEREIGNTY. The throne of Judah was to be restored, and it should be
“established in mercy” or benignity. He that sat upon it should “sit in truth,”
“judging and seeking judgment, and hasting righteousness;” ¢.e. engaved in the
administration of justice, endeavouring to act justly, and acting, not with a troublesome
delay, but with an apyreciable promptitude. These are the two foundations on which
sovereignty rests everywhere and always—blenignity and justice. ‘The throne may rely
on centuries of unchallenged rule, may be fortified by venerable tradition and ancient
laws, may be guarded by many thousands of muskets; but it does not stand on any
secure basis, it is certain to be ultimately overthrown, if it is unjust in evactment
or harsh in execution. Righteousness, justice between man and man, between class
and class, between sect and sect—a broad and unbroken impartiality ; this great virtue,
and its most excellent handmaid, benignity—kindness in manner, sympathy shown
to the unfortunate, consideration for the poor and unbelriended ;—these are the pillars
on which alone human sovereignty will be secure. It has been well said by an English
statesman that “justice and mercy are the supreme attributes of Deity, but all men
everywhere comprehend them; there is no speech nor language in which their voice
is not heard, and they cannot be vainly exercised ” with the millions of mankind.

Il. THe RULE or Curist. Jesus Christ claims to be Sovereign of the world. ‘Thou
art a King, then?” said the astonished procurator. ‘Thou sayest that lama King,”
replied the Son of man, And his word has been justified by the event, for he is
ruling now over vast inultitudes of human souls. On what does bis power rest? On
these foundations—iighteousness and mercy. 1. He, the Lord of truth, of holiness, of
love, has a right to the bomage of our minds, to the assent of our conscience, to the
unmeasured gratitude and devoted love of our hearts. 2. He, who is full of kindness,
of forbearance, of tenderness, of beneficent bestowal and gracious purpose,—he will
continue to reign over those who have willingly bowed beneath his spiritual sway. “ In
mercy shall” his ‘‘ throne be established.”

HL. InpivipuaL INFLUENCE, Men covet power; they do well to do so. If they
seek it in order that they may exert a precious and helpful influence on the minds and
on the lives of others, their ambition ig no other than an honourable and laudable
aspiration. Its possession by any man must be according to ‘ the ability which God
giveth ” (the original faculty with which his Creator has endowed him), and according
to the favonring circumstances which God has thrown around him. But, these being
taken into thought, the power which a man will wield and the duration of its exercise
must depend on the measure of these two great moral qualities, benignity and right-
eousness. In mercy—in kindness, in breadth of beneficence, in readiness and reality of


cH. xvi. 1—14.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 285
I


sympatny, in genuineness and greatness of self-forgetting love—shall every man’s throne
be established. But he that would sit long on the throne, he that would continue
to exercise power with men, he that would retain his influence over men, must
be a righteous as well as a genial and gracious man; he must “ seek judgment,” must
“haste to righteousness; ” he must obviously endeavour to do that which is right
between man and man; he must eagerly embrace the opportunity of making the
crooked things straight, of restoring that which is wrong, of lifting up that which
should no longer be abased.—C,


Vers. 6—11.—@uilty arrogance and commendable compassion. 1. THe avtuT or
ARROGANCE. (Ver. 6.) Moab was proud, haughty, insolent, boastful; she lifted up
herself in contemptuous defiance of Judah, of the city of God; and the prophet of
Jehovah speaks of her arrogance as a very great offence in the eyes of the supreme
Disposer. There is nothing which is more emphatically, or more repeatedly condemned
in Scripture than haughtiness of heart or spiriiual pride; it is a very rank offence in
the estimation of the Holy One. And well may it be so; for what can be more pitifully
wrong, more utterly unbecoming, than that such puny, ignorant, dependent creatures
as we are should assert ourselves against the God from whom we came and in whom we
live? It should be remembered that there is not only the arrogance of an idolatrous
defiance, like that of Moab, but also, as too often found amongst ourselves, (1) the
arrogance of wnbelief—the product of intellectual pride; (2) the arrogance of impiety—
the daring determination of the soul to live without God, to delay all attention to his
sovereign claims until a late hour of life; (3) the arrogance of vice—the reckless reso-
lution to snatch forbidden and unholy pleasure, whatever Divine laws may be broken,
whatever human hearts may be embittered and human lives despoiled, whatever peval
consequences may be entailed.

Il. THE DEPTH OF ITs DiscoMFITURE. 1. This is seen in the sadness of the cir-
cumstances of Moab. Its inhabitants were “ stricken” (ver. 7) with a crushing blow
(see ch. v.; also ver. 8). Perhaps the culminating feature is seen in the shouting of
the harvest home being exchanged for the shouting of the enemy’s soldiery taking
possession of the spoil (ver. 9). 2. It is also seen in the sigus of prevailing misery.
“ Moab shall howl for Moab; every one shall howl” (ver. 7). Each one for himselt
and all for one another; “ the people to the city, the city to the provinces.” The land
should be full of weeping. “ Pride cometh before a fall; ” “ He that exalteth himself
shall be ahased.” ‘hese are specimen-passages, representing a large number and a
great variety of Divine declarations that arrogance will have a disastrous end, Of
course, the special form which the sin takes will usually determine the particular
punishment which will ensue. But there will surely come defeat, humiliation, dis-
tress; and of this distress the most intwierable element will probably be a lacerating
remorse, in which the soul will smite itself because it yielded not, as it might have done,
in the day of opportunity.

III. Tue compassion OF THE RIGHTEOUS. (Vers, 9—11.) The prophet is so im-
pressed with the deplorableness of Moab’s condition that his heart is powerfully touched
on its behalf. He ‘‘ bewails” for it; his heart “sounds like an harp” for it. Human
indignation against sin does well to pass into pity for the sorrow and the ruin which
sin entails. This is truly God-like, Christian. “God so loved,” with the love of an
infinite compassion, this sin-ruined world, “that he gave his only begotten Son.” Jesus
Christ, when he beheld the doomed city of David, moved with a tender compassion for
its coming woes, “ wept over it.” Let the holy grace of indiznation have its due share
in the Christian character; the soul that has it not is seriously wanting: but let it
by ne means exclude from the chambers of the heart that heavenly guest—Christ-like
compassion. Let us have a large and generous pity for the fallen, for the guilty, for
those who are suffering the bitter pangs of self-reproach ; and let sympathetic sorrow
pass speedily into a wise and kind helpfulness, which will lead back from the “ far
country” of sin and shame to the Father’s home of righteousness and joy.—C.


Ver. 12.— Unavailing prayer. Moab “ will come to his sanctuary to pray, but he


shall not prevail.” There are two kinds of unavailing prayer— he
L THE PRAYER WHICH I8 ADDRESSED TO NON-EXISTENT BEINGS. How pitiable that,
‘ 11


286 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.  [cn. xvi J—14.


as the consequence of the blinding influence of sin, men should have spent so much
thought and effort in devotion that must have been absolutely barren of all good result!
It is painful to think of the multitude of sacrifices—even human sacrifices—that have
been offered up beneath every sky, of the labours that have been undergone, of the
pilgrimages that have been made, of the turtures that have been inflicted, of the
privations that have been endured, of the observances that have been gone through,
and, if last not least, of the prayers that have been presented from full and burdened
hearts, that have all been wasted, inasmuch as the devotees have all been making their
appeal to an ear that could not hear, to a hand that could not help.

1, THE PRAYER WHICH IS UNAVAILINGLY ADDRESSED TO Gop. It is almost equally
sad to think that there must have ben, and must be, a vast amountof devotion
vainly and fruitlessly directed to the living God. There is (1) the formal )rayer—
the prayer which goeth forth from feigned lips, in which men “ honour God with their
lips, but their hearts are far removed from him” (ch. xxix. 13); (2) the prayer of pride
(see Luke xviii. 9—14); (8) the prayer of tmpenitence (Ps. lxvi. 18; Prov. xv. 29;
xxviii. 9; ch. i, 15); (4) the prayer of unbelief (Heb. xi. 6); (5) the prayer of
irreverence (Heb. v. 7); (6) the prayer which is unacceptable by reason of the nature
of the request. If we ask God for his interposition in the spirit of vindictiveness
rather than of generosity, or if we ask for material enrichment or earthly honours
rather than the Divine favour and spiritual progress, we may be asking for that which
our heaverly Father will deny 7m mercy to ourselves. For he may know that the very
thing we crave would prove to be the most mischievous thing we could possibly
possess. It may be worth our while to look also at—

lI. THe PRAYER WHICH DOES NOT SEEM TO PREVAIL, BUT WHICH IS NOT INEFFEC-
TUAL. There are many acts of devotion which do not bring any immediate, desired
result, but they are far from being vain and fruitless. Such are: 1. The prayers which
are not supplicatory at all—those which begin and end in communion; those in which
the reverent and loving heart of the human child finds a holy and satisfying joy m
holding fellowship with the heavenly Father, the redeemed spirit with its gracious
Saviour, its unchanging Friend. 2. ‘The prayers which are not answered at the time,
but after some patient waiting. 8, The prayers which are answered in a way alto-
gether different from that expected by the soul. As the prophet of the Lord met
Naaman’s request in a way which surprised and even angered him, so the Lord himself
often mects our requests in a way which surprises and even “ offends” us. We should
prefer the immediate touch of his mighty hand, renewing, cleansing, enlarging,
enlightening. But instead of this, he employs some simple and common instru-
mentality, or some unpleasant discipline, which brings about the change that is to
be desired. Thus in Newton’s hymn—


“T asked the Lord that I might grow
In faith and love and every grace.”


But instead of “his love’s constraining power” subduing sin and giving rest, come
assaults from without and wrestlings within; and when the disturbed and questioning
spirit asks, “ Why is this?” the answer comes—


“These inward trials I employ
From s: lf and pride to set thee free,
And break thy schemes of earthly joy,
That thou may’st seek thine all in me,”


G.


Ver. 1.—Recovering false steps. The word “lamb” in this verse should be rendered
“lambs.” From 2 Kings iii, 4 we learn that the tribute rendered to the King of
Israel by Mesha, King of Moab, was a huudred thousand lambs, and a hundred thousand
rams, with the wool. At the death of Ahab Mesha refused to pay this tribute, and
asserted his independence. In view of the exposure of Moab to attacks from Assyria
this was a false step, and Mesha is here urged to retrace that step, and at once send
the tribute as a sign of renewed alleyiance. The urgency of the case is shown in
the advice to send the tribute round the southern part of the Dead Sea, because the
northern end was already blocked by the Assyrians. This introduces the subject of


ou. xvi. 1—14.)} THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 287


retracing our false steps; undoing the wrongs we have done; stepjing back from our
wilful paths, and beginning once more in the right way.

I. THIS Is ABSOLUTELY NECESSARY WoRK. Its necessity may be argued from these
points of view: 1. It is due to God that we should préve our sincerity by reparation
as a sign of repentance. 2. It is due to those whom we ha onged that when we
are brought to aright mind we should remove and undo the wrong. 8. It is due to
burselves that we should clear away from memory and conscience the bad past, as far as
its evil consequences can be cleared. It is never enough for a man to “cease to do
evil;” he is bound to remove, as far as possible, the issues of his past evil; and the
intensest bitterness a good man can ever know arises from the fact that he cannot
heal the wounds he has made, or check the evil working of the influences he has
exerted, or example he has shown. When pleaded with in respect of his intense
religious earnestuess, John Newton is said to have replied, “How can the old blas-
phemer be silent?” He felt that life was not long enough, or powers large enough,
for the undoing of the wrong wrought by a godless, vicious youth. And, further, if
in life we swerve from the paths of rectitude, we shall find there is no going on round
into those paths again; we must do one thing—we must go back the bad road we have
chosen.

If. Bur Tuis 1s Most DirricuLt work. In either the larger or smaller senses to
which reference has been made. And that because: 1. It involves serious self-
humiliations. None of us can easily say, “I was wrong.” 2. Because it exposes
us to tlie scorn of the unprincipled, who regard all retracing of steps as a sign of weak-
ness, and cannot understand the heroism of conquering the baser self. In the sense of
unudving wrong that has been done it is most difficult, because the issues of our words
and deeds go on out of our reach. It is as if we dropped poison into the fountain-
head of a river, and then in remorse tried to cleanse that fount. ‘It can be done, but
away down tlie valley the poison has been carried, and none can bring back to life the
poor dead fish that are borne on the current ot to sea. The Apostle Paul never
could undo the wrongs of that time when he so bitterly persecuted the disciples of tlie
Nazarene.

Ill. Yer THIS Is ALWAYS HOPEFULLY REMUNERATIVE worRK. It has its special
rewards. 1. It satisfies our sense of duty. 2. It rests a conscience which otherwise
would ceaselessly reproach. 3. It makes us clean-handed to appear before God. 4. It
enables us to receive the assurance of Divine acceptance. 5. It becomes our witness to
righteousness. Restitution, reparation, humbly going back the wilful way we may
have taken, meet gracious Divine response. God surely smiles on the man who is
brave enough to set wrongs right, and acknowledge the foolishness of his self-willed


way.—R. T.


Ver. 3.—Practical righteousness. It does not seem certain whether this counsel is
addressed to Moab in relation to the people fleeing for shelter {rom the invasion of
Sennacherib, or to Israel in relation to the outcasts from Moab. Whichever it be,
the point of the counsel is that they should act kindly, considerately, charitably.
Righteousness is like “ pure telision and undetied ;” it is doing-something—* visiting
the fatherless and widows in their affliction” “He that doeth righteousness is
righteous, even as he is righteous ;” “ If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do
them.” Absolute righteousness, as before the all-searching God, is not a human possi-
bility ; but Scripture uses the term in reference to men. The psalmist says, “ Jude
me according to mine integrity, and according to my righteousness which is in me.”
And our Lord pleaded thus, “ Except your righteousness shall exceed the righteous-
ness of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom ot
heaven.”

I. RIGHTEOUSNESS MAY BE MERE SENTIMENT. A delusion of excited feeling, as it
too often is with persons who take up with “holiness theories.” The danger of
sentiment is that too often it satisfies, and in the pleasant enjoyment of it a man has
no care about giving righteousness its due expression. No fruits ever grew on the tree
of sentimentality, and its leaves have no virtue for the healing of the natiuns. ;

IL RIGHTEOUSNESS MAY BE A PROFESSION. It is assumed in our being Christians,
It is the state into which we are called, It is guaranteed in our regeneration. Why,


28 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (on. xvi. 1—


then, may we not be satisfied with this profession? Because such rizhteousness is, at
the best, something belonziny to a class, and not to the individual; and the only
richteousness worth having is something which the individual has for himself alone.

“IIL. RigHTEousNESs MUST BE A PRACTICE. ‘Even as he [Christ] is righteous;”
and his rivhteousness was distinctly conduct, and the spirit of conduct, Righteousness
is truth, brotherliness, service, charity, self-denial, purity; it is God-likeness, and God
is righteous in all his works. It is well for us to have and to cherish right feelings
and good resolves, but the question te ask ours:]ves is this—If we have the opportunity,
do we give these good resolves, do we find for these good thoughts and feelings practical
expression? The message sent to David has often been misunderstood and misused
In convection with building the temple God said, “Thou didst well that it was ip
thine beart.” But we forget that David went as far as he was allowed, in giving
practical expression to what was in his heart; he made preparations for what he might
not himself accomplish.—h. ‘I’.


Ver. 5.—Righteousness hindered or hastened. There is a possible reference here to
King Hezekiah, and of him it is said that “seeking judgment and hasting righteous-
ness” should be characteristics. The expression, “ hasting righteousuess,” is a very
suggestive one. Cheyne translates, “is prompt in righteousness.” The following
thought may be worked out and illustrated: Establishing righteousness in the earth
is God’s purpose, and towards the accomplishing of that purpose—the speedy accom-
plishment of it—every good man should work. But what are the facts of life, which
we cannot fail to observe ?

I. RiaHTEOUSNESS HAS ACTIVE OPPONENTS. They who would dethrone God attack
righteousness, which is the spirit and the demand of his rule.

‘Il, RigHrrousNess IS HINDERED BY STOLID RESISTERS. With whom it is much
more difficult to deal than with active opponents. They simply block the way of
God’s chariot-wheels. ‘

lI. Rigurgousyess I8 DELAYED BY THE WEAKLY INDIFFERENT. Who put uo
strength iuto either good or evil.

1V. RiaireousNess HAS EARNEST HASTENERS. Men and women who strive for it,
witness for it, suffer for it. Whose whole lives do but repeat the great cry with which
the Book of God closes: “Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly ;” “ Even so, come, Lord
Jesus.”—R, T,


Vers. 9, 10.—The sadness of a silent land. These verses bring betore us tne picture
of a country from which, at the proper seasons, there rises no harvest and no vintage
song. ‘*Gladness is taken away, and joy out of the plentiful field; and in its vineyard
there shall be no singing, neither shall there be shouting.” In every age and every
land the gladness of the people has found expression in the joy of harvest, and no
picture of woe, want, and desolation could be so effective as this simple one of the
harvest-fields from which arise no song. Meditatively treated, we consider—

J, A LAND WITH NO Joy IN IT. ‘That must be a land on which rests no Divine
benedictions ; and it must be the picture of—

Il, A LIFE WITH NO JoY IN IT, That must be a life on which rests no Divine
smile. We are like the birds, we can only sing in God’s sunshine, Inexpressibly sad
is human life without God. “The joy of the Lord is our strength ;” but the sadness of
agnosticism, atheism, Comtism, secularism, is the all-sufficing proof that these can
never take the place of religion for man, who fain would sing for joy. Let such
systems prevail, and the song of earth would cease. From the silent, songless land a
heart-cry to the great heavens would go, saying—


“Ob for a vision! Oh for the face!”
RT.


Ver. 12.—Prayer that may not prevail. The immediate reference of this verse is
to the vain and hopeless prayers of Moab, offered in his time of distress to his idol-
god Chemosh. Idols are only gods for sunshiny days, when their worshippers want
nothing, There is no prevailing to secure help from them when life is full of calam-


om. xvi. 1—14.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 289
ee


ties, and when hearts ache. But the expression reminds us that prayer offered to the
true God does not always prevail—at least, prevail to the securing of the precise thing
asked for; though this comes about, not by reason of the Divine inability, but by reason
of the Divine wisdom and love. Our prayer may not always prevail with Jehovah, for
such reasons as the following—

I. BECAUSE THE ATTITUDE OF HIM WHO OFFERS IT Is wrona. 1, He may demand,
and that God can never allow, 2. He may not have clean hands; and man must put
away his evil doings before he seeks God. 3. He may be unforgiving towards his
brother; and if we forgive not our brother his trespass, God will heed no prayer from
us for the forgiveness of ours. 4. He may fail in that importunity which is before
God the sign of earnestness. 5. He may ask with purely selfish intentions—to consume
the blessing sought upon his lusts.

Il. Because THE PRAYER IS ONLY A CRY OF DESPAIR. Not a quiet, thouchtful
turning to God, but only a feeling, “ Nobody can help me—let us see if even God can.”
There is nothing in such a cry to which God can hopelully respond. For prayer to
prevail with God there must be some trust in it.

III. Because Gop’s GooD TIME FOR BLESSING MAY NOT HAVE coME. Prayer often
only seems not to prevail, because the answer is held over until God’s best time has
come. And Divine delayings are tests of sincerity and inspirations to importunity.
“Though it tarry, wait for it; it will surely come, it will not tarry.”

IV. BECAUSE OTHER PRAYERS MAY BE PRAYING AGAINST OUR PRAYERS. Other
people’s prayers, and the voice of some things in ourselves. Sodom’s iniquity was
crying hard against Abraham’s prayer, and Abraham could not prevail. Jerusalem
was crying hard against the Lord Jesus, and his prayer could not prevail, St. Panl’s
infirmities of temper were crying hard against his prayer that the thorn in the flesh
snould be removed; and they prevailed, not Paul, and the thorn stayed piercing on.
Here is a hidden secret unfolded. Why have we so often seemed to pray only to feel
the heavens like brass above us? We should know if we could hear all the prayers
that rise to God, and know how many and how loud are the prayers that plead avainst
us. God weighs them all, and the answer to us is always that which is best, on the
whole.—R. T.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER XVIL

Vers. 1—3.—Tue Burpen or Damasces.
The eye of the prophet travels northwards
from Moab, and, passing over Ammon as an
enemy of small account, rests once more upon
Damascus, already threatened in ch. vii. ]
—9, and probably already partially punished.
Damascus is seen once more in alliance
with Ephraim (ver. 3), and the two are
joined with a new power, Aroer (ver. 2),
which possesses several “cities.’”’ Woe is
denounced on all the three powers: desola-
tion on Damascus and Aroer; on Damascus
and Ephraim, the complete loss of the last
shadow of independence. The Assyrian
inscriptions point out, as the probable date
of the prophecy, the commencement of Sar-
gon’s reign—about B.o. 722 or 721.

Ver. 1.—Damascus is taken away from
being a city. According to Vitringa, Da-
mascus has been destroyed oftener than any
other town; but it has a wonderful power of

ISALAH,


rising again from its ashes. Probably a
destruction by Sargon is here intended
(‘ Records of the Past,’ vol. ix. p. 6).

Ver. 2.—The cities of Aroer are forsaken.
That the Aroer of this passage cannot be
either that on the Arnon, or that facing
Rabbath-Ammon (Josh. xiii. 25), has long
been perceived and recognized (see Mr.
Grove’s article on “ Aroer” in the ‘ Dict. of
the Bible,’ vol. i. p. 115). It is evidently
a city of the sime name lying much fur-
ther towards the north. And it is a city
of far greater importance, having “ cities”
dependent on it. Now, Sargon’s annals tell
us of a “Gargar,” a name well expressing
the Hebrew 1p y, which was united in a
league with Damascus, Samaria, Arpad, and
Simyra, in the second year of Sargon, and
was the scene of a great battle and a great
destruction. Sargon besieged it, took it,
and reduced it to ashes (‘ Records of the
Past,’ l.s.c.). There is every reason tu recognize
the “ Arocr” of this verse in the “ Gurgar”
of Sargon’s inscriptions. They shall be for
flocks (comp. ch. v.17; vii. 25). It marked
the very extreme of desolation, that cattle

U


£90


should be pastured on the sites of cities.
None shall make them afraid; ze. “there
shall be no inhabitants to make any objec-
tion.”

Ver. 3.—The fortress also shall cease from
Ephraim. Sargon did not destroy Samaria
on the occasion of his first capture. But he
says that he “1educed it toa heap of ruins ”
on tlie occasion of its second capture (‘ Re-
cords of the Past,’ l.s.c.). And the kingdom
from Damascus. We do not hear of any
King of Damascus after Rezin, who was slain
by Tiglath-Pileser about B.c. 732. Damas-
cus, however, reasserted her independence
in 8.0. 721, and probably set up a king at
the same time. In B.c. 720 she was reduced
and destroyed. Nothing more is heard of
her until B.c. 694—the eleventh year of Sen-
nacherib—when her “ governor” is Assyrian
Eponym, and she must therefore have been
absorbed into the Assyrian empire, The
remnant of Syria. This phrase shows that
the great blow which struck down Syria—
Tiglath-Pileser’s capture of Damascus and
slaugliter of Kezin—was a thing of the past.
Syria was already but “a remnant.” Now
she was to cease to exist altogether. They
shall be as the glory of the children of
Israel. Ironical. ‘The irony is made appa-
rent by tue next verse.


Vers. 4—11.—A DenvunciaTion or Wor
on IsRAEL, COMBINED WITH THE PROMISE OF
A Remnant. Israel, having united herself
with Syria to resist the Assyrians, will ineur
a similar fate. Her glory will decay, her
population dwindle and almost disappear.
Still there will be a few left, who, under the
circumstances, will turn to God (ver. 7).
But it will be too late for anything like a
national recovery ; the land will remain “a
desolation ” on account of the past sins of its
inhabitants (vers. J—11).


Ver. 4.—The glory of Jacob shall be made
thin. Tliere is reason to believe that the
deportation of the Isrielites was gradual.
Sargon, on taking Samaria for the first time,
in B.0. 722, carried off no more than 27,290
of the inhabitants (G. Smith, ‘Kponym
Canon,’ p. 125). Over the remainder he
appointed governors, and required them to
pay the same taxation as before. About
B.0. 715 he placed a number of Arabs in
Samaria, probably deporting natives to make
room for them (ibid., p.128). The continu-
ance of # remnant of Israelites in the land
down to B.o. 625 is indicated by 2 Cliron.
xxxiv. 9. The fatness of his flesh shall wax
lean (comp. ch, x. 16). Depopulation is
primarily intended; but there is, perhaps,
also a more general reference to depression,
wasting, and misery.


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. xvu. 1—14.


Fo


Ver. 5.—As when tne harvestman gather-
eth the corn. Death is the “ harvestman”
here, and gathers the Israelites by shocks, or
sheaves, into his garner. A great depopula-
tion appears in 2 Kings xvii. 25, where we
learn th.t lions so multiplied in the land as
to become a terror to the few inhabitants.
Reapeth the ears. Mr. Cheyne well remarks
that the “ ears” only were reaped, tie stalk
being cut close under the ear. This was
the practice also in Exypt (Rawlinson,
‘Hist. of Ancient Egypt,’ vol. i. p. 162).
In the valley of Rephaim. The valley of
Rephaim was the scene of David’s double
victory over the Philistines, related in
2 Sam. v. 17—25. It is disputed whether it
lay north or south of Jerusalem; but the
connection with Bethlehem (2 Sam. xxiii.
13—17) and with the cave of Adullam seem
decisive in favour of a soutiern position. A
“valley,” however (emek), suitable for the
cultivation of corn, in this direction, has yet
to be discovered.

Ver. 6.—Yet gleaning grapes shall be left
in it; rather, yet gleanings shall be left in it.
There is no mention of grapes, and it is clear
that the “ gleaning ” intended is that of an
olive-ground. As the shaking of an olive
tree; rather, as at the beating of an olive tree.
The olive crop was obtained, not by shaking,
but by beuting the trees (Deut. xxiv. 20),
The owner was forbidden to “ go over the
boughs again,” in order that a portion of
the crop might be left for the stranger, the
widow, and the fatherless to glean. In the
top of the uppermost bough. Whe the sticks
of the beaters had not reached. Four or five
in the outmost fruitful branches; rather, four
or five apiece on its fruitful branches. ‘This
is tlle average that would be left, after beat-
ing, on a good-sized branch.

Ver. 7.—At that day shall a man look to
his Maker. We have evidence of this revul-
sion of feeling on the part of Israel in the
statement of Chronicles that, in the reign of
Josiah, offerings of money were made for the
temple service by men of “ Manasseh and
Ephraim, and of all the remnant of Israel,”
which the Levites collected and brought te
Jerusalem (2 Chron. xxxiv. 9).

Ver. 8.—And he shall not look to the
altars. The altars at Dan ana Bethel
(1 Kings xii. 28—33) may be intended, or
the Israelites may have had other idolatrous
altars besides these (2 Kings xvii. 11; Hos.
viii. 11), Josiah, about B.o. 631, broke down
altars througliout all the land of Israel, in
the cities of Manasseh and Ephraim and
Simeon (?), even unto Naphtali (2 Chron.
xxxiv,i—7). Apparently he had the consent
of the inhabitants to this demolition. Either
the groves, or theimages. Ashérah, the word
here and elsewhere commonly translated
“grove” in the Authorized Version, is now


cH. xv. 1—14,] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


291


generally admitted to have designated an
artificial construction of wood or metal, which
was used in the idolatrous worship of the
Phoenicians and the Israelites, probably as
the emblem of some deity. The Assyrian
“sacred tree” was most likely an emblem of
the same kind, and may give an idea of the
sort of object worshipped under the name of
Ashéral) (comp. ‘ Ancient Monarchies,’ vol.
li. pp. 235—237). The Israelites, in the
time of their prosperity, had set up “ groves ”
of this character “on every high hill, and
under every green tree ” (2 Kings xvii. 10).
Many of them were still standing when
Josiih made his iconoclastic raid into the
Israelite country (2 Chron. xxxiv. 5—7), and
were broken down by him at the same time
as the altars. The “images” of this place
are the same as those coupled with the
Israelite “groves” in 2 Chron. xxxiv. 7,
namely “sun-images,” emblems of Baal,
probably pillars or conical stones, sucii as
are known to have lield a place in the reli-
gious worship of Phosnicia.

Ver. 9.—In that day. While a remnant of
the Israelites shall repent and turn to God,
throwing in their lot with Judah, as it would
seem. the country generally shall feel the
weight of God’s chastening hand, on account
of Israel’s former sins and offences. As a
forsaken bough, and an uppermost branch;
rather, as the forsaken tract of woodland and
mountain- crest (Kay). The reference is to
the condition of the land when it passed out
of the possession of the Canaanitish nations.
It was tlien forsaken and desolate. So shall
it be once more, when Israel is expelled for
the same sins (see 2 Kings xvii. 7,8). Which
they left because of the children of Israel;
rather, which men forsook before the children
of Israel; i.e. from which the Canaanites
fled as the children of Israel advanced and
took possession. The writer ignores tlie
long and fierce struggle which the Canaan-
ites made, and looks only to the result—
retirement from a desvlated country.

Ver. 10.—Because thou hast forgotten;
rather, because thou didst forget. The late
repentance of a “rc mnant”’ which “ looked to
their Maker” (ver. 7) could not cancel the
long catalogue of former sins (2 Kings xvii.
8—17), foremost among which was their
rejection of God, or, at any rate, their com-
plete forgetfulness of his claims upon them.
The Rock of thy strength. God is first called
“a Rock” in Dvut. xxxii. 4, 15, 18, 30, 31.
The image is caught up by the psa)mists
(2 Sam. xxii.-2, 32,47; xxiii. 3; Ps. xvii.
2, 31, 46; xix. 14; xxviii. 1, ete.), and from
them pisses to Isaiah (see, besides the
present passage, ch. xxvi. 4, xxx. 29; and
xliv. 8). Among the later prophets only
Habakkuk uses it (i. 12). Israel, instead of
looking to this “ Rock,” had looked to their


rock-fortresses (ver. 9), Therefore shalt thou
plant pleasant plants; rather, dost thon plant,
or hast thou planted. Forgetfulness of Je-
hovah has led to the adoption of a voluptu-
ous religion—one of debased foreigi rites.
There is possibly, as Mr. Cheyne thinks, a
special reference to the cult of Adonis.
Shalt set it; rather, settest it, or hast set it.
“Tt” must refer to “ ficld” or “ garden”
understood, The later Israclite religion hus
been a sort of pleasant garden, planted with
exotic slips from various quarters— Phoenicia,
Syrit, Moab, ete. It hus been thought per-
missible to introduce into it any new cult
that took the fancy. Hvcnce tie multiplica-
tion of altars complained of by Hosca (viii.
AAS Xe ol exit ah):

Ver. 11.—In the day; or, in a day (Kay).
Shalt thou make; rather, thow makest. Each
new slip that is planted is forced to take
root and growand flourish at once; the next
morning it is expected tu have formed its
seed and reached perfection. So the harvest
is hurried on; but when it is reached, the
day of visitation has arrived—a day of grief
and of desperate sorrow.


Vers. 12—14.—A PropHEoy aGarnst As-


sYRIA. This passage 18, apparently, out of
place. At any rate, it is quite unconnected


with what precedes, and almost equally so
with what follows. Still, it must be borne
in mind that, until the destruction of Sen-
nacherib’s army, Isaiah las the thought of
the Assyrians, as the pressing danger, always
before him, and continually reverts to it,
often abruptly, and without preparation (see
ch. v. 26—30; vii. 17—25; viii. 5—8; x.
5—19, 24—34; xiv. 24—27). The present
prophecy seems, more distinctly than any
other in the purely prophetical chapters, to
point to the miraculous destruction of the
host which Sennacherib was about to bring
against Jerusalem.


Ver. 12 —Woe to the multitude of many
people; rather, Ho for the tumult of many
peoples! The advance of an army composed
of soldiers from many nations is descried.
They advance with noise and tumult—a
tumult compared with that of “seas that
are tumultuous.” Under the circunstances
of th. time, it is reasonable to suppose the
Assyrians to be intended (comp. ch. xxii. 6,
7). ‘Ihe rushing sound of the advance is
borne in strongly upon the prophet’s mind,
and made the subject of three consecutive
clauses.

Ver. 13.—God shall rebuke them; lite-
rally, he shall rebuke them—he who alone
can doso. There is no need to mention his
name. They shall flee far off. The destruc-


292


tion of the great bulk of Sennacherib’s army
io the nigit was followed, as soon as morning
came, by the hasty flight of the survivors
(2 Kings xix. 36; ch. xxxvii. 37). And shall
be chased. Herodotus says that the Egyp-
tians pursued the army of Sennaclierib and
slew vast numbers (ii. 141). As the chaff
of the mountains (comp. Hos. xiii. 3).
Threshing-floors were ordinarily placed upon
eminene's (2 Sam. xxiv. 18; 2 Chron. iii. 1),
where the wind had freer course and conse-


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (on. xvin 1—14.


quently greater power. Like a rolling thing;
or, like whirling dust (Kay). The word used
commonly means “a wheel.”

Ver. 14.—Behold at evening-tide trouble;
rather, terror, as the word is elsewhere
always translated (comp. 2 Kings xix. 35,
“Tt came to pass that night that the angel
of the Lord went out,” etc.). He is not
(comp. 2 Kings xix. 35, “They were all
dead corpses”). That spol us. , . that rob
us (see 2 Kings xviii. 13—16).


HOMILETICS,


Vers. 6—11.— National repentance may come too late to avert national ruin. The
crisis of a nation’s fate is brought on by slow dezrees, and results from a multitude of
acts, each one of which, when once done, is past recall. Up to a certain point there is
a possibility of retrieval. ‘Tout peut se rétablir,” as a great monarch of our own time
said, ‘The modes of action that have biought the state into difficulties may be renounced,
or even reversed ; and recovery may set in as a natural consequence of such reversal.
Or the change of couduct may have appeased God’s anver, and his favour may raise up
the nation which he has depressed, to mark his displeasure. Such was the case with
united Israel during the period of the judges. Seven times was the nation for its sins
“ sold into the hand” of a foreign power, its independence suspended, its ruin all but
accomplished ; and seven times upon its repentance did God raise up a deliverer who
restored it to vigorous life and re-established its prosperity. But this process cannot go
on forever. A time comes when the sources of national vigour are sapped, when exhaus-
tion has set in, when foreizn neighbours have become enormously powerful, aud when it
would require, not one miracle only, but a series of miracles, to save the state from the
consequences of its long-continued misconduct. Then, although the remnant left may
perceive its danger, and regret the past, and repent, and put away the evil of its doings,
and even reverse its modes of action, turning to God (ver. 7) instead of turning away
from him (ver, 10), and looking to the Holy One instead of looking to idols and vanities,
it may be too late to reverse the fiat that has long since gone forth, or to arrest the
destruction decreed and determined on, The remnant may save their own souls, but
they cannot save their country, The “ day of griet and of desperate sorrow ” comes on,
whatever they may do; and the nation perishes in consequence of its past misdeeds,
despite its tardy amendment.


Ver. 10.—The Rock of our strength. Irreligious men have many “rocks of strength,”
or at any rate think that they have many. 1. “Some put their trust in chariots and
in. horses,” bel eve in “ big battalions ” as really ruling the world, and think they have
only to swell their armies in order to sway the course of events at their pleasure. ‘Tell
them that “it is nothing with God to help, whether with many or with them that have
no power” (2 Chron, xiv. 11); assure them that “it is no hard matter for many to be
shut up in the hands of a few, and with the God of heaven it is all one to deliver with
a great multitude or a small company, for the victory of battle standeth not in the
multitude of a host, but strength cometh from heaven ” (1 Mace. iii. 18, 19); and they
open their eyes wide with astonishment, and set down the speaker as a dreamy fanatic.
2. Others regard wealth as a tower of strength, a “rock” that will never fail them.
Three things alone are wanted to secure complete success in life, and these are “ Money,
money, money.” ‘Iheir highest idea of perfect safety and security is “the Bank of
England.” No qualms of fear assail them so long as they have a good balance at their
bankers, “Soul,” they say to themselves, “ thou hast much goods laid up for many
years; take thine ease, eat, drivk, and be merry ” (Luke xii. 19), Tell them that
riches make themselves wings, talk to them of failures, bankruptcies, revolutions, and
they will laugh you to scorn; theirs are safe, they are quite certain, and that is enough
for them. 38, A third class “trust in princes,” or great men. ‘They have a patron, a
protector, a “friend at court;” and all must necessarily go well with them, Nay,


OH. Xvi. I—14.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 293


ke


perhaps they have “ two or three strings to their bow ”— powerful friends belonging to
both parties; how, then, is it possible that they should not be secure? Christian men
have, on the other hand, but one “ Rock of strength,” but one Trust, but one Stay, and
that is God. God is their ‘* Rock ”—

L As BEING FIRM AND IMMOVABLE, All else is shifting and changing. Men die,
even tlouh they be princes or prime ministers. Armies melt away, suffer defeat,
mutiny. Wealth becomes the prey of the spoiler, is lost through fraud, or taken away
by violence. God always remains the same—firm, solid, substantial; something on
which we can count, something that will not disappear, that will not change, that we
can rely upon as a sure foundation.

Il. As Berna A STRONGHOLD AND Derence. The Israelites looked to their fortified
cities to protect them (ver. 9). The Christian looks to God. God’s strength is such
that nothing can prevail against it. He is an absolutely sure Defence, able to save men
“to the uttermost.” No one that has relied wholly and solely upon God, has ever
found his reliance misplaced or his defence fail him. If we make God our Refuge, we
place ourselves in an impregnable citadel. He is omnipotent, and therefore ever able
to save; he is faithful. and therefore ever willing to save,

Ill. As Berne a SHADOW FROM THE HEAT, A SHELTER FROM THE TEMPEST. God
not only protects but consoles, not only saves but comforts. Te is “ the Shadow of a
great Rock in a weary land.” When dangers threaten, when calamities come, when we
are drooping beneath tle noonday heat, or chilled by the pitiless storm, we can rest on
him, and he will cheer us; we can make our appeal to him, and he will give us relief
and refreshment. It is promised that, ultimately, “God shall wipe away tears from
all eyes” (Rev. xxi. 4). Already he does this to a large extent: Not only is he our
Defence and Stay, but he is a “ Rock” that “follows us” (1 Cor. x. 14) through the
wilderness of human life, assuaging our griefs, tsking away our sorrows, giving us
shelter, comfort, satisfaction, peace, happiness. He is himself an ever-present Joy,
possessing which, whatsvever happened to us, we should be content,


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


‘Vers. 1—8.— Damascus and Israel. The present oracle bids us turn to # different
scene—to the famed city and territory of Damascus. It lies in the vast rich plain east
of Mount Aniilibanus, on the border of the desert. Through the plain flows the river
Barada, provably the Abana in which Naaman delighted. “In the midst of the p/ain
lies at your feet the vast lake or island of deep verdure—walnuts and apricots waving
above, corn and grass below; and in the midst of the mass of foliage rises, striking its
white arms of streets hither and thither, and its white minarets above the trees which
embosom them, the city of Damascus. On the right towers the snowy height of
Hermon, overlooking the whole scene. Close behind are the sterile limestone mountains,
so that you stand literally between the living and the dead” (Stanley). The river:
turns what would otherwise be a dese:t into a rich garden, full of walnuts, pome-
granates, figs, plums, apricots, citrons, pears, and apples.

I. History or Damascus, There were traditions of Abraham lingering from early
times about the city. Eliezer of Damascus was his steward (Gen. xv. 2), But the
history is a blank till the time of David. He, being at war with Hadadezer, King of
Zobah, encvuntered Syrians of Damascus, who came to succour his foe, and slew of
them twenty-two thousand men. He then garrisoned the whole land with Israelites
(2 Sam. viii. 5, 6; 1 Chron. xviii. 5), From Solomou’s time we have hints of enmity
between Damascus, whose king appears to have been titularly desi:mated “ Hadad,” aid
Israel; also of Rezin, from Zobah (1 Kings xi. 23; xv. 19; 2 Chron. xvi. 3). The
fourth Hadad, with thirty-two subject kings, marched against Ahab, and laid siege to
Samaria (1 Kines xx. 1). In the end, the invader became subject to Ahab (1 Kings
xx. 13—34), Three years later, Ahab was defeated and slain in his attempt on Ramoth-
gilead (1 Kings xxii. 1—4, 15—387). The Syrians of Damascus were encouraged to a
second invasion of Israel, and a second siege of Simaria, which was raised in a panic
(2 Kings vii. 6, 7). A new page of history opens with the succession of Hazael to the
tule of Damascus, and the struggle against the Assyrians. Probably the dread of the


294 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. xvu. 1—14.


latter led to an alliance between Israel and Damascus a century later. The march of
Rezin of Damascus and Pekah of Israel against Jerusalem brings us within the scope of
(srael’s view (ch. vii. 1—6; 2 Kings xvi. 5). Ahaz placed himself under the protec-
tion of Assyria; Rezin was slain, his kingdom brought to an end, and Daiuascus
destroyed, its people being carried captive to Assyria (2 Kings xvi. 9; ct. ch. vii. 8;
Amos i. 5).

Il. TuE PROPHET’S DESCRIPTION OF ITs FATE. The fair city will be effaced from
the number of those that exist, and will become # heap of fallen ruins. And Israel,
which has hung her fortunes on those of Damascus, will share her fate. The very
sound of the word Aroer, reminding of the nature of barevess, nakedness, had an
ill omen. The strong places of Ephraim, te. of Israel, are laid low, and Damascus
ceases to exist as a kingdom. And the Aramzans who do not fall in battle are
carried away captive. The fate of Damascus is as pathetic as that of a di-tressed
womar. Cities were in ancient thought generally seen under the ideal of the woman,
their beauty as her beauty, their sorrows as hers. Damascus waxes feeble and turns
to flee, and fear seizes on her; anguisl) and sorrow have taken her, as a woman
in travail. “The city of praise is gone, the city of my joy!” exclaims Jeremiah
(xlix. 24, 25). “Cities have been as lamps of life along the pathway of humanity and
religion. Within them science has given birth to her noblest discoveries. Behind
their walls freedom has fought its noblest battles. They have stood on the surface of
the earth like break waters, rolling back or turning aside the swelling tide of oppression.
Cities indeed have been the cradle of human liberty. I bless God tor cities ” (Guthrie).

II. Arruicrion or IsRAEL AND HER REPENTANCE. (Vers. 4—8.) 1. Jmayes of
national deciy. ‘lhe glory of Jacob wastes, the fat of his flesh grows thin. Necessary
and constant in thought is the connection between the flourishing of a land and the
blessing of God, the withdrawal of his blessing and the withering of its fruits, the failure
of the supply of food. We must believe in this connection without hastily presuming,
as superstition does, to detect the exact sin which has called down the displeasure of
God. Our poet Tennyson, in some dark pictures of superstition in his ‘Queen Mary,’
represents the quren as saying that “ God is hard upon the people” because the nobles
would not give the Church lands back. And when she exclaims on the “ harvestless
autumn, horrible agues, plague,” the king replies—


“The blood and sweat of heretics at the stake
Is God’s best dew upon the barren field.”


Such are the reasonings of bigotry and fanaticism. Then only do we make the proper
application of the lessons of suffering, when we visit our own errors with self-chastise-
ment, and stir up the neglected gift, the forgotten talent, in ourselves. Another image
is that of the field of corn falling before the mower. Israel is ripe for judgment, as the
field of corn for the reaper. On the broad vale of Rephaim, sloping down to Bethlehem,
only an ear or two will be seen scattered here and there. ‘That vale may be viewed
as symbolic of the great world, and that reaping as prophetic of the day of judgment,
when on the white cloud sits one like the Son of man, having a golden crown on his
head, and in his hand a sharp sickle; and another angel comes out of the temple, and
cries with a loud voice to him that sits on the cloud, “Thrust in thy sickle, and reap:
for the time is come for thee to reap; for the harvest of the earth is ripe” (Rev. xiv.).
Few will escape the judgment, and yet afew there will be. At the olive-beating, when
it seems, at a superficial glance, that the tree is quite stripped, there nevertheless remain
“two or three berries high up at the top ; four, five on each of its branches.” 2. Redemp-
tion of the remnant. This word, “The remnant shall return,” is the standing word of
promise and of hope for Israel. It contains the “law of Israel’s history.” The ring is
gone, but the finger remains; the tree is felled, but the root-stump may yet send out
suckers; from the bared harvest-field some gleanings may yet be gathered. And so
Israel stands as the type of human life. All is not lost while conscience remains, while
will may still exert its energy against evil, and in the reformation of the habits. But
there must be this reformation, which begins with a looking up to God. The state of
the soul depends on the direction of its gaze. We look where we love, and our looking
tay produce love. Much has Scripture to say on the moral effect of vision. Some-
times it is equivalent to enjoying: “ What man is he that will see good ?” And as we


oH. Xvi. 1—14.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 295
a eee


do not willingly bend our eyes and keep them fixed upon sights which strike pain to the
feelings, the prayer, ‘Turn away mine eyes from beholding iniquity,” is equivalent to
the prayer that we may have no relish in evil ways. In the days of repentance men
will look up to their Creator. It is when we turn our eyes from our Maker and fix
them exclusively on the creature that we forget our dependence. “It is he that hath
made us, and not we ourselves; ” this is the thought which expresses the foundation of
all reverence, the duty of all worship and obedience. As all idolatry means loss of
self-respect, so regard to the great and glorious Creator reflects itself in veneration for
the nature he has given us, the image of his own. And he is the Holy One of Israel.
In every family, every congregation, every state, there must be an existing ideal of
righteousness, of truth, of purity. Such ideals are the shadows of the personality of
the holy God. If they pass away from the faith and relivious imagination of a people,
they fall into sensuality and materialism. The first step, then, towards a better life is
to look away from self, and from the evil associations which have grown into one’s
habits, or into which one has grown, to God as the Supreme and the Holy. Looking up
to God will mean looking awny from idols. “He will not look to the altars, the work
of his hands; and what his fingers have made he will not regard, neither the groves
nor the images.” True religion alone can drive out superstition. Science has not and
cannot do it. Men must either be superstitious or religious; for the imavinative
faculty demands, and will have, nourishment. The great prophets of Israel, training
men’s minds to look up to the great spiritual Source of man and of nature, have taught
us lessons that can never become obsolete. But the heathen idolatry referred to should
be more closely considered.—J.


Ver. 8.—The prophet on heathen worship. Having described in brief the true
religion as a “ looking up to God” as Maker and Redeemer of Israel, the prophet with
equal expressiveness characterizes the heathen worship around.

1, If 18 REVERENCE FOR THE OBJECT OF HUMAN ART. Contemptuous is the reference
to “the work of his hands,” and “ that which his fingers have made”—altars and
images. When the spiritual nerve of relizion is weakened, the affections fix upon
the symbols, forms, and accessories of religion. ‘The soul that has lost its God
must have some visible substitute, as a pet, a plaything, an idol. When the meaning
of sacrifice is deeply realized and felt, any bare table will suffice for altar. But as
the idea and feeling become extinct, all the more will men seek to supply the
void by some beauty in the object. The shrine becomes more splendid as devotion
becomes more cold. Perhaps the prophet is thinking of the case of King Ahaz.
He went to Damascus to meet Tiglath-Pileser of Assyria, and there saw an altar
which so pleased him, that he sent the pattern of it to Urijah the priest, who built
one to correspond. And this was a king who “sacrificed and burned incense in the
high places, and on the hills, and under every green tree” (2 Kings xvi.) And
Manasseh, rejecting the good example of Hezekiah his father, set up altars to Baal, and
made a grove, and plunged deeply into all manner of superstition (2 Kings xxi.). The
Prophet Hosea pointedly speaks of the tendency in the people generally: “ Because
Ephraim has made many altars to sin, altars shall be unto him to sin” (viii. 2).
The connection of this with luxury is pointed out by our prophet iv ch. ii. 7, 8. But
what strikes him especially with astonishment is the addiction to “art for art’s sake.”
This has been a cant and, to some extent, a creed in our time. When carried out, it
must mean the valuation of human genius and talent regardlessly of the subjects on
which, and the ends for which, it is employed. No matter how sensualizing or other-
wise debasing to feeling the painter’s or the sculptor’s theme, the cleverness with
which he treats form and colour, light and shade, is only worth attending to. These
doctrines may be carried into the church, which may become a place for mere imagina-
tive and sensuous enjoyment; and people may find they cannot “ look up to God” in
a building whose lines are incorrectly drawn, or where the latest fashion of ecclesiastical
foppery is not kept up. By-and-by it will be discovered that the house of God has
been turned into a theatre, containing, it is true, an altar, but, like the altar in the
great theatre at Athens, serving for little more than a station of performers Spiritual
worship is extinct with us if we cannot lift up eye, and heart, and hand, and voice to the
Eternal with equal joy, if need demand, in the barn as in the cathedral But how


296 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (om. xvu. 1—14


wide-reaching the principle of idolatry! The delight in genius, the admiration for it,
may enter into religious feeling as one of its richest elements; it may, on the other
hand, be separated from religious feeling altogether, and be the principle of an
idolatry.

Il. ie 18 IMPURE AND CRUEL. There is an allusion to the worship of Baal and
Ashtoreth, and wiiat we know of these deities indicates beings conceived by those
worshippers as dark, wrathful, malignant, and lustful. Baal, often named in the
plural Baalim, is closely related to, if not identical with, Moloch (see Jer. vii. 31;
xix. 5; xxxii. 35), whose terrible wrath was supposed to be manifested in the torrid
heat of summer, and who exacted human sacrifices, In great dangers kings sacrificed
to this Bel-Moloch their only sons (2 Kings iii. 27); and this is sternly denounced in
Lev. xx. 8. It would seem that Israclites in thcir declension confounded the nature of
this heathen god with that of Jehovah (Judg. xi. 84; Numb. xxv. 4). Read the
eloquent protest of Micah vi. 7, and see how clearly in that animated passage the
contrast is made between the merciful and holy religion of Jehovah and the cursed
ritual of Baal or of Moloch. “To do justly, to love mercy, to walk humbly with God,”
—these are the requirements of true religion. By the side of Baal was Ashtoreth in
Canaav (Judg. x. 6) and in Syiia. The Greeks called her Astarte. At Babylon she
was known as Mylitta or Beltis, consort of Bel; and Herodotus describes the darkly
superstitious and impure character of her worship, which involved the profanation of
women (i. 199). The relizion of Israel knows no goddess; the people itself, when true
to their Iaith, felt themselves to be as a people, the bride of Jehovah, and unfaithful-
ness to him is a crime analogous to unfaithfulness to the nuptial tie. “Israel my
people, I their God,” is the symbolic word of the covenant between spirit and Spirit,
which religion ever is, in its truth and purity. There are lessons for us in all this.
There are ever tendencies at work to degrade and defile the holy ideas of our religion.
Sometimes it is wealth, sometimes it is ignorance, sometimes greed and other passions.
Men would subdue the spirit of Curistianity to their own liking, and bow down, if not
to the work of their fingers, to the impure idols of an uncliastened fancy. ‘The
preacher, the true prophet, must, on the other hand, be ever upholding the purity of
doctrine, and exbibit those grand requirements to which the conscience must, how-
ever reluctantly, respond. And he must lay it to heart that the purer religion can
never be the most fashionable. If the people turn aside to groves and altars more
suited to their taste, at least let him make it his one concern to “save himself and
them that hear him.”—J.


Vers. 9—11.—Forgetfulness of God and its consequences. I. Gop as AN OBJECT
OF THE SOUL'S ATTENTION. He is the “‘ God of men’s salvation.” His Name calls up
all those ideas of power, of grace, of voodness, necessary to the Deliverer, the Saviour,
To acknowledge that such a Being exists is not enough ; the eye of the spirit must be
turned to him, its gaze fixed upon him, its ear bent towards the place of his holy
oracle. Micah says in evil times, “I will look unto Jehovah; I will wait for the God
of my salvation: my God will hear me.” To think of God in his moral relations to
us brings confidence and security to the heart. And hence the expressive imave of the
Rock on which the fortress stands, as symbolic of him, so frequently employed in
Scripture (Deut. xxxii. 4, 15, 18, 30, 31, 37; 1 Sam. ii, 2; 2 Sam. xxii, 2, 3, 32;
Ps, xviii. 31, 46; xix. 14; xxviii. 1; xxx. 1, 2). How much depends in our intel-
lectual life on attraction—the grasp of objects, the remembrance of what they are,
the firm hold of principles and truths! Impressions are made upon us as in wax or in
ruuning water, without this tension of the will. And how in various ways does
Scripture press upon us the need of attention in religious things! ‘ Earnestly give
heed,” “‘ Remember,” “ Be mindful,” “Look unto the Lord,” etc., are all exhortations
implying the need of prayer and habitual direction of the spirit to higher things.
‘There can be no clear memory and no confident expectation where the mind has been
lax and listless.

Il, Consequences OF ror@ETTING Gop. Ephraim, turning away from its true rocky
stronghold in Jehovah, will see its own castles lie in ruin and desolation. The
estrangemeut from God is marked by indulgence in pleasure and idolatry. The people
planted pleasant gardens, and sowed them with strange grapes; s.c. formea an alliance


ou. xvi. 1—14.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 297
SS EE ee


with a stranger, the King of Damascus. And these new institutions were carefully
fenced, t.e. apparently they were established as a state relizion. “ And the very next
morning he had brought into blossom what he had sown, ‘he foreiyn layer had shot
up like a hot-house plant, te, the alliance had speedily grown into a hearty agree-
ment, and had already produced one blossom at any rate, viz. the plan of a juint
attack upon Judah. But this plantation, so flattering and promising for Isracl) and
which had succeeded so rapidly, and to all appearance so happily, was a harvest heap
for the day of judgment.” ‘The closing words of this strophe are impressive: “'‘l'lie
day of grief and desperate sorrow; ” or, “ The day of deep wounds and deadly sorrow of
beat.” Let us fix on these words. Let us forget Ephraim for the moment, and think
of the individual, think of ourselves, The words hint at remorse, which has been
called “the echo of a lost virtue.” It will come upon all of us in so far as, remem-
bering many things not to be neglected, self-interest, duty to family, Church, country,
we have yet forgotten the one thing needful—have not brought all our life’s concerts
into that unity which reference to the Supreme Will imparts. Life should be direct
and simple; a simple piety can only render it so. There may be mindfulness about
many things, distracting us {rom the ceutral interest. How can it avail us to have
remembered to be prudent, to have regarded public opinion, to have taken care to be
with tne majority, to swim with the stream, and in the end we find that this has
been a turning ol the back on God, and so an illusion, a misconception of life? For
if God be remembered, nothing important will be forgotten; if he be forgotten, nothing
is truly re, is beguiled by fantasy, and life becomes the pursuit of a
dream.—dJ.


Vers, 12—14.—Sounds from afar. In the distance the prophet hears a vague
tumult, like that of the sea with its roaring, incoming tide. It is the noise of tle
invading host. Readers will recollect the powerful passage describing the eve of the
battle of Waterloo—the dull distant sound repeated until the conviction flashes, “ It
is—it is—the cannon’s opening roar!” So does the prophet listen to the uproar of
the advancing Assyrians.

I. THE POETIC REPRESENTATION. It is one of sublimity and terror, appealing through
the sense of hearing to the imagination, and calling up indefinable alarm and sorrow.
He hears in the distance the gathering of a multitude of nations, represented by the
imperial name of Asshur. These hoats spread out in long line like the rolling wave,
one excited surging mass, threatening to carry everything before it into destruction.
Such an image may represent any great movement which seems at any time to
threaten the spiritual life of a Church, of a nation. Never was there a time when
anxious listeners did not hear such rising sounds in the distance; the statesman
trembling for the welfare of institutions, the believer for the stability of faith. Ls
there just cause for alarm? Let the prophet answer.

lI, ‘HE PROPHEOY OF JUDGMENT. Remarkable is the picture of the sudden change.
The power of the Divine Word is instantaneously felt. “It costs God simply a
threatening word, and the mass all flies apart, and falls into dust, and whirls about in
all directions, like the chaff of threshing-floors in high situations, or like dust whirled
up by the storm.” In the evening the destruction of the Assyrians begins, and in the
morning they are completely destroyed. And the oracle ends with an expression of
triumph over this portion and Jot of the spoiler and the plunderer.

Lessons. 1. The Church, Christianity, religion, civilization, seem in every age to
be threatened; yet they are ever safe. Force, numbers, armies, have but the show of
strength when confronted with the spiritual world. 2. God is ever in his heaven—
cannot aud will not desert his place. 3. His judgments and rebukes are the expreasion
of the eternal truth of things, and must prevail.—J.


Ver. 14.—The gluomy evening. “Behold at evening-tide trouble.” We all love
beautiful evenings, whether on land or sea. Then, when the clouds of purple and amber
across the horizon constitute a royal chariot for the setting sun, we gaze with admiration
and delight uu the glorious close of day.

I. TROUBLE 18 NEVER 80 3AD AS IN THE EVENING, At morning or midday we have
more of streugta to bear it; we can brace our eneryies to fight the battle or to endure


298 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. xvi 1—14.


the burden. But in the evening, when heart and strength fail, we look for quiet
comfort and considerate friends, and the gentle words of love. ‘l'rouble in the evening
isa pensive si-ht. But if it be connected with sin, with personal wrong-dving, how
bitter a cup it is! T/en, when there should be memory of holy deeds and earnest words;
then, when we may fairly think of an honourable reputation well earned, and an influence
which we may hope, indeed, will be an “ after-glow” after we are dead. Yet so it is.
Sin has its judgments, which “follow after” even here below.

ll. TROUBLE IN THE EVENING IS WELL EXPLAINED. The prophet says (ver. 13),
“God shall rebuke them.” It is all contained in that. Rebuke! ‘That involves in its
utterance conscience and memory, else how could we feel rebuke? We feel all that is
meant by rebuke more from some than others. It does not always need words. A little
spectacle that recalls some jast scene, an old letter, the visiting of half-forgotten
places, the swift rush at times of old memories,—these often have rebukes in them. We
have neglected so many never-recurring opportunities, we have scattered so many seeds
of evil. tut when God, the living God, rebukes us, how can we stand? Tor he knows
our most secret thoughts, aud in his book all the life is written.

IIL. T’RoUBLE IN THE EVENING MAY STILL BE THE LAST ANGEL OF Gop’s MERCY HERE.
Even then it 7s evening, and the light lingers. The Saviour’s power to save is still
the same. he city of refuge has its gates open. God’s renewing and redeeming
grace may yet be ours. Not even then need we despair; for as there is a strain of hope
coming for the nation Israel which will occupy us further on in these prophecies, so
there is hope in personal life, even in the latter days, if we turn to the Lord with full
purpose of heart. The lingering light of evening still falls on the cross of him who said,
“T came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.”— W. M. 8.


Vers. 1—6.—Reduction. In the spoliation and consequent decrepitude of Damascus
and Samaria we have a picture of—

I, A NATION DENUDED OF ITS POWER. Under the judgments of Jehovah the proud
city of Damascus becomes a “ruinous heap ” (ver. 1), the populous towns are pasturage
for herds and flocks (ver. 2), the strong places are reduced to utier weakness like the
departed glory of Israel (ver. 3); under his judgment Ephraim also shall waste away,
shall be as barren as the reaped corn-field, shall be reduced miserably like the tree on
whose uppermost branches only a few thin berries can be discovered (vers. 4—6). Under
the action of God’s righteous laws, the strong nation is thus reduced by sin, from power
to weakness, from pride to humiliation, from wealth to poverty, from populousness to
depopulation, And it is always siz which is the true account of the reduction.
Violence may be the immediate cause of overthrow, but violence only succeeds when
corruption has brought enleeblement and decline. Greece fell, not by the Roman
sword, but by its own inherent weakness. ‘lhe fall of Rome was due, not to the might
of the barbarians, but to the corruption which sapped it of its strength, and thinned
the ranks of its citizens. If Mngland falls at some future day, it will not be because
some Huropean power has become irresistible, but because luxury will have bred
corruption, and corruption have laid it open to the weapon of its foes. Its fatness will
become thin, its strength will be seen only on its uppermost boughs; it will fall a prey
to the first strong adversary that assails it.

Il, A CHURCH BEREFT OF ITS BEAUTY AND ITS INFLUENCE. Churches do not, usually,
suffer loss by the hand of violence. But, by sins of their own, they are often painfully
reduced, so that they are as a man whose “ fatness has waxed thin,” as the field of corn
that has been cut, as a tree stripped of its goodly frnit, with nothing left but two or
three berries in the top of the uttermost bough.” ‘The enemies which work this waste,
which bring this pitiful reduction, are these. 1. Discord within the ranks. 2. The
spirit uf worldliness, robbing of devotion and therefore of strength. 38. Unbelief, acting
as a cancer that cuts off all spiritual nourishment. 4. Inactivity, begetting selfishness
of aim, and causing the Church to miss that noble exercise which is the source and
spring of all moral vigour. The Church that would not be thus wretchedly reduced
must sedulously shun these sources of reduction; that one which has to lament its wasted
condition must “repent, and do the first works,” and the field shall yet be covered with
the precious grain, the tree with its clusters of fruit.

IU. THE INDIVIDUAL MAN DEPRIVED OF HIS POSITION OR HIS STRENGTH. In


cH. xyz. 1—14.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 299


individual instances, the words of the text find illustration. 1. When the proud,
godless man is brought down from his high position; when of all in which he gloried
nothing but a lew berries on the topmost bouhs are left. Let youth shrink from
entering on a course which will certainly have this pitiful end; let those who are
pursuing it abandon it at the very earliest hour. 2. When death (the penalty of sin)
intimates its approach, when the leanuess and fruitiessness of death are apparent, then
let a man ask whether there is life in its fulness and fruitfulness awaiting him on the
other shore.—C,


Vers. 7, 8.—The function of adversity. I, THE PREVALENCE OF TROUBLE IN THIS
WORLD OF SIN. “'l'hat day” was the day of national disaster, and, therefore, of
individual distress. In the more settled and durable condition of modern times and
Western lands, we are much less liable to suffer from this particular cause. But
civilization brings its own perils and its own troubles, and while sin lasts “ the day ” of
sorrow will be continually recurring. How many are the sources whence it may spring!
Pecuniary embarrassment; disappointisent; the loss of kindred or friends, or (what is
worse) the loss of their love and their friendship; humiliation; ill health, and the fear
of sudden reiuoval from those who are clinging, and perhaps d:pendent; a sense of
guilt befure God; a sense of defeat as a Christian aspirant or Christian workman, ete.

II. Gop’s PURPOSE IN SENDING IT. 1. (iod does send it. (See Amos iii. 6.) He
directly inflicts it, or he furthers it in his Divine providence, or, at the least, he permits
it (see, also, Matt. x. 29). 2. He sends it to draw us fo himself. (1) To witiidraw us
from the inferior and the untrustworthy objects; that a man may “not louk to the
altars, the work of his hands;” that we may discover, what we are suv slow to learn,
that all human help and all earthiy securities are insufficient and unavailing; that
these thins of our own devising and constructing, which our fingers have made, break
down in the time of our distress, and leave us “ uaked to our enemies.” (2) ‘lo draw
us to the mighty and the holy One. Our Maker will not want the power to redeem
us. ‘he Holy One of Israel will not fail to sanctify to us the evil he has sent us. He
draws us to himself that, at his throne of grace, in sacred fellowship with him, we may
be drawn to penitence, to trustfulness, to prayerfulness, to the consecration or the
rededication of our lives to his service.—C.


Vers. 10, 11.— The sin and doom of ungodliness. We learn—

I. THaTt Gop Is WRONGED AND GRIEVED BY OUR NEGLECT OF HIMSELF AS WELL
AS BY OUR DISOBEDIENCE To His LAWs. Men sometimes mistakenly suppose that
their sin is limit:d by the number of their transgressions of God’s positive enactments,
They wake a very serious mistake in so judging. Great guilt, indeed, is contracted by
the breach of Divine commandment, by setting at defiance the “Thou shalt not” of
sacred Scripture. But our obligation strikes ueeper far, aud, when we fail, our sin
includes immeasurably more than this. God deserves, and he desires, and he even
demands, that we, his human children, should render to him, himself, all that filial love
and fellowship which is due from such beloved and enriched ones fo such a gracious and
bountiful Father. His charge against us is not merely that we have cone numbers otf
things which he has prohibited; it is that we tave lived on through days, weeks,
months, years, through whole periods and stages of our lile, and have forgvtten him, the
God of our salvation, have not been mindful of him, the Rock of our strenuth; it is
that we have taken blessings and deliverances from his strong, redeeming hand, and
have been content to spend our days in unvodhness, withholding the gratitude, the
affection, the submission, the willing and joyous service which a relationship so near as
is ours to him, and which benefits so great as are his to us, do emphatically demand.
‘The simple and true answer to the question, “ What have we failed to render to our
redeeming and our beneficent God?” should cover us with shame and send us to our
knees in penitence.

Il. THAT AN UNGODLY LIFE IS NOT ONLY A PROLONGED INIQUITY, BUT IS ALSO A
SUPREME MISTAKE. “cause thou hast forgotten... therefore shalt thou plant
pleasant plants . . . but the harvest shall ve a leap,” etc. The mistake of ungodliness
is seen in that: 1. It leaves out and loses all the real nobility from human life—all that
which raises man’s nature above the brutes’, and connects it with the angelic aud


300 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. xvm. 1—14


RS Ne


Divine. 2. It includes only that which is absolutely insufficient and unsatisfactory. It
supplies treasures which the thief can steal, joys which pall and perish, friendships
which linger only for a few passing years, It bas nothing which fills and satisfies the
human soul, made, as that is made, for heavenly wisdom, for holy service, for the
worship and the love of God. Its harvest is only a heap of husks, and not the granary
of life-sustaining curn. 38. It makes no provision for the time of trial—for “ the day of
grief aud of desperate sorrow,” for the day of death, for the day of judgment.—C.


-Vers. 12—14.— The overthrow of the enemies of God. 1. THAT THE ENEMIES OF
Gop’s PEOPLE ARE THE ENEMIES OF Gop HIMSELF. “ God will rebuke” those who come
up against his people to spoil and to rob them. Those who assail Israel come beneath
his ban, and are subject to his “woe.” Jesus Christ taught nothing more plainly or
emphatically than that they who befriended his disciples were, in his estimation,
befriending him (Matt. x. 40—42; xxv. 40). It is equally true that those who oppose
his friends and disciples are accounted his own enemies. Woe unto him that puts a
stumbling-block in the way of any of his “little ones”! To wrong them is to agyrieve
him.

II. THaT THEIR WORST SUCCESS I8 IN DESPOILING THE HOLY OF THEIR HERITAGE.
There is nothing worse that cau be said of them than that they are “those that spodl,
that rob us.” But the worst despoiling is that which robs the wise and yood of their
highest heritage, of the excellency which they bave in Christ—of peace, of joy, of
spiritual integrity, of moral beauty, of helpfulness, of hope.

Ill. THav THEY MAKE THEIR ASSAULT WITH EVERY CONFIDENCE OF success. The
enemies of Isracl came on with a “ noise like the noise of the seas,” like the “ rushing
of mighty waters,” ze. with the dash and daring of those that are bent on carrying
everything before them. Sin is often arrogantly confident; it has no belief in the
inviolable purity, in the impregnable uprightness, of the people of God. It says with a
sneer that every man has his price. It believes that its weapon will pierce any shield,
however firm; will slay any soul, however stronz. It goes, Goliath-like, contidently to
the encounter ; the noise of its impudent assurance is in the air. :

IV. ‘THAT THEY ARE LIABLE TO BE UTTERLY AND IMMEDIATELY OVERTHROWN. When
God rebukes them they “flee far off, and are chased as the chaff of the mountains
before the wind,” ete. ‘“ At evening-tide is trouble, and before the morning he is not.”
So absolutely, so speedily, is the enemy destroyed, Dves it accord with our observation
that evil is thus suddenly and irremediably cast down? The truth is: 1. That when
the fatal blow falls it strikes that which is ripe for destruction. The last blow of the
hammer seems to do the work; but, in fact, it succeeds only because all the preceding
ones have loosened the particles and made the final stroke effective. So when the
decisive judgment comes down from Heaven, it brings irrecoverable ruin because long
years of folly and of sin have been preparing for the disaster which ensues. 2. That
when God’s judgment once overtakes the sinner, it is often found to be that from which
there is no escape or recovery. ‘The empire is hopelessly dissolved; the “house” is
utterly rvined ; the fumily is scattered, never to be reunited; the fortune is dissipated,
never to be repaired; the reputation is blasted, and no labours or severities can restore
it; poverty, shame, death, appear and will take no denial; at evening-tide is trouble,
and before the morning the worst has happened, (1) Take care to be on God’s side; be
able to say, “lhe Lord is on my side,” or there will be irretrievable disaster at the end.
(2) Remember that Christ identifies himself with his friends. True as it is that
those who assail his people will be rebuked of him, it is equally true that they who
espouse the cause of his disciples will win his approving smile and his large reward.—C.


Ver. 1.—The mission of Syria, Discernment of this mission, so far as it bears upon
Israel, and carrics religious lessons for all the generations, depends on our understanding
the history of the times. Two nations, distant from each other, contended for the
country which lay between them. Egypt and Assyria both wanted to be universal
world-powers, Hlad the kingdom of David been kept together, it might have effec-
tively resisted both ; but when separated under Jeroboam, and encouraged to cherish
rival interests, the southern portion natnrally inclined to ally with Egypt, and the
northern as naturally allied with Syria to resist the encroachments of Assyria. To the


cH. xvi. 1—14.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 801


7—_—_—.._


view of a prophet of the southern kingdom, Syria was the ringleader of a confederacy
against Judah, and so against Jehovah and the Jehovah-worship. And to such a
Jehovah-prophet, Syria was the agent in teinpting the northern kingdom of Israel to
forsake even its show of allegiance to Jehovah, and throw in its interest altogether with
idolatrous nations. That is the point on which we now dwell. God carries on bis
work of grace by means of temptations as well as by means of trials; our testinys of
faith, virtue, and obedience are just as truly within the overrulings of God as are out
afflictions and our cares. This is taught us in the prologue to the Book of Job, where
Satan, the tempter, is represented as appearing among the “sons of God,” and receiving
Divine commissions. Syria may stand for the associations and circumstances which
tested the allegiauce of Israel to Jehovah; and so for the relationships and conditions
of our life, which bring out and prove what really is in our hearts towards the God of
our fathers. It is true that God tempts no man in the sense of maliciwusly enticing
him to do evil. It is also true that God tempts every man in the seuse of placing him
in circumstances under which, while he may fail and fall, he may be confirmed and
established in goodness. This view is strikingly supported by a passage in Deut. xiii,
2,3. The prophet who uses his gift to persuade men to forsake the Lord God is to
be rejected, for by such a pro; het “the Lord your God proveth you, to know whether
ye love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul.” All such
tempters, whether they be individuals, clisses, or nations, come at last under Divine
judgments, as Syria did. Syria tempted Israel—

I. BY THE ATTRACTIONS OF ITS WEALTH. Damascus was one of the wealthiest of
ancient cilies, and situated so as to be an important centre of trade. The attraction it
proved to Israel may be illustrated by its influence on the luxurious and asthetical
king, Ahaz. Associations of wealthy companions are often serious enticements to
youths. The entrée of wealthy society makes many a family live beyoud its means.
The swiftly growing wealth of some business men excites others to grasp at wealth by
questionable means.

Il. By THE ATTRACTIONS OF ITS IDOLATRY. Wealth enabled the expressions and
forms of Syrian idolatry to take refined and artistic shapes. These tended to hide the
abominations which attend on all idolatrous systems, So, it may be shown in relation
to modern times, infidelity offers itself in the garb of advanced knowledge, and immo-
rality appears in the guise of exciting pleasure. Syrian idolatry would have presented
but feeble temptation if it had looked as repulsive as it really was, Ard still we are
so often “drawn away and enticed,” because Satan can appear to us as an angel of
light. Illustrate by the well-known picture “The Pursuit of Pleasure.” If Pleasure
were not such a lovely syren form, surely the foolish host would not thus vainly pursue
her. The practical skill of life is shown in the detection of what a thing ts, no matter
in what form it may appear.

III. By DHE ATTRACTIONS OF ITS ALLIANCE. Which seemed to offer security for
Israel from the foe which was becoming go danverously strong. But it was soon proved
that Syria was unable to protect itself. Its position exposed it, Its wealth attracted
the invader. It was but an arm of flesh, and was powerless when the evil day came.
It took Israel away from allegiance to Jehovah and trust in him, and brought on that
kingdom, the curse of him who trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm. As a
general application, observe that untried character and untested piety are of little
worth. No man can hope to receive the crown of life, save as he is tempted, tried, and
proved, That crown belongs only to those who “stand in the evil day.”—R. T.


Ver. 6.—The Lord’s remnant. Figuratively here is called to mind the fact that
God’s dealings are never wholly destructive; they never utterly desolate; there is
always a mitigation, always a spared remnant. The figure used, of the few olive berries
left for the gleaner, is a very striking one, if the customs of the olive-growing countries
is understood. In Thomson’s ‘Land and the Book’ there is a full description. ‘* Karly
in autumn the berries begin to drop off of themselves, or are shaken off by the wind.
They are allowed to remain under the trees for some time, guarded by the watchman of
the town—a very familiar Bible character. Presently public proclamations are made
that the owners may gather the fruit. And in November comes the general and final
summons. No olives are now safe unless the owner looks after them, for the watchmen


302 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cun. xvu. 1—14


are removed, and the orchards are alive with men, women, and children. It is a merry
time, and the laugh and the song echo far and wide. Everywhere the people are in the
trees, ‘shaking’ them with all their might, to bring down the fruit. he effort is to
make a clear sweep of all the crop; but in spite of shaking and beating, there is always
a cleaning left—‘ two or three berries in the top of the uttermost boughs, four or five
in the outermost fruitful branches.’ These are afterwards gleaned up by the very
poor, who have no trees of their own.” Matthew Henry well expresses the thought to
which this figure directs us: “ Mercy is here reserved, in a parenthesis, in the midst of
judgment, for a remnant that should escape the common ruin of the kingdom of the
ten tribes. Though the Assyrians took all the care they could that none should slip
out of their net, yet the meek of the earth were hidden in the day of the Lord’s anger,
and had their lives given them for a prey, and made comfortable to them by their
retirement to the land of Judah, where they had the liberty of God’s courts.” God’s
remnants are illustrated in the Floud; fate of Sodom; Captivity; Elijah’s time; and siege
by the Romans of Jerusalem, Always there has been “aremnan’ according to the
election of grace.” This remnant has sliown in every ave that God’s judgments are never—

I. Vinpicrive. They are always, and for every one—

Il. Disctptryary And they are so mitigated as—

II]. NeveER To CRUSH OUT HOPE FOR THB FUTURE.—R. T.


Ver. 7.— Eyes turned to God only. Cheyne’s translation is, “In that day shall the
earth-born look towards his Maker, and his eyes shall have regard to the Holy One of
Isracl.” The reference seems to be to those who, after the Assyrian conquest of Israel
accepted Hezckiah’s, invitation, returned to Jerusalem, giving up their confidence in
idols, and looking with single eye to Jehovah, and serving him with sincere hearts.
The figure suggests for consideration the possible attitudes of human vision towards
God.

I. THERE IS THE BLINDED VISION. Two things blind: 1. Ignorance, as illustrated
in the case of the heathen. 2. Wilfulness, as illustrated in all who are living in sin.
The one blindness is a calamity, calling forth our pity; the other is a crime, calling
for our indignation. There is also a judicial blindness—the stroke of God upon those
who have missed their eyesight, keeping it fixed on vanity, not lifted up to the
heavens, “ from whence cometh man’s help.” They who will not see shall not be able
to see.

lJ. TurrE Is THE DIMMED Vision. Influenced by surrounding atmospheres of (1)
thought; (2) social custom; (8) familiar errors. Nowadays men are sadly suffering
from dimmed vision, Fogs of prevailing unbelief are for a time half hiding God,
and even Christians are troubled lest the dimness should prove to be in their eyes.
The evil is ouly in the medium through which the eye looks.

Ill. THeRE Is THE DivipeD vision. Which can see both God and self, and tries
hard to keep both, side by side, in the field. Of some in the olden times it was said,
“They feared the Lord, and served other gods;” and this must be the description of
very many in the modern, “ Their heart is divided.” They cannot see “ Jesus only.”

IV, THERE IS THE CLEARED VISION. Oftentimes cleansed and purified by the
medicine of affliction, as in the association of the text. God’s chastisements are his
teaching us to see.

V. THERE IS THE CONCENTRATED VISION. Eyes turned to God only. The sign of
entire devotement; full consecration, An eye single, »nd fixed on one object. This
one thing I will do, “I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills.” Plead the call and per-


suasion of the risen and living Christ, “ Anoint thine eyes with eye-salve, that thou
mayest see.”—R. T.


Ver. 10.—God our Rock. Here called the “ Rock of thy fortress ;” and contrasting
with the fortress-cities, which proved no defence, and the fortress-rocks, in which the
refugees had found safe shelter. The cify represented man’s power to defend ; the rock
represents God’s power, According to the circumstances of the age, and in view of the
machinery of war then in use, the steep rock was a better safety than the walled city.
The figure of God as a Rock is found very early in Scripture, and was pe: haps associated
with the fact of God’s revealing himself from the mount, or rock. of Sinai. Moses


on, xvi1.1—14.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 803


——_——————— eee


pleads in striking similarity with Isaiah, saving, “Then he forsook God which made
him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation;” “Of the Rock that becat thee
thou art unmindful, and hast forgotten God that formed thee” (Deut. xxxii. 15, 18).

J. Man’s PERILS AS A MORAL BEING. These can be illnstrated from the evils and the
perils of social and national life. They can be opened out fully under three headings:
(1) intellectual ; (2) moral; (8) religious.

FoR SUCH PERILS MAN CAN NEVER PROVIDE EFFICIENT DEFENCES. Intellectual
safecuards fail before the subtleties of agzressive unbelief. Moral safeguards fail before
the uprising swell of passions. Formal religions safecuards fail to satisfy when heart
begins to cry. In the dangerous ways of an earth full of temptation and evil, “it is
Lot in man that walketh to direct his steps.”

II]. May’s SAFETY FROM ALL PERILS IS IN Gop HIs Rook. On God a man may
stand secure, though the wild storm-waves beat around him, Jn God a man may hide
quite safely until all the calamities be overpast. His house may feel the blowing of
the mighty winds; but it falls not, for it is founded on a rock.


“God is my strong Salvation;
What foe have I to fear?
In darkness and temptation,
My Licht, my Help, is near.
Though hosts encamp around me,
Firm to the fight I stand;
What terror can confound me,
With God at my right hand?”
RT,


Ver. 11.—The mission of disappointment ; or, disappointment used as a Divine
judgment. In this passage is presented the case of unrewarded toil. Seed is sown,
blades spring up, there is every prospect of harvest; but all hopes are disappointed, the
harvest proved a failure—it was “a heap in the day of grief and of desperate sorrow.”
One special feature of the discipline of life is the disappointment of our most cherished
hopes and expectations. We build our castles on some new enterprise, and at first all
seems to go well; but at last our castle lies in ruins about us. We sct our hopes on
one of our children, and fashion for him a future of honour and success, and our dis-
appointment in him almost breaks our heart. We make important changes, which
promise much, and result in the humiliation of failure and distress. God works by
disappointments; they are keener rods for smiting than afflictions are. _ They bear
more quickly on the humbling of man’s pride and on the conviction of his sel!-help-
lessness. They try temper more. They too often result in hardening and increased
wilfulness. There is no harder lesson for us to learn than this one, that God works
his work of grace by shutting doors against us, and not permitting us to achieve the
success which is the desire of our heart. We plan, we work, but all proves in vain;
and so we learn that it is the blessing of the Lord alone that maketh rich, and giveth
good success. We observe— erie

J. DISAPPOINTMENT DIFFERS FROM AFFLICTION. ‘Take two scenes from David’s life.
The rebellion of Absalom was an affliction. The refusal to permit him to build the
temple was a disappointment. The one was no more under Gud’s overruling than was
the other. They are perfectly distinct in character and in influence. One difference
may be effectively illustrated. With “afflictions” there is usually an enfeebled and
depressed state of body, involving weakened will and limitation of resistance. With
“ disappointments ” there is usually the full health and energy; and the conflict, that
ends in true submission, is therefore more severe.

II. DisaPpoINTMENTS MAY INFLUENCE WHEN AFFLICTIONS WOULD NoT, That depends
on dispositions. Many a man can bear sufferings who would be thrown into the most
violent struggles by having his will crossed, Then that “ crossing of his will” may be
the only way to accomplish his sanctifying. We should rejoice that he who knows the
best methods of chastisement also knows ws on whom the correction comes. For us
the way to heaven may be round by a series of lifelong disappointments. Most
persons, perhaps, looking back over their lives, would say that. their bitterest hours
were those in which they realized that they “could not do ‘ne things that they would.


804


THE BOOK OF TIE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xvm. 1—1.


—————————————————————————————————————————————— eS


St. Paul knew such times. The story of one such is very simply told, but those who


read between the lines may find indication of much feeling.


“ We assayed to go into


Bithynia, but the Spirit suffered us not.” And it is not easy to estimate the educa-
tional influence on our Lord’s disciples of that overwhelming disappointment, which
came when he who they thought should have redeemed Israel was “hung up and


crucified.”


That may be just the kind of weapon which our heavenly Father may


need for our correction ; and, in our various disappointments, we may hear his gracious


5 i


voice saying, “Should it be according to thy mind ?”—R. T.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER XVIIL


Vers. 1—7.—TueE HomaGe or ETHIOPIA
To JeHovaH. Amid the general excitement
caused by the advance of Assyria, Ethiopia
also ia stirred, and stirred to its furthest
limits. The king sends messengers in boats
upon the canals and rivers to summon his
troops to his standard (vers. 1, 2). The
earth stands agaze to see the result of the
approaching collision (ver. 3); but God rests
calmly in heaven while events are ripening
(vers 4,5). When the time comes he will
strike the blow—Assyria will be given to
the fowls of the air and the beasts of the
field (ver. 6), Then Ethiopia will make an
act of homage to Jehovah by the sending of
a present to Jerusalem (ver. 7). The time
seems to be that immediately preceding the
great invasion of Sennacherib (about B.o.
700), when Shabatok the Ethiopian was
King of Egypt, and Tirhakah (T'ahark)
either Crown Prince under him, or more
probably Lord Paramount of Egypt over
him, and reigning at Napata,

Ver. 1.—Woe to the land; rather, Ho
for the land ! (comp. ch, xvii. 12). Shadowing
with wings; literally, either the land of the
shadow of wings or the land of the noise of
wings, most probably the latter. Allusion
is thought to be made to the swarms of
buzzing flies, especially the tsetse, with
which Ethiopia abounds. At the same time,
these swarms are, perhaps, intended to be
taken as emblema of the hosts of warriors
which Eihiopia can send forth (comp. ch.
vii. 18). Beyond the rivers of Ethiopia.
The prophet cannot be supposed to have liad
more than a vague knowledge of African
geography. He secms, however, to be aware
that Ethiopia is a land of many rivers (see
Baker’s ‘ Nile Tributaries’), and he assumes
that the dominion of the Ethiopian kings
extends even beyond these rivers to the
south of them. His object is. as Mr. Cheyne
says, “ to emphasize the greatness of Ethi-
opia.” It may be questioned, however,
whether the dominion of the Ethiopian


kings of the time extended so far as he
supposed. The seat of their power was
Napita, now Gebel Berkal, in the great bend
of the Nile between lat. 18° and 19° N.;
and its southern limit was probably Khar-
toum and the line of the Blue Nile (see
Rawlinson’s ‘History of Ancient Egypt,’
vol. ii. p. 436).


Ver. 2.—That sendeth ambassadors; rather,
perhaps, messengers, as the word is trans-
lated in ch. lvii. 9 and Prov. xxv. 13. They
are sent, apparently, by the king to his own
people. By the sea, “ The sea” must in this
place necessarily mean the Nile, which is
called “the sea” in Nah. iii. 8 certainly,
and probably in ch. xix. 5. Vessels of papyrus
could not possibly have been employed in
the very difficult navigation of the Red Sea.
Vessels of bulrushes. That some of the
boats used upon the Nile were consiructed
of the papyrus (which is a sort of bulrnsh)
we learn from Herodotus (ii. 96), ‘| heo-
phrastus (‘ Hist. Plant.’ iv. 9), Plutarch
(‘De Isid. et Osir..”? § 18), Pliny (* Hist.
Nat.,’ vi. 22), and Lucan (‘ Piarsal.,’ iv. 136).
They are represented occasionally on the
Egyptian monuments. Saying. This word
is interpolated by our translators, and gives
a wrong sense. It is the prophet that ad-
dresses the messengers, not the king who
senils them. Toa nation scattered and peeled;
rather, tall and polished, or tall and sleek.
The word translated “scattered” means
properly “drawn out,” and seems to be ap-
plied here to the physique of the Ethiopians,
whose stature is said to have been remark-
able (Herod., iii. 20, 114). The other epithet
refers to the glossy skin of the people. A
people terrible from their beginning hitherto.
The Israelites first knew the Ethiopians as
soldiers when they formed a part of the army
brought by Shishak (Shesiionk L.) against
Rehoboam, about B.c. 970 (2 Chron. xii. 3),
They had afterwards expericnce of their
vast numbers, when Zerah made his attack
upon Asa; but on this occasion they suc-
ceeded in defeating them (2 Chron. xiv,
9—18). It was not till about two centuries
after this that the power of Ethiopia began
to be really formidable to Egypt; and the
“miserable Cushites,” as they had been in
the habit of calling them, acquired the pre


eo


on. xvi. 1—7.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 805


oe influence in the valley of the
ile, and under Piankhi, Shabak, Shabatok,
end Tirhakah (Tahark), reduced Egypt to
subjection. Isaiah, perhaps, refers to their
rise under Piankhi as “ their beginniny.”
A nation meted out and trodden down;
rather, a nation of meting out and trampling ;
ie. one accustomed to mete out its neivh-
bours’ bounds with a measuring-line, and to
trample other nations under its feet. Whose
land the rivers have spoiled; rather, whose
land rivers despoil. The deposit of mud,
which fertilizes Egypt, is washed by the
rivers from Ethiopia, which is thus con-
tinually losing large quantities of rich soil.
This fact was well known to the Greeks
(Herod., ii, 12, ad fin.), and there is no reason
why Isaiah should not have been acquainted
with it.

Ver. 3.—All ye inhabitants of tne world.
From exhorting the messengers to hasten
on their errand, Isaiah turns to the nations
generally, and bids them attend to a coming
signal—an ensign is about to be raised, a
trumpet is about to be sounded—let them
gize and heaiken; the result will be well
worth noting. ‘Ihe imagery is not to be
taken literally, but in the same way as the
notices in ch. xi. 10, 12; xiii. 2. When he
lifteth up an ensign . . . when he bloweth a
trumpet; rather. when an ensign is lifted
up... when a trumpet sounds. On the
mountains. Wherever the great event tiok
place, the signal for it was given on the
mountains of Judea (see 2 Kings xix.
20u—34).

Ver. 4.—For so; rather, for thus. The
word kéh is prospective. I will take my rest,
and I will consider; or, I will be still and
look on. The rest of God is contrasted with
the bustle and hurry of the Ethiopians and
Assyrians. God “sits in his hely seat,”
calm and tranquil, knowing what the result
is about to be, aud when it will be; he waits
while the influences of heat and moisture,
sunshine and dew—his own agencies—ripen


part. Then, suddenly, he takes the part
described in the latter portion of ver. 5,
“cuts off the shoots and hews down the
branches.” Like a clear heat upon herbs,
etc.; rather, while there ia clear heat in the
sunshine, while there is a cloud of dew tn the
harvest-warmth ; i.e. while surrounding in-
fluences are such as must favour the growth
of Assyria’s power and pride.

Ver. 5,—For afore the harvest. God can
rest thus tranquil, because he can step in at
any time; and this he is about to do, before
Assyria reaps her barvest. When the bud is
perfect, etc.; rather, when the blossom is past,
and the green grape ts becoming a ripening
bunch. He shall cut off (comp. ch. x. 33,
34). The metaphor is shebtly varied in
this place, to suit the imagery of the pre-
ceding clause, where Assyria has been re-
presented as a vine-stock, Formerly her
“boughs” were to be “loppcd;” now her
“branches” and “sprigs” or “sprouts” are
to be cut away with pruning-houks,

Ver. 6.—They shall be left together unto
the fowls. At length imayvery is dropped.
The vine is shown to be an army, slaughtered
all “ together,” and left a prey to kites and
vultures, jickals and hyenas. Shall sum-
mer... shall winter. They will furnish
food to the beasts and birds of prey for the
remainder of the year.

Ver. 7.—In that time shall the present be
brought; rather, a present. It would not be
atallimprobable that Tirkukab should, efter
the destruction of Sennacherib’s aimy, send
a gift to the temple of the Jews, either as a
recognition of the miracle as wrought by
Jehovah, or simply as a thank offering.
Necho sent the armour in which he had
fought at Megiddo to the temple of Apollo
at Branchidee, near Miletus, as a thank otfer-
ine (Herod., ii, 159). We lave, however,
no historical record of Tirkakah’s present as
sent. Of a people; rather, from a people
(compare the next clause, which supplies
the ellipse of the preposition). (For the


Assyria’s schemes, impassive, taking no | rest of the verse, see nutes on ver. 2.)


HOMILETICS.


Vers. 1—4.— The contrast of Divine calm with human bustle, hurry, and eacttement.
When men take a matter in hand wherein they feel an interest, aud set themselves
sither to carry out a certain design of their own, or to frustrate the designs of others,
hothing is more remarkable than (if we may use a vulgarism) the “fuss” that they
make abvut it. Heaven and varth are moved, so to speak, for the accomplishuient of
the desired end; the entire uation is excited, stirred, thrilled to its lowest depths ;
a universal eayerness prevails; ali is noise, clamour, haste, bustle. tumult, whirl, con-
fusion, Assyria’s “nvise” is compared (ch. xvii. 12) to the roar uf the sea, and the
rushing of mighty waters. Ethiopia's stir is like the sound of many wings (ch. xviii. 1),
Even Cyrus, though he has a Divine mission, cannot set about it without “the noise of
a multitude in tne mountains, like as of a great people; a tumultuous noise of the
kingdoms of nations gathered together” (ch. xiii. 4). 1tis in vain that men are told

ISAIAH. : x


306 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (ca. xvi. 1—%,


to “stand still and sce the salvation of God” (Exod. xiv. 13), or admonished that “in
quietness and confidence should be their strength” (ch. xxx. 15); they cannot bring
themselves to act on the advice tendered. Great minds indeed are comparatively quiet
and tranquil; bat even they are liable upon occasion to be swept away by the pre-
vailing wave of excited fecling, and dragged, as it were, from their moorings into a
turbid ocean. And the mass of mankind is wholly witout calm or stability. It
trembles, flutters, rushes hither and thither, mistakes activity for energy, and “ fussi-
ness” for the power of achievement. This condition of things results from three weak-
nesses in man: 1. His want of patience. 2. His want of confidence in himself. 3, His
want of confidence in Gud.

I. Man’s WANT OF PATIENCE. Man desires to obtain whatever end he sets himself
at once. The boy is impatient to be grown up, the subaltern would at once bea general,
the clerk a partner, the student a professor of his science. Men “ make haste to be
rich” (Prov. xxviii. 20), and overshoot the mark, and fall back into poverty. They
strive to become world-famous when they are mere tyros, and put forth ambitious
writings which only show their ignorance. ‘They fail to recognize the force of the
proverb, that “everything cones to those who wait.” To toil long, to persevere, to
make a small advance day after day—this seems to them a poor thing, an unsatisfactory
mode of procedure. They would reach the end per saltum, ‘‘ by abound.” Hence their
haste. ‘loo often “ most haste is worst speed.” “ Vaulting ambition doth o’erleap itself,
and falls on the other side.”

II. Maw’s WANT OF CONFIDENCE IN HIMSELF. He who is sure of himself can afford to
wait. He knows that he will succeed in the end; what matters whether a little sooner
o: a little later? But the bulk of men are not sure of themselves; they misdoubt their
powers, capacities, perseverance, steadiness, reserve fund of energy. Hence their spas-
modic efforts, hurried movements, violent agitations, frantic rushinys hither and thither.
If they do not vain their cn at once, they despair of ever attaining it. They are con-
scious of infinite weakness in thems: lves, and feel that they cannot tell what a day may
bring forth in the way of defeat and cisappointment. They say that it is necessary to
strike while the iron is hot ; but their real reason for haste is that they question whether
their ability to strike will not have passed away if they delay ever so little.

II]. Man’s WANT OF CONFIDENCE IN Gop. He who fcels that God is on his side
has no need to disquiet himself. He will not fear the powers o! darkness; he will not
be afraid of what flesh can do unto him. But comparatively few men have this feeling.
Hither they put the thoughts of God altogether away from them, or they view him as
an enemy, or they mixdoubt, at any rate, his sympathy with themselves. Mostly they
feel that they do not deserve his sympathy. They cannot “ rest in the Lord,” and they
cannot find rest outside of him. Hence they remain in perpetual disturbance and
unrest, Strang-ly in contrast with man’s unquiet is God’s immovable calm and
unruffled tranquillity. “Th: Lord said, I will take my rest ” (ver. 4). None can really
resist his will, and hence he has no need to trouble himself if resistance is attempted.
“The fierceness of man” will always “turn to his praise.” Time is no object with him
who is above time, “ whose goings have been from the days of eternity ” (Micah v, 2).
In silence and calm he accomplishes his everlasting purposes. Himself at rest in the
still depths of his unchangeable nature, it is he alone who can give his creatures rest.
As they grow more like to him, they will grow more and more tranquil, until the time
comes ers they will enter finally into that rest which “remaineth for his people »
(Heb. iv. 9).


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS,


Vers. 1—7.—Homage of Ethiopia to Jehovah. I. Aarration 1x Erutorta. The
oracle opens with a scene full of life. Hus's of Egyptian and Ethiopian warriors are
seen, like buzzing swarms of flies moving to and fro. Messengers are speeding in
papyrus boats to announce the approach of the Assyrians. The Ethiopians are described
as a nation “ tall and polished,” terrible, strong, and all-subduing, whose land rivers cut
through. A seuse of mystery and greatness hung about this land from the earliest
times—the land of the source of the Nile, opened wp by our countryman Speke and


OH. xvi. 1—7.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 307


pas


others. The prophet lifts up his voice to this people. A signal will be seen on the
mountains, the blast of a trumpet will be heard. There will be symptou..s of the Divine
presence, restrainirg, overruling the wrath of men for ends of Divine wisdom. ‘ When
wars are cartied on, every one sees clearly what is done; but the ureater part of men
ascribe the beginning and end of them to chance. On the other hand, Isaiah shows
that all these thins ought to be ascribed to God, because he will display his power in
a new and extraordinary manner; for sometimes he works so as to conceal his hand,
and to prevent his work from being perceived by men, but sometimes he displays his
hand in it in such a manner that all men are constrained to acknowledge it; and that
is what the prophet meant ” (Calvin).

Il. Tue wairinea or JEHovAH. Impressive is the contrast between the noise and
stir and avitation below, and the calmness above. Jehovah “ will be still ”—as the blue
sky behind a moving host of clouds, above a surging sea below. In the second psalm
we have the picture of him sitting in the heavens and “laughing ” at the vain attempts
of the enemies of the Messianic kingdom, There are three thoughts here. 1. The repose of
God. lt seems as if we must ever contemplate him resting trom his toils of designing
and creating and providing—entered on an eternal sabbath. The consciousness of vast
force, sleeping, held in reserve, we must conceive of in God. Hence his stillness amidst
our excitement. At times when vague movements are passing through the bosom of
society, many voices rend the air with opposing cries, deep questions agitate the heart
and conscience of thoughtful men. We long to hear the one infallible voice, to see the
signal extended ; and yet “God speaks not a word.” Perhaps it may be said, a still small
voice, saying, “ Be still, and know that I am God!” may be heard by acuter spiriiual
ears. His stillness must be the effect of infinite strength and profoundest confidence.
2. His contemplativeness. He “looks on in his mansion.” Not as the Epicureans repre-
sented the gods of the heathen, sitting apart, reckless of the weal or woe of men; but
intently watchful of the development of things, the ripening of good, the gathering up
of evil towards the day of sifting and judgment. Ina power(ul biblical image, “his
eyes are in every place, beholding the good and the evil.” And our thought, to be in
harmony with his, must in many matters and at many times fall into the mood of
contemplation. Instead of seeking to theorize rashly upon the strange mixture of
tendencies life at any troubled epoch presents, it were well to possess our souls in
patience—to look on and “ let both grow together till the harvest.” 38. His waiting
attitude. ‘‘ While there is clear heat in sunshine, while there are clouds of dew in
harvest-heat,” he is waiting till “the fruit of Assyrian annoyance is all but ripe.” The
heat and the clouds of dew hasten the powers in nature; there are corresponding forces
at work in the moral world, seen by him to be working towards certain results. God
can wait because he knows. And may not we in a measure compose our souls into that
attitude of waiting ? Some things we, too, know; about many otlers we can say, “ God
knows,” and so leave them. Especially so in times or in moods of alarm. In the
present case men below see one picture of the future; quite another is seen by God
above. To them a vast black cloud is gathering over the horizon; he sces the sun
that will presently smite it asunder. They see a fell harvest of woe for themselves
ripening; he has the pruning-knife in his hand, with which he will make havoc among
the growth. They see an immense host of irresistible warriors; he the birds of prey and
the beasts that will soon be feeding upon their remains. Let us think of the immense
reserves of force at the disposal of Jehovah. The statesman, in times of alarm, assures a
trembling country that the “resources of civilization” are not yet exhausted ; yet they
have their limit. Behind them lie the absolutely inexhaustible resources of the living
and eternal God. Let our hearts be stayed on him, and all will be well.

Il. Tue errect on Eruiopra. They will bring a tribute to Jehovah Sabaoth, to
the Lord of hosts, in his seat on Mount Zion. It is he who has done these things. We
find the like impressive pictare passing before a prophetic eye in Ps. Ixviii. 82: “ King-
doms of splendour come out of Egypt, Ethiopia stretches out her hands to God.” The
gatherirg of so glorious a people into the true Church is to be the result of the maniles-
tation of the power of Israel’s God.

Lessons. 1. The providence of God over the Church. “ He shows that he takes care
of the Church, and that, though he determines to chastise it, still he comes forward at
‘he proper season to hinder it from perishing, aud displays his power in oppositivn tu


308 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. xvur. 1—7


tyrants and other enemies, that they may not overthrow it or succeed in accomplishing
what they imagined to bein their powers. In order, therefore, to excite them to patience,
he uot only distinguislies them from the Ethiopians, but likewise reminds them that
God mitigates his judgments for their preservation ” (Calvin). 2. The indestructibility of
the spiritual life. This must not be confounded with the institutions in which it dwells
for a time. But, understanding the “Church” in the spiritual or mystical sense, it
cannot perish. Calvin wrote in his day, “‘The Church is not far from despair, being
plundered, scattered, and everywhere crushed and trodden underfoot. What must be
done in straits so numerous and so distressing? We ought to lay hold on these pro-
mises so as to believe that God will still preserve the Church. The body may be torn,
shivered into fragments and scattered; still, by his Spirit, he will easily unite the mem-
bers, and will never allow the remembrance and calling on his Name to perish.” 3. The
self-concealment of God. The trial of faith in all ayes. Oh that he would show his face,
bare his arm, disclose his majesty, exert his power, appear as Judge to end once for all
the strifes of the world! But we must learn to say, “God’s in his heaven, all’s right
with the world.” At the proper season he will come forth. “If he instantly cut the
wicked down and took them away likea sprouting blade of corn, his power would not
be so manifest, nor would his goodness be so fully ascertained, as when he permits them
to grow to a vast height, to swell and blossom, that they may afterwards fall by their
own weight, or, like large and fat ears of corn, cuts them down with pruning-knives.” 4,
The unity of religion the prophetic ideal. “ Mount Zion” was its ancient symbol ; for
us it is not Rome, nor any other city or mount,—it is the human heart, with all its
pathos, its faith, hope, and love, its regenerate life and aspirations, it is one spirit uni-
versal in maukind.—J.


Vers. 1—6.— The patience of power. The most striking and distinctive truth this
chapter contains is that of the patience of Divine power, which permits evil to rise and
to mature, and which, at the right moment, effectually intervenes. But there are other
points beside this; they are—

I. THE MISDIRECTION OF HUMAN INTELLIGENCE. Whatever may be the right trans-
lation and the true application of these verses, it is clear that reference is made to a war-
like people—a people “ terrible” to their neighbours, a people “of command ” or “ tread-
ing underfoot,” aggressive and victorious. It shows how far we have fallen from our
first estate and from the condition for which we were created, that it does not strike us
as strange that this should be the description of a people; that the number of uations
whom it characterizes is so great that we fail to identify the nation which is in the
prophet’s vision. Under sin it has become common, not to say natural, that a nation
should be “terrible,” should be treading down or crushing, and full of commands to its
neighbours. But to how much better purpose might the strong peoples of the earth
devote their strength! God has made rich provision for the peaceable and Iruitful
exercise of our largest powers. ‘here are rivers and seas (ver. 2) for travelling, explo-
ration, commerce ; there is vegetation (bulrushes, papyrus), which may be made to carry
men’s bodies, or which, by the exercise of human ingenuity, may be made to convey
their thoughts to distant lands and remotest times; there is land and there are seeds,
there is sunshine and there is dew, which can be made to produce golden harvests that
will satisfy man’s wants and minister to his most refined tastes (vers. 4, 5); there are
birds and beasts (ver. 6), with whose habits men may become intelligently fa:iliar;
there is wealth beneath the soil in precious metals, which can not only be raised and
collected to eurich the homes of men, but which can be conveyed, as the tribute of
piety, to the house of the Lord (ver. 7). But, despising and neglecting such materials
and such anbitions as these, nations have aspired to rule over others—have perfected
themselves in all the arts and enginery of war, have congratulated themselves on
nothing so tiuch as in being “ terrible” to those on the other side the river or across
the mountain rane,

IL. Tit coMPLETENESS OF MAN’8 OVERTHROW IN THE DAY OF Driving axaER. The
destruction threatened (vers. 5, 6) probably refers to that of the army of Seanacherib ;
har it the rtere ce be to some other national calamity, it certainly points vo an over-
(hiow. sical aud fearful, from which the imagination turns away oppressed. So has
it been found, voth by individual meu and nations, that when God arises vw judement,


ou. xvmi. 1—7.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 809


rr ee


their feeble defences are scattered to the winds, and their doom is utterly irreversible by
anything they can do to mend it (see Ps. ii.; lxiii, 17—20; xcii. 6, 9).

III. Tae Lesson or Gon’s suDGMENTS. The result in this case is seen in the bring-
ing of a tribute to the Lord (ver. 7). If God puts forth his power in overwhelming
retribution, it is, chiefly if not wholly, that they who witness it (men or nations) may
repent of their own misdeeds or impiety, and may return unto the Lord in penitence, in
prayer, in consecration; for the most acceptable “ present” that can be “ brought unto
the Lord of hosts” is the humbled, believing, obedient heart.

IV. Tue patience or Divine power. (Ver. 4.) The Lord said, “I will take my
rest [I will be calm or still), I will consider in my dwelliny-place [I will look on from
my habitation] like a clear heat upon herbs, like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.”
God will not be provoked into hurried and impatient judgments; he will retain a Divine
composure, he will manifest the patience which belongs to conscious power; the
heavens should be as still as on the calmest summer day while evil was working to its
bitter end, while sin wasadvancing to its doom. Here is a contrast to us and here are
lessons for us. We, in our finite feebleness, are often impatient in spirit and hurried in
action. We are afraid that, if we do not strike at once, we shall not have time to strike
at all, or that our resources of retribution will fail, or that our adversary will be out of
our reach. God can entertain no such fear and be affected by no such thought. 1. All
time is at his command. 2. All resources are in his hands. 3. The men (nations)
whom he may find it needful to chastise can never be beyond the reach of his power.
Hence his calmness in place of our contusion, his patience in contrast with our feverish
restlessness. (1) Let not the wicked presume on Divine disregard; God will put
forth his hand in punishment at his own chosen time. (2) Let not the righteous be
surprised or disheartened by his delay; he does not count time by our chronometry ;
he has not the reasons for haste which urge us to immediate action; the hour of his
merciful intervention will arrive in time.—C.


Ver. 1.—Man’s energy put in place of trust in God. This comes to view in a more

precise translation of the passage. The King of Ethiopia, who was nomirally also King
of Egypt, alarmed by the near approach of the Assyrians, is aroused to the exhibition
of great energy, and sends messengers in the light river-vessels to spread the news
through the empire as rapidly as possible, and call the troops of all his dependent
nations to his standard. Geikie translates, or paraphrases the passage thus: “O land
of the buzz of fly-swarms—emblems of countless armies—by the rivers of Ethiopia,
which art seuding messengers upon the seas, and in swift, light, papyrus boats along all
your waters, to gather allies, and muster all the force of your empire: Go back to your
homes, ye swift messengers—go back to Ethiopia—the tall and strong race, terrible in
war from their rise till now,—the nation very strong and all-subduing, whose land is
seamed with rivers! Jehovah, alone, will destroy the invader!” ‘lhe energy of the
Ethiopian king is so far commended, but the prophet urges that in this case it is not
needed, for God proposes to take to himself all the glory of driving back the Assyrian
nvyasion.
L Man’s ENERGY IS CALLED For. Whatsoever a man findeth to do he should do
“ with his might,” “heartily.” Success in life greatly depends on the strength and
vigour in our touch of life’s duties and claims. Energy includes strength of will,
decision, promptness, perseverance, power to overcome obstacles and hindrances, and
fertility of resources, Energy is the quality most commended in business life; and it
is found to make up for the absence of actual abilities. The man of energy compels
life to yield him some of its best. Itis thought of asa characteristic of American busi-
ness life, and is illustrated in the man who put together the blackened ra/ters and
boards of his burnt warehouse, and commenced business again before the great fire was
fully quenched, putting up this for a sign, “ William D. Kerfoot; all gone, save wife,
children, and energy.” However much this energy may be a peculiarity of individual
disposition, it is also subject to culture, and may be nourished into strength by a firm
self-mastery of our life and habits. [Exercise thyself thereunto.

Il. Man’s ENERGY I8 CONSISTENT WITH DEPENDENCE ON Gop. Only the weak man
fails to make try harmonize with trust. Here the point may be fully argued and
illustrated, that the submission which God seeks is no slavish lying down to bear,


310 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. xvm. j]—T.


i


which is the Islam, or submission of Mohammedanism, but the submission of an active
and cheerful obedience, which expects Gud’s will to be doing rather than bearing, anc
carries a noble spirit of watching for God and waiting on him, into every detail of life.
Yo suffer and submit is no very great triumph; to carry the spirit of submission at the
heart of our work is the sublime victory of Christian life. And just this is the glory
of the energy illustrated in the Apostle Paul. To men’s view “ beside himself ;” his
secret this, “To me to live is Christ.”

1{]. Man’s ENERGY MUST NEVER BE PUT IN THE PLACE OF Gop. But just in this
the worldly man is constantly failing. ‘This is great Babylon, which J have builded.”
“7 will pull down my barns and build greater.” “See this business which / have
established.” ‘“ My might, and the strength of my arm, have gotten me this victory.
Nothing tends more readily to separate a man from God, and God from a man, than life
sucecss attending energy. And of this great peril the Christian man needs to beware,
Even he may find that he has dethroned God from the rule of bis liie, and raised up
in his place the old idol of self, dressed in the garments of “ energy ”

IV. SoMETIMES MAN’S ENERGY MUST BE PUT ASIDE, THAT GOD ALONE MAY WORB
As in this case, the Ethiopian king must stop his hurrying messengers, and be still; fer
Jehovah would work the needed rescue. There are times in our lives when we cannot
work, when we must not work; and in those times we learn how to put energy and
enterprise into their right place. God puts us in his school, and teaches us the hard
lesson of practically uniting “ energy ” with “dependence.” And yet this is but the
same lesson as joining harmoniously together “ faith ” and “ works ;” or, as the apostle
expresses it, “ working out your own salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God
that worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure.”—R. T.


Ver. 4.—God can wait. “I will rest.” God was apparently inactive and unobser-
vant, while the Assyrian was maturing his plans and taking all his first steps. But
God watches the influences gathering round the growing-time of the trees, though men
trace his working almost only in their fruitage. The words of this passage “ paint
with marvellous vividness the calmness and deliberation of the workings of Divine
judgments. God is at once unhasting and unresting. He dwells in his resting-place
(i.e. his palace or throne) and watches the ripening of the fruit which he is about to
gather. While there is a clear heat in sunshine, while there is a dew-cloud in harvest-
heat, through all phenomenal changes, he waits still” (Dean Plumptre). The figure of a
cloud of dew in the heat of harvest is well illustrated by Thomson, in ‘ ‘he Land and the
Book,’ who writes of a cloud which “absolutely reposed upon the vast harvest-fields of
Philistia, lying on the corn serene and quiet as infancy asleep. I have never seen such
a cloud in this country except in the heat of harvest.” Cheyne brings out the point
of this verse. “In the midst of all the excitement, of the Assyrians on the one hand,
and of the Ethiopians on the other, Jehovah is calmly waiting till the fruit of Assyrian
arrogance is all but ripe. Favouring circumstances are hastening the process (clear
heat, etc.), and when perfection seems just within reach, God will interpose in judg-
ment.” God can wait—quietly wait—until the fulness of time has come. God
reproaches our restlessness by his example, for our time is “always ready,” and by our
impatience and failure in self-control we spoil a thousand things. This subject may
be opened in the following way.

I. In secuRING MATERIAL ENDS THERE I8 OFTEN GREAT NEED FOR WAITING.  IIlus-
trate from the failure of the general, because he did not wait until preparations were
complete; or from the farmer who loses his crops by cutting them too soon, before the
weather has become settled; or the artist who cannot wait to give his work the per-
fecting touches of his own criticism; or the pastor who injures the young blade by
worrying anxiety over it, and cannot wait to let young soul-life gather quiet strength
in its own simple ways. The wisdom of waiting is harder to learn and practise than
the wisdom of acting and working. Yet the motto, by no means untruthfully says,
“‘ All things come round to him who can wait.” é

II. IN sEcURING MORAL ENDS THERE I8 OFTEN ABSOLUTE NEED FOR WAITING.
Because moral processes can never bear forcing. They vary in different individuals.
The lesson of virtue which one person learns at once, another grasps only as a final
result of the training of a long life. This point may be opened up in relation +0 the


oH. Xvi. 1—7.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 311


_-. eee OOo —


work of mothers and teachers, They seek moral ends. They are often distressed by
the slowness of the approach to the end. They must learn the importance of active,
watchful wazting. And in the highest sense, in relation to God’s moral working, we
all need to hear the voice that pleads, “Wait thou his time.” Marvellous is the long-
suffering patience of him who waited while the ark was building, and waited through
the ages until the “ fulness of times” for his Christ had come.

Ill. IN MAN WAITING MAY BE EITHER STRENGTH OR WEAKNESS. It may be
“masterly inactivity,” and it may be that “procrastination” which loses golden
opportunities.

IV. In Gop WAITING IS ALWAYS WISDOM AND STRENGTH. So we never need fret
under it, or make mystery of it, or think untrustful things about it. God acts on the
absolutely best moment, and we should wait on for ages, and never want a thing until
God’s best moment for it has come. Because God can wait, we should trust.—R. T.


Vers. 5, 6.—God can work. When his time has come. Then, before man can do
his harvesting work; when the blossoming and the growing times are over, through
which God had waited; when the fruit becomes the full ripe grape,—then God will show
how he can work, putting in his implements, and proving himself to be a Deliverer
and a Judge. God’s working here referred to is doubtless the sudden, unexpected, and
complete overthrow of the Assyrian army under Sennacherib, which came at the time
when it would prove absolutely overwhelming, and perfectly effective as a deliverance.
Matthew Henry states the case in this way: “ When the Assyrian army promises itself
a plentiful harvest in the taking of Jerusalem and the plundering of that rich city,
when the bud of that project is perfect, before the harvest is gathered in, while the
sour grape of their enmity to Hezekiah aud his people is ripening in the flower, and the
design is just ready to be put into execution, God shall destroy that army as easily as
the husbandman cuts off the vine with pruning-hooks, or because the grape is sour and
good for nothing, and will not be cured, takes away and cuts down the branches. This
seems to point at the overthrow of the Assyrian army by a destroying angel, when the
dead bodies of the soldiers were scattered like the branches and sprigs of a wild vine,
which the husbandman has cut to pieces.”

I. Gop’8 WORKING IS WELL-TIMED. This is the point made specially prominent
here. What was needed, for the due impression of Judah and the surrounding nations,
was some startling deliverance; something that should be at once complete, and yet
should be manifestly beyond man’s accomplishing. Such a working must be exactly
timed. When the success of Assyria seemed assured, when its prey seemed within its
grasp, and when men’s hearts were failing them for fear,—just then the wild hot
Simoom blast swept over the army, and as in a moment there were heaps of dead men,
and few escaped to tell the awlul story. For the timeliness of God’s judgment-work-
ings find illustration in the Flood, the destruction of Sodom, the extirpation of the
Canaanites, the captivities, and the final siege of Jerusalem.

II. Gop’s worKING IS FULL oF ENERGY. Ever setting before us the example of
thoroughvess in the doing of whatever work has to be done. This is in great part the
reason why, in making Israel his executioner, God required Israel to treat everything
belonging to the Canaanites as accursed, and doomed to destruction. It was, for the
first ages, a Divine lesson in thoroughness, energy, and promptitude. God never works
with a slack hand, and his servants must not.

III. Gop’s worKING 18 ALWAYS EFFECTIVE To ITs END. And that, not because it
is almighty working, so much as because it is all/-wise working. Power is quite a
secondary thing to adaptation. A thing fitted to its end will accomplish it, aud
it will be accomplished better through the fitness than by any displays of power. The
end here desigiied was an adequate impression of the sole and sovereign rights of
Jehovah, and a loud call to the nations to put their trust in him, The overthrow of
a mighty army, in the fulness of its pride, by purely natural—which are purely Divine
—forces, was exactly adapted to secure this end. Illustrate by the moral impression
produced by great and destructive earthquakes. When the end of God’s working is the
persuasion of his fatherly “ove, then we find his means marvellously adapted and
effective. “He gave his Son, his only begotten Son.” And herein we say is love, “ not
that we icved God. but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our


312


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


(oH. x1x. 1—25.


sins.” Be it work of judgment or work of mercy, of this we may be quite sure—God
accomplishes that which he pleases, and his work prospers in that to which he sends


it.—R. J We


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER XIX.

Vers. 1—17.—Tue Burpen or Eoyrt, It
has been doubted whether this prophecy
refers to the conquest of Egypt by Piankhi,
as related in the monument which he set up
at Napata, or to that by Esarhaddon, of
which we gain our knowledge from the
inscriptions of his son, Assliur-bani-pal. In
the former case, we must suppose it written
as early as B.o, 735; in the latter, its date
might be as late as B.c. 690. The division
of Egypt, “kingdom against kingdom,” is a
circumstance rather in favour of the earlier
date; but the “cruel lord,” and the mention
of the “princes of Zoan and Noph,” are
decisive for tle later, Piankhi is anything
rather than a “cruel lord,” being particularly
mild and clement; Napata (Noph) is under
him, and cannot be said to have been
“deceived” or to have “seduced Kgypt;”
and Zoan plays no part in the history of the
period. Esarhaddon, on the contrary, was
decidedly a “cruel” prince, and treated
Egypt with great severity, splitting it up
into a number of governments. Zoan was
one of the leading cities of the time, and
Noph was the leading power on the Egyptian
side, the head of the patriotic party which
resisted the Assyrian mouarch, but to no
purpose. We may, therefore, regard this
prophecy as one of Isaiah’s latest, placed
where it is merely on account of ita lead-
ing—the compiler having placed all the
“burdens” against foreign countries to-
gether.


Ver. 1.—The Lord rideth upon a swift
cloud. Natural imagery to express tlie
rapidity of Divine visitations (comp. Ps,
civ. 3). God, being about to visit Egypt
with a judgment of extreme severity, is
represented as entering the land in person
(so in ch. xiti. 5). The idols of Egypt shall
be moved. Neither Piankhi nor any other
Kthiopian conqueror made war on the
Egyptian idols; but the Assyrians were
always bent on humbling the gods of the
hostile countries (see above, ch. x. 10; and
comp. ch, xxxvi. 18—20). We have no
detailed account of Ksarhaddon’s campaign;
but we find Asshur-bani-pal’s first vietory


over Tirhakah immediately followed by the
presentation to him in his camp of Egyptian
deities (G. Smith, ‘History of Asshur-bani-
pal,’ p. 20, 1. 1). f.e. of their images. These
were probably taken to Nineveh, or else
destroyed. Ata later date, the same monarch
deprived an Egyptian temple of two of its
sacred obelisks (ibid., p. 54, ll. 4, 5). The
heart of Egypt shall melt (comp. ch. xiii. 7;
Ps. xxii. 14).

Ver. 2.—I will set the Egyptians against
the Egyptians. The disintegration of Egypt
commenced about B.o. 7460—750, towards the
close of the twenty-second dynasty. About
Bo. 735 a struggle began between Pian-
khi, King of Upper Egypt, and Tafnekht,
King of Sais and Memphis, in which the
other princes took different sides. Ten or
twelve years later there was a struggle
between Bocchoris and Sabaco. From this
time onwards, until Psamatik I. re-established
the unity of Egypt (about B.o. 650), the
country was always more or less divided, and
on tlie occurrence of any crisis the princes
were apt to make war one up n another.
Kingdom against kingdom. During the
period of disintegration, the title of “ king”
was assumed by most of the petty princes,
though they were little more than chiefs of
citivs (see ‘Records of the Past,’ vol. ii. p.
100; G. Smith, ‘History of Asshur-bani-
pal,’ pp. 20—22).

Ver. 3.—They shall seek to the idols. The
Egyptians believed that their gods gave
them oracles. Menephthah claims to have
been warned by Phthah, the god of Memphis,
not to take the field in person against the
Libyans when they invaded the Delta, but
to leave the task of contending with them to
his generals (Brugsch, ‘History of Egypt,’
vol. ii. p. 119). Herodotus speaks of there
being several well-known oracular shrines in
Egypt, the most trustworthy being that of
Maut, at the city which he calls Buta (ii.
152; comp. ch. 111). The charmers.. .
them that have familiar spirits . . . wizards,
Classes of men corresponding to the “ magi-
cians” and “wise men” of earlier times
(Gen. xli. 8). (On the large place which
magic occupied in the thoughts of the
Egyptians, see ‘Pulpit Commentary’ on
Exod. vii. 11.) There was no diminution
of the confidence reposed in them as time
went on; and some remains of their practices
seem to survive to the present day.


Ver. 4.—The Egyptians will I give over
into the hand of a eruel lord. It has been


OH, XIx. 1—25.]


observed above that Piankhi will not answer
to this description. It will, however, well
suit Esarhaddon. Esarhaddon, soon after
his accession, cut off the heads of Abdi-
Milkut, King of Sidon, and of Sanduarri,
King of Kundi, and hung them round the
necks of two of their chief officers (G@. Smith,
‘Eponym Canon,’ pp. 187—139). In an
expedition which he made into Arabia, he
slew eight of the sovereigns, two of them
being women (‘ Records of tlie Past,’ vol. iii.
pp. 106, 107). On conquering Egypt he
treated it with extreme severity. Not only
did he divide up tle country into twenty
governments, but he changed the names of
the towns, and assigned to his twenty
governors, as their main duty, that they
were “to slay, plunder, and spoil” their
subjects (G. Smith, ‘History of Asshur-
bani-pal,’ p. 37, 1. 7; comp. p. 16, 1.7). He
certainly well deserved the appellations of
“a cruel lord,” “a fierce king.”

Ver. 5.—The waters shall fail from the
sea, By “the sea” it is generally allowed
that the Nile must be meant. as in ch. xviii.
2 and Nah. iii. 8. The failure might be
caused by deficient rains in Abyssinia and
Equatorial Africa, producing an insutticient
inundation. It might be aggravated by the
neglect of dykes and canals, which would
be the natural consequence of civil dis-
orders (see Canon Cook’s ‘Inscription of
Piankhi,’ p. 14). Wasted and dried up;
rather, parched and dried up. Allowance
must be made for Oriental hyperbole. The
meaning is only that there shill be a great
deficiency in the water supply. Such a
deficiency has often been the cause of
terrible famines in Egypt.

Ver. 6.—And they shall turn the rivers far
away; rather, and the rivers shall stagnate
(Cheyne). Probably the canals are intended,
as in Exod. vii. 19 (see ‘ Pulpit Commentary,’
ad loc.). The brooks of defence shail be
emptied. Some render this “brooks of
Egypt,” regarding matsor as here used for
“ Mitsraim ;” but our translation is more
forcible, and may well stand. The “ brooks
of defence” are those which had hitherto
formed the moats round walled cities (comp,
eh. xxxvii. 25; Nah. iii. 8). The reeds and
flags shall wither. Reeds, flags, rushes, and
water-plants of all kinds abound in the
backwaters of the Nile, and the numerous
ponds and marshes counceted with its over-
flow (see the ‘ Pulpit Commentary’ on Exod.
ii. 8, p. 24). These forms of vegetation
would be the first to wither on tle occurrence
ot a deficient inundation.

Ver. 7.—The pa”er reeds by the brooks,
etc.; rather, the meadows on the river, along
the banks of the river, and every seed-plot by
the river. The banks of tle Nile were partly
grass-land (Gen. xJi. 2, 18), partly cultivated


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 313
ee


in grain or vegetables (Herod., ii. 14), .o
either case producing the most luxuriant
crops. All, however, depended on the in-
undation, and, if that failed, or so far as it
failed, the resulta predicted by the prophet
would happen.

Ver. 8.—The fishers also shall mourn. The
fisherman’s trade was extensively practised
in ancient Egypt, and anything which in-
terfered with it would necessirily be re-
garded as a great calamity. A large class
supported itself by the capture and sale
of fish fresh or salted. The Nile produced
great abundance of fish, both in its main
stream and in its canals and backwaters,
Lake Moris also provided an extensive sup-
ply (Herod., ii. 149). All they that cast
angle into the brooks; rather, into the river.
Fishing with a book was pructised in Egypt,
though not very widely, exvept as an
amu-ement by the rich. Actual hovks have
been found, not very different from modern
ones (Rawlinson, ‘ History of Ancient hgypt,’
vol. i. p. 506), and representations of angling
oceur in some of the tombs. Someiimes a
line only is used, sometimes a rod and line
(sec Rawlinson, * Herodotus,’ vol. ii. pp. 101,
103, 2nd edit.). They that spread nets.
Nets were very much more widely employed
than lines and hooks. Ordinarily a drag-
net was used; but sometimes small fry were
taken in the shallows by means of a double-
handled landing-net (ibid., p. 108, note 2),

Ver. 9.—They that work in fine flax.
Linen of great fineness and delicacy was
woven in higypt, for the priests’ dresses,
for mummy-cloths, and tor corselets. Solo-
mon imported “linen yarn” from his Egyp-
tian neighbours (1 Kings x. 28), and the
Phosnicians a linen fabrie for their sails
(Ezck. xxvii. 7). In the general decline of
Egyplian prosperity, caused by the cireum-
stances of the time, the manufacturers of
linen would suffer. They that weave net-
works; rather, they that weave white clothes.
Cotton fabrics are probably intended. Shall
be confounded; literally, shull blush, or be
ashamed.

Ver. 10.—And they shall be broken in the
purposes thereof; rather, and the founda-
tious thereof shall be broken, or crushed to
pieces (Kay). The rich and noble, the foun-
dations of the fabric of society, seem to be
meunt. All that make sluices, ete. Trans-
late, all that work for hire (comp. Prov. xi.
18) shall be grieved in soul. ‘he meaning
is that all classcs, from the highest to the
lowest, shall sutf-r affliction (so Lowth,
Gesenius, Knobel, Kay, Cheyne).

Ver. 11.—Surely the princes of Zoan are
fools. Zoan, or ‘Tanis, which had been an
insignificant city since the time of the shep-
herd-kings, came to the front once more at
the time of the struggle between Egypt and


314


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


[oH. xIx. 1—25,


ETE


Assyria. Esarhaddon made it the head of
one of the petty kingdoms into which he
divided Egypt (G. Smith, ‘ History of Asshur-
bani-pal,’ p. 21,1. 2). arly in the reign of
his son it revolted, in conjunction with Sais
and Mendes, but was ere long reduced to
subjection by the Assyrians. Its king, Petu-
bastes, was tuken to Nineveh, and there
probably put todvath. Its “ princes” were,
no doubt, among those who counselled re-
sistance to Assyria. The counsel of the
wise, etc.: liierully, as for the wise coun-
sellors of Phuravh, their counsel is become
senseless. Two classes of advisers seem to
be intended—nobles, supposed to be quali-
fied by birth; and *¢ wise men,” qualified by
study aud education. Both would now be
found equally incapable. Pharaoh. Pro-
bably Tirhakah is intended. It is possible
that he was really suzerain of Egypt at
the time of Scnnaclierib’s invasion, when
Shabatok was nominally king. It is certain
that, after the death of Shabatok (about B.o.
698), lhe was recognized as sovereign both
of Ethiopia and of kgypt, and ruled over
both countries. Hsarhaddon found him
still occupying this position in B.o. 673,
when he made his Egyptian expedition.
Tirhakah’s capital at this time was Memphis.
How say ye, etc.? With what face can you
boast of your descent, or of your learning,
when you are unable to give any sound
advice?

Ver. 12.—Where are they? where, etc. ?
rather, Where, then, are thy wise men? If
thou hast any, let them come forward and
predict the ec ming course of events, what
Jehovah ha- determined to do (compare simi-
lar challenges im the later chapters of the
book, ch, xli. 21—28; xliii, 9; xlviii, 14,
etc.).

Ver. 13.—The princes of Noph. There
are no grounds for changing “ Noph” into
“Moph.” ‘Noph” is probably “ Napata,”
known as “ Nup” in the hieroglyphic in-
scriptions—the original capital of the Ethi-
opian kings, and, when Memphis had _ be-
come their cipital, still probably regarded
as the seeond city of the empire. The
‘‘princes of Noph” would be ‘Tirhakah’s
counsellors They have also, ete. Trans-
late, Hven they have led Eyypt astray, who
are the corner-stone of her tribes. Sirictly
speaking, there were no “tribes” in Eeypt,
much less “castes,” but only classes, marked
out by strong lines of demarcation the one
from the other, Hcrodotus yives seven of
them (11. 164)—priests, soldiers, herdsmen,


swincherds tradesmen, interpreters, and
beatmer, But tere were several others
also, eg. vrivulturial labourers, fishermen,


artisuus, officiinl employes, ete.
Ver. 14.—The Lord hath mingled a per-
verse spirit, etc. “Shall there be evil in


a city, and the Lord hath not done it?”
(Amos iii. 6). To bring Egypt into so dis-
tracted a state, the hand of God had beer
necessary. He had introduced into the
nation ‘¢a spirit of perverseness.” Those
in whom this spirit wis bad then “led
Egypt astray in all her doings.” ‘They had
made her “ like a drunken man,” who “ stag-
gers” along his path, and slips in “ his own
vomit.” Lon:z-continued success and pros-
perity produces often a sort of intoxication
in a nation.

Ver. 15.—Neither shall there be, etc.
Translate, And there shall be for Eqypt ne
work tn which both the head and the tail,
both the palin branch and the rush, may (con-
jointly) work, The general spirit of per-
verseness shall prevent all union of high
with low, rich with poor.

Ver. 16.—In that day; or, at that time;
iee when the Assyrian invasion comes.
Shall Egypt be like unto women (comp.
Jer. li. 30). So Xerxes said of his fighting
men at Salamis: “ My men have become
women ” (Herod., viii. 88). Because of the
shaking of the hand of the Lod (comp.
ch. xi. 15 and xxx. 32). The Egyptians
would scarcely recognize Jehovah as the
Author of their calamities, but it would none
the less be his hand which punished them.

Ver. 17.—The land of Judah shall be a
terror unto Egypt. In Manasseh’s reign
Judxa became subject to Assyria (2 Chron.
xxxili. 11; G. Smith, ‘lponym Canon,’
p. 139, 1. 13), and had to take part in the
hostile expeditions, which both Ksarhaddon
and his son, Asshurbanipal, conducted
against Evypt. Egypt had to keep her
eye on Judea continually, to see when
danger was approaching her. It is not
likely that Isaiah’s prophecies caused the
“terror” here spoken of. Every one that
maketh mention thereof shall be afraid;
rather, when any one maketh mention thereof,
they shall turn to him in fear. The very men-
tion of Judeea by any one shall cause fear,
because they will expect to hear that an
expedition has started, or is about to start,
from that country Because of the counsel
of the Lord of hosts. This is how Isaiah
views the Assyrian attacks on Egy t, not
how the Keyptians viewed them. ‘The fear
felt by the Egyptians was not a relizious
fear. They simply dreaded the Assyrian
armics, and Judea as the country from
which the expedit.ons seemed to issue.


Vers. 18—22.—Tur Turnina or Eayrt
ro Jrnovan. The chastisement of the
Egyptians shall be followed, after a while,
by a great change. Influences from Canaa
shall penetrate Egypt (ver. 18), an altar
shall be raised in’ her midst to Jehovah
(ver. 19), and sne herself shall cry to


NG ayes


CH, xix. 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


315


for succour (ver. 20) and be delivered (ver.
20). Egypt shall even become a part of
Jehovah’s kingdom, shall “ know him,” and
serve him with sacrifice and oblation (ver.
21), and perform her vows to Jehovah, and
have her supplications heard by him, and be
converted and healed (ver. 22).


Ver. 18.—In that day. Not really the
day of vengeance, but that which, in the
prophet’s mind, is most closely connected
with it—the day of restitution—whereof he
has spoken perpetually (ch. i. 25 27; ii.
2—4; iv. 2—6; vi. 13, ete.). The two are
parts of one sclieme of things, and belong in
the prophets mind to one time. Shall five
Cities in the land of Egypt speak the language
of Canaan. It is quite true, as Mr. Cheyne
remarks, that the Kastern De.ta was from a
very early date continually more and mure
Semitised by an influx of settlers from Pales-
tine, and that Egyptian literature bears
strong marks of this linguistic influence.
But this is scarcely what tie prophet intends
to speak about. He is net interested in phi-
tology. What he means is that there will
be an appreciable influx into Egypt of Pales-
tinian ideas, thoughte, and sentiments.
“Five” is probably used as a “round”
number. The first manifest fulfilment of the
prophecy was at the foundation of Alex-
andria, when tlie Jews were envouraged to
become settlers by the concession of impor-
tant privileges (Joseplius. ‘ Contr. Ap.,’ il. 4),
and where they ultimately became the pre-
dominant element in the population, amount-
ing, according to Philo ¢ In Flacc.,’ § 6), to
nea'ly a million souls. The next great
Palestinian influx was under Ptelemy VI.
(Philometor), when Onias tled from Palestine
with a number of his partisans, and obtained
permission tu erecta Jewish templenear Helio-
polis. ‘The site of this temple is probably
marked by the ruins at ‘el-el-Yahoudeh
(‘Quarterly Statement’ of Palest. Expl. Fund
for July, 1880, pp. 137—139). It seems to
have been a centre to a number of Jewish
communities in tlie neighbourhood. In this
double way Jehovah became known to Egypt
before Christianity. A Christian Church
was early established in Alexandria, possibly
by St. Mark. Swear to the Lord of hosts;
i.e. “swear fidelity to lim.” One shall be
called, The city of destruction. Some manu-
scripts read ’Ir-ha-hhéres, “City of the
Sun,” for ’Ir-ha-héres, “City of Destruc-
tion,” in which case the reference would be
plainly to Heliopolis, whieh was in the im-
mediate neighbourhood of 'Tel-el- Yaloudeh,
and which in the Ptolemaic period may well
have fallen under Jewish influence. Kven
if ’Ir-ka-héres stand as the true reading, the
name may still have been given with allusion
to Heliopolis, the prophet intending to sav,


“That city which was known ¢. the City of
the Sun-God shall become know a as the City
of Destruction of the Sun-God and of idola-
trous worship generally.” Tiiat Heliopolis
did actually fall under Jewish influence in
the Ptolemaic period appears from a re-
markable passage of Polyhistor, who says of
the Exodus and the passage of the Red Sea,
“The Memphites say that Moses, being
well acquainted with the district, v atched
the ebb of the tide, and so led th: people
across the dry bed of the sea; bul they of
Heliopolis affirm that the king, a. the head
of a vast force, and having +i sacred ani-
mals also with him, pursued ufier the Jews,
because they were carrying sway with them
the r.ches whic: they i.ad berrowed from the
Eeyptians. Then,” they say, “the voice of
God commanded Moses to s)aite the sea with
his rod, and divide it; and Moses, when he
heard, touched the water wth it, and so the
sea parted asunder, and the host marched
through on dry ground.” Such an account
of the Exodus would scarcely have been
given by Egyptians unless they were three
parts Hebraized.

Ver. 19.—There shall be an altar to the
Lord. An altar to the Lord was undoubtedly
erected by Onias in the temple which he
obtained leave to build from Ptolemy Philo-
netor. Josephus says that he persuaded
Ptolemy by showing him this passage of
Isaiah (‘ Ant. Jud., xiii 3; ‘ Bell. Jud.,’ vii.
10). And a pillar at the border thereof. It
is not clear that any “pillar” was ever
actually erected. The erection of pillars for
religious purposes was forbidden by the Law
(Deut. xvi, 22), But this would be a pillar
of witness (Gen. xxxi. 52), and would mark
that the land was Jehovah's. Dr. Kay sug-
gests that “the Jewish synagogue first, and
afterwards the Christian Church at Alex-
andria, standing like a lofty obelisk, with
the name of Jehovah inscribed upon it, at the
entrance of Egypt,” sufficiently fulfilled the
prophecy.

Ver. 20.—It shall be fora sign. The out-
ward tokens of Jehovah-woiship shall witness
to God that he has in Egypt now a covenant,
people, and he will deal with them accord-
ingly. He shall send them a saviour, and a
great one. ‘This does not seem to point to
any earthly deliverer, but to the Saviour from
the worst of all oppressors, sin and Satan,
whom they will need equally with the rest
of lis people.

Ver. 21.—The Lord shall be known; rather,
shall make himself known, as in Ezek. xx.
5, 9; by answering praycr, by spiritual in-
fluences, and the like. The Egyptians shall
know the Lord (comp. Jer. xxxi. 34, “ They
shall all know me from the least of them
unto the greatest’). And shall do sacrifice
and oblation; rather. shall serve with sacrifice


316


and oblation. The bulk of the Jews settled
in Egypt. toget er with their Egyptian
proselytes, went up year by year to worship
Jehovah at Jerusalem, and make offerings
to him there (se Zech. xiv. 16—19), Chris-
tian Egypt worshipped God with sacrilice
and oblation in the same sense as the rest of
the Church (Mal. i. 11).

Ver. 22.—And Jehovah shall smite Egypt,
smiting and healing; t.e, Jeliovah sliail in-
deed “sinite Exypt,” as already prophesied
(vers. 1—16), but it shall be with a merciful
object, in order, after smiting, to “ heal.”
His smiting shall induce them to “ return”
co him, and when they return he will forgive
and save (comp. Zeph. iii. 8, 9; Jer. xii,
14—16). Egypt was a Olristian country
from the third century to the seventh; aud
the Coptic Church (though very corrupt)
still remains, knowing Jehovah, and offering
the holy ublation of the Christian altar con-
tinually.

Vers. 23—25.—UnNIon BETWEEN E@yYrt,
ASSYRIA, AND IskarL. Assyria’s conversion
to God will follow or accompany that of
Egypt. The two will be joined with Israel
in an intiinate connection, Israel acting as
the intermediary. There will be uninter-
rupted communication, common worship,
and the common blessing of God extending
over the three.

Ver. 23.—Shall there be a highway. The

hraseology resembles that of ch. xi. 16;

ut the purpose is different. Then the
“highway” wus to facilitate the return of
the Israclites to their own land. Now the
object is perfectly free communication be-
tween the three peoples. The Egyptians
shall serve with the Assyrians. “Shall
serve”? means “ shall worship” (see ver. 21).
The “ Assyrians” represent the inhabitants
of the Mesopotamian regions generally. As,
from the time of Alexaider, Hebrew influ-
ence extended itself largely over Egypt, so,
even from an carlier date, it began to be felt
in the Mesopotamian countries. The trans-
plantation of the ten tribes, or a consider-
able portion of them, into Upper Mesopo-
tamia and Media, was the commencement
of a diffusion of Hebrew ideas through those
regions. ‘I'he captivity of Judah still further
impressed tliese ideas on the native races,
Great numbers of Jews did not return from
the Captivity, but remained in the countrics
and cities to which they had been trans-
ported, particularly im Babylon (Josephus,
‘Ant. Jud.’ xi. 1). The policy of the
Seleucid princes was to establish Jewish
colonies in all their great cities. In the
time between Alexander and the birth of
our Lord, the Hebrew community was re-
oognized as composed of three great sections


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


[cm. xix. 1—26.


—the Palestinian, the Egyptian, and the
Syro-Babylonian. Constant communication
was maintained between the three branches.
Ecclesiastical regulations, framed ut Jerusa-
lem, were transmitted to Alexandria and
Babylon, while collections made in all parts
of Egypt and Mesopotamia for the temple
service were annually carried to the Pales-
tinian capital by trusty persons. It is thua
quite reasonable to regard as an “ initial
stage in the fulfilment of this prophecy”
the state of things existing at this period
(Kay). The more complete fulfilment was
doubtless after Pentecost, when Christianity
was ;reached and established in Egypt and
Libya on the one hand, in Parthia, and
Media, and Klam, and Mesopotamia on the
other (Acts ii. 9, 10).

Ver. 24.—In that day shall Israel be the
third; rather, a third. Not third in rank,
for ver. 25 shows that she would retain a
pre-eminence, but the common int:rmediary,
bringing the other two tog: ther. A blessing
in the midst of the land; rather, inthe midst
of the earth. Judean monotheism, upheld
by God’s people in Palestine, Kgypt, aud
Mesopotamia, would be a blessing, not only
to those three countries, but to the world at
large. So, and still more, would Christi-
anity.

Ver, 25.—Whom the Lord of hosts shall
bless; rather, forasmuch as the Lord of hosts
hath blessed him. ‘“ Him” must be under-
stood collectively, of the threefold Israel,
spread through the three countries, which
all partake of the blessing. The three
countries are able to be a blessing tu the
world at large, because God’s blessing rests
upon them. Egypt my people. Egypt's
great work in Jewish times, by whici she
became a blessing to the world, was her
translation of the Hebrew Scriptures into
Greek, commanded by Egyptian kings, and
executed at Alexandria, the Egyptian capi-
tal. Neo-Platonism certainly owed much
to this source. Stoicism probably some-
thing. Assyria the work of my hands
Assyria did no such work as Egypt. Neither
the Targum of Onkelos nor the Babylonian
Talmud can be compared for a moment with
the Septuagint. Still the Mesopotamian
Jews were a blessing to their neighbours
They kept alive in the East the notion of
one true and spiritual God; they elevated
the tone of men’s thoughts; they were a
perpetual protest against idolatry, with all
its horrors. They, no doubt, prepared the
way for that acceptance of Christianity by
large masses of the population in Syria,
Mesopotamia, Babylonia, and even in Persia,
of which we have evidence in the ecclesi-
astical history of the first seven centuries.
Israel mine inheritance (comp. ch. xlvii. 6;
Luii. 17)


=.


on. xx. 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 817


HOMILETICS.


Vers. 1—17.—Egypt’s punishment, a proof both of God's long-suffering and of his
inexorable justice. The punishment of Egypt by the Assyrian conquest, on which the
prephet enlarges in this chapter, may be regarded in a double light.

L A® STRONGLY EXHIBITING THE LONG-SUFFERING AND MERCY OF Gop, 1. Consider
the long persistence of Egypt in sins of various kinds—idolatry, king-worship, practice
of 1nagic, kidnapping of slaves, cruel usage of captives, impurity, indecency ; consider
that her monarchy had lasted at least sixteen hundred years, and that both im religion
and in morals she had continually grown worse. 2. Bear in mind her treatment of
God’s people—how she had first oppressed them (Exod. i. 8—14), then endeavoured to
exterminate them (Exod. i. 15—22); this failing, made their bondage harder (Exod. v.
6---19); repeatedly refused to let them go; sought to destroy them at the Red Sea
(Exod. xv. 9); plundered them in the time of Rehoboam (1 Kings xiv. 25, 26);
alternately encouraged and deserted them in their struggles against Assyria (1 Kinys
xvii. 4; xviii, 21, 24). 3. Note also that she had helped to corrupt God’s people. Iv
Egypt many Israelites had worshipped the Egyptian gods (Josh. xxiv. 14; Hack. xx. 8)
They had brought from Egypt an addiction to magical practices which had never left
them. Manasseh, in calling his eldest son “ Amon,” intended to acknowledge the
Egyptian god of that name. Under these circumstances, it is marvellous that Kgypt
had been allowed to exist so long, and, on the whole, to flourish; and the marvel can
only be accounted for by the extreme long-suffering and extraordinary mercy of
Almighty God.

IL As «a DECISIVE PROOF OF GOD’s INEXORABLE Justice. However long God
defers the punishment of sin, it comes at last with absolute certainty. It might have
seemed as if the hardships suffered by his people in Egypt bad escaped God’s recollec-
tion, so many years was it since they had happened. It might have seemed as if all
Egypt’s old sins were condoned—as if she was to escape unpunished. Sixteen centuries
of empire! Why, Rome herself, the “iron kingdom,” that “broke in pieces and
bruised ” all thinvs (Dan. ii. 4), was not allowed more than twelve centuries of existence,
But Egypt was allowed a far longer term, not only of existence, but of prosperity.
Since the time of the shepherd-kings, four hundred years before the Exodus, she had
suffered no great calamity. Even the Ethiopians had not been so inuch foreign
conquerors, as princes connected by blood and identical in religion, who claimed the
crown by right of descent from former Egyptian sovereigns. But God had all the time
been waiting, with his eye upon the sinful nation, counting her offences, remembering
them against her, and bent on taking vengeance. And the vengeance, when it came, was
severe. First, internal discord and civil war—“ kingdom against kinudom, and city
against city” (ver. 2); then conquest by an alien nation—conquest effected by at lcast
three distinct expeditions, in which the whole land was overrun, the cities taken and
plundered, and army after army slaughtered; finally, subjection to a “ fierce king,” a
“eruel lord” (ver. 4). And the sufferings of war aggravated, apparently, by the
natural calamity of a great drought—a failure of the inundation either tor one year, or
possibly for several (vers. 5—8). Truly, when the day of vengeance came, Hgypt was
afflicted indeed! No wonder she “ was afraid, and feared because of the shaking of the
hand of the Lord of hosts” (ver. 16). It is, indeed, “a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God” (Heb. x. 31).


Ver, 22.—Smiting and healing closely connected in God’s counsels, God’s smiting is
no doubt twofold, (1) remedial and (2) penal; but by far the greater portion of it
is of the former kind. Once only has he visited mankind at large penal:y—t.e. at the
Deluge; but a thousand times has he visited them remedially. Similarly with nations.
He smote Egypt in Moses’ time with the ten plagues, not to destroy, but to chasten,
So again at the Red Sea. So now by the hands of Hsarhaddon and his son, So by
Nebuchadnezzar, Cambyses, Ochus. And at last he bowed their hearts and caused
them to turn to him, first partially, when Judaism gained an influence over them ;
afterwards, as a nation, when they accepted Christianity. Former chastisements had


doubtless some remedial force, or the nation would scarcely have been borne with so
12


318 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xm. 1—25


a


tong; but they did not fully heal, and blow after blow became requisite. So God went
on “smiting and healing.” And the course of his providence is similar with indi-
viduals. Primarily he smites to heal. Each offence brings down his rod, but the
stroke is comparatively light at first, and intended to warn, admonish, call to amend-
ment. If men persist in wrong courses, the blows become heavier. But still the inten-
tion is the same; it is sought to bring them to repentance. God has no pleasure in the
death of him that dieth. Only after repeated trials, after blow upon blow, warning
upon warning, if they will not repent, if they will not be healed, the penal sentence
goes forth to “ pluck up and destroy” (Jer. xii. 17).


Vers. 23, 24.—Unity in religion joins together the bitterest foes. As, ultimately, the
establishment of the kingdom of Christ among all the nations of the earth (ch. ii. 2)
will produce a reign of universal peace, so that men will everywhere “ beat their swords
into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning-hooks ” (ch, ii. 4), 80, on a lesser scale,
wherever true religion prevails, asperities are softened, old enmities die out and dis-
appear, a friendly spirit springs up, and former adversaries are reconciled and become
friends. Assyria, Eyypt, Israel, long the bitterest foes, were drawn together by a
common faith in the later days of Judaism and the earlier ones of Christianity—felt
sympathy one with another, and lived in harmony The Papacy was an attempt to
bring all the Roman communion into a species of political unity, to abolish wars
between its various members, and unite it against heathendom. ‘This attempt had,
however, only a partial success, owing to the admixture of bad with good motives in
those who were at the head of the movement and had the direction of it. ‘lhat war
has not yet ceased among all Christian nations is a slur upon Christianity, and an
indication that nations are still Christian in name rather than in spirit. The league of
Assyria, Evypt, Israel, may well be held up to the modern Christian world as an
example that should shame it into the adoption of “ peace principles.” If such foes,
so fiercely hostile, so long estranged, could become close friends through the influence
of a community of religion, why cannot the Christian nations of modern times attain
to a similar unity ?


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1—4.— Coming judgment upon Egypt. The historical allusions in this passage
cannot be positively cleared up. So far as the discovery of inscri) tions in recent years
evables us to lift a little the veil which hangs over the land, we see it shaken to the
centre by the wars of rival chieftains, A victory of Sargon over the Egyptian king
Shabatok, in 8.0. 720, has been made out from Assyrian inscriptions; and, again, the
conquest of Egypt by Hsarhaddon in B.c. 672, who divided the land into twenty small
tributary kingdoms, The chapter may refer to this event, and it may not (see Cheyne’s
Introduction to the chapter).

I, THE ADVENT or JEHOVAH. “He rideth upon a swift cloud” (comp. Ps. xviii. 10,
“ He rode upon a cherub, and did fly ;” comp. Ps. civ. 3). To study those magnificent
winged figures, which pass generally under the name of griffins, in our museums and
works of art, and as they are described by Ezekiel in the land of captivity (i.),
may be tiie best way to realize the significance of this poetry. We must throw
ourselves into that mood of mind in which all life and movenient in nature is symbolic
of the infinite power and majesty of the Divine Being—audibly the wind, visibly the
strong gathering clond upon the horizon. ‘lhis picture, then, is a hint (1) of the
majesty of Jehovah; (2) of his ascendency in the world of spirit. The “ not gods” of
Egypt shall shake before him. He comes to judge them. The God of Israel is on his
way to punish the teeming multitudes of Memphis, Pharaoh, and Egypt, and their
gods and kings. The idols are to be destroyed, their images are to cease; and the
secular power, which has been supported by a false religion, shall be laid low (comp.
Exod. xii, 12; Jer, xlvi. 25; Ezek. xxx. 18). A striking contrast is suggested between
the pure sublime religion of Jehovah and the debased worship of the Egyptians,
whose reverence for cats, and bulls, and crocodiles, and onions attracted une satire of
later times. How could such worshippers do other than tremble, their nea:t melting


cH. x1x. 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 319
a


within them at the approach of the light that reveals and judges the voluntary dark-
nesses and confusions of the mind? As Calvin remarks, we should behold the sane
thing exemplified in all revolutions of kinedoms, which proceed solely from the hand o1
God. If the heart melts and the strength fails in men who are usually brave, and who
had formerly displayed great courage, this ought to be ascribed to the judgment of God.

I], Tue supements vescripeD. 1. Internal dissension. One canton is set against
another. There will be the feud of brother with brother, fellow with fellow, city with
city, and kingdom with kingdom. Men’sheartsarein the hand of God. Whenever we
see in a nation social dissension setting in, unity and co-operation no longer possible,
it is a sign that a new force is at work, that a new light has come in, that existiny
customs are being criticized, in short, that “ God has awoke to judgment.” Such times
are times for seli-scrutiny, for thoughtful study, for earnest prayer. 2. The sense of the
hollowness of existing institutions, Terrible is it when a na‘ion suddenly awakens to
find its strongest ideals reduced to empty and mocking delusions; terrible also for the
individual, The “ heart made empty.” Sometimes it is a “ science falsely so called ;”
sometimes a spurious faith, which is suddenly found to be a leaking cistern, and the
water of life has fled. Under these conditious there will be a feverish outbreak of old
superstition. Men will resort to the “not gods” and to the “spiritualists”—the
“mutterers,” who pretend to give voices and messages from the other world. So men
have done in our time, The history of the heart repeats itself from age toage. If
men have not genuine religion, they must have the counterfeit of it; and they will
love the lie and cling to tle ieat when the possibility of the truth is no longer within
reach. 38. Subjection to the tyrant. ‘Yhe land will be shut up into the hand of a hard
lord, and a fierce king shall rule over them. And is not tyranny the last sign of Divine
displeasure, as viewed from anvther side it is the last sien of degeneracy and weakness
in anation’s manhood? “ Hence we see how great is the folly of men who are desirous
to have a powerful and wealthy king reigning over them, and how justly they are
punished for their ambition, thongh it caunot be corrected by the experience of every
day, which is everywhere to be seen in the world” (Calvin).—J.


Vers. 5—10.— The drying up of the Nile. Nothing has left a deeper mark on the tra-
ditions of Eastern lands than the impressions of burning heat, the drying up of springs,
tne consequent suffering. Egypt was the “gift of the Nile,” Herodotus said. Well
might the presence or absence of its waters denote the pleasure or the wrath of Deity.

J. Tue vescripTion. The Pelusiac arm of the Nile is dried. The neglected canals,
dykes, and reservoirs become staxnant, the vegetation withers. The bright oasis of the
Nile will melt away into the surrounding desert. The canals, first undertaken as a
necessary work of civilization and culture, become naturally neglected and choked up in
time of civil war.

Il. THE EFFECTS ON PEACEFUL INDUSTRY. Besides agriculture there were three
main sources of Egyptian wealth: the fishing, the linen manufacture, and the cotton
manufacture. There was abundance of fish in the Nile, and it was avreat article of food.
The combed flax was prepared for the priests’ clothing and for the mummy-cluths, and
the cotton for dress in general. The result is universal consternation in all ranks and
elasses. The wealthy classes, the “ pillars ” of the land, and the artisan population are
alike in despair.

III. THe corncIDENCE OF THE SPIRITUAL AND THE NATURAL WORLD. A fertile land,
an industrious people, peace and plenty, the favour of God,—these are ideas that lic
linked together in the thought of the prophet, lorming one causal chain. The dis-
pleasure of Jehovah, the effect in war, and this, again, working desolation in the face
of nature and cutting at the root of industry,—these form another chain, of connected
representations. From the sources and springs of the mizhty Nile up to the seat of
thought, passion, and motion in the mightier human heart, all are in the hands oj
Jehovah. Alike in every occupation of the industrial and of the political and
intellectual world, let us own our depeudence upon him.—J.


Vers. 11—15.— The folly of statesmen. God hath made foolish the wisdom of this
world, in Egypt as in other lands, And the marks and characters of folly are every-
where the same.


320 THE BOOK ‘OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [en. xrx. 1—25


Se


I. Tue srrrrr or Boastine. The king and his priestly counsellors possess sacred
booke, which they consult as a college in times of emergency. The priests boast of
being “sons of the wise,” and sons of ancient kinus. The Pharaoh himself belonged
to the royal stock. Boasting is ever a sign of weakness. ‘lhe strong man needs not to
talk of hig strength; he feels it, and others feel it. Wisdom is distinguished by
the absence of self-conceit, and is impressive by its silence and modesty.

II. Proors oF FoLLy. 1. Inabilily to read the signs of the times. Prediction was
their favourite occupation; how is it they cannot read the thoughts of Jehovah
toward the land? They resort to false methods—astrology, divination, etc. Truth
may not really be loved, or it may be sought by paths that can only lead away from
it. It is not by mere reading, it is not by digging in quaint and curious lore, that we
can arrive at sympathy with the mind of God. All the learning of the schools is
folly unless we keep the light within brightly burning, the conscience clear, the mind, if
not the knees, ever bent in the attitude of uplooking and prayer. 2. Bar administra-
tion. They lead the country astray. The yriestly class, that is, the intellectual and
educated class, looked upon as the “corner-stone of the tribes,” are themselves under an
illusion, and their “light and leading” is an ignis-fatuus. We are too much dazzled
by the acuteness, the knowledge, the abilities, the vast grasp of facts, in our great men.
Often the cleverness of such overreaches itself, and great men stumble and fall, and “ run
into great dangers which any peasant or artisan would have foreseen.” They become
inebriated by their own thoughts, But it ever sobers the mind to collect itself, so to
speak, in Ged. “This wit, this insight, is mine, peculiarly mine ”—he who speaks with
himself thus—is on the brink of some fatal delusion. ‘“ 1t is God’s peculiar gift to me;
it is a talent from him, to be used for his world”—this is the thought that steadies ;
and “if our wisdom rest on God, he will truly be a steadfast Corner-stone, which no one
shall shake or overthrow,”

Ill. JupicraL inratTuatTions. These delusions are traced to the judicial act of
Jehovah. It is he who has put a cup of enchantment to their lips, so that the power of
discernment is suspended, ‘lhe image of drunkenness fitly represents their state. It is
a spirit of “ perverseness,” or of “subversion.” And the people have imbibed the same,
so that they stagger about helplessly ; there is no consistency, no agreement, no firm and
joint action. It is an awful thing—the being “given over to a reprobate mind.” Nor
dare we accuse the Almighty of injustice. We are ready enough to throw the blame of
our own aberrations upon others, upon circumstances, or even upon him. But what
“right” have we to anything, from the light of the sun to the light of reason in the
soul? God gives and Gud deprives, for reasons inscrutable to us and not to be
questioned, But “the heart has reasons that reason knows not of;” and the heart
knows that, if its choice be true, its asking will not be refused, the needed guidance will
not be denied.—J.


Vers. 16—25.— Mingled judgment and mercy. JY. THe EFFECT oF JUDGMENT. The
land will be like timid and trembling women, for the mighty hand of Jehovah will be
brandished aloft in judgment. Whenever it is felt that Divine power is working on the
side of the ioe, the most warlike nations lose heart. “ God with us! ”—a watchword that
nerves the feeblest arm, and fills the faintest heart with courage. ‘ God against us!”
—the hand of the bravest hangs down, the knees of the stoutest tremble. Judah,
Jeho al’s seat of empire, will be a terror to the proud land of Evypt. ‘The seeming
weakest community, the most insignificant individual, will be a power if the truth is
operating through it. It is not magnitude that is appalling; it is spiritual force. Men
will shudder at the Name of Judah; it will be a symbol of a purpose never successfully
resisted, But when thus the prospect is at its darkest for Egypt, a light of hope
glimmers., ; ;

IL Pxomises or Goon. 1. A view of Egypt’s conversion to the true religion here
opens. ‘There will be five cities speaking the tongue of Canaan, or Hebrew, the
language of the worship of Jehovah. They will take the oath of loyalty to him. And
it seems that the city known as “ city of the sun” shall be called “ city of the breaking
down of idolatrous altars.” And an altar of the true religion, with the pillar marking
the holy place, will be seen, visibly witnessing to the Lord of hosts in the land. There
is now a covenant between Jehovah and the repentant and restored land. He will no


OH. xIx. 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 821


—_————ee:\}X}Q.---T-__————— ——


longer be their Foe, but their Friend ; and when they cry to him, in the midst of distress
and oppression, he wil] bearken, and send a Helper and Deliverer. he speople will
sacrifice to him, and he will make himself known; whether in the land or at Jeritsalem
(comp. Zech. xiv. 16—19) is not stated. 2, This cannot be without previous suffering.
Never does conversion from evil, from obstinate persistence in it, occur without
suffering. But the suffering is beneficent, inflicted by love. God smites to heal. It is
a thought echoed back from many a page: “I kill, and I make alive; I wound, aud I
heal; ” “He has torn, and he will heal us; hath smitten, and will bind us up;” “He
wounds, and his hands make whole” (Deut. xxxii. 39; Hos. vi.1; Job v. 18). The
fire of his wrath cousumes, but purifies. “hen will I turn to the people a pure
language, that they may call upon the Name of Jehovah, to serve him with one
consent” (Zeph. iii. 8, 9). There lives a fund of pity in the heart and constitution of
nature—compassion in Jehovah, the Hebrew prophet said (Jer. xii, 14, 15). “God does
not punish that he may punish, but that he may humble; wherefore, when humility
is produced, his punishmeuts proceed no further. God is of too great mercy to triumph
over a prostrate soul” (South).

Ill. THE Happy RESULT. Peace replacing war, trust substituted for mutual hate.
There is to be intercourse between Egypt and Assyria, a free hixhway between the two
lands, Nay, there shall be a triple alliance, Israel being the third, and blessing is
thus to be diffused over all the earth. Where Jehovah’s blessing is, there is and must
be prosperity. ‘Thus have the clouds dispersed, and the golden year seems to have
begun, “ peace lying like a lane of beams across the sea, like a shaft of light athwart the
land.”

PERSONAL APPLICATION. To avoid national judgment, to secure the Divine favour, let
each inquire into his own sins. Persvnal sins bring down natiunal juduments. Li there
were no personal, there could be no national sin. In punishing the many, God does not
overlook the individual. There is no suffering of a natiou without the suffering of its
members, no repentance which is not that of men one by one, uo prosperity aud favour
which is not reflected from a million faces and hearts. here is infinite ground of hope
from the promises of God, and from their actual fulfilment.—J.


Ver. 1.—God’s presence a trouble. “Behold the Lord... shall come into Egypt...
and the heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst of it.” The presence of God would pro-
duce consternation among the peole. This is significant enough. It need excite no
wouder, indeed, that the coming of the holy and righteous One iuto the midst of those
who had provoked him by their idolatries would result in quaking of spirit, in
liveliest agitation. What could await such guilty ones but the most serious rebuke,
the most distressing judzments? But the presence of God is not only troublous
to idolatrous Egyptians, but to his own servants. So the prophet himself found
(ch, vi. 5). The psalmist “ remembered God, and was tronbled ” (Ps. lxxvii. 3). Why
is this? Concerning the trouble which the presence of God brings to the human spirit,
we remark—

I. THAT HI8 KNOWN NEARNESS TO US AND POWER OVER US MIGHT BE EXPECTED TO
PRECLUDE 8UCH ALARM. Why should we be concerned to find God appearing unto us?
Do we not know well that he is “not far from any one of us;” that “in him we live
and move and have our being”? Do we not know that he is jndginy our actions and
our attitude toward himself every moment, and is, moreover, expressing bis judgment
by Divine bestowals and inflictions day by day ? Why should terror or alarm, or even
apprehension, seize us because he manifests himself to us, and constrains us to feel
conscious that we are standing in his near presence? But, however we may reason
thus, it is the fact—

ll. THAT OBSERVATION AND EXPERIENCE UNITE TO PROVE THAT HIS FELT PRESENCE
DOES TROUBLE Us. Both Old Testament and New Testament history show that any
visitant from the unseen world causes “ the heart tu melt;” and if any mere messenger
(angel), how much more he who reigns over all that realm—the Divine and eternal
Spirit himself? And we find now that when men, in the full possession of their
spiritual faculties, have believed thernselves to be 1m, or to be about to pass into, the
near presence of the Eternal, their spirit has shrunk and trembled at the thought. We
ask—

TRA lA BL : v


$22 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. xix, 1—25


IlI, Tae EXPLANATION OF THE FACT. The explanation is found in two things. 1. In
our sense of God’s greatness, aud the corresponding consciousness of our own littleness.
Those who move in a humble social sphere are agitated when they find themselves
jn the near presence of human rank, especially of high rank, more especialiy of royalty ;
how much more so when men feel themselves to be (or to be about to be) before the
King of kings, the infinite God! 2. In our sense of God’s holiness and the corre-
sponding consciousness of our own imperfection and sin. (1) ‘Ihe Christian man may
have his reason for apprehension ; for has he not to bring his life of Christian service
to the judgment of his Divine Master, for his approval or his disapproval; and is he not
conscious that this his service has come short of his Lord’s desire, if it has not been
blemished or even stained by many sins? (2) The impenitent man has abundant
reason for anxiety and even for alarm; for he is the child of privilege and epportunity ;
he has known his Lord’s will; he has heard many times the sacred summons; he has
often felt the movings of the Divine Spirit in his heart. But be has “judged himself
waworthy of eternal life;” he has striven to silence the voices which came to him from
heaven. He is open tothe most terrible and intolerable rebuke of God (Prov. i. 24, etc.) ;
he lies exposed to the penalty of deliberate disob:dience, of persistent rejection of the
grace of God (Luke xii. 47; John iii. 18, 19, 836; Heb. x. 26—81; xii. 25).—C.


Vers, 2—10.—4A picture of penalty. The threatened penalty of Ezypt as painted
by the prophet here will, on examination, be found to be essentially the penalty with
which God causes sin to be visited always and everywhere.

I. Srrire, especially internal strife (ver. 2). The guilty nation will find itself
plunged into civil war (Egypt, Greece, Rome, France, America—northern and southern
states, etc.), or rent with bitter and vindictive factions; the guilty family will have
its domestic harmony destroyed by petty broils and miserable disagreements; the
individual soul will be compelled to expend its powers in internal strife—conscience
having a long and perhaps desperate strugele with passion; reason, which urges
to immediate decision, contending with the evil spirit of procrastination; the will to
submit to Divine demands doing stern, protracted battle with a desire to conform to the
good pleasure of the unholy and the unwise.

Il. Devusion. (Ver. 3.) As the Egyptians, paying the penalty of disobedience,
were to abandon the counsels of hu:wan wisdom for the fancies and fooleries of the
juggler, so will men find that sin leads down from the guidance of reason to the
dictates of folly and the misleadings of delusion. It is not long before the sinner
experiences “ the deceitfulness of sin ;” before he finds that he does not impose on other
men half so much as he is imposed upon, or as he imposes on himself. He comes
to think that utterances which are earthly, or of lower origin than that, are the voices
of heaven; he “calls evil good, and good evil;” counsel which he ought to abjure
as diabolical, he deems excellent and wise; neglecting truths and principles which
would be his salvation, he falls back upon sentiments which lead down, with certain
path, to innermost and uttermost ruin.

Ill. Bonpaee. (Ver. 4.) It is one of the most certain and one of the saddest
penalties of sin that the wrong-doer is handed over to the despotism of “a cruel lord.”
By what truer or more descriptive terms could these enemies of the soul be charac-
terized into whose iron grasp the transgressor falls? Is not the insatiable craving for
strong drink or for the hurtful narcotic a “cruel lord”? What but cruel lords are
covetousness, ainbition, lasciviousness, the voracity or extreme delicacy of those “ whose
God is their belly "—the passion which demands and will not be denied, which consumes
the time, which saps the energy, which steals the manhood that should be devoted to
nobler ends, that should be laid on a worthier altar? The victims of vice are “ holden
with the cords of their sins ;” they are “in the hand of a cruel lord,” who will make
them pay “ the uttermost farthing.”

IV. Surinxacs. (Vers. 5—10.) Egypt should be pitiably reduced; the waters of its
life-giving river should be wanting (ver. 5), its vegetation should fade and die (ver. 6),
its industries should be stopped (vers. 8, 9), its chief men should be overthrown
(ver. 10). All Egyptian lile, through its length and breadth, should be struck a
ruinous blow, should shriuk from fulness and power into feebleness and dicline.
Under the dominion of sin, human life suffers a ruinous reduction. Made for God, for


og. x1x, 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 323


his likeness, for his fellowship, for his service, for the highest forms of usefulness and
ine noblest order of enjoyment, we sink into folly, into selfishness, into smallness
of aim and littleness of accomplishment; our lives are narrowed, lessened, shrivelled.
It is the pitiful penalty of departure from God, of withholding our hearts from our
Divine Friend. In Christ we realize the fair and blessed opposites of these. In him
is (1) peace (John xiv. 27; xvi. 33; Eph. ii, 14); (2) endiyhtenment (1 Cor. xiv. 20;
Eph, i. 18; Col. i. 9); freedom (John viii. 32—36; Rom. vi. 18; Gal. v. 1); enlarge-
ment (Matt. v. 45; John xv. 14; Rom. viii. 17; Eph. ii. 6; Rev. i. 6).—O.


Vers. 11—14,.—Teaders that mislead. The strong, energetic language of the prophet
respecting the princes and counsellors of Eyypt express for us the vast injury which
is wrought by untrustworthy teachers in every place and time, and the duty of the
people to be on their guard against such seducers (ver. 13).

I, THE LEADERS THAT MISLEAD. (Vers. 10—13.) Theseare: 1. Jn the nation, leading
their fellow-countrymen into a false and spurious patriotism; into vain-gloriousness ;
into luxury and extravagance; into the ruinous error that the fascinations of military
glory are preferable to the advantazes of peaceful industry, etc. 2. /n the Church,
leading their fellow-members into theological error; into doctrine which ia not a faith
but only a philosophy, or which is not a faith so much as a superstition ; into indulgence
in emotion without the cultivation of Christian morality ; or into habits of virtue that
do not rest on the basis of personal attachment to God,etc. 3. In the fumily, lead-
ing their children into laxity of belief; into the conviction that worldly success is of
greater account than the favour of God and the possession of spiritual integrity ; intc
the practice of dubious habits which tend to immorality or irreligion, ete.

Il. {HEIR LAMENTABLE RELIGIOUS IGNORANCE. (Ver. 12.) ‘The “wise men” of
Egypt could not tell ‘‘ what the Lord of hosts had purposed ; ” they did not know his
mind. What availed all their other knowledge, all their political sagacity, all their
pretentious skill, it they were utterly ignorant of what was in the mind of God? Our
leaders of to-day, in whatever sphere they may preside, are useless and worse than
useless if they cannot propose those measures, if they ca:mot commend those doctrines,
if they cannot foster those habits and instil those principles, which are according to the
mind of God, which contain the will of Jesus Christ. ‘To advise the policy, to repent
the phrases, to build up the character which they themselves received of their fathers,
may be wholly inadequate, utterly inapplicable, entirely wrong; what is wanted in our
leaders is the power to perceive the mind of God, to especially understand what is
“his will concerning us in Christ Jesus,” to guide and teach and train so that their
disciples shall live in the light of his truth and the enjoyment of his friendship.

Il]. THe MISCHIEF WHICH THEY worRK. (Vers. 13,14.) These men seduced Egypt
from the true path, and they led her to err and stagger in false paths. The immensity
of the evil which is wrought by false leaders, whether in the nation, the Church, or the
home, is seen by regarding it on the negative and on the positive side. 1. They seduee
from the saving truth. (1 John ii, 26.) ‘They lead men from the fear of the living God ;
from tbe faith and love of Jesus Christ ; from the produce of the heaveulier graces, and
therefore from living the nobler and worthier life; from the possession of a peace which
no distractions can disturb, and of a treasure which no thief can steal, and of a hope
which triumphs over death, 2. They lead into the saddest and even the grossest evils.
Their disciples “err... as a drunken man stagvereth in his vomit.” A painful but
graphic picture of those who are led astray into evil patlis, into beliefs which are
not only false but shocking, into companionships and alliances which are not only
unsatisfactory but demoralizing, into habits which are not only wrong but shameful.
It is the duty of the community, in view of the fact that false and foolish |-aders have
always abounded, and that their influence is disastrous, (1) to be sedulously on guard
lest these should be appointed; (2) to depose those that are found unworthy of their
charge; (3) to realize that every individual man is responsible to God for the faith he
holds and the life he lives (Luke xii. 57 ; Gal. vi. 4, 5).—C.


Vers. 18—22.— Smiting and healing. We may glean from these verses—
7. THAT THE BLOWS WHICH WE SUFFER IN OUR ORDINARY EXPERIENCE COME FROM
THE HAND oF Gop. No doubt the various calamities by which Egypt was afflicted


324 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.  [on, xrx. 1—26.


came to her in the ordinary ways, and appeared to her citizens as the result of common
canses. They accounted for them by reference to general laws, to visible human
powers, to known processes and current events. Yet we know them to have been
distinctly and decidedly of God, by whatever instrumentalities they may have been
brouvht about. “ The Lord shall smite Egypt” (ver. 22). So now with us; the
evils which overtake us—sickness, separation, disappointment, losses, bereavement, etc.
—may occur as the result of causes which we can discover and name; nevertheless
they may be regarded as visitations, as chastisement, as discipline, from the hand of God.

ll. THAT THESE WOUNDS OF GoD’s CAUSING ARE INTENDED BY HIM TO ABOUND
UNTO THE HEALTH OF THE WOUNDED spirit. ‘ He shall smite and heal.”  God’s
inain purpose in smiting was to bring about a far healthier condition than existed
before. .Aft-rwards the chastening would “ yield the peaccable fruits of righteousness ; ”
and for this end chiefly, if not wholly, it was sent. We are to consider that this is
always God’s design in sending affliction to his children. He smites that he may heal,
and that the new health may be much better than the old—that the blessing gained
may greatly outweigh the loss endured (2 Cor. iv. 17). To part with bodily health and
to obtain spiritual soundness, to lose material possessions and secure treasures which
make “rch toward God,”—this is to be enlarged indeed.

Il]. THAT THE RESTORATION OF THE SMITTEN 8PIRIT IS ATTENDED AND FOLLOWED
BY VARIOUS BLESSINGS. 1. The soul addressing itself to God in earnest prayer. “ They
shall cry unto the Lord” (ver. 20); ‘‘ He shall be entreated of them ” (ver. 22). ‘This
is an act of returning from folly and forgetfulness unto the God who has been forsaken :
“They shall return,” etc. (ver. 22; see also ver. 21). 2. The soul seeking God’s
acceptance in his appointed way. ‘There shall be an altar to the Lord” (ver. 19).
However interpreted, this passage points to the special means appointed by God through
Moses for obtaining forgiveness of sin, and suggests to us the one way—repentance and
faith—by which we must seek and may find the Divine mercy. 3. Profession of attach-
ment to God. These five cities should “swear to the Lord of hosts” (ver. 18). The
pillar at the border would perhaps be an obelisk, making mention of his Name as the
One that was worthy of human adoration. 4. The service of the lip. They would
“ speak the language of Canaan ”—the language spoken by the people of God. Language
is far from being everything, but it is far from being nothing (Ps. xix. 4; Matt. xii. 37;
Rom. x. 10). By truthful, kindly, help!ul speech, and in sacred song, we may do much
in serving and in pleasing God. 5. Consecration. ‘ ‘They shall vow a vow unto the
Lord, and shall perform it;” the solemn presentation of self unto a Divine Saviour and
a lifelong redemption of the vow.—C,.


Vers. 23, 24.— The crown of privilege. The promise of the text may not have seemed
to Israel so gracious and so inspiring as many others; but it was one that might well
have been considered surpassingly good. For it predicted that the time would come
when Israel should be closely associated as “a third” with two great world-powers—
Egypt and Assyria; not, indeed, to triumph over them, but to be “a blessing in the
midst ” of them, This is the very crown of privilege. Concerning privilege itself we
tay consider—

Il, Irs UNDOUBTED EXISTENCE. There are “elect” nations and individuals; it is
not only a truth written in the pages of Scripture, but a fact confirmed by all testimony
and observation, that God has conferred on some much more than he has allotted to
others. ‘To one nation (man) he gives one talent, to another two, and to another
five. Physical strength, intellectual capacity, force of character, material wealth and
natural advantages, knowledge, revealed truth,—these are some of the privileges by
which men and nations are favoured.

Il. Irs perin. The great danger attending the possession of privilege ia that of
entirely mistaking the object of the Creator in conferring it; of assuming that he
bestowed it simply for the gratification or the exaltation of its recipients. This was
the disastrous mistake which the Jews made: hence their spiritual arrogance, their
selfishness, their pitiable exclusiveness, their misreading of Scripture, their maltreat-
ment of their Messiah, It is s mistake we are all tempted to make; it is one against
which we do well to guard with the utmost vigilance; for it is a sinful one, and one
that carries ruin in its train,


oH. xix. 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. $25
a


III. Irs crown. This is to be “a blessing in the midst of the land;” to be a bond
of union between other powers—a “third” to the Egypt and Assyria by which we
may be surrounded, Privileged lands, like England, find their crown, not in military
successes, nor in annexations, nor even in well-filled banks or well-fitted vessels ;
but in giving free institutions to neighbouring or even distant nations, in conveying
the message of Divine mercy to heathen lands, “in being a blessing in the midst of the
earth.” Privileged men find the crown of their life, not in possession, nor in enjoy-
ment, Dor in conscious superiority to others “that are without; ” but in distributing,
in imparting, in making others partakers of the peace and joy and hope that fill their
own hearts, in broadening the belt of light on which they stand, in sowing the seed of
the kingdom in land which now bears only briers and thorns, in being “a blessing in
the midst of the Jand.”—C.


Ver. 25.—Lightsin which God regards us. The words intimate that there are various
aspects in whicti the Divine Father looks at his human children, and they may suggest
reciprocal views on our part.

I. LienTs IN WHICH GoD REGARDS Us. 1. As those to whom he ts nearly related.
Egypt in her hour of obedience has become “ my people,” t.e. closely connected with God,
aud having, therefore, scrious claims upon him. God does regard bis own as those who
are most closely, most intimately, most tenderly related to him, standing in such close
relation that they may confidently reckon on the continuance of his kindness, on the
protection and interposition of his strong arm. 2. As those who are the product of
his Divine energy. “ Assyria the work of my hands.” We who are trusting and
rejoicing in him and walking in his truth are frequently to remind ourselves that we
are not the product of our own wisdom and effort, but are “his workimauship created
in Christ Jesus” (Fpl. ii. 10; and see 1 Cor. iii. 9; 2 Cor. v. 5). God has expended
on us Divine thouglit, Divine love, Divine sorrow, Diviue patience, Divine discipline.
3. As those in whom he finds a Divine delight. “Israel mine inheritance.” In Israel,
when that people was faithful to his rule, God found his portion, his inheritance,
In us, when we are attentive to his voice, responsive to his love, obedient to his
commands, submissive to his will, he finds a Divine satisfaction (Johp xv. 11).
4. As those on whom he can confer blessedness. “Whom the Lord shall bless;”
“Whom God blesses, they are blessed indeed.” ‘l'heirs is not mere physical
excitement, or temporary gratification, or dubious delight, but true, abiding, ele-
vating joy.

I. RectprocaL VIEWS WE SHOULD TAKE oF HIM. We should consider God: 1. Aa
One to whom we are most intimately related—more closely, indeed, thau to any human
kindred, 2. As One to whom we owe everything we are, as well as everything we have,
3. As that One in whom, in whose friendship, service, presence, we find (and hope to
find) our true and lasting heritage.—C.


Ver. 2.—Political commotion regarded as Divine judgment. “ And I will spur Egypt
against Egypt, and they shall fight every one against his brother, aud every one against
his fellow, city against city, and kingdom against kingdom.” Civil war does far more
serious and permanent mischief to a nation than foreign war. There are no such
distressing conditious brousht about by any other agencies as those which follow civil
war. There can be no true heroism in its scenes; because the impulse is either
mercenary, or it is class hatred and passion. Patriotism is swallowed up in mere
sectional interests. The historical connections of this prophecy seem to be made clear
by the recent discoveries of Egyptian and Assyrian inscriptions, There bas been found
an inscription containing a proclamation of one Piankhi, who, in the eighth century B.o.,
united under his sceptre the whole of Egypt and Ethiopia. Lower Egypt was divided
among rival princes, whose connection with their over-lord was merely nominal, and
civil wars from time to time arose. ‘That which is true of actual civil war, is in
measure true of times of political excitement and conflict, when party feeling runs high.
Some of the evils of such times may be pointed out.

|. THESE TIMES OF COMMOTION SET CLASS AGAINST OLASS. It is curious to notice
that political conflict is never cuntined to the subject about which it arose, It is
opening the floud-yaies and letting out all the waters of class jealousy.


325 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (on. xix. 1—25.


Il. THesk TIMES DISTURB SOCIAL ORDER. Breaking up families and friendships,


and diverting nicn’s minds and enervies from their ordinary occupations.
IL. Tues TIMES INTERFERE WITH BUsINESs. Which is very sensitive to disturbed
conditions uf the boay politic. Mutual trust is essential to business development, and


the sense of security gives value to property.

IV. THESE TIMES GIVE INFLUENCE TO EVIL MEN. The demagogue finds then his
opportunity. The masses of society gain undue importance. Noise has more power
than intelligence. Kcason’s voice can seldom be heard. She keeps still, for it is an
evil time.

V. THESE TIMES SERIOUSLY HINDER CHRISTIAN AND CHARITABLE ENTERPRISE,
Diverting both energy and money. So seasons of political commotion become agencies
in executing Divine judgments, and become times of national waruing an¢ correc-
tion.—R. T.


Ver. 3.—Temptation to trust in diviners. ‘They shall seek... to the charmers,”
“ A time of panic, when the counsels of ordinary statesmen failed, was sure in Egypt,
as at Athens in its times of peril, to be fruitful in oracles and divinations.” ‘lhe
most remarkable instance recorded in Scripture is that of King Saul, who in his
extremity, and after having himself driven the witches out of his laud, imperilled his
life to consult the witch of Endor. And even in these days there are most
curious survivals of the old spirit, in the consultations of fortune-tellers, and the
confidence placed in the guesses of prophesiers, and the vague generalities of so-called
astrologers. Large numbers of ignorant and only partly educated people hold to this
day their confidence in lucky and unlucky times, and their fears of thirteen at the table,
the ticking of the death-watch, and the coffin-shaped ciuder. In times of national
distress men who pretend to prophesy find their harvest, and trade upon the fears and
hopes of men.

1. THE UNIVERSAL DESIRE TO PIERCE THE UNSEEN AND THE FUTURE. On this
desire rests the success of modern spiritualism. Where there is no restful confidence
in God’s love and lad, men try to force aside the veils that hide God and God’s
purposes from mortal view. Man can do so much in the present that he is fretted and
annoyed because he can get no guarantees for to-morrow, and every day must act upon
the uncertainty whether, for him, there will be any to-morrow. After this life, what
then? Men are angry because no fellow-man has ever answered that question or ever
can. Revelation from God can alone relieve the mystery. Show how in all ages men
have peered into the dark future, and been compelled to coufess that they could see
nothing but the “ fulds of the wondrous veil.”

Il. THE MORAL REASONS WHY THE FUTURE IS HIDDEN FROM Us. 1. It is necessary
for our probation. 2. It prevents procrastination by impression of the supreme
value of now. 3. It keeps from the self-security which nourishes free indulgence in
sin, 4, It makes our life manifestly a life of faith.

III. THE REST WHICH RELIGION GIVES FROM THE CARB ABOUT THE FUTURE. Religivn
brings God into direct relations, and gracious relations, with the individual. Past,
present, future, are all in God’s control. If the soul is in right relations with God, the
present is his overruling, and the future is his provision, If we are with God, all is
well, here or there.—R. T.


Vers. 5—10.—The withholding of God’s gifts making man’s woe. These verses are
suggestive of the thousandfild forms of trouble that follow on an unusually low Nile,
or the failure of the Nile flood. It is peculiar to the valley of the Nile, and the Delta
forming the land of Egypt, that cultivation of the soil depends upon the yearly
flooding of the river, which, by canals, sluices, ponds, and ditches, is led over the fields
as the great fertilizer. Holy Scripture gives us the picture of supreme distress
following on the failure of the Nile for seven successive years in the times of Joseph,
The complete dependence of the country on this periodical overflow, and the fact that
all agricultural arrangemeuts are adapted to this peculiarity, involved a remarkable
helplessness throughout the laud when the Nile failed to rise. The people could not
dv what they were accustomed to do, so they did not know what todo, and could uot, in
any effective way, make up for this calanaty. If their mver be dried up, their fruitful


oH, x1x.1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 827


land will soon be turned into barrenness, and their harvests cease. Two things are
suggested for consideration.

1, ‘(HE WONDERFUL WAY IN WHICH THINGS ARE LINKED TOGETHER. So that failure
in one thing brings on a most varied train of evils. ‘The prominent thing here is the
failure of the Nile flood ; but how many things are found to depend on that !—the basket-
trade; the paper-trade; the farmer’s trade; the fish-trade; the fiax-trade; the
net-trade; the builder’s trade. So is it still, The cotton supply from America was
checked a few years ago, and the consequences reached, in ove way or another, all
classes of society. Depressions in trade first affect one branch, but jresently rise
to the highest and descend to the lowest classes of society; and so it is again and
again proved that, ‘‘ we are members one of another.”

Il, ‘THE WONDERFUL WAY IN WHICH ALL PROSPERITY IS MADE DEPENDENT ON THE
FIRST GirTs OF Gop. Man’s riches are God’s gifts. Man can never add to the wealth
of the world by eaxchaiges, which only vary the possessors. Air, rain, sunshine,
water, electricity, coal, increase from field-and beast, are man’s riches; and these are
first things that are absolutely dependent on God, and out of man’s control. God
witbholds the rains, and a nation is in misery ; God tempers the air, aud plague sweeps
away the multitudes ; God stops the flood, and Hyypt pines away in its helplessness.
The source of all real good is God, in whose hands are the very springs and svurces of
all human happiness and prosperity.—K, T.


Ver. 14.—Men’s minds a sphere in which Gods judgments may work. “The
Lord hath mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof.’ Failure in recognizing
men’s minds and wills, as s)heres of Divine operation, makes difficult to us such cases
as that of Pharaoh, whose heart the Lord is said to have hardened; or that of the
prophets in the time of Ahab, amongst whom God had sent a “ lying spirit.” But the
apostle distinctly taught that all the sides and all the forces of mau’s nature are in
God’s control, and that he can work his purposes through them all. Writing to the
Komans (i. 23), | aul says of the Gentiles, ‘Goud gave them over to a reprobate mind,
to de those things which are not couveuient.” And the heathen have a motto which
embodies the same truth, “Whom the gods would destroy they tirst dement ’—a
sentence involving a belicf in the coutrol of the gods over men’s minds. A further
illustration may be tound in the prayer offered by David in the time of his extreme
peril: “O Lord, | pray thee, turn the counsel of Ahithophel into loolishiess” (2 Sam.
xv. 31). This truth we can clearly see and fully accept.

I. Gop HAS CONTROL OVER MAN’S CIRCUMSTANCES. These are, undoubtedly, the
usual spheres of Divine operation. Life in the midst of varying circuimstanecs, and
subject to the influence of circumstances, is our preseut lot. God’s providence we assume
to have its sphere in things and events; and too easily we may come to limit Gud’s
working to the incideuts of life, and keep him entirely in the external spheres,
reaching us only through onr senses. So we need to have set belore us the further
and more searching truth, that—

Il. Gop HAS CONTROL OVER MAN’S MIND AND HEART. This may be difficult to
harmonize with our notions of man’s free-wil] and independence. But man’s free-will
is not an absolute thing; it is set within careful avd precise limitations. Man has

liberty withim a tether; aud he cannot be trusted beyond the tether. God never
looses his huld on him. ‘Lhe point, bowever, which especially calls for illustration and
enforcement here is, that God may execute his judyments on man in the sphere of his
mind. A state of stubbornness, perversity, and hardening may be traced by man as
the natural response of certain minds to certain circumstances. We are taught to look
deeper, and sce in bad mental states and moods wot Divine permissions only, but
Divine operations and Divine jidgments. The mental blindness and deafuess, tie
narrow-mindedness, the sceptical tendency, of a particular age, we view amit when
we regard as Divine judgiwent working towards humility.—R. ‘I.


Ver. 19.—The cry of distress after the true Gud, The erection of the altar and the
pillar would be a sign of desire after God. “Iu Isaiah’s time it must have seemed
incredible that the firmly organized idolatrous system of Egypt should ever be broken
up. Yet such a result was brought about by a series uf movements—Assyrian,


328 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.  [en. xx. 1—25.


reer


Babylonian, Persian, and Greek—which commenced almost immediately after the date
of the above prediction, In the district of Heliopolis, on the site of a ruined temple
at Leonto) olis (twenty miles north-east of Memphis), the high priest Onias IV. built
his temple, under a special licence from Ptolemy Philometor (about B.o. 150).” The
chapter deals with the corrective judgments which were to come upon Egypt, and
gives this prophecy as the assurance that they will in measure prove efficient; and
Egypt in her distress will cry after the trne God; and the presence of Jews in
her midst would give direction to her ery. We only suggest the following topics for
illustration :—

|. THE MISSION OF ALL NATIONAL DISTRESS I8 CONVINCEMENT OF THE CLAIMS OF
Gop.

II. Tue PRESSURE OF NATIONAL DISTRESS I8 A PERSUASION TO CALL UPON GoD.

IL]. THe ARRANGEMENTS OF GOD’s PROVIDENCE ALWAYS HELP MEN’S DESIRE TO SEEK
Gop. Illustrated in the fact that Jews were settled in Egypt, and witnessing for
Jehovah, when the people’s hearts were turning towards him. From this we may
proceed to sbow how our establishing missions in various parts of heathendom proves
to be providevtial help affirded to peoples who have begun to cry after God. Our
“altar "and our “ pillar” are tuus for “a sign and for a witness unto the Lord of hosts.”
—R. T.


Ver. 22.—God both Smiter and Healer, “The meaning is not simply that the stroke
should be followed by healing, nor is it simply that the stroke should possess a healing
virtue; but both ideas seem to be included.” The full thought is expressed by the
Prophet Hosea (vi. 1, 2), “Come, and let us return unto the Lord: for he hath torn,
and he will heal us; he bath smitten, and le wil] bind us up. After two days will he
revive us: in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight.” Hen-
derson says, “ The doctrine here taught is, that when God has purposes of mercy towards
a sinful people, be will continue to visit them with calamities till they are humbled,
and thus brought intoa fit s'ate for appreciating the value of his mercies.” For
illustrations of the same view of God’s working, see Job v. 17—19; ch. lvii. 15—19;
Hos. vy. 15. ‘There are few conceptions of God which should seem so tender and so
restfully satisfying as this to conscious sinners who long to be freed from their sins.
God will not leave us alone; he will smz¢te. God will watch the effects of his smiting,
and take the first opportunity to heal. God never smites save with the prospect before
him of healing, and with gracious intentions of making his healings an unspeakable
blessiug—* the intention of healing is predominant throughout ” (comp. Zeph. iii. 8, 9;
Jer, xii. 5—7).

I, THese TWO THINGS—SMITING AND HEALING—ARE OFTEN SEVERED IN MAN. 1.
Some sinite for others to beal. 2. Some smite in malice, and do not want us to be
healed. 8. Some smite in wilfulness, and do not care whctiier we are healed. 4. Some
smite in kindness, but are unable to heal the wounds they make. And so often men
do not know bow to smite, though they mean well, and so the wounds they make are
mischievous, and only wounds, not really corrective agencies. Man’s bungling ways
in smiting and healing, make us say, alter David, “ Let me fall into the hands of the
Lord, and not into the hands of man.”

11, THese TWO THINGS—SMITING AND HEALING— ARE ALWAYS UNITED IN Gop.
1. In God’s thought. 2. In God’s arrangement. 38. Given time enough, also in God’s
action, Because of the union God’s smitings can always be severe enough to be
eflicient, He can venture to smite harder than any man can ever do, But God’s
wouuds never go beyond his healing power. The most striking illustration is perhaps
ihat set before usin the story of Job, In dealing with him we know not which to
admire most—God’s wonderful smitings, God’s wonderful healings, or the gracious
way in which the smitings and the healings fitted in together.—R. T,


Ver, 24.—The God-fearing man a blessing wherever he is found. Israel is the type
of the God-fearing man, and it 1s prophesied of Israel, as a nation, that when it is
linked in friendly alliance with Eyypt and Assyria, its testimony for the true God,
aud its example of noble living in the fear of God, would make it a blessing in the
iauds, The prophecy was fulfilled in the time of the Hasmonean princes. Compare


ox, xix. 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 829


the promise made to Abraham, as a man of God and man of faith, that “in him, and
in his seed, all nations of the earth should be blessed” (Gen. xxii. 18). Scripture
intimates that the Jews have been the great conservators of the two foundation-truths,
of (1) God’s unity and (2) God’s spirituality, for the whole world, and that they are
yet to be the vreat agents in the conversion of the world to God, as revealid in Jesus
Christ ; and perhaps no race is so widely scattered over the earth, or so efficiently
represented in all lands, as the Jews. They may be a “ blessing” indeed, when the veil
is taken away, and they see in Jesus of Nazareth the world’s Messiah and Saviour.
We, however, for the purpose of this homily, think of the Jew in the world as
representing the godly man set in various circumstances, and exercising a gracious
influence in his circle, whatever it may be. He is a source of blessing, a means of
blessing, and an object of blessing.

I. HE 18 A SOURCE OF BLESSING. This term brings up for consideration his wncon-
scious influence—the blessing which flows from the good man, by virtue of what he 7s,
rather than of what he does. A beautiful picture, a work of perfect art, a gracious
and gentle-mannered person, exert power for good apart from conscious intentiun. And
so the pure are the “ salt of the earth.”

Il. He Is A MEANS OF BLESSING. This term brings to view his conscious influence.
For the good man lies under trust, and wants to be faithful. And the good man, by
virtue of his goodness, is full of concern for the well-being of others; so his life must
be an active charity. Like his Master, he is “ever going about, doing good,” inventing
ways in which he can become a blessing,

III. He 18 AN OBJECT TO BE BLESSED. By God, whose wo-k he is doing, whose
Name he is honouring, and whose service he is commending. God never forgets our
work of faith and labour of love, but ensures that all who are @ blessing are
blessed.—R. T.


Ver. 25.—All nations belonging unto God. This isa singular and even surprising
expression. These uations were idolatrous, and they came under severe Divine judg-
ments, aud yet God claims them as his, and even declares his favour towards them,
using the same terms conceruing Egypt and Assyria as concerning his own people
Israel, and saying, “ Blessed is my people Egypt, and the work of my hands Assyria,
and mine inheritance Israel.” ‘Speaker’s Commentary ’ says, “ The widespread influence
of the Jews over Syria, and the adjacent countries under the Syro-Macedonian kings,
as well as over Egypt under the Ptolemies, may represent an initial stage in the
fulfilment of the prophecy. A second stage commenced with that great day, which
sent devout men back from Jerusalem into Egypt and Libya on one side, into Parthia,
Media, Elam, and Mesopotamia, on the other (Acts ii. 9, 10), to tell how “ God, having
raised up his Son Jesus” (tlhe Prince and the Saviour), had sent him to bless “ the Jews
first, and in them all nations.”

I. As INDIVIDUALS, COMPOSING NATIONS, ALL MEN ARE Gop’s cREATION. So he has
natural rights in them all. “1t is he that hath made us,and not we ourselves ;” then
“ Come; let us worship aud bow down: let us kneel before the Lord our Maker.”

II. AS LOCATED IN PARTICULAB POSITIONS, NATIONS HAVE THE BOUNDS OF THEIR
HABITATIONS APPOINTED BY Gop. See St. Paul’s argument in Acts xvii. 26.

ILL As ENDOWED WITH NATIONAL CHARACTERISTICS, ALL NATIONS ARE CALLED TO
THE SERVICE oF Gop. for nations have special gifts, as truly as individuals; and
wherever there are gifts there must be responsibility. ‘The genius of every uation is
its special ability to witness for and work fur God. It has been well said that Israel,
Greece, and Rome were three countries of God’s election; Israel called to witness for
religion, Greece for art, and Rome for law. But a similar statement might be made
concerning every nation.

IV. As UNDER MORAL TRIAL, ALL NATIONS ARE WITHIN THE SUPERVISION OF GoD.
The true way to regard national history and experiences is this: In them, Gou’s
dealings with individuais find open and public illustration; and so individuals may
learn moral lessons that have personal application to themselves.

V. As NEEDING A REDEEMER, ALL NATIONS SHARE IN THE ONE PROVISION MADE BY
Gop. God loves the world. All have sinned. There is only one Name, but by it all
men everywhere may be saved.—R. T.


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH,


(cH. xx. 1—6,


Oo


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER XX.


Vers. 1—6.—A PropHecy aGAINsT EGypt
anp Eraropia. The Assyrian inscriptions
enable us to date this prophecy with a near
approach to exactness. Ashdod was be-
sieged by an Assyrian army twice in the
reign of Sargon—in his ninth year (B.0. 713)
and in his eleventh year (8.0. 711). On the
former occasion it is probable that the arms
of a general (Tartan) were employed; on
the latter it is nearly certain that Sargon
made the expedition in person. The capture
of Ashdod, here mentioned, is consequently
the first capture. Egypt and Ethiopia were
at the time united under one head, Shabak,
or Shabatok; and the inhabitants of Ashdod
looked to this quarter for deliverance from
the Assyrian power. Shortly after the first
capture, they revolted, deposed the king
whom Sargon had set over them, appointed
another, and then proceeded, in conjunction
with Philistia, Judah, Hdom, and Moab, to
call in the aid of the Egyptians and Ethio-
pians. Isaiah’s mission on this occasion
was to discourage Judea from joining Ash-
dod and her allies in this appeal. He was
instructed to prophesy that Assyria would
shortly inflict a severe defeat on the two
African powers, and carry into captivity
large numbers of both nations. The pro-
phecy seems to have had its accomplishment
about twelve years later, when Sennacherib
defeated the combined forces of Egypt and
Ethiopia at Eltekeh, near Kkron (G. Smith,
‘Eponym Canon,’ p. 133).

Ver. 1—In the year that Tartan came
unto Ashdod; rather, a tartan. The word
was not a proper name, but a title of office,
equivalent to surena among the Parthians,
aud signifying “ commander-in-chief.” The
tartan held the second position in the
empire. Isaiah las been accused of having
confounded together the two sieges of Ash-
dod (Cheyne); but if one was conducted by
the tartan, and the other by Sargon in
person, his words would distinguish as per-
fectly as possible which siege he meant.
When Sargon the King of Assyria sent him,
The present passage furnished almost the
sole trace of the existence of this monarch—
one of the greatest of Assyria’s sovereigns—
until about the middle of the present cen-
tury, when the exploration of the Assyrian
ruing. and the decipherment of the Assyrian


inscriptions, presented him to us in the
most distinct and vivid way, as king, con-
queror, and builder. He was the founder of
the last and greatest of the Assyrian dy-
nasties, tlhe successor of the biblical Shal-
maneser, and the father of Sennacherib.
He reigned from B.o. 722 to B.o. 705. He
was the captor of Samaria; he defeated the
forces of Egypt; he warred on Susiana,
Media, Armenia, Asia Minor. Cyprus; and
he conquered and held in subjection Baby-
lon. He built the great city explored by
M. Botta, near Khorsabad, which is some-
times called “the French Nineveh.” It is
now found that Ptolemy’s ‘Canon’ contains
his name under the form of Arkeanus, and
that Yacut’s ‘Geography’ mentions his
great city under the form of Sarghun. Bat
these facts were unsuspected until the
recent explorations in Mesopotamia, and
Isaiah’s meution of him alone gave him a
place in history. And fought against Ash-
dod, and took it. Ashdod was the strongest
of the Philistine cities, and one of the most
ancient (Josh. xv. 47). Its name is probably
derived from a root meaning “strength.”
We hear of its having stood on one occasion
a siege of twenty-nine years (Herod., ii, 157).
It is now known as Hsdud. When Ashdod
is first mentioned in the Assyrian inscrip-
tions it is tributary to Sargon, having pro-
bably submitted to him in B.o. 720, after the
battle of Raphia. It soon, however, revolts
and reclaims its independence. In B.o. 713
the Assyrians proceed against it; and its
capture is implied by the facts that the
Assyrians depose its king, and install one of
lis brothers as monarch in his room (comp.
2 Kings xxiii. 34).

Ver. 2.—Loose the sackcloth from off thy
loins. Dr. Kay supposes that Isaiah was
wearing sackcloth exceptionally, as during
a time of mourning. Lut it is more probable
that the Hebrew sak represents ti: luir-
cloth (“rough garment,” Zech. xiii. 4),
which, as ascetics, the Hebrew prophets
wore habitually (2 Kings i. 8; Matt. iii. 4),
Walking naked. Probably not actually
“naked,” for captives were not stripped
bare by the Assyrians, but with nothing on
besides his short tunic, as the male captives
are commonly represented in the Assyrian
sculptures,

Ver. 3.—My servant Isaiah. Isaiah shares
this honourable title, “my servant,” with a
select few umong God’s saints—with Abra-
ham (Gen, xxvi. 2), Moses (Numb sii. 7),
Caleb (Numb, xiv. 2+), Job (Job i. 8; xiii.
7,8), Eliakim (ch xxii. 20), and Zerubbabel
(Hag. ii. 23). It is a great acknowledgment
for the Creator to make to the creature that


CH. xx. 1—6.]


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


331


—————————— eee


he really does him service. Three years.
Probably from 8.0. 713 to B.c. 711, or during
the whole of the time that Philistia, Edom,
Moab, and Judah were making representa-
tions to the Egyptians and Ethiopians, and
endeavouring to obtain their aid (see G.
Smith, ‘Eponym Canon,’ p. 130). It has
been propused, by an arbitrary emendation,
to cut down the time to “three days;” but
a three days’ sign of the kind could not
have been expected to have any important
effect. The suppos:d “impropriety” of
Isaiah’s having “ gone naked and barefoot”
for three years arises from a misconception
of the word “naked.” which is not to be
taken literally (see the comment on ver. 2).
The costume adopted would be extraor-
dinary, especially in one of Isaiah’s rank
and position; but would not be in any degree
“improper” It would be simply that of
working men during the greater part of the
day (see Exod. xxii. 2, 27).

Ver. 4.—So shall the King of Assyria lead
away the Egyptians prisoners, and the
Ethiopians captives. In Sennacherib’s
annals for the year B.c. 701, twelve years
after this prophecy was given, we find the
following passage: “The kings of Egypt,
and the archers, chariots, aud horsemen of
the King of Meroe, a force without number,
gathered and came to the aid of Ekron, In
the neighbourhood of Hltekeh their ranks
were arrayed before me, and they urged on
their soldiers. In the service of Asshur, my
lord, I fought with them, and I accomplished


their overthrow. The charioteers and sons
of the kings of Egypt, and the charioteers of
the King of Meroe, alive in the midst of the
battle,my hand captured” (G. Smith ‘ Eponym
Canon,’ pp. 133, 134), Young and old. The
intermixture of young and old, of full-grown
males with women leading children by the
hand or carrying them upon the shoulder,
in the Assyrian sculptures, strikes us even
on the most cursory inspection of them.
Naked and barefoot. Assyrian captives are
ordinarily represented “barefoot.” Most
commonly they wear a single tunic, reaching
from the neck to the knees, or sometimes to
the ankles, and girt about the waist with a
girdle. It is probable that Egyptian and
Kithiopian prisoners would be even more
scantily clad, since the ordinary Egyptian
tunic began at the waist and ended con-
siderably above the knee.

Ver. 5.—They shall be afraid and ashamed.
Those who have resorted to Egypt and
Ethiopia for aid shall be “ashamed” of
their folly in doing so, and “afraid” of its
consequences (see the last clause of ver. 6).

Ver. 6.—The inhabitant of this isle; rather,
of this coast (Knobel, Hitzig, Kay); te. of
Palestine generally, which was a mere strip
of coast compared with Kgypt and Ethiopia.
Sargon spcaks of all the four powers who
at this time “sought to Egypt,’ as “dwell-
ing beside the sea” (G. Smith, ‘ Eponym
Canon,’ p. 139). Such is our expectation ;
rather, so hath it gone with our expectation ;
Le. with Egypt and Ethiopia.


HOMILETICS,


Vers. 1—4.— Foolish trust rebuked by a strange sign. Few things are so difficult
as to bring men to rely wholly and solely upon God. The circumstances of the time
were these. Humanly speaking, Judea lay absolutely at the mercy of Assyria, There
was no existing power or combination of powers that could successiully contend at the
time against the vast bodies of well-armed and well-disciplined soliiers which a king of
Assyria could bring into the field. Nothing could prolong Jewish indep-ndence for
more than a few years but some miraculous interposition of God on behalt of the Jewish
people, But for God to interpose miraculously, it was necessary that implicit trust
should be placed in him (Mark vi. 5; ix. 23, etc.), The Jews, however, could not bring
themselves to believe that they had no help but Jehovah. They thought Egypt, or
Egypt and Ethiopia combined, might well prove a match for Assyria, and were bent on
placing themselves under the protection of the combined powers. The lesson of the
destruction of the kingdom of Israel, which had trusted in Egypt (2 Kings xvii. 4), and
then been destroyed by Assyria, was lost on them. In connection with Ashdod, they
had actually sent ambassadors to Egypt to intreat assistance (ch. xxx. 1—4), Then it
was that Isaiah received the special mission which was to warn his countrymen of the
utter folly of trusting to human aid. For three ) ears he was to wear the scant clothing
that Assyrian captives ordinarily wore, announcing that he did so in token that ere
long the warriors of Egypt and Ethiopia would be seen thus clad, on their way frow
Egypt to captivity at Nineveh. ‘Ihe unusual attire of the prophet could not but create
a great sensation. It probably made a considerable impression on Hezekiah and his
counsellors. It was not forgotten; and if it did not at once cause the negotiations with
Exy pt to be broken off, it produced the result that, when Isaiah’s prediction was lusfilled


332 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. xx. 1—6.


after the battle of Eltekeb, the Jewish monarch and people did in their trouble turn to
God. At the crisis of his danger, Hezekiah made appeal to the Almighty (ch. xxxvii.
4); and his appeal was followed by that destruction of the Assyrian host (ch. xxxvii
36) which caused the Assyrians to respect and fear the Jews thenceforward, and to allow
them to retain their independence. ‘hus the life of the Jewish monarchy was extended
for above a century.


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS,


Vers. 1—6.— The prophet asa sign. I, THE HISTORICAL CIRCUMSTANCES. The {Illusion
of Egyptian unity had passed away again. ‘The country was broken up under the
tule of a number of petty kings, of whom Shabak, or So, or Seve (2 Kings xvii. 4),
was one. Negotiations seem to have been begun between Judah and Egypt, probably
as a resource against the Assyrian. Ashdod was laid siege to by the Assyrians about
s.c. 718—711, and the inhabitants carried off captives. And Judah’s name appears
in the Assyrian inscriptions among the nations guilty of treason to Assyria. Isaiah,
both as the prophet and the politician, is seen to be opposed to the Egyptian alliance.
Aud his policy scems to have been justified by the event, for Judah was subsequently
invaded and subdued. When the tartan, or Assyrian general, came to Ashdod, sent by
King Sargon, the spirit of lsaiah was stirred within him.

Il. THE SYMBOLIO ACT OF THE PROPHET. He takes his distinctive dress of hair-
cloth from his loins, and is “ bare,” in that sense in which the Roman soldier was said
to be nudus without his armour. So the Prophet Micah says he will wail and howl,
and go stripped and naked, because of the desolation of the land. The reader will be
reminded of George Fox at Lichfield, and of Solomon Eagle preaching re;entance to
the people amidst the horrors of the Plague of Loudon (1665), of which scene there was
an affecting jicture by Poole in the Royal Academy winter exhibition of 1884. The
act is: 1. Hapressive of strony feeling ; suited to Oriental effusiveness, though not to
our colder habits. The mind needs, in moments of strong feeling, to see itseif reflected
in some outward form. We all acknowledge this in connection with the great epochs
of life—the funeral, the wedding. he great heart of the prophet throbbing in sympathy
with his nation, must signify his grief at its condition by some change in his attire,
And then: 2. It isa means of impressing others. We speak, not only by our words,
but by our appearance, our apparel, our manners. Though we are not called upon in
our time to adopt a peculiar dress, that dress should betoken a serious mind. Incon-
spicuousness may serve as good an end as conspicuousness in this matter. Let us at
least, without straining a point, learn this lesson, that life should be significant. It
should mean something; not be neutral, utterly without emphasis; or dubious to the
eye and ear, like heathen oracles and heathen symbuls. Without affectation and folly,
we can find a way to make others feel tliat we feel and think and have a purpose in
existence. But this way of self-manifestation must be adapted to our own constitution,
to the taste of others, to the condition of our times.

Jl. THE APPLICATION OF THE SYMBOLISM. Egypt and Ethiopia will fall into
humiliation and captivity. There will be every sign of disgrace. And Judah will see
the fallacy of having put her trust in Eyyptian alliances. It isa deeply painful picture
of a nation’s shame that rises before us in these verses. Shameless sins bring shameful
punishment. “Conquest and captivity are perhaps the bitterest cup that vengeance
can put into the hands of a sinful people.” This general lesson, then, may be drawn: The
effect not only points to the cause, but the nature of the effect to the nature of the
cause. “Of all the curses which can possibly befall a sinner, there is none comparable
to this, that he should add iniquity to iniquity, and sin to sin, which the shameless
person cannot but do, till he falis by it too; his recovery, while under that character,
being utterly impossible. For where there is no place for shame, there can be none
for repentance. God of his infinite goodness work better minds in us!” (South).—J.


Vers. 1—3.— Unpleasant service. It may always remain uncertain whether Isaiah
went stripped and barefoot for three whole years or for a shorter period. ‘I'wo things,
1owever, are quite certain, viz. that for sume time, longer or shorter, this servant of


Nek


oH. xx. 1—6.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 833
ca


Jehovah (ver. 3) went about Jerusalem in that humiliating condition, and that he
would have unhesitatingly done this ald the time if God had required him to do so.
Many suggestions have been made on the subject, but it does not occur to any one to
entertain the idea that Isaiah would decline to render such an unpleasant service, how-
ever long the period of service might be.

I, Toat Gop SOMETIMES DEMANDS OF US SERVICE WHICH WE FIND [T HARD TO
RENDER. It may be: 1. Zo incur the hostility of those whose honour and affection
we would fain enjoy. Isaiah had to pronounce avainst an alliance with Egypt and
Ethiopia, thus stirring up the active dislike of those politicians who advised that
course. We may often have to take a course which is regarded and denounced as
unpatriotic or disloyal. 2. To endure privation as the consequence of fidelity. Isaiah,
in the fulfilment of his prophetic mission, went half-clad throngh all changes of
temperature. In order to speak the true and faithful word which God has put into our
mind, or to take the right course which he opens before us, we may have to do that
whieh will lessen our resources and lead to straitened means and even to serious
embarrassment. 38. To expose ourselves to the derision of the scvptic or the scoffing.
Doubtless the partisans of Kvypt sneered and the idle multitude mocked as the
unclothed prophet passed by. It is hard to have to utter that truth or to identify
ourselves with that course which entails the bitter raillery of the opponent and the
heartless jest of the ribald crowd. But “my servant Isaiah walked uaked and bare-
foot’ as long as he was charged to do so. And we conclude—

II. THAT WE CANNOT HESITATE TO RENDER INSTANT AND FULL COMPLIANCE. For:
1. God’s demand is absolute and authoritative. If the filial son hastens to do the
behest of his father, the loyal subject that of his king, the brave soldier that of his
commander, however uninviting or even perilous it may be, how much more shall we
render instant and hearty obedience to the “Do this” of our heavenly Father, of our
Divine Redeemer. 2. God asks us to do that which is small and slight indeed in
com arison with the service which, in Jesus Christ, he has rendered us. What are
the privations, the insults, the humiliations we may be summoned to endure for Christ
when compared with the poverty and the shame and the surrow to which he stooped
for us? 3. Our unpleasant work is prior, and perhaps preparatory, to nobler and
more congenial service further on. Il aithful in the “few things” now and here, we
shall have rule given us over “ many things” in the coming years, and still more truly
in the beiter land.—C.


Vers. 5, 6.—The insufficiency of the stronger. Assyria attacked Ashdod with designs
on Judea. Judza rested on Egypt and Ethiopia; but these “ powers” would be utterly
defeated by Assyria, and their citizens led away into captivity with every circumstance
of humiliation and shame. In that hour of fear and humiliation (ver. 5) the inhabi-
tants of Judea would be constrained to argue from the insufficiency of Evypt and
Ethiopia to their own helplessness, If sich strong nations as these are ignominiously
overthrown, “‘ how shall we escape”? We conclude—

I. THAT TIMES OF SEVERE TRIAL AWAIT US ALL. Not only collectively but indi-
vidually considered. As separate, individual souls we must anticipate that the future
has in store for us not only the pleasant, the gratifying, the successful, but also the
unpleasant, the painful,even the overwhelming. S me of the more crushing sorrows it
may be our fortune to escape, but every one of us will have his share. Sickness which
threatens to be fatal; bitier disappointment which appears to throw the whole future
path into darkest shadow; bereavement which takes away the very light of our eyes;
the sudden loss which strips the tree of branch as well as bloom; the financial or (what
is a thousand times worse) the moral failure of beloved friend or near relation; the last
illness unexpectedly arriving and extinguishing many a cherished purpose; the power-
ful temptation inviting and almost constraining to folly, or vice, or crime ;—one or more
of these things, or things as bad as these, will certainly overtake us all.

Il. THAT THOSE WHO ARE STRONGER THAN WE ARE 80METIMES FOUND TO BREAK
BENEATH THE BLOW. We hear or read of men who in mental capacity, in educational
advantages, in worldly endowments, or in the number of their fricnds, are suj-erior to
ourselves, but who cannot stand the strain of their trial, hither their bealth breaks
down, or their sanity seriously suffers, or their faith fails, or their courage and evergy


834 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [vn. xx. 1—6.


—


succumb, or their moral character is lost, and consequently their reputation is shattered,
never to he restored.

II]. THaT IF THESE STRONGER SOULS ARE BEATEN, WE MUST BE IN DANGER OF DEFEAT.
If Egypt and Ethiopia are led into captivity, how shall Juda be delivered —* how
shall we escape”? The storm in which such noble vessels founder will wreck our
fragile bark. On any ordinary human calculations we cannot hope to be victorious
where spirits so much stronger and wiser than we are have been crushed. But we
need not yield to despondency; if we are the disciples and followers of Jesus Christ,
and if, therefore, “the Lord is on our side,” we may find relief and rest in the
thought—

IV. THAT WE HAVE A 8AFE REFUGE IN AN ALMIGHTY Saviour. So long as Juda
was faithful to Jehovah, she had no need to be afraid of Assyria, and she covld afford
to witness the overthrow of the Egyptian and Ethiopian armies. So long as we are
loyal to our Divine Lord we may go fearlessly forward into the future. If the good
Shepherd—“ the great Shepherd of the sheep”—be our Guardian, we will “fear no
evil,” though we walk through the valley of the shadow of death, though the darkest
shadows shut us round.—C,


Vers. 2, 3.— Divine revelation in actions as well as words. The language is some-
what uncertain, but it seems better to understand that, for three years, Isaiah was seen
going to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, having the dress and appearance
of one who was already a prisoner of war, ready to be led into an ignominious exile.
Isaiah wore no upper or outer garment, and no sandals, so that, when his dress was
compared with that of others, he might be said to go naked; but “ naked” in Scripture
usually means “with only under-garments on.” The three years were, perhaps,
designed to represent three incursions of the Assyrians. The general topic suggested
is the variety of forms which Divine revelations may take; the diversity of aencies
which Divine revelation may employ. All modes by which man may be reached and
influenced God may take up and use for conveying his mind and will.

I, REVELATION IN NATURE. We often speak of a voice in nature. That voice
God may employ. The beautiful, the sublime, the gentle, affect us, and bring to us
thoughts of (:od’s goodness, wisdom, and power. This kind of revelation St. Paul
recognizes, pleading thus at Lystra (Acts xiv. 17), “ Nevertheless he left net himself
without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons,
filling our hearts with food and gladness ;” and writing thus to the Romans (Rom. i. 20),
“For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead.” What
is called natural relivion is that common knowledge of God, and of our duty to God,
which comes through nature alone; and God has so made us kin with nature, has so
set us in relation with an external world, that we can receive moral impressions
through it.

Il. REVELATION IN INCIDENTS. Events of personal life and of public history
convey God’s mind to us. And therefore so much of our Bible is but a treasured
record of facts and incidents. Our Lord’s life on the earth was full of incidents, and
we find in these the truths which God purposed, by Christ, to teach us. We are
constantly receiving fresh revelations, new to us individually, though not new to the
world, through the circumstances of public or of private life. We often think of this
as God’s voice in providence.

II. Reve.ation in minps. Or in those parts of man that are distinct from the
senses. What we think of as the spiritual nature of man, including his conscience.
God’s witness in this part of our being is argued by St. Paul, when, writing of the
heathen, to whom a book revelation has not been given, he says (Rom. ii. 15), “ Which
show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness,
and their thoughts the mean while accusing or else excusing one another.” We must
guard against the notion that God has put all his will into a book, and has now no
direct access to our souls. What is true is that we can test all direct revelations by
their harmony with the revelation that is written.

1V. REVELATION IN syMBoLs. Since symbols do convey ideas to men, God may
use them. Illustrate by vision of divided pieces to Abraham; pillar of cloud te


oH. xx. 1—6.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 835


Israel; angel with drawn sword to David; fire-flash to Israel on Carmel, ete. And,
to take symbols of another character, the prophets acted thinys before the people,
making impressions without employing words—as Isaiah here; as Zedekiah’s horus
(1 Kings xxii. 11); Jeremiah’s yokes (xxvii. 2); Ezckiel’s lying on his side (iv. 4) ;
and Agabus’ binding himself with his girdle (Acts xxi. 11).

V. REVELATION IN worps. The more ordinary method of communication between
man and man. This opens up the opportunity of showing (1) the reasonableness and
(2) the practical efficiency of a book revelation, and of commending that collection
of revelations which we call Holy Scripture. Howsoever God may be pleased to
speak to us, our duty is to heed, listening with the cherished purpose that we will
carry out the Divine will in all holy and loving obedience.—k. T,


Ver. 5.—The bitter experience of all who trust in man. The sin of Judah, in its
latter days, was its reliance cn Egypt for help rather than on God. In alarm at the
advance of Assyria, the natural alliance was with Egypt; but alliance with any
world-power was unworthy of a nation whose history had been so full of Divine
deliverings and defendings as that of the Jews. And Egypt could not help. It was
a broken reed. A type of all merely human helpers; for “cursed is the man that
trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm, and whose heart departeth from the Lord.”
Hosea represents Israel as finding out how vain is the help of man, and turning to God
with this penitential promise, “ Asshur shall not save us; we will not ride upon horses:
neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, Ye are our gods.” The
following three points open up lines of thought and illustration, and should be
sufficiently suggestive without detailed treatment.

I. WE CANNOT TRUST MAN, FOR WE CANNOT BE SURE OF HIS GOOD WILL. These
two dangers are ever before us: 1. The man who seems willing to serve us may be
deceiving us, and really serving his own ends, setting his interests before ours. 2. And
if a man begins sincerely to serve us, we have no security that his good will is
maintained, and presently he may take advantaze of us. We cannot read hearts.
And hearts do not always keep steadfast. So “ put not your trust in princes, nor in the
sons of men, in whom there is no help.”

Il. WE CANNOT TRUST MAN, FOR WE CANNOT BE SURE THAT HIS ABILITY MATCHES
nis wILy. So often we find in life that men who could, will not help us, and men
who would, cannot. With this sort of feeling in his mind the sufferer came to the
“ Man Christ Jesus,” saying, “If thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.”

III. WE CAN NEVER RECKON ON MAN IF HE IS AGAINST Gop. Such a man can
never be any help to us, ‘The Jews forsook God to seek help from a godless nation,
and it was bound to prove a bitter and humiliating experience. Man may be, and often
is, God’s agent for helping us; but then our trusting is in God who sends, and not in
the man who may be sent to do his bidding.—R. T.


Ver. 6.—A grave question with many applications. “How shall we escape?”
Egypt being reduced, no defence remained for Israel against the overwhelming power
of Assyria. ‘“ ‘his was the cry of despair at Jerusalem. But in such despair was her
only hope. The destruction of Egypt and Ethiopia by the arms of Sennacherib
weaned her from looking any longer to earthly powers for help, and raised her eyes
to heaven ” (Bishop Wordsworth). The expression, or exclamation, may be—

I. APPLIED TO PERSONAL TROUBLES. Oftentimes in life we are brought to
extremities; we know not what to do, nor which way to take. In our difficulties,
hedged in on every side, we cry out, “ How shall we escape?” The Israelites cried
thus when the Red Sea rolled before them, a wall of mountains barred the path,
and an enraged foe hurried upon them from behind, The secret of peace and
deliverance is, ‘Trust in the Lord, who maketh ways in the seas, and paths in the
creat waters.”

Il. APPLIED TO THE POWER OF SIN. When it has become the enslavement of
fixed habit. Compare St. Paul’s exclamation, ‘‘O wretched man that I am! who shall
deliver me from the body of this death?” And see his triumphant answer, “I thank
God through Jesus Christ our Lord.”

UL AprrLizD TO THE PENALTIES OF sINNING.: The “fearful looking for of


336


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cn. xx1. 1—1%.


a ——————————


judgment and fiery indignation, which shall consume the adversaries.” The utter
despair of escape is pictured in Scripture by the people crying to the very rocks to
cover ana hide them from the wrath of God and of the Lamb.


IV. APPLIED TO OUR PRESENT OPPORTUNITIES OF SALVATION.


The writer of the


Epistle to the Hebrews finds expression for this (ii. 2, 3): “If the word spoken by
angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recom-
pense of reward; how shall we escape, if we neclect so great salvation ?” This grave
question—this great cry—may be the cry of hopeful self-humiliation and distrust ;
and then to it God will be sure to respond. But it may be the cry of hopeless despair,
the conviction that the day of erace is passed, that it is “too late;” and then God’s
response must be holding aloof, and letting the overwhelming judgments come, if even
thus at last the true humiliations may be wrought.—R. T.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER XXI.


Vers. 1—10.—Tue Burpen or tHE Ds-
SERT OF THE Sea. This is a short and
somewhat vague, but highly poetic, “ bur-
den of Babylon” It is probably an earlier
prophecy than ch. xiii. and xiv., and perhaps
the first revelation made to Isaiah with
respect to the fall of the great Clialijean
eapitil. It exhibits no consciousness of the
fact that Babylon is Judak’s predestined
destroyer, and is expressive rather of sym-
pathy (vers. 3, 4) than of triumph, Among
recent critics, some suppose it to refer to
Sargon’s capture of the city in B.o. 710;
but the objection to this view, from the
entire absence of all reference to Assyria as
the conquering power, and the mention of
“Elam” and “Media” in her place, is
absolutely fatal to it. There can be no
reasonable doubt that the same siege is
intended as in ch. xiii., where also Media is
mentioned (ver. 17); and there are no real
grounds for questioning that the event of
which tbe prophet is made cognizant is
that siege and capture of Babylon by Cyrus
the Great whieh destroyed the Babylonian
empire.

Ver. 1—The desert of the sea. The
Isaianic authorship of this title is doubtful,
since “the desert of the sea” is an expres-
sion elsewhere wholly unkuown to biblical
writers. Some regard “the sea” as the Eu-
phrates, in which case “the desert of the sea”
may be the waste tract west of the Euphrates,
extending thence to the eastern borders of
Palestine. As whirlwinds in the south
pass through; rather, as wh/rlwinds in
the south country, sweeping along. The
“south country” is that immediately to the
south of Judwa. Its liability to whirlwinds
is noticed in Zech. ix. 14 and in Job


xxxvii. 9 (compare Major Palmer’s ‘ Sinai,’
p. 33). It cometh. What cometh? Dr.
Kay says, “ God’s visitation; ” Rosenmiiller,
“a numerous army.” But is it not rather
the “grievous vision” of the next verse?
From the desert. The great desert bound-
ing Palestine on the east—a truly “terrible
land.” Across this, as coming trom Baby-
lonia to Palestine, seemed to rush the vision
which it was given to the prophet to see.
Ver. 2,—A grievous vision; literally, a
hard vision; not, however, “hard of inter-
pretation” (Kay), but rather “hard to be
borne,” “grievous,” “calamitous.” The
treacherous dealer dealeth treacherously ;
rather, perhaps, the robber robs (Knobel);
or, the violent man uses violence (Rosen-
miiller). The idea of faithlessness passes
out of the Hebrew bégéd occasionally, and
is unsuitable here, more especially if it is
the army of Cyrus that is intended. Go up,
0 Elam. The discovery that Cyrus, at the
time of his conquest of Babylon, bore the
title of “King of Ansan,” not “King of
Persia,” coupled with the probability that
“ Ansan” was a part of Klam, lends a pecu-
liar interest to these words. Isaiah could
not describe Cyrus as “King of Persia,”
and at the same time be intelligible to his
contemporaries, since Persia was a country
utterly unknown to them. In using the
term “ Elam” instead, he uses that of a
country known to the Hebrews (Gen.
xiv. 1), adjoining Persia, and, at the time of
his expedition against Babylon, subject to
Cyrus. Besiege, 0 Media. Having given
“lam” the first place, the prophet assigns
to Media the second. Eleven years before
he attacked Babylon, Cyrus had made war
upon Astyages (Istuvegu), King of the
Medes, had captured him, and become king
of the nation, with scarcely any opposition
(see the ‘Cylinder of Nabonidus’). Hence
the Medes would naturally form an impor-
tant portion of the force which he led
against Babylon. All the sighing thereof
have I made to ceage. The “ sighing” caused


on. xx1. 1—17.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH,


by Babylon to the nations, to the captives,
and to the kings whose prison-doors were
kept closed (ch. xiv. 17), God has in his
counsels determined to bring to an end.

Ver. 3.—Therefore are my loins filled
with pain, etc. (comp. above, ch. xv. 5;
xvi. 9—11), The prophet is horrorstruck at
the vision shown him—at the devastation,
the ruin, the carnage (ch. xiii. 18). He
does not stop to consider how well deserved
the punishment is; he does not, perhaps, as
yet know how that, in emiting Babylon, God
will be specially avenging tle sufierings of
his own nation (see the introductory para-
graph). I was bowed down at the hearing,
ete.; rather, J am sougonized that I cannot
hear; I am 20 terrified that I cannot see.

Ver. 4.—IMy heart panted; rather, my
heart trembleth, or flutiereth. The night of
my pleasure; t.e. “the night, wherein, I am
wont to enjoy peacelul and pleasant slum-
bers.”

Ver. 5.—Prepare the table, etc. With
lyrical abruptuess, the prophet turns from
his own feelings to draw a picture of Ba-
bylon at the time when she is attacked.
He uses histurica] infinitives, the most
lively form of narrative. Translate, They
deck the table, set the watch, eat, drink ;
i.e. having decked the table, they commit
the task of watching to a few, and then
give themselves up to feasting and revelling,
as if there were no dangcr. It is impossible
not to think of Belshazzu’s feast, and the
descriptions of the Greek historians (Herod.,
i. 191; Xen., ‘Cyrop.,’ vii. 23), which mark
at any rate the strength of the tradition
that, when Babylon was taken, its inhabi-
tants were engaged in revelry. Arise, ye
princes, and anoint the shield. In the
midst of the feast there enters to the
revellers one from the outside, with these
words, “ Rise, quit the banquet; get your
soields; anoint them; arm yourselves.”
That shields were greased witli fat or oi]
before being used in battie appears from
Virg., ‘ Hneid,’ vii. 625, and other places.
It was thought that the enemy’s weapons
would more readily glance off an oiled sur-
face.

Ver. 6.—Go, set 2 watchman. The event
is not to be immediate, it is to be wateled
for; and Isaiah is not to watch himself, but
to set the watchman. Morcover, the watch-
man waits long before he secs anything
(ver. 8). These unusual features of the
narrative seem to mark @ remote, not a near,
accomplishment of the prophecy.

Ver, 7.—And he saw... he hearkened;
rather, he shall sce... he shall hearken
(Kay). He is to wait and watch until he
sees a certain sight; then he is to listen
attentively, and he will hear the crash of
the falling city. A chariot with a couple


IBAIAH.


337


of horsemen; rather, @ troop of horsemen
riding two and two. This is exactly how a
cavalry force was ordinarily represented by
the Assyrians. Chariots are not intended
either here or in ver. 9. They were not
employed by the Persians until a late
period of their history (see ‘ Ancient Mo-
narcliies,’ vol. iv. pp. 113, 122). A chariot
of asses, and a chariot of camels; rather,
men mounted on asses and on camels. It is
well known that both animals were em-
ployed by the Persians in their expeditions
to carry the baggage (Herod., i. 80; iv.
129; Xen., ‘Cyrop., vii. 1, ete.). But
neither animal was ever attached to a
chariot.

Ver. 8.—And he cried, A lion; rather, he
erted as a lion; i.e. with a loud deep voice
(comp. Rev. x. 3). The watchman, after long
waiting, becomes impatient, and can contain
himself no longer. He mak:s complaint of
his long vain watch. My lord; rather, O
Lord. ‘The watchman addresses his com-
plaint to Jehovah.

Ver. 9.—And, behold, here cometh, ete.
Our translators make the words those of
the watchman. But they are better taken
as the prophet’s statement of a fact, “ And
behold, just tnen there cometh a troop of
men, riding two and two”—the sign for
which he was to watch (ver. 7), or rather
the first part of it. We must suppose tle
rest of the sign to follow, and the watchman
then to listen awhile attentively. Suddenly
he hears the sound of a sacked town, and
he exclaims, Babylon is fallen, is fallen,
etc. All the graven images of her gods he
hath broken unto the ground. Recent docu-
ments, belonging to the time of Cyrus, and
treating of his capture of Babylon, show
that this expression is not to be understood
literally. Cyrus was not an iconoclast; he
did not break into pieces, or in any way
destroy or insult the Babylonian idols. On
the contrary, he maintained them in then
several shrines, or restor.d them where
they had been displaced ; he professed him-
self a worshipper of the chief Babylonian
gods—Bel, Nebo, and Merodach—he re-
paired the temple of Merodach; he prayed
to Bel und Nebo to lengthen his days; he
caused his son, Cambyses, to take part in
the great religious ceremony wherewith tlie
Babylonians opened the new year. Thus
his conquest of Babylon did not bring
upon its gods a pliysical, but only a moral,
destruction. The Persian victory discredited
and degraded them. It proclaimed te
West: rn Asia that the idolatrous system so
long prevalent in the r gion between Mount
Zagros and the Mvditerranean ws no
longer in the ascendant, but lay ui the
mercy of another quite different religiva,
which condescended to accord it toleration.

Zz


338


Such was the permanent result. No doubt
tlere was also, in the sack of the city,
much damage done to many of the idols by
a greedy soldicry, who may have carried off
many images of gold or silver, and broken
up others that were not portable, and
stripped off the plates of precious metal
from the idols of “brass, and iron, and
wood, and stone” (Dan. v. 6).

Ver. 10.—O my threshing, and the corn
of my floor. These are the words of the
prophet to Israel. Ler chastisements have
long been “threshing” Israel, separating
the grain from the chaff, and will do so still
more as time goes on. The propliet’s mes-
suge is for the comfort of those who shall
have gone througi the process and become
the true “children of the thresling-floor”
—pure wheat, fit to be gathered into the
garner of God (Matt. iii. 12).

Vers. 11, 12.—Tue Burpgen or Doumag.
This short “burden” is probably to be
understood as uttered with reference to
Edom, which the prophet prefers to call
“Dumah,” i.e. “silence,” in reference to
the desolation which he sees to be coming
upon the country. Such a play upon words
is very usual in the East. Isaiah has
already given an instance of it in the name
under which he has designated Heliopolis
(ch. xix. 18).


Ver. 11.—Dumah. There were at least
two towns of this name (‘ Dict. of the Bible,’
vol. i. pp. 459, 460); but neither of them is
in the district of Seir. It is best, therefore,
to regard “ Dumah” here as representing
Edom, or Idumea (so the LXX., Jarchi,
Rosenmiiller, Kay, Cheyne, and others).
He calleth to me; rather, one calleth to me ;
i.e. I seem to hear a call from Mount Seir,
as of one making inquiry of me. There is
no need to suppose that the inqniry was
actually made. Mount Scir, or the district
south-suuth-east of the Dead Sea, was the
heart of the Idumean country, which thence
extended vaguely eastward und westward.
What of the night? ¢e. what hour, or,
rather, perhaps, what watch of the night is
it? May we consider that “the night is far
spent, and the day at hand”? Edom had
offended Sargon by joining with Ashdod
(G. Smith, * KEponym Canon,’ p. 130), and
was probably at this time oppressed by
Sargon in consequence.

Ver. 12.—The morning cometh, and also
the night. Av oracular reply, but pro-
bably meaning (1) that a brighter time
would soon dawn upon the Edomite people ;
and (2) that this brighter time would be
followed by a return of misery and affliction.
We may (conjecturally) understand the
“morning” of the earlier part of Senna-


THE BOOK OF 'THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xxt 1—17.


cherib’s reign, when Edom was at peace
with Assyria, merely paying a moderate
tribute (G. Smith, ‘ Eponym Canon,’ p. 132),
and the “night” of the later period in the
sume king’s reign, when (about B.o. 694—
690) the country suffered from another
Assyrian invasion, in which the king’s
treasures and his gods were carried off to
Nineveh (ibid. p. 137). If ye will inquire,
inquire ye; return, come. Some take this
very literally, as meaning, “If you would
inquire further into the meaning of this
answer, do so; return to me; come again.”
But this implies that tle Kdomites bad sent
an actual messenger to make the inquiry
of ver. 5, which is improbable. Others
understand a reproach to Edom: “If ye
will have recourse to God in the time of
trouble, do so; but then do more—return
to him altogether; come, and be one with
Judah.”

Vers. 13—17.—Tue Burven oF ARABIA.
Edom will have companions in misfortune
among the Arab tribes upon her borders,
Dedan, Tema, and Kedar. War will enter
their territory, derange their commerce
(ver. 13), cause flight and privation (vers. 14,
15), and within a year greatly diminish the
number of their fighting men (vers. 16, 17).
The date of the prophecy is uncertain, but
can scarcely be earlier than B.o. 715, when
Sargon made an expedition into Arabia (G.
Smith, ‘Eponym Canon,’ p. 66).

Ver. 13.—The burden upon Arabia;
rather, in Arabia. The phrase is varied
from its usual form, probably because it is
not Arabia generally, but only certain of
the more northern tribes, on whom calamity
is about to fall. In the forest... shall ye
lodge. The word used is commonly trans-
lated “ forest ;” but Arabia has no forests,
and the meaning here must be “ brush-
wood.” Thorny bushes and shrubs are
common in all partsof Arabia. The general
meaning is that the caravans will have to
leave the beaten track, and obtain such
shelter and concealment as the scanty brush-
wood of the desert could afford. Ye travel-
ling companies of Dedanim. The Dedanim,
or Dedanites, were among the chief traders
of the Arabian peninsula. They had com-
mercial dealings with Tyre, which they
supplied with ivory, ebony, and “ precious
clothes for chariots” (Ezek. xxvii. 15, 20).
This trade they carried on by means of
large caravans—the “ travelling companies ”
of the present passage. ‘They are thought
to have had their chief settlements on the
shores of the Persian Gulf, where the island
of Dadan may be an echo of their name.

Ver. 14.—The inhabitants of the land of
Tema brought water; rather, bring ye water,


cH. xxI. 1—17.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


339


O inhabitants. Tema is reasonably iden-
tified with the modern Taimd, a village of
the Hauran, on the caravan route between
Palmyra and Petra. Its inhabitants are
exhorted to bring water to the thirsty
Dedanites, as they pass along this route
with their “travelling companies.” (For
other mentions of Tema, which must not be
confounded with Teman, see Job vi. 19 and
Jer. xxv. 23.) They prevented with their
bread him that fied. Several commen-
tators take this clause as imperative, like
the last, and render, “ With his bread meet
the fugitive;” but the existing Hebrew
text seems to require the rendering of the
Authorized Version. Dr. Kay understands
the prophet to mean that the men of Tema
did not need exhortation; already of their
own accord had they given of their bread
to the fugitive Dedanites.

Ver. 15.—For they fled; rather, they have
fled. The Dedanites have been attacked
with sword and bow, and have fled from


Assyria, but no trace of the war has been
found on the Assyrian monuments.

Ver. 16.—Within a year, according to
the years of an hireling (see tlie comment
on ch. xvi. 14). All the glory of Kedar
shall fail. “Kedar” is a name of greater
note than either Dedan or Tema. It seems
to be used here as inclusive of Dedan, per-
haps as a designation of the northern
Arabians generally. The people of Kedar,
like those of Dedan, carried on trade with
Tyre (Ezek. xxvii. 21). Th y dwelt partly
in tents (Ps. exx. 5; Jer. xlix. 29), partly
in villages (ch. xlii. 11), and were rich in
flocks and herds and in camels. Though
not mentioned in the inscriptions of Sargon,
Sennacherib, or Esarhaddon, the contem-
poraries of Isaiah, they hold a prominent
place in those of Esarhaddon’s son and suc-
cessor, Asshurbanipal, with whom they
carried on a war of some considerable dura-
tion in conjunction with the Nabatheaus
(G. Sinith, ‘ History of Asshur-bani-pal,’ pp.


their assailants. Probably the enemy was | 261—290),


HOMILETICS.


Vers. 3, 4.—The sadness of a@ nation’s overthrow. A nation is God’s creation, no
less than an individual And it is a far more elaborate work. What forethought,
what design, what manifold wisdom, must not have been required for the planning out
of each pevple’s national character, for the partitioning out to them of their special
gifts and aptitudes, for the apportionment to each of its place in history, for the con-
duct of each through the many centuries of its existence! It is a sad thing to be
witness of a nation’s demise. Very deeply does Isaiah feel its sadness. His “ loins
are filled with pain; ” the pangs that take hold of him are “as the pangs of a womar
that travaileth ;” he is “‘so azonized that he cannot hear,” “so terrified that he cannot
look” (ver. 3). “ His heart flutters,” like a frightened bird; terror overwiielms him; he
cannot sleep for thinking of the dread calamity ; “‘ the night of his pleasure is turned
into fear.” The sadness of such a calamity is twofold. It consists (1) in the fact;
(2) in the circumstances.

], THE SADNESS OF THE FACT. We mourn an individual gone from us—how much
more a nation! What a blank is created! What arts and industries are not destroyed
or checked! What possibilities of future achievement are not cut off! Again, an
individual is only removed; he still exists, only in another place. But a nation is
annihilated. It has but one life. There is “no healing of its bruise” (Nah. iii. 19),
no transference of it to another sphere. From existence it has passed into non-
existence, and nothing can recall it into being. It is like a sun extinguished in mide
heaven.

Il. THE SADNESS OF THE CIRCUMSTANCES. The end of a nation comes necessarily
by violence, from within or from without—from without most commonly. A fierce
host invades its borders, spreads itself over its fertile fields, tramples down its crops,
exhausts its granaries, consumes its cattle, burns its towns and villages, carries every-
where ruin and desolation. Wanton injury is added to the injury which war cannot
but inflict—fruit-trees are cut down (ch. xvi. 8), works of art are destroyed, good land
is purposely “ marred with stones” (2 Kings ili, 10), And if inanimate things suffer,
much more do animate ones. Beasts of burden are impressed and worked to death;
horses receive fearful wounds and scream with pain; cattle perish for want of care;
beasts of prey increase as population lessens, and become a terror to the scanty remnant
(2 Kings xvii. 25), Not only do armed men fall by thousands in fair fight, but (in
varbarous times) the unwarlike mass of the population suffers almost equally. “ Every


340 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET {[SAIAH, (cu. xx1. 1—17.


ce ESC A a as


one that is found is thrust through, and every one that is joined to them {s slain by
the sword” (ch. xiii. 15). Even women and children are not spared. Virgins and
matrons are shamefully used (ch. xiii, 16); children are ruthlessly dashed to the
ground (ch, xtii, 16; Ps. cxxxvii. 9); every human passion being allowed free course, the
ruost dreadful excesses are perpetrated. No doubt in modern times civilization and
Christianity tend to alleviate in some degree the horrors of war; but in a war of con-
quest, when the destruction of a nationality is aimed at, frightful scenes are almost
sure to occur, sufficient to sadden all but the utterly unfeeling. It should be the
earnest determination of every Christian to endeavour in every possible way to keep
his own country tree from the guilt of such wars.


Vers, 11, 12—WHalf-hearted turning to God of no avail. There are many who, in
the hour of distress, turn to God and his ministers with the question, “ Watchman,
what of the night? Watchman, what of the night?” They are anxious to be assured
that the dark time of their trouble is well-nigh over, and light about to dawn upon
their horizon. And they so lar believe in God's ministers as to think that they can,
better than others, give them an auswer to their question. Accordingly, they impor-
tune their clergymen with such inquiries as these: “ Will this sickness, or the effect
of this accident, or this time of slack work, last long? Is there likely to be much
more of it? Or may we look to be !ree from our trouble speedily?” To such the
“ watchman ” bad best answer with some reserve, or even with some obscurity, so far
as he gives any direct answer at all to their questions, “The trouble will no doubt
pass in time—it may be svoner, it may be later; God only knows the times and the
seasons which he has put in his own power.” But he may take the opportunity of the
inquiry to give a very clear lesson, “If ye will inquire, inquire ye: return, come; ”
that 1s to say, “ Be not half-hearted, beat not about the bush. If ye throw yourselves
upon God for one purpose, do so for every purpose; look to him, not for an answer to
oue inquiry only, but for everything. Return to him—come.” “The Spirit and the
Bride” are always saying, “Come” (Rev. xxii. 17). Christ himself has said, most
emphatically, “Come” (Matt. x1. 28). If they “return” and “ come,” they will be no
longer Edom, but Israel ; no longer aliens and straugers, but “ fellow-citizens with the
saints and of the houseliold of God” (Eph. ii. 19), Let the cry, then, be sounded in
their ears unceasingly, “ lteturn, come.”


Ver, 15.—The grievousness of war. The grievousness of war is especially felt in
defeat. Kedar was the most turbulent of the sons of Ishmael (Gen. xxv. 13). “ His
band,” like that of his father, “ was against every man, and every man’s hand against
him” (Gen. xvi. 12), So long as his “ mighty men,” armed with their formidable bows,
could ravave and plunder the inhabitants of more peaceable districts at their pleasure,
and carry off plenty of spoil to their fastnesses in the rocky parts of the desert
(ch. xlii. 11), the “ grievousuess of war” was not felt. Rather, “ the inhabitants of the
rock sang, and shouted from the top of the mountain” (ch. xlii. 11). But at length
the tide of battle had turned. Kedar was itself attacked, invaded, plundered. The
“drawn sword” and the “bent bow” of the men of Asshur were seen in the recesses
of Arabia itself, and the assailants, becoming the assailed, discovered, apparently to
their surprise, that war was a “grievous” thing. Does not history ‘repeat itself” ?
Have we not beard in our own day aggressive nations, that have carried the flames of
war over half Europe or half Asia, complain bitterly, when their turn to be attacked
came, of the “vrievousness” of invasion? ‘lhe Greeks said, “To suffer that which
one has done, is strictest, straitest right;” but this is not often distinctly perceived
by the sufferers, It is only “ God’s ways” that are “equal; ” man’s are apt always to
be “unequal” (Ezek. xviii. 25).


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers, 1—10.— Full of Babylon. It is thought, by some recent commentators,
that the description refers to the siege of Babylon in 8.0. 710 by Sargon the Assyrian,
Tie King of Babylon at that time was Merodach-Baladan, who sent letters and a present


Ne


cH. xx1, 1—17.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 34


—


to Hezekiah when he was sick (ch. xxxix. 1; 2 Kings xx. 12). The prophet may wel
grieve over the fall of Babylon, as likely to drax down with it weaker kingdoms.

I, Tue sounD oF THE TEMPEST. What sublime poesy have the prophets found ix
the tempest! We are perhaps impressed more through the perception of the ear that
that of the eye, by the sense of vague, vast, overwhelming power working through al
the changes of the world. The sweeping up of a tempest from the southern dry
country of Judah is like the gathering of a moles belli, and this again betokens that
Jehovah of hosts is stirring up his might in the world unseen, Hence his arrows go
forth like lightning, his trumpet blows (Zech. ix. 14), This movement comes from
the terrible land, the desert, the haunt of serpents and other horrible creatures.

II. Tae vision oF caLamiry. The march of the barbarous conqueror is marked
by cruelty and devastation. The prophet’s heart is overpowered within him, He
writhes with anguish as iu the visions of the even-tide the picture of Babylon’s fall passes
before his mind. He beholds a scene of rivalry. There is feasting and mirth. We
are reminded of that description which De Quincey adduced as an example of the
sublime: “ Belshazzar the king made a great feast unto a thousand of his lords, and
drank wine before the thousand” (Van. v. 1); and of Byron’s description of the eve of
the battle of Waterloo at Brussels. Suddenly an alarm is given; the walls have been
stormed, the palace is threatened; the banqueters must start from the couch and
exchange the garb of luxury for the shield and the armour. The impression of the
picture is heightened by the descriptions in Herodotus (i. 191) and Xenophon (‘Cyrop.,
vii. 5), whether they refer to the same event or no, It is the picture of careless eax
and luxury surprised by sudden terror. “Let us go against them,” says Cyrus in
Xenophon. ‘‘ Many of them are asleep, many intoxicated, and all of them unfit for
battle.” The scene, then, may be used parabolically to enlorce those lessons of temper-
ance, of watch{ulness, of sobriety, and prayerfuluess which our religion inculcates.

Ill. Tse watcuman. The word of Jehovah directs that a watchman shall be posted,
the prophet “ dividing himself into two persons”—his own proper person and that of the
speculator or scout upon the height of the watch-tower. So Habakkuk “stands upon
his watch, and sets him upon the tower” (ii. 1). And what does the prophet see ?
Cavalry riding two abreast, some on horses, others on asses, others (with the baggage)
on camels. This he sees; but he hears no authentic tidings of distant things, though
straining his ear in utmost tension. Then he groans with the deep tones of the
impatient lion. How long is he to remain at his post? We cannot but think of the
fine opening of the ‘Agamemnon’ of Aischylus, where the weary warder soliloquizes—


“The gods I ask deliverance from these labours,
Watch of a year’s length, whereby, slumbering thro’ it
On the Atreidii’s roof on elbow, dog-like,
I know of mighty star-groups the assemblage,
And those that bring to men winter and summer.”
(R. Browning’s translation.)


As he waits for “the torch’s token and the glow of fire,” so does Isaiah wait for certain
news about Babylon, And, no sooner is the plaint uttered, than the wish is realized,
The watchman sees a squadron of cavalry, riding two abreast, and the truth flashes on
him—Dalylon is fallen! The images, symbols of the might of the city, protected by
the gods they represented, are dashed to the ground and broken, ; What was felt under
such circumstances may be ga‘hered by the student of Greek history from the awful
impression made, on the eve of the expedition to Sicily, by the discovery of the mutila-
tion of the statues of the Hermai. It is all over with Babylon.

IV. THE ANGUISH OF THE PATRIOT, ‘“O my threshed and winnowed one!” Poor
Israel, who has already suffered so much from the Assyrian, how gladly would the prophet
bave announced better tidings! The threshing-floor is an imaze of suffering, and not
confined to the Hebrews. It may be found in old Greek lore, and in modern Greek
folk-poesy. No image, indeed, can be more expressive (comp. ch. xli. 15; Micah iv. 12,
13; Jer. li. 33). “ But love also takes part in the threshing, and restrains the wrath.’

V. Genera tEssons. The Christian minister is, too, a watcher. He must /isten
and he must look. There are oracles to be heard by the attentive ear, breaking out of
the heart of things—hinta in the distance to be caught by the wakelul and scarching


342 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cx. xxi 1—17.


eye. “They whom God has appointed to watch are neither drowsy nor dim-sighted.
The prophet also, by this example, exhorts and stimulates believers to the same kind
of attention, that by the help of the lamp of the Word they may obtain x Cistant
view of the power of God.”—J.


Vers. 11, 12.—The watchman. I. THE CALL From Serr. The Edomites are asking,
“Will the hght soon dawn? What hour is it?” Like the sick man tossing on his
bed, they long for the first tidings that the night of tribulation is past.

lI. Tse enigmatic ANsweR. “ Morning cometh, and also night.’ There were “ wise
men” in Edom, and probably the answer is couched in the style they loved. What does
it mean? Wecan but conjecture. It may mean that the coming light of prosperity
and joy is soon to be queuched in the night of calamity again. Or, the dawn of joy to
some will be the nizht of despair to others. “ When the morning comes, it will still
be night” (Luther). Even if morning dawns, it will be swallowed uj again imme-
diately by night. And in what follows, also obscure, seems to be a hint that ouly in
case of Edom’s conversion can there be an answer of consolation and of hope. The
design may be “(1) to reprove them for the manner in which they had asked the
question ; (2) to assure them that God was willing to direct humble and serious
inquiries; (3) to show in what way a favourable answer could be obtained, viz. by
repentance.”

Ill. Appuication. 1. Historical. ‘“ History was quite ir xccord with such an
answer. The Assyrian period of judgment was followed by the Chaldean, the Chaldean
by the Persian, the Persian by the Grecian, and the Grecian by the Roman. Again
and again there was a glimmer of morning dawn for Edom (and what a -limmer in the
Herodian ave!); but it was swallowed up directly by another night, until Edom became
an utter Dumah, and disappeared from the history of nations.” Herod the Great,
“ King of the Jews,” was son of Antipater of Edom, who became procurator of Judea,
Under the Mussulman rule in the seventh century a.D., the cities of Edom fell into ruin,
and the land became a desolation (comp. Ezek. xxxv. 3, 4, 7, 9, 14). The famed rock-
built city of Petra was brouzht to light in our own time by Burckhardt, 1812.
2. General. The prophetic outlook upon the world at any epoch is of the same general
character, Night struggles with morning in the conflicts and changes of nations, in
the controversies of truth with error. In the closing chapters of St. Matthew’s Gospel
we do not find a prospect of unmingled brightness, very far from it. Christianity will
call into existence vast organized hypocrisies; the shadow attends closely upon the
light. At the conversion of the empire under Constantine, at the Reformation, etc.,
“the morning came, and also night.” History pursues a spiral line; old errors return,
decayed superstitions revive ; then again the day breaks. And so with the individual;
the light we gain at happy epochs must yield to fresh doubts or fears, avain to be
dispelled by redawning faith. Such is the condition of our life; we dwell in the
chiaroscuro, the twilight of intuition; we “ see as in a glass, enigmatically.” But hope
and endeavour remain to us; and the looking forward to the everlasting lizht of
Jehovah, the glory of God, the rising of the sun that shall no more go down; the end
of mourning ; the “one day” that shall be neither day nor night; the evening-time
when it shall be light (ch. lx. 19, 20; Zech. xiv. 7).—J.


Vers. 13—16.—The tribes of Arabia. I. THE FATE oF THE Depanrres. Their
caravans must hide in the thorn-bushes away from the beaten track. These Dedanites
belong to Edom (Jer. xlix. 8; Ezek, xxv. 13). They were merchants, and among
others traded with wealthy Tyre (Ezek. xxvii. 15), And probably the meaning is that
when on their way from ‘lyre they would be compelled to camp in the desert, because
of the widespreading war from north to south,

I], Tae SYMPATHY OF THE pRopuET. He calls the people of Tema to supply the
thirsty and hungry fugitives with water and with bread. Tema lay on the route
yetween lalmyra and Petra. The tribe was among the descendants of Ishmael. In
these sad scenes the light of human kindness in the heart of the prephet, reflected in
the picture of ‘Temanite hospitality, shines forth.


“ These are the precious balsam-drops
That woeful wars distil.”


os, xxI. 1—17,] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 343
cee a a


Hospitality is still found in generous flow among the Arabs of these regions, and
reminds the wayfarer how near God is to man in the most desolate places. Wherever
there is a loving human heart, there indeed is a fount and an oasis in life’s desert.
And this scene reminds us how good comes out of evil, even the bitterest; the sight of
the flying warriors, showing the bent bow and the wave of war, touches the spring of
sympathy and mercy in yonder wild hearts.

Ill. THe PRopHEcY oF Doom. In a year, “as the years ofa hireling,” de. swiftly,
certainly, without delay, and without time of grace, Kedar’s glory shall be at an end,
the powerful tribes of nomad archers will be reduced to a remnant. Those tents, “ black
but comely,” of which the bard of the Cauticles sang (i. 5), those splendid flocks, and
the famed “rams of Nebaioth,” shall disappear, or melt down to a fraction of the
former numbers. So again the night sets on Edom, after a brief dawn.

1V, Tue Worp or tHE Gop oF IsrazL. 1. These events were to happen by
Divine appointment. 2. The God of Israel is the true God. Let us take the saying to
heart, amidst all that is most saddening in the fates of nations and institutions,
“God hath done it, (tod hath said it.’ The true Ged who revealed himself to the
fathers, and manifested himself to men in Christ, is the Being whose will is made known
in the course of history. And amidst his heaviest punishments we have this consola-
tion, eae he chastises gently, and does not “give men over to death” (Ps, exviii.
18).—J.


Ver. 11—A momentous question. “Watchman, what of the night?” This is
the question which ever occupies earnest minds, ‘That the darkness of sin is here
wise men note, without wasting metaphysical thought upon the how or why. Here
is sin. On that all are agreed. Is there salvation too ?

I, PRopHETIO vision. Isaiah sees. Far away on the world’s horizon he beholds a
rising light; and, in anticipation of that, he himself is permitted to reveal truths which
shall brighten the darkness of Israel. All deliverance is a prophecy of the great
Deliverer; all returnings of Israel are foreshadowinys of that day when to Christ shall
the gathering of the people be.

II, PRopHETIO DECLARATION. “The morning cometh.” Always a musical note
that. To the sufferer in the chamber of affliction, longing for the first beams of day; to
the dismantled ship out far away on the melancholy sea; to the oppressed people
waiting for deliverance; to the idolatrous Israel in returning to the true and living
God. ‘‘The morning cometh.” A thought to be meditated on in all long and weary
nights of disappointment, disaffection, doubt, and trial. ‘ Weeping may endure for a
night, but joy cometh in the morning.” Patience, poor heart! The morning cometh
to the penitent Peter and the doubtful Thomas. “The morning cometh.” Not for
Israel only, but for the world. The nations that sat in darkness have seen a great
light. Isaiah was right.

lll, Propuetio counsen. “If ye will inquire, inquire ye.” But do more than
that. “ Return, come.” This is the condition on which the morning glory rests.
“Return.” Give up your love of darkness, and “come.” God waits to furgive and
bless. “Come.” The curiosity of inquiry may belong to mere intellectual states of
being. The return of the soul means a great moral change. We must feel the truth
of these words, “ The morning cometh, and also the night.” For the morning will be
no morning unless the veil of night is taken away from our hearts.—W. M. 8.


Vers. 1—9.—The effect of God's judgments on the good and on the guilty. We
gather, preliminarily: 1. That God uses not only elemental forces but human agents
tor the accomplishment of his righteous purposes. ‘The winds and the waves are his
ministers; but sometimes, as here, the whirlwinds he invokes are not the airs of
heaven but the passions and agitations of human minds. 2. That the greatest human
power is nothing in his mighty hand. Babylon was a “ great power” indeed in human
estimation at that time, but it needed only the whirlwind of God’s holy indignation to
sweep it away. Concerning the judgments of the Lord, we mark—

I. THEIR EFFECT ON THE GUILTY. 1. The suddenness and surprise of their over-
throw. “ Prepare the table... eat, drink,” say they in the palace. But even while
they are feasting comes the cry from the watchman on the walls, “ Arise, ye princes,


844 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cx. xxi 1—17,
a ee


and anoint the shield” (ver. 5). How often, when the ungodly are in the midst of their
unjust exactions or their unlawful pleasures, comes the blow which strikes the weapon
from their hand, the cup from their lips (see Dan. v. 80; Acts xii. 22, 23; Luke xii.
20)! 2. The completeness of their downfull, “ Babylon is fallen, ts fallen” (ver. 9)—
fallen utterly, never more to rise; her tyranny broken to pieces, her fires of persecution
put out. When God arises to judgment his enemies are not merely defeated, they are
scattered. 8. The abasement of their pride. “ Babylon is fallen.” The word is suggestive
of an inglorious descent from a high seat of assumption and is certainly descriptive of
the destruction of the Babylonian power. We know that God wills to humble the
haughty, and that nothing is more certain to ensure humiliation than the spirit of
pride (Prov. xvi. 18; xvii. 17; ch. x. 33; Luke xiv. 11), 4. The rebuke of their
impiety. “The graven images he hath broken,” etc. As idolatry was visited with the
signs of God’s wrath, so impiety, covetousness, absorbing worldliness—which are idolatry
in modern form—must expect to receive the proofs of his displeasure.

IL. THEIR EFFECT ON THE Goop. 1, Merciful relief from oppression. “All the
sighing thereof have I made to cease.” The downfall of the tyrant is the deliverance of
the oppressed; hence the close connection between Divine judgments and human
praise. As God, in his providence, brings cruelty, injustice, inconsiderateness, to its
doom, he makes sighing and sorrow to flee away. ‘There is much tyrauny still to be
struck down before all burdens will have been taken from the heavy-laden, and before
all sighs shall cease from the heavy-hearted. 2. Conversion from resentment to com-
passion, he vision which the prophet saw, albeit it was one of triumph over his
enemies, excited his compassion; it was ‘‘a grievous vision” (ver. 2). He was even
“bowed down at the hearing of it,” “dismayed at the seeing of it” (ver.3). The night
which he loved (the night of his pleasure), instead of bringing him the sacred joy of
communion with God and prophetic inspiration, brought to him sympathetic pain and
distress, Thus was burning patriotic indignation turned into humane compassion. It
may be taken, indeed, as an anticipation of that Christian magnanimity which “loves
its enemies, and prays for them that despitefully use and persecute” it. When God's
judgments on our enemies thus soften our spirits and call forth the kindlier and
more generous sentiments, then do they serve au even higher end than when they make
our sighs to ceave and our songs to sound.—C,


Ver. 10.—Tribulation. There is no little tenderness in this Divine address or invo-
cation ; it reminds us that God’s love may be set upon us when there seems least reason
to think so if we judge of his feeling by our outward circumstances. We think
naturally of—

I. TrisuLation. The instrument by which corn was threshed (éribda) has given
us the word with which we are so familiar. To some it speaks of lone-continued sickness,
or weakness, or pain; to others of depressing disappointment; to others of bereavement
and consequent desolation; to others of loss and the inevitable strugzle with poverty ;
to others of human frailty or even treachery and of the wounded spirit which suffers
from that piercing stroke. ‘The heart knows its own bitterness, and every human soul
has its own peculiar story to tell, its own especial troubles to endure, But this human
suffering is only appropriately called tribulation when it is recognized that the evil
which has come is seut (or allowed) of God as Divine chastening, when it is understood
that the Divine Father takes a parental interest in the well-being of his children, that
he is seeking their highest good, and that he is passing his threshing-instrument over
“his floor” in the exercise of a benign and holy discipline,

Il, Separation. When the “éribula” passed over the reaped corn it separated the
valuable grain from the worthless chaff; one was then easily distinguishable from
the other. Sorrow, persecution, trial, tribulation, is a “discerner of the thouchts
and intents of the heart.” Before it comes, the genuine and the pretentious may be
mingled indistinguishably ; after it has come, it is apparent who are the loyal and true
disciples, and who are they that have nothing but “ the name to live.” We cannot be
sure of “the spirit of our mind” or the real character of others until we, or thev, have
been upon the threshing-floor, and the Divine instrument of threshing has done its
decisive and discriminating work. It comes, like Christ himself, “ for judgment ;” and
then many who were supposed not to see are found to have a true vision of God and


Ds


oH. xx1. 1—17.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. B45
a et


of his truth, while many who have imagined that they saw have been found to be
blind indeed (see John ix. 39).

III, Syapatuy. Israel in Egypt may have thoncht itself unpitied and even for-
gotten of God; but it would have been wrony iv so thinking (Exod. iii. 7). The Jews
in Babylon may have imagiued themselves disregarded of Jehovah; but they were
mistaken if they so thought. “O my threshing,” etc., exclaims the sympathetic voice
of the Lord. When we are tempted to bewail our unpitied and forgotten condition, we
must check ourselves as the psalmist had to do (Ps. Ixxiii.), or we sball be unjust ane
even ungrateful; ‘‘ for whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth.” The mark of tribulation
is the sign of parental love and care.

1V. Preparation. ‘he process of threshing prepared the corn for the granary, and
so for the table, and thus for the fulfilment of its true function. When God stretches
us on his floor and makes us undergo the process of tribulation, it is that we may be
refined and purified; that we may be made “ meet for his use” both on earth and in
heaven ; that we may be prepared for such higher work and such nobler spheres as we
should have remained unfitted for, had he not subjected us to the treatment which
is “not joyous but grievous” at the time.—C.


Vers. 11, 12.— Taunt, retort, and overture. 1, We take this to be a bitter taunt on
the part of the Idumazan. ‘ Watchman,” he says, “ what of this long night of national
calamity through which you are passing? Where is the God of David, of Josiah, and
of Hezekiah? What about those promises of Divine deliverance which have been your
trust,” etc.? 2. Then we have the calm retort of the prophet. He says, “ ‘he
morning cometh.’ Yow may see nothing but darkness; but to me, on my watch-tower,
there are apparent the grey streaks of dawn. I see afar off, but approaching, a glorious
deliverance and returu—a repopulated city, rebuilt walls, a reopened temple, a
rehonoured sabbath, a regenerate and a rejoicing people. ‘The morning cometh, and
also the nivht:’ to us the morning, to you the night. The sun that shines on you is
a setting sun; it is sloping to the west. The dark pall of defeat, captivity, destruction,
will soon veil your skies; you have little reason to triumph. We are down, but we are
moving up; you are up, but you are moving down.” 38, And then comes the prophet’s
overture. ‘‘I do not want,” he says, “ to gain a barren victory of words. If you will
approach me in the spirit, not of mockery, but of inquiry, really wishing to know the
mind of God, I will reply to your question. ‘If ye will inquire, inquire ye: return,
come,” As the scoffing Iduma@an thus assailed the Jewish Church, so the sceptical
Kuropean assails the Christian Church, and we have—

I. THE TRIUMPHANT TAUNT OF THE SCOFFER. ‘“ What,” says the scoffer, “ of this long
night through which the Church is passing? Eighteen ceuturies have gone since Jesus
Christ declared that his cross would attract all men unto him; but barbarism is still
found on island and continent, idolatry still prevails among the millions of Asia,
corrupt Christianity still deludes the peoples of Europe, and infidelity, inmorality, crime,
and ungodliness still hang, like angry clouds, over ‘Christian England.’ What about
this long nizht of Christendom?” Similarly the hostile critic speaks concerning the
individual Christian life. ‘“ What of this long night of protracted sickness, of unsuc-
sessful contest with financial difficulties, of undeserved dishonour, of repeated losses in
the family circle by death, etc. ?”

IL, THe CALM BETORT OF THE CHRISTIAN ADVOOATE. He says, “‘ The morning
cometh.’ Barbarism is steadily disappearing before Christian civilization ; superstition
is being honeycombed by doubt; unbelief is finding itself unsatisfied with its hollow
husks; earnest, practical religion is making its attack, by a hundred agencies, on
immorality and irreligion; the Churches of Christ are putting on strength, and there
is a sound of victory in the air, there are streaks of morning light in the sky. On the
other hand, there are signs that overthrow and utter discomfiture will overtake and
overwhelm the unholy doubts of the scoffer. To the oppressed Christian man, even
though weeping should endure for the whole night of this mortal life, ‘joy cometh
in the morning’ of the everlasting day.”

JI]. Tue overTuRE OF THE CHRISTIAN ADVOCATE. He does not content himself
with an effective retort. His mission is not to silence, but to convince and to help,
He knows that bencath the sneer is doubt or disbelief, and this is too serious and too


346 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cn, xx1. 1—17.


sad a thing to be left unanswered. So he says, “If you will ‘inquire,’ do inquire.
Come into the court of inquiry with a candid, honest spirit; do not delude yourself
by holding up one or two modern objections before your eyes and declaring that there
is nothing to be seen. Take into account all the evidence—of prophecy; of miracle; of
the life, character, truth, works, of Jesus Christ; of the effects of his gospel on the world,
on human hearts, homes, !ives; on man, on woman, on the slave, the poor, the prisoner,
etc. Set against this what has to be considered on the other side, and then decide
whether this redemption in Je-us Christ is not from heaven. Or, again, if you have
any serious doubts as to the efficacy of true piety and its actual worth to a man as he
goes through life, inquire; but take heed of whom you inquire. Ask of one who has
had large and varied experience of life; ask of one who has seen much of men, in
whom men have trusted and who knows the thoughts of their hearts; take the testi-
mony of men to whom religion has been not a mere name, or a mere ceremony, but
a solid conviction and a living power; and you will find, on such fair inquiry, that it
is not only a stay and succour, but is the mainstuy and the strength of the human
soul in the labours and contlicts of life."-—C,


Vers. 13—17.—Our ills and their remedics. Yn this “burden” upon Arabia we
may detect a picture or, at least, find a suggestion of—

I, THE ILLS TO WHICH FLESH I8 HEIR. 1. Beiny turned out of our course. The
caravans of Dedan are obliged to forsake their track and find refuge in the forests
or stony retreats of the desert (ver. 13). Continually are we compelled to change our
route as travellers along the road of life. We mark out our course and set out on our
way, but the irresistible obstacle is confronted and we are oblived to deviate into some
other track, or wait in hope until the hindrance be removed. 2. Being straitened for
the necessities of life. ‘The refuzees are reduced to such straits that they are glad
to receive the bread and water which “the inhabitants of the land of ema” bring
(ver. 14). Thouzh God has made this earth to be large and bountiful enough for
a vastly greater population than even now exists upon it, yet, chiefly owing to
human folly or iniquity, though sometimes to misfortune, men are reduced to such
extreme hardship that the common necessaries are beyond their reach. Between this
exigency and the condition of competence, how many decrees of want, and how many
thousands of the children of want, are there to be found! 3. Being assailed and pur-
sued by the enemies of our spirit. (Ver. 15.) There are adverse powers from beneath—
the “principalities and powers” of the kingdom of darkness; there are hostile powers
that are around us—unprinci) led and ungodly men, evil practices and harmful insti-
tutions in society ; but our worst foes are those which are “of our own household,”
those that are within the chambers of our own souls—bad habits, evil propensities,
those inclinations toward folly and sin which pursue us even when the main battle
has been fought and won, 4. Finding our life oppressive and burdensome to us.
“According to the years of a hireling ” (ver. 16). The time thus counted is reckoned
with extreme carefulness; there is no danger that a single day will be left untold.
The hireling is impatient for the time to be past that he may lay down the yoke and
receive his wage. How many are there to whom life is s» much of a burden, who are
so oppressed by toil, or weighed down with care, or overwhelmed by sorrow, that they
look gladly, if not eagerly, forward to its evening hour, wien the night of death will
release them from their struggle! 5, Being distinctly and at length fatally enfeebled.
“ The glory of Kedar shall fail,” the bowmen and the mighty men “ be diminished ”
(vers. 16, 17). Up to a certain point human life means, not only enjoyment, but
increase; from that point it means diminution—at first unconscious, but afterwards
sensible and painful; at length fatal diminution—in the capacity for enjoyment, in
intellectual grasp, in physical endurance, in force of character. The glory of life
goes; the faculties of soul and of body are palpably diminished; death draws near.
But we may take into our view—

II, DivineLy provipep REMEDIES. 1. Pursuing the straight path to the goal which
is set before us, from which no enemy need make us turn aside. 2. Trusting in the
faithful Promiser. 8, Hiding in the pavilion of Divine power, and securing the mighty
aid of the Divine Spirit. 4. Seeking and finding the comfort of the Holy Ghost. 6
Awaiting the immortal youth of the heavenly land.—C.


oH. xxi. 1—17.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET {SAIAH. 347


ee eee


Ver. 2.—Nations working out God’s providences. The reference of this “ burden ” is
to Babylon, which was the successor to Assyria in executing the Divine judgments on
the Jews. Babylonia is called “the desert of the sea,” as a poetical fivure, suggested
by the fact that its surging masses of people were like a sea-desert ; or because it was
a flat country, and full of lakes, like little seas. It was abundantly watered by the
many streams of the river Euphrates. The prophet, writing when Babylon was the
rising and triumphing nation, sees in vision her terrible fall and humiliation. Which
siege of Babylon he refers to cannot be assured, but much can be said fur Cheyne’s
suggestion, that the depression under which Isaiah writes is best explained by
referring the vision to the first siege of Babylon. when Merodach-Baladan was king (B.o.
709), whose interests were in harmony with those of Hezekiah, and whose humiliation
Isaiah would regard as injurious to Judah, Watching the movements of these several
nations, Assyria, Babylonia, Elam, Media, Judah, we meditate on—

I. Ricur tpeas oF Gop’s PRovIDENCE, We do not speak of providence so freely as
our fathers did, because we have less impressive views of the Divine rule and control.
As Dr. Bushnell expresses it, “our age is at the point of apogee from all the robuster
notions of the Divine Being.” We are more interested in the ordinary workings of
Law, than in the continuous adjustments and qualifications of Law by the ever-pre-
siding Lawgiver. Yet, if our eyes were opened, we might see manifest signs of what
our fathers called “ providence ” in the personal, the family, and the naiwual spheres
of to-day. The proper idea of providence may be thus expressed—it is (iod using
for moral purposes commonplace events, and therefore adjusting, arranging, and fitting
together those events. Providence ordering or controlling the nations is “God in
history.” And the illustrations of Divine overruling which we see in the large
spheres of the world-kingdoms, are desigued to convince us of the reality of that over-
ruling in the small details of our personal life.

II. THE PROVIDENTIAL DISTINGUISHED FROM THE MIRACULOUS. The distinction is in
our apprehension; we cannot conceive of tie distinction as recognized by God. As by
the “ providential ” we mean God intervening to readjust the usual order of material
events, it is plain that sometimes he may use forces with which we are familiar, and
then we call his working “ providential; ” but at other times he may use \orces with
which we are unfamiliar, and then we call his working ‘‘ miraculous.” There need be
no difficulty in recrgnizing resources in God beyond what he has been pleased to explain
to man. (od has not exhausted himself in making revelations to man. If we could
see clearly we s!.onid see that “ providential” and “ miraculous” are convertible terms,

TIl. THY xvi.ATION OF PROVIDENCE TO MoRAL Law. This may be put into a
sentence. {t is the executor of its sanctions. The rewards of obedience and the
penaities of disobedience are not things deferred until some yet far-distant day. They
are continually operating in all spheres, private and public. And what we call
“providence ” is the agency in their distribution. But our “ providence” differs from
“fate,” or the pagan conception of the “ furies,” because it is the working of an
infinitely wise and good Being, who acts upon comprehensive knowledge and sound
judgment. 5

IV. THE RELATION OF PROVIDENCE TO NATIONS. Here we take one single point.
Nations have a corporate life, so they are, as it were, individuals, with a distinct
individual character and action. Just as God uses the individual man for his purposes,
so he uses the individual nation. For the characteristics of uations, see (rreece, Rome,
Germany, France, etc. The natural expression of’ a nation’s character or genius
becomes the providential agency for carrying out God’s purposes. Illustrate the con-
quering genius of Babylon under Nebuchadnezzar doing God’s work in the destruction
of the kingdom of Judah. The fact that a nation employed as an executor is still in
God’s control, is shown in God’s judging that nation for evils that become manifest in
its doing of that executive work. Kfficient illustrations may be found in the move-
ments and enterprises of the European nations during the last century.—R. T.


Ver. 3.—Sympathy of bodies with distress of mind. The prophet is only seeing in
a vision something that is going to happen by-and-by. But the scene presented to him
is so terrible that he cannot exult in it, though it is the overthrow of an enemy’s city.
He is deeply distressed, and the mental anguish finds its response in acutest bodily


548 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cm xxz 1—1%.


eS


pains, The “loins” are referred to in Scripture as the seat of the snarpest peins
(Ezek. xxi. 6; Nah. ii, 10), The most familiar illustration of the sympathy between
body and mind is the expression of mental emotion by tears. Ministers and public
speakers know, from bitter experience, how nervous excitement stands related to sharp
bodily pain aud serious bodily depression. The connection may be seen in Job, in
Hezekiah, in the Apostle Paul, and in David, who, with vigorous poetical figures
describes the bodily distress which accompanied his months of restraining himself,
in his hardness and impenitence: “* When I kept silence, my bones waxed old through
my roaring all the day long.”

I. Sou, axD BopDY ABE KIN. Our normal condition is the perfect harmony of the
two, 80 that the soul only uses the body for good and right purposes; and the body
responds perfectly to all the demands which the soul makes upon it. Combat the idea
that the body is evil, or that evil lies in matter, and so our great effort should be to get
free of our bodies. The true triumph is to win the use of our body, or, as the Apostle
Paul puts it, to get “the body for the Lord, and the Lord for the body.”

Il. Bopy MaY MASTER souL, This is the abnormal condition into which men have
paseed. They are practically ruled by “sensations” which dominate the will, and
so the mass of men are merely animated bodies, in whom the soul is silenced and
crushed. [Illustrate by the demoniacs in our’ Lord’s time, in whom the man was
crushed by the vice.

Il]. Sou sHouLD conTBoL Bopy. This is the recovered normal condition and
relation; and to evergize the soul unto a full and efficient mastery and use of the
body is precisely the work of the Divine redemption. The indwelling Spirit of God is
a new life for the soul, in the power of which it may overcome the body and the
world.—R. T.


Ver. 9.—The work of the iconoclast. “ Fallen, fallen is Babylon, and all the images
of its gods he hath broken unto the ground.” Recent researches have disclosed the fact
that there were three sieges of Babylon during the time of Isaiah—in B.o. 709 by
Sargon, and in 703 and 691 by Sennacherib. Mr. George Smith, writing of the last of
these three sieges, says, ‘‘ Babylon was now wholly given up to an infuriated soldiery ;
its walls were thrown down, its temples demolished, its people given up to violence
and slavery, the temples rifled, and the images of the gods brought out and broken
in pieces.” Herodotus is our authority for the supposed aversion of the Medes and
Persians to all images. “They not only thought it unlawful to use images, but
imputed folly to those who did so.” But modern researches do not coufirm the state-
ment of Herodotus, and we need see in the destruction of the Babylonian idols no more
than the siyns of a humiliating and overwhe!ming conquest. Cyrus has been hitherto
regarded as a Persian and monotheist; it is now argued that he was an Elamite and
a polytheist. Illustrating the subject, we note—

I, SomE MEN’S LIFE-WORK I8 BUILDING uP, They make businesses; they found
familis; they start theories; they commence organizations; they build churches; they
initiate societies, Such men are full of schemes. Moses founds a nation. David
organizes a kingdom. Paul establishes a Christian society in the Gentile world.
Wesley begins a sect.

Il. Somgz MEN’s LIFE-wWORK I8 KEEPING UP. They cannot begin. They are not
fertile in resources. Initial difficulties crush them. But quiet perseverance, good
faithful work, enables them well to sustain what others have becun.

Ill. Some MEN’s LIFK-WORK IS BREAKING DOWN. As was Carlyle’s. He broke down
society slams, and conceits and hypocrisies of modern thought. So Mahomet broke
down corrupt Christianity. The sceptic is an iconoclast; but he breaks down for the
pleasure of breaking down. The critic is an iconoclast; but he only attacks the evil.
The reformer must often be an iconoclast; but he breaks down only that he may
rebuild. Sometimes things reach such a pass that they cannot be reformed, and then
“ destruction cometh from the Lord,” whatever agents he may use; as in the old world,
Sodom, captivity of Israel, destruction of Babylon, ete.—R. T.


Ver. 10.—God’s people threshed and winnowed. Isaiah was familiar with the
threshing and winnowing processes, and what was in his mind may be presented to


cH. xx1, 1—17.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 849


—


ours. In the East, the threshing-floor is prepared upon some level spot, on high gronad
The soil is beaten hard, clay is laid over it and rolled; this soon dries in the heat of the
sun, and makes a firm clean floor. Sometimes horses or oxen, tied together and led
round in a circle, tread out the corn-grains; but the more general plan is to use a sort
of sled made of thick boards, four or five feet in length, with many pieces of flint or
iron set firmly in the wood of the under surface. This is drawn over the sheaves, as
they are laid on the threshing-floor, by a pair of oxen, The winnowing is done by
throwing up the heap with a large shovel, so that the wind may separate the lighter
chaff from the heavier grain. The familiar word “ tribulation,” it will be remembered,
is taken from the Latin word tribulwm, a heavy threshing-roller. The comparison of
severe oppression or affliction to threshing is a common one. We may work the figure
out by saying—Life is God’s floor; his people are the corn laid upon it ; dispensations
of providence are the sharp threshing-instruments; but their working only proves how
anxious God is for the final good of his people ; and over their separating and refining
he anxiously and lovingly presides, The reference of the text is to Judah, suffering
under Babylonian oppression. Isaiah sees the fall of Babylon, and he would gladly
have reported that the success of its enemies would prove a permanent relief to Judah ;
but alas! he only sees more trouble, and heavier trouble still, in store for his
country.

I. l'HRESHING AND WINNOWING ARE ALWAYS TRYING PROCESSES. They crush and
cut and bruise; they seem to fling away as we fling away worthless things. And the
answering providential dealings of God try faith, try patience, try endurance, try
submission. ‘They are trying only because they must be. No man would bruise his
corn, if it could be separated from its husk in some simpler and easier way. When
we think of the work God would do in us—get the corn of goodness quite free from
the husk of evil—then the wonder is that, even with such threshing-instruments of
trouble, suffering, humiliation, disappointment, as he uses, he yet can accomplish so
great a result. Only Divine grace can make such means adequate to such an end,
On this dwell further.

Il. THRESHING AND WINNOWING ARE PROCESSES HAVING A GRACIOUS END IN VIEW.
That end is variously stated. It is “holiness ;” it is our “ sanctification; ” it is know-
ing how rightly to use these “ vessels of our bodies; ” it is “ likeness to Christ ;” it is
“meetness for the inheritance of the saints in the light;” it is the “liberty of
righteousness.” God would have the grain clean, free from all chaff, or dust, or straw;
it must be “ meet for the Master’s use.” The ends of Divine threshing are the further
ends sought by the Divine redemption, God forms a people for himself; by provi-
dential threshings and winnowings, he beautifies them for himself.

II]. THE TRYING PROCESS MAY BE BORNE IF WE KEEP THE GRACIOUS END IN VIEW.
“No affliction for the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous.” Yet does the child
of God yield submissively, singing his restful refrain, and saying, “Our light affliction,
which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more excecding and eternal weight
of glory.” Even in view of further threshing-times, Judah may be quiet; they would
but be God’s threshings, with a view to final good.—R. T.


Ver. 11.—The watchman’s response. “Dumah,” meaning “silence,” is probably a
mystical prophetic name for Edom. It seems that Edom was at this time in a con-
dition of humiliation and depression that is well represented by the night-time. As
the night passes, Edom calls to Isaiah, as the prophet-watchman, asking how much longer
the darkuess is tu last. Isaiah cannot return a comfortable and satisfying answer; he
can only say, “If this night of trouble passes, it will but give place to another.” The
prophet foresees a short day of prosperity followed by a new night of trouble. “The
words sum up the whole future of Edom, subject as it was to one conqueror after
another, rising now and then, as under Herod and the Romans, and then sinking to its
present desolation.” ;

I. NiGHT-TIMES OF LIFE HAVE THEIR MISSION. They stand, in private life, for the
times in which we are put aside from active work, compelled to rest. In national life
they stand for the times in which national enterprise is checked by calamities, invasions,
plagues, famines, etc. It is found thav night has an important and necessary place
in the economy of nature. Isaac Taylor has, in a very interesting way, proved that

13


350 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cn. xxr. 1—17.


one or two absolutely dark nights in a year are essential to the well-being of vegetation.
Resting-times are important for individual growth, and national calamities are found
to bear directly on the conquest of national evils and the culture of national virtues.
We may thank God that in our moral life he never gives continuous day, but relieves
the overstrain by recurring nights.

Il. NiGHT-TIMEs OF LIFE HAVE THEIR RELIEFS. There are the moon and stars to
shine in them; and they presently give place to the “garish day.” Pain is never
intense for more than a little while. The light of love and friendship and sympathy
relieves the darkness of suffering. National calamities develop national unity and
energy, that presently issue in national triumph and stability ; as is well illustrated
in Prussia’s uight-time when she was humiliated by Napoleon L Out of that night-
time came German unity, and the recovery of German territory. “Our light affliction,
which is but for a moment.”

III. NigHT-TIMES OF LIFE HAVE THEIR RETURNS. They are like the tunnels on
some of our railways. We are scarcely out of one, and enjoying the open sky, the free
air, and the sunshine, before we rush screaming into another. “If there be a morning
of youth and health, there will come a night of sickness and old age; if a morning of
prosperity in the family, in the public, yet we must look for chanyes.” And such
returns of trying experiences are so essential for our moral training, that it is the most
serious calamity to an individual, or to a nation, that they should be spared them,
“ Because they have no changes, therefore they forget God.” “Moab hath been at
ease from his youth, and hath not been emptied from vessel to vessel, neither hath he
gone into captivity; therefore his taste remained in him, and his scent hath not
changed.” Only of the heavenly and the sinless world may it be said, “There is no
night there.” These two thoughts may sugzest an effective conclusion. No explana-
tions can avail for more than just the piece of life now over us. We cannot know
(rod’s meaning for us until the whole of life is before us, aud we can fit together the
missions of the darkness and the light. Well did our Lord quiet our restless desire to
read the mystery of life by saying, ‘‘ Ye shall know hereafter.” And David turned
away from the mystery, saving, “I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness.”
And nobody can ever know the meaninys of a life if he fixes attention only on its night-
times. They are the shades in the picture, necessary to bring out the picture, but they
are not the picture. We must rise to the outlook of God, of whom it is said, “ The
darkness and the light are both alike to thee.”—R. T.


Ver. 15.— The grievousness of war. “ For before the swords have they fled, before the
drawn sword, and before the bent bow, and before the pressure of war.” The figures
imply that the people are conquered, their camp or city taken, and they pursued and
cut down by a relentless, blood-thirsty enemy. As this subject is a familiar one, and
illustrations lie ready to hand, ouly divisions need be given. The grievousness of war
may be shown—

I, IN THE SACRIFICES IT DEMANDS.

Il. IN THE LIVES IT DESTROYS.

II|. IN THE TREASURE IT WasTES. The Franco-German War of 1870 cost France
£371,000,000, and Germany at least £47,000,000. The American Civil War cost
£330,000,000. The Crimean War cost England £167,000,000.

1V. IN THE PASSIONS IT ENGENDERS,

V. IN THE NATIONAL ALIENATIONS IT LEAVES BEHIND.

Vl. IN THE SUFFERINGS IT ENTAILS. In the Franco-German War, one hundred and
thirty thousand soldiers died on the battle-fields or in the hospitals, and thousands
more lost limbs and health, What a wail of sorrow from thousands of homes and
hearts such tacts bring to our ears!

VII. IN THE RESULTS IT sEcURES. Which are usually most insignificant when
compared with the expenditure and loss.

Talk of the glory of war! The Bible reminds us how much wiser and how much
truer it is to talk of its grievousness,—R. T.


Ver. 17.— The security of the Divine Word. “They shall... for the Lord God of
Israel hath spoken it.” This sentence intimates that God, as the God of Israel, has a


cH, xx, 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 351


quarrel with Kedar, and at the same time that his power and omniscience will secure
the fulfilment of the threatening.

I. Tux Divine rorexNow.epGE. “ All things are naked and opened unto the eyes
of him with whom we have todo;” “He knoweth the end from the beginning.” God
may be pleased to leave man his freedom, and yet he may so know man, and each man,
as to see beforehand how each will act in given circumstances; and the Divine plans
can be based on such foreknowings and fore-estimatings.

II. Tue Divinz UTTERANCES ARE BASED ON SUCH FOREKNOWLEDGE. God may not
be pleased to tel! us all he knows, but we may have perfect coufideuce in what he tells.
Revelation is limited, but it is absolutely true within its limitation, because based on


complete, adequate knowledge.


Ill. Timz pRovES THE HARMONY OF THE UTTERANCE AND THE EVENTS.
the utterance was made in full view of the event.
Men do, in their freedom, just exactly what God,


happens, and his Word never fails.


surveying their work, anticipated that they would do.


fall to the ground.”


Because
To God the unexpected never


“ He will let none of his words


IV. '|HE CONFIDENCE IN GOD’S UTTERANCES INVOLVES THE PRACTICAL ORDERING


OF OUR CONDUCT.


announcements of ever-working principles!
of righteousness, which are Jehovah’s Word to men.
It will come to pass, if the “ Lord God of Israel hath


and it may shape our lives,
spoken it.’—R. T,


This applies to prophetic anticipations; but how much more to


There are no exceptions to the vreat laws
God has said,” is enough for us,


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER XXII.


Vers. 1—14.—A Propuzoy acainsT JERU-
SALEM. The prophet, present in Jerusalem,
either actually, or at any rate in spirit, sees
the inhabitants crowded together upon the
housetops, in a state of boisterous merri-
ment (vers. 1,2). Outside the walls is a
foreign army threatening the town (vers.
§—7). Preparations have been made for
resistance, which are described (vers. 8—11);
but there has been no turning to God.
On the contrary, the danger has but made
the bulk of the people reckless. Instead of
humbling themselves and putting on sack-
cloth, and weeping, and appealing to God’s
mercy, they have determined to drown care
in drink and sensual enjoyment (vers. 12,
13). Therefore the prophet is bidden to
denounce woe upon them, and threaten that
Jehovah will not forgive their recklessness
until their death (ver. 14). There is nothing
to mark very distinctly the nationality of the
foreign army ; but it is certainly represented
as made up of contingents from many nations.
Delitzsch holds that the Assyrian armies
were never so made up, or, at any rate, that
the nations here mentioned never served in
its ranks (‘Site of Paradise,’ p. 237); but
this is, perhaps, assuming that our knowledge


| on the subject is more complete and exact


than is really the case. It is almost im-
possible to imagine any other army than the
Assyrian besieging Jerusalem in Isaiah’s
time. Moreover, the particulars concerning
the preparations made against the enemy
(vers. 9—11) agree with those mentioned in
2 Chron, xxxiil. 3—5 and 30 as maae by
Hezekiah against Sennacherib, And the
second section of the chapter has certainly
reference to this period. It seems, there-
fore, reasonable to regard the siege intended
as that conducted by Seunacherib in his
fourth year (B.C. 701), of which we have a
brief account in his annals (G. Smith,
‘Eponym Canon,’ p. 135, ll. 15—18).

Ver. 1.—The burden of the valley of vision.
“The valley of vision” is only mentioned
here and in ver. 5. It must have been one
of the deep depressions near Jerusalem from
which there is a govd view of the town.
The LXX. render, “ the burden of the valley
of Zion.” What aileth thee now? Jerusa-
lem is addressed by the prophet, who assumes
the réle of a spectator, surprised at what he
sees, and asks an explanation. That thou
art wholly gone up to the housetops. Partly,
no doubt, they went to watch the enemy and
his movements, as Rosenmiiller says; but
still more for feasting and revelry (Judg.
xvi. 27; Neh. viii. 16). The flat roofs of
Oriental houses are often used as places of
recreation and entertainment, especially in


352


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xx1. 1—25,


rT


the evening (Shaw, ‘ Travels,’ p. 211; Char-
din, ‘ Voyages en Perse,’ vol. iv. p. 116;
Layard, ‘ Nineveh,’ vol. i. p. 177, etc.).

Ver. 2.—A joyous city (comp. ver. 13).
Thy slain men are not slain with the sword.
It is a blockade rather than a siege. Men
die, not of wounds, but of privations (Lam.
iv. 9), Sennacherib himself says, “ Hezekiah,
like a caged bird, within Jerusalem, his
royal city, I confined; towers round about
him I raised; and the exit of the great gate
of his city [ shut’? (G. Smith, ‘Eponym
Canon,’ p. 135, Il. 15—18).

Ver, 3.—All thy rulers are fled together;
rather, all thy chief men. We must make
allowance for Oriental hyperbole. The
meaning is that numbers of the principal
men, regarding resistance as vain, had en-
deavoured to make their escape from the
dvomed town, but had been captured and
bound by the enemies’ archers. All that are
foun ee; rather, belonging to thee. The
reference is to those who had made their
escape and were fleeing far away. The
archers seize them, and bind them all together.
We often see a number of captives bound
together by a single rope in the Egyptian
bas-reliefs. Which have fled from far;
rather, which were flying far away.

Ver. 4.—Therefore said I. The prophet
turns from the description of the scene before
him to an account of his own feelings. Look
away from me, he says; “leave me free to
vent my sorrow without restraint; I wish
for no consolation—only leave me to myself.”
Because of the spoiling. The word used
sometimes means “ destruction ;” but “ spoil-
ing ” is a better rendering here. Sennacherib
describes his “spoiling” of Jerusalem on
this occasion as follows: “ Thirty talents of
gold, eight hundred talents of silver, precious
carbuncles, great... stones, couches of
ivory, lofty thrones of ivory, skins of buffa-
loes, horns of buffaloes, weapons, everything,
a great treasure, and his daughters, the
eunuchs of his palace, male musicians, and
female musicians, to Nineveh, the city of
my dominion, did Hezekiah send after me”
(G. Smith, ‘ Eponym Canon,’ p. 135, ll. 29—
37). To what straits Hezekiah was reduced
in order to collect a sufficient amount of the
precious metals we learn from 2 Kings xviii.
15, 16.

Ver. 5.—It is a day... by the Lord;
rather, there is a day to the Lord; or, the Lord
has a day. God_has in reserve such a day;
and it will assuredly arrive in due course.
Hence the prophet’s grief. In the valley of
vision. We may suppose that Hezekiah,
before he made the submission recorded in
2 Kings xviii. 14 and in the ‘Cylinder of
Sennacherib,’ col. iv. ll. 28, 29, tried the
chances of battle against the Assyrians in
this valley, and that Isaiah had a prophetic


vision of the fight. Breaking down the
walls; rather, wndermining. The Assyrian
sculptures show numerous examples of this
practice. Sometimes swords or spears are
used to dislodge the stones of the wall, some-
times crow-bars or axes (see ‘ Ancient
Monarchies,’ vol. ii. p. 82). Crying. Some
regard this word, and also that translated
“the walls” in the preceding clause, as
proper names, and render the passage, “ Kir
undermineth, and Shoa is at the mount”
(Ewald, Cheyne, Luzzatto). But it seems
unlikely that “Kir” would be mentioned
twice.

Ver. 6.—Elam bare the quiver. Elam, the
country extending from the Zagros range to
the Lower Tigris, and watered by the
Choaspes, Euleus, Pasitigris, and other
rivers, was an independent kingdom from a
very early date (Gen. xiv. 1, 9), and in
Isaiah’s time was generally hostile to
Assyria. Sargon, however, relates that he
conquered a portion of the country, planted
colonies in it from the more western parts
of his empire, and placed both colonists and
natives under the governor of Babylon (‘ Re-
cords of the Past,’ vol. ix. p. 16). It is thus
quite possible that both Sargon and Sen-
nacherib may have had a contingent of
Elamites in their armies. With chariots of
men and horsemen; rather, with troops of
men (who were) horsemen (comp. ch. xxi. 7).
Kir uncovered the shield. “Kir” is men-
tioned in 2 Kings as the place to which
Tiglath-Pileser transported the inhabitants
of Damascus (xvi. 9), and by Amos (ix. 7)
as the original country from which the
Syrians were derived. It has been recently
identified with Kirkhi, near Diarbekr, orwith
Kirruri, in the Urumiyah country (Cheyne);
but neither identification is more than pose
sible. (On uncovering shields as a prelimi-=
nary to engaging in battle, see Cesar, ‘ De
Bell. Gall.,’ ii. 21.)

Ver. 7.—And it shall come to pass, ete.
This verse and the next are closely con-
nected, and introduce the new subject of
the preparations which the Jews made for
their defence. Translate, And it came to
pass, when thy choicest valleys were full of
chariots (or, troops), and the horsemen had set
themselves in array toward the gate, that then
did he draw off the covering of Juduh, ete.

Ver. 8.—The covering of Judah was that
which hid their weakness either from them-
selves or from the enemy—probably the
former. God drew this aside, and they
suddenly saw their danger, and began to
think how they could best defend them-
selves. Arms were the first things needed.
The armour of the house of the forest. “The
house of the forest” was probably that por-
tion of the palace of Solomon which he had
called “the house of the forest of Lebanon”


cH. xx. 1—28.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


853


( Kings vii. 2—5). This was, it would
seem, used as an armoury (1 Kings x. 17;
xiv. 27; ch. xxxix. 2).

Ver. 9.—Ye have seen also. . . are many;
rather, ye saw also... were many. The
breaches of the city of David. “The city of
David” may be here a name for Jerusalem
generally, as “ the city where David dwelt”
(ch. xxix. 1), or it may designate the eastern
hill, where David fixed his residence (2 Sam.
Vas wNeh wi. 1516 025-0 xii Say In
2 Chron. xxxii. 5 we read that Hezekiah at
this time “built up all the wall that was
broken, and raised it up to the towers, and
another wall without, and repaired Millo in
the city of David,” where a particular part
of Jerusalem seems certainly to be meant.
Ye gathered together the waters of the lower
pool. The arrangements made by Hezekiah
with respect to the water-supply at the time
of Seunacherib’s invasion, seem to have been
the following: He found on the north of
the city, where the Assyrian attack was
eertain to be delivered, in the vicinity of the
Damascus gate, a pool or reservoir (ch. vii.
3), fed by a conduit from some natural
source, which lay open and patent to view.
The superfluous water ran off from it by a
“brook ” (2 Chron. xxxii. 4), which passed
down the Tyropceon valley, and joined the
Kedron to the south-east of Ophel. His
first step was to cover over and conceal the
open reservoir, and also the “ brook” which
ran from it, at least as far as the northern
city wall, to prevent their use by the
Assyrians. He then further made a conduit
underground (2 Chron. xxxii. 30) within
the city, along the Tyropceon depression, to
a second reservoir, or “ pool,” also within the
city, which could be freely used by the
inhabitants (see ver. 11; and comp. Ecclus.
xlviii. 17). Further, it is probable that he
carried a conduit from this second pool, under
the temple area, to the “ fount of the Virgin”
on the eastern side of Ophel, and thence
further conveyed the water by a tunnel
through Ophel to the “pool of Siloam.”
(This last may be the work here alluded to.)
The inscription recently discovered at this
pool is probably of Hlezckial’s time (see
‘(Quarterly Statement’ of Palest. Expl. Fund
for April, 1881, p. 70).

Ver. 10.—Ye have numbered ... have
broken down; rather, ye numbered... ye
broke down. The “numbering” was pro-
bably im order to see how many could be
spared for pulling down. The repair of the
walls with materials thus furnished was a
sign of extreme haste and urgency. It would
secm from vers. 7,8 that the repairs were
not begun until the town was invested.

Ver. 11.—Ye made also a ditch; rather, a
lake, or reservotr (see the comment on ver. 9).
But ye have not looked unto the maker

ISAIAH.


thereof; t.e. you have not looked to God,
who in his eternal counsels foreknew and
decreed all the steps that you are taking
for your defence (see below, ch. xxxvii. 26).

Ver. 12.—In that day. The day alluded
to in ver 7, when the choice valleys in the
neighbourhood of Jerusalem were first seen
to be full of a hostile soldiery, and the As-
syrian horsemen were observed drawing them-
selves up opposite the gates. Such a sight
constituted an earnest call upon the people
for inmmediate repentance. Baldness (comp.
ch. xv. 2; Micah i. 16; Amos viii 10). It
has been said that ‘ baldness” was forbidden
by the Law (Cheyne); but this is not so,
absolutely. Baldness was wholly forbidden
to the priests (Lev. xxi. 5; comp. Ezek. xliv.
20); and certain peculiar modes of shaving
the hair, the beard, and the eyebrows, prac-
tised by idolatrous nations, were prohibited
to all the people (Lev. xix. 27; Deut. xiv. 2).
But such sliaving of the head as was practised
by Job (Job i. 20) and other pious men, was
not forbidden to laymen, any more than the
wearing of sackcloth. It was regarded as a
natural mode of exhibiting guief.

Ver. 13.—And behold joy and gladness
(comp. ver. 2). “Let us eat and drink, for
to-morrow we die,” is a common sentiment,
if not a common expression. It has been
supposed to have given rise to the Egyptian
practice of carrying round the model of a
mummy to the guests at feasts. According
to the Greeks, Sardanapalus had a phrase
very like it engraved upon his tomb (‘ An-
cient Monarchies,’ vol. ii. p. 500). Sailors
have often acted upon it, when they found
it impossible to save their ship. On seeing
their city invested, a portion of the inhabit-
ants of Jerusalem, despairing of safety, did
as sailors have done so frequently.

Ver. 14.—It was revealed in mine ears by
the Lord of hosts; rather, the Lord of hosts
revealed himself in mine ears, saying. This
iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye
die. The sinof turning a call to repentance
into an excuse for rioting and drunkenness
is one which God will not pardon. It im-
plies a hardness of heart which cannot fail
to issue in final impenitence.

Vers. 15—24.—PRoPHECY ON THE DEPosI-
TION OF SHEBNA AND THE ELEVATION OF
Eviaxim. In its first and simplest applica-
tion, this section predicts the fall of one
state official and the advancement of an-
other—matters, no doubt, of some impor-
tance in the court history of the time, but
scarcely (with reverence be it said) of such
moment as to be worthy either of prophetic
announcement or of divinely inspired re-
cord. It has, therefore, been generally felt


that there must be a secondary application
2A


354


of the passage. According to some, the two
officials r- present respectively the two cove-
nants, the old and the new; according to
others, they stand for the two great purties
in the Jewish state of the time—that which
put its trust in Jehovah, and that which
leant upon heathen alliances.

Ver. 15.—The Lord God of hosts. This
form, Adonay Jehovah Tsabadth — rarely
used by Isaiah, but occurring above in vers.
5, 12, and 13—scems to show that this
section is in its right place, being intended
asa sequel to the description of Sennache-
rib’s siege. Thistreasurer. The word “ this”’
is contemptuous. That translated “trea-
surer” is of doubtful import. The key to it
is probably to be found in the cognate
noun, translated “storehouse ” in 2 Ciiron.
xxxii. 28, und “store” in 1 Kings ix. 19; 2
Chron. viii. 4, 6; xvi, 4; xvii. 12. Trans-
late, this storeke-per Shebna (see below,
eh. xxxvi. 2, 11, 22; xxxvii. 2; and comp.
2 Kings xviii 18, «te.). The name, which is
not found elsewhere, is thouht to be Syriac
rather than Hebrew, and Shebna himself is
conjectured to have bern a foreign adven-
turer, perhaps “a refugee from Damascus”
(Cheyne). (See the next verse.) Which is
over the house. An office like the imperial
prefectus palatio” ut Rome, or the Frankish
“mayor of the palace” (see Gen. xli. 40;
1 Kings iv. 6; xviii. 3), At this time it
seems to have been the highest office that a
subject could bold (2 Chron. xxvi. 21; 2
Kings xviii. 18, etc.).

Ver. 16. What hast thou here? i.e. what
business, or what right? It seems, certainly,
to be implied that Shebna was wholly un-
connected with Jerusalem. Whom hast
thou here? t.e. what relations? what family ?
To be justified in hewing out a large tomb,
Shebna should have ha: a numerous family
for whom graves would be needed. Other-
wise, his excavation of a grand sepulchre
was merely selfish and ostentatious’ As he
that heweth him out a sepulchre on high.
Jewish tombs of any pretension were gene-
rally excavitions in the solid rock, on the
side of some Lill or mountain, and had often
a very elevated position. Tombs exist on
the slopes of all the hills about Jerusalem,
but are most numerous on the eastern side
of the temple mount, which slopes steeply
to the Kedron valley. A square-topped door-
way leas into a chamber, generally square,
from which recesses, six or seven feet long,
two broad, and three high, are carried into
the rock horizontally, either on a level with
the floor, or with a platform, or shelf, balf-
way up one of the walls. These recesses
have been called locult. After a body had
been placed in one, it was commonly closed
by a stone, which fitted into the end, and


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xxn. 1—25,


thus shut off the body from the chamber.
Chambers had sometimes twelve such loculi.
An habitation ‘comp. Eccles. xii. 5). We
must not suppose, however, that the Jews,
like the Egyptians and Etruscans, regarded
the soul as inhabiting the tomb. The soul
descended into sheél; the grave was the
“habitation ” of the body only.

Ver. 17.—The Lord will carry thee away
With a mighty captivity; rather, the Lord
will hurl thee away, O man, with a hurling ;
ie. “ will hurl theeaway toa distance.” It
is not said that Shebna would be a captive.
Will surely cover thee; literally, will cover
thee with a covering ; i.e. “ will make thee ob-
scure” (Rosen miiller)—a fitting punishment
for one who aimed at attracting attention
and making himself famous (ver. 16).

Ver. 18.—He will surely violently turn
and toss thee, etc.; literally, rolling he will
roll thee with rolling lke a ball, ete. Intoa
large country. Assyria, or perhaps Egypt.
If Shebna was disgraced on account of his
recommending tle Egyptian alliance, he
may not improbably have taken refuge with
Tirhakuh. There the chariots of thy glory
shall be the shame of thy lord’s house;
rather, there shall be the chariots of thy glory,
O thou shame of thy lord’s house. His chariots,
in which he gloried, should accompany him,
either as spoil tuken by the enemy, or as the
instruments of his flight.

Ver. 19.—I will drive thee from thy
station; rather, from thy post, or office
(comp. 1 Chron. xxiii. 28). Shall he pull
thee down. Jehovah seems to be meant in
boti clauses (comp. ch. xxxiv. 16). The
full accomplisliment of this prophecy is no-
where declared to us. We merely find that,
by the time of Rabshakeh’s arrival at Jeru-
salem as Sennacherib’s envoy (ch. xxxvi.
2—4), Shebna had lost his post as prefect
of the pilace, and filled the lower position
of scribe or secretury. He may, however,
have been subsequently furtlier degraded,
and thereupon he may have fled to Egypt,
as Jeroboam did (1 Kings xi. 40).

Ver. 20.—In that day. In the day of
Shebna’s deposition from his office of prefect
of the palace. My servant Eliakim. On the
dignity of this title, when given by God
himself, see the comment on ch. xx. 3.

Ver. 21.—With thy robe .. . with thy
girdle. The dress of office worn by Shebna
would be taken from him, and Eliakim
would be invested therewith. The “robe”
is the long-sleeved cloak or tunic worn com-
monly by persons of rank; the “girdle” is
probably an ornamental one, like those of
the priests (Kxod. xxviii. 39), worn over
the inner tunic. He shall be a father; de.
a protector, counsellor, guide (comp. Job
xxix. 16, “I was a father to the poor : and the
cause which I knew not I searched out”) If


oH, xxi1, 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


355


ES


is, perhaps, implied that Shebna had not
conducted himself as a “ father.”

Ver. 22.—The key of the house of David
will I lay upon his shoulder. A key would
seem to have been the special badge of the
prefect’s office, which included the control
of the stores (ver. 15), and the general
management of the household. It was, per-
haps, a part of the form of investiture, that
the key should be first laid on the prefect’s
shoulder and then delivered into his hand.
Among the Greeks the priests of Ceres are
said to have borne a key on tlieir shoulder,
permanently, asa badge of office (Callimach.,
‘Hymn. ad Cererem,’ 1. 45). The reference
to this passage in Rev. iii. 7 is sufficient to
show that Eliakim, the “ servant of Jehovah ”
(ver 20), is, to a certuin extent, a type of
Christ; perhaps also of his faithful ministers
(Matt. xvi. 19; John xx. 23).

Ver. 23.—I will fasten him as a nail in
& sure place (comp. Ezra ix. 8; Zech. x.
4). The idca intended tov be expressed is
firmness and fixity of tenure. He shall be
for a glorious throne to his father’s house
(compare the next verse). All lis relations,
even the most remote, shall derive honour
from him, and bask in the sunshine of his
prosperity. So shall all members of the
family of God, made sons of God by adop-
tion in Christ, participate in the final glory
of Christ in his eternal kingdom.

Ver. 24.—All the glory. According to
scriptural notions, the “ glory ” of a family
consists very much in its size (Gen xv. 5;
Ps. exxvii 5, etc.). And Christ’s glory
in his final kingdom will consist greatly in
the number of the saved (Rev. vii. 4—9).
The offspring and the issue; t.e. the flourish-
ing scions, and the despised seedlings alike.
The word translated “issue” is a term of
contempt (see Ezek. iv. 15). From the ves-
sels of cups; rather, of bowls (comp. Exod.
xxiv. 6). To all the vessels of flagons;
rather, of pitchers. “A numerous, uniis-
tinguished, family connection” seems to be
intended (Delitzsch).

Ver. 25.— SEQUEL OF THE PROPHECY CON-


OERNING ELIAkm™m. This verse has been
truly called “an enigma” (Kay). Its im-
possible to understand it of Shebna. “ The
nail that was fastened in a sure place” can
only refer to the nail said to have been so
fastened in ver. 23. Are we, then, to under-
stand that Eliakim too will experience a re-
verse of fortune? But then all the foree of
the contrast between him and Shebna would
be gone. Is it not possible that the prophet,
seeing in Eliakim a type of the Messiah,
and becoming more and more Messi:nic in
his utterances, has eniled by forgetting the
type altogether, and being absorbed in the
thought of the antitype? He, the nail, so
surely fixed in his eternal place, would
nevertheless be “removed” for a time, and
then “be cut down and fall” (comp. ch. lii.
14; liii. 8). At the same time would be
“cut off” the burden which Messiah bore
(ch. liii. 12, “ He bare the sin vf many”).

Ver. 25.—In that day. Not the day of
Shebna’s fall, certainly (ver. 20), but some
other. Is not the day that of Christ’s earthly
mission, when it seemed as if his people were
about to acknowledge him (Matt, xxi. l—11;
Mark xi. 1—10; Luke xix. 29— 40), and his
throne to be established. but suddenly Mes-
siali was “ cut off” \ Dan. ix. 26)—stricken
for the transgression of his people (ch. liii,
8)? The burden that was upon it shall be
cut off. The great burden upon the Messiah
was the load of human sin which he had to
bear. “ He himself bare our sins in his own
body on the tree’’ (1 Pet. ii. 24). By his
dc ath this burden was “ cut off” (1 John ii.
2; 2 Cor. v. 19; Eph. ii. 16; Col. ii 14).
For the Lord hath spoken it. The double
attestation, at the bezinning and at the end
of the verse, is a mark of the vast importance
of the announcement contained in it, which
is, in fact, the germ of the great doctrine of
the atonement,


HOMILETICS.


Vers. 4—6.—Isatah weeping for the dauyhter of his people a type of Christ lamenting
over J rusalem. Isaiah was in many respects a type of Christ. His name, whic! signi-
fies “ Salvation of Jehovah,” is a near equivalent of “Jesus,” which means “ Jehovah
is Saviour.” Tradition says that he was of royal lineage, like Jesus. The s) here
of his teaching was in the main Jerusalem, where our Lord’s principal discourses were
delivered. He reproved sin, yet pitied the sinner, like Jesus (see Homiletics on ch.
xv. 5). He was, like Jesus, martyred at Jerusalem. We may, thereiore, without
impropriety, regard the “bitter weeping” of ver. 4 as in some respect the counterpart
of our Lord’s lament on the day of his triumphal entry into the city, when he beheld
it from the brow of Olivet. ‘They were alike iu several respects.


L Boru WERE CAUSED BY PROPHETIC VISION OF THE HORRORS OF A SIEGE. In Isaiah’s


356 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xxu. 1—25.


EU arty at


time the siege had begun. The enemy was investing the place (ver. 7). But his
tears flowe! on account of the future “spoiling” of his people on that “day of trouble
and treading down and perplexity ;” when there was to be “ breaking down of walls
and crying to the mountains ” (ver. 5), and Elam was to “ bear the quiver,” and Kir to
“uncover the shield.” Jesus wept because the days were coming upon Jerusalem, when
“her enemies would cast a trench about her, and compass her round, and keep her in
on every side,” and at last “lay her even with the ground, and her children within
her” (Luke xix. 43, 44), In the one case Rome was the enemy, in the other Assyria,
both equally truculent. In the one case final destruction impended ; in the other a
punishment far short of final destruction, but stilla very severe punishment. In both
cases grievous sins had provoked the catastrophe, yet the thought of these did not
prevent the tears from being shed on account of it.

II. Bors DERIVED THEIR BITTERNESS FROM THE FACT THAT THE SUFFERER WAS OF
KIN TO THE MOURNER. “I will weep,” said Isaiah, “ because of the spoiling of the
daughter of my people.” The woes of other peoples shocked and distressed him to some
extent (ch. xv. 5; xvi. 9—11; xxi. 8,4); but not as those of his own nation, bis
“kinsmen according to the flesh.” And so it was with Jesus. Patriotism moved the
spirits of both mourners, and rendered their grief especially poignant.

III. BorH WERE AGGRAVATED BY THE THOUGHT THAT THE SUFFERING WAS UNEX-
PECTED. Isaiah tells us that at Sennacherib’s siege no preparations had been made
to resist the foe, until the choice valleys were ful! of troops, and the horsemen set in
array at the gates (vers. 7—10). Our Lord gives it as the climax of the horrors at the
siege by Tilus, that Jerusalem had not “known the day of her visitation” (Luke
xix. 44). Jerusalem was at the time expecting the Messiah, who would enable them
to cast off the Roman yoke. She did not know that her Messiah had come. Just
when she was looking for a glorious deliverance, there came a crushing disaster. So
Hezekiah was probably looking for victory by the help of Egypt, when he had to make
the most abject submission—to strip the temple in order to satisfy the cravings of the
conqueror for “spoil,” and to see a large part of his people carried into captivity
(G. Smith, ‘Eponym Canon,’ p. 134).


Vers. 15—24.—Shebna and Eliakim: a moral lesson. It is a remark of Bishop
Butler’s, that the moral government of God, thouzh it may be very imperfectly carried
out, is at any rate beguu, in this world. Many virtues have natural rewards, and
many vices natural punishments, attached to them. Again, though undoubtedly the
righteous do suffer a large share of affliction, and the ungodly are often seen in great
prosperity, yet, on the other hand, very signal instances from time to time manifest
themselves, of the punishment of the wicked in this life by a grievous downfall, and the
reward of the righteous by an exaltation to worldly greatness and honour. The most
sigial instance presented to us in Scripture of the double Nemesis is that of Haman
and Mordecai in the Book of Esther. In that most striking tale, the whole history of
the two men is set before us, and the rise of the one and fall of the other are inter-
connected in a way that lends peculiar interest to the narrative. Here we have simply
a moral contrast, leading to a contrast of result.

I. A mMoraL conrrast, 1. Shebna, selfish, isolated, vain-glorious; noted for his
display of chariots, like Absalom (2 Sam. xv. 1); no “father” to the people under
his charge; no good adviser of the king his master; chiefly desirous of handing his
name down to posterity by a magnificent tomb; perhaps not even a worshipper of
Jehovah. 2. Eliakim, God’s “ servant;” kind and thoughtful for others; rezarded at
“a father,” not only by the people of Jerusalem, but by the entire “ house ” or tribe
of Judah; looked up to by a large body of relations, of whom many were poor and of
low rank, and willingly sharing his prosperity with them; an honest and prudent
counsellor to his king; a faithful worshipper of the One God, whose unity his name
proclaimed, No two dwellers at the same court, no two servants of the same king
could well be more different in character, in circumstances, in moral desert. ae

II. A conrrasT or RESULT. 1. Shebna, degraded from his office, is forced for a
time to serve in one of very inferior dignity. Then he is either further degraded or so
dissatisfied with his position that he cannot bear to retain it. He becomes a refugee in
a distant land, an exile, an outcast. 2. Eliakim, advanced into Shebna’s place, has the


CH, xxl, 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 357


key of the house of David placed upon his shoulder, becomes his king’s most trusty
counsellor and representative, is a glory and a support to his father’s house, and
retains his position, if not till his death, at any rate for a long period.

In estimating the extent to which God’s moral government is carried on in this
world, such instances as those of Haman and Mordecai, Shebna and Eliakim, should
by no means be omitted from our calculation, History contains very many such cases.


Vers, 15—24.—Shebna and Eliakim: an allegory. Shebna, set over the house
of the king by the king himself, but_unfaithful in his office, worldly, carnal, fond of
grandeur and display, typifies the old covenant, and the priesthood to which it was
committed—a priesthood which looked more to the enrichment of the treasury than to


the pure service of God (Mark vii. 11), and which was not above the weakness of
raising up grand sepulchres for its members in a conspicuous place (1 Mace. xiii.
27—30). This priesthood, found wanting, had to be cast away, and a better priest-
hood, after a different order, to be instituted. Eliakim typifies this new priesthood—
a priesthood “made, not after the law of a carnal commandment, but_after the power
of ess life” (Heb. vii. 16). Primarily, he typifies Christ himself, the true
“ Servant of the Lord” (ch. xlii. 1—4; xliii. 10; xlix. 3, 6; lii. 13, etc.), the perpetual
High Priest of his Church, the eternal Possessor of “the key of David, who openeth,
and no man shutteth; and shutteth, and no man openeth” (Rev. iii. 7), who “hath
the keys of hell and_of death” (Rev. i.18). Eliakim was “a father” to Judah and
Jerusatém ; among Christ’s names is that of “Everlasting Father” (ch. ix. 6).
Hliakim was “as a nail fastened in a sure place;” Chiist-is goné up where he “ for
ever sitteth on the right hand of God” (Heb. x. 12). Hliakim had a “ glorious
throne ;” Christ’s throne is that ‘‘ great white” one, which is set in heaven (Rev.
xx. 11), out of which “come lightnings, and thunderings, and voices” (Rev. iv. 5).
On Eliakim hung all the members of his father’s house; on Christ depends, for pardon,
for peace, for life, for glory, every true Christian. Secondarily, Eliakim may be
regarded as typifying the faithful minister of Christ, to whom the power of the keys
is communicated in a certain modified sense (Matt. xvi. 19), who, binding and loosing
according to Christ’s ordinanse, binds and looses effectively, so that none can undo his
work, and, as a faithful steward in the household of Christ, dispenses the good things
committed to his charge by his King and Master. The faithiul minister will not blench
before the powers of evil, any more than Eliakim did before Rabshakeh (ch. xxxvi.
11, 21); he will be “a father” to the people of God, @.e. a protector, a guide, a friend;
and with those who “ hang upon him” he will always be ready to share both his material
and his spiritual blessings.


Ver. 25.—Messiah’s burden and Messiah’s death. How Christ’s death atones for sin


we know not, and need not co curiously inquire, But, if plain words have a plain
meaning, it is impossible to doubt that this is the teaching of Scripture. “ By his


stripes_we are healed ” (ch. liii. 5); “ He is the Propitiation for our sins ” (1 John il. 2);
“Qne died for all” (2 Cor. v.14). It is quite possible that there is something in the
nature of things, which we cannot fathom, that made it impossible for man’s sins to be
forgiven unless God died for them. Our wisdom is to avoid curious speculation, and
to view the matter on its practical side. Thus viewed, it manifestly calls on us for
three things.

I. INTENSE HATRED OF SIN, ON ACCOUNT OF ITS HAVING CAUSED MEssIAH’s DEATH.
If an animate, or even an inanimate, thing has caused the death of one we loved, how
bitterly we detest it! Often we cannot bear to look upon it, nay, even to see a thing
of the same kind. How, then, should we hate sin—hateful in itself, hateful in its effects,
hateful in its origin, most hatelul_in_that it _caused the deat of the one Man who
alone of all that have ever lived did not deserve to die d he, moreover, One who
dearly loved us, who came down from heaven for us, lived a life of privation and
suffering for us, at last died for our sakes.

II. InTENsE LOVE oF CHRIST, ON ACCOUNT OF HIS HAVING DIED FoR us. “ Greater
love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends.” But Christ
died for his enemies. Sin is an insuperable barrier between God_and_ man, sets them at
variance, makes them adversaries. And till Christ: died man could not be forgiven.


358 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (on. xxu1. 1—25,


So he died for those with whom he was at enmity! And died by what a death!
1. More painful probably than any other. 2. Considered at the time more disyraceful.
3. Agyravated by the insults of lookers-on. 4. Regarded as bringing a man under a
curse,

Ill. Inrense Love oF Gop THE FATHER, ON ACCOUNT OF HIS GIVING HIS Son TO DIE
FoR us. We caunot realize the love of the Father for the Son; but we cannot doubt
that it transcends any love known on earth. Yet he gave him to suffer all that he
suffere|—and why? For us, Because he loved us, As our Lord himself says, “ God
so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth
in him should not p-rish, but have everlasting life” (John iii. 16). If the knowledge
of this fact fail to stir up love towards the Father in our souls, we must be “ past
feeling” (Eph. iv. 19), utterly dead to any high motive, scarcely better than “ brute
beasts” (Jude 10).


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1—14.—Judyment upon Jerusalem. I. THE PROPHET AS SPECTATOR. The
valley of vision seems tv mean Jerusalem as a whole, round about which are mountains
(Ps. cxxv. 2); the city is spoken of, when compared with the surrounding mountains,
as the ‘inhabitant of the valley,” otherwise as the “rock of the plain” (Jer. xxi. 13;
comp. xvii. 8). If [saiah is gazing from his house in the lower town, the city would
appear as in a valley in relation to the mountains inside as much as those outside


(Delitzsch). He sees the whole population crowded together on the house-tops, and
the air is Hled_with the uproar of merriment. The house- tie Ware places Of seecrt at
festival-time (Judg. xvi. 27; Neh, viii. 16).

Il. THE MIRTH-OF DESPAIR. It was famine and pesti ence which, forcing the people
intodespair, had brought about this mad rebound of hollow merriment. The slain of
the cit, had not been slain upon the firld; but the crowding in of fugitives from the
country had occasioned the plague. The descrij tion reminds us of Zephaniah’s picture of
Nineveh : “ This is the rejoicing city that dwelt carelessly, that said in ber heart, I am,
and there is none beside me” (ii. 15). And again we think of scenes in connection
with the plazues in the Italian cities of the Middle Ayes, when revelry and story-telling
are said to have gone on amongst groups who had withdrawn themselves trom the
horrors around them. How terrible the contrast between the dark backvround of


calamity and this hollow feverish exhibition of merriment in the foreground! “T said
of laughter, What is it?” Let us thank God for the precious gift of humour. Its
light, lambently playing upon the sternest and most awful scenes and imagery of the
mind, was given to relieve the tragedy of life. In melancholy minds the source of
humour is deeply seated. But how different the cheerfulness which springs from the
sense that the scheme of things is sound and right, that “God’s in his heaven, all’s
right with the world,” and that which confronts a hopeless future with mad defiance!
There is something lurid, ominous, in the latter, full of foreboding; and the scene in
Jerusalem may be dwelt upon as typical of the ill-timed mirth of the sinner when
danger is impending, soon to be quenched in silence and night. The rulers have fled
away from the devoted city; in the face of the enemy they have flung down their bows
and yielded themselves prisoners, All is lost.

Ill. THE Forecast oF poom. 1. The grief of the prophet. In warm patriotism he
identifies himself with his city and his people, and gives way to bitter tears: a proto-
type of Jesiis in later days, looking on the doomed city, perhaps, from some similar point
of view. We are reminded also of Jeremiah, whose heart “fainted” under a similar
sense of the miseries of the people, and who exclaims, “Oh that my head were full of
waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might bewail the slain of my people!”
(iv. 31; ix. 1). These are living examples of compassion, and of true patriotic
feeling, including a true Chured feeling. “ We are altogether unworthy of being
reckoned in the number of the children of God, and added to the holy Church, if we
do not dedicate ourselves and all that we have to the Church in such a manner that
we are not separate from it in any respect. Especially the ministers of the Word ought
to be moved by this feeling of grief, because, being appointed to keep watch and to look


cH. xxi. 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 859


Ee)


at a distance, they ouzht also to groan when they perceive the tokens of approaching
ruin” (Calvin). 2. The siege and crpture. ‘“ We seem to see and hear the last hurry-
ing stages of the siege and capture” (Cheyne). In one of the valleys the hosts of the
enemy are seen thickly trampling and spreading dismay and confusion all around. As
the undermining of the walls by the siege artillery goes on, cries of woe beat against
the surrounding hills, and are echoed back again. The terrible famed bowmen of Elam
(comp. Jer. xlix. 35) and the people of Kir, together forming, as it would seem, the
vanguard of Assyria, are seen advancing. The valleys ahout the city, all teeming
with associations of the past—Kedron, Gihon, Rephaim, Hinnom—are ploughed by
hoofs of horses and wheels of chariots; and the foe is drawn up in column, ready to
enter the “great gate,” so soon as it shall be broken down by the battering-rams.
3. The state of the inhabitants, Jehovah draws aside the curtain from Judah. This
may mean (1) he exposes their weakness to the enemy; or (2) he takes away the blind-
ness of the people to their danger, Probably the former. In either case the hand of
an overruling Providence is recognized. The “forest house,” or arsenal built by
Solomon on Zion, is examined (1 Kings vii. 2; x. 17; ef. ch. xxxix. 2). The “ city of
David,” t.e. the fortress on Mount Zion, is inspected by the leading men, and the
numerous breaches in the walls are observed. They survey the houses, and take
material from them to repair the wall. They concentrate the water-supply in one
reservoir—the “lower pool,” and form a basin between the two walls. These prepara-
tions may be compared with those of Hezekiah (2 Chron. xxxii. 2—5).

IV. FaTaL FoRGETFULNESS. All these precautions would be too late! A dreadful
word! And why? 1. The Divine counsel hasbeen forgotten. ‘ Hast thou not heard
long ago, how I have done it; and of ancient times, that I have formed it? now have
I brought it to pass” (ch. xxxvii. 26). These_harpers, and violinists, and tabret-
players, and feqaters Save-pot “regarded the work_oflgthovah, nor considered the
operation of his hands” (ch. v. 12). Self-reliance may be religious, or it may mean an
attempt to be independent of God, and so end in alienation from God. How feeble
and how foolish policy must become if from the first it ignores the Divine will, and at
the last only comes to acknowledge a destiny above human might and human calcula-
tion! The idea of all that will be exists in the mind of God; we may know something
of his meaning by constantly consulting the “living oracles,” by truthful thinking,
by loyal acting—in a word, by communion with the living God. What can attention
to ramparts and ditches and reservoirs avail, if men have not found their defence in
God? If he be trusted, what is there to fear? If he be denied, what can shield from
calamity? “The fate of Jerusalem is said to have been fashioned long ago in God,
But Jerusalem might have averted its realization, for it was no absolute decree, Th
Jerusalem repented, that realization would be averted” (Delitzsch). 2. Divine warn-
ings have been neglected. God had called—in that day; at every critical time. By
many ways he speaks—by the living and passionate tones of prophet and brother man,
by the general course of events, by the touch of sorrow, by the hints of personal


experience. There is a time for everything ‘the sun; to know our opportunity
makes the wisdom of the world ; to kno e time of our visitation ” is the wisdom


of heaven. But, alas! the Jews knew it not; “rushing to the banquet-table with
despair in their hearts, and wasting the provisions which ought to have been husbanded
for the siege.” ‘ Let ug eat _snd-drin’s <_fortoporrow we die.” The sensualism of
despair (Cheyne). When the light of life, Ly rcomcre eea hope-toward God, dies out,
what remains but to counterfeit its glow by some artificial illumination, kindled from
the tow of physical excitement? A love of life which scoffs at death (Velitzsch). Tis
dangerous to scoff; to scoff at the great scoffer Death, what is this but the last extreme
of self-abandonment ? And does not despair imply the last sin we can conmit? And
is not recklessness its evidence? And follows there not upon all this the shadow of a
state unforgiven, a mind eternally unreconciled ? Who can but tremble as he meditates
on these things? ‘Probably if the real feeling of the great mass of worldly men were
expressed, they could not be better expressed than in the language of Isaiah: ‘ We
must soon die, at all events; we cannot avoid that—it is the common doom of all.
And since we have been sent into a dying world; since we have had no agency in being
placed here; since it is impossible to prevent this doom,—we may as well enjoy lile
while it lasts, and give ourselves to pleasure and revelry. While we can, we will take


360 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISATAH. (cn. xxm. 1—25.


our comfort, and, when death comes, we will submit to it, borause we cannot avoid it’”
(Barnes), But such argumentation cannot really satisfy the conscience, Blessed the
Word which evermore, in the mercy of the Eternal, calls to repentance, and reminds us
that “now is the acceptable time, now is the day of ealvation ”|—J.


Vers. 15—19.—Denunciation of Shebna. 1. SHEBA THE HOUSE STEWARD. He was
the steward of the household—a high office, as we may see from the allusion in ch.
xxxvi, 3; xxxvii. 2. Once it was held by a king’s sen (2 Chron. xxvi. 21; cf. 1 Kings
iv. 6; xviii. 3). This officer stood nearest the king, and had the domestic affairs of the
palace under his superintendence. The office of the mayor of the palace under the
Merovingian kines of France has been compared with it. It is thought that Shebna
was not a native Israelite, as his father’s name is not mentioned. Possibly he was a
Syrian from Damascus, and a leader of the Hzyptianizing party, whose perverse and
crooked policy in collecting the subsidy for Egypt is denounced by the prophet in
ch. xxx. 12.

Il. His pripE AND OSTENTATION. He was busy hewing out for himself a family
sepulchrein the rock. We realize what is raeent when we see figured in works of art
the magnificent rock-built tombs of Persia, of Lydia and Phrygia and Lycia, of Pheeni-
cia, and the vast pyramid-tombs of Egypt. There kings desired to “lie in honour, each
in his own house” (ch. xiv. 18). So, 00, grandees—Hshmunazar King of Sidon,
Joseph of Arimathea, etc.—bvuilt themise) ves sepulchres in their lifetime. At Rome we
look upon the famous tomb of Hadriaa, now called the Castle St. Angelo, and the tomb of
Cecilia Metella upon the Appian Way, the pyramid of Cestius. What may we learn from
the habit of tomb-building? It expresses man’s protest against the doom of mortality.
On the tomb of Sardanapalus is said to bave been written, “ Eat, drink, and love; for the
rest is little worth;” and yet tne tom itself is a witness that there hovers before the
mind the thought of the fatuve, in which man would still live and still be remembered
by his fellows, even though only dy means of the lifeless stone. ‘Thus it expresses
man’s infinite longings, the czaviags of a nature that nothing but eternity can satisfy.
There was, then, somethiagz great, something even sublime, in this tomb-building instinct.
“The power of acting for a distant object, of realizing distant good, and reaching
forward to it over an intervening period of labour, has something moral in it.” Yet,
on the otner hand, the motive may be something of a much lower order—vanity, self-
exaltation. So che prophet views the undertaking of Shebna. He has no right, as
a foreigner, thas to appropriate the soil of the sacred city, the slope of one of its hills.

Il. THe punvxczarion. In the vehemence of his indignation, the prophet declares
that Jehovah will clutch the offender tightly, will roll him as a ball, and toss him into
@ broad Jand; thither he, with the chariots on which he has been rolling about the city,
shall go to die! Noticé the opposition between the might of Jehovah and the weak-
ness of mere man, however exalied. Shall mortal man attempt to rival the Eternal,
proudly seeking to perpetuate his memory on earth (compare the thoughts in Job iv.17 ;
x. 5; xxii, 2)? The leading Hebrew teaching recurs—the insignificance of ephemeral
and frail man in presence of the mighty, just, and ever-living Goud. ‘The renown of
that sepulchre which Shebna had built is indirectly contrasted with the ignominy which
quickly followed it.” “That the mask of his high rank might not screen him from
the prediction, the prophet expressly states that the office which he holds aggravates
his guilt and renders him more detestable. Let princes, therefore, if they do not wish
to expose themselves and their houses to reproaches, learn to act with judgment in
appointing men to hold office . . . Infer that God is highly displeased with that ambi-
tion by which men scek to obtain undying renown in the world instead of being satis-
fied with those honours which they enjoy during life. God punishes their haughtiness
and presumption, and causes those things which they wished to be the records of their
glory to become their disgrace and shame” (Calvin).—J.


Vers. 20—25,.—Instalment of Kliakim. I, A SERVANT oF JEHOVAH. So he is cha-
racterized, The title may be of personal, spiritual, import, or of official; or both may
be blended, as in the case of Isaiah himself (ch. xx. 3); or there may be a separation
of the two. Unhappy for a nation or for a Church if the true servants of the Eternal.
the true devetees of right and truth, are excluded from the places of honour and influs


oH. xx. 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 861


TT


ence; or if the “ ministers and stewards” of Divine mysteries are so only technically
and officially. The true servant must in any case be called. He must not push himself
forward, but must be drawn forward by invisible, Divine leading. He does not “achieve
greatness,” but it is “ thrust upon hima.” “In that day I will call to my servant.”
The words suggestively remind us of that principle of Divine selection which runs
through the order of the world. In this, in every day, the “ right men” are wanted
for every place. In this day, too, there is much excitement about education, What
men can do by the instruction of the intellect is very limited; in quiet places and in
hidden ways, unknown to the schools, the Almighty is growing men and training men
till the time is ripe for their service, and his call is heard.

Il. His mvestirure. 1. Jt ts the solemn, symbolical way of transferring an office.
We think of Elijah finding the son of Shaphat_plonghing with twelve yoke of
oxen, and pepuc hts mantle upon him as he passed by (1 Kings xix. 19). That was
the prophet’s simpler dress; this is the tunic of a man of rank and state. The girdle
was an essential article of Oriental dress, worn by all classes and by both sexes. The
fineness of its quality denoted the rank of the wearer. Here it was probably similar to
that worn by the priests (Exod. xxviii. 39; xxxix. 29). Josephus describes it as
made of linen so fine that it looked like the slough of a snake, and it was embroidered
with flowers of scarlet, blue, purple nt., 11. 7. 2). ‘This is the only place where
the word abneth is used for any but_a priestly girdle. 2. The girdle is in other ways
symbolic, Jehovah “girds kings with a girdle,” and “ ungirds them according to
his pleasure” (Job xii. 18). Thus to be “girded with strenuth” is a symbol of
Divine invigoration (1 Sam. ii. 4); to be “girded with gladness,” of refreshment
(Ps. xxx. 11). “Have your loins girt about with truth” (Eph. vi. 14); “Gird up
the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to the end”—are noble Christian exhorta-
tions, carrying with them all the force of the old Oriental imagery. ‘To be ungirt is
a way of describing nervelessness, lack of strength and manhood ; and the very picture
of the good servant is of one “ whose loins are girt about, whose lamp is burning.”

Ill. THE sprrir AND FUNCTIONS OF THE STEWARD. Il. He is to be like a father to
the people. An appropriate term for the chief man of a town or the prime minister of
a country (1 Chron. ii, 24; iv. 5; cf. ix. 6; Job xxix. 16; Judg. v. 7). So the Roman
senators were putres. It speaks of benevolence united with wisdom and experience—a
rule both firm and loving. The great Father in heaven must be the sublime ideal before
us in all positions of rule and influence on earth. 2. He ts to bearthe key. This isan
ancient_badge of office ; Callimachus represents the priestess of Demeter as having a key
upon her shoulder (‘ Hymn. ad Cererem,’ 1. 45), and in the ‘ Supplices’ (291) of Aischy-
lus, in like manuer, 16, priestess of Héra, is “‘ key-holder ” of the goddess. For illustration
the following interesting passage may be cited from Roberts: “ How much delighted
was I when I first saw the people, especially the Moors, going along the streets, with
each his key on his shoulder! The handle is sometimes made of brass, though some-
times of silver, and is often nicely worked in a device of filagree. ‘The way it is
carried is to have the coruer of a kerchief tied to a ring; the key is then placed on the
shoulder, and the kerchief hangs down in front. other times they have a bunch of
large keys, aud then they have half on one side of the shoulder and half on the other.
For a man thus to march along with a large key on his shoulder, shows at once that
he is a person of consequence. ‘ Roman is in great favour with the modehir, for he
now carries the key.’ ‘ Whose key have you got on your shoulder?’ ‘I shall carry
my key on my own shoulder.’” (For the application to the apostles and to the Lord
himself, see Matt xvi. 19; Rev. iii. 7.) 38. His tenwre of office. ‘The nails must be
those hooks or spikes which were worked into the mortar of the walls of houses while
still-soft, answering the purpose of _cramp-i to hold the walls together, and pegs to
hang things.on. So, ee eon see helmets, swords, spoils of war, were
hung on such nails. An appropriate image these of stability, of (to use a modern
coinage) reliableness. All may depend upon a man such as this; all “ know where to
find him; ” sacred and precious trusts may be reposed on him without fear of disap-
pointment. ‘Sv in Zech, x. 4 the “ peg” means a prince.

IV. ABUSES OF STATION AND OFFIcE. ‘There is “another side” to everything good
in human institutions. ‘All tue honour of his father’s house” will be found hanging
npon Eliakim. All his bumble relations—tbe “small fry,” as we say; the “small


362 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. | [cn. xxu. 1—25


—


vessels,” as the prophet calls them—will look up to him, and he will shed lustre and
give support to all. The allusion is to vessels of a small kind—basins, leathern bottles,
earthen pitchers. We must respect the judgment of the majority of commentators,
who see a turn in the prophecy about Eliakim here. ‘There is an impression of nepo-
tism, of favouritism; and it seems that the firm “ peg ” is, after all, to be loosened from
its place. And if so, how instructive the passage! How is it that man, once high in
esteem and general confidence, came to be weighed in the balances and found wanting ?
Some weakness of flesh and blood, some_undue leaning to_one’s_kith and kin, some
element of partiality or favouritism, is often the cause. “ His family makes a wrong
use of him; and he is more yiélding than he ought to be, and makes a wrong use of his
office to favour them! He therefore falls, and brings down all with him that hung
upon the peg, and who have brought him to ruin through the rapacity with which they
have grasped at prosperity ” (Delitzsch). Whatever view may be taken of the passage,
*twere well to remind ourselves of the old lesson, ‘‘ Let him that thinketh he standeth
take heed lest he fall.” God raises up and brings low. Let us walk softly, nor boast
ourselves if for a time we flourish like a green bay tree. Our own weakness may, like
a worm, be gnawing at our root. The “pitted speck” in the “ garnered fruit” may
be spreading, the “ little rift” in the lute be widening.


“More the treacherous calm I dread
Than tempests sailing overhead.”


Let us be content with obscurity, with fallentis semita vitz, seeing that station brings
out men’s weaknesses no less than their strength, and the loftier the columuar height
of the great, the more overwhelming the fall.—J.


Ver. 17.— Captivity, and yet safety. ‘* Behold, the Lord will carry thee away with a
mighty captivity, and will surely cover thee.” These threatenings of the Alinighty had
mercy at the heart of them. Captivity was a drastic remedy, but it once and again
saved the health of Israel. It was a time of home-longing and sickness of heart. It
was a time when the old religious memories flooded the heart till they filled it with
an aching sense of shame for sin, and sujplication for mercy.

I. Gop CARRIED THEM AWAY. ‘lhe enemies of Israel were but instruments mm the
hands of Jehovah. He reigned over their interests as truly then as in their more
prosperous day. ‘ The day is thine, the night also is thine.” And in the Captivity,
God was disciplining the people as no other dispensation could. ‘Their lofty looks were
changed for penitential tears, and their proud hearts were brought low. God would in
due time “turn ayaip Zhe ca) tivity of Israel;” and the Law would be read again, and
not only be read, but be “ lived.”

Il. Tae CapTiviry WAS A MIGHTY ONE. It occurred to a mighty multitude; it
affected mighty interests; and it produced mighty results. For this people God had
formed for himself, to show forth his praise. We have to learn the lesson too. How
tremendous are the powers of gricf and loss, change and sickness, under which God
often brings his children captive now! We are “prisoned” by pain and circumstance.
In our hours of solitude and sorrow, God renews our will, separates the chaff from
the wheat in our character, and meetens us for service here and for the inheritance of
the saints in light hereafter.

Ill. Tue covering was surE. They were not cast away; they were only cast
down, The almighty wings were still over them. In strange lands, amid strange
fa istening to strange-voices, they could not sing the Lord’s song in a strange
land. But the time_of joy was to return. God was very near them still, and none
could really harm them, What a covering! Not the mere roof of the home; not
the mere outward raiment; but the Lord himself was there, spreading his shield over
them, when they were away from the munition of rocks and from the defences of dear
Jerusalem. Sure! That is what we want. He also is our Dwelliny-place in all
generations and under all skies—W. M. S.


Vers. 1—14.— The sorrow of the world.” We have here a striking picture of that
which. in distinction from “ godly sorrow,” Paul calls “ the sorrow of the world.”
I, THat GoD SENDS SORROW TO HUMAN soULS. ‘These national distresses were to be


cu, xx11, 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 863


of his sending; it was to be “a day of trouble... by the Lord of hosts” (ver. 5).
The human instrumentality would be visible enough, and both those who inflicted the
blow and those who endured it—their enemies and themselves—might fail to discern
any Divine hand at work ; nevertheless, it was a chastisement that came from heaven,—
it was sent of God. And to whatever second causes we may trace our troubles in the
day of our “treading down and of perplexity,” or in the day of our loss, or suffering, or
bereavement, we may always go beyond the instrumentality to him “of whom are all
things,” and feel that what has happened to us is “ by the Lord of hosts.”

Il. THAT HIS PURPOSE THEREIN IS OUR SPIRITUAL AMENDMENT. “In that day did
the Lord God of hosts call to weeping,” etc. (ver. 12). God would then invite to a
general humiliitioa—he would draw their minds to a view of their guilt, and lead
them to repentance and so to restoration and life. This is always the Divine purpose in
adversity. God seeks our spiritual amendment. Other metho:ls of instruction failing,
he lays his hand upon us so that we must feel his touch; he speaks to us in tones it
is difficult to disregard ; and we know that the thing from which he calls us is sin—
sin in one or other (or in some) of its many forms; we know also that the thing to
which he summons us is rectitude—rightness of heart and life.

Ill. Tuat THIs His DIVINE END IS SOMETIMES ENTIRELY DEFEATED. “ Behold joy
and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep,” etc. (ver. 13). Both national history
and the biography of individual men prove to us tliat affliction may produce the very
Opposite result to that for which it is sent. Never has the city been so abandoned to
vice as when the plague was raging and the dead_lay unburied in the streets. Many
a@ man allows adversity to drive him to dissolute enjovments or to ruinous crimes,
instead of letting it allure him to a Divine Deliverer. Trouble that was intended to
lead to heavenly wisdom and to the service of God only too often hardens a stony
heart, makes still ungodlier the man who has forsaken the sanctuary, fastens the fetters
of some enslaving vice on the limbs of its wretched victim.

IV. THAT UNSANCTIFIED SORROW LEADS DOWN TO SPIRITUAL DEATH. This iniquity
would not be purged until they died (ver. 14). It would end, not only with, but in
death. Death is the penalty of unsanctified sorrow: “ The sorrow of the world worketh
death” (2 Cor. vii. 10). It leads down inevitably to that utter estrangement from
God; tha’ unlikeness to God, and that condemnation by God, in which spiritual death
is found here; it leads on to that final banishment from his presence and glory in which
it will be found hereafter.—C,


Ver. 4.— Christian patriotism. The profound concern which the prophet of the
Lord displays for “the daughter of his people,” showing us that the reception and the
record of the prophetic vision did not interfvre with his strong feelings as a Hebrew
patriot, may sugyest thoughts on Christian patriotism. This is to be clearly distin-
guished from: 1. The evuggerated self-consciousness or vain-gloriousness which some
“patriots” exhibit. 2. The ewclusiveness of spirit which others betray. 3. The diseased
sensitiveness which leads many to catch at the first apparent international wrong as a
valid casus belli, A great deal passes current as patriotism which would have been
allowable, if not creditable, under heathenism, but which is simply false and guilty
under the |)ivine teaching we have received who have learned of Christ. That man is
the true friend of his country who takes—

I. A DEEP AND PRACTICAL INTEREST IN ITS POLITICAL WELFARE. A part of the
“spoiling ” to which Isaiah refers is to be found in the threatened seizure of his
country’s political independence, its being made subject and tributary to the invader ;
this could not be other than a calamity of the first consequence in his eyes, The
Christian patriot, while he ought to oppose most strenuously all unrizhteous projects
on the part of his own people, does well to be earnestly concerned for the integrity,
the independence, the reputation, of his native land, : oo

JI. A PRACTICAL INTEREST IN ITS MATERIAL WELL-BEING. No doubt this “ spoiling”
included, in the prophet’s thought, the destruction of its property and the deportation
of its wealth. Considering how all the citizens, the wage-recciving multitudes as well
as the wealthier minority, are affected by the material prosperity of the land, it is right
and Christian for us to make this a matter of careful and conscientious effort.

Ill, A PROFOUND INTEREST IN ITS MORAL AND SPIRITUAL CONDITION. It was (1)


564 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cn. xxi 1—25,


the moral condition of Jerusalem, feasting and making merry on the day of its
humiliation (vers, 12,13); and also (2) its spiritual condition, forgetting its true
Deliverer (ver. 11), and slighting his discipline (ver. 12), which so much distressed the
holy prophet. And it should be the moral and spiritual condition of our country
which should create in us and call forth from us our most profound solicitude, And
this because (1) that is the matter of most intrinsic importance ; (2) that is the thing
on which the Divine judgment and determination will depend; and (8) that will be
ultimately decisive of our country’s political and material interests. If we would do
our whole duty in relation thereto, we shall: 1. Join in prayer for Divine mercies. 2, Be
careful to exert the influence of a godly and irreproachable example. 3. Exert all our
power as individual men and through useful organizations for the guidauce and the
elevation of the people.—C.


Vers, 15—25.—Human reckoning and Divine interruption. We have one instance,
if not two—according to the application we give to the “nail” of the twenty-fifth
verse—of ill-founded security. It is a lesson very necessary to teach, for it seems to
be one very hard to learn,

I. Human rEckonina. Shebna had carefully and successfully built_up_his position
in, the-state, and he made sure that he should keep it; he had not only. ~ feathered is
nest,” but he had made up his mind that he should “ diein- his nest.” He had arranged
beforehand the place ‘of his sepulchre (ver. 16). ‘The nail was fastened in a sure
place ” (ver. 25). All his plans were drawn, and he confidently anticipated that they
would be justified by the event. In this respect he was but a type and specimen of
mankind; we do the same thing in our turn and in our way. 1. It may seem strange
that it should be so. A modest view of our own capacities; the instruction we gain
by reading what has happened to men in the past; the lessons we gather from our
observation of human life ;—all these might save us from the error, but they do not,
2. The fact is that men do indulge in this illusion: the boy counts on the prizes he
will win at schocl, and the young man on the honours he will gain at college; the
tradesman reckons on the profits he will make in business, and the professional man
on the mark he will make in his vocation; the minister anticipates the work he will
accomplish in his sphere, and the statesman indulges the confident expectation that he
will carry the measures on which his heart is set. Others, we know, have failed, but
we, we think, shall avoid their errors and escape their discomfiture.

Il. Divine inteRRvPTION. Shebna’s calculations were to be entirely overthrown;
instead of living on and dying in Jerusalem, and being buried in the sepulchre he had
so elaborately prepared, he should be hurled away like a ball by the strong arm of
Jehovah into a distant land, where he should live and die in inglorious exile. 1. It
may be that Divine judgment will overtake us, as it evidently overtook and overwhelmed
this prefect of the palace. His ostentation (ver. 16), his luxury (“the chariots of thy
glory,” ver. 18), his tyranny (implied in characterizing his successor “a father to the
inhabitants,” in contrast to his own severities), brought down upon him the Divine
displeasure and the prophetic denunciation. Sooner or later owr sin will find us out.
If we owe our elevation to our iniquity, or if, on the summit of our success, we fear not
God, neither regard the claims of man, we may be sure that at some time and in some
way defeat and dishonour will await us. 2. Or it must be that disciplinury changes
will affect us. Whatever there is in sorrow which is not judgment is discipline. And
of this latter, we must all have our share; we shall find that events will not fill up the
outlines we draw, that our future will be very different from that which we picture it
now: boyhood will not prove to be all that childhood imagines ; still less will manhood
be what youth supposes ; friends will forsake us, schemes will be thwarted, hopes will
be extinguished, props will be cut in twain, clouds will come up and rains will pour
down, as we little think to-day. The hour will come when the nail that now seems
so fast will be removed, and all that hangs upon it be brought to the ground (ver.
25). (See Luke xii. 16—21; Jas. iv. 13—16.)

III. THE Goop ON WHICH WE MAY RECKON WITHOUT FEAR OF INTERRUPTION.
1. Holy service, either in the form of action or endurance. 2. The favour of God, the
friendship of Jesus Christ. 3. Eternal blessedness. Between the faithful soul and
these high hopes no power can intervene.—C,


oH. xx1L, 1—25,] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 865


Vers. 20—25.—Authority and influence. On the deposition of Shebna, Eliakim was
appointed prefect, clothed with the robe and invested with the keys of office; hence-
forth he should shut and open, should appoint and depose according to his good
pleasure. We look at—

I. THE EXCELLENCE OF HUMAN AUTHORITY. 1. J¢ satisfies a craving which is both
broad and deep. Doubtless his succession to the high office vacated by Shebuva brought
great gratification to the heart of Eliakim. Men covet office, and the authority which
it brings. Many meek and lowly minded ones, indeed, there are who have no such
thirst of spirit; but, on the other hand, there are very many who profoundly desire and
exceedingly enjoy it. The craving is both broad and general; its satisfaction, conse-
quently, brings an intense and a widespread delight. 2. It conduces to order and to
all those activities and pleasures of which order is the first condition. 8. Jt enables
its holder to confer benefits (1) on those whom he is most desirous of serving—“a
glorious throne to his father’s house,” a source of strength and succour to all those
related to him; and also (2) on those whom he should account it a privilege to serve
—he can be “a father to the inhabitants,” etc., a source of blessing to his fellow-
countrymen ; (3) on those who are specially deserving—a man in authority can admit
to office those who are capable and honourable, while he can exclude those who are
incapable and undeserving (ver. 22). On the other hand, it has to be remembered that
authority (1) often injures its possessor by making him selfish or self-sufficient ; (2) is
often grossly and pitifully abused ; (3) is often suddenly and unexpectedly withdrawn,
plunging him who holds it into humiliation and distress (ver. 25).

Il. THE GREATER EXCELLENCE OF HOLY INFLUENCE. Our Lord gave his apostles
promise of power; but he distinctly told them that such power would lie, not in the
exercise of authority, but in the exertion of influence (Mark x. 42—45). ‘They were
to be commissioned to deliver the most vitalizing and transforming truth, and to live
a life purified and ennobled by that truth; their utterance and their action together
would have a most decisive influence on individual men and on society at large. We
inherit the privilege which the Master conferred on them. The truth they taught we
teach ; the life they lived we live. And this Divine, this redeeming, this everlasting
wisdom, thus revealed from God, and thus manifested throuvh us, is a far greater and
a far mightier thing than the exercise of any human authority whatever. [or by their
attitude towards it men determine their destiny; by it they stand or fall (Matt. xxi.
44; John iii. 36; 2 Cor. ii. 15, 16). It “opens, and no man can shut; it shuts, and
no man can open.” It is not only a mightier, but also a more blessed thing. This
holy influence, thus exerted by the wise and good, through lip and life, (1) shuts men
out of evils into the power of which none can thenceforth draw them ; (2) opens the gate
into kingdoms from which none can exclude them—those of Divine wisdom, of holi-
ness, of usefulness, of heavenly joy and glory; (3) has a salutary and elevating effect
upon the heart of him who wields it. It blesses him that gives as much as him that
takes. 1. Only the minority amoug mankind can possibly exercise authority ; it is
to a small fraction only that it will prove a blessing; and from all of tliese it will soon
be removed by the fickleness of man or by the lapse of time. 2. But it is open to every
child of man to exert a holy influence ; this will confer a true, spiritual, undying good
on others, and will leave a lasting, inward blessing on the giver. It is far the better of
the two.—C.


Vers. 1, 2.—Jll-timed joy. The “valley of vision” is, without doubt, Jerusalem,
though Mr. Birks thinks Samaria may be ineant. The Prophet Isaiah speaks thus
poetically of it as the place where he had his visions. Now he sees the people hurrying,
in great excitement, on to the flat roofs of the city, to watch the gathering hosts of
Sennacherib’s army. ‘The attitude of the people surprised Mim. At such a time, when
pestilence decimated the inhabitants, the leading citizens had fled to secure their
personal safety, and the enemy was at the very door, he looked for humiliation before
God, or at least the calmness of a noble courage; but alas! even in such an hour it was
a “tumultuous city, a joyous city.”

I. Joy 18 ML-TIMED WHEN IT EXPRESSES SELF-SECURITY. Foolish notions of the
impregnability of their city possessed the Jews, in spite of the fact that it had been
taken, Self-reliance blinded them to the elements.of weakness <n themselves, and to


366 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xxm. 1—25,
er  ———— _ _—c— aS a—V


the strength and energy of their foes. We have heard many a man laugh at threatened
danger, and say, “1 am safe,” and show, as Jerusalem did, the folly of joy with no
better basis than self-security.

Il. Joy 18 ILL TIMED WHEN IT EXPRESSES THE RECKLESSNESS OF DESPAIR. Some
think tiat was rather the spirit of Jerusalem at this tine—the spirit which says, “ Let
us eat and drink; for to-m e die” (see vers. 12, 13). Self-vestraint is very
dgpendSee ORCS Ilustrete. by the wild excitement and fovlis!: things done when
shipwreck is imminent; or by the riotings of the man who knows he is within an
hour of binkruptey. “1 said of laughter, It is mad.” There is an old saying which
explains such reckless, beartless joy: “ Whom the gods would destroy they first
demeu..’ All such joy is foolish and perilous, especially becanse it keeps men from the
duty of the hour, the doing of which might be the means of delivering them from the
danger.

Ill. Joy 18 ILL TIMED WHENEVER IT HAS NO ROOTAGE OF RELIANCE ON GoD. Joy
in God is the joundation of all joy. We can rejoice in what we pcssess; for it is
God-viv.n. We can rejoice in what we lose; for the Lord taketh away. We can
rejoice in the future; for “the Lord doth provide.” We can rejoice in the darkness
and peril; for “ he that keepeth Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps.”—R. T.


Ver. 2.—The moral influence of pestilence. “Thy slain men are not slain with the
sword.” “The words imply something like a reproach of cowaidice. Those who had
perished had not died fighting bravely in battle, but by the pestilence which then, as
at all times, was prevalent in the crowded streets of a besieged city.” The law of
epidemic disvase is found to be this—the conditions which are peculiarly favourable to
the development of vice and immorality are exactly the conditions most favourable
to epidemic disease. Illustrative reterences may be made to overcrowding in houses,
and to want of cleanliness, and neglect of adequate sanitary ;recautions, From the
picture given in the passage now before us we gather the following sentences,

I. PesTILENCE CREATES FRIGHT. And this prepares the way tor the march of the
pestilence; partly because those in whom are the seeds of disease go to other places,
carrying the evi] with them; and partly because fear lowers vitality, and so limits the
power of resistance to disvase. Fright in time of pestilence was painfully exhibited
in the recent visit of the cholera to the towns in the south of France.

II. PesTILENCE BREAKS UP SOCIAL LIFE. By the flight, from the infected neighbour-
hood, of all whose means permit. By the disturbance of commerce, business, educa-
tion, ete. Worse than this, danger of life nourishes self-interest, so that men are ready
to sacrifice others to save themselves. At such times the worst of humanity is
revealed in the many, and the best of humanity in the few.

Ill. PesTILENCE OFTEN LEADS TO RECKLESSNESS. As was most painfully seen in
the time of the great plague of London, and as is indicated by Isaiah in the text.
Despair flings the reins on the neck of lust.

IV. PEsTILENCE MAKES HEROES. Madame de Genlis tells of an incident in connection
with the prste at Marseilles. The true nature of the disease was unknown, and could
only be discovered by a post-mortem examination, but that was certain death to the
operator, All the doctors drew back. Then a young surgeon, named Guyon, of great
celebrity in his profession, devoted himself for the safety of his country. He made the
necessary examination, recorded his observations, nade his suggestions, placed the
papers in a vase of vinegar, retired to the lazaretto, and in twelve hours was dead—a
hero made by the pestilence.—R. T.


Ver. 4.—“ A time to weep.” “Therefore I say, Look away from me; let me weep
bitterly.” Eastern wee) ing is excessive, unrestrained. Westerns go to the other
extreme, and severely repress all expressions and signs of emotion, Eastern grief is
often exaggerated, and it is in danger of being conventional and even hypocritical.
Public weping, at least on the part of the prophets, became a testimony and a warning,
It belonged to their teaching by signs, Isaiah’s weeping here drew public attention,
and led to inquiries as to the meaning of such exceeding distress. ‘The following points
are sufficiently suggestive to need no more than brief statement.

IL Wk MAY WEEP IN ANTICIPATION. If we can see trouble ahead, and our distress


OH. xxl. 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 367
ee eee ee eee


can be the means of awakening others who are careless, but who ought to be preparing
to meet the trouble, our very griefs may_be a “ fore-warning,”

Il, WE MAY WEEP IN TIME OF TROUBLE. ecause tears are the natural expres-
sions of feeling, and the natural relief of overcharged feeling. Danger to brain and
heart attend undue restraint 8.

I], WE MAY WEEP IN SYMPATHY WITH OTHERS. Often such silent sympathy is
more effective than any words. ‘I'o feel with another so as to join in the same
expression of feeling is most soothing and comforting. The sublime illustration of
this is our Redeemer weeping in human sympathy with gentle Mary at the grave of
Lazarus.

IV. WE MUST NOT LET OUR WEEPING BECOME A SELF-INDULGENCE. This is a
greater peril to us all than we are wont to estimate. here is a luxury of grief;
a keeping it up for the sake of the comforting and petting it brin's; a pleasant giving
way. Weeping is wrong, is mischicvuus, the moment it passes beyond the bounds of
what is necessary for relief, As soon as self comes in, and we will to give way, our
weeping becomes sin.

V. WE MAY WEEP AS A TESTIMONY. For this we have the example of our Divine
Lord and Master, who “ when he beheld the city [of Jerusalem—the very city concerning
which Isaiah wept], wept over it, saying, Oh that thou hadst known, in this thy day,
the things that make for thy peace!” John Howe most sugyestively calls this * The
Redeemer’s tears wept over lost souls.”—R, T.


Ver. 8. —Man’s trust in his weapons. “Thou didst look in that day_to the armour
of the house of the forest.” A sermon for the times, in which the hi hest science and
inventive skill are devoted to the perfecting of the deadliest engines of war; and when
men dare to say that “ Providence is always on the side of the larg st battalions.”
‘Some trust in horses, and some in chariots, but we will trust in the Name of the
Lord; ” “A horse is a vain thing for safety ;” “God is a Refuge for us.”

I. MEN TRUSTING IN WEAPONS ONLY. By the term “weapons” understanding
all that belongs to armies, navies, fortifications, and the material forces on which nations
depend (see vers. 9—11). So often we hear that “Her navy is England’s delence ;”
“Her insular position is her security.” Great guns, powerful ships, efficient drill,
brave hearts—these, they say, guard Albion’s honour. But these are only things, and
they have to be continually changed and renewed. We can never be quite sure that
we are abreast of the war-engines or the war-force of other natious, and trust in mere
weapons involves keeping the nation at a perpetual strain. Again and again we are
alarmed as somebody argues our insecurity because of the state of our army and navy
and coaling-stations. :

Il. Men trustina 1n Gop onty. They should trust in God first and chiefly; but
not only, if by that is meant letting the trust keep our hands idle, and put us on an
expectation of miraculous deliverance. There have been times in the history of our
race when men were required to do nothing, and simply to trust. In lace of the Red
Seca Moses said, “ Stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord.” And Sennacherib’s
army was overthrown without use of man’s military forces, But these are exceptional
cases, designed to impress one side of truth.

lIl. MaN MAKING HIS TRUST IN GOD APPEAR THROUGH THE USE OF HIS WEAPONS,
This is, in every way, man’s most difficult work. It may be dangerous self-confidence
to trust weapons only. It may be mere listlessness to trust God only. It is the
essence of piety to brace ourselves to all noble and wise endeavour, and keep through
all our doings a soul full of trustings in God. This is but illustration in the war-
spheres of the universal rule, “ Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling ,
for it is God which worketh in you, both to will and to do, of his good pleasure.”—R. T.


Ver. 12.—God’s call to penitence. ‘Sn that day did the Lord God of hosts call to
weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth. ’ ‘These are
the Eastern signs and expressions of penitence and humiliation ; as may be illustrated in
the case of Nineveh, which repented at the preaching of Jonah (iii. 5—9). God calls on
the people to “lament their sins, by which they had brought these judgments upon their
Jand, and to dispose themselves to a reformation of their lives by a holy seriousness, and


868 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [ca. xxum. 1-25


eae UE EE ESE UIE EEE EEE EE SER ERRORS


a tenderness of heart under the Word of God.” God is ever, and has ever been, in various
ways, calling men to repentance, because men are sinful, and constantly grieving him
and ruining themselves by their wilfulness.

I. Gop’s CALLS TO PENITENCE BY HIS PROPHETS. From Enoch (Jude 15), and Noah,
to Isaiah, Jeremiah, Jonah, etc. It is the burden of prophecy, ‘Their voice is ever
crying, “ Put away the evil of your doings.”

Il. Gop’s CALLS TO PENITENCE BY THE SILENT MARCH OF EVENTS. See the plea of Joel
on foretelling invasions (ii. 12—14), “ Coming events cast their shadows before,” and
those shadows ought to prove calls of God to thought and moral prej aration.

III. Gon’s CALLS TO PENITENCE BY THE REVEALED WorpD. “ When God threatens us
with his judgments he expects and requires that we l1umble ourselves under his mighty
hand, that we tremble when the lion roars, and in a uy of adversity consider ” (Matthew
Henry).

I Gop'e CALLS TO PENITENCE BY JoHN Baptist. A most remarkable person, as
standing on the dividing line between the new and old dispensations. He carries
forward into the new God’s great demand in the old, “ Repent.” And he shows that
moral preparation by repentance is the threshold of the new kingdom of forgiveness,
acceptance, and grace,

V. Gop’s CALLS TO PENITENCE BY THE LorD JESUS AND, HIS APOSTLES. They still
demand repentance. Our Lord sends his apostles out with this message, and the
apostles in the Pentecostal time, and in their letters, plead, saying, “ Repent, and be
baptized, every one of you.”

VI. Gop’s CALLS TO PENITENCE IN MODERN PREACHING. In this, more than in any
other aspect of revealed truth, modern preaching fails. The ministers of the present
day have no oppressive burden from the Lord, almost making them run away like
Jonah—a burden of demanding “ repentance of sin.”—R. T.


Ver. 14.—Iniquity that cannot be purged in this life. God is a God of infinite
mercy to forgive sin, and yet he will “ by no means clear the guilty.” He will surely
visit iniquity by fixing its consequences upon the sinner, ah even also upon others
who may be related to him.

I. SIN-PENALTIES THAT CAN BE REMOVED NOW, WHILE WE ARE IN THIS WORLD. They
are such as rest on the soul. Sin has a twofold aspect—it is both an act of trans-
gression and a spirit of self-will. It is the soul that sinneth; the self-will, as opposing
God’s will, is the fountain and source of all wrong-doing. But the soul finds expression
and action through the body, and consequently there will be both spiritual and bodily


penalties following upon all sin. The soul will undergo a hardening process, The
body will come into disabilities and cuferng Phase hen the Lord, in
his judgment, will harden Pharaoh’s heart; smite him in the tenderest part of his
family feeling by the death of_his firstborn ; and bring down the pride of Kgypt by an
ignominious overthrow in the Red Sea. The soul-penalties attaching to sin are expressed
in the sentence, “ The soul that sinneth it shall die.” Death, spiritual death, is the
necessary result of soul-sin, Our first father, Adam, began to die when, in a spirit
of self-will and self-pleasing, he ate the forbidden fruit. Every one of us, nowadays,
begins to die the “eternal death” when we sin with our souls. The sphere of the
atonement made by our Lord Jesus, in his life and in his cross, is precisely this sphere
of soul-penalties. Christ removes the penalties of sin which come upon our souls.
Christ renews the life of love, and trust, and submission, and joy in God, which
effectually prevents any of the hardenings and debasings of sin becoming permanent in
our cases.

II, SIN-PENALTIES THAT DANNOT NOW BE REMOVED. ‘The penalties and consequences
of sin that come on our bodies, our circumstances, and others who are connected with
us. God has appointed the order in which family and social life should be arranged
and conducted. If we would carry out that Divine order perfectly, and obey those
Divine laws faithfully, heaven, with its eternal purities, its peace passing understanding,
and its Joy_unspeakble, would be begun below. Sin, in its outward aspect, is the
infringement of this Divine order, the breaking of those gracious and holy laws. To


every such infringement a natural penalty is attached. This is expressed in a figure by
the familiar words, “ Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.” ‘The redemp-


CH. xx. 1—25.] ‘THE BOOK OF 'THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 369
a


tion provided by the Lord Jesus does not immediately and directly touch these natural
penalties of sin. ‘here is an important sense in which the forgiving God “ by no
means clears the guilty.” he child of the drunkard or the sensualist will not have
the spirit of drink or of passion taken out of him, nor will he be renewed from his
physical deterioration, because his father becomes a Christian in his later years, Con-
seyuences of wrong reach on until they get altogether beyond hand-grasp. Do any
wrong, and for the soul of the wrong there is forgiveness, and full restoration, in tha
Divine mercy, through the precious blood-shedding; but you may pursue all your life
after the natural consequences, and you shall never overtake them, never master them,
never remove them. On they go, carrying their burdens of woe to the third and fourth
generation. And Isaiah reminds us that there are some special kinds of iniquity to
which the rule must more especially apply, for whose consequences there can be no
earthly purging. They are such as are: 1. Maintained in a spirit of wilfulness. 2.
Such as outlast all warnings and corrections. 38. Such as have become a cause of open
reproach. 4, And such as have been the means of ruining others. In all these cases
the judgment must come, and the sinnev’s fellow-men must see it hanging over him as
long as he lives, If it were not so, adequate impressions of the evil and hatefulness of
sin could not be kept before the eyes of men. Though we should also sce that these
sin-penalties, lying so heavy on the race, are part of the Divine remedial scheme for
finally delivering humanity from its self-serving and its sin.—R. T.


Vers. 16, 17.—Man’s plans for himself frustrated by God’s plan for him. The answer-
ing New ‘Testament case to this is our Lord’s account of the prosperous farmer, who
had no room to bestow his fruits and his goods. He said to himself, “I will pull down
my barns and build ereater.” But God said, “ Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be
required of thee.” In the passage before us, Shebna, in the full assurance that he will
die quietly, and be buried honourably in the neighbourhood of Jerusalem, proposes to
build a tomb or sepulchre for himself. It would be one of the rock-hewn sepulchres on
the slopes of the hills surrounding the holy city. The aristocratic families had their
private sepulchres, but this Shebna was a new man, not belonging to any of the ancient
families, so he had to begin a sepulchre as one part of his ambition to found a family.
God’s plan for him was quite different to his plan for himself. He was to be carried
away into captivity, and the fair creation of his energies would fall into ruins. “Man
proposes, God disposes.” : 4

I, Men ovuGuT To MAKE PLANS. The Bible never opposes foresight, practical wisdom,
reasonable ambitions, taking life with a strong hand, or the statesmanlike sagacity, that
estimates public movements and prepares for inevitable changes. No man’s ship is
expected to drift anyhow; the man’s hand must be always at the helm, and the man
must know for what port he sails.

II. MEN TOO OFTEN MAKE PLANS IN A SPIRIT OF SELF-RELIANCE. As the Apostle
James (iv. 13—15) puts it, men say, “To-day or to-morrow we will go into this city,
and spend a year there, and trade, and get gain.” The mistake lies in that will.
“ Whatever happens, I will.” “ They that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare.”

JI. Men sHOULD MAKE PLANS IN THE SPIRIT OF DEPENDENCE ON GoD; and with due
reference of every case to him. As James says (iv. 15), “For that ye ought to
say, If the Lord will, we shall both live, and do tiis, or that.” Man’s will sometimes is
strong, and carries him over and through great difficulties; but God is ever stronger
‘han he, and grasps him with effectual restraints.—R. T,


Ver. 18.—God’s violent providences. Margin Revised Version, “He will surely wind
shee round and round like a ball and toss thee.” Generally the figure is assumed to be
that of a ball Hung violently on a smooth, even plain, where it bounds on and on with
nothing to stay its progress. But a gentleman was in the island of Mitylene during a
great storm of wind in winter, and observed a peculiar plant, not unlike wormwood,
which grows into a compact, globular form, with very stiff stalks and branches. In
the winter the plant dies down to the ground, and in its dry and light condition is torn
from its roots by the wind, and set bounding over the wide and unenclosed country.
He reports having seen five or six of these balls coursing along at once. If such plants
were found in the countries familiar to the prophet, they would furnish a vivid emblem


ISAIAH. 2B


370 THE BOOK OF THE PROPAET ISAIAH. [ca. xx. 1—25.
SS


of the man who is at the mercy of a higher power, and helpless either to choose his own
course or to find rest. The point which is proposed for illustration is that there must
be a variety of arrows in the Lord’s quiver, and a needs-be sometimes for the severest
and most searching dealings, God must sometimes display his sovereign power over
men in a crushing and overwhelming way, in order to silence the tongue of pride, to
prove that man can never get beyond God’s reach, never raise Babel-towers that he
cannot overwhelm. The mizhtiest forces of nature are God’s instruments. And man’s
pride he will utterly abase. Compare the death of the lord who scorned the prophet’s
assurance of immediate deliverance (2 Kings vii. 19, 20); Nebuchaduezzar’s humilia-
tion in the hour of his boasting (Van. iv. 29—83); and Herod’s awful death (Acts xii.
20—23), when he permitted men to offer him the honours due alone to God. Man’s
folly in trying God’s power to smite and wound is finely satirized by Eliphaz the
Temanite (Job xv. 25,2): “ For he stretcheth out his hand against God, and strength-
eneth himself against the Almighty. He runneth upon him, even on his neck, upon
the thick bosses of his bucklers.”—R. TT.


Vers. 20, 21.—The influence of an individual on public policy. Governments always
drift into the control of the most energetic, or most gifted, man. They go astray unless
ruled by some master-spirit. It is said, with as much truth as satire, that “ committees
are always committees of one.” ‘hey are the comfortable agencies by means of which
some strong-willed man gets his own way. And it may be urged that at least as much
good as evil attends the arrancement. Eliakim is raised up as a master-spirit, in a
time of national anxiety, and he is to prove a “ father to the inliabitants of Jerusalem,
and to the house of Judah.” ‘here recur times in our national history when public
ministrations on such a theme as this may wisely guide public opinion. Such topics as
the following are suggested.

I. THE GENIUS OF THE PUBLIC LEADER. As much a Divine endowment and trust
for the world’s use as the gifts of the orator, the artist, or the poet.

Il, THE EVIL INFLUENCE OF THE UNPRINCIPLED PUBLIC LEADER. In his permission
of wrong things. In his securing of right things by wrong methods. In the public
example which encouraves unpriucipled dealings in private lite.

Ill. THE POWER OF THE GODLY PRINCIPLED LEADER. He elevates the tone of society.
Avoids causes of offence to neighbouring nations. Aims at the permanent well-being
of the whole people. Puts the moral progress of the nation betore its material pros-
perity. Such leaders were Moses and David.

1V, THE DUTY OF THE GIFTED INDIVIDUAL TO TAKE PUBLIC RESPONSIBILITY. TIllus-
trate by Cincinnatus. A true man finds a sphere of service for his Gud in the common
affairs of the nation. Josepl) served God through years of famine in Eyypt. Daniel
served his God through important national changes and revolutions, The history of
each age in nations is really the biography of the leading individual of the age. The
world curses or blesses the memory of its public leaders.—R. ‘Tl.


Ver. 22.—The symbol of authority. The “key on the shoulder” is no mere badge
of the steward’s office ; it represents delegated authority. Large wooden locks and keys
were used in the East, and these keys were heavy enough to need carrying on the
shoulder. But the expression is best regarded as a recognized figure of speech, The
figure may receive four illustrations,

I, Tue KEY OF courT oFFIcE. As in case of Eliakim.

II. THe KEY OF RABBIS, AS TEACHERS. Remember the expression, “The key of
knowledge.”

Ill. Tae xy or Curist, as Heap or Tue Cuurcn. (Rev. iii. 7.)

1V. Tae Keys as commiTrep To Perr, (Matt. xvi, 19.)—R. T.


Ver. 23.—The sure nail as a type. The idea may be the peg driven into the ground,
round which to fasten the tent-ropes. But, more probably, the reference is to a peg in
the wall, driven in so securely that things may be safely hung upon it. The word is
here used metaphorically in application to the support which Eliakim would yield to all
his dependent relations. It is the type of the man on whom others can depend. The
tullowing points will be readily worked out and illustrated.


oH, xxi11.1—18.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


371


—_—_—_———— OOO — —


I. THE sorT OF MAN WHO CAN THUS BE A NAIL FOR OTHERS TO DEPEND ON.
yy
Il. THE TYPE FULLY REALIZED IN THE Lorp Jesus Curist.


Ill. ‘tHe TYPE ReALIZED, IN MEASURE, IN CHRIST-LIKE MEN AND WOMEN.
better can be said of any) of us than this—Meu trust us.


Nothing
Wiiat cau be said of woman


nobler than this, “he heart of her husband trusteth in her” 7—R. T.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER XXIII.


Vers. 1—14.—Tur Buren or Tyre. We
here reach the last of tle “ burdens ”—the
concluding chapter of the series of denun-
ciatory prophecies which commenced with
ch. xiii. It is an elegy “in three stanzas,
or strophes” (Chvyne)—the first extending
from ver. 1 to ver. 5; the second, thence to
ver. 9; and the third from ver. 10 to ver. 14.
An undertone of sadness, and even of com-
miseration, prevails throughout it, the pro-
phet viewing Tyre as a fi llow-sufferer with
Israel, persecuted and oppressed by the
same enemy, Assyria, which was everywhere
pushing her conquests, and had recently
extended her dominion even over Babylon
(ver. 13). This lust allusion fixes the date
of the prophecy to a time subsequent to B.o.
710, when the Assyrian monarch, Sargon,
first conquered the country, and took the
title of king (G. Smith, ‘ Eponym Canon,’
p. 86).

Ver. 1.—Howl (comp. ch. xiii. 6, 31). The
expression is comion in the prophets (see
Jer. iv. 8; xxv. 34, etc.; Ezek. xxi. 12;
xxx. 2; Joel i. 5, 11,13; Zeph. i.11; Zech.
xi. 2, etc.). Ye ships of Tarshish. “Ships
of Tarshish” are first mentioned in con-
nection with tle trade carried on by Solo-
mon. Apparently, the term tere designates
a certain class of ship rather tlan those
engaged in a particular trade (see the com-
ment on 1 Kings xxii. 48 in the ‘ Speaker’s
Commentary,’ vol. ii. p. 623). Here, how-
ever, |’hoenivian ships, actually engaged in
the trade with Tartessus, may be intended.
Tartessus was a very ancient Phcenician
settlement in the south of Spain, beyond
the Pillars of Hercules, and was the centre
of a most important and lucrative com-
merce(see 1 Kings x. 22; Herod.,i. 163; Ezek.
XXvii. 12, etc.). In the present passage the re-
turning fleet of merchautmen is addressed,
and told that the harbour to which they are
hastening is closed, the city desolate. From
the land of Chittim. “Chittim ” here, as in
Gen. x. 4, and elsewhere generally, is pro-
bably Cyprus, whose most ancient ca)ital
was called by the Greeks Kition (see Joseph.,


‘Ant. Jud ,’ i. 6,§ 1). The name “ Chittim ”
is not improbally a variant of “ Khittim,”
“the Hittites,” who may have been the
first to colonize the island. A fleet from
the Western Mediterranean would natu-
rally touch at Cyprus on its way to Tyre,
and would there learn the calamity.

Ver. 2.—Be still; rather, be silent, as in
the margin. It would be idle to complain
or lament. Ye inhabitants of the isle. Tyre
was situated on a small isle, which Alex-
ander joined to the mainland by means of a
mole (Arrian, ‘Exp. Alex.,’ ii. 23). It is
uncertain, however, whether this isle is
neant here, or the strip of Phcenician coust,
since the Hebrew ’¢ lias both meanings,
Thou whom the merchants of Zidon...
have replenished. During the flourishing
period of Tyre (B.o. 1025—585), Zidon,
though it had generally kings of its own,
played a secondary part to ‘l'yre, and for
the most part acquiesced in Tyrian su-
premacy. Its best sailors served in the
Tyrian fleet (Ezek. xxvii. 8), and its mer-
chants were content to enrich the recognized
“chief city.”

Ver. 3.—By great waters; rather, on
great waters; i.e. on the waters of the Me-
diterranean (cf. Ps. evii. 23; Ezek. xxvii.
26). The Exyptian vessels conveyed tie
corn intended for exportation to the ports
at the mouths of the Nile, where it was
transhipped aboard Phoenician craft, which
carried it on the open sca to the countries
needing it. We never hear of the Egyptians
disjuting the trade of the Mcditerranean
with the Phoenicians and the Greeks, tiiough
they certuinly bad trading-vessels at times
on the waters of the Red Sea. The seed of
Sihor; i.e. the corn of the Nile valley. “Si-
hor,” or rather “ Shihor,” is the only proper
name by which tle Nile is designated in
the Hebrew Scriptures. It means “ the dark,”
“the turbid,’ and may be compared with
the modern ‘ Bahr-el-azrak,” used of the
Eastern or Abyssinian Nile, and with the
term ‘ Nilus” itself, if that signifies “ the
dark blue stream.” It occurs, as the name
of the Nile, only in Josh. xiii, 3; 1 Chron.
xiii. 5; Jer. ii. 18; and the present place.
Is her revenue; #.e. “ produces a portion of
her annual income.” And she is a mart of
nations (so Gesenius and Ewald). De-
litzsch and Mr. Cieyne translate, “ Jt is


3872


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [eu. xx1u1. 1—18,


—_—<—$—<——— "I sv _llllll TTT


the gain of the nations,” referring “it” to
the corn which the Tyrians exported.

Ver. 4.—Be thou ashamed, 0 Zidon. Zidon,
the most ancient and venerable of the Pho-
nician cities (Gen. x. 15; Josh. xi. 8; xix.
28; Judg. xviii. 7; Justin, xviii. 3, etc.),
is called upon to feel shame because Tyre
is captured. The ruin of the metropolitan
city would be felt as a disgrace by all the
lesser towns, and by Zidon especially. The
sea . . . even the strength of the sea;
rather, the stronghold of the sea; i. Tyre
herself. Tyre declares that she is child-
less, has neither son nor daughter, is as if
she had never travailed nor brought forth
children. I travail not, eto.; rather, J have
not travailed, nor brought forth, nor nourished
up, etc. My children being dead or taken
from me, it is as if I had never borne them.

Ver. 5.—As at the report concerning
Egypt; rather, when the rumour shall reach
Lgypt (see the Septuagint, the Vulgate, Ge-
senius, Knobel, Cheyne, etc.). They shall
be sorely pained. The Egyptians bore no
great affection towards any foreign nation.
‘hey were a people whose charity began
and ended at home. But the fall of Tyre
was always a shock to them, and was felt to
portend evil to themselves. The Asiatic
power which was strong enough to capture
the island-fortress would be a formidable
enemy to Egypt itself, and might be ex-
pected at no distant date to attempt the
conquest of the Nile valley.

Ver. 6.—Pass ye over to Tarshish. The
advice was good, and may, perhaps, have
been followed to some extent. When Sen-
nacherib attacked Eluleus of Sidon (8.0.
701), that monarch fled across the sea
(‘ Records of the Past,’ vol. i. p. 35), pro-
bably to Cyprus. When Alexander finally
ruined Tyre, a part of the population made
its escape on shipboard to Carthage (Arrian,
‘Exp. Alex.,’ ii. 24, § 8). An escape of the
kind is represented in the Assyrian sculp-
tures (Layard, ‘Monuments of Nineveh,’
first series, pl. 71).

Ver. 7.—Is this your joyous city? lite-
rally, your joyous one; i.e. Can this wretched
heap of ruins be the rich and joyous Tyre?
Whose antiquity is of ancient days. Though
regarded as less ancient than Zidon (Justin,
xviii. 3), Tyre nevertheless claimed a very
remote antiquity. Herodotus was told
(about B.c. 450) that its temple of Hercules
(Melkarth) had been built two thousand
three hundred years previously (Herod., ii.
44). Q. Curtius makes the city to have
been founded by Agenar, the father of Cad-
mus, who was supposed to have lived three
hundred years before the Trojan War (‘ Vit.
Alex.,’ iv. 4). It must be noted, however,
on the other hand, that there is no mention
at all of Tyre in Homer, and none in Scrip-


ture until the time of Joshua (Josh. xix.
29), about B.o. 1300. Her own feet shall
carry her afar off to sojourn (so Lowth,
Rosenmiiller, Gesenius, Ewald, Kay). Others
render the passage, “ whose feet were wont
to carry her afar off to sojourn.” In the
one case the coming flight and exile, in the
other the past commercial enterprise of
the city, is pointed at.

Ver. 8.—Who hath taken this counsel?
Who can have conceived the thought of
destroying a city at once so powerful and
so conducive to the advantage of other
states? The answer is given in the next
verse. The crowning city; ze. “the dis-
penser of crowns.” Hither to the governors
of her colonics, or perhaps to the other
cities of Phoenicia Proper. It is not quite
clear whether the kings of those cities needed
the sanction of Tyre to confirm them on
their thrones, or not. The Hebrew word
used must certainly be rendered “crown-
ing,” and not “crowned.” Whose mer-
chants are princes. Not actually sove-
reigns, but the chief men in the state under
the king. Traffickers; literally, Canaanites.
But the ethnic name seems to have early
acquired the secondary meaning of “ tra-
ders” (see Prov. xzxi. 24; Job xli. 6).

Ver. 9.—The Lord of hosts hath purposed
it; rather, hath counselled tt. The word is
the same as that used in the opening clause
of ver. 8. God has conceived the thought
of destroying Tyre, for the reasons which
the prophet proceeds to specify: 1. To
stain the pride of all glory; or, of all beauty.
Not that “glory” or “beauty” are dis-
pleasing to him, or provoke his envy, as the
heathen thought (Herod., vii. 10, § 4), but
that those who “ pride” themselves on their
glory and beauty offend him. 2. To bring
into contempt all the honourable of the earth;
t.e. to render contemptible those whom the
world honours, though they do not deserve
honour.

Ver. 10.—Pass through thy land as a
river; rather, overflow thy land, as the Nile.
Shake off all restraint; that is, give thy
desires free vent—be no longer cramped and
confined by the restrictions of the metro-
polis. Tartessus is addressed, as the leading
colony, and perhaps the one most oppressed ;
and in her person all the colonies are called
on to shake themselves free of the mother
city. There is no more strength; rather,
there is no more a girdle; i.e. there is no-
thing that need restrain you—the power of
Tyre is gone!

Ver. 11.—He stretched out his hand over
the sea. By “he” we must understand
“ Jehovah” (see ver. 9). God has smitten
Tyre—the great maritime power—destroyed
its dominion, and set its subject cities free,
He shook the kingdoms; ¢.e. not only Tyre,


on. xxi. 1—18.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


373


———


but the other cities of the Phoenician coast,
each of which had its own king (Herod.,
vii. 98; Strab., xvi. p. 754). Against the
merchant city; rather, against Canaan.
Phoenicia is called “Canaan,” as England
is often called “ Britain.’ So the “ Syro-
Phenician woman” of Mark vii. 26 is “a
woman of Canaan” in Matt. xv. 22.

Ver. 12.—He said. Jehovah continues
his threatenings. The oppressed virgin,
daughter of Sidon—or rather, the oppressed
virgin-daughter of Sidon—may be either
Tyre, which, according to some, was built
by fugitives from Zidon, or Phoenicia gene-
rally, of which Zidon, as the “ firstborn ”
(Gen. x. 15), was a sort of mother. Pass
over to Chittim (comp. ver. 6). Chittim
(Cyprus) was a nearer refuge than Tarshish,
and far more easily reached; but, on the
other hand, it was much less safe. Sargon
and Esarhaddon both of them exercised
dominion over it; and when Abdi-Milkut,
King of Sidon, fied there in the reign of the
latter, the Assyrian monarch pursued him,
caught him, and “cut off his head” (G.
Smith, ‘Eponym Canon,’ p. 137). Still, it
was so often sought by princes flying from
Phoenicia when attacked by Assyria, that
cuneiform sch lars call it “the usual refuge
of the Pheenician kings” (‘ Transactions of
Bibl. Archzology Society,’ vol. iv. p. 86).
There also shalt thou have no rest. Cyprus
submitted to Sargon (‘ Records of the Past,
vol. vii. p. 26), and again to Esarhaddon
(ibid., vol. viii. p. 108). It was included in
the dominions of Asshur-bani-pal (G. Smith,
‘History of Asshur-bani-pal, pp. 31, 32).
After Nebuchadnezzar’s conquest of Tyre,
it was annexed by Egypt (Herod., ii. 182),
on the conquest of which country by Cam-
byses it became Persian. ‘The Phoenicians
had “no rest” there after Assyria had once
found her way to the island.

Ver. 13.—Behold the land of the Chal-
deans (comp. ch xiii. 19; xlvii. 1, 5; xlviii.
14,20). Like Jeremiah and Ezekiel, Isaiah
knows the people as Chaldeans (Kasdim),
the capital as Babylon. Kaldi, in the in-
scriptions, is a rare word, and the name of
a@ not very important tribe. Yet Berosus
uses the term to designate the whole nation.
This people was not; rather, 7s not; i.e. ‘is
no more a people ’—“ has ceased to exist.”
Sargon conquered Babylon in B.o. 710, and
made himself king, ruling it, together with
Assyria, until B.o. 705, when it rebelled and
recovered its independence. Sennacherib
reconquered it in B.o. 704, and again in B.o.
700, when he made his eldest son viceroy.
Esarhaddon ruled over both countries, as
did Asshur-bani-pal. Though later (about
B.0, 620—610) Babylon reasserted her inde-

ndence, and became a great No ey

jah was justified, at almost any period of


his life after B.o. 710, in speaking of her as
non-existent. Till the Assyrian founded it for
them that dwell in the wilderness. There
is no “till” in the original. The clause is
separate and independent, not connected
grammatically with the preceding. Nor
does it assert that the Assyrians “ founded ”
Babylon for any one, but only that they
“established ” it, or “appointed” it to be
a habitation for “the beusts of the desert”
(comp. ch. xiii. 21; xxxiv. 14; Jer. 1. 39,
etc.). The prophet views the Assyrians as
intending to reduce Babylon to ruins, and
leave it waste and uninhabited. The towers
thereof; i.e. the siege-towers requisite for
reducing so strong acity. They raised up;
rather, they made bare (cf. Hab. iii. 9).
He brought it to ruin. “He” is “the
Assyrian.” The case of Babylon is ad-
duced to increase the alarm of Tyre, by
reminding the inhabitants of what the As-
syrians had done to a town greater and
stronger than their own. The allusion is
probibly to certain severities of Sargon’s
in B.c. 710, which, however, are rhetorically
exaggerated. It was never the policy of
the Assyrians to depopulate or destroy
Babylon.

Ver. 14.—Howl, ye ships of Tarshish
(comp. ver. 1). The ships that traded with
Tarshish, not those belonging to Tarshish,
are intended. Your strength is laid waste;
rather, your stronghold; i.e. Vyre itself.
The elegy ends as it began, with a state-
ment of tle bare fact. Alexander’s destruc-
tion of the city was the final and complete
fulfilment of the prophecy. The captures
by Esarhaddon (G. Smith, ‘Eponym
Canon,’ pp. 139—142), by Asshur-bani-pal
(ibid., pp. 144. 145), and by Nebuchadnezzar,
were anticipations of the final one, and
partial fulfilments of the prophecy.


Vers. 15—18.—Tyre’s RxsTORATION TO
PROSPERITY AND CONVERSION TO JEHOVAH.
After an interval, expressed by the symbolic
number of “ seventy years,” Tyre is to rise
from her ashes, and become once more a
prosperous state, resuming her former occu-
pation of a “ merchant city,” and once more
making great gains, which she will devote
to the service of Jehovah. St. Jerome
thought that this prophecy had not been
accomplished in his day. If so, it cannot
be said to have been accomplished yet;
unless, indeed, Tyre may be regarded as
representing the commercial spirit, which,
under Christianity, is not necessarily alien
from religion, but shows itself sometimes
altogether friendly to the Church, supplying
ways .and means for ten thousand philan-


374


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (ca. xxut 1—18.


No ee ee ee ee


thropie and praiseworthy enterprises (ver.
18).

Ver. 15.—Tyre shall be forgotten; ¢.6.
“shall cease to occupy men’s thoughts, as a
factor in politics—shall pass out of their
calculations, and count for nothing.” Seventy
years, “Forty years” and “seventy years”
are the chief representatives in Scripture
of an indefinite time. The week of creation
seems to have given to seven its quasi-
sacred character, which passed from the
primary number to tlhe corresponding deci-
mal one. The sacred use of “seventy”
appears first in the “seventy elders” who
accompanied Moses to the covenant-feast on
Sinai (Exod. xxiv. 9). After this, “seventy ”
talents are mentioned as the weight of the
bronze offerings for the tabernacle (Exod.
xxxviii. 29), and “seventy” shekels as the
weight of the silver bowls offered by the
heads of tribes when the tabernacle was set
up (Numb, vii. 13—85). Tie “inilefinite ”
use of “seventy” is most apparent in such
expressions as that of Gen. iv 24, “If Cain
shall be avenged sevenfold. surely Lam: ch
seventy and sevenfold;” and that of Matt.
xviii. 22, “I say not unto thee, Until
seven times: but, Until seventy times seven.”
“Seventy” seems also to be indefinite in
Exod. xv. 27; Numb. xxxiii. 9; Judg. i. 7;
xii, 13; 2 Sam. xxiy. 15; 1 Kings v.15;
1 Chron. xxi. 14, ete. It is absurd to count
the “seventy years ” of the present passage,
as some do, from the accession of Nebuchad-
nczzar to the death of Nubonidus, for neither
did Tyre begin to be forgotten in the first
year of the one prince, nor did she imme-
diately recover herself on the death of the
other. According to the days of one king;
or, like the days of one king. The period,
whatever its length, should be to Ty:e
“like the days of one king;” t.e. unclianging,
without hope. Oriental kings prided them-
selves on maintaining an unaltered policy
(cf. 2 Kings xxv. 27; ch. xiv. 17). Shall
Tyre sing as an harlot; lit: rally, 7 shall be
to Tyre as [in] the song of the harlot. A
particular song seems to be meant, part of


which the prophet proceeds to quote in the
next verse.

Ver. 16.—Take an harp. Harlots in the
East, and indeed in the West also in ancient
times (Hor., ‘Epist.,”’ i. 14, 1. 25), were
expected to be musicians. The harp and
the guitar were their usual instruments.
Forgotten harlot. In addressing Tyre as
a “harlot,” the proph:t docs not seem to
mean more than that her aims were, or at
any rate had been, selfish and worldly, such
as sever between man and God. She had
pursued wealth for the enjoyments that it
brought her, not in order to make a good
use of it. Hers had been the covetousness
which is “idolatry ” (Col. iii. 5).

Ver. 17.—The Lord will visit Tyre. In
mercy, not in judgment (cf. Jer. xxvii. 22;
xxix. 10). She shall turn to her hire}; ¢#.e.
“to her commerce,” to her former mode of
life. But with the difference noted in
ver. 18.

Ver. 18.—Her merchandise and her hire
shall be holiness to the Lord. There is
nothing intrinsically wrong or debasing in
commerce. Rightly pursud. and engaged
in with the view of devoting the profits
made in it to good and pious ends, the com-
mercial life may be as rligious, and as
acceptable to God as any other. The world
has known many mereliants who were Chris-
tians, in the highest sense of the word.
Solomon in his best days was a merchant
(1 Kings ix. 27, 28; x. 22), but one who
employed the wealth which le derived from
commerce to the honour and glory of God.
It shall not be treasured nor laid up. The
merchants shall not lay it up in their own
coffers, but expend it wisely and religiously.
It shall be for them that dwell before the
Lord; f.e. it shall be applicd to religious
uses—to the sustentation of ministers, the
relief of the poor and nec: ssitous among
Gou’s people, and other similar purposes,
Such an employment of the guins made
sanctifies commerce, and makes it a good
and a blessed thing.


HOMILETICS.


Ver. 9.—The fall of Tyre a warning against pride in the glories of ctvilization
and art. In destroying Tyre, God, we are told, “purposed to stain the pride of all
glory.” The word translated “ glory ” also signifies “ beauty ” (2 Sam. i. 19; ch. iv. 2;
Kizek. vii. 20); and the “ glory ” for which Tyre was renowned consisted, not in mili-
wiry reputation or governmental ability, but in wealth, commerce, and the preduction
ot beautiful objects, as garments, bowls, metal castings, and «iter works of art. It
was on the perfection to which she had brought the arts which aim at embodying the
beautiful, that Tyre especially prided herself. Her boast was, “‘ lam of perfect beauty ”

izek, xxvii. 3). By her fate we are taughit—

|. THAT THE CULT OF THE BEAUTIFUL HAS ITS ESFECIAL DANGERS TO OUR MORAL


cw. xx111. 1—18.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 875


NATURE. Artistic work seems to emanate so entirely from a man himself, to be so purely
his own absolute creation, that it naturally raises in him an admiration of himself and
an exalted conception of his own powers. How shill he not be proud of faculties that
enable him to produce works which send a thrill of delight through crowds, and are
Tecogiized as possessions for all time! Again, the beautiful is so charming, so attrac-
tive, that it is apt to seem sufficient for a man, and so to absorb all his attention, and
shut out all thought of higher and nobler things. Jn our own time the cult is actually
preached as a sufticient religion, and men are asked what more they can possibly desire
than to feast the eye perpetually on beautiful objects—beautiful buildings, beautiful
furniture, beautiful clothes, pictures, statues, statuettes, harmonious colours, delicate
textures, soft and subdued light, graceful forms, pleasing contrasts. A weak and effe-
minate race is produced by such a training; the robuster virtues are uncared for; men
become lajped in a luxurious sensualism, and need a warning voice, like that of
the prophet, to wake them from their delightful dream to life’s stern realities,

I]. ‘}HAT THE EXCLUSIVE CULT OF THE BEAUTIFUL PROVOKES Gop’s ANGER AND
geaLousy. Tyre is not accused of crimes. She is not a “ bloody city,” like Nineveh
(Nah. iii. 1); she is not “full of lies and robbery.” Her punishment does not come
upon her “ because of the violence ” that is in her, nor for extreme arrogancy, nor for
hypocrisy. Her sin seems to be in her luxury, in ber softness, in her “ perfvct beauty ”
(Ezek. xxvii. 11). She is rich, she is comely, she has things of beauty all about her,
and she is coutent. She wants no more. The beantiful and the enjoyable satisfy her.
But God is angered thereby. He will not have even the beautiful, though it isa shadow
of himsel!, shut him out from the first place in men’s thoughts. He will vindicate his
own houour. He will suffer no rival near his throne. If men are so wrapt up in
anything as to forget him, he will remind them of himself by some terrible judgment,
which can be ascribed to none but him (vers. 8—11),


Vers. 17, 18.— The pursuit of wealth culpable or praiseworthy according to the object
had in view. To seek gain for gain’s sake, either for the mere purpose of hoarding and
accumulating, and so having the satisfaction of feeling that one is rich (Hor., ‘Sat.,’ i. 1,
ll. 66, 67), or to expend it on one’s self in luxuries and enjoyments of various kinds,
though perhaps beneficial to the community whereto a man belongs, is injurious to his
own moral character, and an offence to God. Covetousness, the apostle assures us
(Col. iii. 5), is tdo/atry, and so is selfishness of every kind. Those who have their
heart set on any other end except pleasing God, are idolaters, whatever the end may be.
They let something, which is not God, absorb their thoughts, occupy their minds,
engage their affections. They gradually and silently, perhaps even unconsciously, lose
the sense of Gud’s presence, of his proviaence, at last of his very existence. They
become practical atheists. On the other hand, to seek gain for the purpose of making
a right use of it, to spend it in the service of God, either directly in church-building
and endowing, or indirectly in ameliorating the condition of mankind at large or of any
special class of men, is elevating to the moral character and pleasing in God’s sight.
Any occupation not in itself wrong is rendcred honourable, and in a certain sense
sanctified, by being pursued in this spirit. Better to be a “ publican,” like Zaccheus,
however discreditable the calling in the sight of man, if one-half of the gains made be
devoted to feeding the poor, than to follow the most elevated calling and appropriate
all the proceeds to one’s self. “Gain” becomes “ godliness”? when the great wealth,
which is the result of high qualities wisely employed, and blessed by God in such
employmer |, is made an offering to him, in the person of his Church or of his poor.


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1—18.—The fall of Tyre. I. Tu ancient FAME or Tyre, Consecrated to
Melkarth, the principal god of the city, the temple on the island, the supposed site of
the ancient city, is said by Arrian to have been the most ancient within the memory
of man. Ezekiel speaks of Tyre as “in the midst of the seas” (xxvii. 25, 26). The
Tyrians were closely connected with the Zidonians, those famous “ hewers of timber
(1 Kings v.6). And perhaps the Zidonians of Homer (‘Il,’ vi. 290; xxiii. 743;


376 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cn. xxu1. 1—18,


‘Od.,’ iv. 841; xvii. 424) include the Tyrians, Besides their renown in forest-craft,
they were skilful workers in brass and copper. In Solomon’s time there was close
intercourse between Hebrews and Tyrians, the former exchanging their corn and oil for
the cedar-wood and precious metals of the latter (1 Kings ix. 11—14, 26—28; x. 22).
‘’he denunciation of the prophets against Tyre begin from the time when the Tyrians
and the Phenicians began to buy Hebrew captives and sell them to the Greeks:
“The children of Judah and the children of Jerusalem have ye sold unto the Grecians
that ye might remove them far from their border” (Joel iii. 6; cf. Amos i. 9,10). A
great commercial people, they planted Carthage, and became possessed of Cyprus. We
find one Luliya (or Elulzus) named in Josephus (‘ Ant.,’ ix. 14. 2) as ruling over Tyre
during this prosperous period ; he seems to have been, in fact, king also of Zidon and
suzerain of Pheenicia. He fled before Senna:herib to Cyprus (‘ Records of the Past,’
vii. 61). It is in the light of such relations—Pheenicia trembling before the advance
of Assyria and warned by the fate of Babylonia—that we must read the prophecy or
oracle.

II. THe RUMOUR OF ILL. We see in this picture the trading-ships of the Phoenicians
returning from their distant colonies in Spain on the Betis (or Guadalquivir). Their
last landing-place on the way home is Cyprus, the “land of Chittim” (or Citium).
And here the news meets them that their harbour and their home is desolate. And a
mighty howl arises from the fleet, while the dwellers on the Pheenician coast are dumb
with grief. Egypt also is implicated in the fate of Tyre. In the description by Ezekiel
of the wealth of Tyre, we read, “ Fine linen with broidered work from Egypt was that
which thou spreadest forth to be thy sail” (xxvii. 7). So here the “seed of Sihor” (the
Nile) is on the ocean-highway, their trade being carried on for them by the Phcenicians.
The Pheenician coast was the “ barn for the corn of the Nile,” and they distributed it
to the nations. And now Pheenicia is addressed through Zidon, the ancient ancestral
city. The city was thought of in antiquity as feminine—sometimes as a daughter,
sometimes as a mother. So Tyrian coins bear the legend, “ Of Tyre, mother of the
Zidonians.” The rocky stronghold of the sea speaks, and complains that she is like a
barren woman; for the war has robbed her of her young men and maidens. In effect
she says, “I am destroyed; my wealth and resources gone, my commerce annihi-
lated, 1 cease to plant cities and colonies, and to nourish and foster them by my trade.”
Tyre, a daughter of the sea, is denied by her own mother. As Tyre was an outpost
of Egypt against the Assyrians, she, too, is “‘ sore pained ” at the sad tidings.

III. THE LAMENTATION OVER TyrRE. The prophet advises the people to migrate to
their Spanish colonies; for the capital can no longer shelter them. From later times we
have a picture of a scene similar to that now passing before his mind’s eye. When
Alexander the Great besieged Tyre they at first laughed at the king and the mound
which he built, “‘as if he thought to vanquish Poseidon,” god of the sea; afterwards,
as it grew surprisingly, they sent their children, wives, and old people to Carthage ”
(Diod., xvii. 41). And the LXX. says that they fled thither on this occasion.
1. Luxury and pride ashamed. The prophet looks in vision upon a heap of ruins; it
is like the corpse of a once beautiful and proud woman. Once she was the “ joyous
city, that dwelt carelessly ” (Zeph. ii, 15), and felt herself to be without a rival. She
boasted of her antiquety. The Tyrians told Herodotus (in the fifth century B.o.) that
their city had already been founded two thousand three hundred years (ii. 44). Her
traders, like those of Venice in the Middle Ages, had been reckoned the equals of princes
and kings (Jer. xxv. 22). But greed, arrogance, oppressive conduct towards other
nations, had brought her low. 2. The judgment of God. The hand of Jehovah must
be traced and felt in all this. He brings the haughty low, that the meek and despised
may be raised. Beauty, which has itself associations of sacredness to the imagination,
is not beautiful when it gilds and glorifies infamy. ‘Then Jehovah desecrates it, and
brings disgrace upon the grace and honour of the merely worldly great. Whoever is
the instrument, yet the overthrow of wicked, proud, and vicious cities and nations is to
be traced to the God who rules in the empires and kingdoms of the earth; and he often
selects the most distinguished and important cities and men to make them examples to
others, and to show the ease with which he can bring all down to the earth.” The
dispersion of the people is strongly contrasted with their own belief in their rooted and
immemorial origin in the soil of Phcenicia.


ca. xxi. 1—18,] THE BOOK OF TIE PROPUET ISAIAH, 317


—_——


IV. EMANcipation or THE TyRIAN coLonres. Harshly treated, perhaps, they tal «
the first opportunity of throwing off the yoke of the mother-city. Especially Tartessus
is mentioned. She may now freely and unhindered overflow the land, even as, in the
time of the inundation, Nile’s waters overspread Evypt (Amos viii.8; ix.5). There is
no “girdle ;” perhaps no bridle in the hand of Tyre any longer to restrain ber eolony’s
defiant ind»pendence. For all the kingdoms that border upon the sea, especially Phoe-
nicia and Syria, have been convulsed with alarm, as Jehovah’s hand was stretched out,
and the order was given to destroy the strong places of Canaan. ‘I'hen, under the
favourite figure of the woman, the city appears no longer an inviolate maiden, but
dishonoured and defiled. Cyprus will afford no refuge for the fugitives, for she will be
rejoicing at deliverance from the Pheenician yoke, and will not welcome them; or the
“long arm” of the Assyrian will reach them there. No power, however well founded and
far-extending, can endure against the fiat of the Almighty. It might seem impossible
that a city so celebrated and so powerful, so well defended and fortified, and associated
with many allies and confederates, should be destroyed and overturned; but “all that
appears permanent in the world stands or falls according to the will of God, and there
is no need of the instruments of war for overturning the best fortified place, but the
mere expression of the will of God is enough” (Calvin). Warning from the fate of
the Kasdim. We know little about this people, who are, perhaps, used to denote
Babylon in general, conquered by Sargon. This land has been turned into a desert
and haunt of wild beasts. The battering-engines of the Assyrians have reduced their
forts to ruin. All around denotes the impending ruin to Tyre.

V. THE RESTORATION oF TyrE, At the end of “seventy years,” probably put for a
long period, it appears that commerce will revive, “but only as the handmaid of reli-

ion.” ‘This is the main truth to be dwelt on, and the obscurity of the passage must
be left to the exegetes. Recurring to the city under the image of the woman—now a
singing-woman—the prophet looks forward to the time when there will be the mirth
of restored prosperity in the seats of Tyre. “ When it begins again to make love to all
the world, it will get rich again from the profit acquired by this worldly intercourse.
Wealth will no longer be stored up and capitalized as formerly, but tributes and
presents will be given to Israel, and thus help to sustain in abundance and clothe in
stately dress the nation which dwelt before Jehovah, ¢.e. whose true dwelling-place was
in the temple before the presence of God (Ps. xxvii. 4; Ixxxiv. 5)” (Delitzsch). In
Christian times there was a Church at Tyre, visited by St. Paul (Acts xxi. 3, 4), and
80 its trade was connected with the spread of the gospel.

Lessons. 1. God mingles compassion with his chustisements of cities, peoples, and
individuals. If so towards the wicked, how much more towards the children of his
adoption and love! Restoration, revivals of prosperity, are from him who, as the
proverb says, “ never smites with both hands,” 2. There is a selfish and corrupt and a
true and generous spirit in trade, A time is contemplated when riches will be no
longer absurbed by a few enormous capitalists, but be diffused for the common good.
The narrow-minded in trade is the sign of the narrow heart; the best traders are those
whom love to their kind has taught to unite personal interest with the general good.
The accumulation of immense wealth can hardly be the object of a Christian ambi-
tion. Let us hasten, by prayer, by teaching, by example, the time when wealth shall
not be treasured nor laid up—


“No more shall rest in mounded heaps,
But smit with freer light shall slowly melt
In many streams to fatten lower lands,
And light shall spread, and man be liker man
Thro’ all the season of the golden year.”


3. Commerce and Christianity should go hand-in-hand. Our sailors and our merchants
ghould be the best pioneers of the gospel, and our missionaries the most enlightened
friends of commerce and civilization. So may our


“Happy sails ..
Knit land to land, and blowing havenward
With silks, and fruits, and spices, clear of toll,
Enrich the markets of the golden year.” 3


378 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cn. xxm1. 1—18


a!


Ver. 3.—“ The havvest of the river.” Egypt was the first of nations, and the masts
of the vessels stuo. like tall river-reeds by her Lanks. How expressive the words are]
There is life wliere the river comes, life along the emerald banks to which the cattle
jome, and on the ficlds where the waters overflow.

J, ALL LANDS HAVE THEIR RIVERS. ‘think of the Tiber, the Tigris, the Thames,
she Riione, the Rhine, the Nile, the Niger. Cities rise on their banks which are, like
Tyre, populous and prosperous. The harvest is vast indeed. Ships which are
freighted with necessaries and luxuries, with the works of art, the spoils of the sea,
and the prodice of far-away lands, all come up the river. What wonder that the
river should become a type of the blessings of the gospel—that the prophet should
tell us “living waters shall flow out of Jerusalem ” |

Il, THE HARVESTS ARE MANIFOLD. We are so accustomed to think of the golden
sheaves of the corn-fiel'is when we mention the rivers, that we are liable to forget how
indebted we are to the broad estuaries which bear on their bosom the wealth of many
nations, How manilold, too, are our harvests under the gospel! Where that comes
philanthropy lives, and social purity flows, and justice is sacred in its rivers of righteous-
ness, and salvation comes, delivering us from sensuality andsin. Harvests? Surely the
Christian shiuuld notice how wide and vast the gospel waters are.

Ill, ‘T'HeIR DRYING UP Is DEATH. We cannot live without rain and rivers. Cattle
perish. Verdure witlers. Man himself dies. No wealth can purchase what God gives
so plentifully. “Hath the rain a Father?” Ob yes. Not a mere Creator, but a
Father ; for it is rich in evidences of his universal care and love. God gives “the former
and the latter rain,” and all through the ages the rivers flow into the sea. So God’s
truth remains! ‘The living water flows, and the voice is still heard, “ Ho, every one
that thirsteth, come je to the waters.”"—W. M. 8.


Vers. 1—15.— Aspects of Divine judgment. I. Its certatnty. 1. The duration of
time is no guarantee against its coming ; Tyre was a “ joyous city, whose antiquity was
of ancient days” (ver. 7), but judgment would fall upon her in God’s chosen time
Both men and nations are apt to think that long continuance in comfort is a sufficient
pledge that it will never be disturbed ; duration begets a false sense of security. If
men could only see things as they are, they would perceive that the true argument is
exactly opposite to that in which they indulge; for the longer a man has been living
in unvisited transgression, the longer has penalty been due, and the sooner may he
confidently expect retribution to arrive. 2. Ordinary defences are of no avail avainst
it. The commerce and consequent wealth of Tyre (vers. 2, 3), her replenishments from
Zidon, and her enrichments from Egypt would not save her; nor would the high station
to which she had mounted, nor the social position of her sons; it was nothing to the
righteous Lord that she was esteemed a “ crowning city ” (ver. 8), and that her merchants
were princes. No defences that we can raise will avert God’s judgment when the hour
is ripe for sentence to be executed. Wealth cannot buy off retribution, nor can rank
interpuse its influence to avert it; science cannot teach us how to elude it; and the
arm of affection is imputent to shield us from its blow. There is no barrier man can
raise which is not swept down in a moment when God arises to judgment,

Il. ITs FULNESS AND EFFICACY, 1, Jt silences. (Ver. 2.) It brings the curses, the
clamours, the revilings, the slanderous accusations, the shameful innuendoes of ungod-
liness and of maliynity to a disgraceful end, “God strikes a silence through them all.”
2. It scatters, it dissolves, (Vers. 6,7, 10.) It sends the children of iniquity, of vice, of
crime, to “the four corners of the earth ;” it disperses them over sea and land. The
bands of sin are broken up, and its guilty members are scattered far and wide. 3. J¢
humiliutes. (Ver. 12.) The virgin-daughter of Zidon should be humbled; God’s judg-
ments bring to the dust of humiliation those who have held their head high and treated
others with indignity. 4. Jt pursues. (Ver. 12.) ‘There also shalt thou have no rest.”
The penalty of a man’s sin finds him out whithersoever he may go to escape it. Jonah
“flees from the presence of the Lord;” but whither shall a man flee from his presence
or from the blow of his chastisements? No change of skies, of scenes, of society of
occupations, will shut out accusing recollections from the soul, or shield from the
uncompleted corrections of the Divine hand. The serious and repeated violation of the
“ greater commandments” of God is attended with penalties which pursue the soul


OH. xxi, 1—18.} THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 379
ee


from place to place, and from period to period, in all the journey of our life. 6. Jé
tncapacitates, (Ver, 4.) Tyre should lose her power to found colonies and to sustain
Cities; she would be reduced to helplessness and incapacity. This is the fate of those
whom God’s judgment overtakes. What they once did with pride and joy they can
do no longer, though they put forth all their remaining powers; there is “no strength
in their right band.” The energies of the mind, the vigour of the soul, the craft of the
hand,—all is gone.

Ill. Irs rEMorE EFFEcTs. When Tyre fell, the ships of Tarshish would have occasion
to lament (vers. 1, 14), Zidon would have to be ashamed of her daughter (ver. 4), and
Egypt would be sorely pained (ver. 5). Far across sea and land, and a long way down
the coming and departing years, reach the sad consequences of guilt. The wisest
moralist cannot point to the place where these will not be found, nor the cleverest
calculator tell the time when these will not be felt.

IV. Irs Diving meanine. “The Lord of hosts hath purposed it, to stain the pride
of all glory,” etc. (ver. 9). God sends punishment because tt is dwe; because, in the
exercise of his righteousness, sin must be marked with the signs of his deep displeasure ;
but he sends such penalties as he does send in order to compel his subjects to see and
to feel that tLe glory of man can be scattered in a moment, and that over all his mag-
nificence the shadow of death will be thrown whensoever the hand of Divine judgment
is uplifted. God’s visitations are man’s opportunities; then may he learn and feel—
as otherwise he never would—that his only wisdom is in instant abandonment of
every evil way, and immediate return, in penitence and faith, toa forgiving and restoring
Saviour.—C.


Ver. 18.—Gain and devotion. We are reminded that—

I, We CANNOT DEVOTE TO GoD’s SERVICE ANYTHING WE HAVE NOT HONOURABLY
GAINED. It may be said that the text, taken with its context (see ver. 17), does not
sustain this thought; that, indeed, it points in the opposite direction. But in addition
to such explicit prohibitions as that in Deut. xxiii. 18, we have the whole strain and
spirit of the Law of God. It is the glory of that Law that it so states, establishes,
guards, enforces, emphasizes, the purity of the Divine Lawgiver that if any solitary
passaze like this one seerns to sanction that which is inconsistent with it, we are quite
sure that, either in its rendering or in our interpretation of it, there must le a mistake
Everything was done that could be done to separate the people of God from the impurities
and iniquities into which other nations had fallen, and into the sanction of which they
had pressed even their religious rites. We may be uncertain about many things in
Scripture, but we are quite sure of this, that no smallest countenance is meant to be
given in any single part of it to the devotion of ill-earned gain to the service of the
holy God (see Acts xix. 18, 19). Not only such “hire” as seems to be hinted at here,
but all revenue that is obtained by unworthy, unprincipled, unconscientious means
must be wholly unfit for an offering on the altar of God.

Il. THaT WE HAVE NO RIGHT TO WITHHOLD FROM GOD'S SERVICE THB RESOURCES
WE CAN conTROL. They are not to be “ treasured or laid up.” ‘To keep them back
for use at some future time, to hold them in reserve for some possible emergency, is:
1. Disobedient. God plainly and repeatedly requires of us that we should put out our
“talents” in his service and in that of our fellow-men; and all the resonrces we may
have at our disposal of every kind are talents committed to our charge, 2. Distrustful.
It indicates a lack of faith in the readiness of God to provide for our returning wants,
and to meet our necessities as they arise. 38. Selfish and unsympathizing. It is the
action of one who has no heart to feel the strong and pressing claims of ignorance,
sorrow, and degradation on our pity and our help. 4. Wasteful.

III. THAT WE SHOULD DEVOTE SOME GOOD PART OF OUR SUBSTANCE TO THE MAINTEN-
ANCE OF PUBLIC worsHIP. “For them that dwell before the Lord,” etc. 1. Ad our
possessions are to be gained, held, and used religiously ; they are to be “ holiness to the
Lord.” 2. Much of what we have at our disposal should be spent in the furtherance of
philanthropy : in the cause of education ; in the restoration of the sick and suffering ;
in the reclamation of the fallen; in the help and rehabilitation of the unfortunate, etc.
3. Some of our “ means” we should apply specially to the maintenance of Christian
worship and of the Christian ministry. It is, indeed, possible to give handsomely


380 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (ou. xxim. 1—18.


toward the erection of sacred structures, and, in so doing, to be ministering to our own
importance; men may be magnilying themselves when they propose and pretend to be
honouring God. But, on the other hand, we render true, acceptable, and lasting service
when we give freely —and in such a way as to evcourage similar generosity in others—
towards the worship of God, towards the publication of redeeming truth at home or
abroad, towards the support of those who employ all their time and expend all their
strength in the noble work of saving men and training them for the kingdom of
heaven.—C.


Ver. 1.—The mission of Tyre, the commercial. This is the aspect under which Tyre
is best known and remembered. Dean Stanley gives a brief but characteristically
suggestive description of it. “The massive remains of the ancient walls of Arvad,
nearly surrounding the island of the modern Ruad, give some notion of the defences of
Tyre. The limited size of the island led, both in Tyre and Arvad, to arrangements
which must have rendered them a striking exception to most Oriental and to most
ancient cities. For the sake of economizing the narrow space, the houses of both were
built up, fearless of earthquakes, to the heizht of many stories, recalling, says Strabo,
the aspect of the gigantic mansions of the Augustan Rome. With this lofty mass of
edifices towering on its sea-girt rock, Tyre might well be thought a fit type of the
ancient queen of commerce; and the prophet naturally spoke of her as a floating
palace, as a ship moored by the long strand, ‘in the midst of the seas,’ with her ‘ masts
of cedar,’ her ‘sails of fine linen, blue and purple,’ her ‘ mariners, rowers, and pilots.’”
The practical point to keep in view is that commercial nations are always in peril of
getting to merely wse other nations, and so to neglect their responsibilities to them. To
this danver commercial England is now exposed. Very much of the talk of the day
goes on the assumption that the whole world was made for the sake of England. We
are being constantly reminded of our individuality, and of the precise mission of the
individual; we may be profitably reminded that there is an individuality of nations,
and that each nation has its separate mission and responsibility. Dr. Arnold illustrates
this when he says, “‘There are three peoples of God’s election—Rome, Athens, and
Jerusalem; two for things temporal, and one for things eternal. Yet even in things
eternal they were allowed to minister. Greek cultivation and Roman polity prepared
men for Christianity.” ‘God appears to have communicated all religious knowledge to
mankind through the Jewish people, and all intellectual civilization through the
Greeks.” As a distinctively commercial city, we may observe—

I, Tue Mission oF TYRE IN CIVILIZATION. The refinement of human society comes
about by the operation of the laws of association and emulation, just as does the
refinement of the individual and the family. It is by seeing the things others possess,
and the ways others take, that we are incited to personal, family, and social improve-
ments. Families that shut themselves up from society keep their boorish manners.
Nations isolated by natural situation civilize very slowly. Exactly what happens to
the young men through Continental travel happens to a nation when it reaches out to
other lands the hand of commerce. In neither case is the result wholly good, but a
large share of goodness is in it, because intellectual growth and moral advancement
always go along with the material advantages of civilization.

Il. Tue mission or TYRE IN THE BROTHERHOOD OF THE RACK, The scattering of the
nations over the earth; the development of special race-types; the separations made
by antagonistic interests and aggraudizing individuals, all tend to the destruction of
the sense of mutual brotherhood. And just this commercial nations revive, by bringing
plainly to view how the prosperity of one nation depends on the prosperity of another,
and how the well-being of the whole race-family can alone be secured by universal
freedom, peace, and kindly helpfulness, ‘Tennyson reminds of this in the lines—


“ Knit land to land, and blowing havenward, ...
Enrich the markets of the golden year.”


III. Ivs mission IN THE DEMAND OF HUMANITY FOR WoRK. It is singular that man’s
idea of bliss should have become “idleness.” The end set before a man in this life 1s
that he shall no longer have need for work. Yet work is man’s good—-the Divine idea in


oH. xxi, 1—18.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 881


his creation; the Divine agency for his culture: and the inexpressibly sad thing to say
about any man, here or yonder, is that he does nut work. And commerce, by con-
stantly creating new demands and enriching our stores of raw material, makes work.
All hindrances to commerce, such as taxation and war, injure the nations by putting
limitations on work. Universal peace would mean a healthy activity throughout the
world. Every man using his ability in the service of his fellow, and getting, as his
return, the service of his fellow to him. But there are evils attending the spread of
commerce. Especially such as follow the undue share of wealth possessed by indt-
viduals. Shelley speaks of it thus—


* Commerce has set the mark of selfishness,
The signet of its all-enslaving power,
Upon a shining ore, and called it gold ;
Before whose image bow the vulgar great,
The vainly rich, the miserable proud,
The mob of peasants, nobles, priests, and kings,
And with blind feelings reverence the power
That grinds them to the dust of misery.”


To this also must be added the tendency of commerce to create selfish interests—to
destroy the idea and sentiment of personal and national honour, which seeks its vindi-
cations in war, and to encourage the notion that we are to use other people rather than
to serve them, service being the supreme idea of Christ’s regenerate humanity: “I am
among you as he that serveth.” ‘The Son of man came, not to be ministered unto,
but to minister.”—R. T.


Ver. 2.—The dependence of one nation upon another. Tyre was, according to some
authorities, a colony of Zidon. And the figure in the text sets forth a corporate body,
each part dependent on the other. Insular Tyre directly dependent on the mainland,
and both closely related to Zidon. And yet further, the Egyptians had in their coune
try no timber for the building of seaworthy ships, so their foreign trade was carried
on for them by the Phenicians. Some of the European nations now are pressing to
secure seaports, in order to relieve their sense of dependence on others. Insular England
does the carrying trade for the world, so all nations depend on her, and she in turn
depends on the trading of the nations. In the pottery districts we were told that the
white clay, of which biscuit china is made, is brought all the way from Cornwall,
because it can be more easily carried than the heavier clay, and the coal, which are
needed for the firing process. So even Staffordshire depends on Cornwall, and Cornwall
on Staffordshire. Some countries send us corn, some sugar, some spice, some cotton,
some fruit. Countries vary in their genius. Rome finds law for the world, Greece finds
art, and Palestine finds religion. For its highest well-being no one nation can separate
itself from the others. It lives and thrives by its very dependence. We only note—

I. THAT THIS MUTUAL DEPENDENCE TENDS TO CHECK THE WAR-SPIRIT. The people of
the nations never want war. They may be roused to a fever-heat of passion, and so be
driven into war; but the long experience of the ages proves that, whoever gets good out
of war, the people always suffer. Classes of society want war; but only for the
maintenance of selfish interests. ‘The evil of war is seen in its shutting the markets
of the world. Such is England’s dependence on foreign corn, and so nearly does it
consume its stores in the face of the new harvest, that six months’ war would threaten
famine. All classes, except those who trade in war and war material, pray and strive
for universal peace. Man’s true interests support the Christian principles.

JI. THAT THIS MUTUAL DEPENDENCE ENRICHES ALL SECTIONS. God has ordered his
world so that nobody shall be “ sufficient to himself.” And the more a man seems to
have, the more dependent he becomes, because of the increase of his wants. ‘I'he most
independent man is the ignorant labourer, who can lie anywhere and eat anything;
the least independent, the wealthy man who has encourayed ten thousand needless
wants and luxuries. God puts the abundance of one thing in one land, and of another
thing in another. And the exchange of commodities enriches all. The world is one
body, “and if one member suffer, all the members suffer with it.” The interest of one
nation is the interest of all. God is the God and Father of all.—R. T.

14


382 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET [SAIAH. [cn, xxi. 1—18&


Ver. 9.—God’s constant work of humbling pride. “Jehovah Sabaoth hath devised
it, to desecrate the pride of all glory.” It is possible that reference may be imtend:d to
the desecration of the I'yrian temple of Hercules, which is said to have been the oldest
in the world. But the reference may be general, and any actual case would but illus-
trate the general truth. “ God did not bring these calamities upon Tyre in a way of
sovereignty, to show an arbitrary and irresistible power; but he did it to punish the
Tyrians for their pride. Many other sins, no doubt, ruigned among them—idolatry,
sensuality, and oppreasion ; but the sin of pride is fastened upon as that which was the
particular ground of God’s controversy with Tyre, for he resists the proud. Let the
ruin of Tyre be a warning to all places and persons { take heed of pride; for it
proclaims to al! the world that he who exalts himself shall be abased.” Thomson, in
‘The Land and the Book,’ forcibly describes the present condition of humbled, ruined
Tyre: “It (an insigaificams yiuage) is all that remains of her. But wee; not for Tyre;
this very silence and repose are most eloquent and emphatio on themes of the last impor-
tance to the Christian faith. here is nothing here of thas which led Joshua to call it
‘the strong city’ more than three thousand years ago (Josh. xix. 29); nothing of
that migity metropolis which Saffled the proud Nebuchadeezzar and all his power for
thirtcen years, until every hew! in his army was bald, and «very shoulder peeled in the
hard service against T'yrus (Bek. xxix. 18); nothing in this wretched roadstead and
empty markets to remind ene of the times when merry mariners did sing in her
markets; no visible trace of those towering ramparts which uo long resisted the efforts
of the great Alexander ;—all »ave vanished like a troubled dream. As she now is and
has long been, Tyre is God's w:tness; but great, powerful, acd populous, she would be
the infidel’s boast.” The poins to be illustrated is that God will be sure to deal with
individuals and with nations, for the humbling and crushing of pride. He will do so
because—

I. PRIDE INVOLVES PERIL Tt A MAN’S OWN CHARACTER. “here can be no healthy
growth where it is present. The passive virtues, which are so «pecially commended in
Christianity, cannot dwell wit pride, which is so closely allied with satisfaction ino self
and the despising of others. !'ride is a worm at the root of fhe. tree of character.

Il. PRE DESTROYS THE CO FORTABLENESS OF A MAN’S RELATIONS WITH HIS FELLOW=
MEN. The proud man tries te keep away trom his fellows. Ar his feliows are glad
enough to keep away from him. It is incouceivably miserable Sy a “ man to be placed
alone in the midst of the earth.’

IIL. Pripg sPoILs A MAN’S RELATIONS WITH Gop, They are founded on the proper
humility of the submissive and dependent creature. For man the universal law is,
“Humble yourselves under the mixhty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due
time,” or else you certainly must, as ‘l'yre, le humbled.—R. T.


Ver, 12.—No escape from God’s judgments. “There also shalt thou have no rest.”
Either the colonists would not receive them, or their enemies would still pursue after
them, seeking them out even where they had found shelter, Reference is intended to
those calamities which befell the Tyrians in their subsequent settlements —Cyprus,
Sicily, Carthage, and Spain. Cheyne illustrates the expression by showing that “the
long arm of Assyria reached them even in Cyprus, where Luli, King of Zidon, had
already sought refuge.” The im portance of Cyprus as a naval station was recognized
by the Babylonians fifteen or sixteen centuries before Christ. The inscription of
Sargon, King of Agané, relates now “ the sea of the setting sun he crossed,” and in the
third year conquered a land which wan hardly be any other than Cyprus. Cyprus was
also conquered by the Assyrian Sargon. Gud’s judgments never exhaust themselves in
acts which fail to accomplish the desired ends of humbling men’s pride and correcting
men’s faults. They go on until their purpose is reached. The point to be illustrated
here is that God’s judgments cannot be escaped by any fleeing from the place where
God’s judgments are resting. The judgment was on the Tyrians, and it affected Tyre
only for their sakes. So to esca} from Tyre could not result in getting away from the
afflicting and humbling hand of God. This may be efficiently illustrated from the
story of Jonah, who hurried from the upland districts of Palestine to take ship at
Joppa, flee across the great sea, and get away from the presence of the Lord. He could
not, God holdeth “the winds in his fists, and the waters in the hollow of his hand,”


OH. xxIv. 1—23.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 383
ee


and can send these to execute his judgments. And still it is a fixed idea of men, out
of which they need to be driven, that they can get free of their disabilities, and of
Divine judgment as correction of sin, by changing their circumstances, or going from
one place to another. Never. God deals with them, and only in a secondary sense
with their circumstances. As long as we sin we come into the Divine judgment. If
we suffer, and yet the evil is not cured, the Divine judgments must continue. “ For
all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.’ And some-
times the freedom we have sought by changing our place is changed to an even more
humiliating form of chastisement, as the Tyrians endured worse things in their escape
than if they had remained at home. However we flee from troubles, we can never fice
from ourselves, and never flee from God.—R. T.


Ver. 18.—Commerce the handmaid of religion. “Her merchandise and her hire
shall be holiness unto the Lord.” This appears to be a prediction of the conversion of
the Tyrians to the worship and service of the true God. “Instead of hoarding up
their gains, or devoting them as presents to the temple of Hercules, as they had formerly
done, they would now consecrate them to the support of true religion.” In the line
of fulfilment we may note that Jesus Christ visited the neighbourhood (Matt. xv.
21); St. Paul found disciples there (Acts xxi. 3—6); and it early became a Christian
bishopric. The prophecy would be accom: lished if the Christians of Tyre sent gifts to
Jerusalein ; as such gifts would be regarded as representative of the ‘ merchandise.”
Dean Plumptre says, ‘‘Interpreted religiously, the prophet sees the admission of
proselytes to the worship of Israel in the future, as he had seen it probably in the days
of Hezekiah (Ps. Ixxxvii. 4). Interpreted politically, the words point to a return to
the old alliance between Judah and ‘lyre in the days of Solomon (1 Kings v, 1—12),
and to the gifts which that alliance involved (Ps. xlv. 12).” The Tyrians and Zidonians
contributed to the erection of the second temple (Ezra iii. 7). Commerce, as having
regard to purely worldly interests, is called “ harlotry.” ‘Large marts of commerce
are olten compared to harlots seeking many lovers, that is, they court merchants, and
admit any one for the sake of gain.” Commerce is the handmaid of religion wien
she is—

J. Tue AGENT FoR RIGHTEOUSNESS. In the sense of uprightness and fairness between
man and man. Religion is the chief support of practical rightness, truth to word and
promise, fair taking of samples, honest wages, reasonable protits, and doing the best for
those who buy of us and those who sell to us. But religion is glad of the help of all
good business principles, ard all good business customs. Religion is strengthened by
the sense of honour that is found in commercial men. Honest commerce helps on the
work which religion would do in the world.

lJ]. THE AGENT FoR CHARITY. In the sense of gentle consideration for others, and
helpfulness to all who are in distress. ‘The tendency of commerce is towards
selfishness, but when touched by the spirit of religion, it is sensitive to the needs of the
poor, who are always multiplied by advancing civilization. Religion inspires workers
among the poor and suffering and disabled. Commerce is noble when, acting as
handmaid to religion, it supports the workers with its wealth, helping the hungry and
the outcast to “sufliciency for eating, and to durable clothing.”—R. T.


Szcorion VL Gop’s GENERAL JUDGMENTS UPON THE EarTH (CH. XXIV.—XXVIL.).


EXPOSITION.
of a broader character, involving the future of
CHAPTER XXIV, the whole world. ‘This section of his work


Vers. 1—20.—Gops JupGMENTs ON THE | extends from the commencement of ch. xxiv.
Wor.p at warce. From special denuncia- | to the conclusion of ch, xxvii., thus including
tions of woe upon particular nations—Buby- | four chupters, The world at large is the
lon, Assyria, Philistia, Moab, Syria of Va- | general subject of the entire propliecy ; but
mascus, Egypt and Kihiopia, Arabia, Judea, | the “peculiar peuple” still maintains a
’'yre—the prophet passes to denunciations | marked and prominent place, as spiritually


384


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [ceu. xxv. 1—28.


em nes re at


the leading country, and as one in whose
fortunes the world at large would be always
vitally concerned (see especially ch. xxiv.
23; xxv. 6—8; xxvi. 1—4; xxvii. 6, 9, 13).

Ver. 1.—Behold, the Lord maketh the
earth empty. Several critics (lowth, Ewald,
Gesenius, Knobel) prefer to render, “ maketh
the land empty;” but the broader view,
which is maintained by Rosenmiiller, Kay,
Cheyne, and others, seems preferable. The
mention of “the world” in ver. 4, and of
“the kines of the earth ” in ver, 21, implies
a wider field of survey than the Holy Land.
Of course the expression, “ maketh empty,”
is rhetorical, some remarkable, but not com-
plete, depopulation being pointed at (comp.
ver. 6). Turneth it upside down (comp. Ezek.
xxi. 27). Scattereth abroad the inhabitants.
The scanty population left is dispersed, and
not allowed to collect into masses.

Ver. 2.—It shall be, as with the people, so
with the priest, etc. ‘here shall be “no
respect of persons ”—no fuvour shown to men
of any particular rank or station. All shall
suffer equally. The author is obliged to
take as examples distinctions of rank known
to him; but he carefully selects such as are
of almost universal occurrence. There was
searcely any nation of antiquity in which
there were not “priests and people,” “masters
and slaves,” “ buycrs and sellers,” “ lenders
and borrowers,” “takers and givers of usury.”
by “usury” is meant, not exorbitant in-
terest, but interest simply, of whatever
amount,

Ver. 3.—The land; rather, the earth. The
same word is used as in ver. 1 (drets).
Utterly spoiled; 7.e. “* wasted by rival annics,
which have carried fire and sword over the
whole of it.” Compare the declaration of


our Lord, “Ye shall hear of wars and
rumours of wars: see that ve be not troubled ;
for all these things must come to pass, but


the end is not yet. For nation shall rise
against nation, aud kingdom against king-
dor . ull these are the beginning of
sorrows” (Matt. xxiv. 6—8).

Ver. 4.—The earth ... fadeth away. As
a flower that fudes and withers up (comp. ch.
i. 30; xxviii. 1, 4; xxxiv. 4, etce.; and Ps.
i. 3; xxxvii. 2). The world. Tdbél has
never any narrower sense than the entire
“ world,” and must be regurded as fixing the
meaning of érets in passages where (as
here) the two are used as synonymous. The
haughty people; or, the high ones. All the
great are brought down, and laid low, that
“the Lord alone may be exalted in that day ”
(cf. ch. ii, 11—17).

Ver. 5.—The earth also is defiled. Hither-
to the prophet has been concerned with the
mere fact of a terrible judgment to be sent
by God upon the whole world. Now he gets


forth the cause of the fact. It is the old
cause, which has reduced so many lands to
desolation, and which in the far-off times
produced the Flood, viz. tle wickedness of
man (Gen. vi. 5—13). The earth is “de-
filed” or “polluted” by the sins of its
inhabitants, and bas to be purged from the
defilement by suffering. They have trans-
gressed the laws. Apart from both Judaism
and Christianity, all mankind have been
placed by God under a double law: 1. The
“law written in their hearts” (Rom. ii. 15),
which speaks to them through their con-
sciences, and lays tllem under an obligation
that cannot be gainsaid. 2. The law of posi-
tive commands, given to the entire human
race through tle common progenitors, Adam
and Noah, which is obligatory upon all to
whom it has becn traditionally handed down;
but which has been only very partially
handed down, and it is not generally felt as
obligatory. Mankind has in all ages largely
transgressed both laws, and both would seem
to be pointed at in the present passage. The
transgression of the “law written in the
heart” is doubtless that which especially
calls down God’s vengeance, and makes him
from time to time execute wrath on the
whole world. Changed the ordinance; rather,
broken, violated. ‘Transgression in act is in-
tended, not formal abrogation of the Divine
ordinances. Broken the everlasting cove-
nant. Mr. Cheyne supposes an allusion to
the covenant made with Noah (Gen. ix. 16);
but it seems better to understand that ‘ever-
lasting covenant” which exists between
God and man, in virtue of the nature where-
with God has endowed man, and of the laws
wloou te bas impressed upon man’s con.
science. Sophocles well says of these laws,
that they are


UYilmodes, otpaviav 8’ aidepa
TexvodevTes, wy “OAvuTas
matyp udvos, od cw ovara
guvots avépwry Etixtev, ovde
unv ToTe Adba KATAKOIMaoEL


Or—


“Taws that walk on high, begot and bred
In upper air, whose only sire is Heaven;
Nor did the race of mortals give them

birth,
Nor will oblivion ever cause them sleep.”


Ver. 6.—The curse; rather, a curse. God
has pronounced a curse upon the earth on
account of man’s perversity; and hence the
calamities which the earth is about to suffer.
Are desolate; rather, are held as guilty (see
Zech. xi. 5; and compare the marginal
rendering of Ps. v. 10; xxxiv. 21). Are
burned; or, scorched—shrivelled up by the
“burning anger” (ch. xxx. 27) and “ fiery
indignation ” CHeb. x. 27) of Jehovah.


oH. xxiv, 1—23.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH,


885


a


Ver. 7.—The new wine mourneth. Even
when the joyous time of the vintage comes
round, the earth is still sad, cannot shake
off its depression or wake up to merriment.
Even those most disposed to be “ merry-
hearted,” under the dismal circumstances of
the time can do nothing but “ sigh.”

Ver. 8.—The mirth of tabrets . .. of the
harp ceaseth (comp. ch. v. 12). The feasting,
and the drinking-songs, and the musical
accompaniment, common at the vintage
season, are discontinued. All is dismay and
wretchedness—desolation in the present,
worse desolation expected in the future.

Ver. 9.—They shall not drink wine with a
song. Men will still drink; they will seek
to drown their care in wine; but they will
not have the heart to attempt asong as the
drink. Even in their cups they will be
silent. Strong drink shall be bitter. By
“strong drink ” (shékar) seems to be meant
any intoxicating liquor whatever, including
wine. Many such liquors were drunk in
Palestine (see ‘Dict. of the Bible,’ vol. i.
pp- 458, 459). All were more or less plea-
sant to the taste; but they would taste
bitter to those who were warped and soured
by the calamities of the time, which would
prevent all enjoyment.

Ver. 10.—The city of confusion is broken
down. No special city seems to be intended.
“Est urbis nomen collective capiendum ”
(Rosenmiiller). Chaos (tohw) reigns in the
cities, where there is no civic life, no govern-
ment, no order, nothing but confusion.
Every house is shut up; bolted and barred
against intruders. There is no confidence,
no friendly intercourse, no visiting.

Ver. 11.—There is a crying for wine in
thestreets. Wine, though still manufecwwred
(see vers. 7, 9), is scarce, but is much gouglt
after. Men clamour for it at the doors of
the wine-shops, but are unable to obtain it.
They crave fur its exhilarating effects, or
perhaps for the oblivion whieh it brings
when drunk to excess. If they could obtain
it, they would act as the Jews in the siege
of Jerusalem (ch. xxii. 13). But they can-
not. Hence even the factitious merriment,
which wine is capable of producing, is denied
now to the inhabitants of the earth, with
whom all joy is darkene« from whom all
mirth is gone.

Ver. 12.—The gate is smitten with de-
struction. The very gates of the towns,
generally guarded with such care, are broken
down and lie in ruins.

Ver. 13.—When thus it shall be; rather,
for 0 shall tt be. In the time described the
condition of the earth shall be like to that
of an olive-ground when the beating is done,
or of a vineyard when the grapes are
gathered. That is, a small and scattered
remnant of inhabitants shall alone be left,

ISAIAH.


like the few grapes and olives that were the
portion of the gleaners (cf. ch. xvii. 6).
There shall be. These words are not needed,
and should be erased. The nexus is, * go it
shall be as ‘he shaking (rather, ‘ beating}
of an olive tree.”

Ver. 14.—They shall lift up their voice.
Even in this time of depression and ruin
there shall be a “remnant,” which will be
faithful to God, and which, from the midst
of the sufferings and calamities of the period,
will “lift up its voice,” in songs of adoration
and praise, to Jehovah, and sing, or “‘send
forth acry.” This chorus of praise will go
forth—to a large extent—from the sea; t.e.
from the Mediterranean.

Ver. 15.—Wherefore glorify ye the Lord
in the fires. The reading bd’urim, “in the
fires,” is doubtful. If it be regarded as
sound, we must understand the “ fiery trials”
which were coming on the faithful remnant.
But the LXX. seems to have had the read-
ing bd@iyyim, “in the islands” or “in the
coasts;” and so Lowth, Hitzig, and Mr.
Cheyne.

Ver. 16.—Glory to the righteous, The
righteous remnant perceive that the calami-
ties which have come upon the earth are
ushering in a time of honour and glory for
themselves; and they console themselves by
making this fact the burden of some of their
songs. Their honour, it must be remembered,
is bound up with God’s glory; which will
not shine forth fully till their salvation is
complete, and they “reign with him” in
glory (2 Tim. ii. 12). But I said, My lean-
ness. The thought of this joyful time, when
the saints shall reign with their Lord in a
new heaven and a new earth, recalls the
prophet (contrast being one of the laws of
the association of ideas) to the misery of the
present, and lis own participation therein.
A time of suffering, of wasting, and pining
away must be endured—for how long he
knows not—hefore the joyous consummation,
towards which he stretches in hope and
confident expectancy, can be reached. This
is the period of his “leanness.” The
treacherous dealers, or ungodly of the earth,
will bear sway dnring this period, and will
deal treacherously and cruelly with God’s
saints, persecuting them incessantly in a
thousand ways. Have dealt. The perfect
of prophetic certainty.

Ver. 17.—Fear, and the pit, and the snare,
are upon thee. Mian will be like a hunted
animal, flying from pursuit, and in danger
at each step of falling into a pit or being
caught in a snare (comp. Jer, xlvili. 43, 44,
where the idea is borrowed from this place,
and applied to a particular nation).

Ver. 18.—The noise of the fear; t.e. the
sound of the pursuers. Hunters pursued
their game with shouts and cries. The

’ 20


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cn. xxiv. 1—24


vw


windows from on high are open (comp. Gen.
vii. 11). It is not actually another flood
that is threatened, but it is a judgment as
sweeping and destructive as the Flood.

Ver. 19.—The earth is utterly broken
down. ‘The material globe itself breaks up
and perishes. It is “the cra:‘k of doom.”
Mr. Cheyne remarks that “the language
imitates the cracking and bursting with
which the present world shall pass away.”
The Authorized Version is very feeble com-
pared to the original.

Ver. 20.—The earth. .. shall be removed
like a cottage; rather, sways to and fro lile
a hammock. osenmiiller observes, “Alludit
ad pensiles lectus, quos, mctu ferrarum, iu
arboribus sibi parare solent, istis in terris,
non custodes solum hortorum camporumve,
sed et iter facientes.” The transgression
thereof shall be heavy upon it; 7.e. the earth
perishes on account of men’s sins. It shall
fall, and not rise again. The present earth
is to disappear altogether, and to be super-
seded by “a new heaven and a new earth”
(Rey. xxi. 1).

Vers. 21—23.— Tuer SopraMUNDANE
JUDGMENT, AND FINAL ESTABLISHMENT OF
Gopv’s Kinepom. Upon the destruction of
the world there is to supervene a visitation
of those who have been specially instru-
mental in producing the great wickedness
that has brought the world toanend. These
most guilty ones are classified under two
heads: they consist of (1) the host of the
high ones that are on high (literally, “the
host of the height in the height”); and (2)
the kings of the earth upon the earth.
These are to be “ gathered together in the
pit,” and “shut up in the prison,” and finally,
after a long imprisonment, punished (vers.
21, 22). ‘Then the visible reign of the Lord
of hosts is to be established “in Mount
Zion and in Jerusalem,” and he is to rule
in the presence of his “ancients” in glory
(ver. 23).

Ver. 21.—In that day. About that time—
in connection with the series of events just
related. The Lord shall punish the host of
the high ones. It is generally allowed that
these “ high ones,” set in contrast as they
are with the “kings of the earth,” must
belong to the class of supramundane in-
telligences, spiritual beings of a high order.
Some have inclined to identify them with
the “ patron-spirits of nations,” spoken of
by Daniel (x. 13, 20, 21); but those “patron-
epirits ” are among the elect and unfallen
angels; they protect nations, but do not
lead them into sin or wickedness; they have
no need to be “visited,” and will certainly


not be “shut up in prison ” with the wicked
kings of the earth. ‘he spirits here spoken
of must belong to the class of fallen spirits
—they must be included among those “ prin-
cipalitics and powers,” of whom St. Paul
speaks (Eph. vi. 12), whom he calls “the
rulers of the darkness of this world,” and to
whom he ascribes “spiritual wickedness in
high places.” The punishment of such
spirits is, perhaps, shadowed forth in the
eighty-second psalin; it was distinctly
taught in the Book of Enoch; and it is
glanced at by St. Jude in his Epistle (ver. 6).
And the kings. Kings, especially kings in
the Oriental sense, have an enormous in-
fluence over the nations which they govern,
and therefore a heavy responsibility. The
kings of the nations are viewed lhere as
having brought about the general corruption
and wickedness which has necessitated the
destruction of the earth.

Ver. 22.—In the pit; literally, in a dun-
geon. Mr. Cheyne suggests that shedl, or
“hell,” is meant; but the context points to
some narrower confinement. In the prison;
rather, in prison (comp. 2 Pet. ii. 4; Jude 6),
After many days. In the Revelation (xx. 2)
Satan is bound “a thousand years; ” de. an
indefinite term. ‘The imprisonmeut of the
present passage is scarcely the same, but it
is analogous. God’s purposes require s.me-
times long periods of inaciion, Shall they
be visited; or, punished. The word is the
same as that transluted “ punish ” in ver. 21.
“Visiting” for good is scarcely to be
tought of.

Ver. 23.—The moon shall be confounded,
and the sun ashamed. Some interpret this
ic the light of Joel ii. 31; iii, 15; Matt
xxiv. 29; Rev. vi. 12, as pointing to that
physical change, real or phenomenal, in the
shining of the sun und moon, which is to be
one of the antecedent signs of Christ’s
condng at the last day. But the expressions
used suggest rather a contrast between the
dazzling splendour of Christ’s actual ap-
pearance ahd the normal brightness of sun-
light and moonlight. The ereater and lesser
lights will “pale their ineffectual fires”
before the incomparable brightness of the
“Sun of Righteousness ” (Mul. iv. 2). When
the Lord of hosts shall reign in Mount Zion,
and in Jerusalem. The spiritual Zion and
the heavenly Jerusalem can alone be meant,
since the earth is no more (ver. 2). (On
these, see Rey. xxi., xxii.) Before his an-
cients; or, his elders. Four and twenty
elders, clothed in white raiment, with crowns
of gold upon their heads, are represented
in the Apocalypse as sitting round about
the throne of God perpetually (Rev. iv. 4),
and worshipping God and the Lamb (Rev.
iv. 10; v. 8, 14).


oH. xxIv. 1—23,.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 887
a


HOMILETICS,


Vers. 1—20.—@od’s final judgment upon the earth. In striking contrast with
man’s self-complaceut theories of continual progress and improvement in the world,
resulting in something iike the final perfection of our race, is God’s prophetic
announcement that, as the years roll on, mankind will go from bad to worse, plunge
deeper and deeper into wickedness, bring calamity after calamity upon themselves,
and finally so provoke him that he will destroy the very earth itself as “ defiled ”
by its inhabitants (ver. 5), causing it to ‘fall, and not rise again” (ver. 20). The
judgment, as set forth in this chapter, is—

I, Progressive, It begins with wars, which spread from country to country, until
all nations are involved in them. Territuries are wasted (ver, 3); cities are thrown
into confusion (ver. 10); the population of the earth rapidly diminishes; the “ few
men left” (ver. 6) are scattered widely over the face of the globe; there is general
desvlation ; and there is general sadness and misery (vers. 7—12). All classes suffer
(ver. 2); the haughty especially are brought down (ver. 4). If men escape one
calamity, they are overtaken by another (ver. 18). ‘Treachery is at work (ver. 16),
and each man feels like a hunted animal, sure sooner or later to be the prey of the
destroyer (ver. 17). The judgment passes on from man to the material fabric which
he inhabits; man’s trangression lies heavy upon the earth (ver. 20); it tutters and
trembies from its foundations (ver, 18), reels to and fro (ver. 20), is broken up and
shattered (ver. 19); finally, falls from its place.

Il. FrnaL, AS FAR AS THIS DISPENSATION OF THINGS IS CONCERNED. ‘“ The
inhabitants of the earth are burned” (ver. 6); the earth is “ utterly emptied ” (ver. 8);
the remnant that has previously escaped necessarily disappears with the earth that
is their habitation; and that earth is “utterly broken down,” “clean dissolved,”
“fallen” go as never to rise avain (vers. 19, 20).

Ill. Yer nor UNCHEERED BY SOME RAYS OF HOPE. In the midst of the gloom,
and the sadness, and the desolation, and the confusion, there are yet cheeriul voices
heard. Add flesh has not corrupted its way before the Lord. There are still those
who “lift up their voice, and sing for the majesty of the Lord” (ver. 14), who “ wlorify
the Lord” in the midst of the “fires” of affliction, and pour forth songs whereof
the burden is “Honour to the righteous.” They constitute, it may be, a small
minority; but they are not dismayed. ‘‘ God,” they know, “is gn their side;” and
they “do not fear what flesh can do unto them.” They bear witness for Goi to the
last ; and when the final crash comes they are those blessed ones who “ mcet the Lord
in the ar” (1 Thess. iv. 17), and are translated to the heavenly kingdom, without
passing through the gates of death, there to “ be for ever with the Lord.”


Vers. 21, 22.—A sorer punishment reserved for the authors and instigators of evil
than for others. ‘Yhe kings of the earth to a large extent lead their subjects into sin.
Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, by the setting up of the golden calves at Dan and
Bethel, “made Israel to sin,” and was the oriyiual and main cause of that lapse into
idolatry which brought down destruction upon the Israelite nation. Ahab, by his
marriage with Jezebel, and introduction of the Baal-worship, intensified the evil, and
hastened the final overthrow. Manasseh ‘‘seduced Judah to do more evil than did
the nations whom the Lord destroyed before the children of Israel” (2 Kings xxi. 9),
and brought upon Judah a fate similar to that which had befallen the sister kingdom
(2 Kings xxiv. 3, 4). The blood-thirstiness and cruelty of the heathen nations were
encouraged by their kings, who were for ever engaging in unjust wars, and looking
for success to the terror they inspired by the fierceness of their soldiers, who were
instructed to be savage and unsparing. Hence, when the day of reckoning came,
it was just tbat the kings should be reserved for special retribution, and punished
with special severity. We must not too closely press the details of the prophetical
announcement. “The pit,” “the prison,” are wonted phrases in the imagery of
Divine retributive justice, What is intended to be taught is that exact justice will be
meted out; wherever lies the main guilt of the evil done under the sun, there will
be the main severity of punishment. Where kings have been in fault, kings will


388 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu, xx1v.1—»
EEE


suffer; where nobles and prime ministers, on them will fall the heaviest woe ; where
leaders sprung from the ranks, theirs will be the sorest suffering. “God is nw
mocked.” God will know who are the really guilty ones, and will execute his special
vengeance upon them, however exalted they be. Nor will he spare the instigators
of evil who belong to the spiritual world. Fallen spirits are ever tempting men to
sin, suggesting lines of sin, egging their victims on, aiding them so far as they are
permitted, and conducting them to depths of sin and wickedness whereof they would
have had no conception had they been left to themselves. It is just that these
spirits, who are the primary movers in the widespread conspiracy of crime, should
suffer the most. St. Jude tells us of those evil angels who are “reserved in ever-
lasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day” (Jude 6), St.
John saw in the Apocalyptic vision that “the devil who deceived the nations” was
at length “cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false
prophet are,” and was “tormented day and night for ever and ever” (Rev. xx. 10).
hese, too, have their deserts. Inexorable justice requires for so much sin so much
suffering. ‘The law is absolute, imperative, universal. And the whole redounds to the
honour and glory of the great Ruler of the universe. ‘“ For we are unto God a sweet
savour of Christ in them that are saved, and in them that perish: to the one we are
the savour of death unto death; and to the other we are the savour of life unto life”
(2 Cor. ii. 15, 16). The thought is overwhelming, and the apostle with reason
exclaims, “ And who is sufficient for these things ?”


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1—23.— Prophecy of judgment. The difficulties, historically considered, of this
chapter must be left to the exegete. We concern ourselves with the larger seuse it
contains of a prophecy of a judgment upon the whole world.

I. THE APPROACHING DESOLATION. (Vers. 1—3.) The figures of emptying, draining,
are employed to denote the utter depopulation and impoverishment of the earth; also
that of turning wpside down, to denote disorganization and demoralization in every civil
and religious institution, while the people will be driven as chaff before the wind by the
scattering hand of the invader. All ranks will be alike affected and confused together
in the coming calamity. “ Distinction of rank is highly neccessary for the economy
of the world, and was never called in question but by barbarians and enthusiasts.” A
variety of interests and feelings is represented in the different orders of society. Each
contributes an element of wealth or of culture to the commonwealth. The untutored
instincts of the mass have a certain wisdom in them; but they need to be checked and
guided by the intelligence of far-seeing minds. The instinct for progress only safely
operates when it is met by a counter sentiment of conservatism. The minister of
religion is a necessity in society, and equally necessary the free spirit of the people to
check his usurpations. The theory of society is that of a complicated organism, where
all the parts are mutually dependent, and each on the whole. If the servant is
necessary to the master, not less so the master to the servant; the lender to the
borrower, and the reverse. One of our chief blessings is regular government and
good order, How marvellous is the immense, all-teeming, yet quiet and ordered life of
London! The slightest menace of disturbance to it makes us feel, or ought to make
us feel, ke-nly the greatness of the privileges so long preserved to us. “ We ougyit,”
says Calvin, “not only to acknowledge the judgment of God, but also lay it to the
blame of our own sins, whenever he breaks down order and takes away instruct‘on and
courts of law; for when these fall, civilization itself falls along with them.” Again,
God in his judgment is no respecter of persons. No rank is spared, not even the most
sacred. On the contrary, to whom much has been given, of them much will be
required. ‘The higher the rank the deeper the fall, and the sorer the punishment where
there has been ingratitude and unfaithfulness. It is secret disloyalty to the Eternal and
his laws which saps the root of life, and causes in the end the mournful sight of a nation
mourning, its vigour ebbing away, its great men hanging their heads like drooping
flowers, The thonght of many cities and lands once fluurishing, now like a flower
withered down to the bare stalk, should remind us of the constancy of moral laws, of
the fact that “ Jehovah hath spoken the word.” ;


CH. xxiv. 1—23.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 88S


II, THE REASON OF THE JUDGMENT. It closely follows upon the cuilt of men. And
this guilt has polluted the earth. “ Blood profanes the land;” “The land is polluted
with blood” (Numb. xxxv. 33; Ps. cvi. 88). This may be taken literally or generally.
Kingdoms and empires have often been “ founded in blood ” (ef. ch. xxvi. 21). And this
was a transgression of Divine commandment—the violation of a Divine statute, the
breach of a standing covenant of God with men, The allusion may be to the covenant
with Noah (Gen. ix. 16). But if the prophecy refers to mankind in general, then we
must think of the “ Law written on the heart ”—the Divine teaching within. “It was
with the whole human race that God concluded a covenant in the person of Noah, at
a time when the nations had none of them come into existence” (Delitzsch). “ There-
fore hath a curse devoured the earth.” There is an awfulness in the logic of the
Almighty ; there is nothing arbitrary in his conduct, nor meaningless in his words,
No curse “ causeless comes.” The premises of sin contain the conclusion of punish-
ment; and from the fact of curse the fact of “ blood-guilt,” or of sin in general, may
be certainly inferred. ‘‘ All Israel have transgressed thy Law, even by departing, that
they might not obey thy voice; therefore the curse is poured upon us, and the oath that
is written in the Law of Moses the servant of God, because we have sinned against
him” (Dan, ix. 11). The simple and sublime reasoning of the prophets should ever be
laid to heart by us and pressed upon the conscience of others. “ ‘I'he land mourns ;”
trade is dull, taxation is heavy, wars are rife; there is murmuring and discontent.
Why? The prophets are ever ready with a becawse—because of swearing or other
falsehood, because of adultery or other impurity, because of the iniquity of statesmen,
priests, or prophets, the pleasant places are dried up (cf. Jer. xxiii. 10).

III. THE DESCRIPTION OF THE CAUSE. It is conceived as personal. As in Zech.v. 3
it is said to “ go forth over the face of the whole earth,” or to be ‘‘ poured upon ” men
(Dan. ix. 11), so here it is so said to “devour the earth.” The Divine anger burns
(ch. xxx. 27), and the God of judgment is as a “consuming fire.” And under this
terrible doom Nature betrays her silent sympathy with the fortunes of man. The
drooping grape and the languishing vine seem to reflect the sadness of the people, and
visibly to mourn in response to their sighs, And that popular music which charms
away the pain of excessive toil, and expresses the fund of health and mirth which lies
at the heart of man and the world, ceases ; timbrel and lute are hushed, and the merry
shouts of the labourers no longer rise from the vineyards. “ Jerusalem was uninhabited
as a desert. There was none going in and coming out of her children; and the
sanctuary was trodden down, and the sons of foreigners were in her high place, a place
of sojourn for Gentiles. Delight was taken out of Jacob, and the flute and the lyre
ceased ” (1 Macc. iii. 45). This passage in the prayer of Judas the Maccabee is thought
by Vitringa to allude to the fulfilment of the prediction. It is the doom which follows
upon the abuse of the gifts of God. Abuse consists either in excessive indulgence or
in oblivion of the Giver. He knows how in chastisement to insert a bitter flavour into
the most favourite pleasures. ‘he cup will be dashed from their lips, or a want of relish
will be felt for it. A mind clouded by remorse will “darken the ruby of the cup and
dim the glitter of the scene.” If the time comes when a man is compelled to say ot
even innocent social pleasures, “I have no pleasure in them,” can there be a keener
mark of judgment on past excess orabuse? Better the crust and the draught from the
spring, with healthy appetite and clean conscience, than the repast of luxury and the
brimming wine-cap turned to gall on the lips by the secret chemistry of guilt. The
city is chaos and the houses are closed, and in the fields, instead of the vintage shouts,
are heard the howls of those who miss the sweet wine (cf. Joel i. 5). It seems that
the sun of joy has gone down, and the bright spirit of gladness has fled from the earth.
The olive, as the vine, is a speaking symbol of fatness, plenty, wealth, and prosperity.
But the Jand will be like an olive stripped and bared of its fruits—a vineyard when the
gleaning is over. Still a few will be left (cf. ch. xvii. 5,6); for never does God suffer his
Church to become extinct, the spiritual life of mankind utterly to fail, or his work to
come to a standstill. Dark as every cloud of judzment is, it will yet pass, and crushed
hearts will be healed and voices now dumb burst forth anew into song. It is at least
glimpses of such a future which sustain the prophet’s heart under the “ burden of the


Lord.”
IV. Rumours oF BETTER THINGS. A cry is heard from the sea, from the Mediter-


390 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cn xxrv 1—23.


ranean; it must be from some of that sacred remnant acknowledging Jehovah, extolling
loudly his majesty, Israel’s God!“ He follows out and increases the consolations which
he had briefly sketched ; for having formerly (ch. x. 19—22) said that out of that vast
multitude a few drops would be left, which would nevertheless overflow the whole
world, in like manner he now says that the small number of the godly, who shall be
left out of an abundant vintage, will nevertheless rejoice and utter a voice so loud that
it will be heard in the most distant lands. This was done by the preaching of the
gospel ; for as to the condition of Judea, it appeared to be entirely ruined by it—the
national government was taken away, and they were broken down by foreign and civil
wars in such a manner that they could never rise above them. The rest of the world
was dumb in singing the praises of God, and deaf to hear his voice; but as the Jews
were the firstfruits, they are here placed in the highest rank” (Calvin). 1. God
can in a moment recreate and restore his Church, as it were, out of nothing. From
death he brings life, out of the solitude can cause songs of praise to resound, and con-
verts the secne of mourning into one of joy. 2. Worshippers are fitly employed in
extolling God’s perfections, and not their own claims to approbation. His ber fits should
excite our gratitude, and we testify it by singing his praises. 3. The time is to be
looked forward to when all nations will call upon the true God. To call upon the Name
of Israel’s God means the spread of true religion through the world. The knowledge
of him merely as the wrathful and avenging God must strike man with dumbness;
the knowledge of him as Redeemer must open the heart and unloose the tongue for
praise. 4. True religion and human bDlessedness are coincident. “ Honour for the
righteous!” will be the burden of the song; “ Hope to the pious!” the LXX. render.
The Jews are meant in the first place, as the chosen people; then probably the elect of all
nations, as typified in them. ‘“ When the prophet predicted these things, how incredible
might they appear to be! for among the Jews alone was the Lord known and praised
(Ps. lxxvi. 2). ‘To them destruction is foretold, and next the publication of the words
and the celebrition of the praises of God; but how shall these things be done, when
the people of God had been destroyed? Hence we may infer that there were few who
believed these predictions. But now that these events have taken place, it is our duty
to behold with admiration so great a miracle of God, because, when the Jews had been
not only beaten down, but almost annihilated, still there flashed from them a spark
by which tbe whole world was enlightened, and all who were kindled by it broke forth
into a confession of the truth” (Calvin).

V. Revuusion oF FEELING. Before this spiritual restoration can come about, an
interval of misery must be passed through. A cry of intense pain escapes the prophet’s
heart: “ Wasting away is for me! wasting away is for me!” He sees and feels, with
realizing imagination and sympathy, the barbarous oppression from which his people
will suffer, Wave upon wave of calamity seems to roll in from the horizon. ‘To
escape from the “ terror ” is to fall into the “ pit,” to come up from the “ pit” is only to
be taken in the snare. ‘The windows of heaven will be opened, and a new deluge wiil
cover the earth, which will tremble as with universal shock. Then Jehovah will “hold
Visitation upon the host of the highest in the height, and upon the kings of the earth
upon the earth.” They will be imprisoned and shut up in the prison of the lower
world. Then there will be a visitation after many days: whether for the purpose of
punishment or pardon, the prophet does not say, and commentators are divided.
Amidst the obscurity of the passage, some truth that may be used for edification appears
to glimmer, All that takes place on the earthly sphere has relerence to a supernatural
world, There are in a sense “angels” of nations and of men. The rabbinical saying
runs that “God never destroys a nation without having first of all destroyed its prince ;”
i.e. the angel who, by whatever means he first obtained possession of the nation, has
exerted an ungodly influence upon it. “Just as, according to the scriptural view,
both good and evil angels attach themselves to particular men, and an elevated state
of mind may sometimes afford a glimpse of this encircling company and this conflict
of spirits; so do the angels contend for the rule over nations and kingdoms, either to
guide them in the way of God, or to lead them astray from God; therefore the judgment
upon nations will be a judgment upon angels also, The kingdom of spirit has its own
history running parallel to the destinies of men ” (Delitzsch).

VL Fina apocatypsr or Diving @tory. The moon blushes and the sun turns


cH. xxIv, 1—23.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 391
ce


pale, and Jehovah of hosts reigns royally upon Mount Zion and in Jerusalem, and the
elders or representatives of the people are permitted to gaze upon his glory (ef. Exod.
xxiv. 9; xxxiv. 29), The glory of nature fades before the surpassing glory of the
spiritual and eternal. Our noblest sense is that of vision, and its exercise involves that
of imagination, The bright heavenly bodies delicht us in part because they are signifi-
cant and symbolic of light in the intellectual and moral sphere, of him who set them
yonder, and who is the Light of the world. We can think of nothing more glorious
than the light of the sun, except the glory of the Sun of Righteousness. T'hat must he
seen in the soul, in the conscience. And to come finally to the beatific vision; in
purity of heart to see God; to close with the great Object who lies behind all the finite
objects of our intellectual research; to enjoy that reposeful contemplation of the
eternal beauty, of which every imperfect flash and hint reminds us in this twilight of
life ;—this is the goal of spiritual aspiration in every time, as it was of the prophet’s
wishful thought, piercing through the darkness of the future—J.


Ver. 16.—Songs from afar. “From the uttermost part of the earth have we heard
songs, even glory to the righteous.” Beautiful music that! For music has often been
set to unworthy ends—to the praise of pride and power, to war and wrong. It has
been said of one, “I care not who makes a nation’s laws, if I may make their songs.”
A strong antithetical way of putting, in an exaggerated way, a great truth. ‘The
songs of a people are always witn them—in the fie!d and at hme, in toil and in rest.

I. THE SUBJECT OF THE sonas, “ Glory to the righteous.” How could this otherwise
end, than in glory to God? For he is the righteous God, and there is no word by which
the Psalms oftener describe him. Thus in praising the righteous we are led onward
to praise the righteous God, as the God who inspires righteousness in the hearts of
others. Thus we read that “in every nation he tliat worketh righteousness is accepted
of God.” Noword reaches deeper. We may sing songs to the valiant, aud the heroic,
and the patriotic, and the brave; but righteousness speaks, not only of courage, but of
conscience too.

Il. THE DISTANCE FROM WHICH THEY comE. ‘From the uttermost parts of the
earth.” Prophecy of the time when all nations shall call Christ blessed, and when his
praise shall be heard from the rising of the sun to the going down thereof. We have
this sound from the distant places, because in the end all true lovers of righteousness
will hail Christ, when he is revealed to them, as containing all the fulness of God.

Ill. Tue GLoRY OF WHICH THEY BREATHE, ‘There are divers kinds of glory. But
God’s glory is the glory of the cross! There is an empty glory of self-righteousness,
but that is not the glory of the righteous, Far from it. ‘lhe glory of strength is to
help the weax. The glory of wisdom is to enlighten the ignorant. The glory of
righteousness is to shape into order that which is wrong or “ wrung,” from which idea
of being twisted and bent from the straight course the word “ wrung” comes, Yes.
Glory to the righteous! for they are the salt of the earth, the safety of the nation.
The Lord our Righteousness is revealed in Christ, whose holy life was not for our
admiration only, or for our honour and worship, but was “lived” for us and “ laid
down” for us, that we might be filled with his strength, and become holy as God is
holy.—W. M. 8.


Vers. 1—12.— The charge and the calamity. These words give a vivid and a terrible
picture of calamity that should befall the people of God. It is snitably called “ the
curse” (ver. 6), for it should prove an evil of tle severest kind; and it would be other
than a national misfortune—it would be the penalty of sin: therefore, because of the
sins charged against the nation (ver. 5), these multiplied sorrows would overtake and
overwhelm them; “ for the Lord hath spoken this word” (ver. 3).

J, Gop’s CHARGE AGAINST HIS PEOPLE, (Ver. 5.) ‘This is threefold. 1. Disregard
of his spoken Word. “'lhey have transgressed the laws.” Those plain statements ot
the will of God which had been revealed in “ the Law” had been deliberately disobeyed
—requirements unfulfilled, prohibitions set at nought. 3. Perversion of Divine truth.
“‘ Changed the ordinance.” The Jews were subtle and sinful enough to appear to keep
the Law when they were habitually breaking it. This they did by changing or perverting
it, by making it mean something different from the Divine intention. by taking the heart


392 LHE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. xxiv. 1—23,


i


out of it, by minimizing and dwarfing it (see Matt. xv. 3—9). 8. Violation of his will
us revealed in our common human nature, “ Broken the everlasting covenant.” This
covenant is well summarized in Ps, xxxiv. 15,16; it has fallen into grievous and guilty
disregard, Men refrainei from righteousness and “ did evil,” yet they shrank not from
the accusing eye and the uplifted hand of God (see Rom. ii. 14,15). The people of God
will do well to ask themselves whether they are not in danger of being obnoxious to the
same charge; whether they are not neglecting the will of God as expressly revealed in
the words of Christ and his apostles; or are not changing, by radical misconstruction,
the purpose of their Lord; or are not setting aside some of the first principles written
in their nature by the Father of spirits.

IL THE CALAMITY WHICH ATTENDS DISOBFDIENCE. This is manifold, as indicated in
the text. 1. Desolution, Emptiness, waste, dispersion (ver. 1), inaccessibility (ver. 10;
see also vers. 3, 6,12). 2. Degradation. The land “ turned upside down,” so that what
was meant for higher ends is employed for baser ones (ver. 1); “utterly spoiled ”
(ver. 3); defilement (ver. 5); resort to stimulants for false courage (ver. 11). 3.
Linfeeblement. he land “ fadeth away,” “ languisheth ” (ver. 4); the strength of the
city is gone, for even the gate (the strong place) is “smitten with destruction” (ver.
12). 4. Abject misery. (Vers. 7,8.) Even that which usually excites with pleasure
has lost its charm (ver. 9). 5. Completeness and commonness of the scourge (ver. 2).
Such, in various manifestations, according to the nature of the subject and the character
of the guilt, is the calamitous issue of disobedience; so heavy is the devouring curse
(ver. 6) when Divine laws are disobeyed and the Divine claims denied. The land, the
Church, the family, the individual life, is desolate, is degraded, is enfeebled, is rendered
joyless. The best companions are dispersed, and life is lonely ; the loftier and worthier
ends of existence are surrendered for those less worthy, and ultimately for those which
are positively base; the strength of righteousness and virtue gives jlace to the feeble-
ness of folly and to the degeneracy of vice; song dies into silence avd then into a
wail, (1) Beware of spiritual and then moral decline. (2) Seek and find, in repentance
and faith, a way up even from the dark depths of ruin.—C.


Vers. 13—16.— The voice of the chastened. We learn—

I, Taar Gop TeMPERS JUDGMENT WITH MERCY. (Ver. 13.) There will be some fruit
spared, though the olive tree be terribly shaken, though the grapes have been gathered,
All will not be taken from the holy land; a remnant shall be left. Though God strip
& man or a nation of his (its) resources, yet will he leave him (it) a remainder, some-
thing to console him, something with which he may start anew, A starry night suc-
ceeds a stormy day; a calm and quiet age closes a life of struggle and of sorrow; “the
old familiar faces” have disappeared, but a few faithful souls still linger who can go
back with us in thought and sympathy to early days.

II. ‘THAT FROM THE LIPS OF THE CHASTENED THERE OFTEN COME SWEET AND EVEN
TRIUMPHANT STRAINS. (Ver. 14.) Those who have been visited in Divine wrath, and
have seen their compatriots carried away into captivity, shall not give way to despond-
eucy; they shall learn to honour and to rejoice in the majesty of Jehovah; they “shall
lift up the voice,” “ shall sing,” ‘shall shout ” (exult). Something (it does not appear
what) in the Divine character will appear to them so majestic, so glorious, so bene-
ficent, that their sweetest and strongest accents will be called forth. To those who
stand ow/side it often seems wonderful and incomprehensible that those who are inside
& great affliction should find such occasion for thanksgiving. But it is certainly true
that the sick in their sickness, the poor in their poverty, the bereaved in their loneli-
ness, often find more reasun for thankful song than do the strong in their strength and
the wealthy in their riches. And the song they sing is not one in which submission
struggles with complaint, but rather, as here, the happy outpouring of perfect acqui-
escence in the Divine will,—the voice of sacred joy

HL. Toar Gop WILL Be GLORIFIED BY THOSE FURTHEST OFF AS BY THOSE NEAR TO
His sancTUARY. (Ver. 15.) “Glorify ye the Lord” in the east (“in the fires”); in
she west (“the isles of the sea”); “ from the uttermost part of the earth,” ete. (ver. 16).
Under the chastening hand of the Lord Israel went into exile; in exile the truth of
God was made known as it otherwise would not have been. In other ways the judg-
ments of God led, and still lead, to the circulation of his truth and to the magnifying


oH. xxiv, 1—23.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 893
a ee


of his Name. A cleansed and purified Church will be a missionary Church, through
whose instrumentality the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ will be known and sung on
every hand.

IY. THAT THE RECOGNITION OF THE DIVINE RIGHTEOUSNESS IS THE FOUNDATION OF
ALL RELIGIOUS SERVICE. “ Glory to the Righteous One” (ver. 16). Ill indeed would it
be for the land in which the piety of the people lost its hold on the righteousness of
God. In the absence of righteousness from his character, there would be nothing worth
calling goodness or mercy on his part and nothing worth calling reverence or devotion
on ours. All religion worthy of the name rests on the righteousness of God. The
wave of sentiment that would weaken our sense of it is one that washes against our
deepest and highest interests, and should be steadfastly opposed. Above and beneath
all other things God is the Righteous One, at the remembrance of whose holiness we do
well to give thanks (Ps. xxx. 4), in whose purity and perfection we do well to glory.—C.


Vers. 16—22.—Five fruits of transgression. The key-note of this passage is found
in the twentieth verse: “lhe transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it.” All
these dire evils are the consequences of national transgression. They are fivefold.

I. Ir impoverisues. The prophet, speaking not only for himself, but for his country,
exclaims, “My leanness, my leanness, woe unto me!” (ver. 16). The violation of
Divine Law not only (1) reduces a man’s bodily strength, causing him to waste away,
and bringing the pale cheek and the trembling nerve; but it (2) cuts down a man’s
resources, changing the princely revenue into a beggar’s dole; moreover, it (3) im-
poverishes the mind, causing it to starve on empty folly while it mizht be nourished
with heavenly truth; and (4) it despoils the soul, making it barren of those noble
virtues and those exquisite graces which elevate and beautify human character.

II. Iv peLupes. It is full of treachery (ver. 16); its victims delude themselves with
the notion that they are escaping, but they only flee from the noise to fall into the pit,
or escape from the pit to be entangled in the net (vers. 17,18). This is “ the deceit-
fulness of sin.” Men think they will shake themselves free from their iniquity a little
further on, but they find that temptation awaits them at every point, that one sin paves
the way for another: indulgence leads down to dishonesty, and dishonesty conducts to
falsehood; superstition ends in scepticism, and scepticism in utter unbelief, There is
no escape from the consequences of folly but by entering the path of wisdom, from the
penalty of sin but by penitence and purity. They who look to time and chance for
deliverance are only deluding themselves with a bope which will certainly “ make
ashamed ” those that cherish it.

III. Iv aerrates. “ The foundations of the earth do shake. . . the earth is moved
exceedingly ... (it) shall reel to and fro” (vers. 18—20). There often comes a time
in the history of folly, or of crime, or of transgression, when the subject of it—individual
or collective—finds everything unsettled, shaking beneath his (its) feet; it is to him as
if the very ground were rocking; friends fall away, kindred disown, confidence is lost,
obligations are pressed against him, the last measures are taken, liberty itself is
threatened, the blackest clouds overhang; behind is folly and before is ruin, while
within are agitation and alarm.

IV. Iv opPRESSES AND EVEN cRUSHES. “The transgression thereof shall be heavy
upon it; and it shall fall, and not rise again” (ver. 20). Sin lies with a heavy weight
upon the soul. The sense of guilt, the wearing weight of wrong-doing, oppresses the
spirit, takes away its elasticity, its freshness, its vigour. Sometimes it doves much
more than that—it crushes the soul; it makes it incapable of attempting anything
better ; it gives way to a fatal despondency, and pursues the evil path even to the
bitter end. (ne of the very worst penalties of sin is the dead weight which it lays on
the spirit of the sinner, killing his hope and dooming him to despair and death.

V. Iv mprisons. The “ high ones” were to be “ shut up in the prison ” (vers. 21, 22).
There is no dungeon, however dark and strong, in which the bodies of men have been
confined that is so dark and so deplorable as “ the pit” or “ prison” in which sin shuts
up its victims. ‘The children of iniquity are slaves; they wear bonds which are more
firmly riveted than the closest iron fetters on human limbs; they are bondmen
indeed ; their pitiable thraldom is slavery itself, of which the imprisonment of the body
is only the type and picture.


894 THE BOOK OF TIE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xxiv, 1--23,


ne eee UU UE UnnInE EISEN DENSE


In Jesus Christ and in his service is: 1. Enlargement, 2. Truth and disillusion.
3. The calm of couscientiousness and a well-grounded hope. 4. Expectation founded
on a wise and holy trustfulness, 5. Spiritual freedom. ‘‘ Whom the Son makes free,
they are free indeed ;” ‘* Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.”—C.


Ver. 2.—Common burden-bearing. The figure of calamity given in ver. 1 is that of
emptying a vessel by turning it upside down. In national calamities all classes share
alike. There is indiscriminate ruin. No distinction is made between the different
ranks and conditions of life, thongh the idle poor are always the first to suffer. Illus=
trations may be taken frum the great Lancastire cotton famine ; or from times of trade
depression which, as year after year passes on, reaclies every class and section of society.
“Tt is in a special manner true of the destroying judgments which God sometimes
brings upon sinful nations; when he pleases he can make them universal, so that none
shall escape them or be exempt from them; whether men have little or much, they
shall lose it all. Those of the meaner sort smart first by famine; but those of the
higher rank go first into captivity, while the poor of the land are left. Let not those
that are advanced in the world set their inferiors at too great a distance, because they
know not how soon they may be put upon a level with them” (Matthew Henry). ‘The
Apostle Paul advises that we accept the fact of burdens being common, and strive to
turn the bearing of them into Christian virtue. ‘ Bear ye one another’s burdens.”
“ Every man shall bear his own burden.” It is as if he had said, “ Bear ye one another’s
burdens, by kindly sympathy and ready help, as far as ever you can, partly because you
have a very heavy burden of your own to bear, so you know what burden-bearing
means, and partly because, come near to help one another how you may, you know from
yourselves how true it is that every man must bear his own burden; the really heavy
weight of it can rest on no shoulders but his own.”

I, THE BURDENS THAT PRESS ON EACH ONE. The text suggests such as are special
to times of calamity and distress, but we may treat our topic in a comprehensive way,
so as to get direct practical applications, Each one of us has burdens as directly related
to his sins and sinfulness as the woes of Jerusalem were to the national transgressions.
The histories of cities and nations do but picture in the large the story of individuals,
The cursory reader of the ‘ Pilgrim’s Progress’ will tell you that the pilgrim lost his
burden from his shoulders when he gazed so trustfully upon the cross. But the more
careful reader, who notes Christian’s infirmities, and frailties, and stumblings, and falls,
will tell you that the julgrim bore his burdens right through to the end, and that they
weighed him down even when crossing the stream. We have our burdens in our frail
bodies—frail in the nerves, the head, the bones, the lungs, or yet more secret organs.
Tach one has a real “thorn in the flesh,” which has influences far wider and more
serious than he thinks. We have our burdens in our dispositions and characters—-
burdens of despondency, or of impulsiveness, or of carnality, or of masterfulness, or of
vanity, giving a bad appearance to all our work and relationship. And the problem of
our life is just this: “ How true, how beautiful can we become, with that burden, under
the pressures avd hindrances of that burden?” There is divinely arranged a great
variety and wide distribution of burdens and disabilities, both in the sense of infirmities
and calamities, so that we might come very near to one another, and really help one
another. As we meet an: feel “1 ama man with a burden,” we look into the face of
our fellows, and he is a poor face-reader who does not say, “And ny brother, too, is
evidently a man with a burden.” Perhaps a suspicion even crosses our mind that our
brother’s burden is heavier than our own. Burdens, when rightly borne, never separate
men from each other. The sanctified bearing of our own makes us so simple, so gentle,
so tender-hearted, that we can bear the burdens of others, in the spirit of our meekness
and sympathy, and so fulfil the law of Christ.

Il. Tue BURDENS THAT WE MAY BEAR WITH OTHERS. ‘There are common burdens
in the home life; common burdens in the business life; common burdens in the social
life; and common burdens in the mutional life; and we properly think ill things of the
individuals or the classes that isolate themselves, and refuse to share the common
burden, But it will be well to ask how practically we can take up the common burden
so as to really help our brethren who are in the common trouble? Our great power is
our power of sympathy. We can come so near to our brother in his weakness, his


CH, xxIv. 1—23.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 895


disability, even in his sin, that he shall fee] as if another shoulder were put under his
burden, and it felt to him a little lighter. We all yearn for sympathy; we all want
some other human heart to feel in our trouble-times ;


“Oh what a joy on earth to find
A mirror in an answering mind!”


But we can often enter, as a relieving power, into the circumstances that make the
burden. The doctor takes the sufferer into his interest and care, and deals helpfully
with the circumstances that make the burden. And every one of us can be a doctor
for the moral difficulties and distresses of life. We have all more power over the cir-
cumstances that make trouble than we think; we can “lift up hands that hang down,
and strenythen feeble knees.” Beautiful in time of national calamity is the help which
the poor give to the poor. Beautiful ought to be the help which each gives to each,
and all to all, in the ordinary burden-bearing of family and social life—R. T.


Ver. 4.—The future for haughty folk. “The haughty people of the earth do languish.”
The proud are an offence unto God. It is not the rich who find it so difficult to enter
the kingdom of God; it is they who “trust in riches,” who boast of their riches, who
make their riches the occasion for despising others.

I. THE FUTURE IS AGAINST THE HAUGHTY NATURALLY. Fortune tells upon pre-
cisely those things in which they pride themselves. The picture of trembling, suffering
old age, given in the Buok of Ecclesiastes, is designed as a warning to the proud. See
what you are certainly coming to who admired your fine persons, made so much of your
independence, and pampered your appetites and passions. The picture of old age is
not that of the ordinary man, but of the haughty, masterful sensualist, the sinner of the
high places of society. whose iniquity comes back upon him. It is enough for haughty
folk to live; life becomes their humbling and their chastisement.

Il. THE FUTURE IS AGAINST THE HAUGHTY PROVIDENTIALLY. For they cannot win
love. Everybody serves them in fear or for pay; and so, oltentimes, their very grandeur
is undermined by those about them, their riches takes wings and fly away, their
dependents take advantage of their times of weakness, and all are glad to see the
haughty humbled. Striking illustration may be found in the career of Squire Beckford,
of Fonthill. An insufferably austere and haughty man, the providences were against
him. His mansion fell with a crash. His projects failed. He was humbled to the
dust, and died almost a beggar.

Ill. THE FUTURE IS AGAINST THE HAUGHTY JUDICIALLY. For God must punish
pride. It cannot be allowed to lift up its head. The Lord hath a controversy with it.
Nebuchadnezzar eats grass like an ox. “Babylon is fallen, is fallen”—Babylon, the
type of the haughty. Belshazzar sees the recording finger write the judgment of the
proud, God will bring into contempt all the proud of the earth. “God resisteth
the proud, and giveth grace to the humble.” ‘Time is on the side of the meek. Time
is against the haughty. The judgments of God gather, like black thunder-clouds,
against those whose hearts are lifted up. ‘The storm will burst in the ever-nearing
future. The haughty man’s prosperity may blossom as a garden of delights; but God
will breathe his blight upon it, and behold, as in our text, ‘the haughty people of the
earth do languish.” Then, with a true fear, let us “ humble ourselves under the mighty
hand of God.”—R. T.


Vers. 5, 6.—The necessary connection of suffering with sin. ‘Because they have
transgressed the laws . . . therefore hath the curse devoured the earth.” he great
Eastern empires had no staying power. In a few generations dynasties, even empires,
were swept clean away, And the reason is not far to seck. The great Eastern king-
doms were founded on blood-shedding; and for the sin of violence God keeps the curse
of destruction. A lesson which he taught the world once for all when he swept away
the old violent humanity with a flood: “The earth never spues out its inhabitants
until they have defiled it by their sin.” This subject is presented to-us under a variety
of aspects, and with an abundance of illustration. It is one of the great messages of the
Bible. We do but give it here a little freshness of form and setting. F

L Sry comxzs First. God always begins with Eden, The Eden of bright happy


396 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu xxiv. 1—23,


ae


youth in every man’s life. There is no suffering where there is no sin. Thorns and
briers come when man has acted in wilfulness. Suffering has no mission save as the
corrective of sin and sin’s consequences. Our first parents disobey, and then suffering
comes. Man follows the.“ devices and desires of his own heart,” and then the corrective
Divine judgments come. And suffering has always this justification, that sin has
come first. Illustrate in the case of King Saul.

II. SIN MAY HAVE A LONG TETHER. This often creates confusion in men’s minds,
They think the sin cannot be evil because the punishment is so long delayed. So the
unclcanness of cities goes on for years, and seems to be no serious evil; but presently
the plague comes and sweeps its thousands away. Israel presumed on the holding over
of its national judgments, but presently overwhelming destruction came. We can often
sin on for years with apparent impunity, never with real impunity. Storms are
gathering, though they wait their time for bursting

Ill. SUFFERING KEEPS SIN COMPANY ON ITS way. It is always present; always
ready to give sigus of its presence ; always making monitions, It is held back only
in the long-suffering of God’s mercy, the “goodness of God thus leading men to
repentance.”

1V. SUFFERING PLAINLY STAMPS THE EVIL OF SIN IN THE END. As in the case of
the drunkard, the sensualist, the dishonest. You can tell the value of a thing by its
wage, and the “ wages of sin is death.” You can estimate a thing by its issues, and
“sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death.” ‘This lesson the history of indi-
viduals and of nations, ancient and modern, teaches, but teaches in vain to the sons
of men. We say, “Ah, yes! It may be true of sin, but it is not true of our
sin.’—R, T,


Ver. 9.—The distress of pampered appetites, “They shall not drink wine with a
song; strong drivk shall be bitter to them that drink it.” There is, at first, a carnal
pleasure in self-indulgence, in lust of eating and drinking, and in sensuality. But,
sooner or later, God takes the song out of it. ‘This must ever be the distress of mere
appetite—it can excite, it can make ever-increasing demands, but it cannot satisfy.
To indulge mere appetite and passion is to “ spend money for that which is not bread,
and... labour for that which satisfieth not.” ‘The young do not believe this; the old
man Knows it, and he says, “ Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; and let thy heart cheer
thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine neart, and in the sight of
thine eyes :; but know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into judgment!”
and that judgment comes either in early death, or in bitterness and woe if life is long
spared, Sir W. Raleigh on this ground solemnly warns his son: “Take special care
that thou delight not in wine; for there never was any man that came to honour and
preferment that loved it; for it transformeth a man into a beast, decayeth health,
poisoneth the breath, destroyeth natural heat, brings a man’s stomach to an artificial
heat, deformeth the face, rotteth the teeth, and, to conclude, maketh a man con-
temptible, soon old, and despised of all wise and worthy men.” And Matthew Henry
says, “ God has many ways vo embitter wine and strong drink to those that love them
and have the highest gust of them—distemper of body, anguish of mind; the ruin of the
estate or country will make the strong drink bitter, and all the delizhts of sense taste-
less and insipid.” The distress of the men of pampered appetites comes in one or the
other of the two following torms,

I. ABUNDANCE IS PRESENTED, BUT THE POWER TO ENJOY IS GONE. For appetite and
passion wear out, after they have fixed in the soul a dull and dreadful craving that
gives aman no rest, Late in life circumstances often give the money, the time, the
positions which are essential to self-indulgence, and the man is in the midst of this
unspeakable misery—that he is physically unable to enjoy. ‘This is God’s bitter
punishment of sensuality in this life.

lJ. APPETITE BECOMES RAVENOUS, AND THERE I8 NOTHING TO FEED IT ON. Or it
slips away, always just out of reach, as the water to Tantalus, Every act of self-
indulgence has a tendency to repeat itself. You cannot stop with once. But as the act
is repeated it becomes more intense, it wants more force. ‘I'he desire grows until it gets
beyond a man, and nothing on earth can satisfy. Then Providence places a man in
some captivity, like these pampered Jews, where there is the unspeakable misery of


CH. xxIv. 1—23.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 397


immense passion for sensual enjoyment and nothing to enjoy. These are the two
features of God’s hell upon earth.—R. T,


Ver. 13.—The mission of remnants, Explaining the figure used in this verse,
Thomson says, “ Early in autumn the olive berries begin to drop of themselves, or are
shaken off by the wind. They are allowed to remain under the trees for some time,
guarded by the watchman of the town—a very familiar Bible character. ‘hen a
proclamation is made by the governor that all who have trees go out and pick what has
fallen. Previous to this, not even the owners are allowed to gather olives in the groves,
This proclamation is repeated once or twice, according to the season. In November
comes the geueral and final summons, which sends forth all Hasbeiya. No olives are
now safe unless the owner looks after them, for the watchmen are removed, and the
orchards are alive with men, women, and children. Everywhere the people are in
the trees, ‘shaking’ them with all their might, to bring down the fruit. ‘lhe effort is
to make a clear sweep of all the crop; but, in spite of shaking and beating, there is
always a gleaning left. ‘hese are gathered by the very poor, who have no trees of their
own; and by industry they collect enough to keep a lamp in their habitation during
the dismal nights of winter, and to cuok their mess of pottage and bitter herbs,”
Reference may be to the few pvor who were left in the land of Judah to till the fields,
when the great mass of the people were carried away captive. God has always kept a
remnant. Noah and his family in the time of the Flood. Seven thousand in the time
of Ahab, an election of grace. And remnants have always their witness to make and
their work to do.

I. REMNANTS WITNESS OF Gop’s JUDGMENTS. They compel us to ask—Why are
they thus but remnants ? and so the Divine dalings are recalled to mind. There was
punishment because there was sin; there was overwhelming punishment because the
cup of iniquity had become full. The nation is destroyed as a nation because the
world must be taught, over and over again, that ‘‘ righteousness exalteth a nation, but
sin is a rebuke to any people.”

Il. Remnants witness To Gon’s MERCY IN JUDGMENT. They say God’s judgments
are never absolutely destructive. God cuts down the tree, but leaves the stock in the
ground. God removes the nation, but leaves a few to keep up possession and rights.
Self-vindication is only a purt of God’s meaning in his judgments. Correction is his
chief purpose, and his mercilulness calls for repentance.

Il]. REMNANTS WITNESS TO GOD’s RESTORING MERCY THROUGH JUDGMENT. For they
only keep possession till better days, though their possession declares that the better
days will come. The “election of grace” has this to say : “* All Israel shall be saved.”
These pints may be applied to the few that are kept faithful in times of worldliness


Dy oth


and spiritual decay in connection with Christ’s Church.—R,


Ver. 15.—Man’s duty in times of refining. ‘“ Wherefore glorify ye the Lord in the
east ;” margin, “fires” (Revised Version). The word trauslated “ fires” in the Autho-
rized Version is a difficult one. It points to the “ land of the sun,” which would be the
east country, to which Judah was taken for its captivity, and which was to it as a
refining fire; or some think to the “ land of volcanic fires,” which would be the shores
of the Mediterranean Sea. We prefer to see a figurative reference to the refining fires
of the time of exile. It is in strict keeping with the mission of Isaiah that he should
thus bid the people “glorify God in the fires.” Whether the passage directly relers to
the flight of the people to the islands of the sea, or to the great deportation into
Chaldea, the general truth is set before us that, when we are in God’s chastising and
correcting hand, our supreme desire and endeavour should be to “ glorify God in the
fires.” And this is done—

I. WHEN THE SUFFERING I8 RECOGNIZED AS CHASTISEMENT. Suffering is often spoker
of as if it were accident, hereditary taint, or the fault of other people; but God is not
glorified until we see and admit that it is fatherly chastisement. ‘The burden of woe
resting on humanity is overwhelming, unless we can see that God is in it, and thereby
is but chastening his children betimes, The world is God’s erring child. It glorifies
‘he Father to see that he will not let him go on in sin, “ What son is he whom the


ither chasteneth not ?”


398 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. |[cu. xx1v. 1—23.


Il. WHEN WE ADMIT THE SIN FOR WHICH THE CHASTISEMENT IS SENT. God always
sends chastisements that can have a revealing power, and bear evident relation to
particular sins. National sins are shown up by national calamities, bodily sins by
bodily sufferings. This point may gain large and various illustration, as in Saul,
David, Ahab, Jonah, ete. We glorify God when we let the chastisement show us the
sin—act as the revealer to reveal the bad self.

II]. WHEN WE DETERMINE TO PUT THE SIN AWAY. For chastisement then is shown
to be effective; it reaches its end: God is seen not to have wrought in vain. Correctior
is “for our profit, that we may be pirtakers of his righteousness.” |

IV. WHEN WE COME OUT OF THE CHASTISEMENT PURIFIED, HUMBLED, SUBMISSIVE,
AND oprpient. Our Father is glorified when we are made children deed. Beautifully
is it said of the Lord Jesus that, “ though he were a Sou, yet learned he obedience by
the things which he suffered.” Gloriiying God by the spirit of sonshi»n, which he kept
all through the burning ot the dreadful refining fires of Calvary. ‘Trust, submission,
clinginy love, patient waiting,—these still glurify God in the fires—R. T.


Ver. 20.—The burden of earth’s transgressions. “ And the transgression thereof shall
be heavy upon it.” Sin on man is often figured as a burden, Bunyan’s picture of
Graceless with the load on his back is familiar enough to be understood by all.
Prophets picture God’s impending judgments as a burden ready to fall and crush. We
wil! ‘re take the term as referring to the transgressions rather than to the direct
judgments.

|. [HE BURDEN THAT CRUSHES MEN. It is transgression, which is precisely this—
wilful sin. “Sin is a burden to the whole creation; it is a h avy burden, a burden
under which it groans now and will sink at last. Sin is the ruin of states and king-
doms and families; they fall under the weight of tnat talent of lead” (Zech. v. 7, 8).
lilustrative cases may be given of the crushing of health, position, success, friendship,
family, by the burden of willul sin. Pressed down by it, humanity cries as did St.
Paul, “O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this
death ? ”

ll. DELIVERANCE FROM THIS BURDEN IS BEYOND MAN’S POWER. All kinds of purely
human forces have been tried—sell-struggles, strong will, education, philosophy,
religious systems, lvgal enactments, watching of one another, refinemcuts of art, etc.;
but none bave succeeded yet in doing away with the sin of the individual, and so none
have even reached the fringe of the world’s misery. Have we any better reason to hope
for the success of the modern panacca o! scientific knowledge, tian our fathers had of
the nostrums they tried? Before God intervened, there was “no eye to pity, and no
arm to save.” For “sin” man las never been abie to find “ balm in Gilead ;” there is
no adequate “ physician” there.

111, MaAn’s HELPLESSNESS SHOULD MAKE HIM CRY MIGHTILY UNTO Gop. “Thou
caust save, ad thou alone.” Yet precisely in this men fail. They will die rather than
turn to God for pardon and life. And why? Because they do not “ know and believe
the love which God bath unto them.” False and unworthy notions of the God of love,
and Father of Jesus, have long prevailed, and they keep men away from God. So our
work is to preach the gospel of the grace of God, which alone can lift the burden of
transgression that now presses so heavily, so crushiugly, on men’s shoulders, that they
“ fall, and cannot rise again.”—R. T,


Ver. 23.—The Lord’s kingdom ts the doing of the Lord’s will. “For the Lord of
hosts shall reign.”

1. A KINGDOM I8 SIMPLY THE REIGN AND RULE OF A WILL, That is the proper
meaning of the word “kingdom ;” it is the “dom” or rule of a king. There are several
ways in which men may be gathered together into ordered communities. The form ot
the kingdom is the most common. We only in part realize what a kingdom is in our
own land and times, because the relation between the will of our sovereign and the
people is not direct, but is maintained through a constitution, which involves representa-
tive and responsible government. For the scriptural idea of a kinedom we must refer
to the kingdoms established in those Eastern climes, where Bible heroes lived and the
Bible Mself was written. There a kingdom is the rule of one man’s will. The judg-


cH. xxv. 1—12.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPIIET ISAIAH. 899


Se Se ee ee ee ee


ments, wishes, and commands of one man influence the spirit, conduct, and even choices
of a whole people. Properly a kingdom is a number of persons ayrecing to accept the
will of one of their number as their rule and guide. The kinydom grows out of the
family idea; and the family rule is the fatherly will, So the kingdom of God is no
merely outward thing; it is the reign of God's will, The subjects of it are preciscly
those who choose his will, obey him, recognize his kingly rights.

IL. IF WE KNow THE WILL oF GoD, WE KNOW THE SPIRIT OF HIS KINGDOM. We
can judge of any kingdom fairly if we can gain ‘a fair knowledge of its king. Of God
we kuow this—his will is that of a Father, a heavenly Father, a holy Father. God
might have put forth his power and forced the obedience of his creatures. He does not.
He appeals to our motives and feelings as reasonable moral beings. He wants no
kingdom of slaves ; he wauts the love and allegiance of free men. His is a spiritual
kingdom. To accept the will of some men is hard; but God touches our feelings,
wakens our confidence, commands our reverence, and so to us his will seems most
beautiful, ever right, ever wise, ever gracious, And we know tke spirit of his kingdom
—it is the obedience which love renders.

Hil. IF we CHEERFULLY ACCEPT THE WILL OF GOD, WE REALIZE THE COMING OF
HIS KINGDOM. Prophecy indeed makes pictures of the setting up of a king in Jerusalem
in the latter days; but prophecy is fulfilled, over and over again, when hearts yield to
God; when families, communities, and nations accept his willand reign. God wants to
secure the voluntary choice of his will as the rule of life. Wherever that is gained his
kingdom is set up.—R. T,


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER XXV.


Vers. 1—12.—Isarau’s Sona oF PRAISE ON
THE EsTABLISHMENT oF Gop’s Kincpom. As
in ch. xii., after describing the first setting
up of Christ’s kingdom and the call of the
Gentiles, the prophet broke out into song,
through joy at the tidings he was commis-
sioned to announce, so now, having pro-
claimed the final establishment of the same
kingdom in the heavenly Zion, he is again
carried away by tlie sense of exultant
gladness into a fresh Lobgesang, which he
utters in his own person—not, as the former
one, in the person of the Church. His song
divides itself into three sections: (1) vers.
1—5, a thanksgiving for deliverance; (2)
vers. 6—8, a commemoration of blessings
granted; and (3) vers. 9—12, exultation in
the security obtained.


Ver. 1.—Thou art my God; I will exalt
thee (comp, Exod. xv. 2 und Ps. cxviii. 28).
To Isaiah the “Song of Moses” seems to
have been a pattern thanksgiving, from
which he delighted to draw his phrases
wien he was bent on formally singing praise
to God. Compare the following: Exod. xv. 2
with ch. xii. 2, “He is become my salva-
tion; ” the same with ch. xxv. 1, “ He is my
God; I will exalt him;” Exod. xv. 6 with
ch. xiii. 16, “ Hath dashed in pieces ;” Exod.
xv. 7 with ch. xlvii. 14, “ Consumed tliem as


stubble;” Exod. xv. 11 with ch. xlvi. 5, !


“Who is like,” etc.? the same with ch. xxv.
1, “ Doing wonders;” Exod. xv. 16 with ch.
vili. 13, “Fear and dread;” Exod. xv. 18
with ch. xxiv. 23, “The Lord shall reign.”
Wonderful things; thy counsels of old are,
etc.; rather, thow hast wrought wonders,
counsels of old, faithfulness and truth. The
wouders for which God is prais:d were
decreed in his counsels from all eternity ;
their accomplishment shows forth God’s
“ faithfulness” and “ truth.”

Ver. 2.—Thou hast made of a city an heap.
No particular city is pointed at. The pro-
phet has in his mind the fate of all those
cities which have been enemies of Jehovah
and persecutors of the saints upon earth. A
defenced city; i.e. “a fenced, or fortified,
city.” Apalace of strangers, As the “city”
of this passage is not an individual city, so
the “palace” is not an individual palace.
All the palaces of those who were “strangers”
to God and his covenant have ceased to be
—they are whelmed in the general destruc-
tion (see ch. xxiv. 20). They will never
rise again out of their ruins.

Ver. 3.—Therefore shall the strong people
glorify thee; rather, strong peonles. God’s
judgments on the nations specially hostile
to him would cause some among the heathen
peoples to range themselves on his side.
Perhaps Persia is mainly intended (see ch.
xliv. 28; xlv. 1, etc.; and comp. Ezra i.
1—4; vi. 3—12, etc.). The city of the
terrible nations; rather, cities of terrible
nations. Though the noun is singular, the
vero is plural, showing that the word “ city”
is again used distributively.


400


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cn. xxv. 1—12%


a


Ver. 4.—The poor... the needy. The
“ poor and needy ” are especially the afflicted
saints, whom the ungodly of the earth have
so long injured and oppressed. God is ever
a “Strength” and “ Refuge ” to such (comp.
ch. xiv. 30; xxix. 19; and see also Ps. lxxii.
12—14). A Refuge from the storm (comp.
ch. iv. 6; and the Psalms passim). A Shadow
from the heat. ‘he idea is a little enlarged
in ch. xxxii. 2. Its germ is, perhaps, to be
found in Ps. exxi. 5,6. No writer accumu-
lates striking images with such force and
beauty as Isaiah. Primarily, the entire
imagery has reference to what God will have
done for his people when the final con-
summation arrives. Secondarily, a precious
encouragement is hell out to all who are
undergoing their earthly trial and probation,
who are taught where to look for a sure
refuge in time of trouble.

Ver, 5.—Thou shalt bring down. The
past foreshadows the future. What God
had done in “ bringing down” the enemies
of his saints, he would do again and aguin,
He could as easily bring to nought the
clamorous uprising of heathen nations
(strangers) against his people, as temper the
sun’s heat by the interposition of a thick
cloud. The branch; rather, the song (comp.
ch. xxiv. 16; Job xxxv. 10; Ps. xcv. 2;
exix. 51), The exultant chant of triumph
which the ungodly are sure to raise as they
deem their victory over the people of God
complcte, will be stopped in mid-career, and
“brought low,” or reduced to silence, by the
crushing overthrow predicted in ch. xxiv.

Vers. 6—8.—The blessings of the final
state are now touched upon, as a special
subject for thanksgiving. They are not
enumerated; but a certain number are set
forth, as specimens from which we may form
a conception of the general condition of the
“saved.” ‘These are: (1) a heavenly feast,
in which they will all participate (ver. 6);
(2) a removal of the “ veil,” or “ covering,”
which is in this life over all things, causing
men to have an indistinct vision, and an
erroneous estimate of their value; (3) the
abolition of death, which will no longer
hang over them as a thing to be feared;
and (4) the cessation of tears, or the entire
freedom of the saved from all sorrow.

Ver. 6.—In this mountain; 7.e, the heavenly
Zion—the “mountain of the Lord’s house”
(ch. ii, 2; comp. ch. xxiv. 23), Unto all
people; rather, unto all peoples. There is
no restriction of salvation to any particular
race or nation—“ Jew, Greek, barbarian,
Scythian, bond, free” (Col. iii. 11), are
equally invited, and some of each come in
(comp. Dan, vii. 14; Matt. viii. 11; Rev. v.
9; vii. 9). The Church of the redeemed
contains men and women of all “nations,
and kindreds, and peoples, and tongues.”


A feast of fat things. It follows from many
passages of Holy Scripture that there is
something in the final beatitude of man
which is best represented to us in our
present condition by the image of a “feast”
—something very different, no doubt, from
the festive joy of which our Teutonic an-
cestors hoped to partake in the halls of
Odin, but yet figured to us most fitly and
appropriately by terms ordinarily used to
describe earthly feasting. Our Lord tells
of a “marriage supper,” to which he will
invite his friends (Matt. xxii. 2—12); and
the scene of tlie “inarriage supper of the
Lamb,” according to St. John in the Reve-
lation (xix. 7—9), is heaven. ‘There man,
it would seem, will partake of a sacrificial
feast with his glorified Lord (Matt. xxvi.
29)—will eat the “ heavenly manna,” which
is “angels’ food” (Ps. Ixxviii. 25), and drink
a spiritual drink which may be called “ the
fruit of the vine,” deriving from this “ eat-
ing” and “drinking” life and joy and
strength. It has been already observed, in
the Commentary upon Exodus (p. 581), that
the sacrificial meal on Sinai, whereto the
seventy elders were admitted (Exod. xxiv.
9—11), prefigured this heavenly feasting,
and throws a certain light upon it. All
gross and carnal ideas must, of course, be
subtracted from the conception of the
heavenly festivity; but it seems to be true
to say that our author, and also St. John
and our Lord himself, imply that in the
world to come there will be a feast, at which
God will be the Hust, and all men, priests
and laity alike, his guests, and receive from
him the choicest and most exquisite gifts—
gifts which will make them supremely
happy (see Mr. Cheyne’s note on the passage,
p. 148). A feast of wines on the lees. Wine
which remained on its lees, and was not
poured off them into another vessel, was
considered to be of especial strength (see
Jer. xlviii. 11). Its defect was mee of
clearness. The wine of the heavenly ban-
quet is to be at once strong and perfectly
clear or “ well refined.” i
Wer. 7.—He will destroy ... the face of
the covering. According to some, the
“covering cast over all people” is death,
and the second clause of thie verse is a mere
repetition of the first. But, though the
heads of criminals were covered when they
were led to execution (sth. vii. 8), yet
death itself is never elsewhere called a
“covering.” May not the prophet have in
view that “veil” or “covering” of miscon-
ception and prejudice, whereof St. Paul
speaks as lying “on the hearts of the Jewish
nation,” and preventing them from discern-
ing the true sense of Scripture (2 Cor. iii.
15)? Certainly one of the great curses of
humanity while here is its inability to see


ow. xxv. 1—12.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


things as they really are—its coloured, dis-
torted, prejudiced views of life and death,
of this world and the next, of self-interest,
duty, happiness. This *‘ veil” is certainly
to be done away; for ‘now we see through
@ glass darkly, but then face to face; now
we know in part, but then shall we know
even as we are known ” (2 Cor. xiii. 12).

Ver. 8.—He will swallow up death in
victory; rather, he will abolish death for
ever. Hosea, a contemporary, was inspired
to write, “I will ransom Israel from the
power of the grave; I will redeem them from
death: O death, I will be thy plagues; O
grave, I will be thy destruction” (xiii.
14); but otherwise this was the first an-
nouncement that death was to disappear
and to cease to be a possibility. It was an
enormous advance on the dim and vague
conceptions of a future life hitherto current
(Job xix. 25, 27; Ps. xvii. 15) to have such
an announcement made as this. Hitherto
men had been “through fear of death all
their life subject to bondage” (Heb. ii. 15).
Now they were taught that,in the resur-
rection-life, there would be no fear, no pos-
sibility of death. The joyous outburst of
the apostle, when he quotes the present
passage (2 Cor. xv. 5+), is tlhe natural thanks-
giving song of reassured humanity, on re-
cognizing its final deliverance from the
unspeakable terror of death and annihilation,
The Lord God will wipe away tears from
allfaces. A recent commentator asks, “ What
place is left for tears?’”? But surely death
is not the only cause of human mourning.
Our own sins, the sins and sutterings of our
dear ones, are the main provocatives of our
tears. When it is promised, as here and in
Rev. vii. 17 and xxi. 4, that “there shall be no
more pain, neither sorrow nor erying,” the
revelation is made that there shall be no more
sin ; for where sin is, sorrow must be. The
rebuke of his people shall he take away.
It will be among tle lesser satisfactions of
the final condition of the saved that they
are no longer subject to reproach. In this
life they have to endure continually reproach,
rebuke, contumely (Ps. Ixxiv. 10; Ixxxix.
50, 51, ete.). In the resurrection-life they
will be exempt from any such annoyance.
The Lord hath spoken it. God’s word has
gone forth. There can be no retractation.
The blvssings promised are certain to be
obtained.

Vers. 9—12.—After thanksgiving for de-
liverance in the past, and commemoration
of blessings in the present, contidence is
expressed in the future. (1) The redeemed
declare their joy that they have “ waited for
God,” trusted in him, and looked to him for
salvation. MThcy feel that they “ have their
reward.” (2) The prophet declares his con-


ISAIAH


401


viction that the enemies of God’s elect are
henceforth powerless. They are personified
under the name of * Moab,” and regarded as
still animated by sentiments of hostility;
but their absolute impotency for working
evil is insisted on (vers. 11, 12).

Ver. 9.—It shall be said; literally, one
shall say; i.e. the redeemed generally shall
thus express themselves. We have waited
for him. During all the weary time of their
oppression and persecution, the godly rem-
nant (ch. xxiv. 13—15) was “ waiting for
the Lord,” ¢.e. trusting in him, expecting
him to arise and scatter his enemies, won-
dering that he endured so long the “con-
tradiction of sinners against himself” (Heb.
xii. 3), but content to abide his determina-
tion of the fitting season for coming forward
as their Avenger, and now quite satisfied
that he has avenged them in his own good
time and in his own good way. We will be
glad and rejoice (comp. Ps. cxviii. 24 and
Cant. i. 4).

Ver. 10.—In this mountain shall the
hand of the Lord rest. The protecting hand
of God will ever be stretched out over the
spiritual Zion—the Church of the Redeemed
—to defend it and keep it safe throughout
eternity. Moab shall be troddem down
Various reasons have been given for the
selection of Moab to represent the enemies
of the redeemed. ferhaps, as the Moabites
were, on the whole, the bitterest of all the
adversaries of the Jews (see 2 Kings xxiv. 2;
Kizek, xxv. 8—11), they are revailed as
the fittest representatives of the human
adversaries of God. For the dung-hill;
rather, in the water of 2 dung-pit. The
image is, perhaps, selected with conscious
reference to Ps. Ixxxiii., where the psalmist
prays that the “children of Lot” and their
helpers may become “as the dung of the
earth ” (ver. 10).

Ver. 11.—He shall spread forth his hands
... a3 he that swimmeth. Moab will en-
deavour to save himself from sinking in the
water of the dung-pit; but in vain. God
will bring down his pride, or abase his
haughtiness, together with all the plots and
snares that he contrives. A continued
plotting of the enemies of God against his
Church secvms to be assumed, even after the
Church is established in the spiritual Zion
under the direct protection and rule of
Jehovah,

Ver. 12.—The fortress of the high fort...
shall he bring down, etc.; rather, hath he
bowed down, laid low, brought down to earth.
The past mercies of God in abasing the
pride of the Church’s foes, rather than any
further mercies of the same kind, seem to be
here spoken of. Mr. Cheyne suggests that
the verse is out of place.


2D


402 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xxv. 1—12


HOMILETICS.


Vers. 1—12.— The place of thanksgiving in the religious life. It is generally agreed
by Christians that the religious life embraces a considerable number of separate duties
of a strictly religious character. Among these the first place is ordinarily assigned
to prayer; the second to reading of the Scriptures; the third, perhaps, to meditation ;
and so forth. But it is not always, or indeed very often, that a distinct position, or
a very prominent position, is assigned to praise and thanksgiving. Prayer is apt to be
made the staple of our religious exercises, thanksgiving to be huddled off into a corner.
Yet, if we will consider the matter, we shall tind that, on all grounds, thanksgiving is
entitled to at least an equal place in our regards with prayer.

I. THANKSGIVING IS POINTED OUT BY NATURE AS A DUTY NO LESS THAN PRAYER.
It is as the Giver of benefits that man seems first to have rec.gnized God. Worship
began with aitars and sacrifices (Gen. iv 8—5), which were primariiy thank offerings.
One of the earsiest forms of religion was sun-worslip, and the reason for selecting the
sun as the object of religious regard was the manilest fact that from the sun man
derives so many and such great blessings. Geolitry was another very early form of
worship, and took its rise from the fcling that the earth was a nursing mother,
comprehending in herself a manifuld variety of beneficent influences. The very name
“God” is probably a modification of the root gut, or “ good,” and was given to the
Supreme Being by our Anglo-Saxon forefathers, in recognition of his goodness in
bestowing upon us so many benefits. ‘The first relizious utterances seem to have taken
the shape of hymns rather than prayers (Gen. xiv. 19, 20; Exod. xv. 1—18); and
hymns or psalms form the most antique portions of all rituals.

II. THANKSGIVING IS, EQUALLY WITH PRAYER, ENJOINED ON MEN AS A DUTY
in Scripture. If prayer is required in such phrases as, ‘Pray without ceasing ”
(1 Thess. v. 17); “I will that all men pray everywhere” (1 Tim. ii. 8); “ Men ought
always to pray, and not to faint” (Luke xviii. 1); ‘* Pray one for another” (Jas. v. 16);
thanksviving is as frequently and as positively enjoined in passages like the following:
“ Give thanks always for all things” (Eph. v.20); “ Texhort that ... giving of thanks
be made for all men” (1 Tim. ii, 1); “Offer sacritices of praises, giving thanks”
nit xiii. 15); “‘ With thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God”

Phil. iv. 6).

III. THANKSGIVING IS, EQUALLY WITH PRAYER, SET BEFORE US BY THE CHURCH
as A puTy. The ritual of the Jewish Church was almost entirely one of praise. The
Book of Psalms is the Israelite’s ‘Manual of Devotion.” Our own Church declares
the objects for which we assemble in public worship to be (1) “to render thanks for
the great benefits which we have received at God’s hands;” (2) “to set forth his most
worthy praise;” (3) “to hear his most Holy Word;” and (4) “to ask those things
which are requisite and necessary as weil for the body as the soul ”—assigning to
thanksgiving and praise the foremost place. The Eucharistic service is that in which
Christian worship culminates, and that service is, by its very name, a service of praise.
The embodimeut of the entire Psalter in our Prayer-book is a strong evidence of the
importance which our Church assigns to praise.

IV. PRAISE Is, IN ITS NATURE, A HIGHER RELIGIOUS EXERCISE THAN PRAYER. In
prayer we approach God for our own sakes, desiring something of him. Ia praise
we have no selfish object, but desire simply to honour God by setting furth his
admirable qualities and declaring the reasons that we have for loving and adoring him.
Praise is the enduring attitude of angels, who have (comparatively speaking) no
occasion for prayer. Prayer implies imperfection, want, need, defect of nature. Praise
is appropriate when all wants are satisfied, when the nature is no longer defective,
when no need is felt. Thus prayer belongs to the probation period of man’s existence;
but praise will ring on through the vaults of heaven for ail eternity. he cry in the
heavenly Jerusalem will ever be, ‘Great and marvellous are thy works. Lord God
Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints. Who shall not fear thee,
O Lord, and glorify thy Name? for thou only art holy: for all nations shall come
and worship before thee; for thy judgments are made manifest” (Rev. xv. 3, 4).


on. xxv. 1—12.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 403


—<—<—$—$<—<—<—<——————————— eee


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS,


Vers. 1—8.— Hymn of praise to Jehovah. I. THe PERSONAL APPROPRIATION OF Gop,
This is one of the great marks of personal, spiritual religion. Other nations have known
their gods as leaders in war, protectors of hearth and home; it was reserved for Israel
and for Christianity to think of the High and Holy One as tenanting the heart and soul
of the believer. Jehovah is not only “ my father’s God,”—this would be merely tra-
ditional religion ; but “ my God,” “ my Salvation,”’—this is personal religion (Exod. xv.
2). The language of Ps. xviii, 23 and cxlv. 1 seems echoed here. The prophet becomes
“ chora] leader of the Church of the future,” of the Church in all ages. ‘I'he echoes of
all past ages gather up into one volume, and become a mighty prophecy of the future.
The thought of the farthfulness of the Eternal enters into the appropriation of his Name.
He is a covenant-keepiug God. What he has been in the past is a pledge of what he
will be in the future. “There shall never be one lost good; what was shall be as

efore.”

I]. THE INCOMPARABLE WISDOM AND TRUTH OF Gop. This, too, is a thought deeply
impressed from the olden time. ‘“ Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the gods ? who
is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders ?” (Exod. xv. 11;
cf. Ps. Ixxvii. 15; Ixxviii. 12). This is seen in bis counsels and in the execution of
them. 1. His far-reaching counsels. God’s thoughts are not extempore inspirations,
accidental—“‘ happy,” as we say, springing up in no fixed order or method; they orizi-
nated “long ayo” (ch. xxii. 11; xxxvii. 26). To God nothing is sudden or unforeseen ;
though to us it may seem “the unexpected always happens.” All things were ordained
by him before the foundation of the world (Acts xv. 18). “All the wonders which
happen conuary to the expectation of men are the result of that regular order which
God maintains in governing the world, arranging all things from the beginuing to the
end. Now, since we do not understand these secret decrees, and our powers of under-
standing cannot rise so high, our attention must therefore be directed to the manifesta-
tion of them ; for they are concealed from us, and exceed our comprcheusion, till the
Lord reveal them by his Word, in which he accommodates himself to our weakness; for
his decree is unsearchable” (Calvin), 2. The faithful realization of them in history.
The imperial city, the city of Israel’s oppressors (ch. xxiv. 10), is destroyed. It has
become a ruinous heap of stones; and the palace of the barbarians will never again rise
out of those ruins, It is symbolic in its fate of heathen pride and power and super-
stition, and all that exalts itself against the true God and the true religion,

Il]. Tue eFFECT OF HIS JUDGMENTS ON THE HEATHEN. ‘They will honour the mighty
God of Israel. They will be converted from rudeness and wildness to meekness and
lowly reverence. The former oppressors will bow in fear before him, “They are
affrighted, and give glory to the God of heaven” (Rev. xi. 13). For in great crises,
in days of judgment, the nature of Jehovah and hisrule is made manifest to men. The
calm, unbroken smile of the summer day does not so reveal God to us in his power and
beueficence as the thunder and the lightning, followed by the refreshing rain, Revo-
lutions awaken the slumbering consciences of the uation ; and God is revealed, not only
by the objects and institutions he overthrows, but by those which are protected and
fostered in the midst of and by the very means of change. He is seen to have been, in
the magnificent imagery of the prophet, “a fortress to the weak, a fortress to the poor
in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat” (cf. ch. xxx.3; iv. 6;
xxxii. 2; xvi. 3), As he can quell the fiery heat by bringing up a shady thicket of
clouds (Jer. iv. 29; Ixod. xix. 9; Ps. xviii. 12), or say to the proud waves of the sea,
“Thus far, and no further |” so did he dispel the thundering hordes of the assailants of his
people. So in later times did he meet the “ blast of threats and slaughter” (Acts ix. 1)
from the mouth of an arch-persecutor, and turn, by his mighty and merciful sell-
manifestation, that arch-persecutor into an arch-apostle. And to the infant Church
he became what is described in ver. 4. Behind the providence which “ frowns,” the
“smiling face” is ever hidden.

IV. Tue vuLTimaTe consummation. In this mountain of Zion, where the prophet
dwells, the seat of the Divine presence, a feast of fat things, with wines on the lees well
strained, will be made for all peoples. They will,be incorporated into the kingdom of


404 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cn. xxv. 1—12


Jehovah; many having come from east and west, and north and south, to sit down in
the kingdom of God. ‘he feast is symbolic of all spiritual and temporal blessings, as
it is in the parables of our Saviour. It is symbolic of satisfaction: “The meek shall
eat and be satistied ” (Ps. xxii. 26), The allusion may be to the thank or peace offering :
“T will satiate the soul of the priests with fatness, and my people shall be satisfied with
my goodness” (Jer, xxxi. 14; cf. Lev. vii. 31). The meal which followed the sacrifice
was a joyous and festive occasion. It was expected by the Jews that the glorious
Messianic time would be ushered in by a great feast; and of this, doubtless, the guest
at the dinner-table of the Pharisee was thinking when he exclaimed, “ Blessed is he
that shall eat bread in the kinvdom of God!” As the feast, so the age, of the Messiah
is to be unending. And in one great burst of universal joy, death and sorrow are to be
swallowed up. Death is signified by the covering or veil cast over all nations, or web
woven over them. The cover d head is a sign of mourning in antiquity in general; it
will be withdrawn (Ps. xxi. 10; lv. 10). Darkness and oblivion are associated with
death; this will greatly give way before the light of Jehovah. The bondage to the
fear of death will be broken, death itself will be abolished, and life and immortality be
brought to light (2 Tim. i. 10; 1 Cor. xv. 54). The promise belongs to the Jewish
nation (Hos. xiii. 14), aud to all its believing members. All sorrow is more or less
rooted in the associations of death; this too shall cease, and Jehovah shall wipe away
all tears from off all faces. The reproaches so long levelled at the people in their world-
wide dispersion shall be taken away. No more will the taunt be levelled at them,
“ Where is now your God?” (Ps. lxxix. 10). Sin will be eradicated, which has had its
fruit in tears, in shame, and in death. ‘he new Jerusalem is Jehovah’s throne, but
the whole earth is Jehovah’s glorious kingdom. The prophet is here looking from just
the same point of view as Paul in 1 Cor. xv. 18,and John in the last page of the Apoca-
lypse” (Delitzsch). ‘lhe last point in the distant perspective on which the eye rests is
the epoch known as “ the day of redemption,” the restoration of all things, when the
old and corrupt order shall finally give place to the new, the confusions of time cease in
the harmonies of the eternal world (see Luke xxi. 28; Acts iii. 21; Rom. viii. 23;
Eph. iv. 80), A great poet, Burns, said that he could never read this passave without
tears. It does, indeed, touch the depth of the heart, as it strikes the full tones of the
eternal evangel. For here we have the gospel in the universality of its message (“ good
tidings of great joy to all people ””)—the fulness of its power to satisfy and to comfort, in
the all-hojeful perspective of the future it opens up. “ Let us, then, direct all our hope and
expectation to this point, and Jet us not doubt that the Lord will fulfil all these things
in us when we have finished our course. If we now sow in tears, we shall reap in joy.
The reproaches of men will procure for us one day the highest vlory. Having obtained
here the beginuing of this nappiness and glory, by being adopted by God and begin-
ning to bear the image of Christ, let us firmly and resolutely await the completion of it
at the last day ” (Calvin).—J.


Vers, 9—12.—Song of the redeemed. I. THE STATE OF THE CHOSEN PEOPLE. They
will be in the joyous realization of long-awaited blessings, A brief strain from their
hymn is givea—


“To! here is our God!
For him we have waited that he should save uss
This is Jehovah, for whom we have waited;
Let us exult and rejoice in his salvation |”


As “a sorrow’s crown of sorrow is remembering happier things,” so the crown of joy is
the recollection of past miseries in the hour of deliverance. Aud how it intensifies joy—
the sense of having wasted, of having ploughed and sown, watched and wept, with a
view to the “ far-off interest of tears”! And finally, to see and know that in this
mingled experience one hand has been at work, one will has been guiding, one mere
mixing the ingredients of life’s cup! ‘ Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself!” yea,
but verily, also, thou art a God that dost in due time disclose thyself to reward the
patience and faith of thy chosen, and to pour confusion on thy foes! On the sacred
mountain the hand of Jehovah will rest, to protect his people, to judge his foes. Beautiful
image! As a symbol of protection, cf. Ezra vii. 6, 28; viii, 18, 22, 31; Neh. ii. 8


cH, xxv. 1—12.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 405
ot oe


IL. Tux Doom or THE HEATHEN. Moab seems to stand for the heathen in general. Moab,
as the proud foe of Israel (2 Kings xxiv. 2; Ezek. xxviii. 8—11), shall be trampled
down, swamped, and contend like a swimmer for his life. But his pride will be abased ;
his strong walls be cut down, even to the dust. So that hand, which is outspread
beneficently, like the canopy of the broad sky, to protect and bless the chosen, may be
clenched in threat and for vengeance upon the wicked. ‘There are two senses in which
that hand may “rest” upon ns—lightly, as the father’s hand rests on the head of a
beloved child, to express affection, approval, and the promise of aid; or heavily, to
punish, to overwhelin, to “ turn our moisture into the drought of summer.” To listen
to the voice, to submit to the hand of the Eternal,—this is the expression of genuine
piety. To writhe and struggle and resist the pressure of that hand, to turn a deaf ear
to that voice,—this is the expression of hardness of heart and impiety, bringing
certain punishment in its turn, ‘To-day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts |”—J.


Ver. 8.—Christ’s conquest of death. “He will swallow up death in victory.”
Here the fulness of Ixaiah’s evangelical prophecy begins to break forth. In the fourth
verse he has described Jehovah as “a Strength to the poor, a Strength to the needy in
his distress, a Refuge from the storm, a Shadow from the heat;” and all this, he says,
God has been. Human history will endorse the record. But he will be more to men
than all this! Death, that dogs men’s foutsteps and darkens even their days with
fear; death, that breaks in upon all dreams of perfect friendship and permanent joy;
death, which, as invisible monarch, holds empire in so many breasts ;—<death itself shall
be destroyed.

I, THE victory came. It was not then. But the propbecy was fulfilled. Death
had to bring its sacred spoils and to lay them at the feet of Christ during his earthly
ministry. And when men wondered at his mighty power, Christ said, “ Marvel not at
this, for all... that are in the graves shall hear the voice of the Son of man, and shall
come forth.”

II. Tue victory was compietTs. Death was swallowed up in victory. No province
was left undisturbed. No delay intervened. No conflict occurred. Death knew its
own lord and King, and gave back at once its spoils. ‘Thus we understand the words,
“* He led captivity captive.” The very powers that once had held empire over men he
now despoiied. And as in the Roman processions, the princes who once had spoiled
others were now led captive at the chariot-wheels of a greater victor than themselves,
so death was led captive at the chariot-wheels of Christ.

Ill, THE vicrory was PERMANENT. “Christ being raised from the dead dieth no
more; death hath no more dominion over him.” Now that Christ las risen from the
dead, he has become the Firstfruits of all that sleep. The triumph of the Saviour over
the grave was designed to give great rest and gladness of heart. “And the Lord God
will wipe away tears from off all faces.” It is immortal life that not only gives pre-
ciousness to friendship, but that gives relief from overwhelming tribulation. We sorrow,
indeed, still; the hot rain of tears falls from the aching brain; but we sorrow not as those
without hope. We comfort our hearts with these words of Jesus: “ Let not your hearts
be troubled. . . . In my Father’s house are many mansions.” —W. M. 5.


Vers. 1—5.—Rejoicing in God. Such words as these could only come from an
enlightened mind. They would have been impossible to a heathen sage. ‘The gods of
the nations were beings in whom no right-minded man could rejoice at all, and their
character could not have been painted in these colours. But the God of Isaiah, our
God, is One for whom “ praise may be continually on the lips” of the wise and pure.
Our souls can “ delight themselves in God ; ” for—

I. His aprpine FarruruLness. “Ilis counsels of old are faithfulness and truth ”
(ver. 1). “The counsel of the Lord standeth for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all
generations.” What he has purposed and promised is sure of fulfilment. The lapse
of time, the passing of centuries, makes not the faintest difference in the certainty.
Heaven and earth may pass, but his promise never (Jas. i, 17; Heb. xiii. 8). We may
lean all the weight of our hope on his Divine Word, and we shall find that we are rest-
ing on the immovable rock.


406 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. xxv. 1—12.


II. His PERFECT RIGHTEOUSNESS. (Vers. 2, 5.) The powerful empire-city might
boast of its antiquity, its delences, its soldiery, but its iniquity should receive its
desert—it siiouid be humbled to the very dust; it should be a heap, a ruin, a desert.
The righteousness of God will assuredly be vindicated in time. God must not be juaged
as if a few decades were much in his measurement. Only wait his time, and when the
cup of human guilt is full, the arm of Divine retribution will deal its stroke. Then
shall the shoutings of impious arrogancy be silenced; it shall be dumb with shame
ver. 5).
: UU ts Divine compassion. (Ver. 4.) When the raging tempest of human per-
secution threatens to overtake and destroy the humble and the helpless, then the
pitiful One will anpear on their behalf. A Strength to the poor and the needy, a
Shadow from the heat, will he prove to be; as the saving cloud shelters from the
scorching heat (ver. 5), so will Divine interposition deliver from the consuming fires of
human wrath. And this gracious pity is not an unusual or occasional feeling in his
heart—it is his constant attitude, it is his abiding spirit. In every age and in every
land he regards the poor and the needy, the suffering and the down-trodden, with a
peculiar kindness; he is always ready to shelter them in the pavilion of lis power.
Therefore: 1. Let the guilty fear. (Ver. 3.) What God has done io holy retribution
he is prepared to do again, and will do again if heedlessness lead to impenitence, and
impenitence to greater and more arrogant rebellion, 2. Let the oppressed hope. The
destruction of the strong city of sin is the relief and the rescue of the holy. Not only
the “strong people,” but the obedient and humble people—the people of God—will
“ glorify” his Name (ver. 3), 3. Let the redeemed praise God for his righteous judgment
and his merciful deliverances, “I will praise thee.” Not only thuse delivered from
power and bondage of the human enemy, but those who have been ransomed and
redeemed from the tyranny and the slavery of sin. 4. Let every mun claim a direct
personul interest in God. By approaching to him, by communion with him, by
reconciliation tu him, by joyful engagement in his service, let each one of us claim the
right to say with holy exultation, “ O Lord, thou art my God.”—C,


Ver. 6.—Divine provision for the human svul. In the vegetable and animal kingdoms


God has made tull and rich provision for all the wants and cravings of our body—for
its revival, its nourishment, its streusth, its eujouyment. In the gospel of his -race he
has granted us the most ample and geverous provision for our spiritual nature. In
Christ Jesus, in “the truth as it is in him,” and in his holy service, we have all we
need for—

I. OuR sPrrITUAL REVIVAL. Food, especially wine, is given to revive as well as to
nourish. “Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish” (Prov. xxxi. 6). Many
a huian life has been saved by the restoring cup administered with a wise hand. The
wine of heavenly truth is for a revival indeed. rom him who is the “ true Vine”
(John xv. 1) comes that reanimating virtue which calls from spiritual death the soul
that was about to perish in its sin.

Il, Nourisument. Food is, above all things, for sustenance. We partake of the
kind and welcome growths of the garden and ‘he field that the waste of our system
may be repaired, and that life may be preserved in its fulness and integrity. Without
constant refreshment from “the Word of the truth of the gospel,” if we did not sit
down daily to the table which God has spread for us in his heavenly wisdom, our souls
would soon fade and fail and die, As we eat of the “ Bread of life,” as we drink of “the
river that makes glad the city of God,” we find our life sustained; we “live unto God
through Jesus Christ our Lord.”


Ill. Streneto. “A feast of fat things of marrow.” That which is ample, not
only to sustain life, but to augment force. f wines on the lees ”—wines that
have acquired, and will presumably impart, strength. In Jesus Christ is everything


to conter spiritual vigour, manliness, power. Communion with him, the study of his
life and character, active service in his cause, the direct communications which proceed
from his upholding, energizing Spirit,—all these minister to spiritual strength; they
are all open to every disciple, so that the Christian teacher has a right to say, impera-
tively, to the disciple, “ Be strong in the Lord ” (Eph, vi. 10).

1V. Joy. Wine and gladness are closely associated in Scripture (see Ps. iv. 7; civ. 18)


oH. xxv. 1—12.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 407


Feasting and joy are also intimately connected. The provision which {s made in the
feast of the gospel is one that gives a purer, truer, more manly, more lasting joy; for
it is the joy of the soul, and it is a joy in God.

V. Apapration. The wine of this feast was to be strong for those who wanted
strength—“ on the lees;” it was also to be “well refined” fur those who wanted the
coarse flavour remayed and desired purity as well as power (see Jer. xlviii. 11). The
same Divine truth, delivered from the same lips, contained within the same covers, has
force for those who need to be mightily wrought upon, and refinement for those whose
moral perceptions are clear and whose spiritual taste is fine and cultured. here is
everything on the table of our Lord to meet the varied cravings of these hearts of ours,
1. This is a feast which we are not at liberty to decline; for “the Lord of hosts has
made it ”—has prepared it with exceeding care and at great cost. 2. It is open to every
hungering soul. It is made “ unto all people.” It is free to all. “ Ho, every one that
thirsteth,” etc.—C.


Ver. 7.—Spiritual veils, Anything interposed between the eye and the object of
vision may be called a veil; designed for the purpose of convenience or of modesty, the
veil has often been the cause of unsightliness and inconvenience—it has been abused
almost as much as it has been used. In Scripture the word has a moral siguificance,
indicating something which intercepts the truth, and blinds the soul to the will of God
and to its own duty and interest.

I. THE EXISTENCE OF SPIRITUAL VEILS, They are those of: 1. Credulity. Often the
mind freely accepts all kinds of irrational, superstitious errors, which coat and cover
the truth of Gud, rendering it invisible beneath a mass of error, 2. Prejudice. Men
who act as did the Jews in our Lord’s time, determining beforeland and judging irre-
spective of the evidence before their eyes, making up their minds in advance of any
facts or reasons which have to be alleged, are sure to miss their way. They cannot
see through the veil of prejudice. 3. Intellectual pride: unwillingness to believe
anything which our finite faculties cannot comprehend; practical forgetfulness that
the heavenly Father must have many more truths that we can only very dimly discern
to reveal to his children, than earthly fathers have to make intelligible to their sons,
4. Worldliness: allowing the interests, occupations, gratifications, of this world to
assume a magnitude and importaice to which they have no claim; and allowing the
conventional maxims of society to pass current as heavenly truth, when they are only
too often misieading and even deadly errors. 5. Passion. The false glare of passion
hides from many souls the truth which otherwise they would see and by which they
would live.

Il. ‘l'HEIR REMovAL. God “ will destroy ... the veil that is spread over all the
nations.” 1. It is a blessed fact, in the far future, which God will establish. By
means he is now employing, and perhaps by ways and methods of which we may have
no conception now, he will bring it to pass; the day will come when the nations shall
walk in the light of the Lord; both Jew (2 Cor. iii. 16) and Gentile (ch. Ix. 3). 2.
We may contribute our share toward this happy issue: there are mental errors and
spiritual delusions which we can help to ex;ose, both by enlightening words and
convincing action. 8. Weare bound to make every effort to put away whatever veil
may be over our own eyes. Unconscious spiritual blindness is sin (see John ix. 41).
It may be in part a man’s misfortune, but it is partly his fault. There may be that
which palliates it, but nothing will excuse it. We must betake ourselves to God
(Ps. cxxxix. 23, 24).—C.


Vers. 8, 9.—The evening of expectation. Of this passage we may look at—=

J. Irs PRIMARY HISTORICAL APPLICATION. (See Exposition.)

Il. Irs appLicaTion To rae CuurcH or Curist. The Church of Christ is “the
Tsrael of God,” and we may expect much of the language first used in reference to the
Jewish nation to be appropriate to it and even intended for its service, Like ancient
Israel, the Church has found itself in great humiliation and distress, and has Leen in
gore need of Divine comfort in its dark days, At many stayes in its history the Church
has felt itself oppressed with heavy burdens, beset with serious difficulties, threatened
with great calamities; and then the blessed promise of deliverance haa dawned, and its


408 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [ca. xxv. 1—12,


a


heart has been elated, and such words of joyful praise as these in the text have been
upon its lips, Even when there are no signs of the coming of Christ in delivering and
reviving power, the Church may “ take heart of grace” if it be (1) faithful in word and
in deed to its Master’s charge; (2) prayerfully and patiently expectant, waiting on him
in reverent confidence; mindful of the fact that our ways are not always his ways, nor
our chosen times his times. This holy and rightful attitude will turn the night of
sorrow into the evening of expectation; and in due time will come the morning of
deliverance ; this will include (1) the removal of reprouch—* The rebuke of his people will
he take away ;” (2) the cessation of sptritual distress—he “ will wipe away tears,” etc,
the tears of a Christ-like sympathy and regret (see Ps. cxix. 136; Jer. ix. 1; Luka
xix. 41); (3) a joyous participation in the exaltation of Christ and the establishment
of his kingdom —“ Rejoice in his salvation.”

III. Ivs APPLICATION TO INDIVIDUAL souLs. Our Christian life presents various
aspects according to the path by which our Lord leads us home. The life of some may
be characterized as that of abounding privilege, of others as that of multiplied mercies,
of others as that of honourable and useful activity; in these cases the heavenly king-
dom may appear to bea continued though an exalted experience in another sphere. But
in other instances human life is one of unflageing toil, or of unceasing strugyle, or of
oppressive care, or of crushing sorrow: the night for which weeping endures (Ps. xxx. 5)
is all but lifelong. It is in such cases as these that we are “saved by hope.” Hope
is the morning star which is a blessed promise of an eternal day. It turns the night of
weary trouble into the evening of holy expectation; it puts a song of joy even into the
lips of suffering; it calmly but eagerly “ prevents” the approaching morning ; it antici-
pates the hour when the tears of sorrow will be wiped away from eyes that will weep no
more for ever, when every burden will fall from every heavy-laden shoulder, when the
heart will be “exceeding glad” in the joy of God’s great salvation. Let the children
of affliction comfort themselves with these words of the prophet; but let them (1) be
well assured that they are the children of God by faith in Jesus Christ, and that their
title is good to the heavenly heritage; (2) wait patiently for Christ’s appearing.’ If
they would say, “ We will be glad . . . in his salvation,” they must be able to say, “ We
have waited for him.”—C.


Ver. 8.— The supreme victory. ‘‘ He will swallow up death in victory.” The terms
of the text are not satisfied by anything less than the gospel of the grace of God;
that, and that alone, can be truly said to swallow up death. It is only Jesus Christ
who can be said to have “abolished death” (2 Tim. i. 10). This is the supreme
victory. Great conquests have been gained in other fields: in geouraphical research
—diseovery of America, penetration of Africa, etce.; in the useful arts—printing,
telegraphy, steam-power, elu.; In mathematical science; ip historical exploration, ete.
These things, and such things as these, have conferred dignity op our nature ana
enlargement on our life. But there is one victory compared with which even tuese are
small—the triumph over death. Death has been thought of and written about every-
where as the great conqueror, before whose prevailing arm all human forces go down
vanquished to the dust. It has been acknowledged to be the master of our humanity.
But in the gospel of Jesus Christ death is defied, is met face to face, is overcome, is so
utterly subdued and routed that we can truly say that it is “swallowed up in
victory.” In Christ there is a double defeat of its power; for in him is—

I. ABUNDANT SPIRITUAL LIFE HERE. Sin has led man down to moral and spiritual
death ; they that live apart from God are “dead while they live,” for they move on
toward the grave, missing all those things which give nobility, excellency, beauty, real
and lasting joy to buman life. But to know God in Ohrist Jesus is life (John xvii. 3).
And whoso enters into all the fulness of the life which is in Christ has that life “ more
abundantly” (John x, 10). Spiritual death is lost in largeness and fulness of spiritual
life—life in God, with God, for God; it is swallowed up in victory.

If, ImMoRTAL LIFE IN THE HEAVENLY worLD. Here we have the significance of the
words of the text. Other faiths beside that of Jesus Christ have included a promise
of life in the future; but the hopes they have held out have been uncertain, vacne
illusory ; the life they have promised has been shadowy, unreal, unattractive. Their
disciples must have felt that in its contest with death the faith has met its match, and,


cH. xxv. 1—12.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 409


if it has not been actually worsted, it has failed to triumph. In the gospel of Christ we
have a decided and delightful contrast to this. There the victory is complete. We pass
away, indeed, from earth, from its scenes, its engagements, its friendships, its joys; but
we pass into a state and a world where everything is immeasurably better than the
present. 1. We are unclothed in body, but we are clothed upon with a house which is
from heaven (2 Cor. v. 4). 2. The ignorance of earthly twilight we exchange for the
full knowledge of the celestial day (1 Cor. xiii, 12). 3. From the broken delights and
the fatiguing toils of time we pass to the tearless happiness and to the untiring
activities of eternity. 4, The sorrowful separations of the present will make more
blessed the union where we “clasp inseparable hands” in uufading friendship. 5.
The apparent absence of the heavenly Father will be lost in the conscious nearnes:
which will make us to dwell continually in his holy presence, God with us and we
with him for ever. Death will be “swallowed up in victory.” (1) It will be long
before we shall meet with a faith which will offer us greater things than these. (2)
How sad, how foolish, how guilty, to remain spiritually, and therefore essentially, apart
from him in the knowledge and service of whom stands eternal life !—C,


Ver. 1.—Personal riyhts in God. O Lord, thou art my God.” The difference
between the “man” and the “godly man” may be seen in this. The man says,
*O Lord, thou art God;” but the godly man says, “O Lord, thou art my God.” The
difference is the matter of conscious personai relation ; it is a question of “appropriation.”
At first sight it might seem to detract from the august majesty of the Divine Being
that any single individual should call him “mine.” But, whatever we may make of it,
the fact must be admitted that, while God’s revelation to man in nature is to man as
a whole—to man as a race the revelation of God to man in a book, and in a person,
is a constant encouragement to him to recognize and come into the joy of personal
relations. This point may be variously illustrated.

I, THE EARLIEST REVELATION oF GOD TO THE RACE AS MORAL BEINGS PERMITTED
PERSON RELATIONS. This is shown in God’s trusting Adam and Eve; also in his holding
the communion of friendship with them, “ walking in the garden;” and much may be
made of the assertion in Luke’s genealogy, “the son of Adam, which was the son of
God” (Luke iii. 38).

II. THE PATRIARCHS LIVED IN THE JOY OF PERSONAL RELATIONS WITH Gop. Iilus-
trated in Abraham’s familiarity in intercession for Sodom; indicated in the fact of
covenant; ana proved in the distinctness with which God is spoken of as the “ God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.”

Ill, THE DELIVERANCES AND REDEMPTIONS OF THE PEOPLE oF IsrRAEL SHOW AN
IMMEDIATE AND PERSONAL INTEREST IN THEM ON THE PART OF Gop. One instance
ig suggestive of many. On the further shores of the Red Sea Moses put a song of


thanksgiving into the mouths of the people, and this is tts opening verse; “ The Lord
is my Strength and Song, and he is become my Oalvaiiun ie tx any God.”

TV. WiukN PERSONAL GODLINESS FINDS EXPRESSION WE 5EE TH SIGNS OF THE
PERSONAL APPROPRIATION (See Pa. exviil. 28; cxlv. 1.)


V. THE FULL REVELarion oF GOI TO MAN IN CurisT JESUS IS PERMISSION AND
INVITATION TO COME INTO PERSONAL RELATIONS. ‘That is the revelation of God as a
Father, a word which involves our individual rights in him as his sons. That is the
revelation of a salvation which restores broken relations and renews our rights in God.
But it is precisely in this appropriation of God that men are so often hindered. Many
can admit that “Jesus died for the sins of the world,” and “ God loved the world; ”
but there is no life, no joy, no right sense of relation, until we can say, “ God loves me,
even me; and Jesus died for me, even me.”—R. T.


Ver. 1.—The true reiding of the Divine dealings. ‘Thou hast done wenderful things,
even counsels of old, in faithfulness and truth ” (Revised Version). Whvn we can read
aright, the Divine plan and workings in the olden times are not merely wonderful, causing
surprise at the Divine wisdom and power ; the great thing about them is scen to be their
goodness, adaptation, mercifulness, and truth to promise and pledge. ‘This is the result
of a true reading of history, aud many of us have found this to follow our right and
worthy reading of our own lives, and of God’s ways with us. Now we can say, “ Not


410 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAYAH. [cn. xxv. 1—12.


a


one good thing hath failed us of all that the Lord our God hath promised.” “ All the
operations of providence are according to God’s eternal counsels (and those faithfulness
and truth itself), all consonant to his attributes, consistent with one another, and sure
to be accomplished in their season.”

J. We oFTEN MISTAKE GOD'S PURPOSE WHILE IT IS BEING WROUGHT oUT. As we
might mistake any work in progress, Because we do not know the mind of the Worker;
because his ways are other than our ways; because he uses strange agents and agencies;
and because he purposely holds from our view his meaning, so that he may encourage
patience, waiting, and trust.


“Blind unbelief is sure to err,
And scan his work in vain.”


Tllustrate by the apparent confusion in the ground where a cathedral is being erected ;
and show how great a mistake we shonld make about God’s purpose in Joxeph or
David, if we took only isolated parts and incidents of their lives for study. We often
mistake God’s meaning when we try to read only parts of our own lives.

Il. We SHALL NOT MISTAKE GoD’s PURPOSE WHEN WE SEE IT IN ITs Issuzs, That is
true. God’s end always explains and justifies his means. But then the end is not yet ;
it is often away in the future, out of our vision. And we want some indication of God
now. All we can have is the vindication, given over and over again, in history. We
have “seen the end of the Lord, that the Lord is very pitiful and of tender mercy.”
And we have good argument and well-grounded faith that God’s counsels are always
*‘ faithfulness and truth.”

lll. We NEED MOVER MISTAKE Gon’s DEALINGS OR GoD’s PURPOSE IF WE WILL READ
THEM IN THE LIGHT OF WHAT WE KNOW OF GoD HIMSELF. Life for us all may be full of
puzzling things, but we can always say, “ We know God.” It must be right, it must
be wise, it must be good, it must be for the absolute best, since he has done it, who,
being /ove, must be “ making all things work together for good.” ‘True reading is read-
ing in the light of what we know God to be.—R. T.


Ver. 4.—God our Shadow, “For thou hast been ... ® Shadow from the heat.”
The prophet sees, in God’s mercifulness to his people, a reason why the nations around,
the masses of the people, should fear him. We can understand why the word “ fear ”
is employed. God’s dcliverings and defendings of his people involve judgments on the
great kingdoms that were oppressing Israel; and judgments are striking and impressive
to masses of people, who must act upon fear rather than upon love, or even upon a
sense of duty, for they are like children who are only learning the superior power of
moral motives, and. meanwhile must be subject to force, and put into right ways. The
figures in this verse are very forcible. The “storm” is in the original a ‘‘ storm which
overthrows a wail,” or a storm so violent that it sweeps down walls before it (Matthew
Arnold). In Eastern countries the value of a shade from the blazing sunshine 1s well
understood ; and Thomson tells of a terrible heated day when he escaped from the
burning highway into a dark vaulted room at the lower Beth-horon, and realized what
Isaiah pictured, Another traveller says, “ About midaay, when the heat was very
oppressive, a small cloud, scarcely observable by the eye, passed over the disc of the
burning sun. Immediately the intense heat abated, a gentle breeze sprang up, and we
felt refreshed.” As a fizure for God this may be variously applied and illustrated.
We suevest three lines of illustration.

I, Gop IN HIsrorY HAS OFTEN PROVED A SuHADow. Points may be obtained from
such reviews of history as are given in Ps. cv.; cvi.; evil. ‘The key-note is, “Then
they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he saved them out of their distresses.”

Il, Gop NeEps To BE A SHADOW IN OUR TIMES OF PROSPERITY. For then all that
is good and great in us is im grave danger of being burned up in the blazing heat.
Few of us can stand long in the sun of prosperity. Woe unto us when all men speak
well of us! and woe unto us when all things go well with us! It is most gracious in
God that he flings his shadow across, and gives us times of quietness and peace;
humbling times they must be, when self is put down from his boastful place.

Il]. Gop 1s sure To BE A SHADOW IN OUR TIMES OF ADVEKsITY. So David found,
and when new trouble came he could say, “I flee unto thee to hide me.” Our earthly


om. xxv. 1—12.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 411


ee


anxieties come in part from circwmstances, in part from enemies, and in part from our
own evil selves. It may be shown that, for each kind of trouble, the only true shelter
18 in God. Close with this idea—where the shadow is, God, who throws it, must be
near; then, if we keep well within the shadow, we must be close to God, and so quiet
and safe.—R. T.


Ver. 6.—Jehovah’s feast after reconciliation. The picture in this text is based upon
the familiar custom in Judaism of associating a sacrificial feast with a thank offering
or peace offering. Such feasts were highly festive and joyous occasions. As an
instance of the custom, reference may be mace to the scene of the anvinting of King
Saul, Samuel made a feast, after sacrifice, to which some thirty persons were bidden
(1 Sam. ix. 19,22). ‘ According to the Mosaic Law, the fat-pieces of the victim were to
woes to Jehovah immediately by burning, and the next best piece, the breast,
mediately by giving it to his servants the priests;” the rest was a foundation for a
feast in which the offerers shared. The “ wines on the lees” are those kept long, that
have become old and mellowed. “ Full of marrow” indicates syperior quality. The
first reference may be to the joy of the returned captives when God permitted a revival
of Jerusalem; but the full reference must be to the spiritual provisions of Messianic
times. For “feasts” as the figure for spiritual blessings, gospel provisions, comp.
Ps, xxii. 26—29 ; ch. lv. 1—5; Matt. viii. 11; xxv. 1; Luke xiii. 28, 29; xiv. 15—24,
Keeping to the idea of feast after sacrifice sealing the reconciliatiun, and working that
idea out in relation to Christian times, we note—

I, GoD GIVES COMMUNION WHEN HE GIVES RECONCILIATION. The feast was designed
to assure the worshippers that all separations and enmities were done away, and God
was vow in gracious and comfortable relations with them. In the East restored
friendship is sealed by eating together. It will at once be seen how this constancy
of Divine communion with renewed souls is sealed in the symbolic meal of our
sacramental Supper. That feast keeps up the assurance of God’s comfortable relations
with us. Weare the restored and accepted ones to whom God gives his lriendship.

II. Gop Is CONCERNED ABOUT HIS FUTURE RELATIONS WITH HIS REDEEMED ONES.
It is important to correct a sentiment which very seriously imperils right Christian
living, but seldom gets shape in actual words. It is assumed that God is supremely
anxious for our salvation, our “ conversion ” as we call it, but indiffervnt to what we
are and do, if only we are saved. This modern modification of Antimomian error
is met by the fact that God makes a feast for the redeemed, providing for them after
redemp'ion. God is the food for the soul’s life, and that life he quickens,

III. Gop WANTS JOY TO CHARACTERIZE THOSE CONTINUOUS RELATIONS. ‘Therefore
is the festive fizure chosen. ‘‘ The joy of the Lord is our streneth.” The redeemed
of the Lord ought to march “with singing unto Zion.” Depressions may come, but
they may not abide. Our Christian lile should be a glad feasting on the abundance
God provides.—R. T.


Ver. 8.—Triumph over death. There is a first reference here to the restoration
of Judah from its death-state of captivity, and to the wiping away of the tears the
captives shed when they hung their harps upon the willows. But we cannot forget
that St. Paul and St. John have put the richest Christian meanings into these beautiful
and pathetic words (1 Cor. xv. 54; Rev. vii. 17; xxi. 4). And life for a nation out
of the death-state of captivity may well be taken as a type of the sublime resurrection
of humanity from the grasp of physical death. Our triumph over death is assured ;
and foretaste of it is given in the conquest of the Lord Jesus over the grave. He
is our Conqueror of death, and in him the prophecy of this text will have its large and
blessed fulfilment. We read the prophecy in the light of Christ and of his work.
And Scripture teaches us to regard the resurrection of Christ as a final conquest of
death for us (Acts ii, 24; 1 Cor. xv. 21, 55, 56; Eph, iv. 8; 2 Tim. i, 10;
Heb. ii, 14; Rev. i. 18).

I. Cerist 18 THE CoNQUEROR OF DEATH ITSELF. It was not the design of Christ
to destroy death altogether, and withdraw its commission to the human race, He left
it still to bite, but plucked away its sting, the venom of its hopelessness, and the
bitterness of its connection with human sin, We shall die, though Christ bas


412 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. xxv. 1—12%


a


conquered death ; but death is now only the messenger that calls us home—he is ne
longer the jailer that drags us to our doom. Dissolution, or translation, such as we
have hints of in the cases of Enoch and Elijah, may be the Divine idea for unfallen
created beings; but certainly death, as we know it, with all its attendant circumstances
of evil, is the immediate result of human sin. Change of state, and change of worlds,
may be death in an abstract sense; but death in fear, and amid sufferings, and under
disease, and involving agonizing separations, and terrible with the black shadows of an
unknown future; this death—and this is the death with which we have to do—is the
penalty of transgression. “The sting of death is sin.” Lord Bacon, in his essay on
death, almost makes too much of the material accompaniments of it, and under-
estimates the moral feeling in relation to it. He says, “Groans, and convulsions, and
a discoloured face, and friends weeping, and blacks, and obsequies, and the like, show
death terrible. . . . There is no passion in the mind of man so weak, but it mates and
masters the fear of death; and therefore death is no such terrible enemy when a man
hath so many attendants about him that can win the combat for him. Revenge
triumphs over death; love slights it; honour aspireth to it; grief fleeth to it; and
fear preoccupieth it.” But this is only true for certain individuals, and under various
pressures of excitement. To most of us, and especially to those who are thoughtful,
and oppressed with the burdens of humanity, death has aspects of great bitterness.
Then in what sense can we think of Christ as the present Conqueror of death? ‘The
answer is this—He has conquered the death-dread in us, both concerning ourselves
and concerning those who are dear tous. He has “ delivered those who through fear
of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage.” And he has conquered it by
fixing its connections with the body alone, and severing it, once and for ever, from all
relation to the renewed and redeemed soul. ‘He that liveth and believeth on me shall
never die.” In Christ death is compelled to take rank with disease and pain, as the
servants of God. Its masterfulness is destroyed ; its dart lies broken on the ground.

II. THe Conqueror oF DEATH OUGHT TO RULE IN ITS STEAD. In Christ life rules,
hope rules, goodness rules, eternity rules.) Man may despairingly look upon his
partially raised schemes, and say, “ Alas! I shall die.” But the Christian man builds
on bravely and hopefully. He knows that beneath all the outward show he is raising
a structure of character on which death has no power, and he says, “I shall never
die.” ‘The difference that is made by our letting death rule our thoughts and hopes
and endeavours, and letting Christ rule them, may be illustrated by the change
wrought in the land of Persia, when Zoroaster proclaimed that Ormuzd, the Good, was
the real ruler of humanity. When Zoroaster came, the religious instincts of the
people were debased, the divinity worshipped was malevolent, the moral tone was low,
the social habits were vicious, the land of Iran was overgrown with thorns and
weeds ; men were idle, negligent, like the surfeited inhabitants of Sodom, given up to
sensuality ; they thought of their divine ruler as evil, malicious, cruel; they had the
crushing, despairing, disheartening sentiments which always follow the belief that
death, the representative of evil, rules. Zoroaster brought back the old and lost truth
that God rules—not evil, not death. Evil is subject to God. The good God is the God
of life, and life is mightier than death; of liyAé, and light triumphs over darkness,
Ormuzd was the god of production, and if they would sow and plant and weed, they
would be sure to win, under his benediction, a glorious triumph over waste and barren-
ness and death. Weare not yet free as we should be from the notion that death still
reigns. We have not yet opened our hearts fully to the glorious truth that Jesus,
the conqueror of death, now reigns. Above everything else our age wants to yield
its allegiance to Christ, ruling in morals, in education, in literature, in science, in
politics, in commerce, and in society; triumphing now over all the forms of evil that
death can symbolize—R. T,


Ver. 9.— Waiting on God, “This is our God; we have waited for him, and he
will save us.” Waiting on God. Waiting for God. Waiting on when all is dark,
Waiting still, when commotions and troubles surround us. Bidding us wait for him
a way of the Lord’s dealing with us. Making it hard to wait, a sign of God’s severer
dealing with us. And waiting sanctified to our soul-culture. ‘These are subjects very
suggestive to Christian meditation.


cx. xxv. 1—12.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 413
——


I, Warrine circumstances. It was a waiting-time for the godly in Judah when
Isaiah wrote. In their own country, luxury and profligacy were plainly bearing the
country on to some terrible doom. In the nations around them the cup of iniquity
was getting full, and overwhelming judgments were falling on one after another,
Every man who believed in the covenant was put into silence and waiting. The
scenes around him he could not reason out. Precisely what God would do with his
people he could not know. All about him was painful mystery ; he could only watt,
keeping firm hold of the truth, faithfulness, and love of God while he waited. When
circumstances are against us, the best thing we can do is to wait,


“Wait thou his time, so shall thy night
Soon end in joyous day.”

'

The history of God’s ancient people is a series of waiting circumstances. "Through
along Egyptian bondave they were ealled to wazt for the day of their deliverance.
Surrounded with perils, they stood at the shores of the Red Sea, and were bidden to
wait for the salvation of God. Crowded in the plain before the Mount of Sinai, the
people failed to wait in patience until Moses reappeared. For forty years they
wandere, waiting tor admission to their promised land, In their first siege they must
wait until God’s signal for the falling walls. At last they must hang their harps on
the willows, in the stranger’s land, waiting the completion of their seventy years of
judgment. And even to-day, among us, Israel stands in waiting circumstances—
waiting while her land lies fallow; waiting while the times of the Gentiles are being
fulfilled. While the story of that people Israel remains upon the records, all may
know that Gud does a part of his work of grace in men, by placing them in waiting
circumstances. What is true of the nation is true of her heroic sons and dauvhters:
e.g. Abraham, Jacob, Moses, David, Simeon, and a host of others had to wait, and
often wait long, for the fulfilment of their hopes. So we are still placed in waiting
circumstances. ‘There are often times when we can do nothing—we can only sit at the
window, like the sailor’s wife when the storm-wrack fills the sky, and the sea makes
its moan almost to heart-breaking. Times when we are put aside from busy life.
Times when our way seemed to be walled up, no door would open, no sign of the
guiding band apjeared ; we could only wait. But this is true, the circumstances are
God’s arrangement, and the waiting does God’s work. Life itself is one great waiting-
time. Tie earth itself is but in waiting circumstances (Rom. viii. 22).

II. Warrine arrivupes. 1. The attitude of prayer, using that word in its large
sense of openness of soul to God; the outlooking, up-looking of the soul to God;
the humble sense of self; the silent aud the spoken cry for the light and help of
God. The union of prayer with waiting lifts it from the mere dull and stricken
submission of the slave, into the pleasant waiting of the child, who, being sure of the
Father’s love, keeps looking for the Father’s time. Waiting work never becomes
weary work, or bitter work, until we cease to pray. 2. The attitude of expectancy.
Waiting ought to become watching, in strong faith and assured hope; watching like
that of David, when he could sing ont his confidence and say, “Yet the Lord will
command his loviny-kindness in the daytime.” Such a spirit the captives in Babylon
might cherish. Flinsing open their windows westward, as they knelt, they might see
the tem)le arise, the streets of the holy city fill with busy people, and the walls
encircle a delivered and independent nation; and with such expectations it could not be
hard to wait, for God’s time to bless is never more than a “ little way off.” 38. The
attitude of keeping on in the ways of righteousnexs, whether we find them pay or not

ay. Doing right, even if it does seem to bring suffering. Purposing that our mouth
shall not trausgress. If, while we wait, we faint in spirit, let us take good care never
to faint from righteousness. we im

I]. Warrixe consouations. We may be quite sure that God is in the waiting.
Nearer than ever to us in the hours of delay. If the waiting is God’s, if it belongs
to the mysterious ways of the Divine love, then even waiting-times are blessed. They
are even a gracious agency for the culture of our souls; and oftentimes better things
are done for us in the waiting than in the suflering times. ‘lhe great lessons of the
perfect trust are learned in the waiting hours, and “ patience gets her perfect work.”


Shen hs 15


414


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cn. xxvi 1—21,


Oe


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER XXVL


Vers. 1—18.—A Sone oF THE REDEEMED
in Mounr Zion. The prophet, having (in
ch. xxv.) poured forth his own thankfulness
to God for the promise of the Church’s final
redemption and triumph, proceeds now to
represent the Church itself in the glorified
state as singing praise to God for the same.

Ver. 1.—In that day. In the “day of
God” (2 Pet. iii, 12), the period of the
“restitution of all things” (Acts iii. 21).
In the land of Judah; ¢.e. in the “new
eartli””—-whose city will be the “ heavenly
Jerusalem,” and wherein will dwell “the
Israel of God ”—the antitype whereof the
literal “land of Judah” was the type. A
strong city; literally, a city of strength. In
the Revelation of St. John the new Jerusa-
lem is represented as having “a wall great
and high ’ (xxi. 12), and “twelve gates,”
three on each side. The intention is to
convey the idea of complete security. In
the present passage the city has “gates”
(ver. 2), but no “ walls”—walls and bul-
warks being unnecessary, since the saving
might of God himself would be its sure
defence against every enemy.

Ver. 2.—Open ye the gates. The com-
mand is given by God to his angels within
the city, or perhaps by some angels to
others, to ‘‘open the gates,” and let the
saints march in and take possession (comp.
Ps. exviii. 19, 20, which seems to represent
the same occasion; and Ps. xxiv. 7—10,
which tells of another occasion on which the
angelic warders were bidden to throw open
the gutes of the celestial city. The righteous
nation which keepeth the truth; literally, a
righteous nation. A people, made up of all
kindreds and nations and tongues, which
should henceforth be “the people of God.”
They are “righteous,” as washed clean from
all taint of sin in the blood of the Lamb.
They “keep the truth,” or “keep faithful-
ness,” as under all circumstances clinging
loyally to God.

Ver. 3.—Thou wilt keep him, etc.; lite-
rally, the steadfast mind thou wilt keep tn
peace, in peace; i.e. “in perfect peace”
(comp. Ps. exii. 7, 8). The writer’s mind
throughout the first paragraph of his “ song ”
{vers. 1—4) “is running” (as Mr. Cheyne
well observes) “on the security and im-
mnovableness of the new Jerusalem.” All is
peace and sure defence on God’s side; all
is trust and perfect confidence on the side of
man. The first words of the verse may be
taken in various ways—the above rendering


(which seems to us the best) is that of De-
litzsch and Kay.

Ver. 4.—Trust ye in the Lord. The faith-
ful exhort each other to perfect trust, in the
new Jerusalem, as in the old (see Ps. oxv.
9—11). In the Lord Jehovah; literally, in
Jah Jehovah (comp. ch. xii. 2). Is everlaste
ing strength; literally, ts the Rock of ages.
A certain refuge throughout all eternity is,
no doubt, intended (see the comment on ch,
xvii. 10).

Ver. 5.—He bringeth down; rather, he
hath brought down. The redeemed praise
God for his past mercies. He bronght down
in his own good time all the proud and
lofty ones who exalted themselves against
him and oppressed his saints, making cities
desolate (ch. xxiv. 10, 12) and giving over
their inhabitants to destruction (ch. xxiv. 6).
Them that dwell on high; t.e. “that exalt
themselves.” It is not eminence, but pride,
that provokes the Divine anger. The
heathen judged differently (see Herod., vii.
10, § 4). The lofty city (comp. ch. xxiv. 10,
12; xxv. 2,3). The “world-city ” (as it has
been called) ;¢#.e. the idealized stronghold
of the adversaries of God in this world, is
intended.

Ver. 6.—The foot shall tread it down;
rather, trode it down. The feet of the poor,
and the steps of the needy; i.e. the feet of
God’s people, the weak and afflicted of this
world, trod down ultimately, or brought to
destruction and ruin, the great world-power—
not so much that they were victorious in an
actual physical contest, as that they finally
triumphed through God’s judgment on the
world-power, which brought it to nought,
and left it for his people to show their cone
tenrpt by trampling upon the smoking ruins.

Ver. 7.—The way of the just is upright.
ness; or, the path for the just is straight. It
is one of the main blessings of the righteous
that God “ makes their way straight before
their face” (Ps, iv. 8), “leads them in a
plain path” (Ps. xxvii. 11), “shows them
the way they are to walk in” (Ps. cxliii. 8),
so that they are for the most part free from
doubt and perplexity as to the line of con-
duct which it behoves them ts pursue. If
this is so in the present life, still more will
it be the uniform condition of the just in
another sphere. Then God will of a surety
“direct all their peths ” (Prov. iii.6). Thou,
most upright, dost weigh; literally, O up
right One, thou dost weigh. The tcrm “up-
right” is applied to God in Deut. xxxii. 43
Ps. xxv. 8; and Ps. xcii. 16. By “ weighing
the path of the just” is meant keeping it,
- suai keeps her scales, straight and
eve


oH, xxvi. 1—21.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.
Se ee


Ver. 8.—Yea, in the way of thy judgments
«have we waited for thee; rather, we
waited. During the long years of our afflic-
tion and persecution in tle world. we waited
in the constant expectation thai * thy judg-
ments” would fall upon our persceutors.
We were not impatient. We knew that thou
wouldst visit us at the filting time. The
desire of our soul is to thy Name; rather, the
desire of our soul was to thy Name. During
all the weary time of waiting, we lunged
for thee, and thy Name, or rather what thy
Name indicates, th own true self. In de-
fault of thy actual presence, we desired to
have thee ever in remembrance.

Ver. 9.—In the night; te. “the long
night of their affliction.” The sentiment is
identical with that of the preceding verse,
Will I seek thee early; rather, did I seek
thee. For when thy judgments, etc. It was
not a mere selfish desire for the cessation of
persecution that caused the righteous to
long for the time when God's judgments
would be manifested upon the earth, but a
conviction that so only would an impression
be made on the persecutors, and a certain
number of them be induced to learn right-
eousness. A desire for the conversion of
sinners to God characterizes God’s saints
generally, an! none more than Isaiah, who
is here expressing what he conceives will be
the thoughts of the redeemed, and naturally
judges their thoughts and feclings by his
own.

Ver. 10.—Let favour be showed to the
wicked. This is a further explanation of the
reason why tle righteous had so earnestly
desired the coming of God’s judgments
upon the earth. They had felt that further
mercy and long-suffering were thrown away
upon the wicked, and “ only did them harm ”
(Kay). When “favour was showed tliem,”
they did but persist in unrighteousness. In
the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly.
Even good example does not convert the
wicked man. Though he live in a “land of
righteousness,” where God and his Law are
acknowledged, where true religion is pro-
fessed, where the gospel is preached, he will
continue wicked, he will ‘deal unjustly ;”
he will not behold—or, consider—the majesty
of the Lord,

Ver. 11.—When thy hand is lifted up, they
will not see. The original is more graphic.
It runs, “ Lord, thy hand is lifted up, [but]
they see not. They shall see to their sliame
thy jealousy for thy people; yea, fire shall
devour thy adversiries.” God’s jealousy
“burns like fire” (Ps. xxix. 9; Zeph. i. 18)
in the cause of his people.

Ver. 12.—Lord, thou wilt ordain peace for
us; ze. henceforth thou wilt give us an
existence of perfect peace (see ver. 3), un-
troubled by adversaries. For thou also hast


415


wrought all our works in us; rather, all our
work for us. The ‘“ work” intended seems
to be, as Mr. Cheyne observes, “the work of
their deliverance.”

Ver. 13.—Other lords. The saved had
not always been faithful to Jehovah. Some,
no doubt, had actually been idolaters, as
many of the early Christians (1 Cor. xii. 2;
1 Thess. i. 9, etc.). Others had given their
hearts for a time to other vanities, and
turned away from God. Now, in the new
Jerusalem, they confess their shortcomings,
and acknowledge that only through God’s
mercy—by thee—are they in the condition
to celebrate his Name.

Ver. 14.—They are dead, etc. ; literally,
Dead, they shall not live (i.e. return to life) ;
deceased, they shall not arise. The power of
the idol-gods is altogetiier passed away. It
was for this end—therefore—that God had
Visited and destroyed them, and made their
very memory to perish. How strange it
seems that the “ great gods” whom so many
millions worshipped in former times—LBel,
and Asshur, and Ammon, and Zeus, and
Jupiter—should have passed so completely
away as to be almost wholly forgotten !

Ver. 15.—Thou hast increased the nation ;
#.e. the “rigliteous nation” of ver. 2—not
the Jewish people merely, but “the Israel
of God ”—who are to be “a great multitude,
that no man can number, of all nations, and
kindreds, and people, and tongues” (Rey.
vii.9). Thou hadst removed it. ‘This render-
ing gives a very good sense. It makes the
redeemed pass in thought from their present
state of happiness and glory to that former
time of tribulation and «affliction when they
were a remnant, scattered over the face of
the earth (ch. xxiv. 13—15), driven into its
uttermost corners (ch. xxiv. 16), oppressed
and down-trodilen by their enemies. But it
is doubtfui whether the Hebrew will bear
the rendering. Most modern commentators
translate, “Thou hast extended far all the
borders of the land,” which is certainly the
more natura] meaning of the words. If we
accept this view, we must regard the clause
as continuing the idea contained in the
former part of the verse—the nation is in-
creased in number, and its borders are
advanced—it is ‘‘a multitude that no man
can number,” and it has no narrower limits
than the “ new earth,” which has been given
to it for its habitation (Rev. xxi. 1).

Ver. 16.—Lord, in trouble have they
visited thee. Here, at any rate, the redeemed
go back in thought to their time of trouble.
Ti.ey remember that what brought them
back to God from that alienation which they
have confessed (ver. 13) was the affliction
which they so long endured. Their present
bliss is the result of their former woe, and
recalls the thought of it. They poured out


416


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [en. xxvi. 1—21.


a


a prayer; rather, as in the margin, @ secret
speech, or @ low whisper (Kay); comp. eh.
xxix. 4. The word elsewhere means “ the
muttering of a charm,” but must here signify
the “whispered prayer” of one in dep
humiliation.

Ver. 17.—Like as a woman with child
(comp. ch. xiii. 8; xxi. 8). Isaiah uses the
metaphor to express any severe pain com-
bined with anxiety. So have we been in thy
sight; rather, so have we been at thy presence.
When thou wert visiting us in anger, and
laying thy chastisements upon us.

Ver. 18.—We have as it were brought forth
wind. Our pains have been idle, futile—
have effected nothing. We have not given
deliverance (literally, “salvation ”) to our
land; we have not effected the downfall of
our heathen enemies. That downfall was
God’s work (ch. xxiv. 16—20).

Vers. 19—21.—Tue Propuet’s ComMENT
on THE Sone or THE Just. Having con-
cluded his “song of the just” in a minor
key with a confession of human weakness,
the prophet proceeds to cheer and encourage
his disciples by a clear and positive decla-
ration of the doctrine of the resurrection:
“ Thy dead, O Israel, shall live.” Ile then
adds a recommendation for the present—a
recommendation to privacy and retirement,
until the judgments of God which he has
predicted (ch. xxiv.) are shown forth upon
the earth.

Ver. 19.—Thy dead men shall live. A
universal resurrection of some to everlast-
ing life, and some to shame and everlasting
contempt” (Dan. xii, 2), is not yet an-
nounced; but only a resurrection of tle
just, perhaps only of the just Israclites.
The object is encouragement, especially
encouragement of those whom the prophet
directly addresses—the religious Isra:lites
of hisown day. Itis enough for them at
the present time to know that, whether the
day of the Lord comes in their time or no,
when it comes, they will have a part in it.
The assurance is given, and is made doubly
sure by repetition. The prophet does not
say, Together with my dead body they will
arise; for there is nothing in the Hebrew
corresponding to “together,” and the el-
lipse of ’im, “with,” though suggested by
Kimchi, is impossible; nor is it likely that
he intends to speak of his own dead body
at all. He may, perhaps, call the past gene-
rations of just Israclites “my dead,” ie.
the dead with whom he is in sympuatliy; or
the supposed personal suffix may be merely
paragugic, as Rosenmiiller argues In any
case the two clauses must be regarded as
identical in meaning—an instance of “ syno-


nymous parallelism :” “Thy dead men shall
live; my dcad shall arise.” Awake and
sing; rather, awake and shout for joy
(comp. Ps. xxxv. 27; Ixvii. 4, ete). Ye
that dwell in dust (comp. Dan. xii. 2,
“ Many that sleep in the dust of the earth shall
awake”). Thy dew is as the dew of herbs ;
i.e. refreshing, vivifying, potent to make
even dead bones live. “ Thy dew” may be
said with reference to Jehovah, for changes
in the person addressed ure frequent in
Isaiah ; or with reference to the people of
Israel, meaning, “ the dew which Jehovah
will shed on thee,” i.e. on thy dead.

Ver. 20.—Come, my people, . . . into thy
chambers. As when a storm comes, prus
dence counsels men to-seck shelter (Exod.
ix. 19), so now the prophet advises his
people to put themselves under cover during
tiie coming tempest. His mexning, pro-
bably, is that they should retire into the
privacy of communion with God, withdraw-
ing from public affairs and the distractions
of a worldly life. Shut thy doors about
thes (comp. 2 Kings iv. 33; Matt. vi. 6).
For a little moment (30 in ch. x. 25; and
again in ch. liv. 7,8). God’s estimate of
time, we must remember, is not as man’s
(Ps. xe. 4; 2 Pet. iii. 8).

Ver. 21.—The Lord cometh out of his
place (comp. Micah i. 3). In the Psalms
God is represented as “‘ bowing the heavens
and coming down,” bringing them, as it
were, with him. Here (and in Micah) he
quits his place in heaven, as a king quits
his own country when he proceeds to take
vengeance ou rebels in another. The ex-
pre-sions are, both of tiem, accommodations
to human modes of thought. To punish the
inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity;
literally, to visit the iniquity of the inhabitant
of the earth upon him. The earth also shall
disclose her blood; literally, her bloods ; i.e.
her bloodsheddings; the many murders
commitied by man upon her surface.
Isaiuh denounced “ murderers” in his first
chapter (ver. 27). Manassch’s murders were
the main cause of the first destruction of
Jerusalem (2 Kings xxiv. 4). The second
destruction was equally a judgment for the
innocent blood that had been shed upon the
earth, “from the blood of righteous Abel
unto the blood of Zacharias son of Bara-
chias” (Matt. xxiii. 35). Bloodshed “ cries
to God for vengeance” (Gen. iv. 10), and
will be one of the main causes of the world’s
final destruction (Rev. xvi. 6; xviii, 20),
And shall no move cover her slain, ‘There
is nothing covered that shall not” in the
last day “be revealed, and hid that shall
not be known” (Matt. x. 26). Every
murder, however secret, will be brought te
light, and every murderer, however unsus-


pected previously, denounced and punished


oH. xXxvi. 1—21.| THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 417
a Ea a a I


HOMILETICS.


Vers. 1—18,— Thanksgiving the employment of the saints in bliss. The prophet, in
this sublime passage of his prophecy, carries us with him within the veil, and reveals
to us the very words, or, at the least, the general tone and tenor of utterances, which
the saints make when they have passed from earth to heaven, and stand in the very
presence of God. The words are, as we should have expected, mainly words of praise
and thanksgiving. The saints praise God—

I. For THE BLESSINGS OF THEIR ACTUAL STATE, which is (1) one of complete security ;
(2) one of perfect peace; (3) one of the fullest and liveliest trust.

II. For HIs MERCIES IN THE PAST. (1) ‘Towards themselves ; (2) towards his enemies.
Among his mercies to themselves they reckon (a) deliverance from the malice of their
foes; (6) direction of their own paths; (c) chastisements which brought them back to
God when they were straying from his ways.

III. For uIs GLorious arrrivutes. Lg. “ Jehovah is everlasting Strength ” (ver. 4);
He is “ the Upright One” (ver. 7), full of “ majesty” (ver. 10) and “ glory ” (ver. 15) ;
he is all-powerful (vers. 5, 11, 14), all-gracious (vers. 3, 12, 15), a sure Refuge in trouble
(ver. 16). While the occupation of the saints in the heavenly sphere is mainly to
praise God, they also confess before him (1) their rebellions against him while in this
life (ver. 13); and (2) their impotency to effect anything important by their own
strength (ver. 18). It is remarkable that the confession of weakness is that with which
the soug ends. Must we not conclude that humanity, brought into the presence of
God, is at first penetrated by no feeling so much as by a sense of its own utter power-
lessness and nothingness? ‘ Lord, what is man, that thou art mindful of bim ? and
the son of man, that thou visitest him ?” (Ps. viii. 4), is the ery tha! rises to man’s lips
instinctively. Later on, he may forget self, and be absorbed in the contemplation of
the Hizh and Holy One, and be content to bymn ceaselessly the Revelation songs,
“Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb ” (Rev. vii.
10); “ Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and
might, be unto our God for ever andever. Amen ” (Rev. vii, 12); “ Great and marvellous
are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints”
(Rev. xv. 3). Happy for him when self-consciousness disappears, and Gud is to him
“ All in all”!


Ver. 19.—The doctrine of the resurrection. The belief in a future life and a future
judgment was held by the Assyrians and Babylonians from a time anterior to the
departure of Abraham from Ur of the Chaldees. A very elaborate doctrine of a resur-
rection was also held by the Egyptians from an extremely remote antiquity. The
Jews, on the other hand, do not appear to have had definite notions on the subject until
the period of the Captivity. It is, perhaps, possible to account for the indistinct and
undeveloped state of the doctrine among the early Israelites by the effect upon them of
their Babylonian and Egyptian experiences.

J. THe BABYLONIAN VIEW, with which they came into contact in Ur of the Chaldees,
was the following. A life beyond the grave was expected; but the duration of this
life was quite uncertain. Merodach, a sun-god, was the Dayan nisi, or “judge of
men,” and by his favour the souls of the just were received into a heavenly abode, where
tley enjoyed life and happiness (‘ Religions of the Ancient World,’ p. 63). The wicked
descended at death into an infernal region, where there was no enjoyment, and (appa-
rently) suffered different degrees of punishment according to their deserts. Fire was,
perhaps, an agent in their suffering. ;

Il. l'He Eayprian view was far more complete and elaborate. The Egyptians held
that the soul was quite distinct from the body, and that, immediately alter death, it
descended into the lower world (Amenti), and was conducted to the “hall of truth,”
where it was judged in the presence of Osiris and of his forty-two assessors, the “ lords
of truth” and judges of the dead. Anubis, the son of Osiris, who was called “ the
director of the weight,” brought forth a pair of scales, and, afte: placing in one scale a
figure or emblem of truth, set in the other a vase containing the good deeds of the
deceased, Thoth standing by the while, with a tablet in his hand, mheron record

ISAIAH K


418 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. fon. xxvz. 1—21,


aT


the result. If the good deeds were sufficient, if they weighed down the scale wherein
they were placed, then the happy soul was permitted to enter “the boat of the sun,”
and was conducted by good spirits to the Elysian fields (Aahlu), to the “ pools of
peace,” and the dwelling-places of the blest. If, on the contrary, the good deeds were
insufficient, if the scale remained suspended in the air, then the unhappy soul was
sentenced, according to the degree of its ill deserts, to go through a round of transmi-
grations in the bodies of animals more or less unclean; tne number, nature, and
duration of the transmigrations depending on the degree of the deceased’s demerits, and
the consequent length and severity of the punishment which he deserved or the purifi-
cation which he needed. Ultimately, if after many trials sufficient purity was not
attained, the wicked soul, which had proved itself incurable, underwent a final sentence
at the hands of Osiris, supreme judge of the dead, and, being condemned to complete
and absolute annihilation, was destroyed upon the steps of heaven by Shu, the “lord of
light.” The good soul, having been first freed from its infirmities by passing through
the basin of purgatorial fire guard:d by the four ape-faced genii, was made a companion
of Osiris for a period of three thousand years, after which it returned from Amenti,
re-entered its former body, rose from the dead, and lived cnce more a human life upon
the earth. This process was gone through again and again, until a certain mystic cycle
of years became complete, when, to crown all, the good and blessed attained the final
joy of union with God, being absorbed into the Divine essence from which they had
once emanated, and so attaining the full perfection and true end of their existence.
With this elevating belief were mixed up a number of strange superstitions, not very
easily reconcilable with the main creed, yet occupying an important place in the
thoughts of the people. The soul, notwithstanding its transmigrations and presence in
Amenti and Aahlu, was never at any time wholly separated from its body, but still
inhabited the tomb, partook of the offerings left for it, and even had meetings and held
converse with the souls belonging to other neighbouring bodies. It could at all times
read the passages from the “ritual of the dead” painted on its sarcophagus, or its
mummy-bandages, or the inner walls of its tomb, and could thus refresh its memory it
at any time in its long journeyings through the lower world it failed to recollect at the
right moment the proper invocation or prayer under circumstances of danger.

Il. Taz Hesrew view. Coming from Babylonia into Kzypt, with probably only
some vague notions of an after-life, in which the inequalities of this life should be
remedied and justice meted out to all, the Hebrews were brought into contact with the
complicated aid elaborate creed of Egypt upon the subject—a creed which filled the
thoughts of the Egyptians, and dominated their whole life, entering into all their
relations, political, social, and domestic. ‘lhis creed was mixed up with all the
intricacies of the Egyptian polytheism, involved acceptance of the Osirid myth, acknow-
ledgnient of half a hundred deities, and adoption, if it were accepted, of numerous
superstitious practices. Whatever may have been the case with individuals (Josh.
xxiv. 14; Ezek. xx. 6—9), the Hebrews, as a nation, rvjected the Egyptian creed,
viewed it as corrupting and debasing, and put it aside en bloc, without troubling them-
selves to sift the wheat from the chaff, the grains of gold from the mud and sand in
which they were embedded. The rejection of the imaginative theosophy of Egypt
produced a reaction in the Hebrew mind towards the material and the mundane. ‘They
seem to have left Egypt with less definite views on the subject of a future life than
those which their ancestors had had in Babylonia. And in his revelations from Sinai
it did not please God to enlighten them. Light was vouchsafed them gradually through
the psalmists and prophets—by the present statement of Isaiah, by Kzekiel’s vision of
the dry bones (xxxvii, l—10) and the teaching which followed it (vers. 11—14), by
Daniel’s prophecy (xii. 2) already referred to, and otherwise, util, in the time of the
Maccabees, their faith in the resurrection was as strong, and almost as full and definite,
as that of Christians (see 2 Mace. vii. 9, 14, 23, 29, 36; xii. 43, 44),


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1—13.—The vision of future glory. It seems best to take this as the picture
of an ideal spiritual state.


I. THe IMPREGNABLE crry. Its walls and outworks are “salvation.” A great


cH. xxvi. 1—21.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 419
CE a a


word—negatively hinting deliverance from the enemy and the oppressor; positively
including all the contents of sacred peace, prosperity, and happiness. But salvation is
nothing without a Saviour; it is the loving presence of Jehovah who girds about
Jerusalem as a wall. In Zech. ii. 9 he is spoken of as a “ wall of fire.” In another
magnificent image, “ Round about are the everlasting arms.” The idea of the Eden-
garden may be compared with that of this fenced city. A “garden walled around, a
chosen and peculiar ground,” may represent the mystical Church here, the celestial state
hereafter. ‘The city is created and fortified by the Eternal.

Il, THe ceLesTiaL ory. The command is heard trom heaven, “Open ye the
gates!” As in ch. xl. 1, from the same quarter, sounds the gracious word, “ Comfort
ye my people!” The righteous nation that keepeth faithfulness may enter the Divine
city. The emphatic thought is that this city is to be the scene of rightcousness, «
contrast to the state of “this world which passeth away.” ‘ Open to me,” exclaims the
psalmist, “the vates of righteousness: I will go into them and praise Jehovah; the
gate of Jehovah iuto which the righteous shall enter” (Ps. cxviii. 19, 20). And again,
in another sublime passage, “* Who shall ascend into the hill of Jehovah ? or who shall
stand in his holy place? He that hath clean bands, and a pure heart” (Ps. xxiv. 3, 4).
This righteousness of mind and heart is the gift of the Divine grace. Purity in the
human spirit is at once the reflection of God’s nature and the condition of “ beholding”
him. If men are good and taithful, it is because their souls have kept walk and
converse with the truthful God (Ps. xxxi. 24). And this they have only learned to
do as the result of chastisement and the experience of the evil of other ways. “The
Church was always like a baro (Matt. iii. 12), in which the chaff is mingled with the
wheat, or the wheat overpowered by the chaff.” When the Jews caine back from
captivity, it was with purified hearts; a large portion of the filth of idolatry had been
swept away. And so universally; it is “out of much tribulation,” much sifting on
life’s floor, that we must enter the kingdom—that the pure wheat of chastened character
must be gathered into the celestial barn.

Ill. Tue arreiutes or Jesovan. 1. The firmness of his purpose. The words in
ver. 3 are differently rendered: “a steadfast mind thou keepest in;” “ firm is the hope
thou wilt form ;” “a purpose established thou purposest.” And this purpose is one of
peace. He “thinks the thought of peace” (Jer. xxix. 11). Hence the attitude of the
believer is one of fearless and fixed repose; ‘‘ He shall not be moved for ever. . . shall
not be afraid of evil tidings: his heart is fixed, trusting in Jehovah” (Ps. cxii. 6, 7).
This being of ours, in itself frail, anxious, feverish, needs steadying, staying; and its
only sufficient prop must be “Jehovah, the Holy One of Israel, in truth ” (ch. x. 20).
The esseutial thing in faith is habitual dependence; the result, cveffable peace. “ Peace,
peace,” are the proplet’s emphatic words. “He refrains from epit ets; such peace is
indescribable.” So in ch. lvii. 19, “ Peace, peace to him that is far off, and to him that
is near.” And the Christian apostle takes up the thought of the profundity and
unutterableness of this bliss of the soul, “ The peace of God, which passeth all under-
standing, shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus” (Phil.iv.7). 2. The
constancy of his being. Jah Jehovah is a Rock of ages, and may be trusted in for ever.
One of the four places where our trauslators have retained the orivinal name Jehovah,
of which Jah is the abridged form (Exod. vi. 38; Ps. Ixxxiii. 18; ch. xii. 2), The
doubled name is used for emphasis, as in “ Peace, peace,” above; it expresses the per-
fection of his majesty, wisdom, holiness, which should reflect the utmost reverence and
the most absolute trust in the miud of the believers. And “* Rock, Rock ot Israel,” etc.,
is another of the sacred names of the Divine Being (ch. xxx. 29; see Deut. xxxii. 4,
15, 18, 380, 81, etc.). Actively, to protect, to throw the cool shade of his protection upon
the suffering of his people; pussively. to resist the utmost shock and assault of his foes.
The uoble image of one of our poets, too lofty to be applied to mortal, may be applied
to hin—

« As some tall cliff that lifts its awful form,
Swells from the vale, and midway leaves the storm,
Tho’ round its breast the roliing clouds are spread,
Eternal sunshine settles on its head.”


Let us contemplate the nature of God; no other nature yields a lasting satisfaction and
repose to the beholder. “As soon as we turn aside from beholding it, nothing is seen


420 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xxvi. 1—21.


ee


but what is fleeting, and then we immediately faint. Thus ought faith to rise above the
world by continual advances; for neither the truth, nor the justice, nor the goodness of
God is temporary and fading, but God continues to be always like himself.” 3. His
irresistible power. He brings down the lofty and the proud. Bulwarks, armed hosts,
enormous wealth, are of no avail against “ moral influence.” And when we thus speak,
we mean nothing less than the just will, the fixed purpose, of the Eternal. No Babylon,
no Rome, no empire built on force and fraud, need be a terror to the faithful. They, at
the day of doom, 1 ust “ melt like snow at the glance of the Lord,” or be abased even
to the dust. “ We live amidst closing histories and amid falling institutions; there is
an axe laid at the root of many trees; foundations of fabrics have been long giving way,
and the visible tottering commences, ‘'lhe earth quakes and the heavens do tremble’
he sounds of great dowulalls and great disruptions come from different quarters; old
combinations start asunder; a great crash is heard; and it is some vast mass that has
just broken off from the rock, and gone down into the chasm below. A great volume of
time is now sha'tering, the roll is folded up for the registry, and we must open another.
Never again—ncver, though ages pass away—never any more under the heavens shall
be seen forms and fabrics, and structures and combinations that we have seen, The
world is evidently at the end of one era and is eutering upoa another;” but the “ Rock
of ages” will remain, and the Church which rests upon him, “ to enlighten ignorance,
to fight with sin, and to conduct man to eternity ” (Mozley). 4. His just dealings. A
plain or straight path is made for the righteous—one free from obstacles and oppusition,
even as the path of the Eternal himself to the fulfilment of his purjoses (cf. Prov. ili. 6;
xi. 5; xv. 19). He is even said to make their path “ plain with a level,” z.e. toa nicety.
It could not have seemed so to the Jews in captivity ; and often it must seem, in the
midst of perplexity and distress, far otherwise to the children of God now. Yet what
seems to be a “roundabout” path in a mountainous country may actually be the
shortest from point to point. So with the ways by which the Lord our God leads his
children to the end. ‘he direct line which haste and impatience would take is not
really the “ straight path” in the world of spirit. Here, when we seem to be turning
back, we may be really moving forward; we may seem to be “ fetching a compass,”
none the less certainly may be advancing by the safest and most direct road.

IV. Sox@ or THe Cuurcu. A meditation on the ways of God, and the relation of
the believing soul to him. Wazting for Gud. They had watched, as it were, for
Jehovah to advance along the great way of judgment by which he was to proceed to
open the Messianic kingdom. Lonying for the revelution of him. Oh that his Name
and memorial (two expressions for one idea) might be known! The Name of God is
God revealed, “the side of the Divine Being turned towards man” (Ps. xx. 1; ef. Ps.
xxx. 27; Ixiii. 9). (For the meaning of “ memorial,” cf. Exod. iii. 15; Ps. xxx. 4; cxxxv.
13; Hos. xii. 5.) The Messianic hope. ‘he judgments of God, the thought is, must
prepare for the new kingdom, for the reign of righteousness in the world. Calamities are
symy tomatic of evils needing to be cleansed away, if significant of the hand of Jehovah
at work in reformation, and so prophetic of a new era. ‘lhe rein on Mount Zion will
be usliered in by a series of judgments on the unbelievers and the unrighteous, #.e, the
heathen as oj posed to the worshippers of Jehovah. Those judgments are a necessity.
Righteousness is not learned, the need of it, the beauty of it, are not experienced, except
in the school of suffering, of Divine chastisement. he effect of wealth and honour and
success is not to lead men to God, and to the paths of rectitude and religion. Neither
the Divine mercy, nor the bright example of others, nor the general tone of moral
society, have sufficient iufluence to attract the inveterate sinner to better things. In
vain the light is poured upon the morally blind, upon those who “will not behold the
majesty o! Jehovah.” In vain his hand is lifted up in judgment; their insensibility
prevents them from perceiving it, though they are acute enough in their observation of
the trifling interests of the sensuous life. There is but one way of dealing with such
insensibility. Those judgments will be effective. hey shall see the jealousy of Jehovah
for his people (cf. Ps, 1xix. 9), for fire shall devour his adversaries. His jealousy is like
fire (Ps. Ixxix. 5; Zeph. i. 18). In consuming it purifies, in purifying it consumes
(cf. Deut. xxxii 22; Job xx. 265 xxii. 20). Remorse, shame, envy, indignation,—those
fires within the bosom reflect the judgment of God; resistance, rebellion, impenitence
make them unquenchable, Peace and deliverance for the chosen. The past supplies


ou. xxvi, 1—21.) THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 421
eer a Na


arguments of hope for the future. A work has been accomplished by the Church, but
this is Jehovah’s work in it and by it. The deliverance from a foreign yoke was his
work also, ‘They had been enslaved to other lords (cf. ch. lxiii. 18), and they had done
as they pleased with Israel. But they have been swept away into the kingdom of the
shades, and are forgotten. “ From past events and benefits received, we should reason
to God’s future kindness, and infer that he will care for us for the future. God is not
like man, to be capable of weariness in doing good, or exhausted in giving largely ;
therefore the more numerous the benetits with which he has loaded us, so much the
more ought our faith to be strengthened and increased” (Calvin); cf. Ps. cxxxviii. 8 ;
Gen. xxxii. 10, 12; Phil. i. 6. “Thee only.” Under the dominion of Jehovah alone is
peace, blessedness, liberty, to be found.


“He is a freeman whom the truth makes free,
And all are slaves beside.’


J.


Vers. 15—21.—The resurrection of Israel. The population of Judah has been
increased, and its borders extended. (lor this canse of rejoicing cf. ch. ix. 2; xlix. 19,
20; liv. 1, etc.; Micah ii. 1, 2; iv. 7; Obad. 19, 20.) Probably he is thinking of the
population and strength of the land in the days of David and Solomon, as typical of
what is again to be in the happier times. But actually a period of gloom and suffering
must precede the glorious restoration.

I, THE PERIOD OF TROUBLE AND EXPECTATION. It is a pathetic picture of the soul
in its attitude of anxious suspense. Jehovah was missed and longed for as the Light
which seems to tarry in the dark davs of winter. Prayer was poured forth; and there
was a period of acute suffering like that of the mother preceding the birth of a child,
Hope was deceived and disappointed again and again (cf. ch. xiii. 18; xxi. 8). Still the
land was not blessed, still the population was not restored. The prophet is thinking of
the days after the return from exile,

Il. THE RESURRECTION OF THE PEOPLE. “Thy dead shall live.” “Sublimely
recovering himself, the prophet cries that God’s saints, though they are dead, shall live,”
and shall share the duties and privileges of regenerate Israel. The prophet sees, as it
were, his countrymen returning from the under-world. So speaks Hosea: “ Alter two
days will he revive us: on the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his
sight” (vi. 2); cf. the vision of Ezekiel—the valley of the dry bones (xxxvii. 1—10).
With lively faith anticipating the event, he calls upon the new population to awake and
cry. It is as if a dew had fallen on the barren land, This “‘ dew of lights” is thought
of as something supernatural, existing before the sun, In Ps. cx. 3 the ordinary dew
is born out of tle morning shower. “The dew from the glory of God falls like a
heavenly seed into the bosom of the earth; and in consequence of this, the earth
gives out from itself the shades which have hitherto been held fast beneath the ground,
so that they appcar alive again on the f:ce of the earth” (Delitzsch). There is thus a
connection between light and life, so often found in conjunction in religious thought
(Ps. xxxvi. 9; Job iii. 16—20; Johni. 4). For as the return of the morning light is
coincident with the refreshment of the strength, and the awakening to new effort,
so in all spiritual parables of the revival of the nation or the individual, light brings
life. The rena/ssance of knowledge precedes or coincides with the reformation of
manners, the stir of new activities, the beginning of a new era. And this connection
should never be forgotten, ‘‘ And God said, Let there be light.” Hven so; and the
darkness of superstition, of prejudice, of obscurantism, must be symptomatic of moral
death. As the light arouses the sleeper, so the sleeper must bestir himself to greet it
and rejoice in it. ‘ Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall
give thee liyht.”

Ill. Rerurn To sELF-communion. From this enrapturing vision the prophet
returns to the present, with all its sobering and in part depressing circumstances.
‘“‘ He has gained on behalf of his people the comforting certitude that a great exhibition
of the Divine justice is on the point of taking place; and his counsel is to withdraw
from the doomed into the privacy of communion with God” (Cheyne). While the
storm of Divine judgment is sweeping by, let the people of God betake themselves to
solitude and prayer (cf. Ps. xxvii. 5; xxxi, 21; Matt. vi. 6). The opening of the door


422 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cn xxvi. 1—21.


of the prayer-chamber is in times of distress the opening of the door into another world
than this—a scene of serenity and elevation. In the presence of our Father who seeth in
secret, the problems of tlie hour are solved, or cease unduly to harass the mind. ‘I'hat
which threatened to crush us is surmounted by the new energy of the spirit here imparted.


“Prayer ardent opens heaven, lets down a stream
Of glory on the consecrated hour
Of mun in audience with the Deity ;
Who worships the great God, tliat instant joins
The first in heaven, and sets his foot on hell.”


And it is but for “a little moment” that the wrath will last (cf. ch. x. 24, 25; liv. 7, 8;
Ps. xxx. 6). ‘Just as Noah, behind whom Jehovah shut the door of the ark, was
hidden in the ark while the floods of judgment poured down without, so should the
Church be shut off from the world without in its life of prayer, because a judgment of
Jehovah was at hand ” (Delitzsch). a

IV. THe cominG ForTH oF JEHOVAH. (Cf. Micah i. 8.) Where is the “ place” of
Jehovah? It is the supernatural sphere; aud every great manifestation of judgment
mingled with mercy is a “coming forth of Jehovah.” Here it is expressly for judgment
to punish men who have incurred blood-giilt, which is, in other words, sin, Yet in the
heart of judgment still his pity and consvlation live, and we “ should keep it constantly
before our eyes, when the wicked slay, mock, and ridicule us, and inflict upon us every
kind of outrage and cruelty, God will at length make known that the ery of innocent
blood has not been uttered in vain; for he never can forget his own people” (Luke


xviii. 7).—J.


Ver. 9.—Seeking God in the night. ‘*With my soul have I desired thee in the
night.” When God’s judgments are in the earth, even the righteous become more
earnest. They need the quickening of spirit which comes from marking “ the way,”
the sure way, and sometimes the swift way, of God’s judgments. But the night must
be taken in a personal sense as well as in a national seuse.

1. We DESIRE GOD IN THE NIGHT OF OUR soRROWS. ‘lhick clouds come over the
heart. We are no longer surrounded by bright skies and pleasant sounds. We have
come to the wilderness side of life. The morning of our expectations has given place
to the noonday of our toil, and to the evening of our disappointment. The beautiful
dream is over, and earthly joys are only passing guests. At eventide they are gone.
The soul, sitting alone, feels how unrequited has been the love of God. Alone in the
darkness it seeks his face.

JI. We pesikE Gop IN THE NIGHT OF OUR DouBTS. These will come. Old evidences
do not afford us the same basis of faith, New difficulties come face to face with the
intellect. Mysteries born of experience oppress the heart. Before, perhajs, we were hard
and dogmatic to all who differed from us;.before we were inclined to think that doubt
was in itself a sin, and not the exquisite action of a sincere mind. Now we sit in
darkness, and there is temporary eclipse of faith. What we want is God himself—the
living God, God in Christ ; and we are thankful if we can but “touch him.” We feel
how blessed religion is, even when our evidences are darkened, and with our soul we
desire God in the night.

III, We DEsiRE Gop IN THE NIGHT OF OUR SEPARATIONS. They must come. Be
the tie ever so tender, it must be cut; and we must say or look farewell, or perchance
hear of the death of some beloved one in a foreign land. ‘hese tragedics are about us
every day. New habiliments of mourning are put on every hour. No “touch of a
vanished hand.” Nothing below but empty space! Then the soul cries, “O God, be
not far from me!” ‘ ‘

IV. WE bDesirE Gop IN THE NIGHT OF OUR OWN DEPARTURE. And it 7s night. To
the Christian, who looks through it to the morning, who believes in the better country
and who sees the light of the new Jerusalem flickering up into the sky as he ascends
through the darkuess,—still to him, strong as he may be in faith and hope, death is a
dark hour, But One alone can lighten that. Not lover, acquaiutance, mother, or
friend. No. “ When I pass through the valley of the shadow of death thou art with
me.”—W. M. S.


oH, xxvi. 1—21.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 423


Ver. 16.—Prayer in trouble. “Lord, in trouble have they visited thee, they
poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them.” The “other lords,”
mentioned in the thirteenth verse, are all impotent in the hour of tribulation. Truly
they are dead, as Carlyle says. “These idols of yours are wood; you pour wax and
oil on them; the flies stick on them; they are not God, I tell you; they are black
wood.” So at the Reformation. Speaking of Luther, he says, “The quiet German
heart, modest, patient of much, had at length got more than it could bear. Formalism,
pagan-popeism, and other falsehood and corrupt semblance, had ruled long enough;
and here once more was a man found who durst tell all men that God’s world stood,
not on semblances, but realities; that life was a truth, and not a lie!” There are
idolatries in every age; but the idols of rank and fame and pleasure are of no avail
in the hour of trouble.

I. Here 1s REcEpTION. The Lord receives them. He does not spurn their
approach because they have kept away till then. The great Father never reproaches
the repentant, returning Israel. No. Unlike the proud, resentful spirit of man, “ the
Lord God is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness.” The haughty
spirit of man would resent the approach of one who was simply driven by stress of
weather into the haven of his protection.

II. Here 1s REALITY. They are filled with earnestness. It is no easy ritual of
the lips. They “poured out” a prayer. Very expressive indeed is that. The rock
was rent, and the waters flowed forth. ‘The poor bruised heart could contain its agony
no longer. There was confession. ‘There was that blessed “ outness ” which of itself
brings relief. These men had seen the pouring forth of the swollen Jordan, and of the
storm-filled streams of Lebanon. So is it that the earnestness of the soul at once
engages the attention and interest of God. It matters little whether prayer be liturgical
or free, whether it be in the sanctuary or the closet, so long as the soul seeks God as
the hart desireth the water-brooks; and the literal rendering of “ prayer ” here is “ secret
speech.”

Ill. Here 1s piscrprine. ‘ When thy chastening was upon them.” This is very
different from self-chosen and self-inflicted chastisement. Some Christians in every
age have become self-tormentors: some, with the Flagellants, in the infliction of physical
torture, and some in constant introspection—painful searching of their own motives,
and mourning over their own want of faith and of feeling. But this text speaks of
God’s own discipline—a Father’s discipline, and therefore a wise, a kind, and a safe
discipline. Moreover, it is but for “‘a season.” We read, “ when thy discipline was
upon them,” which, in its very language, suggests that it is not a lasting condition.
The Jews came back from exile. ‘heir punishments for idolatry gave place to pardon
and restoration, So itis now. God doves not delight in the sufferings of his children.
“Tribulation worketh patience;” our “weeping may endure for a night, but joy
cometh in the morning.” In the heart of the prickly encasement there is opening out
a beautiful flower.—W. M. 8.


Vers. 5—7, 8 (latter half).—The righteousness of God's rule. I, IT8 APPARENT
ABSENCE. We still find on the earth “them that dwell on high ”—the arrogant, the
presumptuous, the oppressor; there is to be seen “‘ the lofty city,” exalted in its pride
of power, dealing its blows upon the weak and suffering, fearing not God nor revarding
the rights of men. In every age, beneath every sky, these men and these cities have
been known. To those who have been humiliated and ill treated, God has seemed
absent ; his righteousness has appeared afar off; their cry has been, “ How long, O
Lord, how long dost thou not avenge,” etc.? Among such suffering and perplexed ones
are duwn-trodden peoples, persecuted Churches, wronged individual men and women.

II. Irs ASSERTION IN DUE TIME, ‘The justice of God “is not dead, but sleepeth.”
It may be truer to say that it waits in patience for the hour of manifestation ; then it
descends; and it appears: 1. In the utter overthrow of iniquity. The lofty are laid
low, the proud city is brought down to the ground (ver. 5). Instead of power is utter
enfeeblement ; the weapon of cruelty is stricken out of its hand, the words of condem-
nation and cursing are taken out of its mouth. anstead of honour is humiliation ;
the throne is exchanged for the very dust of the ground; and instead of unholy joy
is hopeless misery. 2. In the exaltation of rectitude (ver. 6). Those who have been


424 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. xxvz 1—21


reduced to poverty and need by the unscrupulousness of the sinful will accede to their
heritage of power, of wealth, of pleasure, or—what is better than these—of influence,
of sufficiency, of thunkfulness. God, the Most Upright One, smooths the path of the
just (ver. 7), makes it level, enables the righteous to pursue their way of fruitful
activity, of Divine worship, of holy joy.

Ill. ‘lue EFFEecT oF ITs ASSERTION. ‘ When God’s judgments are in the earth,” ¢.e.
when the righteousness of God is seen and felt in the infliction of penalty on the guilty
and the levelling of the path of the just, then “the inhabitants . . . learn righteous-
ness” (ver. 8). 1. The devout are confirmed in their devotion, and they cleave to God
and to his service. 2. The waverers are decided, and they resolve to unite themselves
with his people. 8. The presumptuous are alarmed, and they may be awak ned and
redeemed. ‘iis is Gid’s intention in, and is the fitting end of, his Divine judgments ;
it is our folly and our sin if we allow that purpose to be defeated. —C,


Vers. 8, 9.—Athirst for God. “The desire of our soul is to thy Name... with
my soul have I desired thee.” The primary reference here is to the hope of troubled
hearts for Divine deliverance; but the words of the text are suggestive of the general
truths—

J, THAT MAN IS CONSTITUTED TO CRAVE AFTER Gop. We have many indications of
this truth. We find it in the facts that: 1. The noblest spirits among cultivated
peoples find their chief joy in communion with him, 2. The worthiest spirits among
uncultivated peoples have been athirst for God. 8. Religious truth and Divine wor-
ship prove a poweriul attraction to the vast majority of mankind. 4. Every human
being is found to possess a capacity for relizious knowledge and devotion, 5. Human
life without God is found to be constantly unsatisfying aud restless. ;

II. THAT THIS (;ODWARD ASPIRATION, DULLED BY SIN, IS OFTEN AWAKENED BY
AFFLICTION. “1 desired thee in the night.” Our interest in God, reduced by the
various harmful and despoiling influences of a sinful society, sometimes so reduced as
to be practically lost, is often awakened by affliction of some kind. It is not until
the soul is brought down very low by sickness, by calamity, by bereavement, by
treachery and disappointment, or by earthly failure and disenchantment, that it finds
its dep and sore need of a heavenly Father, of an unfailing Friend, of a heavenly
treasure. When thus injured and spoiled by sin, it is not until our souls are made to
see their sinfulness in a fierce and awful light that we crave and cry out for an
almighty and all-sufficiont Saviour ; bat then we do.

Ill. ‘lHatT, REAWAKENED IN ADVERSITY, IT BECOMES A PERMANENT HABITUDE OF THE
souL. ‘* With my spirit ... will I seek thee early.” Whether or not we find this
doctrine in the text, we find this truth in the will of God; and God expects to find this
fact in human experience. It is bitterly disappointing to the good—and is it not a
disappointment to the Good One ?—when they who have been brouvht to the throne of
grace by reflection are found, in after-days of comfort and sunshine, to leave the
sanctuary unvisited, and to walk on their way, godless, prayerless, hopeless. Such
men (1) defeat God’s kind purposes; (2) add iniquity to their iniquity; (8) most
seriously endanger their own future (sce ch. i. 5).—C.


Ver. 10.—Guitlty insensibility. The wise and good man will learn something from
everyting; the foolish and sinful man will learn nothing from anything. In what-
ever accents God way speak, this latier hears not his voice, and heeds not his will;
he is guiltily insensible to all kinds of heavenly influence; he is—

I, UnrovucHED BY THE VISITATION OF Gop’s GoopNEss. He does not “learn richteous-
ness, thourh “favour be showed” to him by God. God may be, as he is, multiplying
his mercies unto him, so that they are as the sands of the sea—innumerable; visiting
him by day and by night with loving-kindnesses continually renewed, besetting him
behind and before with his guardianship, laying his hand of gentle power upon him
in guidance and in blessing. But all is lost upon him—he is unmindful of everything ;
he does not “ learn righteousness ;” he goes on, if not in oppression, or in vice, or in
open atheism, yet in a guilty forgetfulness, in an unfilial indifference and ineratitude.

Il. UNINFLUENCED BY HUMAN EXAMPLE, “In the land of uprightness he deals
unjustly.” Around him are men worshipping God, working devotedly in his cause,


CH. xxvi. 1—21.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 425


living in accordance with his will, illustrating Christian virtues in the daily trans-
actions and in the common relationships of life, bearing the best witness to the power
and the excellency of Divine truth, supplying a source of influence which ought to tell
on a human heart and to mould human character; but this is of no avail, The
hardened heart is unmoved, its apathy is undisturbed, its course unchanged.

IU. UNAFFECTED BY THE EVIDENCES OF Gop’s GREATNESS. “He will not behold
the majesty of the Lord.” There are three ways in which the majesty or the greatness
of God is revealed to us, all of which deserve and demand our most patient and devout
attention. 1. In the material world. In the sky, in the sea, in the mountain, in the
storm, in the earthquake, ete. “ With God,” as manifested thus, “is terrible majesty ”
(Job xxxvii. 22); and he who does “not regard the works of the Lord, nor the opera-
tions of his hand,” is guiltily blind to the majesty of the Lord. 2. In Divine providence.
The majestic holiness of God is seen in the revelation of his wrath against impurity,
intemperance, violence, passion, and all other evils; also in the revelation of his
approval of righteousness and peace, in the ordering of our human lives. Whoso is
unobservant of this is a wickedly dull scholar in a world where such plain lessons are
to be learnt. 3. In the yospel of Jesus Christ. There the majesty of God’s character
shines forth, and we see “the light of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.”
In the Incarnation itself, in the character of Jesus Christ, in the severity of the
sorrows he bore, in the depth of the shame to which he stooped, in the awful moral
grandeur of the death he died, in the unspeakable glory of his heavenly mission, —there,
indeed, is the majesty of the Lord to be seen. He who will not dwell on this as on
that which, above all other things, is worthy of his most patient and reverent regard,
is one of “the wicked,” with whom God “ is angry.”

Lxssons. 1. Let us be thankful if we are hearing and heeding the voice of God, if
we are opening our hearts to the heavenly influence. 2. Let us take earnest heed to
the fact that a guilty inattention leads on and down to a fatal deafness.—C,


Vers. 12—18.— The argument from the past. Great things are represented, by the
prophetic voice, to have been done, and these furnish the strongest reason to expect
great things in the future.

I. THE GREAT THINGS GoD HAS DONE For us. 1. He has heard our cry in the day
of distress (vers. 16, 17). Few things go home to our hearts more readily than the
words of the psalmist, “I cried unto the Lord, and he heard me.” It is a great thing
to have been heard of God, to have gained his pitilul ear, and to have enjoyed his
merciful consideration ; that amid the millions of his children he has distinguished us
and bent on us his benign regard. 2. He has granted full deliverance. “ Other lords
. . . have had dominion . . . but [now] thee only will we celebrate; they are dead; ”
their very memory is perishing (vers. 138, 14). We may have been under the dominion
of some cruel vice (lust, or avarice, or intemperance), or of “ the world” (1 John) ; but
in the mercy of God these spiritual adversaries have been defeated, have been slain,
they are no more to be dreaded, and now a Divine Redeemer is the Object of our
adoration; for him we live, his honour we seek, his Name we strive to glorify (ver. 15),
in his holy and ennobling service we spend our days and our powers, 3. He has granted
spiritual enlargement. (Ver. 15.) “ Thou hast increased the nation, O Lord.” To some,
especially to th se whom he redeems from the bondage of vice or crime, God grants
material enlargement, the improvement of their estate, the brightening of their life, the
broadening of their sphere. ‘To all who, at the touch of his liberating hand, come out
of spiritual captivity into the freedom of his children, he gives spiritual advancement,
increase of knowledge, of joy, of love, of influence, of hope. As we love and serve
Christ, we are enlarged on every hand—the horizon of our souls is removed beyond its
former bounds. }

Il. Toe ARGUMENT THEREFROM. The fact that God has done such great things for
us—and all that has been done for us has been wrought by him (ver. 12; and see
Ps. lxxxvii. 7)—is a strong reason to expect other gracious things in the future. “Thou
wilt ordain peace for us” (ver. 12), It is a scriptural argument that the conferring of
greater blessings isa security to us for the possession of smaller ones (see Matt. vi. 265 ;
Rom, viii. 32; Ps. lvi. 13). The gifts of God in the gospel of Jesus Christ, (1) his
most costly gifts, (2) his most valuable gifts, may be to us a strong assurance that


426 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cn. xxvi 1—21


God will not only “ordain peace” in life and at death, but also lead us along all the
path of life, and receive us to his presence and glory when our earthly course is run.—C.


Ver. 19 (with ver. 14).—Contrasted issues. Taking ver. 19 as it surely should be
taken, in connection and in contrast with ver. 14, and understanding the primary
reference of both of them to be to the hopes of the Hebrew nation at the time of
the prophecy, we have our attention called to—

I. THE ISSUE OF UNRIGHTEOUSNESS—DEATH. 1. It tends to fatal ruin. The tyrants
of Babylon, being overthrown, should rise up no more, should never regain their
position, were as dead men whose day was hopelessly and irretrievably gone, All
unrighteousness tends to the same issue; it leads down to loss, to overthrow, to shame,
to a depth of ruin from which there is no recovery. At length the guilty man (party,
nation) is down so low that those who look on say, “ He (it) is dead; he shall rise no
more.” 2. It travels fast to the grave. Guilty violence (Ps. lv. 23; exl. 11) and
shameful vice (Prov. ii, 18; ix. 18) make a quick passage to the tomb. 3, It sinks
into permanent oblivion. God makes “their memory to perish” (see Ps. xxxiv. 16;
Prov. x. 7; Eccles. viii. 10). No man cares to remember those whose lives have been
disgraced by sin; their names lie unmentioned, and their memory fades from view till
it is lost in the thickening shadows of time. 4. It goes down to the death which is
eternal. ‘The wages of sin is death.”

II. THE ISSUE OF RIGHTEOUSNESS—REVIVAL. “ Thy dead men shall live.” God’s
people who have fallen till they have seemed to be wholly lost shall be recovered and
shall reappear. Righteousness is immortal; it cannot be buried and forgotten and lost.
1. It commonly ends in restoration to power and position. Joseph is cast into prison,
but he comes out to be the first minister in Egypt. David is driven into the caves, but
he comes forth to sit down upon the throne. ‘lhe persecuted people o! God, whether in
Babylon, in the Vaudois valleys, in Holland, in the Highlands of Scotland, in the woods
and rocks of Madagascar, come forth when the “ red, right hand ” of cruelty is stricken
down, and appear as those that have risen from the tomb. 2. It secures an earthly
immortality—that of a lasting recollection: “ The righteous shall be had in everlasting
remembrance” (Ps. cxii. 6; Prov. x. 7): that, also, of abiding influence ; for the effect
of their holy lives and true, faithful words shall go down to distaut generations, 38. It
issues in eternal blessedness. ‘lhe righteous shall go into “ life eternal.”—C,


Ver. 20.— The duty of retirement. There are periods in a nation’s history, and there
are times in a good man’s life, when it is well to hear and wise to heed the admonition,
“Enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee.” We may let this
language suggest to us that we should—

I. MAKE TIME FOR DEVOUT REFLECTION. In busy, outwardly active times, when
there is an imperious demand on every hand for “‘ work,” there is urgent need that this
counsel should be given and be taken. Enter into the chamber of solemn and sacred
meditation ; consider what is your present spiritual condition ; estimate the progress you
are making in your course; reflect upon the swift and steady passage of your life ; realize
that the-time is not far off when all earthly interest will be nothing, and when it will
be everything to know that the righteous Judge is well pleased with the witness you are
bearing and the work you are doing,

I. CoMpEL EACH DAY TO YIELD ITS HOUR OF DIRECT INTERCOURSE WITH Gop. We
cannot live, spiritually, on public devotion. Nothing will nourish the soul in the
absence of private, individual fellowship with God. “Enter into thy closet, and when
thou hast shut thy door, pray . .. in secret” (Matt. vi.). ‘he most pressing cares,
domestic, or official, or public, will not excuse the neglect of private communion with
God. If Daniel, with all the cares of Babylon upon him, found timé to pray three
times a day regularly (Dan, vi. 10), we can compel our duties to make room for
devotion, Every day let God speak to us, and let us speak to him, within the shut
doors of our own chamber.

II]. TAKE UP THE ATTITUDE OF REVERENT EXPECTATION. There are times when
man can do nothing more than he has done, and all that is left is patient waiting for
God, And now, Lord, what wait I for? my hope is in thee.” This may be the attitude:
L. Of the diligent, waiting God’s increase on his industry. 2. Of the disciplined, waiting


ox, xxvi. 1—21.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 427


God’s crowning of his patience; whether of the embarrassed, of the sick, or of the
defamed. It is to these that the words of the text are most applicable; for it is they
who are to wait for a little while, “until the indignation be overpast,” te. until the
hour of deliverance is fully come, and the work of redemption has been wrought. But
we may also regard this as the attribute: 3. Of the co-worker with Christ, waiting the
Divine blessing on his zeal—0O,


Ver. 1.—The bulwark of salvation, Two suggestions are made concerning the associ-
ation of this figure in the mind of Isaiah. Some think he had in view the circumstances
of the Assyrian invasion in the time of Hezekiah, and designed to assure the people
that, however boastful might be the Assyrian words, and however terrible the appear-
ance of the Assyrian armies, they were safe, because the defence of God was better than
the mightiest walls, or the loftiest towers, or the most destructive weapons. In pre-
paration for the asvault of the Assyrians, Hezekiah had done all in his power to fortify
and defend Jerusalem; but, in the doing of his best, his trust was still in the Lord his
God; and he looked for “walls and bulwarks” in the salvation which God promised
him by Isaiah. But others regard this song as prepared beforehand, in anticipation of
the deliverance from Babylon, and possession again of the holy city, though then it
would be, for many years, a city without walls or bulwarks, and, even from human
points of view, altogether dependent on the Divine defence. J. A. Alexander says,
“The condition and feelings of the people after their return from exile are expressed
by putting an ideal song into their mouths. Though the first clause does not necessarily
mean that this should actually be sung, but merely that it might be sung, or that it
would be appropriate to the times and feelings of the people, it is not at all improbable
that it was actually used tor this purpose, which could more readily be done as it is
written in the form and manner of the psalms, with which it exhibits many points of
resemblance.” It would be quite in harmony with other parts of Scripture prophecy to
regard Isaiah as having in mind both present and future circumstances; and it is
usually safe to recognize an immediate historical reference. The two associations of
the song will, therefore, give us our two points for consideration: 1. God’s salvation
may come in what he does for us, or outside us. 2. Gud’s salvation may come in what
he does by us, or within us.

L Gop MAY DEFEND US BY WHAT HE DOES FoR wus. In the case of Hezekiah,
Jerusalem was saved by the sudden and overwhelming destruction of Sennacherib’s
army. In this we may tind a type of all the cases in which men have been saved by
the Divine mastering of their circumstances. But all these, which may be called
“ spectacular salvations,” have for their chief design to enable us to apprehend tiiose
far higher moral and spiritual salvations that are wrought within us. The outward
has little interest in itself. Our chief interest in events lies in their illustration, for
those who are dependent on the senses, of moral and spiritual processes. The Bible
is full of records of God’s outward salvations, They begin with the dividing of the
Red Sea, when the people were bidden to “ stand still, and see the salvation of God.”
They are dotted all over the story of the wanderings. ‘Ihey appear again and again in
the time of the Judges. Asa, Jehoshaphat, and Hezekiah have such stories of Divine
deliverance and protection to repeat; and psalmists of all the ages join the chorus that
follows Moses’ great song, “ ‘The Lord ‘is my Strength, and my Song, and he is become
my Salvatiun.” We still may hold fast our contidence that.God is working for us in
our circumstances, and even by the discomfiting of our foes, and making for us plain
paths. The God of providence is in our life; and io his rule of the events of our lives
we too can see his salvation. Keen vision of God’s working in things, persons, and
events outside us we vught ever to cultivate; but the cultivation is a work of exceeding
difficulty in this sensuous and scientific age, when man, his skill and his triumphs,
are so unduly honoured. o

Il. Gop MAY DEFEND US BY WHAT HE DOES WITHIN us. He may give us a spirit
of wisdom and good counsel, so that the action we take shall be prudent; and in this
way security and even rescue from peril are oftentimes obtained. In times of anxiety
less importance attaches to what our foes do than to what we do; and so God’s grace
in us, God’s salvation of us, is the thing of supreme coucern fo us. Our salvation
comes by this, “ He strengtheneth us with strength ia our soul.” It follows upon the


428 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cn. xxvz. 1—21.


ee aE


fulfilment of this assurance, “The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will
he teach his way.” When the exiles went back to a Jerusalem that was without walls
or defences, God keps them safe by helping them to act prudently, and to avoid giving
offence to those around them. Looked at in this light, how full all our lives are of
Divine salvations! Every circumstance of difficulty and trial ; every time of perplexity,
when decisions, on which the most serious consequences depended, had to be made,
is seen to be a time, or a circumstance, in which God saved us by giving grace, wisdom,
guidance, prudence, or good judyment. Either by help within us or without us, God
will surely prove a “strong Salvation” to all who put their trust in him.—R. T,


Ver. 3.—Perfect peace out of trust. Literally, “ Peace, peace ;” the Hebrew super-
lative form meaning the “ greatest, or perfect peace”—inward peace, outward peace,
peace with God, peace of conscience, }eace at all times, under all events, God’s own
peace, the peace which God’s own Son knew, and left as his legacy to his disciples,
These two last expressions give us two Givisions for our subject.

I. Gop GIVES THOSE WHO TRUST HIM HIS OWN PEACE. 1. God’s peace is the result
of his inward harmony. There are no conflicts within him.- And this seems an
amazing thing to us, who never do the right save after a fight with the wrong in
which we have come off conquerors. Asa living Being—a Person—we niust think of
God as having mind, will, affections, emotions, attributes, and relations to others outside
himself. He is One. But in our idea of the unity of God we include the manifold
comprehensiveness of God; and we understand that in him is perlect peace, because
there is harmony ; judement never contlicts with feeling, will never struggles against
desire. Every line tends to the focus of Divine purpose; every power combines to
execute the Divine thought. Sometimes our idea of the Divine peace is spviled by
representations that are made of the work of redemption, as if, in connection with it,
his justice was in antagonism with his mercy, and his Law made hard terms with his
love. Surely that redewption is the work of Divine peace; it is the outgoing of his
whole being towards us in the harmony of pitying love.


“Still hushedly, hushedly, snowed down the thought Divine,
And in a voice of most exceeding peace, the Lord said
(While against the breast Divine the waters of life leapt, gleaming, gladdening),
‘Let the man enter in.’”
(R. Buchanan.)


2. God’s peace follows on his aboveness. A word has to be coined to express this
thought. We feel that we should be at peace if we could get above. God is above:
not in the conflict which we know, but calm in the vision of it all; calm in seeing the
end from the beginning; peaceful as the doctor is when, above the patient, he reads
the issue of the disease; peaceful as the teacher, who is above the child, and knows
perfectly what is causing it so much care and toil. A little picture in the Leeds
Exhibition showed us how man may feel God’s peace out of his aboveness. An old
farm-labourer, dressed in his long patched brown smock and clouted boots, aud grasping
tremblingly his stick, was looking up at a little opening that a) peared in a dull, heavy,
leaden sky. A grand old face, seamed and lined with years of poverty, toil, and care
but full of the peace which God alone can give; tears were glistening in the eyes, and
standing ready to drop; but smiles were breaking through, as, remembering sorrows in
the home and weary burdens on the heart, he sweetly said, “ Up beyant is the blue
sky.” Peace and God, he knew, were up above; over there. 3. (God’s peace attends on
his righteousness and love. Nothing can disturb the peace of him who alway doeth
right, and is love. Peace and Righteousness go hand-in-hand—twin sisters—through
all creation. They live and toil and die together, And in the heart and home of God
they have dwelt together from everlasting, before the earth and the world were formed.
So he is the God of peace.

Il. Gop @IvEs THOSE WHO TRUST HIM HIS Son’s Prack. It is one thing to admire
the peace of God, but quite another thing to feel that it may become ours, that it can
ever be the possession aud the power of aman, ‘the contrasts, God, man, strike us as
too severe. ‘The step of descent is too vast. We want a Mediator. We ask for some
instance in which God’s peace can be seen in aman. And that is one of the revelations


oH. xxvi. 1—21.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 429
ce a ee


made in the Lord Jesus Christ. He is prophesied of as the Prince of Peace. He was the
Teacher of peace. He is our Peace. He knew the peace passing understanding. His
peace was the peace of God, for it also came trom inward harmony, from aboveness, and
from the intertwinings of righteousness and love. But it also was, characteristically,
man’s peace. It was such a peace of mind and heart as we may know; and from Christ
we may learn what its sources are. Man, too, may reach the restfuluess of inward
harmony. Man, too, may rise above the petty disturbances of life. Man, too, may
win the perfect rule of righteousness and love. But it is Christ who teaches us, and
shows us how, and gives us strength to win. He reveals the three vreat sources of
peace for man, and they are found to be these—trust, submission, and obedience.
Trust that says, “The Lord knoweth the way that I take.” Submission that says,
“The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away.” Obedience that says, “ My meat
and my drink is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work.” These are
the sources of peace for man, for they were the sources of peace for man’s Head, the
“Man Christ Jesus.” Nay, but there is an earlier secret than this. In Christ, for
man, is tle great peace. Peace with God, before we can have peace in Gud, and so the
peace of God ruling in our hearts, We “have peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ ;” and his work in us involves such a change in us, such a moral regeneration
and renewal, as can only find fitting activity in lives of peacefulness and “sweet reason-
ableness.” Yes, man can have Gud’s peace; for he is a spiritual being, made in the
image of God. He feels like God. He thinks like God. He willslike God. He loves
like God. And he can be at peace like God. All, indeed, within limitations and in
narrow measures; but the passing clouds can find a true mirror in a wayside pool as
well as in a mighty mountain-lake, A dewdrop will hold the sinshine iu its tiuy
ball; and the mig!ity forest oak will go inte the limits of the acorn-seed. God can
give his own eterval peace to man, his creature. He will give it, he does give it, to all
who put their trust in him.—R. T.


Ver. 4.—The call to continuous trust. “ Trust ye in the Lord for ever.” The words
for ever ” in the prophetical books are a figure for “always,” “continuously,” under
all conditions; even in times when trust seems to have no foundations we may keep on
trusting, because our trust really is in God.

I, WE CANNOT KEEP ON TRUSTING IF OUR TRUST IS IN THINGS. “The fashion of
this world passeth away ;” “ Here we have no abiding city; ” “ Moth and rust corrupt,
and thieves break through and steal.” So often things will not be ‘ according to our
mind.” Often we sadly say that “ nothing is stable,” and “ we are sure of nothing.”

Il. WE CANNOT KEEP ON TRUSTING IF OUR TRUST IS IN MAN. For the pain of
life is our disappointment in our best-loved friends. Live on to old age, and we are
almost alone; some are changed, and sou.s are dead, and some have proved unworthy.
“ Cease ye from man.”

Ill. We CANNOT KEEP ON TRUSTING IF OUR TRUST IS IN SELF. The self-revelations
which come with advancing years humble us in the dust. Youth can have its self-
confidences. But man has leariued the life-lesson badly if he is not ready to say, “ It
is not in man that walketh to direct his steps.”

IV. WE CAN KEEP ON TRUSTING IF OUR TRUST IS IN JEHOVAH. For he és what
he was ; he will be what he is and has ever been. He is an “ everlisting Rock.” He
has been abundantly proved. Secure and blessed always are they who put their trust


in him.—R. T.


Ver. 7.—The level path of the good man. This verse would better read, “ The way of
the just is evenness; thou, most upright, dost muke even the path of the just.” This
suggests the two topics—(1) the prevailing feature of the good man’s conduct ; (2) the
aid which God gives towards maintaining that feature.

I. THE PREVAILING FEATURE OF THE GOOD MAN’S CONDUCT—EVENNESS, The idea
of the word may be expressed in New Testament language as “ patient continuance in
well-doing.” The triumph of the good man’s life is steady walking, never running, and
never draguing, in the way of righteousness. Kivenness may suggest “ rectitude ”—the
ruling of all conduct and relations by the sensitiveness to that which is right and kind.
Or it may suggest “consistency ”—a shaping of all actions into the harmony of godly


430 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cn. xxv 1—21


TT eee


principles. Or it may suggest the correction of the varying experience, now of mountain
heights of emotion, and now of dark valleys of depression; the good man learns to
prefer the level road, Or it may suggest the quietness of the good man’s life. It flows
on like the smovth river, that never roars in flood, always breathing out its blessing,
always singing its low sweet song, always moving on to the ocean of God. But to
describe any man’s life as evenness reminds us at once that evenness is something won ;
it is not sinful man’s natural state, it is a triumph out of struggle. The man who gains
it at last must have kuown much levelling of mountains, raising of valleys, and making
rough places plain. his may be illustrated by the labour and skill demanded in the
making of a vood plain level road through a country of hills and marshes. Compare
Bunyan’s figure of the varied pilgrim-path of “ Christian.” Many of us can only say,
“ Our patb should be level, and we wish it were.”

Il. THE aip wHich Gop GIVES TOWARDS MAINTAINING THIS FEATURE. We might
have said, gaining and maintaining it; for only throuyh grace can we win the true con-
sistency of goodness, or continue in it. Isaiah comforts good people with the assurance
that God is ever “ making even” their path ; working wi/h them, and working through
them, to this good eud. He removes stumbling-blocks which are too big for them.
He reveals to them the things that make their way uueven. He maintains within them
the desire for righteousness, He guides every practical endeavour alter goodness and
charity. He makes the “ plain path for our feet.” If any man would be holding fast
his integrity, lie may be sure that God’s hand is upon his hand.—R. T.


Ver. 8.— Altitude in times of judgment. “In the way of thy judgments, O Lord,
have we waited for thce.” The connections of this chapter need some careful attention.
The prophet, in the twelve preceding chapters, has given visions of the judgments that
were ready to fall on the nations surrounding Israel—judgments in which Israel itself
must share, since Israel! had shared in the idolatries ard the moral evils which had
called these judgments forth. To most of the nations Divine judgments would prove to
be desolation and destruction; an irrecoverable doom. ‘lo Israel, becuse, even in its
shame and sin, some held fast by righteousness and God, judgment would be but chas-
tisement, by means of which the nation should be purified and established. Tyre
should be wiped away; its place would be no longer known; the foundation of her
palaces should be for the spreading of the fisherman’s nets. Bab, lon should be brought
low, even to the dust; no she; herd’s hut, no wandering Arab’s tent, should rise on
her foundations ; the glory of Nebuchadnezzar should be the place of the satyr and
the owl aud the wild beasts of the desert. But Israel should come out of its time of
judgment renewing its youth, purged from its idolatries, and witnessing, with a clearer
voice than ever before, to its great truth, “‘lhe Lord Jehovah is one Lord.” The
prophet, in his vision, sees these judgments pass one by one; but, looking on beyond
them, he sees the ransomed of Israel redeemed and saved, and he presents us before-
hand with the song which they would unite to sing in the raptures of their deliverance.
By telling the people the song which their noblest and best wowld sing when trials
had wrought out their blessings, Isaiah teaches them the spirit wiich they ought to
cherish now, as they anticipated the judgments, or were wearying themselves under
their burden. By-and-by they would rejoice that they had held fast by God under
the gloom. Then “ waiting on him, and waiting for him,” is just the attitude they
should seek and cherish.

I. Viewed in one way, the circumstances through which Israel would be passing
would be supcmENnTs or Gop; but viewed in another way, they would only be the
ORDINARY COMMONPLACE FACTS OF THEIR NATIONAL LIFE. The growth into over-
whelming power of some nations, until they swallowed up all the smaller nations
around them, became proud, tyrannical, and luxurious; lost national virtue, and fell a
prey to the enterprise and energy of fresher and younger uations. This process the
Israelites actually saw going on, at different stages, in the kingdoms around them.
‘The laws that ruled it, the final results of it, they could not discern, and they must
have been gravely bewildered by it. All the more because they had themselves to
suffer from the encroachments of these rising monarchies. In those trying days it
could not have been an easy thing for a Jew to hold fast his faith in God. Reasoning
could explain so little. Iniquity seemed to be triumphing over good, Jehovah


oH, Xxvi. 1—21.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 431
LS


appeared to have loosed his hand, and left the world to riot in its self-will. Those were
great men indeed who could rise above the disasters and the helplessness of the times,
and stay themselves on God, and hope in him, and wait for him.

II. But that was quite A MODEL GENERATION. Each age, thongh expressing itself in
new forms and terms, may find its own perplexities mirrored there. Karly times had
their chief difficulties in outward things, such as the avgrandizement of world-conquerors,
and the debasing effect of idolatrous systems. As the world grows older, the perplexities
and the trials of faith come more and more out of intellectual and moral conditions ;
and we incline to think that it is much harder work to hold on to Gud, with patient
waiting, in times of mental and moral confusion than when the earth is disturbed with
sword and spear and shield. Perhaps never were men called to steady themselves on
God, and wait on him in the way of his judgments, as we are called. There are two
peculiarities of our time which, seen on the one side, are just facts of life, but seen from
the other side are judgments of God in the midst of which we are to wait upon him.
1. The disposition to accomplish all things by human effort, apart from God. Man,
according to present-day teaching, is to be the Saviour and Salvation of man. Let but
every man lift up his brother—so they say—and the world’s golden age shall dawn;
but the light that lightens it shall be the brilliancy of human genius, and not the
“glory of the Lord.” 2. The confusion which advancing knowledge has seemed to
introduce into both doctrines and morals. Some of the greatest men of science have
been reverent men who, while searching with a free spirit into all that can be kuown of
creation, yet held God fast in the arms of trustful love, and found traces of his handi-
work in everything they examined. But not a few are over-ready to discover—some-
times even ready to manufacture—antagonisms between reason and revelation. And
even the best of us cannot fail to be influenced by the atmosphere of doubt which has
thus been created for us. We know what mental struggle means. We know what it
is to search after truth that seems ever to glide beyond our grasp. We, too, are walking
in the way of God’s judgments, and blessed are we if we can truly say, “In the way of
thy judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee.”

We gather two lessons from these considerations. 1. The bottom, the foundation, the
rest, of all things is God. ‘The tirst truth which the child learns is the truth of God.
The utmost truth towards which human intellects and human hearts can push their
devious, struggling way,is God. he simplest word that infant lips can utter is “ God ;”
the largest and awe-fullest word that can burn upon an archangel’s lips is the Name
of God. That man knows something who knows a little of God. That man knows
nothing—all he may seem to know is not within the sphere of true being—who does
not know God. ‘lhe steadying, the resting, of a man’s soul is impossible save in God.
* Who is a Rock save our God?” Then our supreme work in life must be tv know God
—to know him by “ waiting upon him;” to know him in the face of Jesus Christ.
2. And we learn that those who would hold by God will have to “ wait” for him. God
tests the trusting ones by his mysterious doings and dealings. He hiles, as it were,
behind the clouds and the darkness that encircle his throne. He is even to be waited
on in the “ way of his judgments.” And such a spirit of waiting alone can preserve us
amid the judgments. It lies at the very basis of noble and regenerate character. And
all life is to us according to our character. ‘To the pure all things are pure; to the
impure nothing is pure.” ‘Io the bad, godless man, the highest mercies become curses ;
the self-centred character can make poison even out of angels’ food. ‘lo the bad man,
punishments are ruin, desolation, woe; even as to heathen nations these prophetic
burdens were unredeemable calamity. But to the good man, the God-centred man,
punishments are but chastisements, out of which are wrought “the peaceable fruits of
righteousness.” It has been said that the “dealings of God are punishments to the
wicked, but chastisements to the righteous.” It should rather be said that there is no
difference in the Divine dealing—judgments come both on the righteous and on the
wicked; but the attitude in which we meet the judgments makes all the difference.
The ungodly man bruises himself “against the bosses of Jehovah’s buckwr. the
godly man—who “ waits on the Lord”—bends to bear the rod of his heavenly Father’s
chastening. ‘To the godless man life is just stern iron and brass; but the Christian
man, having learnt of God, is alchemist enough to turn all he touches to finest gold.
Then “trust in the Lord for ever: for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.


—R. hs


432 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, [eun. xxvr. 1—21.


a


Ver. 13.—Full allegiance to Jehovah. This may be regarded as still a part of the
song which the exiles would sing when the way was made plain for their return to their
own beloved land. The way would not be plain until the great oppressing city of
Babylon, and the great oppressing dynasty of Nebuchadnezzar, had been humbled.
Then God would “ordain peace ” for his people ; and then the full and glad allegiance
of his people to him could be fully and freely expressed and manifested. The answering
spiritual truth is that we are under the tyranny of other lords— the lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eye, and the pride of life.” Even while we struggle and suffer under
their oppression, the power of this “body of sin and death,” we may hold fast our
allegiance to God in heart and purpose; and we may look on to the time that is
speedily coming, when God shall himself accomplish our deliverance, and then our
allegiance shall gain full and hearty expression; we shall praise him only, we shall
serve him only, and praise and serve him as we ought. Getting illustration from the
historical circumstances, we may set forth this point in its personal applications under
three divisions.

I. IsRaEL’S TIMES OF OPPRESSION UNDER HEATHEN RULERS. These include the
oppression uuder Pharaoh in Egypt; the inroads of neighbouring nations in the times
of the Judges; the temporary supremacy of the Philistines; the degrading supremacy
of foreign idolatrous systems in the age of the later kings; the crushing of the national
life by the self-aggrandizing Assyrians and Babylonians. Israel had a full experience of
the power of the oppressor, many “ other lords” had held dominion over Israel. These
may represent the tyrannies of social custom, prevailing opinion, bodily lust, easily
besetting sins, and worldly persecution, which now bear so hardly upon the saints of
God. If these do but hold a usurped dominion, it is too often so stringent as almost to
crush out all expressions of the life unto God.

II, IsRaEL’s HEART OF ALLEGIANCE TO GoD IN TIMES OF OPPRESSION. The elect
remnant, in every age, kept the allegiance, though they had to hide it in secret places,
A “ten righteous” ever kept the nation irom utter destruction, There isa holy leaven
among us now.

III. Israrv’s FREEDOM FOR FULL ALLEGIANCE IN THE DIVINE INTERVENTION.
Sooner or later God would deliver them, and will deliver us; and then we can open our
lips, “make mention of his Name,” and give ourselves openly to him, as we have held
ourselves secretly for him all through the trying time.—R. T.


Ver. 16.—Payer forced by trouble. One of the commonest, and often one of the
most painful, of iuman experiences. The scoffer bends the knee when life is placed.in
sudden peril. ‘The prayerless cry mightily when death stares them in the face. Prayer-
lessness is only a fair-weather attainment. Like the children who do not seem to care
for mother when health abounds, but run to her at once when the head is aching;
so we can bravely do without God while the sun shines, but want him when the black
thunder-clouds come creeping up against the wind. Let the cholera come into our
midst, and almost abjectly the nation begins to ask for days of humiliation and prayer.
As this subject is a somewhat familiar one, the following divisions may give some
freshness to the treatment of it.

I. A SPIRIT OF INDEPENDENCE I8 NOURISHED BY PROSPERITIES AND SUCCESSES. The
ordinary man does not teel the need of God when all goes well with him. He does not
need prayer, for he is not conscious of anything to pray for. If man can stand alone,
why should we seek God? And the Christian man, who believes in prayer, is under
grave and serious temptation to neglect prayer when he is successful, and free from
care. As soon as we become satisfied with ourselves we begin to lose our “ first love.”
‘The spirit of independence and the spirit of prayer never did, aud never can, dwell
together. Ivy is a poor thing if it grows up independently. Its beauty unfolds only
when it leans on another—on one who has independent strength.

II. A SPIRIT OF DEPENDENCE IS NOURISHED BY CALAMITIES. In a thousand forms
they come to us, but their message is always the same. ‘They say to us, “ See, you
cannot, by yourself.” Life is not all sunshine and prosperity. We must take it as a
whole, take it as it is. We must reckon for trouble. And for life as a whole we need
God; we ought to be dep~wndent; we should be happy in our dependence. Jacob, in his
anxiety at meeting Ksau, was forced to dependence and prayer, Joshua, discomfited


oH. xxv. 1—13.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


433


rr errr


before Ai, was forced to prayer.


prayer.
and prays.


Jehoshaphat, threatened by national foes, flies to
Hezekiah, stricken with disease aud facing death, turns his face to the wall,
Then impress the graciousness of the Divine ways with us.


Watching


over our eternal interests, God saves us again from the perils of independence, and calls
us back to dependence, by putting trouble into our lives, and we learn to say, “ Beture
I was afilicted I went astray, but now will I keep thy Word.”—R, T.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER XXVII.

Ver. 1.—Tue TriPLeE JUDGMENT ON THE
Powers or Darkness. The crowning judg-
ment of all is now briefly described. “In that
day ”’—the day of God’s vengeance—when
all his other enemies have been put down,
Jehovah shall finally visit with his sword
three mighty foes, which are described under
three figures—the first as “ Leviathan, the
swift serpent;” the second as “ Leviathan,
the crooked serpent; ” and the third as “the
dragon that is in the sea.” It has been
usual to see in these three monsters three
kingdoms inimical to God—either Assyria,
Babylon, and Egypt; or Assyria, Egypt,
and Tyre; or Media, Persia, and Egypt.
But this diversity of interpretation shows
that there is no purticular fitness in the
emblems to symbolize any special kingdoms
or world-powers, while the imagery itself
and the law of climax alike point to some-
thing higher than world-powers being in-
tended. “Leviathan,” in Job iii. 8, where
the word first occurs, represents a supra-
mundane power—probably “ the dragon, the
enemy of light, who in old Eastern traditions
is conceived as ready to swallow up sun and
moon, and plunge creation in original chaos
or darkness” (‘Speaker's Commentary,’
vol. iv. p. 25); and the “dragon” is a cus-
tomary emblem of Satan himself (Ps. xci.
13; ch. li. 9; Rev. xii. 7, 9), the prince of
darkness. The triple vengeance here is
parallel to the triple punishment, in the
apocalyptic vision (Rev. xix. 20; xx. 10),
of “the devil,” “the beast,” and “the false
prophet,” who have been termed by com-
mentators “ the three great enemies of God’s
kingdom” (see ‘Speaker’s Commentary
on the New ‘Testament,’ vol. iv. p. 802).

Ver. 1.—The Lord with his sore and great
and strong sword. The “sword” of Jeho-
vah is first heard of in the Pentateuch,
where it is called “ glittering” (Deut. xxxii.
41). It is spoken of by David (Ps. vii. 12),
and frequently by Isaiah (see ch, xxxi. 8;

ISAIAH.


xxxiv. 5, 6; xlvi. 16). Mr. Cheyne supposes
the idea to have been taken from the Baby-
lonian mythology, and seems to think it
half material. But it is merely on a par
with other anthropomorphisms. The word
rendered “sore” probably means “ well-
tempered,” “keen.” Leviathan. Etymo-
logically, the term “ Leviathan” appears to
mean “that which is coiled” or “twisted,”
whence it would seem to have been pri-
marily applied, as in the present verse, to
serpents. In Job xli. 1—34, however, it
manifestly designates the crocodile, while
in Ps. civ. 26 it must be used of some kind
of cetacean, Thus its most appropriate
English rendering would be “monster.”
The piercing serpent; rather, the ficet, or
fugitive serpent. It is a general character-
istic of the snake tribe to glide away and
hide themselves when disturbed. Even
leviathan that crooked serpent; rather, and
also leviathan that crooked serpent. It is
quite clear that two distinct foes of God
are pointed at—one characterized as “ fleet,”
the other as “tortuous.” And he shall slay the
dragon. Here is mention of a third enemy,
probably Satan himself (see the introductory
paragraph to this section).

Vers. 2—6.—Gop’s CarE ror HIS VINE
YARD. This piece may be called @ com-
panion picture to ch. v. 1—7, or a joy-song
to be set over against that dirge. In both
the figure of the vineyard is employed to
express the people of God, and God is “ the
Lord of the vineyard.” But whereas, on
the former occasion, all was wrath and fury,
menace and judgment, here all is mercy and
loving-kindness, protection and promise.
The difference is, no doubt, not with God,
“with whom is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning” (Jas. i. 17), but wilh
the vineyard, which is either not the same,
or, if the same, then differently cireum-
stanced. The vineyard of ch. v. is beyond
all doubt the Jewish Church in the time of
Isaiah, or in the times shortly after. The
vineyard of the present place is either the
Christian Church, or the Jewish Church
reformed and purified by suffering. It is
not the Church triumphant in heaven, since

2F


434


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. xxvu. 1—13.


vl OOD


there are still “ briars and thorns” in it, and
there are stil] those belonging to it who
have to “make their peace with God.” The
prophet has come back from his investiga-
tions of the remote future and the supra-
mundane sphere to something which belongs
to earth, and perhaps not to a very distant
period. His second “song of the vineyard”
may well comfort the Church through all
her earthly struggles.

Ver. 2.—Sing ye unto her. Our transla-
tors have, strangely enough, inverted the
order of the two clauses, which stand thus
in the Hebrew: “A vineyard of red wine;
sing ye unto it,” or “sing ye of it.” The
“vineyard of red wine” is one that produces
abundance of rich fruit.

Ver. 3.—I the Lord do keep it; or, guard
at (comp. ch. xxvi. 3; xiii. 6; xlix. 8;
Ps, cxxi. 5). Vineyards were considered to
require special watching, since they were
liable to damage both from thieves and
foxes (Cant. ii. 15). It was usual to build
towers in them, from which a watch could
be kept (ch. v. 2; Matt. xxi. 33). I will
water it every moment (compare the
threat in ch. v. 6, “I will command my
clouds that they rain no rain upon it”).
The Church needs and receives “the con-
tinual dew of God’s blessing.”

Ver. 4.—Fury is not in me; te, «<I am
not new angered against my vineyard, as on
the former occasion (ch. v. 47); or at any
rate my anger now is not fury.” (Isaiah
frequently ascribes “fury ” to God, as in ch.
XXKIV 2 KUL Zo Lay 20,226 Vilielo.
lxiii. 3, 5, 6; Ixvi. 15.) Who would set the
briars and thorns against me in battle?
The “briars and thorns” are apparently
unrighteous members of the Church, who
have fallen below tbeir privileges. God
asks, “* Who will set the briars and thorns
in array against me?” in a tone of contempt,
“ Who wiill dare to do battle against me with
such weak material?” And then he adds
a forecast of the result in such a case: “I
would move forward; I would burn them
all together” (comp. ch. x. 17).

Ver. 5.—Or let him take hold of my
strength. There is another alternative. If
the ‘thorns and the briars” are not pre-
pared to contend in battle against God, let
them adopt a different course. Let them
“Jay hold of God’s strength,” place them-
selves under his protection, and make their
appeal to him, and see if they cannot “make
their peace with him.” A truly evangelical
invitation! The enemies of God are en-
treated to cease from striving against him,
and are taught that the door of repentance
is still open to them. God is willing to be
reconciled even to his enemies. Let them


make peace with him, make peace with him.
The reiteration constitutes an appeal of
extreme earnestness and tenderness, which
none could reject but tle utterly impenitent.

Ver. 6.—He shall cause them that come of
Jacob to take root; rather, in the days to
come Jacob shall strike root. Jacob, lately
the vineyard, is now compared to a single
vine, which becomes strong by striking ite
rovts deep into the soil, and then, as a cone
sequence, blossoms and buds, and fills the
face of the world with fruit. So the Israe!
of God, firmly rooted in the soil of God’s
favour, would blossom with graces of all
kinds, and bring forth the abundant fruit
of good works.

Vers. 7—11.—Tuex Cominc JUDGMENT UPON
JUDAH A CHASTISEMENT IN WHICH MERCY
Is BLENDED WITH JUSTICE. A coming
judgment upon Judah has been one of the
main subjects of Isaiah’s prophecy from
the beginning. It has been included in
the catalogue of “burdens ” (see ch. xxii.).
It will have to be one of the prophet’s main
subjects to the end of his “ book.’”” Hence
he may at any time recur to it, as he does
now, without special reason or excuse. In
this place the special aspect under which
the judgment presents itself to him is that
of its merciful character, (1) in degree (vers,
7, 8); (2) in intention (ver. 9). While
noting this, he feels, however, bound to
note also, that the judgment is, while i$
lasts, severe (vers. 10, 11).

Ver. 7.—Hath he smitten him, eto.? fe.
“Has God smitten Juduh, as he (God)
smote Judah’s smiters?” Judah’s chief
smiters were Assyria and Babylon. The
judgments upon them would be more severe
than that upon Judah. They would be
destroyed; Judah would be taken captive,
and restored. Them that are slain by him;
rather, them that slew him (so Lowth, Ewald,
Knobel, and Mr. Cheyne). But, to obtain
this meaning, the pointing of the present
text must be altered. The law of parallelism
seems, however, to require the alteration,

Ver. 8.—Our translators have entirely
mistaken the meaning of this verse. The
proper rendering is, In measure, when thow
puttest her away, thou wilt contend with her ;
he sighed with his keen breath in the day of
the east wind. “In measure ” means “ with
forbearance and moderation ”—the punish-
ment being carefully adjusted to the degree
of the offence. God was about to “put
Judah away ”—to banish her into a far
country; but still he would refrain himself
—he would “not suffer his whole displeasure
to arise,” or give her over wholly to destrue-


oH. xxvu. 1—13.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


—_—_—


tion. In the day of the east wind, or of the
national catastrophe, when his breath was
fierce and hard against his people, he
would “sigh” at the needful chastisement.
As Dr. Kuy well says, “ Amid the rough
and stern severity which he breathed into
the tempest, there was an undertone of sad-
ness and grief.”

Ver. 9.—By this; #.e. “by the punish-
ment inflicted.” God accepts punishment
as an expiation of sin; and this punish-
ment of Judah was especially iatended to
be expiatory, and to remove at once his
guilt, and the evil temper which had led
him into sin. Its fruit would be a revulsion
from idolatry, which would show itself in a
fierce determination to destroy all idolatrous
emblems and implements, altars, groves,
images, and the like. This spirit was
strongly shown in the Maccabee period (see
1 Mace. v. 44, 68; x. 84; xiii. 47, etc.).
He maketh all the stones of the altar as
chalkstones. A calcining of the stones
into lime is probably intended. It was
usual to subject the idolatrous objects to
the action of fire, and then to stamp them
into powder (2 Ki.gs xxiii. 4, 6, 11, 12, 15,
etc.). The groves and images (comp. 1 Kings
xv. 13; xvi. 23; 2 Kings xvii. 10; 2 Chron.
xiv. 3; and see the comment on ch. xvii. 8).

Ver. 10.—Yet the defenced city shall be
desolate. Though her punishment is in
mercy, a8 a chastisement which is tu purge
away her sin, yet Jerusalem shall for a time
be desolate, void, without inhabitant, left
like a wilderness. Forsaken; or, put away ;
the same word that is used in ver. 8 of
Jerusalem. There shall the calf feed. A
familiar image of desolation (comp. ch. v.
17; xvii. 2; xxxii. 14, etc.).

Ver. 11.—When the boughs thereof are
withered, they shall be broken off. By a
sudden introduction of metaphor, the city
becomes a tree, the prophet’s thought going
back, perhaps, to ver. 6. “ Withered boughs”
are indications of internal rottenness, and
must be “broken oti” to give the tree a
chance of recovery. Samaria may be viewed
as such a “ bough,” if the “tree” be taken
as “ the Israel of God” in the wider sense.
Otherwise, we must suppose a threat against
individual Judwans. The women come.
Weak women are strong enough to break off
dead branches; they fall at a touch, and
“their end is to be burned’ (Heb. vi. 8).
For it is a people of no understanding. It
was folly, madness, to turn away from
Jehovah, and go after other gods. Only
through having “no understanding ” could
Israel have been so fovlish (comp. Deut.
xxxii. 28; 2 Kings xvii 15; Jer. iv. 22).
He that made them... he that formed
them (comp. ch. xliii. 1,7). God “hateth
‘pthing that he has made” (Collect for Ash


$35


Wednesday). He made all men, but he
“made” and “formed ” Israel with excep-
tional care, and exceptional care leads on
to exceptional love. Will not have mercy
- . + Will show them no favour; ¢.e, “ will
not spare.” No contradiction of vers. 7, 8
is intended. God will have “ measure” and
“mercy” in his punishment of Israel, but will
not so have mercy as not to punish severely,
Vers. 12, 13.—JupAH pRomiIsED Resvo-
RATION. The general practice of Isaiah is
to append to gloomy prophecies words of
encouragement. He does this even when
heathen nations are denounced (ch. xviii. 7;
xix. 18—25; xxiii. 17, 18); and still more
when he is predicting judgments upon
Israel (ch. ii. 2—4; vi. 13; x. 20—34 ; xxiv.
23; xxix. 18—24, etc.). The encourage-
ment in this place is a promise of return
after dispersion, and of re-establishment on
the “holy mount at Jerusalem ” (ver. 13),


Ver. 12.—The Lord shall beat off; te.
“ gather in his harvest.” The mevaphor is
taken either from the beating of olive trees
to obtain the berries (see ch. xvii. 6), or from
the beating out of the grain by a threshing-
flail (Judg. vi. 11; Ruth ii. 17; and below,
ch. xxviii. 27). Perhaps the best transla-
tion would be, The Lord shall thresh.
From the channel of the river; rather, from
the strong stream of the river. As usual,
“the river” (hannahar) is the Euphrates
(comp. Gen, xxxi. 21; Exod. xxiii. 31 ; Deut.
xi. 24; Josh. xxiv. 2, 3, 14, 15, etc.). Its
“strong stream,” or “ flood,” is contrasted
with the scant thread of water which was
alone to be found in the “ Torrens Aigypti.”
The stream of Egypt (nachal Mizraim) is
generally allowed to be the modern Wady
el Arish, which was appointed to be the
southern boundary of the Holy Land
(Numb. xxxiv. 5; 1 Kings viii. 65). The
Lord would collect within these limits all
that were of Israel. He would also, as
appears from the next verse, subsequently
overstep the limits.

Ver. 13.—The great trumpet shall be
blown; rather, a great trumpet (comp. Matt.
xxiv. 31; 1 Cor. xv. 52; 1 Thess. iv. 16)
This imagery, and the return of the Is-
raelites from Egypt and Assyria, point rather
to the final gathering of Israel into the
Church triumphant than to the return from
the Babylonian captivity. Egypt and As-
syria were certainly not the countries from
which they came chiefly at that tine. But
they are the countries from which they will
chiefly come when Jehovah “ sets his hand
again the second time to recover the remnant
of his people” (ch. xi. 11). The outcasta
(comp. ch. xi. 12).


436 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (on. xxv. 1—13.


HOMILETICS.


Ver. 1.—Spiritual wickedness in high places powerless to resist God, As Isaiah
was, somehow or other, brought into contact with the dualistic doctrine of the Zoro-
astrians (ch. xlv. 5—7), it was important that he should bear witness to the impo-
tency of the powers of evil when they matched themselves against Jehovah. The
Zo: oastrians taught that there were two great principles, one of good, and the other of
evil, whom they called respectively Ahura-mazda and Angro-mainyus, who were both
of them uncreated and independent one of the other, aud between whom there had
been {rom all eternity, and always would be, a bitter contest and rivalry, each seeking
to injure, baffle, andin every possible way annoy and thwart the other. Both principles
were real jersons, possessed of will, intelligence, power, cousciousness, and other
personal qualities. ‘he struggle between them was constant and well-balanced, with
certainly no marked preponde:ance of the good over the evil. Whatever good thing
Ahura-mazda had created from the beginning of time, Angro-mainyus had corrupted
and ruined it. Moral and physical evils were alike at his disposal. He could blast the
earth with barrenness, or make it produce thorns, thistles, and poisonous plants; his
were the earthquake, the storm, the plague of hail, the thunderbolt; he could cause
disease and deatl., sweep off a nation’s flocks and herds by murrain, or depopulate a
continent by pestilence; ferocious wild beasts, serpents, toads, mice, hornets, mosquitoes,
were his creation; he had invented and mtroduced into the world the sins of witchcraft,
murder, unbelief, cannibalism ; he excited wars and tumults, continually stirred up the
bad against the good, and laboured by every possible expedient to make vice triumph
over virtue. Ahura-mazda could exercise no control over him; the utmost that he
could do was to keep a perpetual watch upon his rival, and seek to baftle and defeat
him. ‘This he was not always able to; despite his best endeavours, Angro-mainyus was
not unfrequently victorious. It was probably to meet this doctrine, and prevent its
having weight with his disciples, that Isaiah taueht so explicitly the nothingness of
the highest powers of evil in any contest with the Almighty. He had already stated
that, at the end of the world, God would visit and punish “the host of the high ones
that were on high,” as well as the kings of the earth upon the earth (ch. xxiv. 21),
He now presents evil in a threefold personal form of the highest awfulness and
grandeur, and declares its conquest in this threefold form by Jehovah. God is to
“ punish” the two levinthans with his sword, and actually to “slay thedragon.” This
might seem to go beyond the statements of the Revelation of St. John (xx. 10);
but it is probably to be understood, in the same sense, of a living death. ‘The triumph
is at any rate complete, final, unmistakable. Evil can do nothing against good, but is
wholly overcome by it.


Vers, 3—5.— The means whereby God purifies and perfects his Church. Despite
human weakness and human perversity, God will build up and establish a faithfu!
Church—he will “ purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works” (Titus
ii, 14). It is for his honour that this should be so, and he is strong enough to effect
it. His “strength is made perfect in weakness” (2 Cor. xii. 9). We are shown here
ene at any rate, of the chief means whereby he effects his purpose. Most prominent
of all is—

I. His PERPETUAL WATCHFUL GUARDIANSHIP. “I the Lord do keep it.” “TI will
keep it night and day.” Incessant watchful care, never slacking, never wearied, the
fruit of abounding infinite love,—this is the first thing. The Lord “keeps the city.”
The Lord is his Church’s “ Keeper,” so that “ the sun shall not burn it by day, neither
the moon by night; ” so that the thief shall not enter in, nor the fox spoil ; so that the
hatred and wiles of Satan shall be of no avail; so that “the gates of hell shall not pre-
vail against it” (Matt. xvi. 18). The Lord’s care is unceasing—“ he that keepeth Israel
shall neither slumber nor sleep ” (Ps. cxxi.4). The Lord’s care is effectual— he keepeth
his mercy for ever” (Ps Ixxxix. 28).

Il. His CONSTANT REFRESHING GRACE. “TI will water it every moment.” Not only
day by day and hour by hour, but momently, does his grace descend on his Church,
strengthening it, reviving it, refreshing it. His Holy Spirit teaches men’s hearts


cH, xxvii. 1—13.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 432


continually with a doctrine that “ distils as the dew ” (Deut. xxxii. 2), softens them with
an influence that “drops as the rain.” He gives “grace for grace;” leads on “ from
strength to strength ;” converts, upholds, confirms, sustains, each weak and wavering
soul; cleanses, purifies, infuses light, and strength, and sweetness, and every other virtue
into each heart that will admit them; thus constituting and “presenting to himself
a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing . .. holy and without
blemish ” (Eph. v. 27).

Til. His KEEN puRGING Fires. “The briars and thorns... will I burn together.”
The Church, while on earth, will always have imperfections, weak brethren, unworthy
members, faults, ay, sins, even in the best. It is among the greatest of God’s
mercies to the Church that he does not overlook these, but is keenly alive to them—
yea, “sets men’s secret sins in the light of his countenance” (Ps. xc. 8). For when
these things are noted, there is a hope that they may beremedied. God is ever purging
his Church. He “ turns his hand upon it, and purely purges away its dross and taketh
away all its tin” (ch. i. 25). By pain and suff-ring, by chastisements of various kinds,
by sickness, and disappointment, and ill success, and loss of those dear to them, he
leads men to conviction of sin, and hatred of it, and aversion from it, and contrition,
and amendment. Where these fail, there is the final remedy, which saves the Church,
when the individual will not be saved—the reinedy of excision, when the dead branch
is broken off, and “cast into the fire, and burned” (John xv. 6), But in thousands of
cases the purging is effectual, the keen fire does its work, and purifies without destroy-
ing. The soul] that was in danger turns to God, and “ takes hold of his strength,” and
“makes its peace with him,” and both the Church and the individual gain.


Vers. 7,8.—The moderation of God's chastisements. All God’s doings are “ with
measure.” At the creation he “ weiched the hills in a balance” (ch. xl. 12), “‘ made a
weight for the winds,” and “ weighed the waters by measure” (Job xxviii. 25). He sets
one thing azainst another, “looks to the end of the earth,” and “ seeth under the whole
heaven ” (Job xxviii, 24). There is nothing hasty, rash, or inconsiderate in his doings,
He is a law to himself; and the perfect harmony of his own nature necessarily produces
the result that order and measure pervade all that he accomplishes. ‘“ Measure,” as
Hooker says, “ is that which perfecteth all things, because everything is for some end,
neither can that thing be available to any end which is not proportionable thereunto,
and to proportion as well excesses as defects are opposite” (‘ Eccl. Pol.,’ v. 55, § 2).
God’s chastisements have for their end the recovery of those whom he chastises, anc
would not be effectual for this end unless they were carefully apportioned and adjusted
to the particular case. Chastisements unduly light would have no restraining or
educational force; they would be contemned, despised, ana would harden those whom
they were intended to influence for good. On the other hand, over-severe chastisements
would crush and ruin. They would “quench the smoking flax ” and “ break the bruised
reed” (Matt. xii, 20), so rendering recovery impossible. Thus measure is needed in
chastisements ; and those which God inflicts are measured with most marvellous exacti-
tude. He metes out to all the exact cross, difficulty, suffering, which is suited to bring
them to him. He afflicts them always more lightly thau they deserve, “ In measure
he contends with them,” apportioning their day to their strength, and their temptatious
to their ability to bear them.


Ver. 12.— The Israel of God gathered in and garnered one by one. While Scripture
often speaks brvadly of the call and conversion of nations, it yet, to an attentive reader,
is continually proclaiming the fact that salvation is an individual matter. No privileves
of birth or covenant, of Church-membership or Church-position, assure any one who
has come to years of discretion that he is among the saved, or can make up for the
want of personal fitness, personal faith, personal sincerity. God is very carelul, and very
choice, when he “ makes up his jewels” (Mal. iii. 17), His eye is not only over all, but
cach. He tests them “one by one.” He says to each, “ My son, give me thy heart”
(Prov. xxiii. 26). He requires of each conversion to him, trust in him, the earnest wish
to please him. ‘One by one,” as they become fit for it, he gathers thei in, adds them
to his crown, causes them to join the “innumerable company ” of his elect—“ the
spirits of just men made perfect” (Heb. xii. 22, 23). This consideration should make


438 - ‘THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. xxvii 1—13.


men careful to assure themselves; (1) of their hold on the faith; (2) of their interest in
Christ; (3) of their possession of that “holiness” without which “ no one shall see the
Lord” (Heb. xii. 14).


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1—13.—* In that day.” We have here a general picture of the events which
precede the condition of the inauguration of a new era.

I. THE FIGHT WITH THE MONSTER OR MONSTERS. We cannot enter into the subject of
this symbolism, in reference to which, in the absence of definite information, so much of
fanciful interpretation has gathered. We cannot refer the serpent or the drazon to the
storm-cloud, or lightning, as some have done; nor historically to Egypt and Assyria,
Something much deeper seems to be meant, as in the legends of the combat of Apollo,
the greatest god of the Greeks, with the Python at Delphi. The dragon is symbolic,
in ancient thought generally, of the power of death, of the under-world, into which
humanity in its sinfulness and weakness is prone to fall. Jehovah will overcome this
fiendish power : such scems to be the meaning of the prophecy.

Il. ResroraTIon oF ISRAEL TO FAvouR. Here the prophecy passes into song. The
Church appears under the favourite image of the vineyard. Jehovah is its Keeper, who
waters and watches it by night and by day. His feelings are those of pure love, and
his wrath is reserved for those who would injure the sacred enclosure. Were such
thorns and thisties before him, he would set them on fire. These are fivures of the
enemies of the Church (see 2 Sam. xxiii. 6, 7). Yet if ever these yield themselves,
they may find mercy. “A truly evangelical belief that God is willing to be reconciled,
even to his enemies. Its presence has given the prophecy a spiritual superiority over
the other prophetic descriptions of the judgment upon the hostile nations, eg. ch. Ixvi,
16. Even according to ch. xix. 22, Egypt must be first smitten in order that it may
be healed” (Cheyne). As the proverb says, “The Name of the Lord is a strong
tower: the righteous runneth into it, and is safe” (Prov. xvili. 10). So here the
meaning is, “ Let the unrighteous man take sanctuary with Jehovah, and become by
penitence and obedience a servant of his.” And the elect nation will take root, and
throw its sheltering foliage over the nations—a tree of healing (Rev. xxii. 2); and the
blessings of salvation shall be diffused over the world (cf. ch. xxxvii. 31; Hos. xiv,
6). The union of Jew and Gentile seems foreshadowed, and the removal of the dis-
tinction between them. Salvation was of them and for the world (John iv. 22;
Eph. ii. 14),

11]. Tue MITIGATION OF DIVINE CHASTISEMENTS. The punishment of the people
has not been so severe as that of their enemies. There was and ever is “ measure ”
in the afflictions of God; they do not exceed the bounds of justice nor the limits of
man’s enduring power. ‘‘He never smites with both hands; ” he sifts, but does not
destroy. (lor the threshing-floor, cf. ch. xxi. 10.) He was wroth, but not without
love; has banished, but not put an end to, his people. And now, as ever, he would
“reason together” with them, and proclaim the terms upon which he will mercifully
accept their repentance as an atonement for guilt. They must destroy the emblems of
idolatry, and put an utter end to it; and thus, purged from its filth, be prepared for
salvation. Punishinent will cease when sin ceases, but not before. And when the
sin is honestly put away, it may ever be said to the sinner, “ Do as the heavens have
done, forget your evil; with them, forgive yourself.”

IV. THE FATE OF THE WORLD’s METROPOLIS. For it seems better so to understand
the allusion than to Jerusalem, Its fortifications will be razed, its population be
dismissed, and the cattle will browse upon the deserted scene. In contrast to the
magnificent parks and gardens of the great cities, there will be but stunted bushes,
affording firewood to the poor women who come to pick it up (Cheyne). thers, how-
ever, understand the prophecy to refer to Jerusalem itself. The reason assigned for
the doom is igynorunce, as so often in Scripture—guilty ignorance. As the “ begin-
uing of wisdom ” is not prudence, policy, science, or philosophy, but the “ fear of God,”
so irreverence and contempt of Divine laws, leading to sensuality and vice, are identical
with ignorance and folly. “Such ignorance does not excuse men or lessen the guilt


on, xxvu. 1—13.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 439
ee


of their wickedness; for they who sin are conscious of their sinfulness, though they
are blinded by their lust. Wickedness and ignorance are therefore closely connected,
but the connection is of such a nature that iynorance proceeds from the sinful dis-
position of the mind” (Calvin). Oh “to be wise and to understand” (Deut. xxxii,
29)! How dark and dreadful the ignorance which seems to shut out the favour and
compassion of the all-compassionate God!

V. Oracte or comrort. The hand that smites and brings low is also the hand
that raises up; it scatters in judgment, but recalls and gathers together again in
mercy. From the great river of Assyria to that of Egypt the children of Israel will
be gathered one by one. A great trumpet, signalling the Divine interposition, will be
blown (cf. ch. xviii. 3; xi. 12; Matt. xxiv. 81), and the scattered abroad will be seen
thronging to the holy mount in Jerusalem. ‘Thus again there rises upon us that
glorious vision of a united and redeemed Church, gathered out of all nations, for
which change and suffering, conflict and sifting, prepare. All Christian prayer,
activity, waiting, and watching point toward the coming of the Christ, the Deliverer,
to the spiritual Zion, to turn away ungodliness and to found the uew and enduring
empire of righteousness.—J.


Ver. 3.—Divine guardianship. “Lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day.”
Then there are hurtful powers and hurtful people in the world. he Word itself lets
light in upon the condition of humanity. ‘There are hidden invisible foes; and there
is need for One who can discern and defeat them.

I. THe rye THAT sEES. This is all-important. For we are blind to our worst
enemies. Evil puts on the garb of good. And evil hides itself. The serpent is coiled
up at the bottom of the cup. The adder lurks in the grass. By the river-side the
alligator lurks; his skin the very colour of the stones. God’s eye can search all.
His vision sweeps all space. His vigilance never sleeps. ‘ He that keepeth thee will
not slumber.”

Il, THE HEART THAT Loves. This is our truest defence. It is affection that keeps
alive this vivilance. There is no eye like the eye of love. We know this in a
measure from our observation of the human spheres, How quick a mother’s eye is
to detect first departures from the holy and the true—first dalliances with evil! The
tutor is not so sure a guardian as the parent. All Divine revelation tells us that God
is love. Why warn, rebuke, exhort? Why send the prophet to the guilty cities, and
the only begotten Son, the Saviour, to the lost race? ‘Lhis is the explanation of all:
“God so loved the world.”

II], THE GUARDIANSHIP THAT 18 COMPLETE. Lest “any.” That includes all the
forms and forces of evil. We may be awake to special dangers, just as we pay honour
to special virtues. There are dangers which are so pronounced, where the penalties
are so marked, that our consciousness is awake to the dread results. But when we
remember the vast and varied sources of peril, we rejoice to know that there may be
immunity from all disaster. ‘Deliver us from evil” is the prayer taught us by the
Saviour; and God will hear that prayer, for “thine is the power.”

IV. THE WATCHFULNESS THAT NEVER SLEEPS. “By night and by day.” In the
darkness and in the night. For the darkness is no darkness to God. As Sentinel he
never sleeps. Our watch-fires die out, and the beasts of the forest break into the camp
in the silent hours of darkness. We cannot “keep.” But the soul is too precious to
be left to finite watchfulness. The Tower of London contains no jewelled crowns so
rich in value as the nature that contains the pearl of great price. The temple of Jeru-
salem had costly vessels and sacred altars; but the temple of the soul has in it the
true Shechinah. This is God’s promise. This is his own testimony to himself; and
it is a promise to wear as an amulet on the heart in such a world as this.—W. M. 8.


Vers. 1—11.—God’s treatment of the rebellious and the righteous, Amid the different
and difficult interpretations and the numerous and dubious applications given to these
verses, we may discern some truths respecting God’s treatment of human character.

I. His TREATMENT OF THE WICKED. 1. The sharpness of his instruments. He
punishes with “a sore and great and strong sword” (ver. 1). He “ whets his glitter-
ing sword” (Deut. xxxii, 41). Out of the mouth of the Son of God “ goeth a sharp


e


440 THE BUOK OF SHE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cn, xxvu. 1—13.


sword ” (Rev. xix. 15). The various miseries, visitations, calamities, which come to us
as the sad consequences of sin are God’s sword—pain, sickness, separation, bereave-
ment, famine, war, death, etc.; sore and sharp and strong are these. 2. The thoroughness
of his judgments. \t is not only that the blows he sends are severe, but his judgments
are continued and are multiplied till all their punitive or corrective work is done, He
will “go throuyh the briars and thorns” which are spoiling his vineyard, and will burn
them together (ver. 4). “ ‘lhe delenced city shall be desolate,” so abandoned of man that
the calf shall feed there and lie down and browse upon the branches, and these shall be
so withered that the women shall come and “ set them on fire” (vers. 10, 11). When
headstrong and rebellious men defy the power and despise the Word of God, they find
that they are contending with Ove whose correction is not confined to one or two blows.
God pursues such men with his holy and righteous punishment, until the briars are
consumed, until the city is desolate, until the haugtity heart is humbled to the very dust,
3. The opening which he offers them. “Or let him take hold of my strength, that he
may make jeace with me,” etc. (ver. 5). ‘The most rebellious may return unto him:
Ahab may humble his heart, Manasseh may repent, Saul the persecutor may become
his most active servant, taking hold of his Divine magnanimity, which is the strength
of the Divine character.

Il. His TREATMENT OF THE RIGHTEOUS. 1. The care which he takes of them. He
turns the neglected wilderness into a cultivated vineyard (ver. 2); he, tle Lord, does
keep it night and day; he waters it every moment; he guards it against the despoiling
enemy (ver. 3). God distinguishes his people by granting them peculiar privileges; he
expends on them his watchful love; he guards them against their spiritual adversaries :
they have to bless him for attention, for enrichment, for defence. 2. The fuct that he
moderates his corrections of them. (Vers. 7, 8.) He does not visit them with the
severity he shows toward those who are defiant of his will; there is measure, limitation,
in the day when the “ east wind” of his chastisement is made to blow. God restrains
his hand when it is his own children whom he is correcting (Ps. ciii. 8—10). 3. The
parental purpose of his chastisement. (Ver. 9.) It is that iniquity may be purged, that
the dark consequences and the evil stain of sin may be “ taken away,” that the degrads-
ing idolatries of the heart as well as of the life may be demolished ; itis that those whom
he loves may be cleansed from their impurities and may be his children indeed, not only
enjoying his favour and dwelling beneath his roof, but bearing his likeness and fulfilling
his will. 4 The prosperity which he promises them. (Ver. 6.) The prosperity which
is inward, in “ taking rvot,” in laying hold of the regard and the affections of men; that
also which is owtward, in blossom and bud and widespread fruit, in commanding the
honour and enjoying the blessings of the world.—C,


Ver. 6.—Taking hold of God’s strength. How can man take hold of God’s strength ?
The answer depends on the kind of strength which God is putting forth; and his
strength is manifold. He is strong—

I. ly wispom, and the effectuating power which results therefrom. It is in virtue
of his wisdom that the elements of nature have their various attributes, and the pro-
cesses of nature their constant laws—that seeds sprout, and shrubs and trees bear
flower and fruit; that living bodies grow, and minds advance, and souls mature. We
take hold of God’s strength of wisdom when we do our human, instrumental part in
these his workings—when we plough and sow and weed; when we observe and study ;
when we use the privileges of devotion.

Il. In Macnanimiry. God is strong indeed in this grace, Provoked by everything
in man that is fitted to arouse his anger, he has withheld his retributive hand (Ps.
ciii. 10). He has not sentenced us to eternal exile; he has continued his loving-kind-
nesses even to the most obdurate and rebellious (Matt. v. 45). He has shown him-
self willing to receive azain the sons and daughters that have wandered tarthest away
from his home. We take hold of this his strength when we avail ourselves of his
merciful overtures, and hasten in penitence and faith to his feet,

Ill. Ly compasston. God is strong in pity. “ Like as a father pitieth his children, so
he pitieth,” etc. His commiseration, his tenderness, his parental responsiveness to our
various sorrows, is quick, is immediate, is perfect; there is great strength of loving
sympathy in Jesus Christ (Heb. iv. 15). We take hold of his strength when, in our


a.


en. xxvii. 1—13.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 441
ee ee eee


dark days, in our heavier sorrows, we unburden our hearts to him, realize the fulness
of his compassion, make our earnest, confident appeal for his sympathy and succour,

IV. In upHonpine power. In such a world as this with all its allurements and its
dangers, with such a nature as is ours with all its frailty, there is required great
aye to preserve us in our integrity and to build us up on the foundation of our faith,

ut God is able to do this; he is able to “make us stand” (Rom. xiv. 4), to “keep
us from falling, and present us faultless,” etc. (Jude 24). We take hold of his strength
when we act with such obedience and wisdom that we place ourselves in the path where
that power is acting—the path of reflection, of moral safety, of Christian fellowship, of
worship, of holy activity.

V. IN TRANSFORMING PowER. It is impossible for us to make even Divine truth
effectual to the regeneration of a sinful soul. But God is mightier than we; the things
which are impossible to us are possible to him (Matt. xix. 26). His strength is not
unequal even to the softening of the hard heart, the bending of the proud and stubborn
will, even of the hardest and haughtiest of souls. We take hold of this his strength
when we faithfully plead with our fellow-men that they should return to God, and when
we earnestly plead with God that he should put into exercise that renewing and trans-
forming energy.—C.


Vers. 12, 138.—The return of CGod’s absent ones. In the relation of God to his
people in exile, as depicted in these two verses, we may find a picture of the relation in
which he stands to all his absent children.

I. THe BREADTH OF HIS KINGDOM: the broad fields of the husbandman, in which
he might “ beat off” fruit, from the far river in the East to the far river in the West—
from end to end of the known earth. God’s rights and claims extend to all peoples, to
all classes, to men of every character and every temperament and every tongue, to both
sexes; his empire, like his commandment, is “exceeding broad.” He looks everywhere
for fruit to be beaten off, to be gathered in, at the time of harvest.

IJ. THE NEED OF HIS INTERPOSITION. This fruit which God is seeking is spiritual;
it is the reverence, the love, the worship, the obedience, of his own children. But these
his sons and daughters are: 1. Afar off. They are outcasts, along way from home, It
is not geographical, but moral and spiritual distance which has to be deplored. They
are in the “strange land” of doubt, of denial, of disobedience, of indiff rence and forget-
fulness, of utter unlikeness to the heavenly Father. 2. Or they are at the point of
extinction. “Ready to perish.” Those who have not “ bowed the knee to Baal,” who
have not been fascinated and won by ruinous seductions, are a mere remnant, aud even
their life, like Elijat’s, is at stake. Everything cries for God’s merciful interposition.

III. His summons To RETURN. The “great trumpet” is being blown; its notes are
sounding far and wide. “'The voice of Jesus sounds o’er land and sea,” saying,
“Return unto thy Rest;” “Come unto me, all ye that labour.” From the “ far
country ” of sin, of folly, of selfishness, of unrest, the summons calls all human hearts
to leave behind them their sin, their misery, their bondage, and to cast themselves at
the feet of the Divine Father, and beg to be taken back into that holy service which
is perfect freedom.

IV. His pistrncuisuine KINDNESS. ‘“‘ Ye shall be gathered one by one.” God does
not content himself with issuing a general proclamation which each man may interpret
and apply. He comes to every human soul himself. In the Person, and by the direct
influence, of his Holy Spirit, he makes his appeal to the individual heart and conscience.
He says, “ Come thou, my child.” “ Return thou, my daughter.” “ My son, give me
thy heart.”

V. THE GATHERING-PLACE OF HIS RETURNED onES. “Ye shall worship the Lord
in the holy mount at Jerusalem.” All they who return unto God (1) gather at his
house on earth for worship there; and (2) meet in the heavenly city, the new Jerusa-
lem, for “nobler worship there.”—C.


Vers. 2, 3.—Vineyard-keeping. The vine is a familiar Bible figure for the pious
individual; and the vineyard, or cluster of vines, an equally familiar figure of the
Church. Several things make the figure specially suitable. ‘he vine is a beautiful
plant; it is dependent, and cannot be its best when standing alone; it brings forth


442 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, [ca. xxv. 1—13,
ee


rich and abundant fruit; it needs constant and careful tending; its wood is useless fa
any other purpose than carrying the sap that flows through it; and it is exposed ta
peril from changing atmospheres and outward foes. To this last point of comparison
these verses direct us. for the others such passages may be consulted as Ps, Ixxx.
8—16; ch. v. 1—7. We note that vineyard-keeping includes—

I. Tenpine. This is called to mind by the very strong assurance, “I will water
it every moment,” which is evidently meant to impress on us the constancy, the care,
the gracious wisdom, the prompt helpfulness, of the Divine dealinzs with the Church.
‘’o our minds it has a somewhat exaggerated sound, but that is only because we have
no associations with a parched, hilly, hot, and almost rainless country, such as Pales-
tine or Egypt. Constant and abundant irrigation is the essential condition of vege-
table life in such lands, and to it the science and practical skill of the people are
devoted. _ Channels are made in which the water may run to the vineyards, and much
of the gardener’s skill is devoted to this regular and efficient watering. The Eastern
idea of a fruitful tree is one “planted by the rivers of water;” ‘its leaf shall not
wither.” They who are thus careful about the watering of their vines will be sure to
do everything else fur them that is necessary for their well-being. They will gather
out the stones, enrich the soil, clean the bine, prune luxurious growths, guide the
trailing branches, and thin the crowded bunches, And so does the Lord of that vine-
yard, the Churen, mect her needs at every point. That he should “ water it every
moment ” suggests that his supreme care is for the renewal of her vitality, and assures
us of his further care of all the forms and expressions of that vitality. We may be
sure, in New Testament language, that with “his dear Son, God will freely give us
all things.” He will feed, he will correct, he will encourage, he will check. What-
soever is needful for the wise tending of the Church, we may fully trust him that he
will do, for he is a Master-gardener. In following out this thought, precise practical
applications may be made to the conditious and necessities of the particular Church
addressed.

Il. Warcnine. “Lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day.” Van Lennep
tells us that “vineyards which are at a distance from a village require a constant
watch and guard during the fruit season, or they are completely devoured by the
jackals.” Some of the very earliest Egyptian paintings are vivid-hued representation
of trellised and festooned “vines,” while, peering through the bough-twisted fences, is
seen the sharp and mobile nose of the “ fox,” stealthily stealing towards his favourite
repast. It is usual to dig a ditch all round the vineyard, into which stone posts are
driven, branches are twisted in and out of these posts, and, as wild plants and briars
soon grow up among them, a thick and solid fence or hedge is made. But the hus-
bandman is obliged from time to time to examine all parts of the hedge, and close up
any gap or breach made by the foxes, jackals, badgers, hares, hedgehogs, and perhaps
even wild boars which, by trampling, destroy more than they eat. A frail shed raised
on poles a good height is prepared for the defence of the vineyard, in it a watcher
remains day and night while the fruit is ripening. From his elevated position he can
see all over the vineyard, and arrangement is sometimes made for his signalling to the
neighbouring village in case of emergency. He is provided with weapons suitable for
dealing with the jrecise foes which he may have to encounter. These points will
suggest the gracious forms in which God has ever defended his ancient Church. His-
torical illustrations may be given. What he has ever been, that he still is; and the
individual Christian, as well as the Christian Church, may rest secure in his keeping,
No foes can come nigh us that he will not see. None can prove stronger in attack
than he in defence. Sometimes the Christian may, in his desjairings, say after over-
worn David, ‘I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul;” but, with God’s
watching and keeping, he shall no more perish than David did. The Church, over-
estirnating the force of evil at any given time, may cry that it “is in dancer.” It is
always an untrustful cry, raised when men fail to look to the “ Watcher in ‘the booth,”
who keeps the vineyard night and day. “He that keepeth Israel shall neither
slumber nor sleep.” “ As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is
round about his people from henceforth even for ever.”—R. T.


Ver. 5.—Making peace with God. The Rev. T. Toller gives a very striking illus


cn. xxv. 1—13.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 443
ce SE ee


tration of the figure used in this verse. He says, “I think I can convey the meaning
of this passage so that every one may understand it, by what has taken place within
my own family. One of my little children had committed a fault, for which I thought
it my duty to chastise him. I called him to me, explained to him the evil of what
he had done, and told him how grieved I was that I must punish him for it. He
heard me in silence, and then rushed into my arms and burst into tears. I would
sooner have cut off my arm than have then struck him for his fault; he had taken
hold of my strength, and he had mave peace with me.” God, with whom sinful man
is at war, alone can make peace; but he can, and he will. “ Weare ambassadors for
Christ, as though God did beseech you by us: we pray you in Uhrist’s stead, be ye
reconciled to God.” The text is susgestive of what would be undersivod asa “ simple
gospel sermon,” and vie main lines may be as follows :—

J. PEACE IS BROKEN BETWEEN MAN AND Gop. Rivht and comfortable relations
depend on man’s submission and obedience. Self-will and rebellivusness break up
those relations. Man is God’s child; peace depends on obedience. Man is God’s
servant ; peace depends on doing the Master’s will. ‘he essence o! sin is wil/fulness.

Il. Gop Is ABLE TO RESTORE THE BROKEN PEACE. He may be able as a matter of
sovereignty ; but it is more interesting to us to know that he is able through a scheme
of peace-making which he has himself devised and carried out in the Person of bis
Son. “ His own arm has brought salvation.” Such aspects of the great atoning work
may be here dwelt upon as most commend themselves to the preacher.

Ill. Gop acTUALLY OFFERS RESTORATION OF THE BROKEN PEACE. He asks us to
“Jay hold of his strength ;” he invites us to “come and reason wih bim;” he even
grieves over our hesitancy, saying, “‘ Why will ye die, O house of Israel? why will ye
die?” God hath offered to us—ziven to us—“ eternal life, and this life is in his Son.”

IV. THEY MUST BE RIGHT-HEARTED WHO SEEK TO MAKE PEACE WITH Gop. What
is included in right-hearteduess? 1. Humility. 2. Sense of sin. 3. Penitence. 4.
Sign of earnestness in putting away sin. 5. Forsaking of sel!-trusts. 6. Fervent
desire. 7. Whuole-heartedness of purpose. “Ye shall seek me, aud find me, when ye
seek for me with your whole heart.”—R, T.


Ver. 6.—The world-mission of Israel. Just as “no man liveth unto himself,” but
every man liveth for the circle in which he is set, so no nation liveth unto itself—it
liveth for the world of nations in its time, and for all the aves. ‘I'his universal truth
is illustrated for us in the case of prominent, or elect, or selected nations. Egypt keeps
alive the sense of mystery for the world, the claims of the unknown. Chaldea pleads
in all the world for the claims of human observation, for the basis-principle of science.
Greece keeps up to-day its mission to the world, and preaches to us the claims of the
“ beautiful,” the basis of all art, all ideal creations. Rome declares to the world the
supreme importance of wise and stable government for the ordering of society.
And Israel has its voice in every land and every age, pleading for the foundation-
principles of religion, which are the unity and spirituality of (od. Israel is a tree
whose branches overspread the earth ; these are its leaves, and these leaves are for the
healing of the nations that are diseased and dying of idolatries and sensuousness. As
we think of Israel after the flesh, we should remember that we are the true Israel, the
spiritual Israel, who hold fast and testify for the old Mosaic truths, “God is One”
and “God is a Spirit.” The world-mission of Israel is—

I. To PRESERVE THE WORLD’s TRUTH. That is, “Jn the beyinning (fod.” This
truth was given to man as man. It is man’s birthright. Wien man became
mentally and emotionally biassed by yielding to self-will aud sin, this first truth was
imperilled. If man, as God created him, had thought, he would only have thought
of God, one God. When sinful man thinks, he rurs along one or other of two lines—
he either conceives of two gods, one presiding over pleasant thizgs, and the other over
disasters; or else he thinks of many gods, each one oceupying a more or less limitea
sphere. So “monotheism ” was put in peril, and had to be preserved through all the
ages during which God left man to a free experiment of that seli-willedness which he
had chosen. In his infinite wisdom God preserved the essential and foundation-truths
of religion for long ages in a direct Adamic line, giving to men length of life sufficient
to permit of tradition covering the long generations up to the Flood. After the Flood,


444 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xxv. 1—13.


ag


God preserved the world’s truth in the one Abrahamic family; and when that family
grew into a nation, he made it, in a very solemn way, the depositary of the world’s
truth, and set it in a central land, where it might be but slizhtly influenced by the
notions of surrounding nations. ‘ What advantaye then hath the Jew? or what profit
is there in circumcision? Much every way, chiefly because that unto them were com-
mitted the oracles of God.” It is true that Israel did not prove faithful to its duty of
prese ving the world’s truth; but after the chastisement of the Babylonian exile (and
to that the prophet is referring in our text) they never fell into idolatry, and they
exist to-day, scattered everywhere, but holding fast their trust of monotheistic truth.

Il. To EXHIBIT THE WORKING OF THAT TRUTH. “ Example is better than precept.”
The world might fairly ask to see a national life raised on the foundation of belief in
one unseen, spiritual God. Israel is that nation. It is in many respects a striking
example. It failed only when it shifted from its foundation. A glance at the old
world, which grouped round the eastern end of the Mediterranean, will show how
central “little Palestine ” was, so as to be in view of all the nations, as a “city set on
a hill.” The practical applications of this part of the subject are that we hold the trust
of these truths, and of the yet further revelations that have been given; and the
question of supreme interest to all around us is—Do they make us better men and
women? Are vthers won to accept our truths because of the illustrations which we
find for them in our lives and relations? Do we “ walk worthy of our calling”?

II]. To wiTNEss THROUGHOUT THE WORLD FOR THAT TRUTH. ‘The presence of a
Jew anywhere is a plea for belief in one God. The exargerated stubbornness with
which Jews plead for this truth prevents their being willing to receive the further
revelation concerning the one God, that he has been manifest in the flesh. We who
are the spiritual Jews have it as our work to proclaim “ God in Christ reconciling the
world unto himself” to all the nations. Jews have but half a mission now; but the
time is c-ming when their veil shall be taken away; they shall see in Jesus of
Nazareth the Son of God, and join with us in going out through all the world, and
preaching the old truth and the new gospel to every creature.—R. T.


Vers. 7—9.—Judgments and chastisements. These verses set forth two modes of
apprehending the afflictions and sorrows of life, and help us in estimating the distinction
between the modes. We may say that it sets forth God’s ways with the enemies of
Israel, and God’s ways with Israel.

I, THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN JUDGMENTS AND CHASTISEMENTS. In a sense we may
say that judgments are ends in themselves, and chastisements are means to a higher
end. Then has God two ways of dealing with men? Thoughtlessly, and misled by
appearances, many of us answer, “ Yes,” aud suppose that we can account for some
difficult and perplexing thinys by the help of this supposition. But this answer will
not bear the test of either patient thought or Holy Scripture. Thought says, “ God
is One; truth and right are one; menare one; and, if there be two principles of dealing
with the same creatures, both cannot be right.” What God does may to us look
different; it must really be the same, for the “God of the whole earth shall he be
called.” Scripture assures us of the Divine unchangeableness, It says, “One event
happeneth to the righteous and to the wicked.” It expresses the conviction that
the “ Judge of all the earth will do right.” It bids us see that God makes his “ sua
to rise on the evil and on the good.” There is no modification of ordinary natural
conditions for the sake of the elect few. Health, accident, disease, death, affect alike
the righteous and the wicked. Then comes in another question—Can all judgments
be regarded as remedial in their design and tendency? There is a disposition toward
the general acceptance of this theory nowadays; in dealing with crime, the reformation
of the criminal is put in a first place. We may venture to say that God’s final end
is always recovery. But he works over indefinitely long periods; and his immediate
ends—necessary as stages—may not always be remedial. As a part of the work
towards securing the final end, God may stamp by suffering the quality of sin; he
may demonstrate his indignations, as in the case of Babylon. It may even be neces-
sary to make us fear lest the consequences of sin may prove irremediable; and this
may explain such things as everlasting punishment, the sin against the Holy
Ghost that hath never forgiveness, and the day of grace that may be lost. Whether


oH, xxvu. 1—13.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 446
eS ee ee


Divine dealings be judgment or chastisement may depend on three things: (1) the
point from which they are viewed ; (2) the moral condition of those who suffer; and
(3) the relations of God being regarded as governmental or as paternal.

II. THE PURPOSE OF JUDGMENT APPREHENDED AS CHASTISEMENT. (Ver. 9.) Appre-
hended as only judgment, our mind is overborne by our calamity. Apprehended as
chastisement, the mind is started with new and trustful thoughts, The trouble may at
first crush, but soon we learn to accept it calmly. ‘That we are under fatherly chastise-
ments puts the deepest solemnity into life and into sin; it helps us to lift our hearts
away from the present and the seen to the future and the unseen. All deaths become
gates of life when this sunlight streams on them. (For this figure see Noel Paton’s
picture, ‘Mors Janua Vita.”) Prophecy then keeps before us this cheering fact—all
anxieties and sufferings are futherly. Tiheir “fruit is to take away our sin.” And as
we so little know the subtleties of our sin, we need not wonder that we cannot
understand either the subtleties or the severities necessary for taking it away. Our
wonder ought to be that “ refining fires,” so graciously tempered for us, are made to
accomplish so great a cleansing.—R, 1’,


Ver. 9.—Repentance proved in deeds. The first clause may be translated thus:
“On these terms shall the guilt of Jacob be purged.” There must be the signs of
reformation—the actual destruction of idols and all idol-associations, as the proof and
manifestation of the declared heart-surrender of idolatry. The child’s verse is correct
theology and practical godliness—


“Repentance is to leave
The sins we loved before;
And show that we in earnest grieve,
By doing so no more.”


The very “ stones of the altar” must be as “‘chalkstones that are beaten in sunder”
if Jacob would make plain its repentance of its idolatries, and come to receive Divine
forgiveness. [Illustrations may be taken from the practical reformations on which
Hezekiah and Josiah insisted as the outward signs of the national repentance. From
this verse deal with the constant temptation to rest in mere sentiment, and impress the
demand which God ever makes for proof in act of the repentance, or the faith, or the
humility, or the zeal, that may be possessed. As our Saviour expressed the same point
in another of its connections, “ If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.”

I, GooD SENTIMENTS ARE GOOD BEGINNINGS. ‘Therefore in preachings and teachings
appeal is properly made to feeling; effort is made to arouse emotions and to persuade,
By the way of the heart access can often be gained to a man; and Scripture provides
material for emotional appeals. “ Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade
men.” To move feeling, and to awaken good sentiment, is at least to make a breach in
the walls. It is a beginni.g, and there is hope of what may be further accomplished
when such a beginning is made. But we should be alive to the constant disposition of
men to rest in sentiment. There is a subtle pleasure in feeling deeply. We easily get
a kind of satisfaction in our good sentiments; and so Scripture roughly shakes down
the satisfaction by calling such things “ refuges of lies,” or staffs that pierce the hand
that leans on them.

II. Goop sENTIMENTS MAY SOON FADE. They always do when they remain as
sentiments, and do not become motives to action, Our minds are constantly passing
on to fresh things, and the older ones grow dim in the distance. If things are to keep
up their interest, we must put continuous thought to them, and make them bear on
daily conduct. We weep over a pathetic story-book, but in a little while all is forgotten
as a dream when one awaketh. It would be a most humbling sight for us all if God
were to show us the great heap of beautiful sentiments we once had and enjoyed.

III. Goop sENTIMENTS HAVE NO VoIce THAT GoD CAN HEED. If we offer such
things to him, he will entirely withdraw and hide himself within a cloud, and wait
and see how long the good sentiment will last. Penitence that is only a sensational
sigh or tear he will not regard. It means nothing. It is but a passing ripple on
a 21, Why should he turn aside to notice that? This thought will unfold into a
practical dealing with the danger of forced emotions in revivalistic services; or the

16


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu xxvim. 1—29,


a i a
Mere emotion is too light


446


straining ¢f religious feeling in children and young people.
a thing fo ascend as prayer to the throne of God.

IV. Goop sENTIMENTS MUST SPEAK TO GoD THROUGH DEEDS. You say you repent.
But the rapreme question is—What has your repentance made you do? You repent of
that sir: then have you put it away? You repent of that wrong to your neighbour:
then have you, as far as possible, put the wrong right? You repent of your idolatry:
then have you broken up your idol-altars? Corresponding actions, “ works meet for
repentance,”—these are the terms of “purging;” this is the “fruit to take away all
the sin ’—R. T.


Ver. 138.—Restorations prove Divine forgiveness. This is the answering truth to that
dwelt en above, in the homily on ver. 9; God in his dealings with man never stops
with sentiment. We know that he forgives us, because with the forgiveness he grants
us rest tation to his favour. Israel had grievously offended Jehovah by his untaithful-
ness, Wivine indignations had put the offending child away. but the child learned
the lesrons of judgment. The child came, penitent and humble, seeking forgiveness ; and
the Lord heard, granted the forgiveness, and sealed it in a vracious restoration, This
is the vision of that great restoring-day. “They shall come which were ready to perish
in the 'and of Assyria, and the outcasts in the land of Egypt, and shall worship the
Lord ir the holy mount at Jerusalem.” Our Lord presented this truth in his exquisite
picture of the prodigal son. The father forgives the penitent, and we might say, “ That
is enouyh ; such a son can expect no more and deserves no more; forgiven, let him go
away wiere he will.” But love cannot stop at such limitations; it cannot be content
until it can restore: it wants to seal its forgiveness; it would make it the fullest
blessing possible; so the forgiven son is in his old place at the home-table; nay, he is
even decked in the joy-robe, and made the occasion of a feast. He knows he is forgiven,
for he is restored. In nothing do God’s ways appear to be higher than man’s ways
than in this—God can restore when he forgives, and man halts at the restoring work;
he is seldom grand enough for that. We cannot restore our criminals even when they
are penitent. We cannot put back into her place in society the “ woman a sinner,”
who bathes the feet of Jesus with penitential tears. The apostle makes an almost
overwhelming demand on us when he says, “ Brethren, if a man be overtaken ina fault,
ye which are spiritual restore such an one in the spirit of meekness.” How souls yearn
for this sealing of forgiveness is seen in David’s prayer, “ Restore unto me the joy of
thy salvation.” The subject may be treated under two divisions.

I. DivINE RESTORATION ASSURED IN EXAMPLES AND PROMISES. These assure us that
it is God’s way of dealing, and so they become a persuasion to hupe even in our penitence,
and in our prayer for forgiveness.

II. Divine RESTORATION REALIZED IN ACTUAL crrcuMsTANcES. Not always out-
ward circumstances ; only so far as these may have been affected by the sin, Always
in inward circumstances of mind and feeling.—R. T.


Section VII. Renewep DEnuncraTions oF IsRAEL AND JUDAH (CH. XXVIU.—XXXL),


EXPOSITION.


to the condition of things in his own time
and among his own people. After a briof
warning, addressed to Samaria, he turns to
consider the condition of Judah, which he
accuses of following the example of Sa-
maria, of perishing through self-indulgence
and lack of knowledge (vers. 7—12). He


CHAPTER XXVIII.


Vers, 1—4.—A Warnine To Samaria.
The prophet has now cast his eagle glance
over the whole world and over all time.
He has denounced woe upon all the prin-
cipal nations of the earth (ch. xiii—xxiii.),


glanced at the destruction of the world itself
(ch. xxiv. 17—20), and sung songs over the
establishment of Christ’s kingdom, and the
ingathering of the nations into it (ch. xxv.—
xxvii.). In the present chapter he returns


then proceeds to expostulate seriously with
the “rulers of Jerusalem,” on whom lies the
chief responsibility for its future,


Ver. 1.—Woe to the crown of pride, to
the drunkards; rather, ef the drunkards,


ou. xxvut 1—29.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


447


The “drunkards of Ephraim,” or of the
ten tribes, were at once intoxicated with
wine (Amos iv. 1; vi. 6) and with pride
(Amos vi. 13). As the external aspect of
affairs grew more and more threatening
through the advances of Tiglath-Pileser and
Shalmaneser, they gave themselves up more
and more to self-indulgence and luxury, lay
upon beds of ivory, drank wine from bowls,
feasted to the sound of the viol, and even
invented fresh instruments of music (Amos
vi. 4, 5). At the same time, they said in
their hearts, ‘“‘ Have we not taken to us horns
by our own strength ?” (Amos vi. 13). They
persisted in regarding themselves as secure,
when even ordinary political foresight might
have scen that their end was approaching.
Whose glorious beauty is a fading flower;
rather, and to the fading flower of his glorious
beauty. The “ glorious beauty” of Samaria
was a beauty of magnificent luxury. “ Sum-
mer” and ‘winter houses,” distinct each
from the other (Amos iii. 15); “ivory pa-
laces” (1 Kings xxii. 39; Amos iii. 15); a
wealth of ‘ gardens, vineyards, fig-orchards,
and oliveyards” (Amos iv. 9); residences
of “hewn stone” (Amos y. 11); feasts en-
livened with ‘the melody of viols” (Amos
v. 23); “beds of ivory” (Amos vi. 4); “ wine
in bowls” (Amos. vi. 6); “chief ointments ”
(Amos vi. 6); constituted a total of luxu-
rious refinement beyond which few nations
had proceeded at the time,and which Isaiah
was fain to recognize, in a worldly point of
view, as “glorious” and “beautiful.” But
the beauty was of a kind liable to fade, and
it was already fading under the sirocco of
Assyrian invasion. Which are on the head
of the fat valleys; rather, which ts on the
head (or, which decks the head) of the rich
valley. Samaria was built on a hill of an
oval form, which rose up in the midst of a
fertile valley shut in by mountains. The
prophet identifies the valley with the king-
dom itself, and then personifies it, and regards
its head as crowned by the fading flower of
Samaria’s beauty.

Ver. 2.—The Lord hath a mighty and
strong one. God has in reserve a mighty
power, which he will lct loose upon Samaria.
The wicked are “his sword” (Ps. xvii. 13),
and are employed to carry out his sentences.
In the present case the “ mighty and strong
one” is the Assyrian power. As a tempest
of hail, ete. The fearfully devastating force
of an Assyrian invasion is set forth under
three distinct images—a hailstorm, a furious
tempest of wind, and a violent inundation—
as though so only could its full horror be
depicted. War is always a horrible scourge ;
but in ancient times, and with a people so
cruel as the Assyrians, it was a calamity
exceeding in terribleness the utmost that the
modern reader can conceive. It involved


the wholesale burning of cities and villages,
the wanton destruction of trees and crops, the
slaughter of thousands in battles and sieges,
the sulisequent massacre of hundreds in cold
blood, the plunder of all classes, and the
deportation of tens of thousands of captives,
who were carried into hopeless servitude in
a strange land. With the hand; ze. “with
force,” “ violently.” So in Assyrian con-
stantly (compare the use of the Greek yep/).

Ver. 3.—The crown of pride, the drunk-
ards ; rather, of the drunkards (comp. ver. 1),
The “crown of prid-” is scarcely “ Sa-
maria,” as Delitzsch supposes. It is rather
the self-complacent and boastful spirit of
the Israelite people, which will be “ trodden
under foot” by the Assyrians.

Ver. 4.—And the glorious beauty, ete.
Translate, And the fading flower of his
glorious beauty, which is on the head of the
fat valley, shall be like an early fig (that
comes) before the harvest. Such an “ early
fig” is a tempting delicacy, devoured as
soon as seen (comp. Hos. ix. 10; Nah. iii. 12;
Jer. xxiv. 2, etc.). The “beauty” of Sa-
maria would tempt the Assyrians to desire
it so soon as they saw it, and would rouse
an appetite which would be content with
nothing less than the speedy absorption of
the coveted morsel. Samaria’s siege, once
begun, was pressed without intermission,
and lasted less than three years (2 Kings
Xviii. 9, 10)—a short space compared to that
of other sieges belonging to about the same
period ; e.g. that of Ashdod, besieged twenty-
nine years (Herod., ii. 157); that of Tyre,
besieged thirteen years (‘ Ancient Mo-
narchies,’ vol. iii. 492).

Vers, 5, 6.—TueE FAuu or SAMARIA COINCI-
DENT WITH AN OFFER OF Favour To JUDAH.
Her sister’s fate was the most powerful of
all possible warnings to Judah against tread-
ing in her steps. Samaria had perished
through want of faith in Jehovah. She had
turned to other gods; she had trusted in her
own “glory” and “beauty ;” and she had
trusted in Egypt. If Judah would do the
exact opposite, she might be saved, If she
would take Jehovah for her “Crown of
glory” and “Diadem of beauty,” he was
willing to be so taken. He was willing to
impart a “spirit of judgment ” to her rulers,
and “strength ” to her armed force.

Ver. 5.—In that day shall the Lord of
hosts be, etc. This is an offer, and. some-
thing more than an offer. It is implied
that, to some extent, the offer would be
accepted. And clearly the closing of the
clouds around Samaria was coincident with
the dawn of a brighter day in Judah. Heze-
kiah came to the throne only three years


448


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. xxvur. 1—29.


a


before the fatal siece of Samaria began.
His accession must have been nearly con-
temporaneous with that expedition of Shal-
maneser avaiust Hoshea, when he “ shut him
up, and bound him iu prison” (2 Kings
xvii. 4). Yet he was not daunted by his
neighbour's peril. He began his reign with
a political revolution and a religious refor-
mation. He threw off the yoke of Assyria,
to which his father had submitted (2 Kings
xviii, 7), and he cleared the land of idols
and idol-worship. It was the dawn of a day
of promise, such as the propiiet seems to
point to in these two verses. Unhappily, the
dawn was soon clouded over (vers. 7—9).
The residue of his people; z.e. Judah. All
admit that “they also,” in ver. 7, refers to
Judah, and Judah only; but the sole ante-
cedent to “ they also” is this mention of the
residue of Gcd’s people.

Ver. 6.—For a spirit of judgment. How
far Judah had departed from the spirit of
just judgment was made apparent in the
very opening chapter of Isaiuh’s prophecy
(vers. 15—27). To him that sitteth in
judgment; rather, that sitteth on the judgment-
seat (Cheyne). For strength to them that
turn the battle to the gate; te. “to those
who repulse an enemy, and drive him back
to his own city’s gate” (comp. 2 Kings xviil.
8, “He smote the Philistines, even unto
Gaza”’).

Vers. 7—10.—Jupan’s StnruLngss. The
reformation effected by Hezekiah was but a
half-reformation. It put away idolatry, but
it left untouched a variety of moral evils, as:
1, Drunkenness. Judah was no whit behind
Ephraim in respect of this vice. The very
priests and “ prophets” gave way to the dis-
gusting habit, and came drunk to the most
solemn functions of religious teaching and
hearing causes. 2, Scorn and mockery of
God’s true prophets. The teaching of Isaiah
was made light of by the officials of the
priestly and prophetic orders, who claimed
to be quite as competent to instruct men in
their duties as himself. They seem to have
ridiculed the mode of his teaching—its
catch-words, as they thought them, and its
insistence on minutia.


Ver. 7.—They also. Judah, no less than
Ephraim (sce vers. 1,3). It has been ques-
tioned whether literal intoxication is meant,
and suggested that Judah “imitated the
pride and unbelicf and spirttual intoxication
of Ephraim” (Kay). But the numerous
passages which tax both the Israelites and
the Jews of the period with drunkenness
(ch. ¥. 11, 22; xxii. 13; lvi. 12; Hos. iv. 11;
vii. 5; Amos vii 6, etc.), are best understood


literally. Orientals (e.g. the Persians) are
oiten given to such indulgence. Have erred
through wine; rather, reel with wine. Are
out of the way; or, stagger. The verbs ex-
press the physical effects of intoxication.
The priest and the prophet. Priests were
forbidden by the Law to drink any wine or
strong drink previously to their taking part
in the service of the tabernacle (Lev. x. 9),
and the prohibition was always understood
to apply a fortiori to the temple (Kzek. xliv.
21). Prophets might have been expected
to act in the spirit of the command given to
priests. By “ prophets” here Isaiah means,
not persons especially called of God, but
official members of the prophetical order.
Of these there were always mauy in Judah,
who had no strong sense of religion (see ch.
xxix. 103 Jerjv.l3,. 313 zeke exis 216%
Amos ii. 12; Micah iii. 11; Zeph. iii. 4,
etc.). They err in vision; rather, they reel
in the vision. They are drunken, even in
the very exercise of their pro) -hetical oftice—
when they see, and expound, their visions.
They stumble in judgment; or, they stagger
when pronouncing judgment (Delitzsch).
Persons in authority had been specially
warned not to drink wine before the hearing
of causes (Prov. xxxi. 4, 5).

Ver. 8.—So that there is no place clean.
This is probably the true meaning, though
the prophet simply says, “ ‘here is no place”
(comp. ch. ¢. 8).

Ver, 9.—Whom shall he teach ? A sudden
and abrupt transition. The best explana-
tion seems to be that suggested by Jerome,
and followed by Bishop Lowth and most
commentators, viz. that the prophet dra-
matically introduces his adversaries as re-
plying to him with taunting speeches
“Whom does he think he is teaching?”
they ask. “More children, just weaned
from their mother’s milk, and taken away
from the breast? Does he forget that we
are grown men—nay, priests and prophets ?
And what poor teaching it is! What ‘ end-
less petty teazing’! (Delitzsch)—precept
upon precept,” ete. The intention is to
throw ridicule upon the smallness and vexae
tious character of the prophet’s interminable
and uninterrupted chidings (Delitzsch).
Knowledge ... doctrine. Technical terms
in Isaiah’s teaching, which his adversaries
seem to have ridiculed as “catch-words.”
The term translated “doctrine” means
properly “ tidings,’ and involves the idea
that the prophet obtained the teaching so
designated by direct revelation from God.

Ver. 10.—For precept must be upon pre-
cept; rather, for it is precept upon precept
(Lowth, Cheyne), The whole teaching
is nothing but an accumulation of precept
upon precept, rule upon rule, one little in-
junction followed up by another, here


cH. xxv. 1—29,] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


little, there a little. The objectors profess
to find in the prophet’s teaching nothing
grand, nothing broad—no enunciation of
great leading principles; but a perpetual
drizzling rain of petty maxims and rules,
vexatious, cramping, confining; especially
unsuitable to men who had had the training
of priests and prophets, and could have ap-
preciated a grand theory, or a new religious
standpoint, but were simply revolted at a
teaching which seemed to them narow,
childish, and wearisome. It has been said
that in the language of this passage “ we
may hear the heavy babbling utterance of
the drunken scoffers” (Delitzsch); but in
this we have perhaps an over-refinement.
Isaiah probably gives us, not what his ad-
versaries said of him over their cups, but
the best arguinents which they could hit on
in their sober hours to depreciate his doc-
trine. The arguments must be allowed to
be clever.

Vers. 11—13.—Jopan’s PunisHMENT, God
will retort on the Jews tleir scorn of his
prophet, and, as they will not be taught by
his utterances, which they find to be childish
and unrefined, will teach them by utterances
still more unrefined—thiose of the Assyrians,
which will be quite as monotonous and quite
as full of minutie as Isviah’s.

Ver. 11 —With stammering lips and with
another tongue. The Assyrian language,
though a Semitic idiom nearly allied to He-
brew, was sufficiently different to sound in
she ears of a Jew like his own tongue mis-
pronounced and barbarized.

Ver. 12.—To whom he said; rather, be-
cause he said to them. God had fiom remote
times offered to his people “rest” and ‘“ re-
freshing”’—or a life of ease and peace in
Palestine—but on condition of their serving
bim faithfully and observing his Laws
(Deut. xxviii. 1—14). But they had re-
jected this “rest,” since they liad refused to
observe the condition on which it was pro-
mised. Because they had thus acted, God
now brought upon them war and a con-
queror.

Ver. 13.—The word of the Lord was to
them; rather, shall be to them. God will
now speak to them, not by his prophet, but
by the Assyrian conqueror, who will do
what they said Isaiah liad done, we. lay upon
them command after command, rule after
rule, a constant series of minute injune-
tions, under which they will chafe and fret
and at last rebel, but only to be “snared
and taken.” It is uncertain whether the
reference is to the immediate future and to
the Assyrians proper only, or whether the
Babylonians are not taken into account also,
and their oppression of Judea pointed to.

ISAIAH,


449


The yoke of Babylon was probably quite as
difficult to endure as that of Assyria; and
we find that, in the space of eighteen years,
it produced at least three rebellions.

Vers. 14—22.—Tue Resuke or JupDAn’s
Noxues. The power of the nobles under the
later Jewish monarchy is very apparent
throughout Isaiah’s prophecy. It is they,
and not the king, who are always blamed
for bad government (ch. i. 10—23; iii, 12—
15, etc.) or errors of policy (ch. ix. 15, 16;
xxii. 15—19, ete.). Isaiah now turns from
a denunciation of the priests and prophets,
who especially opposed his teaching, to a
threatening of the great men who guided
the course of public affairs. He taxes them
with being “men of scorn” (ver. 14), fe.
scorners of Jehovah, and with “a proud and
insolent self-confidence” (Delitzsch). They
have made, or are about to make, secret
arrangements which will, they believe,
secure Juda against suffering injury at the
hands of the Assyrians, and are quite satis-
fied with what they have done, and fear no
evil. Isaiah is instructed that their boasted
arrangements will entirely fail in the time
of trial—their “refuge” (Egypt) will be
found a refuge of lies (ver. 17), and the
“overflowing scourge” (Assyria) will pass
through the land, and carry all before it
(ver. 18). There will then ensue a time of
“vexation” and discomfort (vers. 19, 20)—
God’s anger will be poured out upou the land
in strange ways (ver. 21), Le therefore warns
the rulers to lay aside their scorn of God,
and humble themselves, lest a worse thing
happen to them (ver. 22).

Ver. 14.—Ye scornful men; literally, ye
men of scorn. The word used is rare, but
will be found in the same sense in Prov.
i, 22 and xxix. 8. A cognate participle
occurs in Hos. vii. 5. That rule this people,
(On the authority of the nobles at this period,
see the introductory paragraph.)

Ver. 15.—We have made a covenant with
death (comp. Job v. 23; Hos. ii. 18). The
words are a boast, expressed somewhat enig-
matically, that they have secured their
own safety by some secret agreement. The
exact nuture of the agreement they are dis-
inclined to divulge. With hell are we at
agreement, A “synonymous parallelism,”
merely strengthening the previous assertion.
When the overflowing scourge shall pass
through, Assyrian invasion has been com-
pared to a “ flood” (ch, wiii. 7; xxviii. 2),
and toa* rod” or“ stail” ineh.x.24. Here

24


450


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


[ou. xxvi1. 1—29.


the two metaphors are joined together. It
shall not come to us. Svume means will be
found—what, they do not say, either for
diverting the flood, or for st.mming it. For
we have made lies our refuge. Here the
Divine reporter departs from the language
of those whose words he is reporting, and
substitutes his own e:timate of the true
nature and true value of that “ refuge” on
which they placed such entire reliance. It
appears by ch. xxx. 1—7 and ch, xxxvi.
6—9 that that refuge was Egypt. Now,
Egypt was a “bruised reed,” not to be de-
pended on for keeping her engagements.
To trust in her was to put confidence in
“lies” and “ falsehood.”

Ver. 16.—Behold, I lay in Zion for a foun-
dation astone. In contrast with the insecure
refuge and false ground of confidence where-
on the nobles relied, the prophet puts for-
ward the one sure “ Rock” on which complete
dependence may be placedl—which he de-
clares that Jehovah is laying, or “ has laid,”
in Zion as a tried stone, a precious corner
stone, a sure foundation. The imagery is,
no doubt, drawn from the practice of Orien-
tal kings, and notably Solomon, to-émploy
foundation-stones of enormous size and
weight at the corners of buildings. Some
of those uncovered at the corners of Solo-
mon’s temple by the Palestine Exploration
Fund are more than thirty-eight feet long,
and weigh above a hi Ss (see
‘Our Work in Palestine, pp 38,115). But
the reference cannot, of course, be to the
material structure of the temple as Israel’s
true refuge Rather, Jehovah himself would
seem to be the Rock (ch. xxvi. 4; xxx. 29,
etc.) intended; und hence tlie application
to Christ by the writers of the New Testa-
ment (Rom. ix. 33; Eph. ii. 20; 1 Pet. ii.
6—8) was natural and easy. But it may be
questioned whether the passage was to Isaiah
himself “ Messianic,” or meant more than
that God had set his Name and his presence
at Jerusalem from the time that the temple
was built there, and that it was a mistake to
look elsewhere than to him for deliverance
orsecurity. He that believeth shall not make
haste. The LXX. have “ He that believeth
shall not be ashamed” or “ confounded ;” and
St. Paul (Rom. ix. 33) follows this rendering.
It is conjectured that the Hebrew had origi-
nally ydbish instead of yalehish.

Ver. 17.—Judgment also will I lay to the
line, and righteousness to the plummet;
rather, justice also will I set for my rule, and
righteousness for my plumb-line; i.e. I will
execute justice and jud&ment on the earth
with all stzicthess and exactness. The
scorners had implied that, by their clever
devices, they would escape the judgment of
God (ver. 15). The hail (comp. ver. 2).
The siorm of Assyrian invasion will over


|


whelm Egypt, which is a “refuge of lies,”
false and untrustw rthy (see tlle comment
on ver. 15). The hiding-place. Mr. Cheyne
adds, “of falsehood,” supposing a word to
have fallen out of the text. Such an ad-
dition seems almost required to complete
the parallelism of the two clauses, and also
for the balance between this verse and
ver. 15.

Ver. 18.—And your covenant with death
shall be disannulled; or, "epancd aust The
entire clever arrangement, by which they
thoucht to avert the danger from themselves
and from Juda, shall come te nought.
When the overflowing scourge shall pass
through, then ye shall be trodden down by
it. As the prophet continues, his metaphor
becomes still more mixed. “ Treading down ”
was so familiar an expression for destroying,
that, perhaps, its literal sense was overlooked
(comp. ch. v.5; vii 25; x.6; Dan. viii. 13;
Micah vii. 10; Zech. x. 5, ete.).

Ver. 19.—From the time that it goeth
forth it shall take you; rather, as often as
it passes alongq, it shall take you away ; i.e. as
often as the flood-of Assyrian Invasion sweeps
through Paléstine, it shall thin the popula-
tion by death and captivity. We know of at
least eight passages of the flood through
Judw#a—one under Sargon, two under Sen-
nacherib, three or four under Esarhaddon,
and two under Asshur-bani-pal. There may
have been more. Morning by morning; t.e.
frequently—time after time. Shall it pass
over ; rather, pass alung. or pass through. It
shall be a vexation only to understand the re-
port; rather, it will be sheer terror to under-
stand the doctrine: There is an allusion to
ver. 9. They had thought scorn of Isaiah’s
“doctrine,” when he taught it them by word
of mouth; they will understand it but too
well, and find it * nothing but a terror,’ when
it is impressed on them by the preaching of
facts.

Ver. 20.—For the bed, etc. We have a
proverb, “ As aman makes his bed, so must
he lie in it.’ The Jews will have made
themselves a bed in which they can have no
comfort or ease, and consequently no rest.
eee they will only have themselves to blame

or it.

Ver. 21—The Lord shall rise up as in
Mount Perazim. The “ Mount Perazim” of
this passage is probably the same as the
*« Baal-Perazim” of 1 Chron. xiv. 11, where


Dayid_ completely defeated the Philistines
by the Divine help. is victory is con-
nected with another over tlie same nation in
the valley of Gibeon (1 Chron. xiv. 13—16).
Now, however, God was to be on the side
of the enemies of his people, who were to
suffer as the Philistines had suffered in the
olden time. This punishment of his own
people by the sword of foreigners was strange


On. xxvil. 1—29.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


461


work on God’s part—a strange act. But it
was their strange conduct which caused
God’s strange action. They had become,
as it were, Philistines.

Ver. 22.—Be ye not mockers, As they
had shown themselves previously (vers. 9,
10). Lest your bands be made strong; or,
lest your fetters grow strong. The prophet
views Judah as still, to some extent, an As-
syrian dependency, held in light bonds; and
warns his countrymen that an attempt to
break the light bonds may result in Assyria’s
making them stronger and heavier. A con-
sumption, . . . determined upon the whole
earth ; rather, @ consummation (comp. ch.
x. 22; 23).


Vers. 23—29.— A ParaBLE_} MFORT


Beevers. Isaiah is always careful to
intermingle promises with his threats,


comfort with his denunciations, Like his
great Master, of whom he prophesied, he
was fain nut to “break the bruised reed”
or “quench the smoking flax.” When he
had searched men’s wounds with the probe,
he was careful to pour in oil and wine. So
now, having denounced the sinners of
Judah through three Jong paragraphs (vers.
7—22), he has a word of consolation and en-
couragemeut for the better disposed, whose
hearts he hopes to have touched and stirred
by his warning. This consolation he puts
in a parabolic form, leaving it to their
spiritual insight to discover the meaning.

Ver. 23.—Give ye ear (comp. Ps. xlix. 1;
Ixxviii. 1). A preface of this kind, enjoin-
ing special attention and thouglt, was
appropriate to occasions when instruction
was couched in a parabolic form,

Ver. 24.—Doth the plowman plow all day?
The Church of God, so often called a vine-
yard, is here compared to an arable field,
and the processes by which God educates
and disciplines bis Church are compared to
those employed by mun in the cultivation of
such a piece of ground, and the obtaining
of a harvest from it. First of all, the
ground must be ploughed, the face of the
earth “opened” and the “clods brokea.”
This, however, does not go on for ever; it is
for an object—that the seed may be sown ;
and, as soon as the ground is fit for the
sowing to take place, the preparation of the
soil veases. Doth he open and break, etc.?
Harrowing succe:ds to ploughing in the
natural order of things, the object of the
harrowing being to break and pulverize
the clods.

Ver. 25.—When he hath made plain the
face thereof; i.e. levelled it—brought the
ground to a tolerably even surface, Doth he


not cast abroad the fitches? The Hebrew
word translated “ fitches ”—7.e. “ vetches ”—
is getsach, which is generally allowed to
represent the Nigella saliva, a sort of ranun-
culus, which is cultivated in many parts of
the East for the sake of its s-eds. These
are (blacly, and have an Grommiio Taxon
Dioscorides (iii. 83) and Pliny (xix. 8) say
that they were sometimes mixed with bread.
And scatter the cummin. “Cummim”
(Cuminum sativum) is ‘tan umbelliferous
plant, something like fennel.” The seeds—
or rather, berries—have “a bitterish warm
taste, with an aromati: flayour” (‘ Dict. of
the Bible, vol. Tp. 372). They seem to
have been eaten as a relish with various kinds
of food. And cast in the principal wheat;
rather, and put in wheat in rows. Drill-
ploughs, which would deposit grain in rows,
were known to the Assyrians (‘ Ancient
Monarchies,’ vol. ii. p. 198). And the rie in
their place. Cussemeth, the word translated
“rie,” is probably the Holeus sorghum, or
3 spa .? which is largely cultivated in
Palestine and other parts of the East, and
is the ordinary material of the bread eaten
by the pvarer classes (see the ‘ Pulpit
Commentary’ on Exvdus, pp. 219, 220).
For “in their place,” Kay translates, “in its
own border.” The wheat and the barley
and the spelt would all be sown separately,
according to the direction of Lev. xix. 19,
“Thou shalt not sow thy field with mingled
se ”

Ver. 26.—For his God doth instruct him.
Through the reason which God has given to
men, they deal thus prudently and carefully
with the pieces of land which they culti-
vate.

Ver. 27.For the fitches are not threshed
with a threshing-instrument. The Nigella
sativa is too tender a plant to be subjected
to the rude trvatment of a threshing-instru-
ment, or “threshing-sledge.”” Such in-
struments are of the coarsest and clumsiest
character in the Kast, and quite inapplicable
to plants of a delicate fabric. Karsten
Niebuhr thus describes the Arabian and
Syrian practices: “ Quand le grain doit étre
battu, les Arabes de Yemen posent le bled
par terre en denx rangées, épis contre é€pis,
apres quoi ils font trainer par-dessus wne
grosse pierre tirée par deux beufs. La
machine dont on se sert en Syrie consiste
en quelques planches garnies par-dessous
d’une quantité de pierres & fusil” (* Descrip-
tion de l’Arabie,’ p. 140). Neither is a cart
wheel turned about upon the cummin. The
allesion is to another coarse mode of thresh-
ing practised in Palestine and elsewhere, by
driving a cart with broad-wheels over the
grain. But the fitches are beaten out with
a staff, and the cummin with a rod. Canon
Tristram says, “While the cummin can


452


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xxvun 1—29.


Neen ee ee eee ee eee ee eee ee eee ee, aeenienaninane


easily be separated from its case by a slender
rol, the harder pod of the Nigella requires
to be beaten by a stout staft” (Natural
History of the Bible,’ p. 445).

Ver. 28.—Bread corn is bruised; literatly,
bread; but no doubt the corn, from which
bread is made, is meant. Most critics regard
the clause as interrogative, “Is bread corn
brnised ?”—and the auswer as given in the
nezative by the rest of the sentence, “No;
he will not continue always threshing it, nor
crunch it with his cart-wheel and his horses
—he will not bruise it.” Hven where the
rougher modes of threshing are employed,
there is moderation in their employment.
Care is taken not to injure the grain. Here
tle main bearing of the whole parable
appears. The ifflictions which God sends
upon his people are alapted to their strength


as to crush and injure. Only such violence
is used as is required to detach the good
seed from the husks. Where the process is
most severe, still the “ bread-corn” is not
“ bruised.”

Ver. 29.—This also (comp. ver. 26). This
prudent dealing of the hushandman with
his produce is the result of the wisdom im-
planted in him by God. The prophet goes
no further, but leaves his disciples to draw
the conclusion that God’s own method of
working will be similar. Wonderful in
counsel (comp. ch. ix. 6). Excellent in
working; rather, great in wisdom (comp.
Job VieedS: sxiia 165) Prov. Wisi tiieeodus
viii. 14; xviii. 1; Micah vi. 9). Prov. viii.
14 is especially in point, since there the same
two qualities are ascribed to God as in the
present passage.


and to their necds. In no case are they such


HOMILETICS,


Vers. 1,3.—The drunkards of Xphraim. While Scripture, from first to last, upholds
the moderate use of wine as cheering and “ making glad the heart of man,” it is dis-
tinct and severe in its denunciations of drunkenness and unrestrained revelry. The
son who was “stubborn and rebellious, a glutton and a drunkard,” was to be brought
by his parents before the elders under the Jewish Law, and “stoned with stones that
he might die” (Deut. xxi. 20, 21). Nabal’s drunkenness and churlishness together
caused him to be “smitten by the Lord that he died” (1 Sam. xxv. 38). Sviomon
warns his son against drunkenness by reminding him of the fact, which experience had
sufficiently proved by his time, that “the drunkard and the glutton shall come to
poverty ” (Prov. xxiii. 21), The “drunkards of Epliraim ” are denounced in unsparing
terms by Isaiah and Amos, Christiaus are taught that drunkards “ shall not inherit
the kingdom of God” (1 Cor. vi. 10), and bidden, “If any man that is called a brother
be a drunkard, with such a one, no, not to eat” (1 Cor. v. 11). Drunkenness and
gluttony are naturally coupled together, as being each of them an abuse of Gud’s good
gifts to man; but drunkenness is far the worse of the two, since, by robbing man of his
self-control, it is apt to lead him on to a number of other sins and crimes, and thus,
while not perhaps worse in itsell, it is in its consequences far more injurious than
gluttony. Wrunkenness is often pleaded as an excuse for the crimes whereto it leads;
but some of the wisest amongst ancient levislators were so far from accepting this plea,
that they doubled the penalty for an offence if a man was drunk when he committed it
(Arist., ‘Eth. Nic.,’ iii. 5, § 8). In the case of the “drunkards of Ephraim,” it may be
suspected that the desire to drown their cares in wine was at the root of their drunken-
ness (comp. ch. xxii. 18; Prov. xxxi. 6, 7). But, however we may pity those who so
act, we cannot excuse them. Difficulties are a call upon us to use to the utmost the
intellect wherewith we are endowed by God, if so be we may anyhow devise an escape
from our troubles—not @ reason for our pushing reason from its seat, and rushing
blindfold on calamity.


Vers. 9, 10.—The objections of unbelievers to such as preach the truth. The argu-
mentum ad hominem, to which Isaiah’s adversaries had recourse, is one very generally
employed by those who are indisposed to receive religious teaching. ‘ Who are you,”
the teacher is asked, “ that you should set yourself up to teach us? On what grounds
do you suppose that you are so much wiser than we? We are not babes—not tied to
our mothers’ apron-strings, not mere children without experience of life. We think
that probably we know quite as much on any religious subject as you. Why should
you imagive that we do not?” It is difficult to meet this objection, By setting up
to be a religious teacher a man does certainly claim to be wiser than his neighbours,


cH. xxvil1. 1—29.1 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISATAH. 453
a ee


and a prima facie obj-ction of undue self-assertion most decidedly lies against him.
He can only meet this objection by discluiming all personal merit, and declaring himself
a mere mouthpiece of One infinitely above hita, whose doctrine he is commissivoned to
spread. ‘The objectors will then have to question either the fact of his commission or
the authority of the Person who gave it. Another line of argument, and a very common
one, is to turn the doctrine itself into ridicule. Has the teacher nothing more to say
than what has been heard so often ?—nothing but little rules, petty precepts, minute
directions for conduct, a touch here, a touch there, tiresome trivialities? Has he no
new grand scheme to propound, no fresh way of salvation, no interesting “Church of
the Future”? Surely it is idle to repeat, over and over again, the same stale maxims,
the same well-worn rules! Who will listen to a harper who harps always on one
string? Something new, something lively, something out of the common, is wanted, if
the preacher is to secure attention ; still more, if he is to affect conduct. Unfortunately,
what is new is seldom true; and though, no doubt, novelty in treatment is to a certain
extent desirable, since the “instructed scribe” should know bow “to bring out of his
treasure things old and new” (Matt. xili. 52), yet it is the old truths wnich alone have
power, which alone can save; and these need to be perpetually impressed on men, “in
season and out of season,” dinned into their ears, forced on their attention, cut into
their hearts by stroke after stroke, even at the risk of its wearying them,


Vers. 14—22.—The judgment prepared for scorners. “ Scorners,” in the lancuage of
Scripture, are those who set at nought God’s prophets, or his messages, or his Holy
Word, or his Church, or his ministers. Men delight in such scorn because it seems to
them so fine a thing. so grand a thing, so bold, so brave, so heroic. It is a poor thing,
comparatively, to exalt one’s self against man; itis magnificent to measure one’s strength
with God’s, and enter the lists against him. This may, no doubt, be so in one point of
view, and for a time, while God chooses to endure the contradiction of sinners avainst
himself. Bnt nothing can be really grand or heroic which is irrational, absurd, doomed
to end in failure, shame, and ruin. ‘There is nothing admirable in a child kickiug
against the commands of a wise father, or in a schoolboy setting at nought the rules of
grammar or of conduct given bim by a good schvolmaster. It is the true wisdom of
those who know themselves to be weak, and ignorant, and short-sighted, and imperfect, anil
liable to error, to accept loyally the rule of an authority stronger and wiser and better than
themselves, The “scorners” find in a little time that their resistance of God is folly.

I. THEIR EARTHLY RELIANCE FAILS THEM. ‘This reliance may be (1) physical force—
the fact they have at their beck and call vast armies, a numerous police, a well-filled
treasury, important allies, and the like; or (2) intellectual power, a consciousness of a
reserve of mental strength in themselves, an indomitable will, a keen intellect, a fertile
imagination, great logical acumen, etc. But their hold on all such things is uncertain.
Armies revolt, melt away by sickness and desertion, suffer defeat, become demoralized,
surrender themselves; a police fails and fraternizes with revolution; a treasury becomes
exhausted ; allies draw back in the hour of danger, as the Ezyptians did in Israel’s greatest
need ; and the mighty potentate who has scorned God and his laws finds himself, together
with his advisers, brought to shame, defcated, ruined. So with the “scorners” whose
mental pride has puffed them up. God can abase them in a moment by mental disease,
brain-softening, paralysis, sense of depression, disgust with life. How the bold atheist
trembles, and wishes that he could retract his daring speeches, when he is struck down
by sickness, crippled, bed-ridden, palsied perhaps. God does not always launch his
bolts in this life; but he can at any time do so, and he does it with sufficient frequency
to leave men without excuse if they do not note, and profit, by his warnings.

II. AN EXTERNAL DANGER THREATENS. No one is safe from the worst forms of
human suffering. Temporal ruin may come upon the rich, disfavour and unpopularity
upon the long-applauded statesman, domestic woe, severe illness, excruciating pain, upon
any one. In every case there is always death threatening men. Some “overflowing
scourge” or other is almost sure, sooner or later, to “pass through,” and press upon us,
and threaten to bring us down to the ground. The scorner trembles when such an hour
arrives, and inwardly confesses his impotency, even if outwardly he wear a front of
brass, and professes to fear neither God nor man,

UI. CaLamrry swoops Down aT LasT. Even if no special judgment is sent to


454. THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cn. xxvut 1—29,
Se eee


punish the scorner, there arrives at last of necessity the time of old age, weakness,
weariness; there arrives at last death; and, some time before death, the fear of death.
The scorner must go to that God whose message he has scorned, whose messengers he
has treated with contempt and contumely. “A consummation is decreed.” He must
“ fall into the bands of the living God”! Then the folly of that “ brave” conduct on
which he prided himself becomes apparent, and’he would fain retract his old speeches,
and submit himself, and niake his peace. But the words addressed to scorners (Prov. i.
22) sound in lis ears aud hold bim back: “ Because I have called, and ye refused; 1
have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; but ye have set at nought all my
counsel, and would none of my reproof: I also will laugh at your calamity; | will mock
when your fear cometh; when your fear cometh as desolation, and your destruction
cometh as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish cometh upon you. Then shall they
call upon me, but | will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find
me: for that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord: they
would none of my counsel: they despised all my reproof. Theretore shall they
eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices. For the turning
away of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them”
(Prov. i. 24—382).


Vers. 24—28.— The analogy of Divine to human methods of working. Tsaiah’s com-
parison in this chapter rests wholly upon the assumption of an analogy between God’s
dealings and man’s, when the latter are such as are consonant wih reason. Reason,
the highes: gilt of God to man, he assumes to be an adumbration of some quality in the
Divine nature, which bears a real resemblance to it. Reason “cometh forth from the
Lord of hosts.” It is the voice of God speaking in the soul of man. Let man
follow it, and his actions are divinely guided. God’s mode of action in parallel matters
may be gathered from his. The general principle is involved in the particular analogy
here indicared. As in human husbandry, so in God’s tendance of that Church, which
is his “ vineyard” and “ fruitful field,” there are three principal processes.

J. THE PREPARATION OF THE GROUND. Israel was prepared bv the long course of
Egyptian affliction, by the “ plouhshares ” and “ harrows” of tyrannical overseers and
taskmasters, which broke up and pulverized what would otherwise have been an
ungenial aud unpromising soil, very unapt to bear fruit. After this preparation had
been made for four hundred and thirty years, there followed—

Il. THe PUTTING IN OF THE SEED. God’s revelation of himself and of his will at
Sinai was the sowing of the seed of his Word in the soil of Isracl’s hearts. When he
had sufficiently prepared the soil, he scattered the seed abundantly—seed of various
kinds—which all fell in its “appointed place,” and did its app inted work, “turning
the hearts ol the disobedient to the wisdom of the just,” and ditlerencing the Jews from
their neig! bours by a higher moral tone and a purer religion than prevailed elsewhere.
Finally came—

ILL. ‘He GATHERING IN OF THE HARVEST. The seed is sown for the sake of the crop
which it will produce. God is continually gathering in his crop by a process analogous
to that which men pursue. He needs good grain for his garner, and to obtain this he
must separate the grain from the husks and chaff with which it is accompanied. As
men use various methods for this object, some gentler, some severer, so God, too, in
the purifying of his grain, has many varieties of treatment. To each kind of grain he
applies the treatment that is fittest. Some kinds are lightly beaten, as with slender
rods; others more heavily, as with stout staves; some, on the other hand, are threshed,
as it were, with spiked drags and rollers, to clear them of their encumbrances. No
more force, however, is applied in any case than is necessary, nor is any force applied
for a longer time than is needed. And even in the severest treatment there is gentle-
ness. God has a care that the good grain shall never be “bruised.”


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS,


Vers. 1—6.— Condition of Samaria, I. DenuncraTION oF wor, ‘The condition of
Samaria was like that of Jerusalem. And judgment must first fall upon Samaria, and


——


cH. xxvi11, 1—29.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 455
a ee


then upon Jerusalem (ch. viii. 6; cf. Micah i. 6). Drunkenness is named, “not as the
root of the national evil, but rather as its flower. The appalling thing is that when all
is on the point of collapsing, those responsible for the state should be given up to careless
self-indulgence” (Cheyne). Samaria is described as the city of the “proud crown.” So in
Greece Athens was cailed the city of the violet crown, and Thebes the “ well-crowned,”
Some explain the crown of the towers; others think that the mere beauty of the hill
on which the city stands, with its cultivated terraces, covered with corn and with fig
and olive trees, has given rise to the figure. But a worm is at the root of all this
beauty, and Samaria must die. Drunkenness may stand for sensuality in general,
which saps the root of a nation’s life. The crown, or chaplet, alludes also to the
custom among Greeks, Romans, and Jews, of wearing a chaplet of flowers at feasts.
In the Book of Wisdom we read—
* Let us fill ourselves with costly wine and ointments:
And let no flower of the spring pass by us:


Let us crown ourselves with rose-buds, before they be withered.”
(Wisd. ii. 8.)


IJ, Tug IMPENDING DESTRUCTION. Jehovah has an unflinching instrument for
destruction. And, like an overwhelming tempest and flood of waters, destruction will
come down on the devoted city. The bright crown shall be trampled underfoot ; and
Ephraim’s beauty shall be swallowed up with all the haste with which one devours
the special delicacy of the “early fig” (cf. Hos. ix. 10; Micah vii. 1; Nah, iii. 12;
Jer, xxiv. 2). It ripens inJune. The whole is a picture of sudden and utter destruction.
(For the Assyrian king as avent in the hand of Jehovah, cf. 2 Kings xvii. 8—6. For
the storm of hail as a symbol of desolation, cf. Job xxvii. 21; Hos. xiii, 15. And
for the flood as a representation of hostile devastation, cf. Ps. xcv. 5; Jer. xlvi. 7, 8.)
In the moral order, sudden destruction is always connected with great impiety. The
triumphing of the wicked is short; and while they speak of peace, sudden destruction
arriveth. ‘‘ What Isaiah declared about the kingdom of Israel applies also to the whole
world. By their invratitude, men prevent all the goodness which the Lord has bestowed
upon them from reaching maturity; for we abuse his blessings and corrupt them by our
wickedness. ‘lhe consequence is that hasty and short-lived fruits are produced, which
cannot yield us continual nourishment” (Calvin), Luxury blinds, blindness leads te
stumbling, and presently to a sudden fall,

Ill. FutFinments or MgssiaNnio pRoMISE. Here again the sky clears, and the star
of hope glimmers. To the converted remnant Jetiovah will be as a glittering Crown
and a splendid Diadem. ‘The royalty of the Divine King shall be more glorious than
the famed beauty of Samaria, whose crown shall have been trampled in the dust, and
his government a fairer chaplet to adorn the Divine seat. There will be a true beauty
and glory in the Messianic times. Moreover, there will be a spirit of justice and sound
intelligence diffused. ‘he priests, the spiritual leaders, will be especially imbued with
it (cf. Deut. xvii. 8—12; Exod. xxi, 22; 2 Chron. xix. 5—8). But the magistracy in
general will be enlightened and instructed by the Spirit of God. Further, there will be
valour in the field, so that the gencrals and their soldiers will be able to turn back war to
the gate—probably of the city whence their foes came (2 Sam. xi. 23, “ And we were
upon them, even unto the evtering of the gate”). There will, in short, in the ideal or
Messianic government, be a government strong both internally and externally, wisdom
and justice in home administration, strength and valour towards the foe without. These
are needed for every empire and kingdom; and they come from God. “'The Lord is our
Defence.” ‘“ Magistrates will not be able to rule and administer justice in a city, and
military generals will not be able to repel enemies, unless the Lord shall direct them.”
To place our confidence in the world is to gather flowers, which forthwith fade and
decay. We then seek to be happy without God, that is, without happiness itself.
If we seek protection aud good in God, then no calamities can prevent him from adorn-
ing the Church. When it shall appear that everything is ou tie eve of destruction, God
will still be a Crown of glory to his people (Calvin).—J.


Vers. 7—13.—The mockers and the prophet. Here, it appears, the scene changes to
Jerusalem. And we should compare the picture of drunkenness and luxury with that
in Amos vi, 1—7 and Micah ii. 1L


456 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cn. xxvu1. 1—29.


I, THE PRIESTS AND PROPHETS OF THE TIME. They are seen reeling and stagzering
in the midst of, or as they come from, their most sacred functions. It is a strong and
indignant description of drunkenness in general (cf. Prov. xx. 1), What more humi-
liating than the spectacle! ‘lo have “ put an enemy in one’s mouth to steal away
one’s brains,” to be the thrall of one’s own brutal appetites, and @ “ scoured dish of
liquor” |

“ Ebrius urgeris multis miser undique curis
Atque animi incerto fluitans errore vagaris.”


How much worse the vice in those who need all the clearness of the brain, all the
composure of the nerves, for the discharge of their high office! They should be “ filled”
with another “spirit” than this. The effect of the bodily intoxication must be to
cloud the judgment, to confuse the perception of truth. And how truly the proverb
must apply, “ Like people, like priest”! If such the habits of the representatives of
the people, what must the people themselves have been ?

Il. Tue spirit or mockery. (Vers. 9, 10.) “The drunkards mock Isaiah over their
cups, Does he not know what respectable persons he is dealing with—not like children,
who need leading-strings, but educated priests and prophets?” (Cheyne). They scoff
at him by taking up words often on his mouth. Whom would he teach knowledge ?
his designates prophetic preaching (see ch. i. 3; xxxiii. 6). And tidings? Another
word for revelation, for something “heard from Jebovah” (ver. 22; cf. ch. xxi. 10;
liii. 1). Then they ridicule his manner. He is always “harping upon the same
string,” always dwelling upon the same commonplaces of morality and religion, “It is
childish repetition,” say they. But, in fact, the preacher must keep dwelling upon a
few main p ints, so easily do they “slip by us”! (Heb. ii. 1). “ Here a little, and there
a little,” it is a true description of popular preaching. It may seem “ foolishness ” to
a scientifically trained understanding; but it has pleased God to save many by means
of it. ‘Lhe gospel requires us to receive it as little children, and little by little, a say-
ing here, and there a verse, and again a proverb; this is how little children learn.

Ill. RepLy oF THE PRopHET He “retorts their own language upon them. Yes;
it shall be, in fact, as you say. This childish monotone shall indeed sound in your
ears. ‘lhe description which you give of the revelations of Jehovah shall be exactly
applicable to the harsh laconic commands of a merciless invader, For Assyrian,
though closely allied to Hebrew, was sufficiently different from it both in grammar and
in vocabulary to seem a ‘stammering’ or ‘ barbarous’ tongue to Isaiah’s contemporaries.
The common diplomatic and commercial language of Syria and Assyria was Aramaic
(see ch. xxxvi. 11)” (Cheyne). (lor the word rendered “stammer,” te. speak unin-
tullivibly, as in a foreivn tongue, cf. ch. xxxiii. 19; Prov. i, 26; xvii. 5; Ps. ii, 4;
lix. 9; Job xxii, 19.) The lessons which the people refuse to heed when taught them
in their native tongue, shall be pressed home upon them in the harsh accents of the
barbarian, “ Since the Divine patience has been lost upon them, a stronger way shall
be taken to force their attentiou. God will thunder in their ears what to them will
appear jargon, the language of a foreign nation!” How prophetic the words in general !
The ill taste on our part which makes truth unpalatable in its simplicity and gentle
persuasiveness will be sorely criticized when we are forced to listen to hoarse and rude
accents, ‘The prophet’s burden had been of rest—rest to the weary; of refreshment ty
hearty faith in Jehovah (ch. xxx. 15; cf. Micah ii. 10; Jer. vi. 16). And now the old
words, “line upon line,” ete., will come back upon memory and conscience, to be
enforced by retreat, and flight, and fall, and captivity. ‘He that hath ears to hear, let
him hear.” If truth sound barbarous, it is because we have not the true listening
faculty. If it be not sweet to the taste as honey, it is because the stomach is dis-
ordered, If the Word profit not, it is because men do not “ mix it with faith,” de.
with obedient and loving dispositions, A willul ignorance and blindness alone deprives
of spiritual benefits ; a stubbornness in turning away from the offered light, and choosing
to remain in darkness (cf. ch. viii. 16; vi. 9; xxix. 11; Mark iv. 12).—J.


Vers, 14—22.—Jehovah pronounces judgment, The rulers or politicians are addressed,
They are stigmatized as “ men of scorn” (cf. ver. 22; ch. xxix. 20; Hos, vii. 5). The
scornful or scofliug habit implies ewcessive self-confidence on the one hand, on the other


CH. XXvul. 1--29.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 457


KS


contempt of religion and of God. But “be not deceived; God is not mocked.” “It
has been commonly found,” says Calvin, “in almost every age, that the common
people, though they are distinguished by unr:strained fierceness and violence, do not
proceed to such a pitch of wretchedness as nobles and courtiers, or other crafty men,
who think that they excel others in ability and wisdom.” It is a dreadful and mon-
strous thing when the governors of the Church, not only are themselves blinded, but
even blind others, and excite them to despise God and ridicule godly doctrine.

I. Fase security. It is some delusion as to their own security which leads men to
mock at the judgments of God. The ruling classes thought they had secured themselves
against an Assyrian invasion. ‘They had their fortresses, their soothsayers and
prophets, their diplomatists—the latter almost occupied with the preliminaries for a
treaty with Egypt” (Cheyne). This fancied security is expressed under a bold figure.
To be in covenant with death is like being in covenant with the beasts or the stones of
the field (Job v. 23; Hos. ii, 18). They have made, as they think, a compact with
Hades. Probably enough the allusion may be to the wizards whom they consult, If
80, it is true enough to all experience that men, when they have cast off the restraints
of true religion, seek to make up for it by dabbling in superstition. ‘The scorners or
free-thinkers have retained a strong belief in the infernal powers, though little enough
in those supernal ” (Cheyne). Idly have they made lies their refuge, and so think to be
exempt from the “ flooding scourge” as it sweeps over the land (cf. ch. viii. 7, 8). They
act as if there was any security except in “ walking uprightly, and in speaking truth
with the heart.” Their resources are spoken of by them under plausible names, and
there are ways that “seem right to them.” They do not think they are falsehoods ;
but the prophet tears away the disguise, and calls them by their proper names. “The
essentia) substance of the thoughts and words of the rulers is manifest to the Searcher
of hearts” (Delitzsch). ;

IJ, Tae tTeve rounpation. A Foundation-stone is, or shall be, laid in Zion, nay,
costly and solid (cf. 1 Kings v. 17, “Great stones, costly stones, hewed stones, to lay
the foundation of the house”), The foundation-stone of the temple typifies the
unchangeable verity of God, as revealed from age to age in his holy seat and oracle.
The believer shall rest securely upon God, and only bere shall true security be found.
(For the general idea, cf. Matt. vii. 24, 25. For the application to the Messiah, see
1 Pet. ii. 6; Rom. x. 11; Matt. xxi. 42; Luke xx. 17, 18; ii, 84; ph. ii. 20.) he
kingdom of God on earth rests on the Messiah. He was tried by temptation and other
suffering, and so proved able and sufficient for the work of salvation. His Name, his
work, is the most precious element in the Church’s foundation. And amidst every
tempest of judgment which shall sweep over the world, he who confides in Christ shall
feel that he has built upon a Rock which cannot be shaken; and shall make no haste,
shall be free from agitation and alarm. ‘Till we possess faith, we must have continual
perplexity and distress; for there is but one Object on which we can safely rely—the
truth of the Lord, which alone will give us peace and serenity of mind. Peace is the
direct result of faith (Rom, vy. 1), and faith is repose on that Foundation other than
which none can be laid (1 Cor. iii. 11).

lI. OverTHRow or FALSE REFUGES. There will be judgment exact and severe,
figured by the carpenter’s line and plummet. The hail-symbol of Divine wrath (Vs.
ev. 82; Ezek. xiii, 18; xxxviii. 22; Rev. viii. 7; xi. 19) will sweep away the refuge
of falsehood, and the hiding-place of deceit shall be carried along in the flood. hat
“covenant with death” shall be cancelled, and the “agreement with Shedl” shall not
stand. There shall be repeated Assyrian invasions; and the “tidings” at which men
laughed shall be a terror for them to hear (cf. ver. 9), Or, having neglected the soul-
message, they shall be compelled to listen to the preaching of lacts. ‘I'he proverb (ver.
20) depicts the state of distress which will exist. History will repeat itself. As when
David conquered the Philistines on Perazim and Gibeou (2 Sam. v. 20; 1 Chron, xiv,
16), or as in the scene of Josh. x. 10, Jehovah will arise to do his work of judgment,
a work more fitted for an alien people than that of his choice and love, God does nut
delight in judgment; it may even be called his “strange work,” being foreign to the
kindness of his heait. All that he drives at in his chastisements is to bring men to
the knowledge of themselves. He is “slow to anger,” and infinitely compassionate
(Ps. ciii. 8; Exod. xxxiv. 6), Or the strangeness may be that he will now proceed to


458 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. xxvii, 1-29
PE sD no EI a a


attack and exterminate his people, as formerly he had their foes. The hand felt by
their fathers for salvation shall be felt by them for destruction,

1V. Crosine avpeaL. These scornful politicians who desire to break the Assyrian
bonds are exhorted to change their minds, and so avoid the destruction otherwise
certain and iufallibly decreed by Jehovah of hosts. They wished to escape from their
fetters by a breach of faith, with the help of Egypt, without Jehovah, and so mocked
at the prophet’s warning. He therefore appeals to them to stop their scoffing, lest they
should fall out of their present bondage into one more severe, and lest the judgment
certainly at hand should fall more weightily upon them. ‘Timely repentance might
even now open a way of escape. We may apply the appeal as general. As God gives
us to foresee the issue of unwise ways in time, so by repentance may we avert the
danger. ‘Io despise the Divine justice is not courage, but madness. Let us judge our-
selves, that we may not be judged of the Lord; and because “ that day” shail come as
a thief in the night, ever let us have oil in our lamps, te. faith and repentance in our
hearts, wisdom iu the intelligence, justice and charity in our lives; and meditate daily
on the vanity and shortness of our lives, the certainty and uncertainty of our deaths,
the exactness and severity of the judgment to come, and the immutability of its results


(South).—J.


Vers. 23—29.—Proverbial lore. The ploughman’s activity and the thresher’s are set
before the people as a parable of Isracl’s tribulations. At least, this is one of the views
of the passage.

I. THE PURPOSE OF AFFLICTION. It is from God, and the end ever kept in view is
the good of the soul and its productiveness. The ploughman does not plough for
ploughing’s sake. He opens the soil, turns up the furrows, breaks the clods with the
harrow, and all to prepare for the sowing of the seed. And so far the tiller is an image
of God and of his operations on the spirit of man. ‘here is seeming severity of method,
but ever beneficence in the end. Again, there is variety of method in God’s husbandry
of the soul. As the farmer adapts his plans to the soil and to the kind of grain,
selects the best modes of preparing the ground, of sowing the grain, of collecting the
harvest, of separating the corn trom the chaff. “He does not always plough, nor always
sow, nor always thresh. He does not deal with all lands and ali grains in the same
way. Some he threshes in one mode, some in another, but he will he careful not to
break the grain or destroy it in threshing it. However severe may appear to be his
blows, his object is not to crush and destroy the grain, but to remove it from the chaff
and save it. In all this he acts the part of wisdom, for God has taught him what to
do. So with God.”

Il. Tue wispom oF THE Divine HuspanpMAN. The prophet seems struck with the
power of the analogy he has drawn; and we “ notice his larze conception of revelation.”
It is a want of reason, as it seems to us, in what we suffer that gives rise to impatience,
To detect wisdom in all we suffer is to know calm and peace in the soul’s depths. Let
us learn, then: 1, That there is @ reason at the bottom of the mystery of all we suffer,
though we may not be able to search it out and make it plain to ourselves. For our
own good, or for the good of others in the scheme of providence, we must undergo and
endure. Generally, perhaps, we may detect in the nature of the chastisement the nature
of the sin, 2. We may expect variety of trial. This means variety of experience, of
knowledge. And every such experience, manfully and dutifully outlived, brings fresh
access of hope to the soul. “ Tribulation” is an expressive word ; it is the threshing and
sifting process that must ever go on, to fit us for the garner of eternity. 3. It is not
the design of God to crush us. He will not always chide, nor always bruise, will remit
his strokes when they have had their due effect. 4, In patience, then, let us possess
our souls. As the homely proverb says, “ Patience is a plaster for all sores,” and “ All
things come round to him that waits.” We may be here more to be acted upon than
to act; to submit to a probation, the fruit and result of which will be brought to light
in some future sphere of service.—J.


Ver. 12.— Rest and refreshment. “To whom he said, This is the rest wherewith
ye may cause the weary to rest; and this is the refreshing: yet they would not hear.”
Religion is designed to give us both rest and refreshment. We are described here—


OH, xxvin. 1—29.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 459
ae a ee


I. A8 WEARY, AND NEEDING REST, Weary! Can we not feel that? We wear away.
The world is full of cares that fret and chafe us. We lose elasticity of step and cheeri-
ness of heart. How many can say, “I am very weary”? ‘lhe Bible understands man,
and therefore its words are so true and its blessings so welcome. What do the weary
need ? Why, first of all, rest. We read of Jesus that, being weary, ‘he sat himself on
the well: ” so completely exhausted was he that all strength was gone. So not only in
a physical sense do we need sweet sleep and rest; but in our human life and in our
spiritual life we are weary. What we need is rest in a Person—rest in God himself;
to rest in the Lord.

Il. As weak, AND NEEDING REFRESHMENT. We become exhausted in life’s pilgrimace.
Even in relation to spiritual supplies, our forces of faith and hope and couraze fail.
We need new supplies of grace and strength. ‘his is well; fur it would not be good for
us to be able to live on yesterday’s piety. Languor would come over our effurts after
the Divine life it we had no need to seek daily bread. But refreshment comes. The
faded flowers of our graces lift their drooping heads again. We have all seen and smelt
the sweet fields after the rain-showers; we have all noticed these “ seasons of re!reshing.”
So in the highest things. These Hebrews would yet find God. He will be again dew
unto Israel, and they will have times of refreshing from the presence ot the Lord.

III. As HEEDLESS AND UNWILLING To HEAR. “ Yet they would not hear.” Some syren
voice is still charming them and deadening their hearts to the heavenly ministry. Let
us remember that we hear what we will to hear. That is still the responsible function
of humanity, viz. to close or to open the ears to the messages of the vreat King. It
is not that God does not speak; for he speaks in many dialects: all the langnages of
human event and circumstance are at his command, With us let it be, “Speak, Lord;
for thy servant heareth.”—W. M.S,


Ver. 16.—Christ the Corner-stone. “ Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a Stone,
a tried Stone, a precious Corner-stone, a sure Foundation.” This stone we all know
to be Christ, concerning whom all the prophets did testify. It is historically true that
the Stone was laid in Zion, and what we have to treat of is the house. Here is the
Foundation. Firm, as the eternal Rock, with its roots in God’s own everlasting
nature. ‘he Foundation is not created ; it is laid. God sends forth his Son to be the
Saviour of men. This foun/ation is laid deep in toil and tears, in humility and indignity.
It is laid in the agony and bloody sweat, the cross and Passion. Yet there it is. None
can move it. Nor can any soul of man find other foundation. This Foundation is
desigiated in three ways.

I. Iv is a TRIED Stone. We are reminded of tried things. The Word of the Lord
is a tried Word. Alrcady prophets speak of the Christ as the tried Stone. The vision
they fae of him is not of a great ‘leacher simply, but of a Divine Kedeemer, upon
whose mighty work all generations of men may rest for redemption and lite. The
centuries have rolled away, and now history endorses prophecy. Generations of departed
saints have testified that Christ is a Friend that loveth at all times—a Rock that no
waters of sorrow, not even the waterfloods of death, can move.

Il. Iv 1s a Precious CogneR-stong. Yes; here the weight of the building has to
come, the Corner-stone. Precious; for there is this description everywhere given of
the Christ: “ Beside me there is no Saviour.” He is the Pearl of great price. He is
the Church’s one Foundation. Precious in himself, as holy, harmless, undefiled, and
separate from sinners. Precious, because of the living temple of redeemed souls which
he supports. Precious in the Fathei’s eyes, in the eyes of angels, and of all the great
multitude of the redeemed.

Ill. A sure Founpation. That is what we all want in religion—certainty. We can-
not do with a mere philosophic “ quest.” We want “rest.” We do not want an ornate
religion ; we want rather to be able to say, “ I know in whom I have believed.” When
the mind is palsied with doubt, when the heart is quaking with fear, then we experience
the deepest misery possible to man; for the sky above us is soon lost to view if the
rock beneath us is not firm and true. Heaven goes when faith goes, God himself
declares, “ Behold, I lay in Zion. . . a swre Foundation.”—W. M. 8.


Ver. 28.—The use of tribulation. ‘“Bread-corn is bruised.” Tribulation must


460 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. xxvi. 1—29.


a __ Ss TT TT OO


thresh our lives. And when the chaff is separated from the wheat, then the corn
must be bruised and broken. It is not the outwardly peaceful, comfortable life that has
in it the elements of ministry. The Saviour was a Man of sorrows, and acquainted with
grief. He is brought near to us as being not of the seed of angels, but of the seed of
Abraham. How were those sensibilities of his nature bruised with the hardness,
coldness, and neglect of men! How even his disciples burt him, forsaking him, and
not even watching with him one hour! ‘*Bread-corn is bruised.” ‘The Son of man
came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for
many.”

hee BEST LIFE MEANS PAIN. Bruised! Corn is not enough. It must be made
into bread. It is thus that true affection comes out when we suffer for others. So
alxo is it with true humility. It is the bruised heart that has medicaments in it for
others out of its own castings down.

IJ, THE BEST LIFE MEANS USEFULNESS. We stand in constant relationship to others.
Man may be to his brother bread of thought, through long hours of mental struggle and
agony. He may be bread of compassion too. We are to be “meet for the Master’s
use.” Thus we learn that to be mere qnietists or pietists is not enough. We must
not light the lonely lamp of incense belore the altar, and remain in rapt meditation or
even devotion, always. No. The disciples had to come down from the ecstatic moments
of the transfguration to the common earth and to homespun duty.

Ill. THe BEST LIFE MEANS OPPOSITION TO THE SPIRIT OF THE WORLD. “Save us from
being bruised,” is the cry of men of this world. “ Give us comfort, ease, health, outward
prosperity.” And so these are protected at every point. Sorrow is never welcomed as
an angel. Discipline is never thought of as a moulder of character.

IV. THE BEST LIFE MEANS GOD’Ss OWN CHASTISEMENT. ‘This is divinely appointed
and delicately ordered. It means wisdom and forethought and adaptation ; ver. 27,
“ For the fitches are not threshed with a threshing-instrument, neither is a cart-wheel
turned about upon the cummin; but the fitches are beaten out with a staff, and the
cummin with a rod.” Yes, that is it, there is a hand at work—a Father’s hand.

Y. THE BEST LIFE MEANS HUAVEN. “Because he will not ever be threshing it.”
No. Discipline, however painful, ends in the grave. The beauty of spiritual per-
fection begins when we are with the saints iu light. “These are they which came out
of great tribulation, They hunger no more. They thirst no more. There shall be no
night there.’—W, M. 8.


Vers. 1—4, 7, 8.— The evil of excess: a sermon on intemperance. The allusion here
is to the prevalent bancful vice of intemperance. The evils which are conuected with
it, and which constitute its condemnation, are such as belong to other kinds of excess,
but especially and emphatically to ¢t.

I. Honour 18 HUMILIATED BY IT. “The crown of pride is trodden under feet”
(vers, 1, 3), The proud city, which was, alas! a city given up to drunkenness, should
be brought down to the very dust. Intemperance causes the man who has held the
highest position to become despised by every neighbour that has the common virtue of
sobriety ; it takes the crown of honour from the brow; it humbles even to the ground
the pitiable victims of vice.

Il. Beaury 18 sPoILED BY IT. Its “glorious beauty becomes a faded flower”
(vers. 1, 4). Excess is found, not only in the vulgar, in the illiterate, in the uncomely,
but also in the refined, in the accomplished, in the beautiful, of the sons and daughters
of men. When it ¢s found there it soon does its fatal work. The beautiful is soon
gone both from the form and from the spirit; the green leaf withers, the exquisite
bloom fades, From that which once attracted every eye, all men turn away grieved, if
not positively repelled.

I. STRENGTH I8 SAPPED BY IT. “Overcome with wine” (ver. 1). The man
whose strength is composed of so many elements—material, mental, spiritual—is_posi-
tively beaten, overcome, made helpless, useless, ludicrous, despicable, by a few glasses
of liquor! It is a painful, shameful instance of strength being mastered by that which
it ought to be able to subdue.

IV, Wisvom Is MISLED BY rt. “They have erred through wine... are out of
the way ... they err in vision, they stumble in judgment” (ver. 7). They who, if


oH, xxvii. 1—29.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 461


eee


their faculties were unclouded, would perceive truth, and have spiritual insight, and
gain the guidance which Heaven grants to thein that seek it, are so weakened in mental
power, or so bereft of spiritual strength, that they grope in darkness wen they might
walk in the livht of the Lord.

V. INFLUENCE I8 FORFEITED BY IT. “The priest and the prophet have erred.”
Even those who, but for guilty excess, might have led the people in every good way,
are caught in the toils, are numbered among the victims, and their power is gone,
their intluence is forfeited. A drunken prophet is one whom all unite to spurn, and his
word is worth less than nothing to the cause he pleads,

VI. Iv LEADS ON AND DOWN TO THAT WHICH Is LOATHSOME. (Ver. 8.)

VU. Ir consumes 17s consumER. (Vers. 4, 7.) Man may say that they swallow
their wine, but it is truer to say of many that their wine “swallows” them; for it
devours their substance, their character, their reputation, their prospects. Everything
is “eaten up” like the “ hasty fruit before the summer,” speedily and utterly.

VILL. Gop Is DECIDEDLY AND EMPHATICALLY AGAINST IT, (Ver. 2.) He has pro-
nounced against it in strong terms, and he brings down a heavy hand upon it; the
enemy which he calls agaist those yuilty of excess is “a mighty and strong one:”
poverty, shame, remorse, loueliuess, early death, and final exclusion from his presence
(1 Cor. vi. 10).—C.


Vers. 5, 6.—God our Glory, Beauty, ete. “In that day,” te. in the day when God
shall reign over his people, either the day of their return to him in loyal obedience, or
the day of their return to their own land under his delivering power—in that day God
would be everything to his chosen people; he would be the Object and the Source of
their glory, their beauty, their righteousness, their strength. \We may see how God in
Christ is the same to us.

I. Our Guory. ‘The Lord of hosts shall be for a Crown of glory.” We glory in our
God as ti.e Lord of ail power and might, as the One whose right hand is full of righteous-
ness, as the faithful Creator, etc.; but we glory most in him as the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, in him who so pitied a rebellious race “ that he eave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believeth,” ete. In Christ Jesus the glories aud grandeurs
of the Divine character are most brilliantiy illustrated,

Il. Our Beauty. “For a Diadem of beauty.” In the gospel God has (1) revealed
the beauties of his own character to us; for in the life, in the spirit of Jesus Chnst, we
behold transcendent moral loveliness, all imayinalle graces perfectly blended and inter-
mingled. And in it he has (2) calied forth the utmost possible beauty in buman
character. There are produced in Christian lands and by Christian processes not one or
two exquisite human characters here and there, but muititudes of thein beneath every
sky and in every age; such that it is not enough to say that they are good or that they
are useful; it must be added that they are exceedingly beautilul—they are diadems,
attracting the eye, delighting the soul.

Ill. Our Rigureousness. “ For a Spirit of judgment.” The man who has “ learned
Christ” is a man of integrity ; to him injnstice, unrighteousness, dishone-ty, the with-
holding of that which is due, of whatever kind, is not ouly distasteful, but impossible:
“ the spirit of judgment,” the spirit of equity and truth is in him, gained from Christ,
implanted by the Divine Spirit. If this spirit, which is the Spirit of Christ, be not in
him, he is none of Christ’s (Rom. viii. 12).

1V. Our Srreners. “ And for Strength to them that turn the battle to the gate.”
They who truly know God in Christ are “ strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might.” God communicates to them something of the “exceeding greatness of his
power.” In Divine strength they are strong (1) to discharge duty ; (2) to bear burdens;
(8) to work in the field of holy service; (4) to resist spiritual adversaries, to “ turn the
battle to the gate.”—C.


Vers. 9—18.—Jndocility. When God speaks man may well listen, whatsoever
strains the Divine Teacher may employ. But man is often found to be, not only an
inapt, but even an unwilling, scholar. Such were they who are here terribly rebuked.

I. Tue Design or Gon’s TEACHING. God had been saying, “This is the rest,” ete.
(ver.12). Tbe end of all God’s instruction is to give rest to his human schvlars. Peace


462 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. xxvuL 1—29,


was the promise of the old covenant (Numb. vi. 26; xxv. 12). Rest was the offer of
the great Teacher (Matt. xi. 28, 29). Rest of heart in the favour and love o! God was
the high and elevated hope held out for all who would learn and be obedient; and
this is still the desire and the design of God in all his teaching and in all his
correction.

Il. May’s opsecrion To Gop’s meTHop. “To whom,” they complain, “ shall he
teach knowledve . . . to them that are weaned . . . must it be precept upon precept ?”
etc. (vers. 9, 10). Are we such little children that we are to be treated thus by
Jehovah? Men have always been found who object to God’s ways of guiding them.
It is too plain and palpable, or it is too mysterious ; it demands no effort of the intellect,
or it taxes the thouglit too severely; it is too commonplace, or it is too startling, or it
is too hard; were he to adopt some other method, to come to them in some other way,
they would listen and obey; but as he speaks they will not hear. Especially are men
slow to learn the simple and repeated lessons by which God teaches them in his
providence—the lessons which come with every morning light and with every evening
shade, with the continued loving-kindnesses of the passing hour, with the changes of
the seasons, witli the passage of neighbours and friends to another world; these reite-
rated tcachings are disregarded, and the one great lesson of reverence and of devotedness
is unlearned.

III. Gop’s INDIGNATION AT HUMAN conTuMACcY. The strain of the prophet is one
outpouring of iniense indignation and keen re! uke; the anger of Jehovah is kindled
against them. We may understand that persistent indocility is a very serious sin in
the estimate of God. Not to hearken when he speaks to us, whether he speaks in
providence, in his Word, or in Christian ordinances, is to place ourselves beneath his
very high displeasure.

IV. living rerrisutTion. The penalty of their perverse indocility shall be that
they will have to learn by far less azreeable methods than tlie one which they despised ;
the repeated elementary instruction of the Hebrew projhet should give place to the
barbarous suunds of a foreign tongue. Guilty tolly often finds that punishment awaits
it which correspoids only too painiully with the sm. ‘he Jews demand a king because
they } refer the visible to the invisible, the physical to the spiritual; and thvy gain one
who is chosen on this cherished principle of theirs, and his bodily stature and visible
form prove to be a sorry substitute for the wisdom of the invisible Suvereiyn : the penalty
is paid in the same coin as the transgression. David’s unholy imterference with
domestic right is punished by saddest and most serious disappoiltments in his own
family. Retribution, not general only, but that which is particularly appropriate to
our sin, awaits us a little further on. Disobedience—aud emphatically indocility—leads
to misery and shame. Hearken intelligently, however and whenever God may speak,
and hasten cheerlully to obey.—O.


Vers. 14, 15, 18—20.—The infatuation of sin. In strong, pictorial language the
prophet points out—

I, ‘THAT SINFUL MEN ACT AS IF THEY COULD AVERT IMPENDING Doom. They act
as if they said, “ We have made a covenant with death,” etc. Every day the guilry
and the fvolish are living as if they were possessed with a power to wrestle with and
overcome approaching doom. ‘The drunkard seems to say, “1 will drink, and not be
ruined in health;” and the gambler to say, “I will stake money, and not be disap-
pointed; ” and the rogue to say, “I will defraud, and not be detected ;” and the men
who “ mind earthly thi: gs” to say, “ We will invest all our hopes and find all our
heritage in this world, and not be robbed of our portion,” ete. Such men seem to buoy
themselves up with that which, to all that look on, is a transparent infatuation,

I], THAT SINFUL MEN CONVINCE THEMSELVES OF THAT WHICH THEY MIGHT KNOW
TO BE WHOLLY FALSE, They ‘‘make lies their refuge, and hide themselves under
falsehoods.” 1. They choose the wrong course, and tell themselves they are acting
under compulsion, and are guiltless. 2. They soften their sin by covering it with some
pleasant euphemism, 38. ‘lhey place between themselves and the condemnation of God
the shield of human example, the frequency and popularity of their vice; they screen
themselves behind their brethren, as if God did not see them, and did not hold them
guilty. 4. They allow evil practice to beget such obliquity of moral vision that they


OH. xxvill. 1—29.] THE BOQK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 463
a ee a


call good “ evil,” and evil “ good ;” they even “ glory in their shame,” so have they lied
unto themselves,

Ill. THAT sINFUL MEN ACT AS IF THEY COULD RELY ON SUCCOUR WHICH I8 WORTH-
Less. They stretch themselves on a bed which is too short for their stature; they wrap
themselves with clothing which will not cover them (ver. 20). In their weariness
they resort to pleasures which do not give them rest, and from which they rise as tired
as before. In their sorrow, or in their shame, or in their defeat, they have recourse to
comforts which give no heart-ease, and leave them sad and troubl:d in soul. Many
weary years, whole periods of life, even an entire earthly course, will men spend, trying
and pitifully failing to console themselves with false comforts, to find rest in excite-
ments, in vanities, and sometimes in vices, which have no power to soothe and satisfy
the soul which only truth and love can fill.

IV. THaT GoD WILL ONE DAY AROUSE THEM FROM THEIR GUILTY ERROR. (Vers.
18, 19.) ‘The overflowing scourge will come, and will noé pass by them; they will be
trodden down beneath it. The overwhelming storm will hold them in its embrace of
death. The day of disillusion, of self-reproach, of shame, of Divine retribution, will
arrive: “ Be not deceived [do not deceive yourselves]; God is not mocked: for what-
soever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.”—C.


Vers. 16—22.— The judgments of God. When human folly has gone to so great
a length (ver. 15), it may look out for the coming of Divine judgment ; for this cannot
be long delayed. And when we look we find—

I, THE SEVERITY OF Gop’s VISITATION. 1. It will correspond closely with man’s
guilt, as if measured with line and plummet (ver. 17); it will be broad as its breadth,
deep as its depth, enlarged to its magnitude; more severe as man’s g11i]t is more wanton,
most severe as it is most aggravated and inexcusable. 2. It will be literally destructive,
sweeping away the false refuge (ver. 18), tearing up the unholy compact (ver. 19),
causing consternation as it proceeds on its desolating path (ver. 19), compelling those
who try to make shift with earthly succour to know the utter insufficiency of their
measures (ver. 20), constituting a very “ consumption ” of all that had been possessed
and rejoiced in (ver. 22). When “the day of the Lord” comes it is often found to be
a very terrible time indeed, stripping the rich and strong of his wealth and power,
humbling the society or the nation to the very dust, causing lamentation, shame,
death.

Il. THE APPARENT SUDDENNESS OF IT. (Ver. 21.) As, in the person of David, the
Lord “ broke forth like a breach of waters” upon the enemy (2 Sain. v. 20), so suddenly
will he appear in judgment against those who break his laws and reject his Son. The
waters have been long cullecting, the banks have been long loosening, but in a few
minutes, at the last, the dam is broken, and the rushing streams are down the valley-
side, carrying destruction in their path. So is it with the accumulating wrath of God:
this is “ treasured ” up by sin after sin, year after year (Rom. ii. 5); but at some point
in the career it “breaks forth ” like David’s army, like the descending waters, and
behold everything is gone—treasure, reputation, health, prospects, life itself.

III. Gon’s rNDISPOsITION TO SMITE. It is a strange work, a strange act, to God
(ver. 21). ‘To confer and to sustain life, to impart blessing, to multiply riches, to
enlarge the mind, to strengthen and sanctify the soul, to fill with hope and joy,—this
is the work which is natural, congenial, pleasant to him whose Name is love. But to
visit with penalty, to smite rather than to spare, to inflict sorrow and humiliation,—
this is strange, ungenial, joyless to the heavenly Father. “As I live,” saith God, “I
have no pleasure in the death of the wicked.” He delighteth in mercy, but he is
constrained to punish.

1V. THE PURPOSE OF MERCY THAT RUNS THROUGH THE DIVINE JUDGMENT. (Ver. 16.)
In the midst of a passage where we should expect to find nothing but holy indignation,
we meet with the intention to bless. Notwithstanding all that provokes to wrath
and deserves destruction, there is to be laid the precious Corner-stone which nothing
can remove, and which will uphold the most majestic fabric of prosperity and joy.
God visits with correction—severe, continuous, complete; yet he has a redemptive
purpose on his mind, and out of all the strife and discord a glorious temple of truth


and piety will arise.


464 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cn. xxvu1. 1—29.
eee ee oe ee ee ee


We learn that the faithful have no need to fear. “ He that believeth shall not make
haste.” (1) No need to be alarmed for his own safety ; for God, whois his Refuge, will
hide him in the pavilion of his power. (2) No need to take hurried or questionable,
certainly not forbidden or unworthy, steps for the deliverance of others; for God’s
promised word is the assurance of ultimate redemption.—C.


Vers, 23—29.— Divine discrimination. There are two preliminary lessons we may
gather from these verses before we pluck the principal one.

1, THAT IN THE ACTS AND INDUSTRIES OF MAN WE MAY FIND APT ILLUSTRATIONS
OF THE wispomM or Gop. “Give ear and hear” (ver. 23). There is something well
worth observing in human husbandry ; it will teach the student a useful lesson respect
ing the ways of God. Not only from the lilies of the field and from the birds of the
air, but also from the arts and industries of man, come suggestions which will explain
Divine providence and give rest to the troubled mind.

IJ. THAT AGRICULTURE AFFORDS ONE PROOF OF THE PRESENCE AND POWER OF A
Divine INTELLIGENCE. How is it that, while the birds and the beasts continue through
all succeeding ages to supply their wants by the same unchanging processes, man is
ever moving forward? From hunting to grazing, from grazing to agriculture, he
ascends; and in agriculture he shows a discretion and a versatility which are striking
to all who have eyes to see and souls to learn. The fact is that man is taught of God.
“His God doth instruct him,” etc. (ver. 26); it comes from him who is “ wonderful
in counsel” (ver.29). The intelligence, the shrewdness, the inventiveness, the patience,
the foresight, which are manifested in husbandry, go far to assure us that God is near
us, laying his hand upon us, touching the springs of our mind, calling forth from us
Hla and moral faculties which, though immeasurably inferior, are yet akin to

is own.

Ill. Tuar Gop 18 SHOWING A CAREFUL DISCRIMINATION IN THE TREATMENT OF
HIS ERRING CHILDREN. ‘This is the lesson of the prophet’s illustration: the busband-
man only ploughs till he is ready to sow; he always threshes with the instrument
which is suitable, adjusting his means to the character of the corn; he orders every-
thing with careful, discriminating consideration of what is best at the particular time
with the particular object. So carefully, so wisely, so tenderly, does God deal with us.
1. He mingles mercies with judgments, light with shade, hope with fear: ‘He does
not always chide.” He sows as well as ploughs. 2. He places us in spheres that
suit us; some in the more prominent, others in the more humble, parts of the field
(ver. 25). 3. He applies his chastisement according to our nature and our character
(vers. 27, 28): to some—to the more hardened and abandoned—he administers his
severer blows; to others—to his people who, though his people, have much yet to
learn—he sends the milder and gentler measures of rebuke; on them he lays his hand
more tenderly.

Learn: 1. That God, in chastisement, is seeking fruit—the harvest of love, of trust,
of obedience, of service, 2, That if he deals severely with us, it is because severity is
needed for the high purpose he has before him, 8. That he will never deal too
rigorously with any one of his children.—C.


Ver. 1.—The woe of the drunkard. On this subject there is grave danger of saying
extravagant, unqualified, and unreasonable things. The abstract rightness or wrong-
ness of using strong drinks must be decided by the individual judgment. Enough now
to say that no man with the spirit of a patriot, much less with the spirit of a Christian
—who is his brother’s keeper,—can observe the growth of drinking habits in modern
society without serious alarm; no mothers without grave anxiety for their sons; no
wives without deep concern for their husbands and themselves. ‘The common speech
about drink too often leaves the impression that the evil of it lies in the drink itself,
and so tends to take our minds from the much more serious fact that the evil of drink
lies in us, and in its relation to us—in feebleness of will, and lack of self-restraint and
self-control,

J, WHEREIN LIES THE PERIL OF STRONG DRINK? Precisely in its strength, in its
raging. “Strong drink is raging.” There is produced by it an elevation and excitement
that are beyond nature; according to the differences of men’s dispositions, it is either an


oH. Xxvil. 1—29.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 465
a EEE eee


elevation, or a raging of folly or of violence. Our peril lies in yielding to the unnatural
or the unnecessary. 1, Ihe wrnatural. Every man is in duty bound to develop all
his faculties up to the limit of their capacity. But every man is in «uty bound also
not to develop some to the neglect of others; and not to excile any to a degree beyond
his full and perfect self-control, So far as he does he ceases to be a true man; a foreign
power has taken the place of his central will, and he is, in fact, a man possessed and ruled
by an evil force, by a devil. This may be illustrated by showing (1) the unnatural
effect produced by strong drink on the physical frame; (2) the effect on the moral
nature, especially in exciting sensual passions; (3) the influence on the children and
descendants of the self-indulgent. ‘his is so important a point, and brings to view
such obscure, but painful facts, that a few may be set down from which selections may
be made. Gall relates the case of a Russian family, where the father and grandfather
had both died prematurely from the effects of intoxication, and the grandson manifested
from the age of five years the most decided taste for strong liquors. M. Morel says, « I
have uever seen the patient cured of his propensity whose tendencies to drinking were
derived from the hereditary predisposition given to him by his parents.” He gives also
the history of four generations of a family. First generation: the father an habitual
drunkard, killed in a public-house brawl. Second generation: son inherited the father’s
habits, which gave rise to attacks of mania, terminating in paralysis and death. Third
generation: grandson strictly sober, but full of hypochondriacal and imayinary fears
of persecution, and had homicidal tendencies. Fourth generation: great-yrandson, very
limited intelligence, an attack of madness when sixteen years old, terminating in
stupidity nearly amounting to idiocy. With him the race became extinct. We can
conceive no revelation of the wnnaturalness of the condition and relations produced by
strong drink more impressive than this. 2. [tis unnecessary ; for it satisfies no demand
of the true manhood; only the demands of a depraved, disordered, and diseased taste.
The best that can be said of it is that it may be a medicine. It is now well established
that it is not a necessary food.

II. WuHo AMONG US LIE EXPOSED TO THE TEMPTATIONS OF STRONG DRINK? This may
be answered with great plainness, simplicity, aud practical force. 1. Those who are born
into a heritage of drinking tendencies. 2. Those who have sume ability in song or enter-
taining, and so are enticed into company and treated for the sake of the pleasure they
give (compare the case of the poet Burns), 38. Tiose who have idle time which can be
spent in inns and hotels. 4. Those who have great business energy and enterprise
without the restraining influence of high moral] principle. 5. Those who, having little
pleasure in intelligent occupations, seek excitement in the indulgence o! bodily passion.
6. Those who have unhappy or uncomfortable homes. 7. ‘’hose whose daily work
takes them to houses where they are treated to drink. All are in special peril at holi-
day or convivial seasons, and in times of convalescence from disease, or of family trouble.
No one of us can venture to say, amidst the enticements of modern social life, “ I shall
never fall, I shall never be a drunkard.” He neither knows himself, nor the subtlety
of the evil, who speaks so confidently. Our power to stand lies in our laying hold of
One who is stronger than ourseives, and keeping up the prayer, “ Lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil.” Every day and everywhere, with our eyes on
God, we should be saying, “ Hold thou us up, and we shall be safe.”—R, T.


Vers. 5, 6.— Beauty, wisdom, and strength for us in God. Kings wear crowns; kings
decide causes and give judgment; kings lead armies to battle; so kings must be chiefly
in the thought of the prophet here. But kings are, or ought to be, the representatives
of the nations they rule; the realized ideals of the nation, the persons in whom they
can see their best selves. Hezekiah was in some good sense such a king. What God
was to bim, God would be to all his people; Isaiah even says, God was to the residue
of his people, to the pious ones of Judah, when Samaria was taken, and the kingdom of
Israel destroyed. The prophet first speaks admiringiy of them, and then finds occasion
for the qualilying of his praise (vers. 7, 8). We may consider what God can be to his
people, when they open heart and life to his incomings and inworkings.

I, CHARACTER FOR THE FELLOWSHIPS OF LIFE comes oF Gop. Upon character the
pleasantness and graciousuess of life upions and associations almost entirely depend,
Those who have the true helpful and sanctifying power among us are those who have

ISAIAH. au


466 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. xxv. 1—29,


a


the “beauty of the Lord their God upon them.” There are spheres of life in which
talent tells; but in homes and society it is character that tells. After illustrating and
enforcing this, the importance of correcting the error of sentiment, which regards
character as a purely human growth and attainment, should be shown. So easily do we
say, “Character, we can win ihat ourselves.” So needful is it to show that “ character
is of God.” It comes out of the circumstances which God provides, and out of the
relations in which God sets us, and through sorrows, bearings, and strugglings, which
God sanctifies. St. Paul says, “I am what I am.” “ His grace on me was notin vain.”

IJ. WisboM FOR THE AFFAIRS OF LIFE coMES OF Gop. We have natural skill for
some forms of business or of profession; but who endowed us with the natural ability ?
We gain practical skill amidst the experiences of life; but who renews the mental
powers and bodily health, and presides over impressions made? A thousand complex
conditions come in every life: who guides to right decisions, directing the judgment in
ways of truth? “ This wisdom cometh from above.”

IIL SrrexGrH FOR THE DEMANDS OF LIFE comes oF Gop. ‘The psalmist lifts a
thankful heart to God who “ renews our youth like the eagle’s.” He “ giveth power to
the faint, and to them that have no might he increaseth strength.” No experience of
life is more assured, none brings a deeper rest to our hearts than this—“ when we are
weak, then we may be strong” in God.—R. T.


Ver. 7.—The moral deterioration of self-indulgent habits. ‘They err in vision, they
stumble in judgment.” Isaiah treats wine and strong drink in much the same way as
we do now. Jl'o him it was the prominent instance, and so it could be made the type,
of self-indulgence, which has many forms and many expressions. Certain very manifest
degradations follow on indulgence in strong drink, or in opium, or in morphia, and in
these cases oppressive illustraiions are given of the evils that attend lesser or less
apparent indulgences, An ever-working law applies to all cases, small as well as great ;
but we may more easily trace the working in the great. This may be shown by some
careful accounts of the deterioration of mind and character following on drink-indulgence
in men, and even more painfully in women. Terrible stories of the ruin of character
wrought by opium-smoking in China can be given. And recently, very painful revela-
tions have been made of the existence of a degrading morphio-mania, especially among
the upper classes, Persons who have had morphia injected under the skin, to relieve
pain, find a craving for it created; they indulge the passion, and the result is utter
mental and moral helplessness, and a certaiu, dreadful death. In measure, the law of
deterioration applies to indulgence in eating, in drinking tea, in matters of sensual
passion, in craving for newspapers, in seeking pleasure, and even in matters of play
or of hobby. As soon as the indulgence in anything gets established it begins to
degrade. A man loses his manhood as soon as any thing is allowed to vain control over
him; and with lost manhood comes dimmed vision and stumbling judgment. The
moral consequences of self-indulgence may be fully treated under four divisions.

I, PuysicAL EFFECTS ON BODIES. This must be considered, because we are every day
coming better to understand the close connection between bodily conditions and moral
states. The moral habit becomes tightly fixed by an actual bodily bias, an actual
tendency of nerve and muscle to do again what has been done once.

II, Mora EFFECT ON wiLLs. ‘There is an actual weakening of will-force. The
power to say “ No” fades and dies out, and the will is borne away wheresoever mere
appetite leads.

III. PracricAL EFFECT ON conDUcT. Wherever moral control is limited conduct
becomes dangerous or disgraceful.

IV, FinaL EFFECT ON FATE. Whatever the view taken of the future state, they are
at terrible disadvantage in it—even if it be a continuous reforming condition—who
start on it degraded by self-indulgence.—R. T,


Ver. 10.—WNeed for the reiteration of truth. ‘Le upon line.” It is not difficult to
set forth the practical applications of this passage; but we cannot be quite sure that we
know the exact original bearing of the words. Three suggestions have been made. L
Ver. 9 may refer to God’s favour to the Jews; then ver. 10 describes the abundant
revelation made to them, with rules and duties related to all the conditions and emer-


OH. XXvnOL 1—29.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 467


gencies of life. 2. Ver. 9 may refer to the incapacity of the leaders and religious
teachers of the Jews; then ver. 10 describes their puerile methods of instruction. 3.
Ver. 9 may refer to the incapacity of the people for high attainment in spiritual know-
ledge; then ver. 10 describes the elementary methods of instruction which are found
necessary for them. This may be reyvarded as the most probable explanation, The
prophet is describing the effect of drunkenness, which was moral and intellectual
weakening. Sin is represented as an enfeebling drunkenness. It is quite in Isaiah’s
method to complain of the incapacity of the people for the reception of truth: ch, liii. 1,
“Who hath believed our report,” etc.? ch. vi. 9, “Hear ye indeed, but understand
not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not;” ch. xliii. 8, “Bring forth the blind
people that have eyes, and the deaf that have ears;” ch. xliii. 17, “O Lord, why hast
thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our heart from thy fear?” Out of
this relation of the text comes the thought for present consideration. It is this—
Religious truths, claims, and duties need to be constantly reiterated. The work of the
Christian teacher can be put into two words—“ simplify” and ‘ repeat.” Both obser-
vation and experience prove the necessity for such constant repetition. We inquire—

I, THE REASONS FOR THIS ARRANGEMENT. As aa fact, it has been found an essential
of effective teaching in every age. One generation only passes in a very limited degree
into possession of the thought and knowledge of the previous generation. No one
individual can make advances from the platform of attainment reached by another.
Each one must reach the knowledge of truth, and the sense of duty, for himself. This
makes the Bible and Christian teaching such ever-new things. Solomon tells us that
there is no new thing under the sun; but he might with equal truth have said that
there is no old thing. We can see that there must be reiteration: 1. Because moral
completeness is never reached on this side the grave, and so there is always a sphere for
the teacher, and a demand for the old truths. We are constantly asking for the renewal
of the same good influences, and as we grow in experience we even care more for the
simpler first principles. 2. Because the power of spiritual motives is always liable to
weaken and fade. Christian teaching proposes no mere fashioning of life; it would
nourish, revive, requicken the very springs of motive and feeling, ever seeking to make
and to keep the heart and the will right. The physician not only removes suffering, he
purifies the blood, and seeks to quicken the vitality. Just as the fountains and the
streams, so our spiritual natures, teud to lose their volume, and even run dry; there
must be the constant reiteration of the showers for their replenishing. 3. Because
truth and duty-claims can only enter in as they find souls prepared for them; and
therefore truth and duty must be always standing before men’s doors, waiting their
opportunity. The humac heart is closed to religion, and, when opened, its tendency is
ever to close again. It is like a spring-door, and sin and self-love have put the spring
on. When providences and sanctified influences open the door, the old, old truth, and
the old, old gospel, must be waiting, ready to enter in.

II. Some THINGS CONNECTED WITH US IN WHICH THIS REITERATION IS EVIDENTLY
NECESSARY. What a joy it would be to Christian pastors and teachers if none of their
people needed !—1. To be urged to accept the offvrs of Divine mercy. But many a door
is shut yet; so the message must be spoken again and again. 2. To be reminded of
the duty of attending public worship, and the means of grace. 3. To be persuaded
concerning the cultivation of Christian unity ; the expression of a Christly forgiveness,
forbearance, and charity in relations one with another. 4. To have enforced upon them
the duty of watchfulness against the encroachments of the worldly spirit, and the loss
of Christian zeal, fervour, and first love. What a joy it would be to Christian teachers
if they could safely “ leave these first principles, and go on unto perfection”! if they
might lay down the minister’s commission, as it is now understood, because they could
say, “ Lord, thy people no longer need precept upon precept, and line upon line”! Plead,
in conclusion, thus: “ You often say of the ministry, ‘It is the same old story ; there
is nothing new.’ But the question is—Have you accepted the message? Have you
obeyed the command? It can never be old until you have, and then it will be so loved
and so precious that you will never think it old; it will be ever fresh and ever new.”—R.T.


Ver. 10.—Mockers of religion. A different explanation to that given in the previous
homily is finding favour in modern times, The passage is supposed to represent the


468 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET? ISAIAH. [on xxvin. 1—29.


 ——————————————————


drunkards mocking Isaiah over their cups. “Does he not know what respectable
persons he is dealing with, not like children who need leading-strings, but educated
priests and prophets? They have caught up from Isaiah one of his favourite words
(probably), and repeat it with a sneer. He is always interfering with moral and politi-
cal recommendations; always finding some ‘little’ point to censure and correct”
(Cheyne). “Vers. 9, 10 contain the taunting language of the drunken priests and
judges of the Jews, who repel with scorn the idea that they should require the plain
and reiterated lessons which Jehovah taught by his messengers. Such elementary
instruction was fit only for babes; it was an insult to their understanding to suppose
that they stood in need of it” (Henderson). Dr. 5S. Cox puts this view of the passage
in a very striking and forcible way: “In their private intercourse with each other,
when, as Isaiah tells us, they ‘were swallowed up of wine’... in their shameless
carousals, the false priests, and the prophets who backed them with ‘lying visions,’
made themselves great sport in jeering at Isaiah, in ridicnling the one prophet who
cared more for the welfare of the people than for their applause, and loved the service
of God more than the pleasure of the senses. They mocked at his incorrivible sim-
plicity. They mimicked and burlesqued his manner of speech. ‘Whom wonld he teach
knowledge?’ they cried; ‘and to whom would he make a messaze intelligible? To
weanlings from the milk, just withdrawn from the breast?’ To them he seemed an
intolerable moralist, for ever schooling them as if they were babes, and ne: ded the mere
milk of instruction, and not strong men capable of digesting meat. ‘ With him,’ they
said, ‘it is always precept on precept, line on line, line on line, here a little, and there
a little.’ Or, as we may, perhaps, better translate their words, they said, ‘ With him it is
always “bid and bid, forbid and forbid, a little bit here, and a little bit there.”’ What
really angered these burly scorners was that the prophet treated them as though they
were children only just weaved, and not masters in Israel. They were weary of hearing
him repeat the first rudiments of morality, aud apply them to the sins and needs of
the time.” We may fix attention on this point—Mocking at religion and religious
teachers represents the last stage of apostasy. here is little hope for the mockers;
they must go into the fires of judgment. But what stages do men pass throuch before
they reach this point of decline? In answering this question we may keep our eye on
the illustrations afforded by the apostasy of Jewish priests and rulers, and at the same
time make due applications to the perils of apostasy, as we may ourselves be exposed to
them.

I. The religious man steps upon the sliding, downward road, when he begins to
NEGLECT PERSONAL SOUL-CULTURE. As the Apostle John tells us, a man prospers only
as his soul prospers. ‘lhe essential thing in the good man is not well-ordered conduct,
but the regenerate life. The new life needs its care and its food continually. This
neglect of soul-culture is the “grieving of the Holy Ghost,” of which St. Paul warns us
so earnestly. It is the “ leaving of the first love” of which the risen and living Christ
complains. A man goes wrong first in matters of private devotion and Christian habit,

Il. The next step is the EN1HRONING OF SELF-WILL IN THE PLACE or Gop’s WILL.
Lose the sacred humility and fear that comes with close relations to God, and self
will be sure to grow big, and the rule of life comes to be the “devices and desires of our
own hearts.” ‘Then mistakes, stumblings, and wanderings are easy ; and “ broad ” ways
are pieferred to narrow.

III. As soon as this condition is established, there arises the wish to SEE AND KNOW
NOTHING THAT CAN POSSIBLY CONVIUT AND HUMBLE; and the man lets the dust cover
his Bible, the grass grow over his kneeling-place, and excuses keep him from the house
of God. Like these priests and leaders, they are at heart atraid of what God’s Isaiahs
might say to them. May we not frar that this is the secret reason for modern neglect
of God’s worship? Men do not wish to be warned. They fear lest they should be
warned, They do not want to hear the truth about the degrading slavery in which
idol self always holds its victims,

IV. Then comes the beginning of the almost hopeless stages. A BLINDING AND
HARDENING PROCESS GOES ON; and presently those who would not see cannot sev.
Then a man can hear all the terrors, and heed none of them; can listen to all the per-
suasions of the everlasting love, and be moved by none of them.

V. And at last he CAN EVEN MOCK AT GOODNESS AND GOOD MEN; and in his foolish


CH. Xxvill. 1—29,] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 469
Ci ea


and wicked pride can scoff even at God’s Word and God’s prophet. Down low indeed
that man must have fallen who once knew the “ glory of the Lord,” and waited for the
Lord’s will, and now, in his rioting, can jeer at sacred things. Impress that those who
neglect the culture of piety put from them all gracious influences, and become so
possessed with the evil spirit of self that, like the demoniac in the Gospels, they say,
even to the healing, saving Christ, “ What have we to do with thee ?”—R. T.


Ver. 16.—The sure Foundation. “A precious Corner-stone, a sure Foundation”
(Revised Version). It is characteristic of prophetic messages that, however severely sins
may be denounced, and judgment declared, in the very midst of the message some word
of love and hope and cheer is put in for the sake of the true and faithful ones. God is
ever mind/ul of his elect remnant. Those who are striving to be obedient and righteous
in a degenerate age, and in the midst of abounding self-indulgence, are within his
observation, and they shall never want the encouragement of his smile, or the cheering,
comforting word of his promise. This text is a message sent to such faithful ones.
It contrasts the grounds on which the confidence of the true Israel rests with the
grounds of confidence which those were trying to fashion for themselves who wished to
live in sin and self-will. Whatever mizht be the appearances of things, their founda-
tions would surely prove in the day of trial to be “refuges of lies.” However it may be
despised, the old Zion-Foundation would be found to abide firm—a tried Stone, a sura
Foundation, in the days of flood and storm. The best of all commentaries on this text,
and its associated verses, is found in the figure with which our Lord cloued the
Sermon on the Mount. Our Lord translated the Zion-Fouudation for us, setting it
out so plainly that none need misunderstand. God’s safe foundation is just this-—
Hearing his words, and doing them. He that builds his lite and his hope on that
foundation “ shall never be moved.”

I, THE FOUNDATION-PRINCIPLE OF MORALS AND RELIGION. By “morals” we mean
right relations with our fellow-men. By “religion” we mean right relations with God.
Both these lie on one and the same foundation-principle. The prophet spoke to the
men of Jerusalem and Judah, who were familiar with the temple of Solomon. He
bids them look at its foundations, and especially observe how all the temple was reared
upon the majestic stone Jaid at the corner that juts out into the valley, the massive
stone that lies in its place to-day just as they set it in Solomon’s tiine—a precious corner-
stone, asure foundation. But he reminds them that the temple, its courts, and its
worship, represented and symbolized the Jewish people, as a nation consecrated to God,
and so that foundation-stone represented the first, the essential principle of the national
life, which was this—full consecration to God, in trust, obedience, and righteousness,
They were a people pledged in a covenant with Jehovah. Their pledge was the founda-
tion-stone of their national life. That pledge they expressed thus: ‘The Lord our
God will we serve, and him only will we obey.” When they passed to a life of self-
will they shifted from the true foundation. But so long as that old temple stood in the
centre of the land, it spoke out, day and nicht, its unceasing reproach, “ Other Founda-
tion can no man lay than that is laid.’ Translated into Christian form by St. Peter
(1 Epist. ii. 6, 8), the spiritual Foundation is Christ; and we are to be building day by
day, stone by stone, on the foundation-principle which Christ laid for us in his own
consecrated life—the principle of full obedience to God, rendered in a spirit of trustful,
childlike humility and love. There is really but one antagonistic principle of life ta
this, It may gain various forms and expressions, but they are shapes assumed by one
body. Tbe principle is this—life for self, the making ot self our foundation.

Il. Tue POSSIBILITY OF RAISING A NOBLE LIFE ON THIS FOUNDATION. Foundations
usually do no more than give stability to a building, but a moral foundation does more
than this—it gives character to all that is reared upon it. Let a man’s foundation for
life be a determination to win material success, and it will surely tone everything he
does with energy and perseverance. Life touched and inspired with this principle of
trustful obedience to God cannot fail to be noble, because it will: 1. Be pure; the
charm of the “right” will lie on everything. 2. Be generous; because living vut of
self anc for God involves living out of self and for uthers. 3. Be God-like; for thi
very things which Gud approves and seeks we also shall approve and seek.

11L ‘THe secURITY OF THE OHARACTER AND LIFE BRAISED ON THIS FOUNDATION.


470 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [ca. xxvunt. 1—29.
Sk


This is expressed in the figure of the last clause. As repeated in Scripture it takes
three forms. 1. Shall not make haste, or hurry out of his house when calamity seems
to threaten. 2. Shall not be ashamed when the angels come to test the character of
the life. 3. Shall not be confounded when the days of storm threaten to overwhelm.
We are each one of us raising a temple—the temple of a character, of a life. Concerning
our work we may well ask two searching questions. It is on the one sure Foundation ?
Are we raising it in a manner that is worthy of the Foundation ?—R. T.


Ver 2.—Man’s inability to order his own life. This verse is very possibly a
popular proverb, which suggested a condition of painful uneasiness. Matthew Henry
gives, briefly and suggestively, its meaning as used here by Isaiah, and as applicable
to us: “Those that do not build upon Christ as their Foundation, but rest in a right-
eousness of their own, will prove in the end thus to have deceived themselves; they
never can be easy, safe, or warm; the bed is too short, the covering is too narrow.”
'Vhis line of thought may be followed out, and duly illustrated. First make a fair
and true picture of a human life fashioned by the man himself. Let him win good
measures of success; and let him stand forth the envy of his feilows. Let us see the
bed he makes for himself to lie on; and the coverlet with which he propuses to wrap
himself up—a fine bed, a beautiful coverlet. But all life-creations have to be tested ;
they must be “tried so as by fire.” Let us see this human life tested. Time tests;
success tests; trouble tests; the true Man, Christ Jesus, as our standard, tests; the
future tests. How does the self-crdered life stand these testings? It is plain—

J. THAT THE SELF-ORDERED LIFE ONLY MEETS THE BODILY NEEDS, AND PROVES
SHORT FOR THESE.

Il. Iv ONLY MEETS THE MENTAL NEEDS, AND IS SHORT FOR THESE.

Ill. Ir ONLY MEETS THE SOCIAL NEEDS, AND IS SHORT FOR THESE.

IV. Iv MAKES NO PROVISIONS FOR THE SPIRITUAL AND ETERNAL NEEDS, and every
advancing year makes these more and more the supremely important ones. Verily
“it is not in man that walketh to direct his steps” Tuen what can he do? What
should he do? (see ch. xxvii. 5).—R. T.


Ver. 27.—God im material things illustrates God in moral things. The precise
purpose for which this illustration from agricultural customs is introduced by the
prophet is much disputed. We note that Isaiah declares the skill which the farmer
shows in choosing his times and adapting his methods, comes directly from God; and
this suggests two points for treatment.

I, Man PLAINLY wANTs GOD FOR THE GETTING OF HIS DAILY BRBAD.

IJ. How much MoRE, THEN, DOES HE WANT GOD FOR THAT BREAD WHICH SHALL
FEED THE S0UL UNTO EVERLASTING LIFE!—k, T.


Ver. 29.—God’s work in men’s minds and wills. The literal translation of the last
clause of this verse is, “He makes counsel wonderful, he makes wisdom great.” The
husbandman’s treatment of his crop, no less than his preparation of the soil, is a dic-
tate of experience under Divine teaching. But these things are not chiefly matters of
hand and arm; they are matters of thought, mind, judgment, will, decision. The handi-
craft in a farm is the carrying out of decisions of mind and resolves of will. This is
true of all the business life of men; the bodily activities follow upon mental activities,
and we are reminded that God is at the very beginnings, the secret sources of things,
presiding over movement of thought and impulse of will. The consideration of this
topic may be used to correct our constant disposition to close up parts of our being and
our life from God, giving him access only to some of them. We may consider— va

I, Toe MAKER OF MAN’S MIND AND WILL SURELY KNOWS THEM. The thought
of our bodies, set by their five senses in relation to the material world, was altogether
the thought of God, But it is harder to realize that the endowment of a mental nature
is also a thought of God, It is harder because our mental nature is subject to growth;
and we can separate the idea of growth from God, And it is yet harder for us to
realize that the partial independence of the creature, in the trust of free-will, is also a
thought of God, because that very independence leads us to shake off all sense of God.
Yet the fact remains that ho made us, and he knows us altogether


CH. xxix. 1—24,.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 471


II]. Tat Maker OF MAN’S MIND AND WILL SURELY CONTROLS THEM. We must
recognize that both mind and will are under strict limitations. Men think and think
on, but at length the brain-agent breaks down, or they get beyond themselves, and talk
vague folly. And to the most strong-willed, the authoritative voice presently comes,
saying, “Thus far shalt thou go, but no further.” Constantly man cries, “ I would, but
I cannot, for God holds me in.”

III. Tae Maker oF MAN’S MIND AND WILL SURELY INSPIRES THEM. This is his
gracious and helpful relation to them ; and this depends on the attitude in which men


place themselves towards him.


In conclusion, show what the rizht attitude is; and
what hinders us from takiny it; and how the hindrance may be overcome.


This will


lead to a declaration of the gospel message.—R. T.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER XXIX.


Vers. 1—4.—A Warnine To JERUSALEM.
Expostulation is followed by threats. The
prophet is aware that all his preaching to
the authorities in Jerusalem (ch. xxviii. 14
—22) will be of no avail, and that their
adoption of measures directly antagonistic
to the commands of God will bring on the
very evil which they are seeking to avert,
and cause Jerusalem to be actually besieged
by her enemies. In the present passage he
distinctly announces the siege, and declares
that it will commence witlin a year.

Ver. 1.—Woe to Ariel, to Ariel, the city
where David dwelt! “Ariel” is clearly a
mystic name for Jerusalem, parallel to
“ Sheshach” as a name for Babylon (Jer.
xxv 26) and “’Ir-ha-heres” asa name for
Heliopolis (ch. xix. 18) It is generally ex-
plained as equivalent to Ari-K], “lion of
God;” but Delitzsch suggests the mean-
ing of “ hearth of God,” or * altar of God,”
@ signification which “ Ariel” seems to
have in Ezek. xliii. 15, 16. But there is no
evidence that “ Ariel” was ever employed
in this sense before the time of Kzekiel.
Etymologically, “Ariel” can only mean
“ lion of God,” and the name would in this
sense be sufficiently descriptive of the
Jewish capital, which had always hitherto
been a sort of champion of Jehovah—a
warrior fighting his battles with a lion’s
courage and fierceness. Dwelt; literally,
pitched his tent—an expression recalling the
old tent-life of the Hebrews (comp. | Kings
xii, 16). Add ye year to year; rather, a
year to a year; i.e. the coming year to the
present one. ‘The intention is to date the
commeacement of the siege. It will fall
within ‘tle year next ensuing. Let them
kill sacrifices. The best modern authorities
translate, “ Let the feasts run their round”
(Kay, Cheyne, Delitzscl:); de. let there be
one more round of the annual festival-times,


and then let the enemy march in and comes
mence the sieve.

Ver. 2.—Yet will I distress Ariel; rather,
and then will I distress Ariel. The sense
runs on from the ;receding verse. There
shall be heaviness and sorrow. Mr. Cheyne’s
“moaning and bemoaning” represents the
Hebrew play upon words better. The
natural consequence of the siege would be
a constant ery of woe. And it shall be
unto me as Ariel. It would be better to
translate, “* Yet she shall be unto me as
Ariel.” The meaning is that, though dis-
tressed and straitened, Jerusalem shall still
through all be able by God’s help to answer
to her name of “ Ariel”—to behave as a
lion when attacked by the hunters.

Ver. 3.—I will camp against thee round
about ; ze. “ I will bring armed men against
thee who shall encamp around the entire
cireuit of thy walls.” There was small
chance of forcing an entrance into Jerusa-
lem on any side except the north; but, in
order to distress and harass her, an enemy
with numerous forces would dispose them all
round the walls, thus preventing all ingress
or egress (see Luke xix. 43). And... lay
sieze against thee with a mount; or, with
a mound. Artificial mounds were raised
up against the walls of cities by the As-
syrians, as a foundation from which to work
their battering-rams with greatvr advantage
against the upper and weaker portion of
the defences (see ‘Ancient Monarchies,’
vol. ii p. 80). And... raise forts against
thee. Forts” were usually movable, and
accompanied the batteriny-ram for its better
protection. Archers in the forts cleared
the walls of their defenders, while the ram
was employed in making a breach (see
Layard, ‘Monuments of Nineveh,’ Second
Series, pl. 21).

Ver. 4.—Thy speech shall be low. The
feeble cries of a people wasted and worn
out by a long siege are intended. These
cries would resemble those which seemed
to come out of the ground when a necro-
mancer professed to raise a ghost. The


}


Hebrew ’ohv is used both of the necro-
mancers (Lev. xix. 31; xx. 6, ete.) and of
the ghosts which they professed to raise
(1 Sam. xxviii. 7,8; 2 Kings xx. 6, etc.).
Here the “ghost” is spoken of. Thy
speech shall whisper; literally, chirp (comp.
ch. viii. 19). Tbe word used occurs only
in Isaiah.

Vers. 5—8.—TuHE WARNING FOLLOWED
BY A Promise. It is ever God’s care to
prevent men from being ‘swallowed up
with overmuch sorrow” (2 Cor. ii. 7). As
long as he is not about to “make a full
end” (Jer. iv. 27), he mingles promises
with his threats, words of cheer with words
of warning. So now the prophet is directed
to attach to lis four verses of denunciation
(vers. 1—4) four others of encouragement,
and to declare the utter discomfiture of the
vast host of enemies which for a time has
besieged and “ distressed ” Ariel.

Ver. 5.—Moreover; rather, but. The re-
lation of vers. 5—8 to vers. 1—4 is that of
contrast. The multitude of thy strangers;
t.e. “of thy enemies” (comp. ch. xxv. 5).
In primitive socicties every stranger is an
enemy; and hence languaye—the formation
of primitive men—often has one word for
the two ideas. In Latin hostis is said to
have originally meant “ foreigner” (Cic.,
‘De Off.” i. 12). Shall be like small dust.
Ground down, 7.e. to an impalpable powder
—rendered utterly weak and powerless.
The meaning is determined by the clause
which follows, with which it must neces-
sarily be in close accordance. As chaff
that passeth away. “ Chiatt,” in Scripture,
is always a metaphor for weakness (comp.
Ch Va 245) XV SX xxii dase xd los
aud see also Ps. i, 4; xxxv.5; Job xxi. 18;
Hos. xiii. 3; Dan. ii. 35; Zeph. ii. 2). It
has no value; man’s object is to get rid of
it: a light wind carries it away, and no
one inquires whither. Yea, it shall be at
an instant suddenly. Dr. Kay says it is
“the collapse of Jerusalem” which is here
intended. Bnt most other commentators
understand, with more reason, the collapse
of her enemies (Cheyne, Delitzsch, Vance
Smith, Knobel, ete.).

Ver, 6.—Thou shalt be visited; literally,
shall there be a visitation. On whom the
visitation will fall is not expressed; but the
context shows that it is on the enemies of
Judah. The terrible nature of the visita-
tion is signified by an enumeration of the
most fearful of Gou’s judgments—* thunder,
earthquake, great noise, whirlwind, tem-
pest, and a flume of devouring fire.’ All
the expressions are probably metaphorical,

Ver. 7.—Her munition; 7.e. her defences
—the walls and towers in which she put her


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cn. xxrx. 1—24,


trust (comp. ver. 8). As a dream of a night
vision. “ The baseless fabric of a vision,”
when it has once passed by, “leaves not @
wrack behind.” The entire host of the
“terrible ones” would melt away and dis-
appear, as a night vision before the light
of day—it would dissolve into nothing,
vanish, leave no trace.


Ver. 8.—It shall be even as when an
hungry man dreameth. The melting away
of the vision would involve a keen dis-
appointment. The enemies of Israel had
expected to secure a most valuable prey.
They had dreamed of a rich booty when
they should take the city—a booty which
would reward them for all the hardships of
their marches, their watches. their toils in
the siege, the dangers to which they ex-
posed themselves in the assaults. It was
as if a hungry man had dreamed that he
was engaged in a feast, or a thirsty man
that he was drinking deep at a banquet,
when suddenly he wakes up, and finds that
he has been merely dreaming, and that
there is no reality in his faucies. Dr. Kay
quotes a passage which is much to the
point from Mungo Park’s journals: “No
sooner had I shut my eyes than fancy
would convey me to the streams and rivers
of my native land. There, as I wandered
along tle verdant bank, I surveyed the
clear streams with transport, and hastened
to swallow the delightful draught; but,
alas! disappointment awake me, and I
found myself a lonely captive, perishing of
thirst amid the wilds of Africa.’’ Those
engaged in the siege, while themselves
vanishing away, would likewise find their
dreams of plunder vanish, and would
bitterly feel the disappointment. That
fight against Mount Zion. To attack Jeru-
salem was to fight aguinst the mount of
God, the place where Jehovah had “ set his
Name,” and where he eondescended in some
true sense to dwell continually. How could
those who engaged in such an enterprise
hope to succeed ?


Vers. 9—12.—NEITHER WARNING NOR
PROMISE COMPREHENDED BY THOSE TO WHOM
THEY HAVE BEEN ADDRESSED. “ Who hath
believed our report?” says the prophet in
another place (ch. liii. 1), “and to whom is
the arm of the Lord revealed?” It was
among the most painful circumstances at-
taching to the prophetical office, that
scarcely ever was the prophet held in any
esteem among his own people, or in his own
lifetime. Isaiah knows that his warning
will fall deal—that the people and their
rulers have neither “eyes to see” nor
“ears to hear.’ He places on record this


OH. xxix. 1--24.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


473


knowledge, while at the same time striving
if by any means he may arouse some from
their condition of dull apathy.


Ver. 9.—Stay yourselves, and wonder;
rather, stand stupefied and be astonished.
The prophet bids them act as he knows
that they will act. They will simply
“stare with astonishment” at a prophecy
which will seem. to them “ont of all rela-
tion to facts” (Cheyne). They will not
yield it the slightest credence. They will
only marvel how a sane man could have
uttered such egregious folly. Cry ye out,
and cry. Delitzsch and Mr. Cheyne trans-
late, “Blind yourselves, and be blind,”
which certainly gives a much better sense,
and is justified by the use of the same verb
in ch, vi. 10. As Pharaoh beyan by barden-
ing his own heart, and then God hardened
it (‘Pulpit Commentary’ on Exodus, pp.
103, 166, 203, ete.), so those who blind
their own eyes, and will not see when they
have the power, are, in the end, if they
persist, judicially blinded by God. They
are druaken, but not with wine. The
@runkards of Ephraim” (ch. xxvili. 3) were
such literally. They “erred through strong
drink” (ch, xxviii. 7); they “were swal-
lowed up of wine;” but the case was dif-
ferent with the infatuated ones of Judah.
They were morally, not physically, intoxi-
cated. Their pride and self-trust rendered
them as irrational and as unimpressionable
as ever drunkenness rendered any man;
but they were not actual drunkards,

Ver. 10.—The Lord hath poured out upon
you the spirit of deep sleep. “Sleep,” in
Scripture, is sometimes “ rest,” “repose from
trouble ” (“ So he giveth his beloved sleep,”
Ps. exxviii. 2). But here it is “spiritual
deadness and impassiveness’’—an inability
to appreciate, or even to understand,
spiritual wagnings. The Jews of Isaiah’s
time were sunk in a spiritual lethargy,
from which he vainly endeavoured to arouse
them. This spiritual lethargy is here said
to have been “poured out upon them by
Jehovah ;” but we are not to suppose that
there was anything exceptional in their
treatment—* because they did uot like to
retain God in their knowledge, God gave
them over to a reprobate mind” (Rom. i.
28), as he does men generally. Hath closed
your eyes (comp. ch. vi. 10; and see also
Matt. xii. 13; Mark iv. 12; Luke viii. 10;
John xii. 40; xi. 8, etc.). The prophets.
As the text stands, the proper translation
would be, “For the Lord hath poured out
upon you the spiritof deepsleep, and hath
closed your eyes (the prophets), and your
heads (the seers) hath he covered.” But it
is reasonably conjectured that the expres-
sions, “the prophets,” “ the seers,” are


glosses, which have crept from the margin
into the text (Hichhorn, Koppe, Cheyne). If
so, they are probably mistaken glosses, the
allusion being, not to particulur classes, but
to the actual “ heads” ani “ eyes ” of indi-
vidual Hebrews, which were “ closed” and
“covered” by the judicial action of the
Almighty. In the East a covering is often
drawn over the head during sleep.

Ver. 11.—The vision of all; 7.e. “the en-
tire vision ”’—all that Isaiah has put before
them in vers. 1—8. As the words of a
book that is sealed; rather, the words of a
letter (marginal rendering) or writing,
Written documents were often sealed up to
secure secrecy, the sealing being done in
various ways. When the writing was on a
clay tablet, it was often enclosed in a clay
envelope, so that the document could not be
read till the outer clay covering was broken.
Rolls of papyrus or parchment were secured
differently. One that is learned; 7.e. “ one
that can read writing,” which the ordinary
Jew could not do, any more than the ordi-
nary European in the Middle Ages. Neither
the learned nor the unlearned Jews would
be able to understand Isaiah’s prophecy, so
as to realize and accept its literal truth.
They were devoid of spiritual discernment.
Even the rulers were but “ blind leaders of
the blind.”

Ver. 12.—Him that is not learned; 7.6,
“that cannot read writing.’ Even in our
Lord’s day the ordinary Jew was not taught
to read and write. Hence the surprise of
the rulers at his teaching the people out of
the Law (John vii. 15, * How knoweth this
man letters, having never learned ?”’).

Vers. 13—16.— A Rene waL oF WARNING.
The inability of the Jews to comprehend
Isaiah’s threatening prophecies probably
arose in part from their accomplishment
seeming to be inconceivable, since they ran
counter to the covenant promises made by
God to Israel. Isaiah is therefore instructed
to inform them that it was a most marvel-
lous and almost inconecivable thing that
God was now purposing to do, yet a thing
justified by their hypocrisy (ver. 18) and
their rebellion (vers. 15, 16).


Ver. 13.—Wherefore the Lord said;
rather, moreover the Lord said. This people
draw near me with their mouth. Samaria
had been punished for open idolatry and
flagrant neglect of Jehovah (2 Kings xvii.
7—17). Jerusalem had not gone these
lengths. She still, in profession, clung to
the worship of Jehovah, and had even re-
ceutly accepted a purification of religion at
the hand of Hezekiah, who had “ removed
the high places, .;.and cut down the


£74


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.  [on. xxix. 1—24,


oves, and broken in pieces the brazen ser-
S  ALt hoontica the eoetburnit incense to it
(2 Kings xviii. 4), But her religion was a
mere lip-service, which God detested—it
was outward, formal, hypocritical (comp.
ch. i. 1I—17). Jerusalem, tlierefore, no less
than Samaria, deserved and would receive
a severe chastisement. But have removed
their heart far from me. Here lies the gist
of the charge. It was not that there was
too much outward religion, but that there
was no inward religion corresponding to_it.
Lip-service without inward religion is a
mockery, though it is not always felt as
such. Their fear toward me is taught by
the precept of men. Mr. Cheyne conjec-
tures tliat ritual books had been already
published by the authority of the priests,
and that these were followed, on account
of the human authority which had issued
them, without any reference to the Law.
Thus ritual obedience became mere obe-
dience to “tlie precept of men,”

Ver. 14.—I will proceed to do a marvel-
lous work. Commentators are not agreed
what this “marvellous work” was. Some,
with Delitzscl, consider it to be the harden-
ing of the hearts of the Jews tosuch an
extent that even the appcarance of wis-
dom and understanding, which the rulers
of the people had hitherto retained, would
completely disappear. Others, with Mr.
Cheyne, regard it as the coming siege,
with those extreme sufferings and _ perils
(vers. 3, 4) which the Jews would have to
undergo—sufferings and perils barely con-
sistent with tle previous ce venant-promises
made to the nation. It is difficult to decide
between these two views; but, on the whole,
Mr. Cileyne’s view seems preferable. A
marvellous work and a wonder; rather, a
marvellous work and a marvel. The repeti-
tion is for the sake of emphasis. For the
wisdom ; rather, and the wisdom; i.e. “when
I do my marvel, then the wisdom of the
wise men shall perish”—all their crafty
designs and plans shall be of no avail, but
come wholly to nought. The chief of these
designs was that alluded to in the next
verse.

Ver. 15.—Woe unto them that seek deep
to hide their counsel from the Lord. The
allusion is to the schemes which were afloat
for calling in the aid of Egypt. As Isaiah
had long since denounced these schemes
as the height of folly (ch. xix. 11—17),
and prophesied their failure (ch, xx. 5, 6),
every effort was made to conceal them from
his knowledge and from the knowledge of
all who were like-minded (comp. ch. xxx.
1, 2). Steps were probably even now being
taken for the carrying out of the schemes,
which were studiously concealed from the
prophet. Their works are in the dark.


Underhand proceedings are at all times
suspicious. “Men love darkness rather than
light, because their deeds are evil.” The very
fact of concealment was an indication that
the works in which the rulers were engaged
were evil, and tliat they knew them to be
evil. They say, Who seeth us? (comp. Ps.
Ixxiii. 11, “Tush, they say, How should
God perceive? Is there knowledge in the
Most Hizh?”). The wicked persuade them-
selves that God does not see their actions.

Ver. 16.—Surely your turning of things
upside down shall be esteemed as the
potter’s clay; rather, O for your perverse-
ness! Shall the potter be reckoned as clay?
They were so perverse and wrong-headed
that they inverted the relation in which
they stood to God and God to them. God
was to be passive, or merely give oppor-
tunities of action, and they were to mould
their own plans and carve out their own des-
tinies. For shall the work say, etc. ? rather,
for the work saith. Taking their destinies
into their own hands was equivalent to
saying that they were their own masters,
which they coul:i not be if God made them.
Shall the thing framed say, etc.? rather,
yea, the thing formed hath said. To refuse
to take counsel of God, and direct the
national policy by the light of their own
reason, was to tax God with having no
understanding.

Vers. 17—24.—A Renewal OF PROMISE.
God’s judgment (ver. 14), whatever it is,
will pass. In a little while there will be a
great change. The lowly will be exalted,
the proud abased. From the “ meek” and
“poor” will be raised a body of true wor-
shippers, who will possess spiritual discern-
ment (ver. 18), while the oppressors and
**scorners” will be brought to nought.
When Isaiah expected this change is un-
certain; but he holds out the hope of it
here, as elsewhere so frequently (ch. i. 24—
31; ii. 2—5; iv. 2—6; v. 13, ete.), to keep
up the spirits of the people and prevent
them from sinking into a state of depression
and despair.


Ver. 17.—Lebanon shall be turned into a
fruitful field. Lebanon, the wild forest,
shall become smiling gurden-ground, while
garden-ground shall revert into wild un-
cultivated forest. An inversion of the moral
condition of Judwa is shadowed forth by
the metaphor.

Ver. 18.—In that day—t.e. when that
time comes—shall the deaf hear the words
of the book; the spiritually deaf shall have
their ears opened, many of them, and shall
not only hear, but understand, the words of
Scripture addressed to them by God’s mes-


oH, xxix. 1—24.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 475
So eee eee


sengers. No particular “book” is intended | thing of nought; rather, and deprive the
—sepher being without the article, but the | just [of their right] by empty charges. “Turn-
words of any writing put forth with Divine | ing aside the just” means turning them
authority. The eyes of the blind shall see | from their right (Amos y. 12; Exod. xxiii.
also out of obscurity. Men shall shake 6); and bat-tohu is not “for nothing” but
off the “deep sleep” (ver. 10) in which | “by nothing,” #e by some vain empty pre-
they have long lain, and have once mure | tence.
“eyes to see” the truth. Ver. 22.—The Lord, who redeemed Abra-
Ver. 19.—The meek ... the poor. The | ham; rather, who delivered Abraham, as
“evangelical prophet” anticipates the | the verb used is often renderd (see Job
gospel in this, among other points —that he | xxxiii. 28; Ps. lv. 18; Ixix. 18; xxviii.
promises his chvicest blessings, not to the | 42, etc.). God’s directions to Abraham to


rich and mighty, but to the poor and meek | remoye from atand of idolaters (Josh. xxiv.
(comp. ch. lvii. 15; Lxi. 1). 2, 3; Acts vii. 2, 3) were practically a


Ver. 20. —The terrible one... the scorner. | “deliverance.” The work thus commenced
“The terrible one” may be the foreign | would not be suffered to remain incomplete,
enemy, as in ver. 5, or, possibly, the native , Israel—the true Isracl—would not be
oppressor (ch. i. 23; v. 23, etc.)—a still more | ashamed, or wax pale through fear any
fearful evil. “The scorner” is the godless , more; they would be God’s children, his true
man, who scoffs at religion (ch. xxviii. 14, | worshippers, and would have no need to
22). Both classes would be “consumed” | experience either fear or shame.
and “brought to nought” when the new Ver. 23.—The work of mine hands; ¢.e.
state of things was established. All that | regenerated and “created avew unto good
watch for iniquity; t.e. “all those who, for | works” (Eph. ii. Ll) -God’s work, and no
the furtherance of their iniquitous schemes, | longer denying themselves to be such (ver.
rise up early and late tuke rest, and eat the | 16). They shall sanctify my Name, and
bread of carefulness”’ (Ps. exxvii. 2). sanctify, etc.; rather, they shall sunctify my

Ver. 21.—That make a man an offender | Name, they shall even sanctify the Holy One

for a word. The meaning of this clause is | of Jacob, and fear the God of Isruel. The
very doubtful. Kay translates, “That lead | last two clauses are exegetical of the first
men into sin by words;” Mr. Cheyne, | (Kay).
“That make out people to be sinners by Ver. 24.—They also that erred in spirit;
their words,” t.e. by bearing false witness | t.e. those who were blind and deaf (ver.
against them; while Delitzsch upholds the | 18). Shall come to understanding; literally,
rendering of the Authorized Version. Mr. | shall know understanding ; i.e. recover their
Vance Smith has other suggestions (‘ Pro- | power of spiritual iiiscernment. They that
phecies,’ p. 171). There seems to be, on | murmured. ‘The reference cannot be to the
the whole, no sufficient reason for setting | “murmuring” in Egypt, thoueh the verb
aside the authorized rendering, which con- | used occurs only eisewhere in Deut. i. 27
demns one form of oppression—the severe | and Ps, evi. 25, whvre that murmuring is
punishment of mere words. And lay a | spoken of. We must look for some later
snare for him that reproveth in the gate. | discontent, which we may find in quite
“The gate” was the place where judgment | recent “ murmuring resistance to the admo-
was given and public assemblies held. If | nitions of Jehovah” (Delitzsch), without
any one boldly stood up and reproved the | going back so far as the time of the Exodus.
oppressors “in the gate,” they instantly set | Shall learn doctrine; te. “shall willingly
to work to lay a trap for him and bring him | receive the teaching, of God’s prophets, and
to ruin. And turn aside the just for a@ | profit by it.”


HOMILETICS.


Vers. 1—4.—" Woe to Ariel!” The lesson of this section seems to be that even those
nearest and dearest to God, who bear his name, who are in a certain sense his, are not
exempt from suffering at his hands, Even Jerusalem, “ the city where David dwelt ”—
“ God’s lion,” his champion, his ‘ mighty one ”—was shortly to experience all the horrors
of a prolonged siege, to be brought down to the dust—to be distressed, weakened,
humiliated. The memory of David would not save her; her name of “ Ariel” would
not exempt her. She would have to go through the fearful ordeal. The Christian may
humbly ask—Wherefore ?

L Brcausz, HAVING SINNED, SHE DESERVED PUNISHMENT, God cannot allow sin to
go unpunished. His attribute of perfect justice requires that even for pardoned sin
there sheuld be a penalty. It is well for sinners when the penalty is exacted in this


476 . THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. xxix. 1—24,


life. The sufferings of the inhabitants of Jerusalem during the siege were no doubt, in
some measure, punishments. 1. For the national sin of unfaithlulness, 2. For the
particular sins of the suilerers. But this is not a full account of the matter. Jerusalem
suffered also—

Il. BroaUsE SHE NEEDED CHASTISEMENT AND WOULD BE THE BETTER FOR IT.
Jerusalem was still undergoing her probation. There were hopes of her turuing to God.
Nay, she did from time to time partially turn, and her actual destruction was deferred
for above a century alter that of her sister, Samaria. The sufferings of the siege were
in the main intended to bring the sufferers to repentance—to humble proud hearts, to
bend stubhom wills, to show the vanity of earthly supports and stays, and induce
entire dependence and trust in God. “ Ariel” was punished far more in love than in
wrath, She was still to God “as Aricl.” Her “ woe” was not the final woe pronounced
on the hoj;elessly impenitent, but the woe which, while it is grievous at the time of its
infliction, “nevertheless afterward yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto
them which are exercised thereby ” (Heb. xii. 11).


Vers. 5—8.—The disappointment that awaits God's enemies. All the enemies of
God have, some day or other, an awaking. ‘Tie designs which they cherish, the selfish
hopes in which they indulge, are mere dreams. Even when the dreanis are realized
the result is disappointing. No man ever yet found the pleasure of success equal to
his expectation. If there is a little satisfaction at first, fruition soon begets satiety.
“Vanity of vanities,” says the preacher, “adl is vanity.” But, for the most part, the
dreams are not realized. God arises, and his enemies are scattered ; those that bate him
have to flee before him (Ps. Ixviii. 1), The schemer finds himself baffled just when he
thinks success most certain. Dishonesty is detected; the bubble of speculation bursts ;
unexpected obstacles arise; a sudden death or a sudden outbreak of war deranges the
best-laid plans: the fortune just about to be made vanishes into the air, the dreamer
“awakes, and his soul is empty”—all his hopes have passed away “at an instant
suddenly.” ‘I'here is but one security against constant disappointment, which is to
trust all to God, to have no will but his, no desire but that expressed in the prayer,
“Thy wiil be done, as in heaven, so on earth,”


Vers. 9, 10.—Two kinds of spiritual blindness. Spiritual blindness is not the natural
condition of man. God has given to all men a certain power of spiritual discernment.
He is “the Light which lighteth every man thut cometh into the world” (John i. 9).
Children are invariably found to be teachable at an early age—to have a power of
receiving and appreciating spiritual verities. The spiritually blind have become such,
and in their condition we may trace two stages.

I. THE INITIAL STAGE, The commencement of spiritual blindness is a wilful
shutting eyes. Instead of seeking to see, striving to see, looking out for the
spititual in life and action, men turn away from it, “ wink with their eyes,” put veils
over them, refuse to let the light of truth shine in upon their understandings. They
“love darkness rather than light” (John ii, 19). The whole of life should be a
continual exercise of the spiritual discerning power. Men give the power as little
exercise as possible. They weaken it by disuse, After a while they deprave it, so
that its judgments become upgertain—even lalse.

Il, Tae rinau stage. In Scripture the final stage is called “a reprobate mind,”
literally, “an undistinguishing mind (ddoxmds vods).” By the law of God’s ;rovidence,
the wilful shutting of the eyes leads on to an inability to see. The moral vision
becomes actually distorted, The “light that is within a man” becomes “ darkness; ”
and then, “bow great is that darkness!” “ Bitter_is put for sweet, and sweet for
bitter” (ch. v. 20), “good for evil, and evil for good.” ‘The state is hopeless, irremedie
able. I[t results naturally from the repeated sins against light of the first stage; but
it is none the less God’s judgment upon the sinner. Hence it has been called “ judicial
blindaess”—an expressive name,


Vers. 18, 14.—God’s hatred of mere lip-service. Lip-service is offensive to God ou
two accounts.


I. Iv & DisHONOURING To HIMSELF, It implies, either that he has not the power


-


ou, xxix. 1—24.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 407


of reading the heart and of perceiving when worship is rendered to him sincerely and
when feignedly, or that he does not care which kind of homage he receives, whether
adoration is offered to him really or formally. In the one case he must be considered
as a Being of very limited power and capacity; in the other, as a Being indifferent to
the gravest moral distinctions. ‘lo profess loyalty to an earthly monarch without
feeling it would be to insult him grossly. How much more to seek to pass such a
cheat on the King of heaven!

Il. Ir 1s pDeGRaDING TO THE CREATURES WHICH HE HAS MADE IN HIS OWN IMAGE
All falsehood is degrading to those who condescend to it. False pretences, flatteries,
insincere professions of love and devotion for the purpose of winning favour and approval
from those to whom we address them, are among the basest and most contemptible acts
to which a human being can stoop. They are lies, and lies which have their origin in
downright unadulterated selfishness. False professions made to Gud are also foolish,
idiotic lies, which cannot possibly impose on the Being who is the Object of them, and
which do not very often impose even on such of our fellow-men as witness them. It
was their insincere “ lip-service” which caused our Lord to denounce the scribes and
Pharisees of his time as “ actors,” or “ hypocrites ” (Matt. xv. 7; Mark vii. 6).


Vers. 17—24.—Feligious revivals, It is sometimes supposed that religious revivals
are modern inventions, concessions to the weakness of the degenerate man of the
nineteenth century ; and no doubt there have been features in many so-called “ revivals ”
which have justified this view of them. But, in point of fact, revivals, if we follow
out the history of religion, are found to be movements which have belonged to all ages,
and without which it appears more than probable that religion in this world would
stagnate and lose all vital energy. The subject may be best viewed under three heads.

I, REVIVALISM Is A LAW OF NATURE. Not only does Nature annually revive in
spring from her winter’s trance, but throughout the universe exhaustion is coutiuually
occurring at irregular intervals, and recoveries from exhaustion, 7.e, revivals, are the
only mode by which Nature is recruited and enabled to maintain herself. A long series
of wet and cold seasons produces at any rate the impression that Nature’s productive
powers are declining and wearing out; when, suddenly, there is a complete inversion of
what had come to be regarded as an established order, and a summer of brilliant sun-
shine causes an overflowing harvest and an agricultural reaction, The ozone in the
atmosphere, so esseutial to human health, decreases (it may be) for months; then, all
at once, there is a revival, and the average of a century is exceeded. Electrical
phenomena are for a time in abeyance, and the earth seems to have “used up” the
power on which her vitality principally depends; when, lo! the reaction comes, fresh
electricity is developed, or conveyed to the earth from without, and electrical phenomena
become more frequent and more striking than ever.

II. REVIVALISM I8 CONSISTENT WITH, AND CONDUCIVE TO, A CONSTANT ADVANCE,
A priori we might have expected that all growth and progress would have been regular
and gradual. But the fact is otherwise. In all the fields of human energy, in art, in
science, in philosophy, in religion, long periods of comparative deadness and apathy
occur, during which there is scarcely any perceptible advance at all, followed by shorter
intervals of activity and energy, when progress is made “by leaps and oounds.” The
scientific energy of the last half-century is a case in point. The artistic revival
initiated by Reynolds and Gainsborough, is another. ‘The history of the Church, dis-
passionately viewed, shows a manifest progress; but the progress has been far from
uviform. Many centuries have been centuries of stagnation. Relivion has just kept
itself alive, and that has been all. Then some stir has come from within or from
without, and a rush of vitality has supervened, which has exercised an influence for
good on all later times. Indifference to doctrinal truth was overspreading the world,
when the dogmatic revival of the fourth ceutury at once saved the faith, and advanced
it. The expansion of the Church, which is a special mark of its life, had almost
ceased, when missionary zeal broke out suddenly in the West, and the seventh and eighth
centuries saw the conversion of England, Scotland, Friesland, Batavia, Switzerland,
aud most of Germany. A general deadness and dulness had come over Christendom
between the eighth and the eleventh centuries, when the Crusades, which were a
political necessity, produced the revival of the twelfth and thirteenth. The greatest

a7


478 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [onm. xxrx, 1—24,


revival of all was the Reformation, which recovered spiritual religion when it seemed
almost lost, and exerted a purifying influence even on those parts of Christendom
which most opposed it. Lesser revivals have been—in Germany Pietism, in France
Jansenism, among ourselves Methodism and the Church movement still in progress.
It seems scarcely too much to say that, without revivals, religion—even the Christian
religion—would perish.

Ill. RevrvALS ARE MOST COMMONLY THE RESULT OF OHASTISEMENTS. As it was
with the Jews of whom Isaiah wrote, so in the Christian Church generally, revivals
have been produced by judgments. The blasphemies of Arius, and the patronage of
Arianism by the court, gave rise to the counter-movement of Athanasius. The con-
traction of Christendom in the East by the conquests of Mohammed and his immediate
successors led on to its expansion in the West by renewed missionary effort. The
alarming progress of the Saracens and Turks caused the revival connected with the
Crusades, The exactions and tyranny of the court of Rome, being felt as a burden
that could no longer be borne, brought about the Reformation. Among ourselves, the
revival which dates from 1830 was due to the loss of ten Irish bishoprics and the otber
attacks made on the Church by her enemies at that period. Methodism is about the
only Christian revival not provoked by some manifest calamity.


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS,


Vers. 1—12.— Concerning Ariel. I. Victsstrupgs or ArtEL. The name is symbolic,
perhaps sizmfying “God’s lion.” It was the city where David dwelt, he prophet
bids the city enter upon the new year, and run the round of the feasts. The distress
will come, and the city, true to her name, will be mourning like a wounded lioness;
and yet her prowess will be seen. She will be beleaguered, the mound for the battering-
ram will be set up; she will be abased, and her low voice will be like the muttering
of a ghost from the under-world. Then a sudden change will occur, and the multitude
of foes will be dispersed like dust or chaff in the wind. After the noise as o! thunder
and eirthquake and hurricane, menacing absolute extinction of the city, the vast host
will disappear like a dream and vision of the night, They too will dream of conquest,
as a hunyry and thirsty man dreams of meat and drink; and their hope will melt
with the morning livht.

Il. THE BLINDNESS OF THE PEOPLE. Those who listen are astonished at a prophecy
which nothing in the past appears to warrant. The prophet takes vccasion to explain
the cause of their blinduess and stiupefaction, and to warn them that they may find
this their fixed condition. ‘They are responsible for this state, he seems to imply when
he says, “ Astonish yourselves!” “ Blind yourselves!” Some strange prepossession
causes them to act like men intoxicated; their reason reels and staggers. A deep
sleep is poured upon them; their eyes are closed, and their hands wrapped up in
Oriental fashion, The result is they cannot see the truth. The “vision and the
faculty divine,” so bright and eminent in the prophet, is not recognized for what it is,
His words are like a sealed book in the hands of a reader. He can read, but cannot
loose the seals of the book, which is so far like that described in Rev. v. 2. Or again,
if a book, though open and legible, be handed to one that cannot read, the result is the
same. It may be a large tablet, with large characters, like that in ch. viii. 1, so that
the passer-by, if he can read, may catch the meaning; but what if he cannot read ?
It is the same as if the writing were non-existent. 1. Seeing truth is like seeing
the meaning of what we read. All see something in the book—some little more than
that it is a book; some can extract a certain superficial sense from the signs, and are
asleep towards the deeper and central meaning. That meaning must be lived out
by the whole effort of the reason, the conscience, the heart. It requires an intense
effort of will to see any object as it ought to be seen. 2. Absence of spiritual
intelligence infers guilt. Men will not see, because the sight is too painful, or some
otlier sight is more pleasurable aud more easy to take in, Moral obtuseness is another
word for want of conscience, or for inertness of conscience.—J.


Vv 13—16.—Li 18st ;
era, 13—16.—Lip-service and dissimulation. I. THE SEMBLANCE WITHOUT TER


GH xxix. 1—24,] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 479


REAL RELIGION. To “ draw men” is a Scripture phr ull ressiveness
for true worship. ‘l'o draw near to God is to assume our holiest mood of feeling; it is
to humble one’s self in tiie presence of the Highest and Holiest. The distance between
ourselves and the Supreme is not to be overcome by an effort of thought; it is in the
sphere of intelligence that that distance is most deeply felt, which mere thought
and study only increase. In the revion of feeling only can that distance be diminished
or made to disappear. As we kneel jn our weakness and abanden—all onr self-sup-
ports, the heaveus seem to stoop to us, and the_armsof the Almighty are thrown
about_us. Pride, dishonesty, low self-seekiny,—these throw the sout Tee tar Baciitor
from itsGod. From the reverent and the obedient he is never far off. But so beautilul
is this action of drawing near to God, so truly ennobling to our manhood, it is certain,
like all the genuine moods and acts of religion, to be mimicked and counterfeited.
All hypocrisy is a_ testimony to the grandeur of that which is cgpied or caricatured,
This imitation of true religion may be carried out in syeech. Nothing more easy than
to learn by heart the great phrases of Scripture concerning spiritual religion, and to repeat
them; and make the verbal not expregs, but hide the abgence of, the real. And so
magical is the effect of sacred and beautiful words on the ear and on the heart, tor the
time they may create an illusion, and it may seem that we have really felt what we
have done little more than utter. Again, respect for mere custom may take the place
of respect for God. “ Their fear of me is nothing but a commandment of men, which
is taught.” Religion is part of social institutions—it is decorous, it is advantayeous
to pay it outward respect, unsafe to contemn it, Thus fear of men and self-interest
may really pass under the outward guise of the fear of God and his Law.

Il. ‘THE DEALING OF JEHOVAH WITH THE PEOPLE. It will be “ wonderful, very
wondertul.” Inconceivable, as it seems, runuing cuunter to all his ancient covenant-
promises. Already the Assyrian invasion had broken in on them; and the visitation
was not to cease, but to continue. These judgments will baffle their intelligence. The
wisdom «f the wise will perish, and the understanding of the intelligent be obscured.
The politicians think to hide their thoughts aud deeds from Jehovah, ‘to throw the
veil of secrecy over their pursuit of worldly alliances. The prophet divines their
purpose and exposes its perversity. The favourite comparison of the potter is intro-
duced (cf. ch. xlv. 9; lxiv. 8; Jer. xviii. 6; Rom. ix. 20)” (Cheyne). Hiding from
Jehovah means liere the same thing as hidng from the prophet of Jehovah. ‘They did
not wish to listen to Isaiah’s reproof. We seem to see them watching the praphet
(cf. ch. viii. 12). And he, from amidst the light of the higher or eterval policy, sees
through their time-serving intrigues. “They think they can dispense with Jehovah,
and yet they are his creatures; they attribute clvverness to themselves, and practically
disown him, as if the pot should say to the potter who has turned it, ‘He does not
understand it’” (Welitzsch), The great lessons are: 1. The short-sightedness of worldly
wisdom. It secs sv clearly the immediate interest to be gained, it ignores the distant
future, and falls headlong into fallacy. 2. The fur-sighte/ness of conscience. The


prophet represents conscience. What is now right is profitable now and ever will be,
And Sipe igeeaitiathip wiaesge inthe right. Men may be deceived and mocked for


a time; but “ be not deceived: God is not mocked.”—J.


Vers. 17—24.—A time of regeneration. A time of refreshing and of renewal
is, notwithstanding all the gloom of preceding pictures, at hand,

I. ‘THE CHANGE IN NATURE. “One of Isaish’s most characteristic ideas is a future
transformation of nature corresponding to that of man” (Cheyne). The forest will be
turned into the garden-land. Lebanon stands for the wild or uncultivated land (cf. ch.
x. 18, 34). he passage in ch. xxxii. 15 is parallel. When God again begins to bless
his people, the untilled land will become a cultivated country, and the fields will
produce av abundance compared with which their present condition may be pronounced
barren. ‘The meaning may be both literal and symbolical, When human euergy is
renewed, so is the face of nature, which saddens with war, pestilence, and the depres-
sion of industry. And the turning of waste land into cultivated fields is typical of
the regeneration of human life; for what is all depravity and misery, but thought,
faculty, passion, run to waste ?

IL Signs oF THE NEW LIFE. The deaf will hear the words of a writing, and the


\


480 ° THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xxrx. 1—24
re ae a ens SE


blind shall be brought out of gloom and darkness into new spiritual perception, the
lowly hearted shall receive a fresh access of joy in Jehovah, and the poor shall exult in
the Holy One of Israel. Notice everywhere the loving spirit of the gospel. Ever it is
good news to those who need that news the most—the ignorant, the humble, and the
poor. And correspondingly, the proud and the self-sufficient are to be brought low.
The terrible foe without, and the scornful foes within, will have vanished and be
brought to nought. The prophetic message in every age is vehement, burning against
oppression and treachery. There are men that watch for iniquity, that swear away
others’ lives by false testimony, or seek to ruin those who plead in the gate or judicial
court, and wrest the just verdict from the righteous by frivolous pretences. (For the
expression, “turning aside the right” of the weak, etc., cf. Exod. xxiii. 6; Amos v. 12;
Mal. iii. 5.) Traitors, conspirators, false witnesses, and false men of every kie2 will
be rooted out of the new kingdom; and all that is incorrigible will be given up to
destruction, that there may be room for the plants of Jehovah’s planting to flourish.

JII. THE HOLY AND HAPPY consuMMATION. No more shall Jacob be ashamed and
his face turn pale. His oppressors will have been swept away. He will see “ his sons,
the work of Jehovah’s hands, within him.” In presence of the judgments of Jehovah
there will be a true conversion; they will become holy even as he is holy—a Church
sanctifying him, the Holy One of Israel. A sound intelligence will displace the former
spirit of error, and former murmuring will give way to a willingness to receive instruc=
tion. This is the state of things for which we pray when we say, “ Hallowed be thy
Name.” “They shall hallow thy Name,” says the prophet; “ They shall fear the God
of Israel.” Pure reverence, united with briyht clear inte\ligence, and applied in every
department of thought and practice, will be the spirit of the future kingdom, must be
the de in all who sincerely pray for the coming of that kingdom in their hearts
now.—J.


Ver. 13.—Inséncerity. ‘ Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth,
and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me.”
Sincerity is the life of devotion. Eloquence in prayer is exccrable if the heart be
worldly and vain. Here we gore Divine insight into-man's soul.

I. HERe Is THE BENDED KNEE WITHOUT THE PROSTRATE HEART. Reverential manner
and sacred solemnities of speech may deceive others, but wit’ God all hearts are open,
all desires known. It is mere mouwth-worship. It is the trick of the muscles, not the
tone of the heart. We resent the false man. Nothing offends the better instincts of
humanity so much as deceitful maunerism. Better the “drawn sword” than the
disguised enemy with fawning friendship on his lips.

Il. HERE I8 THE HONOUR OF THE LIPS WITHOUT THE DEVOTION OF THE LIFE. To
givea place of “honour” to religion is common W the worldliest men. It is like the com-
pliment that vice pays to virtue by imitation of its manner, and hiding of itself. What
should we think of men who did not honour religion? They would be losers. Men
would not trust them, They would be suspected of indifference to those bonds which
hold society together. So they pay outward honour to the Almighty, they join in the
Church anthem, and in the public confession of the great Christian Creeds. But in their
life there is no honour paid to religion, inasmuch as they serve and worship other gods.

III. Here 18 THE TRUE RENDING OF THE HEART, WHICH IS THE MICROCOSM OF THE
MAN. The heart is removed far from God. It does not thrill with his love, nor beat
in sympathy with his claims. This is the loadstone that leads us everywhere. We
can prophesy where the footsteps will be if we know the longings @ spirit, The
heart that he made capable of so much endurance and affection is far from him. Then
it must be somewhere else. It will find some object. The ivy torn down from the old


church tower will cling to the nearest objegt_in its pat Cling it must. *O


Vers. 1—8.—The city of God. ‘The city where David dwelt” was und
Jerusalem, the “city of God.” It is here called Ariel; i.e, according to some, th
hearth or altar of God. This fact, taken with the prophecy itself, may remind us—

I, THAT THE CITY OF GOD I8 THE PLACE WHERE GOD DWELLS. It is where hig
hearth is—the “ place of his abode” where he is at home with his people. where they are


lida Hast Searched me, and known me.”—W. M. 8. Les 1
t d W.M.S PUR wean


N
=e


|
|
|


t
0


OH, xxix. 1—24.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 481
er


at home” with him. The true Church of Christ, the ideal Christian famiiy or society,
is that company which feels that God is with it of a truth, which realizes and rejoices
in his presence.

Il, Toat THE crry or Gop Is THE PLACE OF sAcRIFicE. The “altar” of Old Testa-
ment times has for ever disappeared now that the great Sacrifice has been presented,
now that the way into the holiest is open, now that nothing stands between the Divine
mercy and the penitent and believing soul. But still the city of God is the place of
sacrifice; for still every true servant of Christ is continually engaved in offering up
“spiritual sacrifices” unto God. These are the offerings of praise (Heb. xiii. 15), of
consecration (Rom. xii. 1), of kindness (Heb. xiii, 16);—these and such as these are
“acceptable to God” (1 Pet. ii. 5).

Ill. Tuat THE ciry or Gop IS A PLACE OF REVERENT AND JOYOUS COMMUNION.
“ Add ye year to year,” etc. (ver. 1); #.e. let the festivals go round from year to year.
The prophet is thought to have spoken ironically, as if he would say, “Go on with your
solemnities, but they will avail you nothing.” However this may be, we may be sure
that when Jerusalem was what Jehovah meant it to be, it was a city in which sacred
festivals brought the people ef God into holy and happy communion with one another
and with their Divine Ruler. And when that which is now the counterpart of the city
of God is what its Lord meant ## to be, it is a place where human souls mingle in
sacred fellowship, and where they all unite in reverent and happy intercourse with the
Father of their spirits, with the Saviour of their souls.

IV. Tat THE ciry or Gop MAY BE A PLACE OF Divine supemeNnT. “ Yet I will
distress Ariel, and there shall be heaviness and sorrow,” etc. (vers. 2—4). When the
Church, the society, the family, or the individual soul needs Divine correction, God
will send his chastisements. ‘The Author of its peace will be the Source of its sorrow.
1. It (he) will be as a@ besieged city, as a city against which the agents of God are
encamped, shut in, circumscribed, reduced to privation and distress, made to feel its
feebleness, driven to cry out for help. 2. It (he) will be humiliated. “Thou shalt be
brought down,” etc. (ver. 4). Nothing so much offends God as pride, haughtiness of
heart, presumption; and when this is manifested by his people, they may expect to
be abased to the very dust, until their spirit has been renewed and they have learned
humility under his correcting hand.

V. THAT THE CITY OF GOD IS THE OBJECT OF THE DIVINE DELIVERANCE, (Vers.
5—9.) When God arises to deliver his people, his visitation may be: 1. Uneapected.
(Ver. 5.) When the Son of man cometh, will he find his people expecting his appear-
ance (Luke xviii. 8)? 2. Overwhelming. (Vers. 6,7.) It will (may) be as if all the
elements conspired to work his will. 3. Attended with bitterest disuppointment to his
foes. (Ver. 8.) '

1. See to it that this severe correction be not called for; that it is not brought down
by worldliness, by formality, by selfishness, by pride, by discord, by indulgence. 2. If
the hour of correction should arrive, let immediate repentance bring on at once the time
of deliverance.—O,


Vers. 9—12.—Spiritual incapacity. Our powers, as men and women, are limited
enough ; and it may well ‘be that tlose of God’s children who move in wider spheres
and are endowed with greater capacilies look down in wonder, if not with amusement,
on our large pretensions. Yet we talk freely of the incapable, the feeble, the helpless,
as if we ourselves were strong. There are various degrees of power and weakness
among us, but the most important belong to that kind of incapacity to which the text
Pra Irs pomary. The prophet treats of spiritual helplessness. We see and lament
physical incapacity in the shape of blindness, deafness, paralysis, etc. We also have to
treat mental incapacity in the form of intellectual feebleness, decline, imbecility,
insanity. But by far the saddest sight in the view of God is spixitual incapacity—that
moral condition in which the soul has lost its native powers, is destitute of those
acquirements which would enable it to stand side by side with the holiest of the
heavenly world, lacks the wisdom by which it might defend itself against its adver-
saries, and is therefore the prey of the worst evils, forfeits its birthright. and moves
towards itsdoom. This incapacity affects the soul in all its higher and ue

ISAJAH.


482 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. xxix. 1—24.
Se eee


relations—in its relation to God, to those to whom it is under obligation, to its own
character.

Il. Ivs Two PRINCIPAL MANIFESTATIONS. 1. Blindness. “The spirit of deep sleep ”—
the closing or covering of the eyes (ver. 10). The last, or nearly the last, effect of sin
is to take away the faculty of spiritual insight ; so that a man cannot see those things
which a human soul ought to recognize at once, the recognition of which is indispen-
sable to its very life; viz. the presence, the claims, the power of God; the excellency
of his service; the unworthiness and insufficiency of sensual gratifications and worldly
ambitions; the deathfulness of sin, etc. But to the spiritually incapable these things
are as if they were not. Such souls are as unconscious of these realities as is a
man in a deep sleep, or as is one whose eyes are covered, of the objects which are before
him. 2. Evror. “They stagyer, but not with strong drink” (ver. 9). As a man
under the influence of stimulants cannot “ walk straight,” but staggers from side to
side or wanders out of his way altogether, so men who are robbed of their rightful
powers by sin fail to walk straight on in the path of rectitude: they deviate into (1)
false notions about God and man, about life and destiny ; and into (2) evil habits, into
sad departures from purity, from uprightness, from truth, from wisdom.

Ill. Ivs compteTengss. 1. It extends to the highest,—he has covered the eyes of
“your rulers” (ver. 10); to those who lead and who, being blind themselves, will
certainly mislead (Matt. xv. 14); to those whuse social influence is strong and, in this
case, most pernicious. 2. It includes the secdalists—the privileged, those who profess to
have peculiar access to truth: “The seers hath he covered.” Woe to the land, to the
Church, whose religious teachers are unable to see the directing finger of God, and are
giving way to dreams of their own imagination! 3. It embraces those instructed in
other things. It is not only the unlearned that cannot read at all, but the learned men
also, who are blind to the truths of God (vers. 11, 12). Here, in nature, in providence,
in Scripture is a vlorious, three-volumed work, the full work of God; here are sacred
truths which enlarge the mind and elevate the soul, which beautify and ennoble life,
prepare for death, and fit tor immortal blessedness. But, with powers diminished,
depraved, or destroyed by sin, they who can learn other lessons and read other secrets
are as undiscerning as the most illiterate boor in presence of a language of which he
does not know the alphabet, as helpless as the finished scholar in presence of a roll the
seal of which he cannot break |

IV. Ivs expLanation. How can we account for this depravation of man’s spiritual
powers? It is the fitting penalty of sin; it comes in the righteous judgments of God;
“The Lord hath poured out upon you,” etc. (ver. 10). It is the retribution attached to
a guilty von-use or misuse of spiritual faculty ; it is a “ woe” that is always working:
“From him that hath not”—does not use, or abuses-his-talents—“ shall be taken away
even that which he hath ” (Matt. xxv. 29).—O.


Vers, 13—17.— The Church which God condemns. Here is—

J. A CuuRcH CONDEMNED oF Gop. It has four characteristics of which the Lord
complains, 1. Unspiritual worship. “his people draw near me with their mouth,”
etc. (ver. 18). ‘The service of the lip without the homage of the heart is an unaccept-
able sacrifice to God (see Ps. 1.; lxxviii. 36, 37; ch. i.; Ezek. xxxiii. 81; Matt. xv.
8,9; Jolin iv. 24), ‘lo take sacred words into the lips with nothing of their meaning
in the mind, to assume the attitude without cherishing the spirit of devotion, is not to
propitiate but to offend the Holy One. 2. Unauthorized doctrine. “ ‘heir fear toward
me is taught,” ete.—reudered in the New Testament, ‘“ teaching for doctrines the com-
mandments of men” (Matt. xv.9). This was an early departure from the will of Christ
(see Col. ii, 18—22; Titusi.14; Acts xx. 30). The Church has always been in danger
from men who have represented, first to their own minds and then to the minds of
others, their own reasonings or imaginations as if they were the pure truth of God. So
the mind and will of Christ have been grievously and mischievously perverted. 3.
Incapable_teachers, “The wisdom of their wise shall perish,” ete. (ver.14). A Church
fallen under the rebuke of its Lord is usually one that bas wholly unsuitable and
incompetent teachers—men who have lost their way, who have failed to discover or have
abandoned heavenly wisdom, who cannot declare the way of life. 4. Unenlightened
members. (Ver. 15.) So destitute of the very rudiments of religion as tovack cua


cm, xxtx.1—24.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 483
i


question as this, as to entertain such a thought as this, With a faulty and incapable
ministry you may have a Church ignorant of those elements of the gospel with which
it seems impossible that men should not be familiar.

Il. Tue Diving warnine wuicH Is ALso a Divine Promise. (Vers. 16,17.) He
says—You have perverted everything, turned everything upside down, made nothing
of my Word when you should have made everything of it, elevated the outward and
visible above the inward and spiritual, acted as if you could conceal your doings from
the all-behulding God, treated me as the clay might treat the potter, unworthily and
irreverently. I will bring it to pass that things shall be turned upside down in your
experience: “ Lebanon shal] be turned into a fruitful field,” ete. The humble shall be
exalted and the proud abased. Your false confidence shall be cast down, and that
which you have neglected shall be honoured in the eyes of all. The Church that has
lost its first estate of truth, spirituality, wisdom, must expect a terrible reversal. 1,
Its mistaken notions will be shaken from its mind to make way for God’s liviny truth.
2. Its incapable leaders will be compelled to step down and give place to those whom
they have arrogantly disregarded. 3. Its pompous but unspiritual rites will be
exchanged for simpler and spiritual enyagements. 4. Its luxurious religious enjoy-
ments will be lost in earnest self-ienyine labours, or even in trying bardshijs. Thus
will the fruitful field become a forest, while Lebanon is turned into a fruitful field,
The revolution in the character and condition of the Church will be very intimately
connected with, will be immediately followed by, a revolution in the character and
condition of the world.—C.


Vers. 18—24.— The hour of revival. I. Irs cHaracteristics. 1. The spirit of docility.
Those once deaf now “ hear the words of the book ” (ver. 18); “ ‘They alse that erred
in spirit shall come to understandiny, and they that murmured shall learn ductrine”
(ver. 24). It is one of the surest signs of the presence of God’s Spirit that the attitude
of insensibility or of captiousness is exchanged for the desire to learn the will of God
—that those who once held aloof altogether or came to carp and quibble now lend a
reverent, inquiring ear, sit like Mary at the feet of Jesus, look heavenwards like Paul
and say, “Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?” 2. The power of spir tual per-
ception. “ The eyes of the blind shall see,” etc. (ver. 18). God awakens himan souls
from the sleep of sin or the languor of spiritual decline. Then, in the ove c.se men see
the guilt of continued rebellion azaiust God’s will, also the terrible risks they rua who
remain rebellious, and also the excellency and openness of the salvation which is in
Jesus Christ, etc. ; in the other case they see the transcendent value of the human
souls around them, the admirableness of Christian zeal, the desirableness of vaining
the approval of Christ for carrying on his work of redeeming love, etc. 3. G/adness of
heart in God and in man. (1) Jn God. “Joy inthe Lord” (ver. 19) will be increased,
not only on the part of the meek, but in the heart of all those who are affected by the
action of Divine truth and the influence of the Divine Spirit. Men will realize the
closeness, the blessedness, the nobility of their relation to God, as his children, friends,
co-workers, heirs; and their souls will be lifted up and will swell witl a sacred joy.
(2) In man. Jacob “will not now be ashamed,” his fave will not “ wax pale” (ver.
22) as he regards his children; on the contrary, he will behold them with unbounded
joy when he sees them “sanctifying the Name of the Holy One” (ver. 23). The
fathers and mothers in Israel, the leaders and teachers of the Church, will exult in the
extension of piety and purity, of worth and wisdom, among al] the peo)le, and par-
ticularly among the young. 4. The disappearance of iniquity. (Vers. 20, 21.) The
oppressor, the scorner, the vicious, the unrigiteous,—these and such as they are
removed from the scene; they no longer linger about the gates or frequent the courts
or walk the streets of Jerusalem. he force of sacred fervour, like the cleansing
indignation of Christ himself, sweeps unholiness from the sanctuary; “ that which
defileth ” is cast out with the strong hand of reawakened purity.

Il. Tue Divive Source or rr. All those thus made true children of God are
“the work of mine hands” (ver. 23); everything, as every one, is his workraauship;
it is all of God. It is his Spirit that “renews the face of the earth,” that also revives
the souls of men and the condition of his Church.

Ill. Tue nore or irs comina. 1. We may look to the promises of God's Word,


484 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (on. xxix, 1—24,


that hold out to us the hope of better and brighter days in the future. 2. Or to the
grace and power of our Lord ; for we cannot believe that his yearning compassion and
his mighty power will leave outside for ever the multitudes that are still atar off. 3.
But we do well to look to devout and earnest preparation on our own part. Can we
not “prepare the Lord his way” by cleansing our hearts of selfishness and sin, of
pride and unbelief; by devout expectation and eager readiness for the sound of his
chariot-whecls; by earnest and believing prayer for the action of his reviving Spirit ?—C,


Ver. 2.—Divine corrections through temporal distresses. This subject may be treated
in the larger spheres of nations, classes of society, or Churches, and applications may
be made to individual experience. God’s ways in the world of men are designed to
reveil the mystery of his ways with each man. That impression which we are now
gaiuing concerning the constancy and inexorableness of law, godly people have long
bad concerning the constancy and inexorableness of the Divine dealings, What God
nas becn to one man, he has been to many, he has been to all. What God has been
here, he has been there, and he has been everywhere. It is a law and order with him
that he should correct men for their faults by means of temporal distresses, The
calamities that come to men and nations are no accidents. In them God is working
for rizhteousness, The term Ariel is one of Isaiah’s favourite symbolical names, It
stands for Jerusalem. ‘lhe prophet exclaims, “ Alas for Ariel!” because of the wrong-
headedness and the wilfulness which were leading its rulers away from reliance on
Jehovah to confidence in Egypt. The word “ Ariel” means “God’s lion,” but it is not
easy for us to recoznize the appropriateness of she figure. Some think it may mean
the hearth, or altar of God, and then the reference to “sacrifices” in ver. 1 is seen to
be appropriate. Henderson, feeling that the figure of Jerusalem as a lion, devouring
the flesh of many sacrifices, is very strained, accepts the figure of “hearth or altar,”
and says, “The reference is to Jerusalem as the centre of the Jewish polity, where
alone it was lawful to sacrifice to Jehovah ” (comp. ch. xxxi. 9). In favour of the
translation, “ Lion of God,” it may be noticed that the lion was the emblem of the
tribe of Judah. The historical reference of these verses is to the coming attack of
Sennacherib’s army, which would be a distress to Ariel, but would not involve her
ruin. It would be a providence with the evident design of warning and correcting.
It is matched by many circumstances in individual lives which are distressing rather
than afflicting or overwhelming.

1, ParTicuLAR EVILS IN ARIEL. Perhaps the point of reproach here is the insin-
cerity attending the reformation which Hezekiah instituted. There is an important
difference between a reformation which starts from the people and reaches to affect the
throne, as in the case of Nineveh in the time of Jonah; or as in the case of the German
Protestant Reformation, which was in the heart and purpose of the people before
Luther found it voice; and a reformation which starts from the throne and tries to
carry the people with it, as in the cases of Hezekiah and Josiah. ‘here is the grave
danger of the people’s acceding to the wish of the sovereign, and the example of the
court, apart from their own convictions. This was the particular evil of the time
which necded correction, There were signs of relizious awakening which were insin-
cere. How insincerity in the leaders was shown in the efforts of a considerable party
to turn from Jehovah and negotiate for help with Egypt! Still, we may observe the
prevalence of insincerity, and the fact that “ distresses” are just the fitting corrective
of this evil.

Il, Tue DELUSION OF KEEPING UP SACRIFICES IN ArIEL. An important part of
prophetical work was the denunciation of sacrifices and religious rites when the soul
of meaning was lost out of them, and they expressed no devotion, no thankfulness, no
love, and no consecration (see ch. i. 11—15). Here Isaiah intimates that increasing
the number of festivals and multiplying sacrifices could not deceive God or bide from
him the real moral and religious condition of the people. Keeping up the formalities
of relizion is often successful in deceiving men, but it never deceives God. This is
his sage condition, “They that worship him must worship him in spirit and in
truth.

III. THe Forms IN WHICH ARIEL MIGHT BE HOPEFULLY DISTRESSED, The Mosaic
system had established the idea that men would be sure to get good things by being


on, xxrx. 1—24.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 485


good, This was founded in truth, but it involved men’s having right ideas of what
are “ good things,” and what is “ being good.” Men made it mean that they would be
sure to get temporal blessings if they made large outward show of goodness. And
therefore temporal distresses and anxieties were precisely the things that would awaken
men to a sense of their mistake, and to a worthier apprehension of Divine claims,
Temporal safety and blessing did not attend such goodness as theirs, and so they were
led to suspect their goodness. So we, finding our religion fail us in the evil day, are
brought to see that formal religion never can be acceptable unto him who “ desires
truth in the inward parts.”

IV. Tue Issuz or Divinz DEALINGS witH ARIZL. Here we must distinguish
between the issue which God designs, and for the accomplishment of which the means
he uses are appropriate, and the issue which is actually attained in consequence of
man’s resistant wiliulnuess. One of the saddest things in all human lives is the contrast
between the results of distressful dispensations and the gracious designs contemplated
by God in sending them. Corrections that fail to humble succeed in hardening.—R. T.


Ver. 11.—God’s Word a sealed Book. Reference is to the prophecies of Isaiah, which
were evidently circulated in writing among the people; but, by reason of prevailing
hypocrisy, pride, and obstinacy, they were not uiderstood—they were like a sealed
book (compare the figure in Rev. v. 2). The connection of the text may be stated
thus: “The hearers stare in astonishment at a prophecy seemingly so out of relation
to facts. The prophet warns them that, if they wilfully deaden their spiritual
faculties, there will be no emerging afterwards from this state of blindness and
stupefaction. Jehovah will judicially fix them in it, The ruling class is mainly
addressed, They are spiritually asleep, with eyes closed and heads wrapped up (in
Oriental fashion).”

I. Gop’s WorD I8 NOT A SEALED Book By Divine pesten. A curious notion has
gained acceptance that the Bible could not be the Word of God if it did not contain
mysteries quite beyond the possibility of man’s apprehension. On the other hand, it
has been well urged that God can have no need thus to “show off” his superiority ;
and that revelation must mean “ light,” “ unfolding; ” it can never be intended to meau
“ bewildering.” Of this we may be sure—there is nothing in the Bible sealed from mau,
Whatever is there is for our understanding, for our instruction, Isaiah’s prophecies,
given by God’s inspiration, are plain enough; he may read them who runs,

II. Gop’s WorD BECOMES A SEALED Book THROUGH HUMAN PERVERSITY. This may
be shown: 1. In the blinding influence of prejudice. We cannot find in the Word what
we do not want to find. This may be applied to national prejudice, sectarian prejudice,
and personal prejudice. 2. In the closing of men’s minds to the incomings and gracious
illuminations and inspirations of God’s Spirit. He who gives the Word gives the keys
to its meanings and applications, through the guiding Spirit. It is a sealed Book if we
have not the key. 8. In the judicial sealing which comes as a judgment on the per-
versity. This is the precise case associated with the text. These wilful rulers were
determined to treat Isaiah’s prophecies as a sealed book: then to them it shall be a
sealed book; and when they want to understand it, they shall “weary themselves to
find the door.” Apply to our own relations with God’s Word. The openness and
suggestiveness of it is a test of our spiritual state, We must never think that God
has closed it; the fact can only be that we have closed ourselves to it.—R. T.


Ver. 13.—Lip-service ; or, the peril of losing the heart out of our piety. There was a
time when Israel rendered heart-service to God. There was a life in the Mosaic system.
Taking a figure from the sacrifice which Noah offered as consecrating a regenerate
earth unto God, there was “a savour of a sweet smell” to rise up to God. The
reproach of Isaiah is that the sacrifice was left, but the savour was gone; the husk was
left, but the kernel was gone; the form was left, the heart was gone; the voice still
spoke, but it had no message to deliver. “They draw near with lip, but heart is
far away.” And still, whensoever personal piety is failing, men fall back on some past
experiences, or else they exaggerate the mere formalities of religious worship and
ordinance. Ages of strong faith are very independent of forms. Ages of failing faith
always exaggerate forms. If we have little heart for obedience, we put in its piace


486 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [en. xxix, 1—24,
oh ee eee


much bowing and kneeling and offering—as if God could not see very deep, and would
be taken by appearances (see 1 Sam. xvi. 7).

I. Lip-seERVICE IS THE REQUIREMENT oF Gop. ‘ Whoso offereth praise glorifieth
me.” saith the Lord. Hosea expresses a right feeling when he leads the people to say,
“So will we render the calves of our lips” (Hos. xiv. 2). To worship God is to make
our approaches to him, and to present our adorations to him; it is to draw nigh to him
as those that have business with Him, with an intention therein to honour him. This
we are to dv with our mouth and with our lips in speaking @f him and in speaking toe
him. And, if tbe heart be full of his love and fear, out of the abundance of that
heart the mouth will speak. It should be carefully pointed out that the modern
neglect of meerings for worship, praise, and prayer is as sad a sign of failins heart-love
for God as is the exaggeration of formal rites and ceremonies. It must be plainly and
forcibly urged that God ealls for due expression of our piety ; he asks for “life-service.”

Il, Lip-serVvICE ONLY I8 AN OFFENCE UNTO Gop. Because it is worthless. God
the Spirit cannot be satisfird with things; he asks for spirit, for emotion, affection,
thankfulness, and trust. “ Voice and nothing else” must be mockery to him who
can only bed a voice when the heart speaks by means of it. We call that false, in
relation to ourselves, which is warm expression of affection for us when there is no
heart-love; and such falseness is an offence. And Isaiah tells the rulers that the
secret of their falseness is that they have taken to orderiny their daily conduct by “ the
precepts of men,” and did not want to obey the Law of God; so they gave him words
in place of works.—R. T,


Ver. 15.—God the Mind-Searcher. Foolish indeed are they who “ seek deep to hide
their counsel from the Lord.” ‘he first reference of this warning may be to the
secret schemes of the party in Jerusalem which advocated an offensive and defensive
alliance with Egypt in the national emergency. Such a policy was so evidently
unthercratic that, in the days of the good Hezekiah, they were obliged to work in the
dark. It may be noticed that the Divine ommiscience of all events and circumstances
is a much more familiar and readily recognized truth than the Divine omniscience of
all thoughts of mind and decisions of will. Yet we are to understand that, as the
psalmist expresses it, “Thou understandest my thought afar off. . . . For before a word
is yet on my toneue, lo! © Jehovah, thou knowest it altogether.” By our “ thoughts”
is not meant the passing set of mental assuciations from which we have to select,
but the selections we make, the thines we cherish. The omniscience of God is most
searching to us when we regard it as his “‘ knowledge of the deepest thoughts and most
secret workings of the human heart.”

I. Tue Divine omNiscinnce as A CHECK. A boy was required to accompany his
father when out stealing potatoes from a field. The boy was set to watch while the
man dug. Presently he called out, as if there was danger. ‘ Where? where ?” said
the man, who could see no signs of any one approaching. ‘ Look up!” replied the boy.
This should always be taken into consideration in our thinking and our plauning—
God sees; God knows. We all need that check of the Divine eye upon us, reading
our very hearts.

Il. Tue Divine OMNISCIENCE AS A TERROR. Such it must always be to the evil-
doer, to the man who wants to do wrong. It checks the good man; it frightens the
bad man, A servant-girl was accustomed, to pilfer when dusting her master’s room, but
there was a portrait on the walls, tlhe eyes of which seemed to be always following and
watching her; so, to relieve herself of her terror, the foolish girl cut out the eyes. An
oppressive picture of the terror of God’s looking at and into evil-doers is given in the
description of the judgment, when men will call on the rocks and hills to hide them
from the face of God—as if they could!

II. Tue Divine oMNISCIENCE AS A CONSOLATION AND STRENGTH. This it is to
all who wish to be good. The best source of illustration is Ps. cxxxix. See especially
the restfulness and the joy breathed in the prayer of vers, 23, 24. As Calvin says,
“That man must have a rare confidence who offers himself so boldly to the scrutiny
of God’s righteous judgment.”—R., T.


Ver. 19.— The joy of the meek, “The meek also shall increase their joy in the Lord.”


On, xxix, 1—24.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 487


—


It is quite usual to confuse the “ meek” with the “humble ;” but, though the con-
fusion may sometimes be excused, it is better to associate distinct meanings with each
term, The‘ humble” man is the man who thinks in a lowly way about himself,
The “ meek ” man is the man who is concerned for the interests of others rather than
himself. The ideal “ meek ” man has supreme concern for the interests of God. The
“humble” man does not think of himself more highly than he ought to think. The
‘* meek ” man is really “ disinterested.” The Bible models of meekness are first, Moses,
who sacrificed himself in his zeal for the interests of the Hebrews; and then, the Lord
Jesus Christ, who sacrificed himself for the redemption of mankind. In precise har-
mony with this text, it is said of him, ‘“ Who, for the jvy that was set before him,
endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the rizht hand of God.”
The immediate historical connection of the verse may be thus indicated: The scoffers
jeered at Isaiah’s assurance that the distress arising from the Assyrian invasion would
pass away ; there was no need to think of Egypt; Jehovah could and would defend
his own. Isaiah replies tothem that they need only wait awhile, and they would learn
that God rules, and the day of deliverance and restoration would prove a day of
increased joy for all those meek and pious souls that held fast their trust in God. The
expression, “ shall increase their joy,” suggests two very simple and natural divisions.

I, THE MEEK HAVE THE JOY OF THEIR TRUST IN THE TIME OF PERIL. [Even in
the national distress they held their hope in God, and that hope was streneth and
cheer and song. They did not think so much about themselves and their troubles as
about God and about the ways in which he would vindicate himself and make his
glory known. Meek souls are taken out of themselves; and this is the secret of joy.
Meek souls are so satisfied in those whom they trust that they can be quiet from fear
of evil. ‘Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.” They are always
rich; they may always be happy.

II. THE MEEK HAVE THE JOY OF DELIVERANCE WHEN Gop’s DAY comes. They
are ready for it, expecting it, waiting to welcome it. They are not hindered by the
sense of shame, as are the scoffers. Long expectation makes possession at last a keener,
holier joy ; and prepares them fully to enjoy all the blessings it brings. Still it is true
that the meek have the best of life while they walk under its gloom, aud they will
have the best of heaven when its gates are opened for the ransomed.—R. T.


Vers. 20, 21.— The humiliation of the suspicious. We should see in these verses a
strictly personal reference. Some parties, especially among the leaders of the people,
could see nothing good, nothing wise, in Isaiah’s teachings and warnings. They thought
them babyish, untimely, leading to a false security. They valued statesmanship,
political wisdom, aud the subtlety of setting one great nation against another, so that
their kingdom might be let alone. The kinds of scorning and sneering in which they
iudulged are described to us in ch, xxviii. J—13. Here Isaiah utters his complaint of
their suspiciousness and unreasonableness. ‘They make a man an offender for a
word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate.” There are no members of
society more disagreeable to society than the suspicious, who can so keenly discern
evil when there is none to discern; and find evil motive in actions of transparent
sincerity. If men praise, the suspicious-tempered call it flattery. If men reprove,
the suspicious-tempered say they are jaundiced. Suspiciousness comes to be a disease,
a mania. It is absolutely opposed to the spirit of considerate brotherliness and
heavenly Divine charity, which “thinketh no evil, and is not easily provoked.”
Matthew Henry, describing the people referred to here, says, “They made a man,
though he were ever so wise and good a man, though he were a man of God, an offender
for a word, a word mischosen or misplaced, when they could not but know that it was
well meant, They cavilled at every word that the prophets spoke to them by way of
admonition, though ever so innocently spoken, and without any design to affront them,
They put the worst construction upon what was said, and made it crin inal by strained
innuendoes. Those who consider how apt we all are to speak unadvisedly, and to mis-
take what we bear, will think it very unjust and unfair to make a man an offender for
a word.” As the illustration and enforcement of this subject must greatly depend on
the experienc.s and observations of each preacher, we only give suggestive divisions,

I, THm® sUSPICIOUS TEMPER MAY HAVE ITS ROOT IN NATURAL DISPOSITION.


488 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. xxx. 1—Za,


ne


TI. THE sUSPICIOUS TEMPER SWIFTLY GROWS WITH INDULGENCE,

Til. THe suspicious TEMPER LEADS MEN TO MAKE MISTAKES.

IV. THE SUSPICIOUS TEMPER LIMITS A MAN’S ENJOYMENTS.

V. Tue susPIclouSs TEMPER MAY MAKE IT NEARLY IMPOSSIBLE FOR A MAN TO
TRUST IN Gop.—R. T.


Ver. 23.—The sanctifying power of sanctified people. “They ”—God’s redeemed
and sanctified ones—“ shall sauctify my Name, and sanctify the Holy One of Jacob.”
This thought, in its New Testament form, may be found in the words of the great
High Priestly prayer, “ And for their sakes I sanctify myself, that they also might be
sanctified throuxh the truth.” Christ, the Model of the sanctified ones, honours God,
and redeems and purifies man. ‘Two things need consideration.

I. Gov’s sancTirIeD ones. “ Sanctify ” is a familiar term to godly people. It isa
word bearing several distiuct meanings, or, it would be more exact to say, several dis-
tinct parts of meaning. Sometimes one of these parts is set in prominence, and
sometimes another part; and it is always worth while to use religious terms with
care, precisely apprehending the senses in which they are employed. ‘Sanctify ” may
mean “ make actually pure and holy.” This is indeed the more common and usual
meaning of the term, which comes at once to our minds. We think that for us to be
sanctified must be for us to be made “ perfectly holy.” The word seems to express our
“meetness for the inheritance of the saints in the light.” When we are wholly
sanctified we shall be ready for presenting faultless before the presence of God. Some of
us think that such “ holiness” may be attained in this life; while others of us feel that
the testing death-time must come ere the sanctification can be complete, and the full
bloom can rest on the sacred fruitaze of our life. But by putting this side of meaning
into undue prominence, we lose sight of other ideas which lie in the word—ideas of even
more practical importance to us. The Jews had thoughts about this word “sanctify”
which brought it more helpfully within the sphere of their actual life and labour. To
them to sanctify a thing was to take it away—to separate it from common uses, and
devote it wholly, consecrate it, to Divine and holy uses. A person or a thing was sancti-
fied when it was given over wholly to God and God’s service. A lamb separated from the
flock for sacrifice was said to be sanctified. Samuel, taken by his mother away from
the home-life, aud left with Eli at the tabernacle, was sanctified—lent to the Lord,
given over wholly to the Lord’s service, for so long as he might live. The Levites were
@ sanctified tribe, because they were taken from the other tribes, and devoted wholly
to the tabernacle service. ‘The Jewish idea of the word comes out very fully in the
ceremony of the consecration of a Levite. The priest touched with the blood of a
sacrificed animal the Levite’s right hand, right eye, and right foot. This was the
Levite’s sanctification. It devoted every faculty and every power—of seeing, hearing,
doing, walking, the right-hand faculties, the best and the choicest—to God’s peculiar
service. He was a man set apart. This is the side of sanctifying which we may
realize, and in this sense our Lord could declare, “ I am,” daily, continuously, “ sanc-
tifying myself.” We, too, must be “ sanctifying ourselves” for the bearing and the
doing of God’s holy will and service. And “ sanctifying self ” means (1) the full and
hearty devotion of all our powers to God’s work ; (2) the patient and anxious culturing
of the inner life; (3) hearty and entire separation from all self-seeking interests, Ot
Christ’s school it may be said,


“ Here we learn to serve and give,
And, rejoicing, self deny.”


I], THE SANCTIFYING POWER OF THE SANCTIFIED ONES. This is the only real fitness
ef a man for doing God’s work in the world. It ensures the hiehest and best power
for the doing, because it brings all the force of the man himself to bear upon his work.
It is not a man’s knowledge blessing his fellow-men, nor a man’s experience, nor a
man’s genius, nor a man’s efforts; it is a man blessing men. It is a recenerate
divinely endowed man, blessing men. It is a Christly man continuing Christ’s work
of grace. It is a man who has seen Christ telling his vision to others. It is the man
become a saint, and therefore an apostle, “That self-sauctifying of the Lord Jesus
Christ was ‘for our sakes, and it has power on us. It is the inspiration of an


oH. xxx. 1—38.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISATAH.


489


example. It is more than the realization of our ideal. ‘There is the noblest, the
loftiest manhood ; there is the truest, the meekest piety ; there is the perfection of
human sonship;—there, in that sanctified Man, who kneels before God and says,


‘For thy sake, O Father, I am sanctifying myself.


sanctifying myself. ”


For their sakes, O Father, I am


And there we learn that most blessed lesson that “ sanctity is


power ”—power to honour the Divine Name, power to redeem and uplift our fellow-


men.—R. T.


EXPOSITION


CHAPTER XXX.


Vers. 1—7.—Tue ALLIANCE witH Eeypr
OPENLY REBUKED. In the preceding chapter
(ver. 15) the design of the Jewish rulers to
seek the alliance of Egypt was covertly
glanced at and condemned; now it is openly
declared and rebuked. The rulers are
warned that no good can possibly come of it,
even in a worldly sense. The Egyptians
will give no aid, or at any rate no effectual
aid. The sums expended in purchasing
their friendship will be utterly thrown away.

Ver. 1.—Woe to the rebellious children
(comp. ch. i. 23; lxv. 2). The word trans-
lated rebellious” is used in Deut. xxi. 18,
20 of the persistently disobedient son, who
was to be brought before the elders and
stoned to death. That take counsel; rather,
that form plans, such as the plan now
formed to call in the aid of Egypt. It must
be borne in mind that, under the theocracy,
there was an authorized mode of consulting
God, and receiving an answer from him,
in any political emergency. That cover
with a covering. The exact metaphor em-
ployed is uncertain. Mr. Cheyne renders,
“that weave a web;” Dr. Kay, “that pour
out a molten image.” The meaning, how-
ever, in any case is, “that carry out a
design,” the clause being a mere variant of
the preceding one. That they may add
sin to sin; i.e. “to add a fresh sin to all
their former sins.”

Ver. 2.—That walk; or, are on their way
(comp. ch. xxxi. 1). Either the Jewish
ambassadors have already started, or the
anticipatory vision of the prophet sees them
as if starting. In the history (2 Kings
xviii. 13—37; ch. xxxvi. 1—22) it is not
expressly said that Hezekiah made applica-
tion to Egypt for aid; but the reproaches
of Rabshakeh (2 Kinys xviii. 21, 24) would
be pointless if he had not done so. Have
not asked at my mouth. As they ought
to have done (see Numb. xxvii. 21; Judg.
i. 1; xx. 18; 1 Sam. xxiii. 2; 1 Kings
xxii. 7, etc.). To strengthen themselves
in the strength of Pharaoh. It is very un-
eertain who is the “Pharaoh” here in-
tended. The supreme power over Egypt


was probably, at the time, in the hands
of Tirkakah (2 Kings xix. 9); but Lower


‘Egypt seems to have been ruled by various


princes, the chief of whom was Shabatok,
and any one of these may have been regarded
by Isaiah as a “ Pharaoh.” To trust in the
shadow of Egypt. Trust in the “shadow
of God” was an expression very familiar to
the Jews (see Ps. xvii. 8; xxxvi. 7; Ixiii.
G excl, Wevoh. xxVe 45 XXXU..2)9 Lo “trust
in the shadow of Egypt” was to put Egypt
in the place of God,

Ver. 4.— His princes were at Zoan,
“Zoan” is undoubtedly Tanis, which is
now “San,” a heap of ruins in the Delta,
where some interesting remains of the
shepherd-kings have been discovered. It
was a favourite capital of the monarchs
of the nineteenth dynasty, and seems to
have been the scene of the struggle between
Moses and the Piaraoh of the Exodus (Ps.
Ixxviii. 12, 43). It then declined, but is
said to have been the birthplace of the first
king of the twenty-first dynasty. In the
Ethiopian period it rose once more to some
importance, and was at one time the capital
of a principality (see G. Smith’s ‘ Asshur-
bani-pal,’ pp. 21, 26, 32). The “ princes ”
here spoken of are probably Hezekiah’s
ambassadors. His ambassadors came to
Hanes. “Hanes” has been generally
identified with the modern LEsnes, a
village between Memphis and Thebes,
which is thought to mark the site of Hera-
cleopolis Magna. But it has been well
remarked that the Jewish envoys would
scarcely have proceeded so far. Mr. R.S.
Poole suggests, instead of Esnes, Tahpenes,
or Daphne (‘ Dict. of the Bible,’ vol. i. p.
753); but that name 1s somewhat remote
from Hanes. Perhaps it would be best to
acknowledge that ‘“ Hanes” cannot at pre-
sent be identified. It was probably not
very far from Tanis,

Ver. 5.—They were all ashamed; rather,
all are ashamed. The reference is not to
the ambassadors, who felt no shame in their
embassy, and probably returned elated by
the promises made them; but to the sub-
sequent feelings of tlie Jewish nation, when
it was discovered by sad experience that no
reliance was to be placed on “ the strength
of Pharaoh.” A people that could vot profit


490


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


(cH. xxx. 1—33.


ere


them. Mr. Cheyne compares, very perti-
nently, an inscription of Sargon’s, where he
says of the people of Philistia, Judah, Edom,
and Moab, that “ they and their evil chiefs,
to fight against me, unto Pharaoh, King of
Evypt, a monarch who could not save them,
their presents earried, and besought his
allinnce ” (G. Smith, ‘Eponym Canon,’ p.
130, ll. 35—89). . Egypt was, in fact, quite
unable to cope with Assyria, and knew it.
A shame, and also a reproach. A mutter of
which they would themselves be “ ashamed,”
and with which the Assyrians would
“reproach” them (as they did, 2 Kings
XViii. 21, 24).

Ver. 6.—Burden of the beasts of the south.
Delitzsch thinks that the Egyptians are
intended by the “ beasts of the south ”—the
expression pointing primarily to tle hippo-
potamus, which was an apt emblem of the
slow-moving Egyptians. But most com-
mentators regird the “beasts” of this
clause as equivalent to the “ young asses
and camels” mentioned towards the end
of the verse. (On the sense of the word
“burden,” see the introductory paragraph
to ch. xiii.) Into the land of trouble and
anguish ; rather, through a land. It is not
. Egypt that is spoken of, but the desert
between Judea and Egypt. The remini-
scences of this desert were such tliat the
Israelites always exaggerated its terrors and
dangers (see Deut. vili. 15; Jer. ii. 6).
From whence come the young and old
lion; rather, the lioness and the lion (see
Speaker's Commentary’ on Gen. xlix. 9;
vol, i. p. 227). Lions can never have been
numerous in the tract in question, but they
may have haunted portions of it, when it
was better watered than at present. The
viper and fiery flying serpent. Snakes of
various kinds have always been abundant
in the desert between Judea and Egypt
(Numb. xxi. 6; Strab., xvi. p. 759 ; Schubert,
‘Travels, vol. ii. p. 406; Burckhardt,
‘Travels,’ p. 499, etc.). Some of them
were believed anciently to have wings
(Herod., ii. 75; iii. 107); but the fact is
doubted, Taaiah is not concerned with
natural history, but with definitely marking
out the locality through which the am-
bassadors would march. Vor this purpose
it was best to describe it in terms drawn
from the popular belief. Their riches...
their treasures. Ambassadors wl:o came to
request military aid, as 1 matter of course
carried rich presents with them. Young
asses...camels. The ordinary beasts of
burden employed in the passage of the
desert (Gen. xxxvii. 25; xlii. 26; Herod.,
iii. 9, etc.).

Ver. 7.—Therefore have I cried concerning
this, Their strength is to sit still. No
modern critic accepts this interpretation.


Most translate, ‘Wherefore I name it”
(i.e. Egypt) “ Rahab, that sits still;” or
“Arrogance, that sits still.” Rahab,
“pride” or “arrogance,” woul seem_to
have been an old name for Egypt (Job
xxvi, 12; Ps. Ixxxvii. 4; lxxxix. 10; ch.
li. 9), not one given at this time by Isaiah.
What he means to say is, ‘‘ Proud as thou
art, thou doest nothing to maintain thy
pride, but art content with sitting still”
This he “cries” or “ proclaims ” concerning
Egypt, as the most important thing for
other nations to know about her.

Vers. 8—17.—A RENEWAL OF THREATEN-
ng. The denunciation of the Egyptian
alliance had been made vivd wee, in the
courts of the temple or in some other place
of public resort. Ais he ended, Isaiah re-
ceived a Divine intimation that the prophecy
was to be put on record, doubly, upon a
tablet and in a book. At the same time,
the “rebelliousness” of the people was
further pointed out, and fresh threats (vers.
13, 14, and 17) were uttered against them.

Ver. 8.— Write it before them in a tablet;
t.e. “ write the prophecy before them” (equi-
valent to “to be set up before them”) “ona
tablet,” in the briefest possible form (comp.
ch. viii. 1). And note it in a book; i.e. “and
also make a full notation of it ina book,” or
parchment roll. The “ tablet ” was to be for
the admonition of the living generation of
men; the “ book” was for future generations,
to be a record of God’s owniscience and faith-
fulness “for ever and ever.” That it may
be for the time to come; rather, for an after-
day—not for the immediate present only.
For ever and ever. Modern critics observe
that the phrase, lé’ad ad ‘olém, never occurs
elsewhere, and suggest a change of the
pointing, which would yive the sense of
“for a testimony for ever.” Whether we
accept the change or not, the meaning un-
doubtedly is that consigning the prophecy
to a “book” would make an appeal to it
possible tn perpetuum. The perpetuity of
the written Word is assumed as certain.

Ver. 9.—That this is a rebellious people;
rather, for this ig a rebellious people. The
words to be written were those of the pre-
ceding prophecy. The reason for their
being written is now given (comp. Deut.
xxxi. 26, 27). Lying children (comp. ch.
lix. 13). They professed devotion to God;
but their acts contradicted their words.

Ver. 10.—Which say, ete. Not, of course,
directly, in so many words. But indirectly
they let it be understood that this was
what they wished. Compare the advice
given to Micaiah by Ahab’s messenger,
who, no doubt, correctly interpreted the
wishes of the monarch and his nobles (1


em. xxx. 1—33.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


491


SS


Kings xxii. 13). Seers . . . prophets. Not
two classes of persons, but two names for
the same class. ‘The “ parallelism” of He-
brew poetry leads to the constant employ-
ment of synonymous clauses. Right things;
t.e, the truth in all its plainness. Smooth
things ; t.e. soft, pleasant announcements.
Deceits; or, iliusiuns (comp. Jer. ix. 5,
“They will deceive” or “ mock ”—where
we have tlie same root).

Ver. 11.—Cause the Holy One of Israel to
cease from before us. “The Holy One of
Israel” was one of Isiial’s most frequent
names for the Almighty. He used it especi-
ally when rebuking [srael’s unholiness (ch.
i, 4; v. 24, ete.). The irreligious Jews
were weury of this constant iteration, and
wislied to hear uo more concerning this
* Holy Oue,” whose very holiness was 6
reproach to them.

Ver. 12.—Because ye despise this word;
rather, because ye reject this word (sce 1 Sam.
viii. 7; xv. 23, 26° 2 Kings xvii. 15, etc.).
The “word ” intended is probably the pro-
phecy aguinst trusting in Kgypt (vers.
1—7). And trust in oppression; or, extor-
tion. Oppressive measures employed to
obtain the rich gifts which had to be sent
into Egypt (ver. 6) are probably intended
(comp. 2 Kings xv. 20). Gratz and Cheyne
change the revd.ng from ’oshek to ’tlkésh
(“ perverseness ”); but without any neves-
sity. And perverseness; literally, erooked-
ness; i.e. “turtuous policy” (Kay). And
stay thereon; rather, lean or stay yourselves
thereon.

Ver. 13.—This iniquity shall be to you
as a breach ready to fall. Your sin in re-
belling against God, rejecting the warnings
of his prophets, and trusting in your own
devices sliall bring you into the condition
of a wall in which there is a “breach,” or
ratler, a “bulve,” which therefore totters
to its fall, and is liable to dissolve in ruins
at any moment. Swelling out in a high
wall. The higher the wall, the greater the
danger, and the more complete the destruc-
tion.

Ver. 14.—And he shall break it as the
breaking of the potters’ vessel that is broken
in pieces. Isaiah is fond of mixed meta-
phors, and of superseding one metaphor by
another. From comparing Judah’s fall and
ruin to the shattering of a lofty wall, he
suddenly turns to a comparison of it with
the breaking to pieces of an earthen pitcher.
Judah shall be so broken as when the
pitcher is crushed into minute fiagments,
s0 that tlere is no piece large enough to
convey a coal from one fire for the lighting
of another, or to be of even the least use for
drawing water from a well. A complete
dissolution of the political fabric is fore-


shadowed, such as did not actually take |


effect till the conquest of Jerusalem by
Nebuchadnezzar,

Ver. 15.—For thus saith the Lord God,
the Holy One of Israel. As the irreligious
party wished to hear no more of “ the Holy
One of [srael” (ver, 11), [saiab takes care
to kvep him constantly before their minds
(comp. ch. xxxi. 1). In returning and rest
shall ye be saved; ratiier, should ye be
saved, or might ye be saved. The conditions
are put forward, not as now capable of
being realized, but as those whici might
have been realized at an earlier date. ‘lhe
“returning” spoken of is an abandonment
of the course hitherto pursued, which was
reckless provocation of Assyria and trust in
Egypt. The “rest” is staying upon God—
renunciation of trust on any arm of flesh,
and simple reliance on the Divine aid, as
sure to be sufficient when the need came.
In quietness and confidence shall be your
strength; rather, should be. The clause is
a mcre iteration in other words of the pre-
ceding one. Ye would not. They had
practically rejected the policy of quiescence
and patient waiting upon God, when they
sent the embassy into Kgypt.

Ver. 16.—Ye said, No; for we will flee
upon horses; rather, we will fly wpon horses.
The nobles had perhaps a manly eagerness
to mount the LWyyptian war-lorses, and
rush upon the enemy at full speed, in the
hope of discomfiting them. Isaiah warns
tiem that they will not really fy on the
enemy, but flee before him. We will ride
upon the swift. “The swift” (kal) seems
to be a mere variant for “ horse,” the paral-
lelism being, as so frequently, “synouy-
mous.” Therefore shall they that pursue you
be swift. However swift the horses of the Ju-
deeuiis,t heir enemies would beas well mounted
and would pursue and overtake them.

Ver. 17.—One thousand shall flee at the
rebuke of one. A byperbole common in
Scripture (Deut. xxxii. 30; Josh. xxiii.
10; Ley. xxvi. 8), and not confined to the
sacred writers. Piankhi the Ethiopian
boasts, in his great inscription, that, with
Ammon’s help, “many should turn their
backs upon a few, and one should rout a
thousand ” (* Records of the Past,’ vol. ii. p.
84). At the rebuke of five. The “rebuke”
of five (Ze. their war-shout) would put
to flight the whole army. As a beacon;
rather, as a flag-staff—stripped and bare
(comp. ch. xxxiii, 23; Ezek. xxvii. 5).
A tree stripped of its branches and left
standing as a landmark seems to be in-
tended. As an ensign. A military stand-
ard, such as was in common use among
the Assyrians and Egyptians, as among
the Greeks and Romans (see ‘ Ancient
Monarchies,’ vol. ii. p. 57; Bawlinson,
‘Hist. of Egypt,’ vol. i. p. 463)


492


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xxx. 1—33,


ee eee


Vers. 18—26.—A Renzwau oF PRomiss.
The denunciations of the preceding passage
(vers. 9—17) had been so terrible that, with-
out some counterpoise of promise, they must
have produced a general despair. This was
not the Divine purpose. Judah’s probation
still continued. Therefore it was necessary
to let it be seen that the Divine long-suffer-
ing was not yet exhausted—there were still
conditions under which God would be gra-
cious to his people. The conditions were
“orying to the Lord” (ver. 19), and entire
abolition of idolatry (ver. 22).


Ver. 18.—And therefore. ‘ Because your
sins require this chastisement” (Kay);
“Because of the extremity of your need”
(Cheyne). It is, perhaps, best to own that
the motives of the Divine action are very
commonly obscure; and, if seen clearly by
the prophets, are certainly not clearly set
forth, being (it may be) inscrutable. While
the motive, however, is obscure, the promise
is plain and unmistakable. The Lord will
wait, that he may be gracious unto you.
God is not about at present to “ make a full
end;” he is bent on “ waiting ”’—his intent
is “to be gracious.” He will be exalted, that
he may have mercy. He will find some
means of vindicating his honour and exalt-
ing himself, short of your destruction, in
order that it may be open to him to give
you a further chance of repentance, whereby
you would obtain mercy. For the Lord is a
God of judgment. God is essentially just;
sin must receive punishment; but the punish-
ment may be short of destruction. Justice
does not exclude mercy. If men bear their
punishment with patience, and wait for
God, a brighter day will dawn on them in
course of time.

Ver. 19.—For the people shall dwell in
Zion; rather, a people shall continue. Jeru-
salem shall not now be made desolate, or
deprived of its inhabitants. Whatever the
number of captives taken, “a people shall
remain.” Thou shalt weep no more. The
reasons for weeping shall be removed. He
will be very gracious unto thee at the voice
of thy cry. For God to be gracious to them,
they must first “ory” to him—make an
earnest, hearty appeal to him for mercy.
Their “ery” will be answered as soon as
heard, ¢.¢. as soon as uttered.

Ver. 20.—And though the Lord give you
the bread of adversity (so Mr. Cheyne).
But most modern critics (Kay, Delitzsch,
Vance Smith, etc.) regard the words as a
promise of support through the siege, and
omit the interpolated “though.” Translate,
And the Lord will give you bread of ad-
versity, and water of affliction; i.e. scant


rations, but sufficient; and thy teachers
shall not, etc. Be removed into a corner;
i.e. “ have to hide themselves from persecu-
tion.” A persecution of Jehovah’s prophets
had commenced in Judah during the reign
of Joash (2 Chron. xxiv. 19—22), and had
probably continued with more or less se-
verity ever since.

Ver. 21.—Thine ears shall hear a word
behind thee. Kay says, “The teacher will
go before his flock, marking out the way
before them.” But in that case, the flock
would hear the word before them. Delitzsch
explains better, “They (the teachers), as
the shepherds of the flock, would follow the
people with friendly words of admonition.”
Even in the East, shepherds sometimes fol-
low their flocks (see Gen. xxxii.17). When
ye turn, t.e. when ye are about to turn.

Ver. 22.—Ye shall defile also the covering
of thy graven images of silver. Idolatry,
greatly encouraged by Ahaz, had been
strictly forbidden by Hezekiah at the be-
ginning of his reign (2 Kings xviii. 4); but
the present passage, amoug others, shows
how impossible it was for a king, with the
best intentions, to effect the extirpation of
idolatry, if his subjects were attached to it.
Evidently the Jews had, in many cases,
secretly maintained tleir idols and their
idolatrous practices, despite the efforts of
Hezekiah. But now, in their repentance,
they would “ defile” (#.e. destroy) both the
outer “ covering ” of precious metal, and the
inner core of wood or stone, or base metallic
substance. The ornament of thy molten
images of gold; rather, the coating or over-
laying. It was usual to overlay with gold or
silver molten images of bronze or other in-
ferior metal. Cast them away; literally,
scatter; ie. either griud them to powder
(2 Kings xxiii. 6), or at any rate break them
to bits, and then disperse the fragments far
and wide.

Ver. 23.—Then shall he give the rain of
thy seed, that thou shalt sow the ground
withal; rather, then shall he give rain for
thy seed, wherewith thou sowest the ground.
God, having forgiven his people, will once
more renew the blessings of his ordinary
providence, giving them “ rain from heaven,
and fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with
food and gladness” (Acts xiv. 17). Bread
of the increase of the earth; rather, bread,
the produce of the ground; i.e. ordinary
bread, not “bread from heaven,” like the
manna in the wilderness, Fat and plenteous ;
literally, rich and fat. Thy cattle. To com-
plete the general prosperity, there should be
plentiful pasture for the flocks and herds.

Ver. 24.—The oxen likewise and the young
asses that ear the ground; rather, that till
or cultivate the ground. The Hebrew word
is generic, and does not apply to “ earing”


on, xxx. 1—33.) THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


493


(é.e. ploughing) only. Shall eat clean pro-
vender. Delitzscl says that v’lil khamitz is
“a mash, composed of oats, barley, and
vetches, made more savoury with salt and
sour vegetables.” Mr. Cheyne translates,
“ Shall eat mixed provender with salt.” The
general idea is clearly that they shall have
for their ordinary food that superior kind of
provender which, according to existing
practices, was reserved for rare occasions.
Winnowed with the shovel. Anciently, win-
nowing was chiefly effected by tossing the
grain into the air with shovels in a draughty
place (see Wilkinson, ‘Ancient Egyptians,’
vol. iv. pp. 86, 89, 90). The fan was scarcely
in use so early as Isaiah’s time. He means
by mizreh probably a second instrument for
tossing the grain. JDelitzsch translates,
“ winnowing-fork.”

Ver. 25.—Rivers and streams of water;
rather, rivulets, courses of water. Channels,
along which water was conveyed for the
purpose of irrigation, are intended (comp.
Ezek. xlvii. 1—12; Joel iii. 18). No doubt
there is a secondary allegorical meaning
running through the whole description of
Judalhi’s prosperity (vers. 23—26). In this
allegorical intention the waters stand for
the streams of God’s grace. In the day of
the great slaughter. Equivalent to “the
day of vengeauce” (ch. xxxiv. 8)—the day
when God shall tread down his enemies.
The prophet passes from the immediate
effect of Judah’s repentance to a broader
view of what shall happen when God’s
kingdom is established upon the earth.
When the towers fall; ze. when there
shall be a general “ pulling down of strong
holds,” and a “casting down of every high
thing that exalts itself against God” (2 Cor.
x. 4, 5).

Ver 26,—The light of the moon shall be
as the light of the sun. “The promise now
rises higher and higher, and passes from
earth to heaven” (Delitzsch). All nature
will become more glorious in the “last
times.” Moonlight will be as sunlight, and
sunlight will be seven times brigiiter than it
isnow. Again, there may be an under alle-
gorical sense. The light of truth will shine
with greater brilliancy, so that all men will
be enlightened by it. “ For the earth shall
be full of the knowledge of God, as the
waters cover the sea” (ch. xi. 9). As the
light of seven days; ¢.e. as though the light
of seven days were concentrated into one.
In the day that the Lord bindeth up the
breach. At that period in the world’s his-
tory when God forgives the iniquities of his
people, and condescends to reign over them
as their actual King, eilher in this present
world or in “anew heaven and anew earth ”
(Rev. xxi. 1; comp. ch. Ixvi. 22), wherein
shall “ dwell righteousness ” (2 Pet. iii. 13).


And healeth the stroke of their wound;
rather, the wound of his stroke; i.e. the wound
caused by the stroke wherewith he has
smnitten them.


Vers. 27—33.—A PropaEcy or Assyria’s
Destruction. Mr. Cheyne regards this
passage as “a symbolic description of the
judgment introduced by a theophany.” But
is it not rather a poetical description of
God’s judgment on Assyria, which may be,
probably is, a type of his final judgment
upon an iniquitous world? The mention of
Assyria in ver. 31 seems to be decisive in
favour of the prophecy being (primarily) of
special application to the circumstances of
the time. -


Ver. 27.—The Name of the Lord cometh
from far. “The Name of Jehovah” is
scarcely distinguishable from Jehovah him-
self. Jehovah, who has long hid himself,
and seemed to keep himself remote from
worldly uffairs, now is about to manifest his
glory, and interpose in the doings of men in
a wonderful way. Burning with his anger;
rather, his anger burneth (comp. ch. xlii. 25),
And the burden thereof is heavy; “and
heavy is its grievousness.” His tongue asa
devouring fire (comp. Exod. xxiv. 17; Deut.
IXjou COuIX pO Xailisis) XXX 66 XXX lg l)s

Ver. 28.—His breath, as an overflowing
stream, shall reach to the midst of the neck,
When the sacred writers are oppressed by
the tremendous character of the revelations
made to them, their metaphors are often
laboured and incongruous. Here, the mouth,
in which there is a tongue of fire, sends
forth a rush of breath, which is compared to
an “overflowing stream, which reaches to the
middle of the neck,” and sweeps those who
try to cross it away (comp. Ezek. xlvii. 5),
To sift the nations with the sieve of vanity.
More incongruity, to be excused by the
writer’s theme being such as to transcend
all language and all imagery. One of the
Divine purposes, in all violent crashes and
revolutions, is “ to sift nations ’—to separate
in each nation the good from the bad, the
precious from the vile; and this is done
with “the sieve of vanity,” t.e. the sieve
which allows the good corn to pass through,
separating from it, and keeping kack, all
that is vile and refuse (comp. Amos ix. 9).
There shall be a bridle in the jaws of the
people, causing them to err. Another entire
change in the metaphor. The result of
Gou’s interference shall be “to put a bridle
in the jaws of the peoples,” whereby the
hand of the Almighty will guide them to
their destruction.

Ver. 29.—Ye shall have a song; literally,
to you will [then] be a song. While the


494


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [es, xxx, 1—8%


a a


nations weep and lament, and are burnt up
by God’s anger, und swept away by his
“overflowing flood,” and guided to their
destruction by his bridle in their jaws, Israel
shall rejoice with singing, Asin the night
when a holy solemnity is kept. Ter aps a
special reference is intended to the Pass-
over-feast, which commenced with an even-
ing or n ght celebration (Exod. xii, 6,8, 42;
Matt. xxvi 30). Or perhaps “ Isaiah is not
referring to one frast more than another”
(Cheyne), night-rituals belonging to all
feasts, since the day commenced with the
sunset, ‘The Passover-song consisted of
Ps. cxiii.—exviii. And as when one goeth
with a pipe to come into the mountain of the
Lord. Joyful processions from the country
districts to Jerusalem are alluded to. These
were commonly leaded by a piper or a band
of pipers( Vitringa). They took place several
times in the year -at each of the three great
feasts, and irregularly when any district
seut up its fir-tfruits to the temple treasury
(Neh. x. 30—37) To the Mighty One of
Israel; literally, to the Rock of Israel ; i.e. to
Jehovah (comp. ch. xvii. 10; and see also
Deut. xxxti. 4, 15, 18, 40, 31; Ps. xviii. 2,
31, 46, etc.). The idea embodied in the
metaphor is rather that of an unfailing
eefuge than of mere might and power.

Ver. 4U.—The Lord shall cause his glorious
voice to be heard; literally, the majesty of his
voice. Mr, Cheyne renders, “the peal of
his voice.” D. litzsel understands fearful
thundering, like that at Simai (Kxod. xix.
16; xx. Is), to be intended (comp. Ps. xxix.
3—9). The tighting down of his arm; 2z.e.
the blow causing the destruction, of ver. 31,
of whatever kind that destruction might be
—blisting by lightning, plague, simoom,
death by the visitation of God, as men
slept, or any other sudden, sweeping catas-
trophe. With the indignation of his anger ;
rather, in fury of anyer. With the flame of
a devouring fire; rather, with a flume of
devouring fire. All the elements of storm
are accuiuulated by the prophet, to express
the terrible character of the coming judg-
ment——ligzhtuing, and scattering (of crops ?),
tempestuous wind, and hail-stones.

Ver. 31.—For through the voice of the


Lord shall the Assyrian be beaten down;
rather, for at the voice of the Lord shall
Assyria be dismayed (compare the first clause
of ver. 30). Which smote with a rod; rather,
with the rod will he (i.e. Jehovah) smite.

Ver. 32.—In every place where the
grounded staff shall pass, ete ; rather, and it
shall come to pass that every stroke (literally,
passage) of the destined rod which Jehovah
causes to rest upon him shall be with an
accompaniment of drums and citherns.
Each blow dealt to Assyria shall rejoice her
enemies, and cause them to break out into
songs of praise, accompanied by the music
of various instruments (comp. ver. 29; and
sve also Exod. xv. 1—21). In battles of
shaking; or, battles of sw/nging— those in
which Jehovah swings his rod, and deals
(repeated) blows to his enemies” (Cheyne).
Wul he fight with it; rather, will he fight
against her; i.e. against Assyria.

Ver. 33.—For Tophet is ordained of old;
rather, for a Tophet has been long since pre-
pared. A“ Tophet” is a place of burning,
probably derived from the Aryan root tap
or tuph found in Greek tapos, tépa, Latin
tep-.dus, Sanskrit tap, Persian téphtan. The
Name was specially attached tv a particular
spol in the Valley of Hinnom, where sacrifices
were offered to Moloch (2 Kings xxiii. 10;
Jer. vii. 31; xix. 6, 11, ete.); but Isaiah
seems to use it generically, as if there were
many Tophets. For the king it is prepared;
literally, ¢¢ also is prepared for the king—in
the Hebrew “for the melech,” which is the
sane word as “ Mol ch,” who was looked
upon by his worshippers as “the king ” «a7’
eéoxnyv. Isaiuh means to say, “ As the To-
pliet of the Vale of Hinnom is prepared for a
king (Moloch), so this new Tophet is pre-
parcd foranother king(the Kingof Assyria).”
He hath made it deep and large—a vast
burning-place for a vast multitude (2 Kings
xix. 35), with the fire and the wood ready,
only awaiting the breath of Jehovah to
kindle it. As the bodies of great malefactors
were burnt (Josh. vii. 25), and not buried,
so the prophet consigns to a great burning
the hundred and eighty-five thousand As-
syrian corpses, of which it would soon be
necessary to dispose in some way.


HOMILETICS.


Vers, 1—7.—A gorless policy issues in disaster, however seemingly wise.


In the


sight of man there was no more prudent course for the Jews to take than to ally them-


selves with Egypt.
possibly make head against Assyria.


Egypt was the only power in their neighbourhood that could
Egypt bad a standing army, trained warriors,


an ancient military system, numerous chariots and horses, ample siege material, and
abundant appliances of war. She was at the time closely connected with Ethiopia, and


could bring into the field the forces of two great nations,


Had she been thoroughly


awake to her own interests, she would have strained every nerve to make an effective


on, xxx. 1—33.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 495


league of the small nations and tribes lying between her and Assyria Proper, in order
to check the advance of that ambitious and dangerous power. Hezekiah and his advisers
might naturally see in Egypt, not only their only possible protector, but one to whose
protection they might look with confidence and hope. There was one thing only to be
set against all this. The Egyptians were a nation of idolaters, and God had expressly
warned the Jews, by the mouth of Isaiah, against relying on them (ch. xx. 2—6). Thus
reliance on Egypt was a godless policy—involved taking up a position of hostility to
God ; ceasing to ask his counsel (ver. 1), turning a deaf ear to any warnings that might
be addressed to them by God’s prophets (ch. xxix. 1O—14), And God made it of none
effect. God blinded Tirhakah to his true interests, and made him act in the most
foolish way possible—first encourage Hezekiah to revolt, and then desert him in the
hour of need and peril. Some such result follows always on the adoption of a godless
pelicy. The expectations of those who engage in it are disappointed ; there is a failure
somewhere: “God arises, and his enemies are scatiered;” their clever schemes break
down and come to nought.


Ver. 8.—The written Word endures for ever. There is always a permanency about
written, that does not belong to uttered, speech. ‘Litera scripta manet,” said one
Roman poet; “ Exegi monumentum ere perennius,” said another, when he had com-
pleted a book of his odes. It was to secure continuance to human utterances that the
act of writing was invented at the first; and it was probably long employed for no other
purpose. The permanency, however, that attaches to ordinary writings is a limited
permanency. They are not intended to “endure for ever.” For the most part they
are on a frail and perishable material, which cannot be expected to last a century, and
there is no expectation of their being copied and so prolonged in existence. But it is
otherwise with the Divine Word. ‘The Divine Word is enshrined in writing, that it
may continue as long as the world continues. It is too precious to be lost. When the
material on which it is written shows signs of decay, there always have been, and there
always will be, pious persons, who will take care that the words are reproduced exactly
on some fresh material, and so handed on unchanged. Since the invention of printing,
it has become practically impossible that any work held in esteem by any considerable
number of persons should perish. The written Word could only pass away by all
interest in it being lost among all sections of human-kind. Against such a miserable
result the promise of God to be with his Church “always, even unto the end of the
world” (Matt. xxviii. 20), furnishes an absolute security. Hence we may be sure that
“the Word of the Lord will endure for ever” (1 Pet. i. 25).


Vers. 10, 11.—Smooth things more acceptable to man than the truth. In connection
with this subject there would seem to be three things to be specially set forth.

I, THE FACT OF THE PREFERENCE. Man has no natural aversion to truth as truth.
On the contrary, truth is congenial to his nature and acceptable to his intellect.
Scientific truth, historic truth, is readily received when offered to him, and, if not very
eagerly desired or very carefully sought out, is at any rate, when put before him,
generally to some extent appreciated. The truth that is disliked is moral truth. Even
when set before him in an abstract form, moral teaching frets him, vexes him; and
moralists have been always unpopular from the days of Socrates to those of Samuel
Johnson. Especially disliked are the teachers who do not stop at abstract morality,
but point their moral teaching by applying it to the life and conduct of those to whom
they address themselves. On the other hand, there is no surer way of pleasing men
than by flattering them, provided it is done skilfully and with a delicate hand. We
like to have our conduct praised, our characters admired, our example held up as a
model to be imitated. We detest being found fault with, criticized, told that we have
done wrong. We do not perhaps ask men to “ prophesy unto us smooth things,” but
we make it very plain to all with whom we come into contact that “smooth things”
alone are agreeable to us.

IL THE GROUND OF THE PREFERENCE. Moral truth is disliked because it is felt as a
reproach. We are conscious to ourselves of our own moral imperfection; and every
exhibition of a high moral standard, every inculcation of high moral principles, seems
to us a reflection on our own shortcomings, not far short of actual personal censure,


496 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (on. xxx. 1—83,


TT


The smooth voice of flattery pleases us, partly, through its contrast with the rough
tones of the unwelcome moralist, but further through its persuading us that we really
have some of the good qualities which the flatterer imputes, and thus calling into play
our self-respect and self-esteem, Moral warnings awaken fear for the future; flattery
awakens hope. Moral warnings disturb; flattery soothes. Even when we perceive
that the flatterer is cozening us, we let ourselves be cozened; our vanity is pleased at
being tickled, and asks for nothing but a prolongation of the pleasurable excitement.

III. ‘HE ILL RESULTS THAT FLOW FROM THE PREFERENCE. Character, which would
naturally improve under the bracing discipline of a stern and strict inculcation of moral
truth, continually deteriorates, if flattery takes the place of honest plain-speaking,
Men believe themselves better than they are, and take less pains to become better.
They grow vain and self-satisfied, thinking themselves in need of nothing, when truly
they are “wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked” (Rev. iii. 17).
Spiritual teachers should beware of encouraging men’s self-indulgent desire for spiritual
ease; and, while careful not to “quench the smoking flax,” or “ break the bruised reed,”
should constantly sound in the ears of all denunciations of vice, warnings, rebukes,
admonishments. In no other way can they be either faithful to their calling or truly
serviceable to their fellow-men.


Vers. 19—22.—Turning to God. It is the intention of God’s chastisements, and
their natural, thongh perhaps scarcely their ordinary, result, to stir the soul to penitence,
and produce a turning of the heart to God. When the spirit of the man is truly touched,
the steps on the path of repentance are commonly—

J, THe UTTERANCE oF a cry. “Men and brethren, what shall we do?” (Acts il. 37).
© Sirs, what must I do to be saved ?” (Acts xvi. 30). “Lord, what wilt thou have me
to do?” (Acts ix. 6). ‘“ Lord, save us, we perish!” (Matt. viii. 25). Some bitter cry
or other is wrung from the lips of the awakened sinner, who feels his own weakness
and guilt, despairs of saving himself, and makes appeal to him who is alone “ mighty
to save,” in tones of earnest entreaty and extreme longing for help. The “cry” is
answered as soon as heard (ver. 19). By external teaching, or an inward secret voice,
ee are warned what they must do as the next step on the path which leads to life,

is is—

II. THE FoRSAKING OF THER sins. Be it impurity, be it lying, be it idolatry, that
has separated between the sinner and God, he must at once set himself to cast it off,
and rid himself of it. ‘‘ Ye shall defile the covering of thy graven images” (ver. 22).
“Put away the evil cf your doings: cease to du evil” (ch. i. 16). It is sin, and sin
only, that separates as from God. If we would be at one with him, sin must be put
away. All, however, is not completed yet. Those who truly turn to God will not be
content with a negative goodness ; they will follow up the forsaking of their sins by—

III. Tae fARNEST ENDEAVOUR TO LEAD A LIFE OF ACTIVE WELL-DOING. ‘“ Cease to
do evil; lcarn to do well,” says the prophet (ch.i, 16). It is not enough to “ put off the
old man; ” we must “ put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness
and true holiness” (Eph. iv. 24), For every weed that we pluck from our hearts, we
must put in a flower; for every vice that we uproot, we must plant a virtue. God
wills that we should “add to our faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and to
knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience godliness; and
to godliness brotherly kindness ; and to brotherly kindness charity” (2 Pet. i. 5—7).
We must endeavour, by “ patient continuance in well-doing,” at once to improve our
own characters, to help the brethren, and to rebuke, if we cannot convince, the
gainsayer.


Vers. 23—26.—The glories of Christ's kingdom shown in figure. Isaiah gives us
several descriptions of Christ’s kingdom, all of them more or less allegorical (see ch. iv.
2—6; xi. 1—9; xxxv. 1—10; lx. 1—22). In the present description all is allegory.
The blessings of the kingdom are—

I. Rich AND ABUNDANT HARVESTS, by which would seem to be signified a great con-
version of the nations by the preaching of the gospel (comp. Matt. ix. 87, 88; John iv.


rs pe with the display of a great zeal to do abundant good works (Matt. vii,


OH, xxx. 1—33.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 497


II. Frequent rain; é.e, an abundant shedding upon the earth of the dew of God’s
blessing; a continued pouring down from hm of refreshing, invigorating, healthful
life-giving influences. By these the rich harvests would be produced, the pastures
made luxuriant, and God’s creatures upon the earth, both men and animals, rendered
happy.

IIL. Conpurrs EVERYWHERE, TO CONVEY THE LIFE-GIVING FLUID FAR AND WIDW.
These appear to represent appointed means of grace—artificially constructed channels
whereby the heavenly influences are ordinarily communicated to the faithful. They
flow everywhere, not only in the valleys and plains, but also upon the mountains and
high hills—the remotest and most inaccessible parts of the kingdom.

IV. FLoops OF LIGHT EVERYWHERE AND AT ALL TIMES; @e. general illumination and
enlightenment—the spread of spiritual knowledge and true wisdom throuzh all parts of
the Church and all ranks of Christians; the disappearance of spiritual darkness, of
ignorance, folly, and blinded consciences. This appears to be mentioned as the crowning
glory of all, beyond which description cannot go, and with which therefore the allegorical
sketch comes to an end,


Vers. 29, 32.—The punishments of nations for deliverance, rather than for vengeance.
God “hath no pleasure in the death of him that dieth ” (Hzek. xviii. 32). His justice
compels him to punish the wicked, and sometimes requires the destruction even of a
nation; but the main object of the Almighty in all such destructions is not to take
vengeance on the oppressor, but to deliver the oppressed. Assyria, and the nations
leagued with her, had now by their wickedness, their pride, their blasphemy, their
cruelty, their idolatry, their impurity, provoked him, as scarcely ever had he been
provoked before. He was about to inflict a signal punishment, the fame of which would
spread far and wide. But it was not on the punishment itself, or on the sufferings of
those affected by it, that his own eye was fixed. It was on the consequences which
would follow to his own people. They would “have a song, asin the night when a
holy solemnity is kept; ” they would have “ gladness of heart, as when one goeth with
a pipe to come into the mountain of the Lord.” The result to them would be the
removal of a constant and terrible fear; a feeling of satisfaction and safety; a sense of
relief which would for a time be jubilant, and show itself in music and song, perhaps
in shouting and dancing, The punishment of the Assyrians would be to them deliverance
—a deliverance which, it might be hoped, would convert the heart of the nation to God,


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1—7.—The embassy to Egypt. The embassy to Egypt has been sent, and the
prophet’s object is to show that the policy of it is false, as all policy must be false
which does not rest upon religion.

I. THE PoLicy CHARACTERIZED. It is that of “ unruly sons,” and they “ carry out
urpose which is not from Jehovah.” So in Hosea we read, “ ‘They have set up kings,
ut not by me; they have made princes, and I knew it not” (viii. 4). They

“weave a net” or “ plait alliances” without his Spirit, and add sin to sin. They go
down into Egypt without having inquired of Jehovah’s mouth, and flee to the fortress
of Pharaoh, to take refuge in the shadow of Egypt. 1. The Divine leading and
inspiration make men humble, while self-will and self-reliance are stubborn, obstinate.
2. Where the first step has been wrong, every subsequent step aggravates the error.
8. The root of a mistaken policy is a false reliance, dependence on an “arm of flesh.

There is a true and a false self-reliance: that which forgets God is ignorant and impious;
that which recognizes him as the Source of all true intelligence is genuine. To the
external observer tlie difference between acting from the self-centre and the God-centre,
between “voing in one’s own strength” and “ going in the strength of the Lord of
hosts,” may not be perceptible. It must be known in the feeling of the actor, and in

j f his action.

HL ee OF THE PoLIoY. The fortress of Pharaoh will become a shame to
them, and the refuge in Egypt’s shadow confusion. “Shame and confusion of face ;


ISAIAH, 2k


498 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. xxx. 1—83
eS a


great Scripture words, most expressive of the resuits of false principles, false policy,
obstinate error. 1. It is the very bitterness of ill success to feel that it is the harvest of
our own faults; while misfortune is sweetened at its bitterest by the consciousness of
having followed the light to the best of one’s ability. The prophet follows in imagina-
tion this mistaken embassy into the heart of Egypt. They will come to Zoan (or Tanis),
and to Hanes (or Heracleopolis), but will be abashed to find that in the expected
saviours and helpers no salvation is to be found. 2. That bitterness is aggravated by
the sense of the great toil and suffering which has only led to failure. How different
the journey from Egypt and that to Egypt! Then men were led throngh “that great
and terrible wilderness,” full of the fiery serpents and scorpions and lions, the land of
drought, and there were fed with manna (Deut. viii, 15; Jer. ii. 6). And now, after
encountering all these dangers, they are to find, after all, that there is no help in Egypt,
though they have carried thither rich presents on asses and on camels. Emphatic is
the. prophet, “ Yea, the Egyptians; in vain, and empty is their help, therefore I proclaim
concerning it, Rahab, they are utter indolence.” ‘There is a play on the name here,
which cannot well be rendered in English. But Egypt may stand as a type of the
“ world,” the absence of true principle, or the principle of policy as opposed to reliance
on God. And then the lesson will be the inherent weakuess of all worldly policy, as
compared with simple trust in God and obedience to his dictates.—J.


Vers. 8—18,—‘A testimony for ever.” The prophet pauses. Perhaps he hears an inner
voice bidding him to write down a few words, such as the last significant ahab. As
in ch. viii. 1, the inscription is to be on a large tablet, set up in a conspicuous place, so
that he who runs may read. ‘Then he is to inscribe the prophecy more tully on a scroll.
Litera scripta manet. The oracle, the oral utterance, transferred to parchment, becomes
a «ria eis del, a “ possession fur ever.” ‘lhe perpetuity of his protest and warning must
be secured. The word rendered “inscribe ” is more literally rendered “carve.” Every
earnest man has surely something worth thus carving, inscribing, engraving, some-=
where, on some material—tablet, book, or “ fleshy table of the heart; ” the condensa-
tion of a life-experience, the sum of life-truths, the whole self-revelation, which is at the
same time God’s revelation to his soul of what is substantial and eterual.

I, THE NEED FOR SUCH INSCRIPTION. The people refuse to listen to any but flat-
tering prophecies. They are disobedient and untruth/ul at heart. They refuse to
listen to the prophet’s message; then they must be made to look upon it in a permanent
form. None are so blind as those who will not see, unless it be those who will not let
others see, Light, more light, is our constaut need: what shall be said of those who
would stay the hand that is drawing up the blinds from the windows of the soul ?
What more precious than insight? How should we cherish the man who sces deeper
into the heart of things, or gathers up the scattered fragments of truth into one inspiring
unity of representation; the mind gifted with the power to shed luminous effects upon
what were otherwise gloomy in life’s outlook !_ How all-precious is that purer eloquence,
not of ephemeral and party passion, but of the truth which is of no party nor time]
How shall these elements of indispensable worth be preserved? Can we trust them to
the popular memory and heart ? Alas! no, or not entirely. In the hour of excitement
and passion all will be forgotten. “ You shall not prophesy unto us right things,” has
been, in effect, the cry of the multitude again and again at such hours, The Jewish
prophets themselves felt these things keenly. “ Don’t preach |” is, in effect, the cry by
which they are met. Or, “ Preach to us of wine and strong drink "—any doctrine of
indulgence, is the demand (Micah ii. 6, 11; cf. Amos ii, 12). If the prophet sternly
resisted this temper of the people, and told the homely truth that God had forsaken
them because they had forsaken him, a shower of stones was likely to be the dreadful
answer, as in the case of the martyr Zechariah (2 Chron, xxiv. 20, 21). Greedy is the
appetite for “smooth things” and “illusions,” and never wanting a supply of such
flattering prophets who will run, though Jehovah has not sent them, and utter what he
has not said (Jer. xxiii, 21), There is a demand for those who will make flexible what
he has made inflexible, mark out a deviating path from that which he has traced
straight and plain. Nay, some would be glad to efface the thought of God from their
minds, because thus they would efface the sense of responsibility, “ Abolish out of our
sight the Holy One of Israel!” For then there will be free course for all licence.


CH. xxx. 1—33.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 499


$$$ |


From all this we see the need of religious literature. Libraries may be burned; a few
manuscrijts worth more to mankind than vold and silver will be preserved. he truth
in Isaiah has been preserved for us by the art of writing, has come down to us in the
form of Scripture. Let us thank God for art as the haudmaid of relizion. At every
epoch in tlie history of the world, religious life is threatened with decay or degeneration ;
but it wiil renew itself from the sacred “ records of the past.”

Il. THe suBsTANCE OF THE TESTIMONY. 1. Simple faith in the Eternal opposed to
worldly policy. We must, in order to apprehend the nature of the “ testimony for
ever,” strip away the temporary references, and regard Rahab and Israel as types of
permane:t phases of character (Cheyne). What does “ Rahab” stand for? ‘“ Perverse-
ness and crookcdness ” (or oppression). Crookeduess and frowarduess mean what we
mean by “unprincipled conduct” (comp. Prov. il. 15; iv. 24). To trust in shrewdness
and policy—this is worldliness. It is one of the many ways in which man’s wit would
contend with eternal wisdom. And punishment must surely attend upon this sin,
according to the laws of the Divine kingdom. Various is the imavery under which
Scripture represents the connection between evil in the mind and the result—tirst in
sin, then in destruction. The strong will be as tow, and burn unquenchably ; the
foolish will conceive chaff, and briny forth stubble, or will be burned as thorns (ch. i.
81; xxxiii 11,12) Here guilt is compared in its result to the cracking or bulging
of a wall, which suddenly crashes down in ruin; to a pitcher dasbed vivlently to the
ground, and broken into a multitude of fragments, so that it can never be of the
slightest use again. But the vessels of Guod’s fashioning shall endure. Let us be
couteut to be what God would make of us; self-devices that would contravene his
purpose will be “ground to powder.” 2. Tie condition of deliverance, returning
From what? Is it the general sense of conversion—the absolute turning once for all,
in choice and conduct, from moral evil? Or is it rather, more specifically, the relin-
quishment of the search for worldly aids? “ Self-chosen ways,” “self-confident works,”
seem certainly to be meant. Would they but lay aside this restless eagerness and
Over-auxious care for safety, and simply fall upon the Almighty arms! Such lessons
can never be obsolete. Trust in God does not imply supimeness, but it shonld still
excessive and feverish fears, Behind al] our plans and proposals, he is thinking and
acting; if they are unsound, they must come to nought; if sound, they will be fur-
thered. ‘Take heed and be quiet; fear not, neither be faint-hearted.” The worldly
mind will lean on worldly support—swift horses of Egypt or the like, only to find
themselves outmatched upon their own chosen ground, “One thousand shall flee at
the rebuke of one.” Mere numbers give no strengih. Strength is in being able to
stand alone, if need be. To find one’s self suddenly deserted, “ as a mast on the top of
a mountain, a signal on a hill,” is often the fate of those whose only policy is to side
with numbers aud with power. 3. The compassion of Jehovuh. Human needs cal]
forth Divine deeds. We are to think of God as Oue who longs to manifest and exert
himself for the good of his creatures; as One who is hindered by human pride,
impatience, petulance; as One who therefore waits for his opportunity and fit season
to be gracious ; as One who is ever true to himself, constant to his covenant, keeping
favour for his people and wrath for his foes. How happy, then, those who in turn
“Jong for Jehovah ” !—whose eyes are directed to the “hills whence cometh help!”
who watch his pleasure as the servant that of his master, the handmaiden that of her
mistress! “To possess God there must be that in us which God can possess. Still to
aspire after the Highest is our wisdom; to cease from aspiration is to fall into weak-


ness,”—J.


Vers. 19—26.— The blessedness of Zion. Throughout the book the idea of temporal
blends with that of spiritual weal. The images are drawn from the state of temporal
happiness and prosperity. Yet Zion and Jerusalem may be regarded as symbolical of
the Church in geueral.

I. Joy 1n Gop. There will be “no more weeping.” ‘Tears are significant of the
lot of humanity; and in the poetry of the Old ‘lestament we hear, as Lord Bacon
says, “as many hearse-like airs as carols,” and the pencil of the Holy Ghost has
laboured more in dejicting the sorrows of David than the felicities of Solomon. It is
oecause the gospel meets the mood of tears in us that its assurances fall so sweetly on


500 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu, xxx. 1—33,


a


the heart. Burns the poet said, “ After all that has been said on the other side of
the question, man is by no means a happy creature. Ido not speak of the selected
few, favoured by partial Heaven, whose souls are tuned to gladness, and riches, and
honours, and prudence, and wisdom; I speak of the neglected many, whose nerves,
whose sinews, whose days, are sold to the minion of fortune.” It is this way of thinking
—it is these melancholy truths, that make religion so precious to the poor miserable
children of men. If it isa mere phantom, existing only in the heated imagination of
enthusiasm, “what truth on earth so precious as the lie”? What is needed is “the
expulsive power of a new affection in the sense of the nearness of God—the sense that
he does hear and that he does answer out of the vastness and the void.” And he will
so answer, if he be sought for with “all the heart” (Jer. xxix. 12—14).

Il. Toe BLESSING oF TEACHERS. On the one hand, here is physical want— bread
of adversity, and water of affliction.” On the other hand, a perpetual supply of
spiritual food and spiritual consolation. The best of the people felt that it was the
saddest thing that could be suffered—to have no more “‘signs” from God, to be destix
tute of the prophet, and of the man of superior insight (Ps. Ixxiv. 9). The famine of
“not hearing the Word of Jehovah” (Amos viii. 11) is bitterer than hunger or thirst.
The effect may be traced to a definite cause—the sin of the people or of the teachers
themselves (ch. xlili. 27). The one might be unworthy to listen to, the other to deliver,
the truth of God (ch. xliii. 27). There is no calling more glorious, none which leads
to a more lustrous immortality (Dan. xii. 3), than that of the religious teacher, none
which is of greater service in the promotion of the kingdom of God. If so great be
the blessing of the ministry of the truth, it flows from the goodness of God that, in
the happy times to come, teachers shall never be absent from the jeople.

Ill. ‘THE BLESSING OF INWARD ILLUMINATION. The “word behind them” may de
the Bath-Kol, the daughter of the Voice, as the Jews say, or, according to a way of
thinking more familiar to ourselves, the voice of conscience. ‘God is not a hidden
God in the sense that his life is ciosed up within himself. His Word gves forth to the
world, that it may come into being, and to the children of men that they may know
it and find life in it (Ps. xxxiii. 6; cf. Deut. iv. 12; 1 Sam. iii. 4; 1 Kings xix. 11,
sqq.). (On the Bath-Kol, see Matt. iii. 17; xvii. 5; John xii. 28.) The notion is that
of invisible and unexpected agency. ‘The admonitions of providence, of conscience,
of the Holy Spirit, seem often to come behind us—to recall us from the path on which
we were going, from the course that would be fraught with danger. When in danger
of straying to this side or to that, the voice will call us back. In this respect the
Divine vcice is like the demonion of Socrates, which was a restraining influence.

IV. Puriry aNpD prospeRITy, A symptom of a return to true religion will be
the casting away of the relics and reminders of idolatry—the defiling in the Name of
the holy God of that which to heathen eyes was holy. Josiah’s conduct was an
example of this (2 Kings xxiii.) The expression of abhorrence for the symbol
expresses at the same time abhorrence for the thing symbolized. The repentance of
the individual, the reformation of the nation, must be signalized by the “ rending of the
idol,” not merely from its high ylace, but from the heart itself. When the heart is
brought into the fuller knowledge of God, it loves what he loves, and hates what he
hates. The thought of what is “an abomination to Jehovah” (Deut. vii. 25) is
reflected in an intense distaste in the soul. 2. This will be consistent with external
prosperity. Rain will come down upon the sown seed. As the withholding of the
rain followed upon national iniquity as the greatest curse (Zech. xiv. 17, 18), so the
giving of the rain meant at once all physical blessing and all Divine favours (Zech. x.
1, ete.), Bread—rich and abundant produce of the land—cattle teeming in the wide
ae cates me happy en of a eee nae ae and water—simple elements
of living; yet what poetry hangs upon their su and
horror, upon the ant of eek ea at) banal aegis hy


Ver. 15.—Sources of strength. “In quietness and in confidence shall be your
strength.” Because, “if God be for us, who can be against us?” When the winds arein
our favour, all we have to do is to set our sails. When the tides are with us, we need
not fret concerning the issues of the voyage. God is on the side of the just ‘man the
true man, the pure man. The disciples of his Son are not likely to lese his favour


oH, xxx. 1—33.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 501


and reward. “ Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right
to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city.”

I, Tue picrum 1s Diving, “Thus saith the Lord God.” There is direct and special
emphasis given to this promise. And he calls himself “the Holy One oi Israel.” So
that the “holy people” need not fear, inasmuch as the Holy Que cannot lie, cannot
a ad anything opposed to holiness, cannot therefore let evil overcome goodness.

hat we have to look to is our state. We need not dream that quietness will help us
if it be the indifference of sloth or the quiescence of an indulgent soul in evil, But if
“holiness unto the Lord” be written on our hearts and lives, God, who is the Hoiy
One, will surely prosper us.

Il. THe DECLARATION IS DUAL. “Quietness end confidence.” Because there is a
quietness which comes from the paralysis of fear, or from the coma of fatalism. We
are to have a confidence which keeps the soul alive, and fills it with intense ardour and
devotion. Nature is intensely active, but all her ministrations, as in the light and the
dew, are quiet. Fussiness and loudness are no true signs of euergy. Nay, rather they
bespeak a superficial and shallow nature, Confidence is the child of wisdom and
courage, It is not the result of ignorance, or of under-estimating the power of our foes.
It takes cognizance of them all—their number and their variety and their ubiquity, but
then, looking up to him who is mightier than them all, it says, “This is the victory
that overcometh the world, even our faith.”

IU. THe sTRENGTH IS WITHIN. What we need is not so much a lessening of the
forces without us, but a strength in the inward man to overcome them. Take temp-
tation, We are told that no temptation shall come but such as we are able to bear.
We are not promised immunity from keen attacks. Everything depends upon the state
of the soul. Temptation, to be successful, requires correspondency within. Sparks
falling upon the ocean are not dangerous. Christ said, “The prince of this world
cometh, and hath nothing in me.” ‘Take trial. Sorrow, coming to the worldly heart,
breaks it down—it ends in the death of hope and energy and joy. Sorrow to the
Christian is an angel of discipline. ‘The soul is sustained by the presence within us of
the Man of sorrows, who can make all grace abound. So even the martyr and the
confessor have been able to rejoice; even Paul and Silas sang “songs in the night.”
As thy day thy strength shall be.” This, then, is proven true in human history, and
must be accepted as a fact. Spiritual consciousness is worthy of as much honour and
to be accepted with confidence, as the boasted facts of science. The promise, there-
fore, is comforting to every generation, “In quietness and in confidence shall be your
strength.”—W. M. 8,


Vers. 1—7.—Going down into Egypt. The prophet of Jehovah utters another
“woe,” he denounces another sin; for the people of the Lord, in the day of their
difficulty, have looked, not to their Divine Redeemer, but to that arm of flesh in which
they should not have trusted, and by which they will be abandoned. We see—

L Tuer sm. It is threefold. 1. Desertion of God. ‘lhey take counsel, but not
now of God, as in better days (Josh. vii. 6; Judg. xx. 27; 1 Sam, xxiii. 2; xxx. 8);
they made alliance, but not with the Divine consent—not “of my Spirit” (ver. 1);
they did not ask “at God’s mouth” (ver. 2). Once they would not have dreamed of
acting without encouragement from God; now they look elsewhere for sanction. This
desertion of him who was their Lord, and who had so often proved himself theit
Deliverer, had its root in: 2. Disirust of God. They trusted in “ the shadow of
Egypt” (ver. 2), because they had come to distrust the “shadow of his wings” in
whom David found his refuge until his calamity was overpast (Ps. lvii. 1). It was
the loss of their faith in God which made them cast about for another power which
should befriend and deliver them. And this deplorable distrust was due to: 3. The
spirit of materialism. They preferred the visible nation to the invisible God; the
fleshly “ power” to the Divine Spirit; the material army of Egypt, whose forces they
could count and whose weapons they could handle, to the unseen One whose angels
were beyond the range of vision, and whose instruments were unlashioned by human
hands. This is the sin of mankind. Desertion of God, departure from his side and
from his service; desertion springing from distrust, and this distrust rooted in a
wretched and pitiful materialism,


502 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. xxx. 1—35.


Il. Tuer punisument. 1. Fruitless erpenditure. (Vers.4—6.) They would take
the trouble to secure princely ambassadors, and these would travel through inhospi-
table and perilous regions, laden with costly gifts, paying servile attention to the
foreigner—and all for nothing; an immensity of trouble and no profit whatever.
2. Bitter disappointment. (Ver. 7.) The land from which they hoped so much would
prove utterly useless; their expectations would end in nothing but chagrin; their
exasperation could only find expression in an opprobrious epithet, in a bitter epigram
directed against Egypt. 38. Mortijication. “The strength of Pharaoh shall be their
shame,” etc. (vers. 3, 5). The result of this attempted alliance would be political
reproach ; and the court and the nation would be ashamed of having taken a step
that turned out so ill. These are the common penalties of sin: the waste of that
which is precious—time, money, strength, reputation, energy, affection, ete.; drsap-
pointment—the soul finding out that that in which it trusted caunot do what it
hoped, that it leaves it still empty, still athirst, still poor; shame—the position in
which it is dishonoured of men, and has keenly to reproach itself for folly into which
it need not have fallen, for sim which it might easily have shunned.

IL. ‘tHEIR ALTERNATIVE. God was with them; one of his truest and most faithful
prophets was at hand, accessible at any hour. Why not trust in the Almighty?
Why not take counsel of the All-wise? he alternative to sin is always at hand.
The gates of obedience are unfastened; the oracles of God are open; the paths of
piety are such as every foot may tread.—C.


Vers. 8—14, 17, 18.— Aspects of sin. This severe denunciation by the pronhet of the
sins of the Jews may reniind us of some of the darker and sadder aspects of sin itself.

I. ‘'HE PEKMANENCY OF ITs RECORD. Isaiah was to record the guilt of “the
reb-llious children ” in a book, that it might be there inscribed “ for the time to come
for ever and ever.” And in the sacred volume there stand written, to be read for all
time, the accusations which the Lord brought against Israel; the record of their
national perversity remains after all these centuries have passed, and will remain for
centuries tocome. Apart from such instrumentality as was here employed, the sins
we commit find a lasting record. They are printed in the faces and the forms of
men, they are legible in their lives, they are apparent in their characters, they survive
in their reputation, they live on for ever in the ineffaceable influences which are left
behind them and which are transmitted from age to age. The sius of the fathers
may be read in the lowered and injured lives of the children unto the third and the
fourth generation, We little think bow and where and when our guilt is being
recorded in one or other of the many books of God.

Il, Ivs oppuracy. “Children that will not hear the Law of the Lord” (ver. 9).
Contumacy reaches its utmost length when it closes its ears against the Word of the
all-wise and almighty God, It is by degrees that the heart becomes thus hardened.
Diminished pleasure, inattention, avoidance, the closed ear of the soul—by such stages
as these man descends to the obduracy which is here rebuked.

Ill. Ivs PowER OF IMPOSING ON ITSELF. (Vers. 10, 11.) When sin is i full pos-
session of the soul it makes men belivve that to be false which they do not wish to be
true, and that true which they do not like to consider false; it prevails on them to
regard the rugged things to be wrong, and the smooth things to be sound; then it
leads them to find a voice for this ;alatable and comforting doctrine; so that they
encourage those to speak who will keep silence as to all Divine but disagreeable truth,
and vive utterance to pleasant and profitable perversions,

IV. THE APPARENT SUDDENNESS OF ITS PENALTY. (Ver. 13.) The spendthrift is
getting poorer every mouth fur many years, but bankruptcy comes on him suddenly at
last. The dishonest man is getting bepelessly involved for years, but his reputation is
blasted in an hour. The fascinatious of the cup are long gaining ascendency, but in
some evil day the victim of this naleful vice is seen staggering in the streets, Passion
may have been winning the mastery from youth upwards, but at a certain point it
blazes forth, and the life-blood is shed. Penalty generally comes at last with seeming
suddenness, like the breaking wall that has long bent but comes down in a moment. _

V. THE COMPLETENESS OF ITS PENALTY. (Ver. 14.)

VI. Irs arerorRiaTENESs, (Ver. 16.) The punishment of Judah’s sin should have


cH. xxx. 1—33.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 503


a marked correspondence with the guilt itself. This is constant. Sins of the flesh
make their mark upon the body; sins of the mind leave their stain upon the spirit;
folly in the home will end in domestic sorrow; he that withholds from others starves
himself; he that oppresses others does violence to his own soul, ete ‘There will always
be found a fitness in the penalty to the sin fur which a man is suffering. “ Whatsvever
@ man soweth, that shall he also reap;” he that soweth the wind, shall reap the whirl-
wind (Gal. vi. 7; Hos. viii. 7).—C.


Ver. 15.— Quiet strength. These beautiful words suggest—

I, Tue First puTy oF THE ERRING. Judah had forsaken God to find a refuge in
another power; the first duty of the nation, therefore, was “to return” unto the Lord,
and to find its rest and its salvation in him. ‘lhis is now and ever the immediate duty
of all wanderers from God; both of those who have never been reconciled to him
through Jesus Christ, and of those who, like the Jews on this occasion, have tempo-
rarily forsaken his service. The way of return is that of penitent confession (Rom.
x. 10), of trust in the Divine promise (Acts x. 43), of surrender to the Divine will
(Acts ix. 6).

IL. Tie stRENGTH OF QUIET ACTIVITY. “In quietness .. . shall be your strength.”
Tt is a common fallacy that noise and strength are closely allied. On the contrary, it
is the quiet and even the silent thinys which are the strong ones. The thunder startles
or appals, but it effects nothing; gunpowder deafens the ear, but it enriches no one;
tempestuous rhetoric excites te momentary force of feeling, but it adds nothing to
character. It is the silent forces of gravitation and electricity acting for ages without
being known to exist; it is the soft sunshine and the still rains of heaven; it is the quiet
words of the calm teacher finding their way to the mind and working conviction and
conversion there ;—it is in these things, and in things like these, that real power resides,
The quiet strength of a gentle mother’s purity and love, of a faithful father’s warning,
of an honoured teacher’s counsel and example, of an earnest Church’s testimony and
work ;—' hese are the God-given agencies by which the world is to be won to righteous-
ness and truth, Noisy, spasmodic, irregular outbursts may be auxiliaries, but they are
only that.

Ill. THe power or raiTa. “In confidence shall be your strength.” Sometimes
we have simply to wait for God, and the best thing we can dois to “ be still” and wait;
our activity would only be harmful (see Exod. xiv. 13). So it was on this historical
occasion (see ch. xxxvii.). So was it often with our Lord’s disciples (Mark iv. 39, 40;
Acts i. 4). So is it now, when in duty or in danger we have done all that we can do;
then we wait for God—our expectation is in him only (Ps. xxxix. 7; Ixii. 5).—C.


Ver. 18.—God’s waiting and ours. I. Gov’s watTine For us. “ Will the Lord
wait.” We may look at: 1. The occasions of his waiting. He waits “that he may
be gracious.” (1) That he may show his grace in forgiveness; in “ having mercy upon
us,” or in making us to feel that we are the subjects of his mercy. (2) That he may
show his grace in interposition, delivering froin danger, relieving from distress, saving
in sickness. (8) That he may show his grace in final and complete redemption (Rom.
viii. 23)—the taking his children away from the struggle and sorrow of earth to the
rest and joy of heaven. 2. Vhe reason of his waiting. It is because “ the Lord is a
God of judement,” or of rectitude. (1) He cannot forgive us till we return in spirit to
him and accept his rule, until we obey his supreme command (John vi. 29). (2) He
cannot interpose until his intervention is fitted to purify and sanctify us. (38) He can-
not call us home until the privilege and discipline of time have prepared us for the
scenes and splires of eternity.

II. Our warttne For Gop. “Blessed are all they that wait for him.” 1. Blessed
is the patient inquirer ; for he who sceks the truth and waits till light shines in upon
-his soul will surely find his goal, 2. Blessed is the patient worker ; for he who sows
the good seed of the kingdom and waits for God to give the increase will “ doubtless
come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.” 8. Blessed is the pa/ient
sufferer ; for he who “ waits for the morning” through the night of pain, or loneliness,
or poverty, or any other ill, will find that the glory which is to be revealed will make
the sufferings of the present time incomparably small (Rom. viii. 18). Now God waits


504 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xxx. 1—33,


for us, and we for him. A few steps more and his largest promises and our highest
hopes will be all fulfilled. —C,


Vers. 19—26.—The people of God in their prosperity. These verses are primarily
applicable, and they are more or less true as they are applied, to the return of the Jews
from captivity, and their residence in their own land. But they find a larger ful ment
in the condition of the Church of Christ in its last days. Possibly they anticipate
the felicities of the heavenly future. We refer them to the Church in its prosperity,
and conclude—

I. THaT THE PEOPLE OF GoD ARE THOSE THAT HAVE KNOWN A TIME OF TROUBLE,
Dark days have passed over their heads; there has been “ the breach of his people, and
the stroke of his wound” (ver. 26). God once made them to “eat the bread of
adversity,” etc. (ver. 20). They have passed through grave spiritual anxieties; they
have felt the burden of unforgiven sin; they have sighed for the sense of Gud’s favour ;
they have known the miseries of separation from God, and the weariness of a life
unbrightened with sacred joy.

Il. TuaT IN THEIR DISTRESS THEY MADE EFFECTUAL APPEAL TO Gop. (Ver. 19.)
Gud is never deaf to the cry of sorrow; but to the appeal of the penitent spirit, longing
to return unto him, his ear is peculiarly alive; he will be “ very gracious” at the voice
of that cry—“ when he shall hear it, he will answer thee.” No loudest sounds will
drown the sigh of the contrite spirit, no multiplied activities will prevent the heavenly
Father from giving it his immediate regard.

Til. THatT THE DAY OF CHRISTIAN PRIVILEGE I8 ONE OF VERY BLESSED ILLUMINA-=
rion. In the day of its prosperity there should be abundance of lizht for the Christian
Church. Its teachers should not have to hide in obscurity, but should be visible and
accessible to all (ver. 20); and there should be times when the light of Divine truth
would be not only clear, but brilliant and powerful, making other days to seem dark
by comparison (ver. 26; see 2 Cor. iii. 9,10). Compared with the condition of heathen
lands, or even with the state of Israel under Samuel or David, or even with many
Christian countries now, how blessed the state in which the gospel of the grace of God
shall be made known in its freedom and its fulness in every town and hamlet, and in
every cottage home!

IV. [Hav THIS DAY OF CHRISTIAN PRIVILEGE WILL BE ONE OF KIND AND FAITHFUL
WATCHYFULNESS. (Ver. 21.) ‘lhe vision is one of high, but not heavenly, blessedness ;
of advanced, but not absolute excellency. The citizens of the holy kingdom will be
found walking in the King’s highway, but there will remain a tendency to “ turn to the
right hand or to the left,” to go off into by-paths of error, or mistake, or unwisdom, if
not of actual transgression, In this case there will be the faithful monitor, the
Christian teacher, who will be ready with the timely intervention, “This is the way,
walk ye in it.” This readiness to intervene at the moment of digression ought to
characterize our own times; it should be the holy habit, the careful acquirement, of the
Christian jastor, On the other hand, a readiness to be admonished is one of the graces
of a godly character.

V. THaT THE TIME OF TRUE PROSPERITY WILL BE MARKED BY THE DECISIVE
INTOLERANCE OF EVIL. (Ver. 22.) They that name the Name of Christ will
not only “ dejart from all iniquity,” but they will reprobate it; they will thrust it
away; they will not like even to allude to shameful things (Eph. v. 3)—these will be
hateful, intolerable to them, We may measure our nearness to God by the degree of
our abhorrence of evil (Heb, i. 18; Rom. xii. 9).

VI. TuHar THE TIME OF CHRISTIAN PRIVILEGE WILL BE ONE OF ABOUNDING JOY.
(Vers. 28—25,) This language is clearly figurative; it is the utterance of exultation,
Everything contributes to joyous prosperity—the timely rain, the large increase of seed
the rich pastures, abundance of food for cattle as well as for man, unfailing “ brooks
that make the meadows green.” The land will laugh with exuberance, the nation will
exult in overflowing wealth, In the days of unfettered liberty and universal privilege
the Christian Church will delight itself in God; its songs of peace and of hope will arise
from every valley; its life will be touched and lighted with the sunshine of a holy
gladness. The light of God’s countenance will rest upon it, and it will rejoice greatly
in his salvation.—C,


cH, xxx. 1—33.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 505


Vers. 27—33.—Judgment and joy. This forcible, energetic language, in which darkest
shadow and brightest sunshine very strikingly intermingle, may remind us—

L Tuat Gop DOES COME IN TERRIBLE JUDGMENTS TO THE CHILDREN OF MEN.
1. Sometimes to men collectively—to societies, to cities, to nations. 2. At other times
“0 individual men, In the special ordering or in the permission of his Divine providence
he sends the overwhelming loss and consequently reduced or even impoverished estate,
or the wasting and consuming sickness, or the undermining and final destruction of
influence, or the shattering of power, or sudden, perhaps violent, death. God lets such
things overtake the guilty, that the pictorial and poetical language of the text is
applicable. It is as if his “anger burned,” as if his “lips were {ull of indignation ;”
his judgments come down as an overflowing stream, they cast forth the guilty like a
winnowing-shovel ; his glorious voice is heard, his arm descends in righteous retribution.

IL, THaT THE JUDGMENT OF GOD Ig ACCOMPANIED WITH THE JOY oF MAN. “Yo
shall have a song, as in the night ... and gladness of heart” (ver. 29); “in every
place where the grounded staff shall pass, ... it shall be with tabrets and harps”
(ver. 82). Here and elsewhere the judgments of God are made the occasion of human
thankfulness and joy. It is clear: 1. That in such joy there should be no element of
vindictiveness. It would be positively unchristian to find a source of satisiaction in the
bodily or mental suffering of men because they have injured us (Rom. xii. 19, 20)
Christian magnanimity should rise to the height of earnestly desiring that its foes
may be won to truth, wisdom, and eternal life. 2. That there may be in such joy the
element of righteous satisfaction ; not, indeed, that men suffer, but that their sin receives
its appropriate mark of Divine disapproval; that the integrity of the Divine rule is
vindicated ; that God’s presence and his holiness are seen to be near and not afar off.
This is the spirit of the psalmist (Ps. xcvii.1), 38. That there may be also the element
of human sympathy. Often at such times we have great gladness of heart, because,
when he that once “smote with a rod” is himself “ beaten down” (ver. 31), those
who were smitten by the oppressor walk in liberty and security. The humiliation of
the wrong-doer is the exaltation of the righteous—is the enfranchisement of the holy
and the wise. 4. That there will also be the element of holy expectation. When
Sennacherib has God’s bridle in his jaws and is caused to wander far from his chosen
path, Jerusalem is safe and Jehovah’s service is secure. When the enemies of religion
are scattered, there is a goodly prospect of opened sanctuaries, of multiplied privileges,
of increase of piety and virtue on every hand. When the persecutor perishes the
minister of truth rejoices greatly, and there is music in the house of the Lord
because there is every reason to hope that the Churches, having rest, will “ walk in the
fear of God . . . and be multiplied” (Acts ix. 31).

1. It is well, in the time of danger or distress, to ask for Divine deliverance. 2. It
is better to ask for |)ivine strength to be enabled to overcome the evil from which we
suffer by the good which we do (Rom. xii. 21).—C,


Ver. 1.— Adding sin to sin. This prophetic warning seems to have been spoken
when the embassy to seek offensive and defensive alliance with Egypt had actually
started on its way. The sin of neglecting to seek direction from God in the time
of national anxiety was now added to by the sin of openly seeking help from man.
There was a constant disposition on the part of the Jews of the later monarchy to
seek their safety in national alliances. When imperilled by the Israclites, they sought
help from the Syrians. When threatened by the Syrians, they made treaties with
the Assyrians. When the Assyrians became their enemies, they tried to strengthen
themselves with the support of hesitating, inactive Egypt. First men lose their
faith in God; then they neglect to seek or obey him; and then they turn to mere
human helpers. So sin follows on sin. Illustrating this from life and experience, with
precise applications to each audience, it may be shown that—

J. SIN Is ADDED TO SIN IN THE NATURAL ORDER OF EVENTS. It is but the simple
fact of life that a sin never goes alone. It always has its companions and its followers.
It must, if for this one reason only—every sin is a disturbance of order by man’s self-
will; that self-will is sure to go on sinning in the effort to get the order right. The
child who finds order disturbed by some wrong act, goes on to tell lies in its vain effort
to get the order straight again.


506 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (on. xxx. 1—33.


ae ee ec ee


II. Stn 13 ADDED TO 8IN BY THE INFLUENCE OF HaBIT. There is a strange
tendency in us all to do a second time what we have done once. This has not been
sufficiently noticed, though it is the basis on which criminals are often detected. A
sin done once, we are actually disposed to do again ; and there seems to be even a bodily
bias towards this formation of habits. Parents and teachers have to watch for it, that
they may check and correct it.

III. Sty ts ADDED TO SIN BY THE ENTICEMENTS OF SaTan. For an act of sin is
giving Satan the advantage over us, putting ourselves into his power. And the
increase of that power depends on leading us to do evil again. He will not let us stop
ani think. We must go on, as the gambler does, until we are enslaved and ruined.

IV. SIN I8 ADDED TO SIN AS A BEGINNING OF PUNISHMENT. A man is usually
“ heady aud high-minded” at the successful result of his first wrong; so, in order that he
may be smitten and humbled, God lets lim go on from sin to sin, until shame, whips
him awake, so that he may see his iniquitv. The way round to right has often to be
by the mire of sin added to sin. ‘There is a gracious sense in which God lets wilful
men alone awhile, as he left these Jewish leaders who advocated the Egyptian alliance,
that they might convince themselves of their own wickedness and folly.—R. T.


Ver. 2.— Trusting others than Jehovah. “ Relying upon human aid, involving a distrest
of the Divine promises, was a crying sin of the ancient Church, not at one time only,
but throuvhout her history.” It is quite as truly the crying sin of the modern Church,
and of the Christian individual. In every time of pressure and need we first fly to
some form of human help. It is either the expression of “ first simplicity,” or else of
“cultured sanctity,” to act on the words, “ Our help is in the Lord our God.”

I, THe DELUSIONS ON WHICH OUR TRUSTING OTHERS REST. Some of these take
shape, and we can recognize them. Others lie down in men’s souls, doing their mis-
chievous work, but never getting put into propositions, which can be fairly dealt with.
They are such as the following: 1. God is far away, and his help is not anything
really practical. 2. God does not heed; he is so largely concerned in the great
affairs ol the universe that it is only an imagination that he can take interest in an
individual life. 3. God is so long about his work; and impatient man cannot bear
waiting—if he is in any trouble, he wauts it dealt with at once. Compare the King of
Israel, in the famine-time, saying pettishly to Elisha, “ What should I wait for ‘the
Lord any lonver?” 4, God makes such hard terms. He always wants repentance and
submission, and letting our own hands hang down; he crushes human energy and
enterprise. The very statement of these cherished delusions of men suggests their
correctives. Surely to all who cherish them the great Father is an unknown God.

Il. THE FORMS WHICH OUR TRUSTING OTHERS MAY TAKE. ‘The Jewish nation
leaned on the help of another nation in her extremity. We, in our individual life and
experience, are in danger of some form of sacerdotalism ; we pin our faith to some sect-
leader, some scientific teacher, some admired statesman, some popular preacher, some
assertive priest. Thousands of people find individual responsibility in religion too
heavy a burden for them to bear, and do not grasp the truth that God is with them in
the bearing, and that it is their dignity to stand under the yoke only with God.
Sacerdotalism is jist the “man-trust” which prophets denounce. In public life and
association the tendency is to Jean on, and worship material strength. We seek the
help of riches for the carrying out of all our religious schemes, We fly to men rather
than to God. ;

Il]. History AND EXPERIENCE ALIKE PROVE THE PRACTICAL FOLLY, AS WELL As
THE INGRATITUDE AND REBELLIOUSNESS, OF THUS FoRsAKING Gop. Our trusts prove,
like Egypt, only shebheth, inactive, do-nothings (see ver. 7). Egypt promised much
but failed utterly in the day of trial.—R. T, ;


Ver. 15.— Quietness and confidence. These terms are related. Quietness is the
result of confidence. Confidence is the secret of quietness. The quietness thought of
by the prophet was the abandonment of the disquieting and distracting search for
earthly aids, as in the case of seeking help from Egypt; the confidence he commends is


that patient waiting on God and waiting for God, which are the necessary expressions
of our faith in him,


on, Xxx. 1—83.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 507


L A Great atraInment. So great, so nearly impossible for men while on the
earth, that, despairingly, men have thought of it as only reached in the grave whither
man hastens. Byron says, “I found in the Certosa Cemetery such a beautiful inscrip-
tion; in Italian the words are absolute music: ‘ Luigi Martini implora eterna quiete.’
On the restless, tossing, changing earth who can be quiet?” ‘The word is like an
angry sea. The vessel of our life is rocked and dashed hither and thither, as blast after
blast assails it, and wave after wave comes rolling on. Think what that power must
be which comes into a human life in such a condition as this, and gives ‘quietness’—
& quietness so deep that none can make trouble.” Quietness never comes by the
smoothing of circumstances. They never are smoothed for more than a very “little
while.” And fears of the clouds that are gathering disturb even the “little while.”
Quietness only comes by soul-mastery over circumstances. Hearts must win peace,
and then only can they make peace.

Il. THE MEANS BY WHICH QUIETNESS MAY BE REACHED. Throuch confidence;
heart -coi fidence—heart-confidence in God. “We must keep our spirits calm and
sedate by a continual dependence upon God and his power and his gooduess; we must
retire into ourselves with a holy quietness, suppressing all turbulent and tumultuous
passions, and keeping the peace in our own minds. And we must rely upon God with a
holy confidence that he can do what he will, and will do what is best for his people.
And this will be our strength; it will inspire us with such a holy fortitude as will carry
us with ease and courage through all the difficulties we may meet with” (Matthew
Henry). In this matter the principle holds that our own endeavour must go along with
God’s bestowments. ‘ Work out your own salvation, .. . for itis God that worketh in
you.” Some of us make no effort to get outside the whirl of life. How can we expect
God to give us quietuess ?

Ill. THE ENCOURAGEMENT TO THE USE OF SUCH MEANS. Found in God’s gracious
ways of giving his people heart-peace, and then peace in circumstances, when they have
fully trusted in him.—R. T.


Ver. 16.— The peril of the wilful. ‘‘ We will ride upon the swift; therefore shall
they that pursue you be swift.” We wil/—there is man’s sin. ‘hat is not a fit
position for dependent man ever to take. “ They that will be rich fall into temptation
and a snare.” ‘Go to now, ye that say, To-day or to-morrow we will go into such a
city, and continue there a year, and buy and sell, and get gain.... For that ye vught to
say, if the Lord will, we shall live, and do this, or that.” From some points of view
these strong-willed men may be regarded as the noble-men of earth. They have a
purpose in life, which holds in and guides, as with bit and bridle, all the forces of their
being. They are the great men in our mills and warehouses; the foremost as states-
men, and in carrying out great social and national enterprises, ‘They seem to have a
power of control over all the circumstances surrounding them, and a power of recoil
from the greatest disappointments and disasters. Yet this disposition lays men open
to peculiar dangers. Strong will is liable to become self-will—to refuse the ordinance
of God ; to refuse the help of God; to refuse to wait for God. It stands up in fancied
majesty and says, “I will.” “ Whatever God may say or do, I will. 1 will be rich, I
will be successful, I will be great.” When a man in such a spirit says, “I will,” he ison
the very pit-edge, and on the pit-edge blindfolded.

I. WILFULNESS IS REBELLIOUSNESS. Because man is God’s servant, pledved to carry
out his Master’s will, and not his own will. Man is God’s child, and in duty bound
to fulfil his Father’s commands. Disobedience is rebellion.

II. Wi_FuLNEss Is WEAKNESS. Because man is entirely dependent on the God
whose will he refuses, for the inecans of accomplishing what he determines to do. His
wilfulness is as weak as a child’a who has no money, no power, but depends entirely
on his parents.

III. WieruLness 18 FooLisHness, For it is a setting of ourselves against the
Almighty God, as if he would allow us to shift and rearrange his plans. Man’s
wilfuluess may make a noise, and bring him into trouble; but it is only a child’s attempt
to hold back the flowing of the great river of God. A little time of vain trying, and
then the child is swept away by the flood, which still rolls on.

IV. Wicrunness 18 PERIL. Jt will be a marvel, almost a miracle, if such a man do


508 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.  [cn. xxx. 1—33


Sn —————————————_————————————


not “fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which
drown men in destruction and perdition.”—R. T.


Ver. 20.—Adversity as Divine bread. “The bread of adversity, and the water of
affliction.” Wecanonly think of God by the help of our associations with man. There-
fore, in the revelation which he has given us in a book, God is spoken of as if he had
the form of a man (anthropomorphism), and as if he had the feelings of a man (anthro-
popathism). We. indeed, know no other moral beings beside man, and probably our
senses would allow of the apprehension of no other. We are not allowed to create
material images representing God, but we are allowed to think of God through the figures
of the human being, Answering to this is the truth that we can only know our soul
through our body; we have to think of it asa kind of spiritual body. So it needs care,
clothing, food, etc., even as the body. ‘This is the line on which it can best be shown
that adversity is Divine bread for the soul, which must be nourished by appropriate
food. Working out this thought, two points may be more especially treated.

J. BREAD 18 THE STAPLE FOOD FOR THE BODY. It is in itself sufficient to sustain
life; it contains all the necessary elements for the renewal of vitality. So is adversity
the staple food for the soul; for it contains all the necessary elements for the renewal
of character. Since we are sinners, wayward, and wilful, the prosperities of life are but
like luxuries; and adversity is our staple’ food, which nourishes humility, penitence,
godly fear, and trust. The expression is used of King Manasseh, the wilful, who, in
prison, was fed with the bread and water of afiliction, and thereby nourished unto
penitence, forsaking of sin, and hearty return to the God of his fathers. If we pray,
“Weed me with food convenient for me,” we must clearly see that the answer may
include “ adversity and affliction.”

II. BreapD Is A GENERAL TERM EMBRACING ALL NECESSARY FOOD. And necessary
tuod for the body includes some things that are unpleasant to the taste. Sometimes
even medicine is bread—the very best of bread for us under the circumstances. And
so our soul-conditions and our soul-culture may make necessary things that are very
trying to feeling. “ No affliction for the present seemeth joyous, but grievous; never-
theless, alterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them who are
exercised thereby.”—R, T.


Ver. 21.—Sins of will and sins of frailty. “When ye turn to the right hand, and
when ye turn to the left.” ‘Uhis is an evident recognition of the infirmities and wander-
ings of those who do, of set purpose of heart, mean to serve God. The verse is a gracious
assurance that, in such times of frailty, God’s people shall have due warning aud cor-
rection, We may take as types of the two kinds of sin—sins of will and sins of frailty
—the two persons who were present to the mind of Christ when he spoke as in John
xii. 10; and these two persons will illustrate the classes who were in the mind of Isaiah
when he gave the warning of the text—the boldly wilful who persisted in the policy of
sceking aid from Egypt, and the frail ones whose faith faltered under the pressure of
the anxiety of the times and the delay of the Divine intervention. They were swayed
tu this side or to that, but, nevertheless, tried hard to keep steadily, right on.

I, JUDAS, TYPE OF THOSE WHO ARE HEART-WRONG, INSINCERE, RULED BY CONSIDERA-
TIONS OF SELF-INTEREST. ‘here are no minute details given of the process of Judas’s
apostasy. There was, indeed, nothing unusual about it. ‘The covetous spirit made him
connect himsell! with Christ chiefly for personal ends. The essential thing in any one
who unites with Christ is surrender of se/fand se/f-will, and this surrender Judas never
made, ‘I'he point, however, to be specially dwelt on here is that his great sin was a
matter of will, plan, resolve, determination. He did not drift into it; he was not
enticed into it; he was not taken at unawares: he schemed it; he willed ‘it ; the guilt
of it fully rested on him, Whenever men sin with their wills and openly they must
aa eae Se aa of ne judgment. Sins of will are rebellions that must

e mastered. ‘I'he distinction between sins of will and si rai
shown in King Saul and King David. ease ep ee

II, Perer, TYPE OF THE SINCERE BUT FAULTY AND FRAIL. Compare David. Peter
was hasty, impulsive, unceriain, sometimes even weak. ‘ The spirit was willing, but
the flesh was weak.” He swayed now to this side, and now to that, and needed. just


oH. xxx. 1—33.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHRT ISAIAH, 509


—


sich warnings as are provided in the above text. The Apostle John urges on those
who are sincere Christians, that if they “say they have no sin, they deceive themselves,
and the truth is not in them.” And these, which at first are “ goings aside,” “ frailties,”
will soon grow to become “ wilfulnesses,” if they are not checked and corrected. There-
fore may we rejoice in God, and assure our hearts in his promise that the voice shall
call us back when our feet incline to wander to the right or the left—R. T.


Ver. 29.— The joy-song of the delivered. Reference is to the deliverance of Hezckiah
and Judah from the yoke of the Assyrians and the fear of their overwhelming attack.
Illustrating the pleasure Eastern people feel in “ nizht-songs,” Roberts says, “ Music 1s
considered far more enchanting at night than at any other period; it gives cheerfulness
m darkness, and pleasure to the heart.” Nothing is more common than for adults to
sing themselves to sleep; thus, as they recline, they beat a tabret and chant the praises
of their gods till, throuch heaviness, they can scarcely articulate a word. In passing
through a village or town at midnight may be heard people at their nightly song, to
grace the festive scene, to beguile away their time, to charm their fears, or to procure
refreshing sleep.”

I. Gop GIVES SONGS IN THE NIGHT OF OUR FEARS. A striking illustration is found
in the times of Jehoshaphat (2 Chron. xx.). A time of exceeding peril and fear cane
through an invasion of Moabites and Ammonites; the matter was committed to God
in prayer; deliverance was assured, and we read that the singers went out before the
army, to praise the beauty of holiness, and say, “ Praise the Lord, for his mercy
endureth for ever.” They were to sing their songs of trust while yet the deliverance
tarried. Singing songs when we are well out of fears is easy work; singing songs even
while strugyling with our fears is the beautiful triumph of faith.

II. Gop GIVES SONGS IN THE NIGHT OF WEEPING. \\ee;ing represents troubles being
borne, not troubles only feared. Smiles can break through tears. God gives heart-rest
that can give forth a song, even to the sons and daughters of pain and grief.

Ill. Gop GIVEs SONGS IN THE NIGHT OF WEARY PILGRIMAGE. For oftentimes “ wait-
ing work,” and the work of keeping steadily on, is very trying and hard. Many a man
knows the painful deprssion of “ patient continuance in well-doing.” This is typified
in the long, dreary journey of Israclites from distant parts of the country to the feasts
at Jerusalem. Weary work, indeed, in those slow-travelling days. It is said that
each band of pilgrims on its way to Jerusalem was headed by a person who played
the flute. Nothing cheers a journey like a song. See the power of music on a soldier’s
march. Then

“Sing on your hecavenward way,
Ye ransomed sinners, sing.”


IV. Gop GIVES SONGS IN THE NIGHT OF DEATH. Songs in the soul, when lips are
sealed in weakness. How often those who watch beside dying saints sce the lips
moving, and catch faint sounds of the old trustful hymns learned in childhood!
Familiar texts and well-loved hymns are the wings that bear many a soul through
the long dark valley into the holy realms of light and love and song.—R. T.


Ver. 33.— The mission of Tophet. “Fire, being the most destructive of all the elements,
is chosen by the sacred writers to symbolize the agency by which God punishes or
destroys the wicked. We are not to assume from prophetical figures that material fire
is the precise agent to be used. It was not the agency employed in the destruction of
Sennaclierib, who is the king mentioned in the text. He was killed by his two sous,
whilst worshipping in the house of Nisroch his god (ch, xxxvii. 88). ‘Tophet properly
begins just where the Valley of Hinnom bends round to the east, having the cliffs of
Zion on the north, the Hill of Evil Counsel on the south. It terminates at Beer Ayub,
where it joins the Valley of Jehoshaphat. The cliffs on the south side especially abouns|
in ancient tombs. Here the dead carcases of beasts, and every offal and abomination,
were cast, and left to be either devonred by that worm that never died, or consumed by
that fire that was never quenched, Hinnom was condemned to this infamous service,
perhaps, because in it, when Israel fell into idolatry, they offered their children in sacri.
fice to Baal.” Tophet came to represent the place of punishment, especially that kind


of punishment which is destructive rather than remedial. 7


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.  [cn. xxx. 1—9.


510


I. DIVINE PUNISHMENTS OF THE INDIVIDUAL ARE REMEDIAL. We are not able to fit
together the fatherly relation and the hopeless destruction of any of his sons. Much
of our difficulty in dealing with the conditions of the future life arises from our failing
to distinguish between the individual and the corporate life of men. Nations, sects,
classes, tamilies even, can be destroyed. ‘'beir corporate life may once for all cease.
God’s judgments may reach them in this form for the sake of, and for the due impres-
sion of, the individual, We understand the destruction of an army or of a city, but
not the destruction of a man,

Il. DivinzE PUNISHMENTS OF THE NATION OR THE CLASS MAY BE DESTRUCTIVE.
Tophet here is the figure for the destruction of the army of Sennacherib, and uf him as
king, not as man. Tophet tells of material destrnctions, and such only can concern
man in human and earthly relations. Sodom and Gomorrah may be burned up in the
fires of God, destroyed from off the face of the earth; but we know nothing of the
standing of individua] Sodomites before God, The Canaanite race was to be swept from
the earth, but we are sure the Judge of all the earth will do rizht by each Canaanite.
God’s temporal destructions for corporate sins are part of the world’s education, but are
no basis for belief in auy everlasting material punishments for individuals.—R, T.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER XXXL


Vers. 1—3.—A FurTHER WARNING AGAINST
SEEKING THE ALLIANCE oF Eeypr. This
prophecy seems to be quite independent
of the lust (ch. xxx. 1—7). It may have
been given earlier or later. The chief point
brought out, which had not distinctly ap-
peared previously, is the value set on the
horses and chariots of Egypt in the conflict
with Assyria (comp. 2 Kings xviii. 24).

Ver. 1.—Woe to them that go down to
Egypt for help (comp. ch. xxx. 1, 2; ana
see also the earlicr prophecy, ch. xx. 2—6).
The examples of Samaria, Gaza, and Ashdod
might well have taught tlie lesson of dis-
trust of Kgvpt, without any Divine warnings
(see G. Smith’s ‘Kponym Canon,’ pp. 125—
181). But the Jews were infatuated, and
relied on Egypt despite her previous failures
to give effective aid. And stay on horses.
The Assyrian cavalry was very numerous,
and very efficient. It is often represented
on the movuments. Egyptian cavalry, on
the otler hand, is not represented at all;
and it may be questioned whether, in the
early times, the Egyptian war-borses were
not entirely employed in the chariot-service
(see ‘Pulpit Commentary’ on Exo wus, p.
321). The later dynasties of Egyptian
kings, however, employed cavalry, as appears
from 2 Chron. xii. 83; Herod., ii. 162; ‘Re-
cords of the Past,’ vol. ii. pp. 68, 70, 72, ete.

- And trust in chariots, because they are
many. The large number of the chariots
maintained by tle Pharaohs is abundantly
evidenced. Diodorus assigns to Sesostris
twenty-seven thousand (i. 54, § 4). This
is, mo doubt, an exaggeration; but the six


hundred of the Pharaoh of the Exodus (Exod,
xiv. 7), and even tlie one thousand two
hundred of Shishak (2 Chron. xii.3) are mode-
rate computations, quite in accord with the
monuments, and with all that we otherwise
know of Egyptian warfare. Egypt exported
chariots to the neighbouring countries
(1 Kings x. 29), and was at this time the
only power which seemed capable of furnish-
ing such a chariot-force us could hope to
contend on tolerably even terms with the
forve of Assyria. They look not unto the
Holy One of Israel (comp. ch. xxx. 11, 12).
The trust in the Eyyptian alliance was
accompanied by a di-trust of Jehovah and
his power, and a disiucliuation to look to
him for aid.

Ver. 2.—Yet he also is wise. Intense
irony. “ Wisdom is not wholly confined
to the human counsellors whose advice
Judah follows (ch. xxix. 14). He (Jehovah)
is ‘ wise’ too, and could give prudent counsel
if his advice were asked.” As he is not
consulted, he will bring evil upon his
people, and will not call back, or rvtract,
his words of threatening, but will give them
accomplishment, by rising up against the
house of the evil-doers (i.e. the Jews), and
their help (¢.e. the Egyptians).

Ver. 3.—Now the Egyptians are men, and
not God. Judah relied on Pharaoh, as on
a sort of God, which indeed he was con-
sidered in his own country (* Records of the
Past,’ vol. vi. p. 145, 1. 320; p. 148, 1. 418,
etc.) Isaiah asserts the contrary in the
strongest way: the Egyptians. one and all,
are men—mere men; and “ there is no help
in them” (Ps. exlvi. 3). Their horses flesh,
and not spirit. The horses, on which so
much reliance was placed, were mere animals,
subject to all the weakness of the animal


OH, XXxI, 1—9.]


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


511


ee er


nature, not spirit-horses, with a life and
vigour of their own, by which they could
be a real tower of strength to those on
whose side they ranged themselves. They
all shall fail together ; 7.¢. the helpers and
the helped (compare the concluding clauses
of ver. 2).

Vers. 4—9.—A Promisg oF Prorection,
AND OF THE DISCOMFITURE OF ASSYRIA.
In the promise of protection (vers. 4, 5)
there is nothing new but the imagery,
which is of remarkable beauty. The
promise is followed by a brief exiortation
(vers. 6, 7); and then the discomfiture of
Assyria is declared in the plainest terms,
and her flight betore the avenging sword of
God (vers. 8, 9).

Ver. 4.—Like as the lion, etc. The re-
semblance of this simile to Hom., ‘Iliad,’ xviii.
ll. 161, 162, has been often noticed. In both,
the lion has seized his prey, and is crouch-
ing over it; the shepherds gather them-
selves tog ther against him, and seek to
scare him away; but he remains firm,
undaunted by their threats and cries, never
for a moment relinquishing the body of
which he has made himself the master.
The image is best explained as representing
Jehovah, standing over and keeping guard
on Jerusulem, whch he will allow no one
to rend from him. And the young lion;
rather, even the young lion (Lowth). A
single anima] must be intended. Roaring
on his prey; rather, growleth over his prey.
So shall the Lord of hosts come down to fight
for Mount Zion; rather, so shall the Lord
of hosts descend, to fight, on Mount Zion.
If we connect ti.e concluding words of the
clause with tsibd, to fight, the mvaning
must be “ fight against,” as Delitzsch shows
conclusively. Lut we may connect them
with the more distant yéréd, will descend,
in which case they will mean “on,” or
“wpon Mount Zion” (comp. Exod. xix. 18;
Ps, exxxiii. 3). The best commentators are
of opinion that this must be the sense. The
words ure a promise, not a threat.

Ver. 5.—As birds flying; rather, as birds
hovering, or fluttering, over their young, to
protect them. A second simile, expressive
of tenderness, as the former one was of
power and strenyth. Defending also, etc.
Translate, defending and delivering, passing
over and preserving. In the word “ passing
over” there scems to be a reference to the


institution of the Passover, when the angel,
sometimes identified with Jehovah himself,
“passed over” and spared the Israelites.

Ver. 6.—-Turn ye unto him. Then, at
any rate, if not before, turn to him who
will have delivered you from so great a
peril. “Turn to him, O children of Israel,
from whom men have so dee}ly revolted.”
The third person is used instead of the
second, out of tenderness, not to hurt their
feelings by mingling with promise an open
rebuke.

Ver 7.—For in that day every man shall
cast away his idols. “In that day ”’—the
day of Assyria’s discomtiture — shall the
vanity of idols be seen and recognized.
They have not helped Assyria. How should
they help Judah (comp. ch. xxx. 22)?

Ver. 8.—Then shall the Assyrian fall with
the sword, not of a mighty man; rather,
and Assyria shall full by the sword of one
who is not a man. Assyria’s destruction
will not be by the visible swords of hum in
enemies, but by the invisible sword of God
(comp. 2 Kings xix 35). And the sword,
not of a mean man, shall devour him; rather,
and the sword of one who is not a mortal shall
devour him—an instance of “synonymous
parallelism.” He shall flee, more literally,
betuke himself to flight. His young men
shall be discomfited; rather, as in the
margin, shall be for tribute. They shall
become the vassals of a foreign power.

Ver. 9 —And he shall pass over to his
strong hold for fear; rather, and his Rock
shall pass away for fear (marginal render-
ing). It is generally agreed by recent
cominentators (Kay, Delitzsch, Cheyne),
that the rock intended, which is contrasted
with the “princes” of the next clause, is
Assyria’s king (see the contrast of the king,
who is “a great rock,” and his princes, in
ch. xxxii. 1, 2). (On the hurried flight of
Sennacherib to Nineveh, see below, ch.
xxxvii. 37.) His princes shall be afraid of
the ensign. The word nés, ensign, seems
to be here used collectively. The Assyrian
princes would tremble at every signal that
they saw displiyed along their line of route,
expecting some enemy to fall upon them.
His furnace. Jehovah was at once a Light
to his people, and “a consuming Fire ”
(Heb. xii. 29) to hiisenemies. His presence,
indicated by the Shechinah in the holy of
holies, was at once for blessing and for
burning.


HOMILETICS.


Vers. 2, 3.—The folly of trusting inan arm of flesh. “ Put not your trust in rinces,
nor in any child of man,” says the psalmist (Ps. cxlvi. 3); “for there is no elp in


them.” All human props are uncertain—


§12 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.  [on. xxxi 1—9.


I. BECAUSE OF HUMAN CHANGEFULNESS. Men do not continue always of one mind.
They make promises, and regret that they have made them, and find some way of
escaping their force, or else boldly break them with a cynical disregard to what others
may think or say. heir interests change, or the views that they take of them; and
the wise policy of to-day seems foolishness, or even madness, to-morrow. Some men
are actuated by mere caprice, and have no sooner effected a desired purpose than it
loses favour in their eyes, and seems to them of little worth. ‘lhey will make heavy
sacrifices to obtain an alliance, and none to maintain it. They sigh always for some-
thing that they have not, and despise what they have. Human protection is always
uncertain, owing to the fickleness of man, who is naturally “double-minded,” and
“unstable in all his ways” (Jas. i. 8).

Il. Because OF POSSIBLE INSUFFICIENCY. The human protector may, with the best
intentions in the world, prove insufticient. Syria and Ammon summoned Assyria to
their aid when they contended with David (2 Sam. x. 6, 16; Ps. lxxxiii. 8); but the
result was the entire defeat of the confederate army. Hannibal called on Macedonia to
assist him against the Romans; but Macedonia proved too weak, and her efforts resulted
in her own subjection. There must, in almost every case, be the risk that the pro-
tector, though doing all he can, may fail, and our having called bim in exasperate, or
even infuriate, our adversary.

III. BrcausE OF HUMAN GREED AND SELFISHNESS. ‘The protector may become, is
only too apt to become, the oppressor and the conqueror. Rome’s vast empire was
built up largely by taking states under her protection, and then absorbing them. Had
Egypt succeeded in defeating Assyria, and rolling back the tide of invasion that had
so long been rising higher and higher, and threatening her own independence and that
of her neighbours, the result would simply have been that Judea and Samaria would
have been absorbed into Egypt, or at any rate have become Egyptian dependencies.
The small state that calls in one powerful kingdom to help her in her struggle against
another rarely gains anything more than an exchange of masters.

IV. BeoausE THE GREATEST HUMAN 8TRENGTH I8 POWERLESS AGAINST Gop. The
Egyptians were “men, and not God; and their horses flesh, and not spirit” (ver. 3).
Had all the chariots of Egypt come forth, and all their footmen and all their horsemen,
they would not have saved Judah, since God had declared that here there was “ no work
for Egypt” (ch. xix. 15), and that Judah, if she trusted in Egypt, “ should be ashamed
of Ethiopia their expectation, and of Egypt their glory” (ch. xx. 5). God can strike an
army with blindness, as he did that of Benhadad (2 Kings vi. 18) on one occasion; or
with panic fear, as he did that of the same monarch on another (2 Kings vii. 6); or he
can cause quarrel to break out among the constituent parts of an army, and make the
soldiers slay one another (2 Chron. xx. 23); or he can send out a destroying angel, and
kill a hundred and eighty thousand men in a night (2 Kings xix. 35). Again, the God
of battles determines the issue of battles. “It is nothing to him to help, whether with
many or with them that have no power” (2 Chron. xiv. 11). He can cast down and
bring to nought the mightiest human protector; he can save, if he wills to save, by
his own angelic army, without the intervention of any human aid at all.


Ver. 9.— The rock of Assyria and the Rock of Israel. In each case the “ rock” was
{1) the refuge, stronghold, and main reliance of the people; (2) a person, not an inac-
cessible height or a fortress; (8) the recognized monarch and master of the nation.
But in all other respects the contrast between the two was extreme, the difference
immeasurable.

I, AssyRia’s ROCK—SENNACHERIB. A man, a weak, fallible, ephemeral man—the
creature of an hour—mortal, soon wearied, needing rest and sleep, liable to sickness,
daily losing strength, approaching nearer and nearer to the grave. And not only
a man, but a wicked man—proud, cruel, contemptuous of his foes, blasphemous
towards God, merciless, pitiless! What a poor object on which to place reliance, trust,
dependence! No doubt to the Assyrians he seemed a grand figure, seated on his
throne of carved cedar and ivory, receiving tribute from kings and princes, and sur-
rounded by his army of perhaps two hundred thousand men. But of what avail was
his grandeur? He could not save a single soldier out of the two hundred thousand
from an ache or a pain, if God sent them—no, nor from death itself, if their lives were


cH, xxx1.1—9.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 513
—————$—$—LLLLLKL


required by the Most High. To-night Sennacherib lies down to rest, confident of
victory, his camp guarded on every side by nigh a quarter of a million of strong warriors.
To-morrow he is woke up by a sound of universal wailing. More than a hundred and
eighty thousand of his soldiers are dead in their tents. His chances of victory are clean
gone; and in half an hour he is an alarmed and trembling fugitive.

Il. Israxu’s Rock—Jenovan. God, and not man—the Strong One, everlasting, he
that “inhabiteth eternity ” (ch. lvii. 15), that is never wearied, that needs not to
slumber or sleep, that knows no sickness, that never loses streneth, that has “neither
beginning of days nor end of life ” (Heb. vii. 3). And One who to all this might adds
tenderness, and the deepest love of his own, and the gentlest care of them. A Rock, but
not hard or rucged—a Refuge from all foes, a Shadow from the heat, a Refreshment to
the weary, a Help to those in need. God is able to save all men, not only from death,
but from all suffering or unhappiness. There is no foe that can daunt him, none from
whom he will have to flee. And he is willing to save all. Only let them “return to
him ” (ver. 6), “cry to him” (ch. xxx. 19), trust in him, wait on him. He is indeed
a “great Rock” (ch. xxxii. 2), a “strong Rock ” (Ps. xxxi. 2), even “the Rock of our
salvation” (Ps. lxxxix. 26).


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Ver. 3.—The help of Egypt. A party in Judah is negotiating with Egypt; and the
prophet points out the falseness of this policy.

I, Iv Is A RELIANCE UPON BRUTE ForcE. “ Horses” are symbolic of martial strength.
And Judah, being peculiarly deficient in cavalry, was “tempted to trust in Egypt for
chariots and horsemen” (ch. xxxvi, 8,9). Famed in Homer was Egyptian ‘lhebes,
with the hundred gates, and the two hundred men who issued forth from each with
horses and chariots (¢ Iliad,’ ix. 882). The memory of the pursuit of the Israelites at the
time of the Exodus contained the picture of those chariots and horsemen (Exod. xiv. 6, 9).
They were in request in Solomon’s time (1 Kings xix. 26). Hgyptian cavalry, the very
nerve and sinew of war; Egypt who possesses them, the most coveted ally. ‘On
horses will we fly,. . . on the swilt will we ride,” was the word of the party. Such was
their “‘ creaturely confidence.” These horses were but “ flesh,” and “ all flesh is.ag grass,”
and withers when the breath of the Eternal hlaws uporrit. The strength of the creature
is but the strength of the dependent nature; folly, then, to lean on that which is itself
a leaning thing. ;

Il. Iv 18 A RELIANCE UPON MAN, AND NOT UPON Gop. Here man, as usual in the
Hebrew prophets, is sharply opposed to God; the dependent, the frail, the mortal, to
the Self-dependent, the Strong, the Immortal aud Kternal ; tie tool to the hand that holds
it, the might that alone can render it effective. ‘The axe, the saw, the staff 5 they are
dead and helpless things, until they are brought into connection with spiritual force.
So horses and chariots can avail naught, unless they be the instruments of the Lord
of hosts, the engines of a spiritual and enduring policy in the earth. Man himself,
without tools and weapons, is the most defenceless of animals; with them, yet still
without God, he is in no better plight. ;

III. Ir 1s TYPICAL OF IRRELIGIOUSNESS IN GENERAL. The folly is not so much in
looking to material resources and defences as in “ not looking to the Holy One of Israel”
—in “not consulting Jehovah.” All wurldliness is negatixe, and there lies its weakness.
it is a strategy of life which defeats itself; moving far from the true base of operations,
and finding itself presently cut off, without the chance of return. Again, it isa departure
from the Source of true wisdom. The “wisdom of the wise, ana the understanding
of the understanding ones ”—this is policy, prudence. In Jehovah is a higher wisdom
than that of Jewish politicians; his is wisdom united with perlect rectitude. And
without reverence for him, the “ fear of Jehovah,” men do not partake of this higher
my Tae END or Eqayprian HELP. In the first place, the hollowness of the Jewish
policy will be exposed. The word of Jehovah has gone forth, and will not come back
to him void. For it is itself spiritual force, truth, mightier than any material force that
. is known. Put into the mouth of a prophet (Jer. i. 9), those words become mighty a


ISAIAH. 24


514 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH,  [cn. xxx1. 1—9.


fire, to devour all that stavs their course as wood (Jer. v. 14). “All that the Lord
speaketh must be done” (Numb. xxiii. 26). The wall of a worldly wisdom will bulge
and suddenly fall, and the “ wisdom of the wise ones” be brought to naught. ‘The
words of the Eternal are backed up by the hand of the Eternal; and, when stretched
out, the “ helper” who has been so much looked up to will be seen to totter, and the
“helped” one be buried beneath the ruins,—J.


Vers. 4—6.—Similes of the nature and power of Jehovah. I. Tut ion. He is
pictured watching over the holy city, the “ peculiar treasure,” the invisible Sanctuary
of the religion and the people, as a lion over its prey, in the presence of threatening
shepherds,

“ As from a carcase herdsmen strive in vain

To scare a tawny lion, hunger-pinch’d ;

Ev’n so th’ Ajaces, mail-clad warriors, fail’d

The son of Priam from the corse to scare.”

(‘ Lliad,’ xviii. 161.)

It is a fine image—found twice in Homer—of the undaunted prowess of the bold and
steadfast warrior. Invincible towards his foes, what is Jehovah towards his friends, the
people of his choice and love?

Il. Tue sirp. Infinite tenderness mingles with irresistible might in the nature of
God. It is no narrow view of the Divine attributes which the Bible gives. All that we
see of nobility in living creatures, all traits of courage and of love, may be borrowed to
enrich our representations of that nature which includes all other nature within its
scope and grasp. Thus the magnificent queen of birds, no less than the magnificent
king of beasts, supplies in its actions and habits a parable of eternal providence. ‘lhe
eagle fluttering over her young, spreading her wide wings and bearing them thereon,
was a type of Jehovah’s conduct to his people in the desert (Deut. xxxii. 10). So does
he now hover over the city, protecting, rescuing. Nor was it otherwise in the days of
the Saviour, who employs also the simile of the maternal bird. Every ideal of lion-
hearted hero, of father, strong yet terder, of all-brooding mother, of living creatures
inspired by mysterious and mighty instincts of love, helps to bring into momentary
clearness some feature of the nature of him whose being is only “ dark from excess of
light.” His voice, pleading with youth and mnoceuce, with the unsophisticated con-
science, says, “Come!” and with the sinner and the sophist, “ Return! ”—J.


Vers. 7—9.— The fire of Jehovah. I. “Our Gop Is a consumine Fire.” He burns
from that sacred oracular centre in Jerusalem. And his foes are seen melting away
before him—the Assyrian fleeing from and falling before the sword, the huge rock of
his power (disappearing, princes fallin into panic terror as the rallying signal of Judah
is raised. The briars and thorns of iniquity, all the weed-like growth of worldly ways
are kindled and devoured,

II. Our Gop ts a Lianr or satvatTion. “ Light of Israel” goes along with “ devour-
ing fire” (ch. x. 17). To be enlizhtened is to know God and our relation to him.
It is to know what is not Divine, and what is sinful, and what is worthless in re/er-
ence to salvation. And so the people, having ‘‘ returned,” will be seen respecting
their “‘not-gods of silver and their not-gods of gold,” the sinful manufacture of
godless art.

II]. THERE MUST BE BOTH THE FIERY AND THE ILLUMINATING ELEMENT IN TRUE
RELIGION, Enthusiasm is needed; without it we have no motive force. Evil will yield
to nothing else than to the heart aflame with piety, the tongue of Heaven-kindled fire.
Yet blind zeal is mischievous; and therefore the illuminated mind is needed, the dis-
criminating intelligence. The union of intellect with piety, the white heat of zeal
kindling all it touches into lightegiving flame,—what can resist it ?—J.


Ver. 1.— Wrong sources of help. ‘“ Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help.”
Egypt is used in Scripture as a symbol of all foreign worldly powers. It represented
carnal force—* trusting in chariots, horses, and horsemen, because they are very strong.”


‘ michea 2 as the same verse says, “to them,” and not looking unto the Holy One of
sra


OH. xxx. 1—9.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 515


I. Woz, Because Gop Has saw rr. He is wise, and knows the end from the
beginning. We are dazzled with the show of power, The neighing of the war-horse
and the glitter of the golden chariot and the flashing steel of the warriors, all look like
strength. But God says to Israel, ‘This is not your strength. This may succeed for
a time, but it is an empire held by the throat, not by the leart.”

Il. Woz, BECAUSE WE HAVE SEEN IT. ‘Ihe facts of history are on our side. When
Israel was pure aud pious she prospered. Deliverance from Egypt was wronght out
in the face of superior force; and an undisciplined band of slaves were too mighty
for the cohorts of Pharaoh. So have we seen iu history ever since. In the end it is
“righteousness that exalteth a nation;” but shame, reproach, and defeat come to those
who forsake God. Woe! Yes; the fires of Lundon had to burn out its proutligacies,
The plague followed its debaucheries.

Ill. Wor, pecause DIVINE LAWS ARE IMMUTABLE. It is not only saéd and seen,
it is swre. For to find true help in Exypt would be like reversing the law of gravita-
tion, or making the stars change their courses, or water forsake its level. ‘ God is not
a man, that he should lie, neither the son of man that he should repent.”

There are many Egypts—force, fashion, frand; these have empire at times; but
woe to those who, forsakiug the simplicities and spiritualities of the gospel, seek ‘ help ”
therefrom !—W. M. 8.


Vers. 1—5.—The arm of flesh. How important is this subject we may gather from
the fact that the prophet is inspired to return to it, and to reiterate bis condemnation
(see ch. xxx. 1). The disposition to lean on the arm of flesh instead of trusting iu the
living God is not Jewish, but human; not peculiar to any age or dispensation, but is
an abiding spiritual peril. We learn here—

I. ‘HE FALLACY WHICH IT INvoLvES. 1. The Jews were trusting in uambers.
Looking to the horses and chariots of Egypt, “ hecause they were many” (ver. 1). We
are apt to be imposed upon by numbers, to think there is safety and even salvation in
them, to indulge the notion that, because we are among a great crowd or are supported
by a very large majority, we are all on the side of truth and victory. Yet nothing is
more uncertain ; often the vast hosts have been overthrown in conflict by the devoted
and di termined few; often the small section, “ every where spoken against ” and des; ised,
has been proved to be in the right and has ultimately prevailed. If Gud be on one side
and the mightiest multitude on the other, we may be sure that the fact that ‘the
chariots and horses are many” will be of no account at all. Divine providence is nos
by any means necessarily or constantly “on the side of the stronvest battalions.”
2. They trusted in apparent human strength. “In horsemen, because they are very
stroug.” Many regiments of cavalry have a very imposing aspect to the eye which
looks upon and judges by the surface of thins; they seem invincible, overwhelming, an
invaluable ally when the encmy is approaching. And not only the well-equipped
cavalry in time of war; but, iu time of peace and in the ordinary life of men, the
sagacious counsellor, tle wealthy merchant, the influential statesman or courtier, the
eloquent and admired speaker or pleader,—these men seem to have in them a source of
strength on which we may build, or to which in the time of peril we may rejair. But
“the Hvyptians were men, aud not God,” ete. (ver. 3); their promised word might be
broken, their overtures might turn out to be selfishly made and to be unscrupulously
withdrawn; their cavalry mizht be ridden down by troops still stronger than they.
Being but men and but horses, they might prove—as they would prove—nothing better
than a broki-n reed, which would pierce the hand that leaned on it (ch. xxxvi. 6). And
the human strength on which we are all so inclined to lean will very likely prove to be
nothing more or better. How often the sagacity of the prudent, the riches of the
wealthy, the influence of the great, the eloquence of the orator, fail us at our hour of
need, and we “ go down to our house ” bitterly disappointed, or perhaps stricken, stripped,
ruined! The arm of flesh will fail you.”

Il. THE FRUIT WHICH BELONGS To IT. “God will not call back bis words” ef
condemnation (ver. 2; see ch, xxx. 1—13). He is grieved and offended that his word
has been disobeyed, and himself distrusted and deserted. (See homily én Joc.)

IIL. 'He PENALTY WHICH WILL FOLLOW IT. God will arise against both those that
seek and those that offer help; at the stretching out of his hand they will both fall


516 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (on. xxxt 1—9,


i


together (vers. 2,3). They who, distrusting God, put their trust in man will fall
under God’s high displeasure, and, according to their circumstances and the character of
their error, will fall into discomfiture, into disrepute, into disappointment, into shame.

LV, Tug RESOURCE WHICH IT OVERLOOKS. All the while that Judah was leaning on
“ that broken reed, Evypt,” it had at hand a sure Support, an almighty Deliverer, One that
would be asa lion for fearlessness and irresistible strength, One that would be as a mother-
bird for swiftness and tenderness (vers. 4, 5), to whom it might have looked, and by
whom it would have been graciously received and effectually succoured. By our side,
in our time of trouble and of peril, is an almighty Friend, whose delivering hand no
army can resist, who will come at the right time to redeem us, who will treat us with
more than parental tenderness and care, Shall we not go unto him, and say, “ My soul
trusteth in thee, yea, in the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge, until these
calamities be overpast ” (Ps. lvii. 1) ?—C.


Ver. 2.—Divine reservation and consistency. “Yet he... will bring evil, and will
not call back his words.” Doubtless God seems to call back his words “The Lord
repented of the evil which he thought to du” (Exod. xxxii. 14; 2 Sam. xxiv.16; Judg.
ii. 18, etc.). ‘‘ He heard their cry... and repented, according to the multitude of his
mercies ” (Ps, cv. 44, 45). Yet, says the prophet, “ he will bring evil and no¢ call back
his words.” How explain this? The explauation of it is found in the fact that there is
some necessary reservation understood, if not expressed, in the Divine promise and in the
Divine threatening.

I. His RESERVATION AND CONSISTENCY IN PROMISE. God promises life to the obedient
and the faithful; yet there are those who believe themselves, and are believed, to be
among this number, whose end is destruction. Has God called back his word? No;
for his promise was contingent on their steadfastness, and they have forfeited all claim
ou his promised word (Josh. xxiv. 20; Ps. lxxxy. 8; Ezek. xxxiii. 13; John xv. 6
Heb. vi. 4—8).

Il. His RESERVATION AND CONSISTENOY IN THREATENING. Although God may seem
to call back his words of solemn threatening, yet he “ will bring evil;” he is not incon-
sistent with himself. 1. God reveals his wrath against sin. He declares that it shall
not go unpunished; that the soul that sinneth shall die; that the wages of sin is death.
2. Godofers pardon. The message of the gospel of Christ is essentially and emphati-
‘cally one of Divine mercy. 38. His mercy in Christ Jesus is large and free. It is not
‘grudving, half-hearted. It is not like the forgiveness we extend to one another
(ch. lv. 7—9). It means a complete restoration of the estranged but reconciled child
to full parental favour (Luke xv. 22, 23). Where, then, is the Divine consistency ? It
is found in the consideration that: 4, His declaration of penalty was always contingent
on the attitude of the sinner. (Hizek. xxxiii, 14, 15.) It is not intended to be absolute
and unalterable, whatever be the future career of the guilty. Like all his promises,
‘God’s warnings are conditional. God does not call back his own words from their
meaning or their fulfilment, he calls us back, through them, to our duty and to our right
relation to himself. And, besides: 5. He does bring evil in some serious measure. For : (1)
Previous to our penitence sin has wrought suffering, sorrow, weakness. (2) At the time
of penitential return it works seli-reproach, shame, anxiety. (8) Reconciliation is
inevitably followed by some kind and some degree of spiritual deterioration ; there is a
lost power, a lessened influence, a narrowed sphere—the absolutely irremovable conse-
quences of repeated wrong-doing and protracted ill-being.—O.


Vers. 6, 7.—Deep disloyalty. The children of Israel had “deeply revolted” from
God by preferring Egyptian cavalry to the defence of almighty power. This preference
of the human and the material to the Divine is only too common everywhere.

I, THE DISLOYAL ATTITUDE OF MANKIND TOWARDS Gop. Mankind is in revolt
against the Divine rule. We have all said in our hearts, ‘‘ We will not have this One
to reign over us.” 1. God righteously claims our allegiance—the homage of our
hearts, the subjection of our will, the obedience of our life. 2. We have deliberately
refused it. We have practically disallowed his claim; we have retained our power for
our own enjoyment, to be spent according to our own tastes and choices. Amid
various forms of iniquity there is one which is common to the race—we have all withe


cH. xxxi.1—9.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 517
ee ee eee ee


held from the Divine Father of our spirits the willing and practical allegiance for
which he has looked.

Il, HUMAN DisLOYALTY IN ITs DEPTH. There are many degrees of rebelliousness.
Only he who searches the hearts and knows the real nature of righteousness and iniquity
can accurately measure them, but we can form aa approximate idea. Men may be
deeply disloyal by going far in the direction of (1) open and flagrant transgression—the
commission of baneful vices or cruel and devastating crimes; (2) distinct and formal
denial of God’s existence—the avowal and advocacy of blank atheism; (3) the public
denial of the Divine claims—the representation of the cardinal error that God is indif-
ferent to the character of his human children, and does not ask for their worship or
service; (4) deliberate and persistent disregard of his will as revealed in his Word—the
turning a deaf ear to his inviting voice.

Il. Tae Divive summons To reTurN. “Turn ye unto him.” 1. God’s message
through inspired men. At sundry times God spake by the prophets. Then and thus
he spoke in very clear and in very gracious tones; he said emphatically and repeatedly,
“ Return unto me” (see text; ch. i. 16—18; lv. 6—9; Jer. iii, 12—16; Ezek. xviii.
30—32; Hos. xiv. 1, 2, etc.). 2. God’s invitation through his Son, our Saviour.
(1) That the disloyal hearts of men should return to their allegiance and become the
holy and rejoicing citizens of his heavenly kingdom was the very end for which Jesus
came, (2) To accomplish this he lived, wrought, spoke, suffered, died. (3) This is
the spirit and the scope of the message he has left behind him, aud of the work in
which he is now engaged. (4) The way of return through Christ is the heart’s accept-
ance of him as its Divine Lord and Redeemer. The voice which comes from the Man
of sorrows, from the ascended Lord, is “Come unto me;” “ Believe in me;” “ Abide
in me.”

IV. THE SPIRITUAL CONSEQUENCE OF RETURN. “In that day every man shall cast
away his idols.” Return to the service of Jehovah and to a sincere trust in him cer-
tainly meant the utter abandonment of idolatry. Our restoration to the favour and
friendship of God in Jesus Christ must also mean the putting away of every form of
idolatry; e.g. (1) the worship of pleasure or indulgence in any unholy or injurious
gratification ; (2) covetousness, ‘ which is idolatry ” (Col. iii. 5); (3) the worship of
mammon, or absorption in the struggles and ambitions of this earthly life (Matt. vi. 24).
(4) Such a devotion to any human object of love as leaves no room, or no sufficient
room, for attention to the highest duties and the most sacred claims. It may be
that not once nor twice, but azain and again, the Christian man may find himself
called on to “ cast away his idols,” to put them out of his heart, and therefore out of
his life-—O,


Vers. 8, 9.—Fleeing away. Here is a prophetic vision of flight, which may suggest
other kinds and instances of “ fleeing away.” Seunacherib comes up vaiu-gloriously
against Jerusalem, confidently reckoning on complete success, thinking to swallow up
Judah as a pleasant morsel; and, behold! he is found hurrying homewards as one that
is pursued by overtaking legions, not staying at his first fortification, but, in his terror
and humiliation, “ passing on beyond his stronghold ” for fear, his princes “ frightened
away by the flags” of the enemy that was to have been so easily and so utterly sub-
dued. Our thoughts may be directed to—

J, THE VANQUISHED FLEEING FROM THE vicToRIous. The annals of human history,
which have hitherto been principally the record of human strife, are only too full of
heart-rending illustrations (see, among others, Erckmann-Chatrian’s ‘ Waterloo’).

II. CrIME FLEEING FROM THE FEET OF Justice. Both fact and fiction will supply
abundant illustrations of the intolerable wretchedness of those who, pursued by the
officers of law, are dogged by apprehension and alarm at every step they take. “‘ Let
no man talk of murderers escaping justice, and hint that Providence must sleep : there
were twenty score of violent deaths in one long minute of that agony of fear.” _

Ill. WronG@ FLEEING FROM REVENGE. Sce the vivid picture of Carker fleeing from
Dombey (Dickens) : “ Shame, disappointment, and disconifiture gnawing at his heart, a
constant apprehension of being overtaken: the same intolerable awe and dread that
had come upon him in the night returned unweakened in the day: . . . rolling on and
on, always postponing thought, and always racked with thinking . . . pressing on


518 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.  [cn. xxxt 1—9.


ET


... change upon change ... long roads and dread of night... and still the old
monotony o! bells and wheels and horses’ feet, and no rest.”

1V. GuiLT FLEEING FROM THE FACE oF Gop. Guilt Heeing: 1. Weakly and vainly.
Long before Juuah, in the hour of sel!-reproach that followed his act of disobedience,
“fled from the presence of the Lord,” men had tried to put a distance between their sin
and its rightful Judge, And long since then have they tried to escape his eye and his
hand. Sa idest of all vain endvavours is the thrice-guilty deed of the suicide, who acts
as if, by entering another world, he could flee from the tace of the Omnipresent One, 2,
But there is a sense in which guilt flies away from the face of God really and most
blessed/y. When God’s conditions of penitence and faith have been fulfilled, then is our
guilt * purged away,” our transgressions are “removed from us as far as the east is
from the west,” our sins are “hidden from his face,” they are “cast into the depths of
the sea” (Ps. Ixv. 3; ciii. 12; li. 9; Micah vii. 19). Moreover, we look forward to
the time when there shall be a glorious fulfilment of the Divine promises, and we
shall have—

V. EVIL DISAPPEARING FROM THE FACE OF MAN; when “ sorrow and sighing shall
flee away,” when “death and hell shall be cast into the lake of fire,” when “ there shall
be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying... for the former things are passed
away ” (ch. xxxv. 10; Rev. xx. 14; xxi. 4).—C.


Ver. 1.—Names for God. Here the Lord, or Jehovah, is called the “ Holy One of
Israel.” When the mysterious name “ Jchovah” was given, anotler name, suited for
more familiar use, was commended, even this, “ the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.”
Iustructive sugvestions come from placing these three natnes together, as representing
(1) God absolute; (2) God in relatious; (3) God in history.

I. “1 am” (YeHven); or, Gop assoLuots. 1. This name in truth involves the
namelesswess of God, It is as if he had said to Moses, ‘* You ask for my Name. ‘I am,’
and that is all that you can say about me.” ‘The words are not, properly speaking, a
name; they are but the assertion of a fact about God. They are a refusal of Gud to
pot all bis great elory into a name. A name is the bricf summing-up of a definition,
and since it must ever be an im, ossible thing wholly to define God, he cannot permit
auy name to be used which shall appear to assume that a definition has been found.
2. This so-called name involves the unity of God. It is as if he had said, “I am, and
there is none beside me” In a maguiticent conception, the prophet represents Jehovah
as rising up from his place, scanning the whole universe, from the infinite east to the
infinite west, and then, seating himself again upon his eternal throne, saying, “ There
is nv God beside me; I know no other.” 3, This so-called name involves the sel/-
existence of God, It is as if he had said, “I am, and no one made me.” None gave
him being. Onno one has he to depend. He has life in himself. He is the very
Foun'ain of life. And thus is declared the perfvct and eternal distinction between God
aud all created existence. Nowhere can we find uncaused being. Everywhere are
effects which can be more or less perfectly traced to their causes. In Jehovah we have
effect without cause. “In the beginning God.” “ From everlasting to everlasting
thou art God.” 4, This so-called name involves the eternity of God, It is as if he had
said, “I ain, and shall be for ever,” It is absolutely impossible for us to conceive of
the force which can stup his existence. There is no death that can touch him,


“ How dread are thine eternal yeara,
O ever-living Lord!”


This impression of God as the Unknowable, Unseeable, August, and Awful One, our
souls greatly need in these light and frivolous times. God is revealed to the soul in
awe, A horror of great darkness fell on Abraham, and under it he saw God. Trem-
bling agony filled the soul of wrestling Jacob, and in the awe of his conflict he heard
God. We may beed the voice that says, “ Be still, and know that I am God. I will
be exalted among the heathen; I will be exalted in the earth.”

Il, “Gop or ABRAHAM, IsAAc, AND JacoB;” OR, Gop IN PERSONAL RELATIONS
wita us. We are to know what God, is by observing what he has been to his people,
and what he has done for them. By calling himself thus,God represents himself as the
Promise-maker and Promise-keeper. At the call of God Abratam had broken away


om. xxx1.1—9.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 519


from his Chaldean home, and wandered forth, a sojourner in a strange land; but God
was faithful to his word, and proved towards him an unchanging Friend. Guilty Jacob
fled from home, and God met him, revealing himself as the faithful Watcher, willing ta
be in close and gracious personal relations with him. For years, while in service, God
blessed his basket and his store. When journeying back to Canaan, God defended him,
subdued the enmity of Esau, and gave him prosperity and honour. Few lives are
offered for our study which bear such manifest traces of the nearness and providence of
God. Few names could suggest so much to us as this most simple one—the God of
Jacob. Still God is what he has ever been—Defence of his endangered people; Wisdom
for his perplexed people; Support of his enfeebled people ; Corrector of his mistaken
people; Saviour of his sinning people. For all the actual needs of a tried, toiling,
tempted life, we may come, even as the patriarchs did, into close personal relations with
God, for “ this is his Name for ever, and this is his memorial to all generations.” Graves,
in his work on the Pentateuch, says, “The peculiar and incommunicable character of
God is self-existence; he is the great ‘I Am.’ But this abstract and philosophical
deseri}ticn of the Supreme Being was not sufficiently calculated to arrest the attention,
conciliate the confidence, and command the obedience of a people entirely unaccustomed
to scientific speculations, and incapable of being influenced by any other than temporal
motives; it was therefore necessary to represent to them the Governor of the universe in
a more circumscribed and attractive form, as the God of the fathers, who had conferred
the most distinguished honours on Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and to whom their
posterity might—trom the full confidence which fact and experience supply—lovok up
and trust ax their peculiar guardian God.”

IIL. “ Hory One or IsraEL;” on, Gop In History. This is the new name given to
God, when his dealings with our race through many generations could be reviewed, and
the character of all those dealings make due impression of the character of God himself.
What one thing comes out most plainly from all reviews of God in, history? The
prophet says, in reply, Azs holiness. ‘Vhis estimate of God may be illustrated on the
following limes. 1. The Holy One of Israel has ever been faithful to his covenant.
2. The Holy One of Isrsel has ever required the holiness of a simple and trustful
obedience. 3. The Holy One of Israel has ever been swift to mark iniquity. 4. The
Holy One of Israel has ever been redeeming and saving. 5. The Holy One of Israel
has ever been jealous of his supreme claims. “ His glory he would never give to
another.” So the three great names on which we have been dwelling (1) touch us with
reverence and awe; (2) open our eyes to see his working all round about us; and (8) call
upon us to render to him hearty trust and lowly service.—R. T.


Ver. 2.— The wisdom of God in his punishments. “Yet he also is wise.” These
words seem to have been spoken as an ironical parenthesis. He also, as well as the
Jewish politicians. ‘ The words vindicate to Jehovah the skill and power adequate to
inflict punishment on both the contracting parties, together with veracity in carrying
his threatenings into execution.” “God was as wise as the Egyptians, and ought
therefore to have been consulted; he was as wise as the Jews, and could therefore
thwart their boasted policy.” As Isaiah leads us to consider so many phases of the
subject of Divine punishment, we only suggest this topic as giving a fresh point of
view. We are reminded of the wisdom, rather than the mysteriousness, severity, or
love, of the Divine judgments and chastisements. In sending calamities “ God is wise.”
Covering the whole subject, the following divisions may be taken.

I. God’s wisdom is seen in the threatenings, which act as warnings, and increase the
guiltiness of the wilful.

Il. God’s wisdom is seen in making his threatenings conditional, so that repeutance
of, and forsaking, sin may be hopcful.

III. God’s wisdom is seen in fulfilling threatenings, so that no wilful men may dare
to presume. :

IV. God’s wisdom is seen in what he does for sinners themselves by his judgments.

V. God’s wisdom is seen in what he does by his judgments for the spiritual training
of the onlookers. “ He is known by the judgments which he executeth.”—R. T.


Ver. 4.—God unhindered by fears of man. We fear and tremble before boastfuh


520 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (ca. xxx1, 1—9.


C—O


words and a great show of force, but we may well remember that God does not. He
reckons it all at its true worth, and goes on with his Divine working quite unmoved by
all the rage. The figure in this verse needs careful explanation. The allusion is to the
boastinys and threatenings of Sennacherib, God has undertaken to defend the city of
Jerusalem. As the lion will not give up his prey, so Jehovah will not allow the
Assyrians to rob him of his “peculiar treasure,” Jerusalem. The vast armies of
the Assyrians were as nothing in the estimation of Jehovah. He viewed unper-
turbed their attempt to seize the locality which he had chosen as his special
residence. Matthew Henry, with quaint force, says, “ Whoever appear against God,
they are but like a multitude of poor simple shepherds shouting at a lion, whe
scorns to take notice of them, or so much as to alter his pace for them.” Taking an
illustration from another sphere of nature, the Divine calmness under excitement
that alarms men may be illustrated by the following passage from Gosse: “There was
a heavy swell from the westward, which, coming on in brvadly heaving undulations,
gave the idea of power indeed, but of power in repose, as when a lion crouches in his
lair with sheatled talons and smoothed mane and half-closed eyes. But no sooner
does each broad swell, dark and polished, come into contact with these walls and towers
of solid rock, than its aspect is instantly changed. It rears itself in fury, dashes with
hoarse roar, and apparently resistless might, against the opposition, breaks in a cloud of
snowy foam, which hides the rocky eminence, and makes us for a moment think the sea
has conquered. But the next, the baffled assailant is recoiling in a hundred cascades,
or writhing and grovelling in swirls around the feet of those strong pillars which still
stand in their majesty, unmoved, immovable, ready to receive and to repel the succes-
sive assaults of wave after wave with ever the same result.” There is a quality or
power in man, whicli we call in a good sense sang-froid—a power of keeping calm in
times of excitement, which we are accustomed to admire, and which may help us to
realize the figure of God given in this passage. A remarkable story is told in connection.
with Prince Bismarck, who is a striking example of persistent keeping on at his designs,
however loud may be the howlings around him. It is said that he wears an iron ring,
on which is inscribed the Russian word ‘‘ Nitschewo,” or “ It does not matter.” In the
winter of 1862 he was burriedly journeying in Russia, and in answer to various appeals
to his driver, he could get nothing from him save this one word, “ Nitschewo.” At last
the sledg- was upset, and taking an iron bar which had become detached from the
sledge, Bismarck, in his annoyance, thought of striking the man, but feeling he had
learned a life-lesson from the frequent repetition of this word, he kept the bar, and had
a ring made of it to remind him, in the worryful times of life that “it does not matter.”
Consider—

I. THE THINGS WHICH GoD DOES NOT HEED. They go under this heading—the
boasts of the proud. Empty words. Noisy deeds. The material forces which lie at
the command of men. ‘hese greatly alarm us, Let but a sound of threatening rise
into the air, and we cry in our fright, “The Church is in danger!” God is not disturbed.
His Church is safe ; the “gates of hell shall not prevail against her.” Let but the
nations unite for some act of violence towards the Lord’s Jerusalem, and in fright her
statesmen run off to Exypt for help. Jerusalem is in no real danger—a wall of Divine
guardian fire is all round about her, and God will defend his own.

Il. ‘Tue THInes wHicu Gop bors HEED. These will go under the heading—the ery
of the humble. He who is best heard by man when he speaks with a “ still, small
voice,” best hears man when he speaks to him with a “ still, small voice.” Not the
thunder of men’s anger, but the quiet evening breeze of men’s liumble prayer, goes
right in to the throne of God. We may learn {rom this figure of God’s patient indiffer-
ence to what seems so alarming, how we may rightly estimate opposing forces and
persons who show enmity to us. Most of such forces and persons had better just be
passed by, left alone. “ Nitschewo”—* It does not matter.” We all of us make too much
of evil things and noisy oppositions. We magnify them until they fret and weary
and hinder us. Would that we were more like God, who—


“ Moves on his undisturbed affairs ” § R. T.


Ver. 6.—Turning to God in giving up sin, Connect with ver. 7% Here is indicated


OH. XXx. 1--20.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 521
SS


one essential characteristic of a genuine conversion or reformation. Two kinds of
“turning ” are suggested.

I. Turyine To Gop AS A VOICELESS SENTIMENT. Merely good sentiments, revi-
valistic emotions, gushing fervours, temporary excitements, have no voice that can
reach to God.

Il. Turnina To Gop sPEAKING THROUGH AcTs. Putting away idols—God can hear
that. He knows what that means. Giving up sins—God can hear that. Cutting off
right hands—God can hear that. Plucking out right eyes—God can hear that. This
is the voice for which God asks, and to which he so graciously responds, ‘ Wash you,
make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do
evil; learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless,
plead for the widow.”—R. T.


Ver. 8.—The surprise of the Lord's deliverances. No inhabitant of Jerusalem could
have imagined how God intended to deliver the city from Sennacherib. God’s way is
in the sea, his footsteps are not known ; but he leads his people safely like a flock. The


following points will recall familiar illustrations.


I, Gop’s PROMISED DELIVERANCES ALWAYS DO COME.
“No good thing has failed God’s people of all
“This poor man cried, and the Lord heard, and saved him out


will surely come, it will not tarry.”
that he has promised.”
of all his troubles.”


Il. THEY COME WHEN WE DO NOT EXPECT THEM.
Disraeli truly remarked that “ the unexpected


urged to keep watchful and expectant.
is the thing that happens.”


Ill. THeY coME IN WAYS THAT SEEM STRANGE.
to be the deliverances which they really are.


“Tf it tarry, wait for it; it


And therefore we are constantly


In some cases not seeming at all


IV. THE SURPRISE THEY BRING IS USUALLY FULL OF GRATITUDE AND JoY. For in


most cases it is manifestly better than our thought.
Enough for us to wait earnestly on him in our


us just in his own way and time.


Then let God save us and deliver


prayer, and wait patiently for him, trustingly sure that he always has his “ set time in


which to favour Zion.”—R. T.


Section VIIL A Pzropruecy or Messtan’s Kryepom (cu. xxx. 1—8).
EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER XXXIL


Vers. 1—8.—A Propugcy or MeEsstAn’s
Kinepom. It is generally allowed that
this prophecy is Messianic; but some critics
insist that it is not so “in a narrow sense.”
They regard Isaiah as expecting Messiah’s
kingdom to follow immediately on the dis-
comfiture of Sennacherib, and as looking to
Hezekiah to inaugurate it. According to
this view, Hezekiah, renovated in character,
was to be the Messiah, and might have
been so had he been “equal to the demands
providentially made upon him.” But he
was not; and the task of establishing the
kingdom fell to “ another,” at a later date.
It is simpler to regard the prophet as look-
ing for a greater than Hezekiah (comp. ch.
vii. 14; ix. 6), but ignorant how soon, or
how late, his coming would be.


Ver. 1—A king ... princes. Delitzsch


and Mr. Cheyne translate, “ the king...
the princes;” but the Hebrew gives no
article. The announcement is vague, and
corresponds to those of other prophets, as
of Jeremiah (xxiii. 5), “ Behold, the
days come that I will raise unto David a
righteous Branch, and a king shall reign
and prosper;” and of Zechariah (ix. 9),
“Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion...
beliold, thy King cometh unto thee.” The
“princes” of the text are the minor authori-
ties whom the king would set over hig
kingdom—+z.e. the apostles and their suo-
cessors. In righteousness . .. in judg-
ment. Messiah’s rule will be a rule of
strict justice and right, offering the strongest
contrast to that under which the Jews have
been living since the time of Jehoshaphat
(see ch. i, 15—23 ; ili. 1—12, etc.).

Ver. 2.—A man shall be as an hiding-
place from the wind, etc. Modern critics
mostly render, “each man” —die. the
king, and each of his princes. But it is,
to suy the least, allowable—with Vitringa
and Kay—to regard the word as referring


522


to the king only (comp. Zech. vi. 12,
where ish, a man, is used in the same
vague way of One who is clearly the
Messiah). There was never but one man
who could be to other men all that is
predicated in this verse of the “man” men-
tioned (comp. ch. xxv. 4, where nearly the
same epithets are predicated of God). A
covert; 7.e a protection against Divine wrath,
Such is Messiah in his mediatorial character.
Rivers of water; t.e. refreshing and invigo-
rating (comp. ch. lv. 1; John iv. 14; vii.
87). The shadow of a great rock. At once
refreshing and protecting (see ch. xxv. 4).

Ver. 3.—The eyes of them that see shall
not be dim. In Messiah’s kingdom there
shall be no judicial blindness, such as that
thrvatened in ch. vi. 9, 10, and described
in ch. xxix. 10, 11; but men shall see the
truth clearly (comp. ch. xxix. 18; xxxv. 5;
Matt. xiii. 16, etc.). The ears... shall
hearken; ¢.e. “shall both hear and wnder-
stand” (compare “ He that hath ears to
hear, let him hear’’).

Ver. 4—The heart also of the rash; ¢.e. of
those who were rash and hasty, who would
not give themselves time to understand the
warnings addressed to them, or to think
of the real character of their actions. These
shall, in Mess.ah’s kingdom, “ have the gift
of discernment to perceive things in their
true nature” (Delitzsch). The tongue of
the stammerers. The tongue of those who
hitherto have spoken hesitatingly and in-
consistently on moral and religious subjects
shall be ready—¢.e. prompt and eager—to
speak upon them with clearness and ele-
gance. ‘Ihe grace given to the uneducated
fishermen of Galilce enabled them to preach
and teach gospel truth, not ouly with clear-
ness, but wit: refinement.

Ver. 5.—The vile person shall be no more
called liberal; rather, the foolish person
—as nabal is commonly translated (Deut.


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cn. xxxn. 1—20.


xxxii. 6; 2 Sam. iii, 33; xiii, 13; Ps. xiv.
1; xxxix. 8; Ixxiv. 22, etc.)—such a man
as the “ Nabal ” of 1 Sam. xxv. Men are
apt to confound moral distinctions, and to
call the “ fools” who waste their substance
in feasting and revelry “generous” or
“liberal,” and the niggards (churls) who
hoard their riches “ warm men,” “ wealthy
men,” “men well to do in the world” (see
ch. vy. 20; and comp. Arist., ‘Eth. Nic.,’ ii.
8, § 3; Thucyd., iii. 82). This perversion
of truth shall not obtain in Messiah’s
kingdom, Bountiful; rather, wealthy (comp.
Job xxxiv. 19, where the same word is trans-
lated “ rich ’’).

Ver. 6.—For the vile person will speak
Villany, etc.; rather, for the fool speaketh
folly, and his heart doeth wickedness, practis-
ing profanity and uttering error against
Jehovah, making empty the soul of the hungry
—yea, the drink of the thirsty will he cause
to fail. The prophet seems to have the
portrait of Nabal in his mind, and to take
him as the type of a class.

Ver. 7.—The instruments. Mr. Cheyne
translates, “ the machinations,” which gives
a better sense; but the rendering 1s scarcely
borne out by any parallel use of the term
cli in Seripture or elsewhere. C’li properly
meais “ vessels,” “ weapons,” “ implements.”
He deviseth wicked devices; rathcr, he
deviseth plots. The word * he’’ is emphatic.
Unlike the fool, who passively dves evil
through thoughtlessness, the uiggard
actively devises cratty plans against his
fellow-men. He seeks tocheat the poor out
of their rights by false witness (comp. ch, i.
17, 23 ii; 145 153 vy. -28)) ete). Even!
when the needy speaketh right; te. “has
right on his side.” The translation in the
text is to be preferred to that in the margin.

Ver. 8.—By liberal things shall he stand ;
or, to liberal things. ‘The Hebrew will bear
either sense.


Srction IX. Fourtraer Denvunciations oF IsRAEL, JOINED WITH PROMISES
(CH. XxXxII, 9—20).


Vers. 9—12.—A Resuxke or THE WomeEN.
It might seem at first sight as if we had
here a detached utterance of the prophet,
accidentally conjoined with the preceding
passage (vers. 1—8). But vers. 15—138
furnish a link of connection between the
two portions of the chapter, and make it
probable that they were delivered at the
same time. Mr. Cheyne supposes that the
indifference of a. knot of women, gathered
at some little distance from the men to
whom Isaiah had addressed vers. 1—8,
provoked the prophet suddenly to turn to
them, and speak to them in terms of warning.


Ver. 9.—Rise up. The “careless daugh-
ters” are sitting, or reclining upon couches,
at their ease. The propliet bids them stand
up, to hear a message from God (comp.
Judg. iii. 10). Ye women that are at ease;
fe. “that are self-satisfied and self-com-
placent.” The word employed has almost
always a bad sense (see 2 Kings xix. 28;
Job xii. 5; Ps. exxiii.4; Amos vi. 1; Zech.
i. 15). Hearmy voice. This clause should
be attached to the first half of the verse.
The order of the words in the original is,
“Ye women that are at ease, rise up and
hear my words; ye careless daughters,
hearken unto my speech.”


Ver. 10.—Many days and years shall ye


sa. xxx. 1—20.] THE BOUK OF THE PRUPHET ISAIAH.


523


_—_—


be troubled; rather, én a year and days;
Le. “in less than two years.” The object
of the prophet is not to fix the duration
of the trouble, but to mark the time of its
commencement (comp. ch. xxix. 1). Shall
ye be troubled; rauther, shall ye tremble, or
shudder (so Deut. ii. 25; Ps. Ixxvii. 18;
xeix, 1; ch. v. 25; Ixiv. 23 Jer: xxxiit. 9;
etc.). Ye careless women; rather, ye con-
fident ones. Vhe word is different from that
employed in vers. 9 and 11. The vintage
shall fail; literally, hus failed —* the perfect
of prophetic certitude” (Cheyne). Some
critics understand a literal failure, or de-
struction, of the vintage through the invasion
of the Assyrians. Others suggest a refer-
ence to ch. v. —7. The vineyard of the
Lord (Judah) has utterly failed to bring
forth grapes—tiere is no ingathering—
therefore destruction shall fall upon it.

Ver. 11.- Tremble ... betroubled. The
repetition of this verse is, as usual, emphatic.
Its object is to impress those whuin the
prophet is addressing with the certainty
of the coming judgment. Strip you, and
make you bare; t.e. “bare your breasts,”
in preparation for the beating which is to
follow (see the comment on the next verse).

Ver. 12.—They shall lament for the teats,
eto. ; rather, they shall beat upon the breasts
for the ple sunt fields, ete. (so the LXX.,
the Vulyate, Jarchi, Gesenius, Ewald,
Maurer, Knobel, Delitzsch, and Mr. Cheyne).
Dr. Kay prefers the rendering of the Autho-
rized Version, understanding by “ the teats”
such ‘dry breasts” as Hosea speaks of
(ix. 14). But nothing has been said in
this place of any such affliction. For the
pleasant fields, etc.; ¢.e. for their loss (see
ver. 10).

Vers. 13—20.—A Furtruer MiInciine oF
THREATS WITH Comr¥orTING Promises.
The women require, like the men, to be
both warned and comforted, wherefore the
prophet addresses to them, as to the men
in ch. xxx. and xxxi., an intermixture of
threatening (vers. 13, 14) with promise
(vers. 15—20).

Ver. 13—Upon the land of my people
shall come up thorns and briars. This was
the punishment with which the untruitful
vineyard was threatened in ch y. 6. It
may be understood either literally or of
the wickedness that would abound when
the time of judgment came. Yea, upon
all the houses of joy (comp. ch. v. 9). If
Sennacheri) carried off, as he declares
(G. Smith, ‘Eponym Canon,’ p. 134), more
than two hundred thousand captives from
Judea, he must have left many houses
without inhabitants. ‘The solitude begun
by him was completed by the Babylonians.


-under strong excitement.


The joyous city (see ch. xxii. 2), The word
used has generally the sense of unholy
mirth (comp. ch, xxiii 7; xxiv. 8; Zeph.
ii. 15; iii. 11).

Ver. 14.—The palaces shall be forsaken;
literally, the palace ; but the word is used in
a generic sense. The prophet sees in vision
Jerusalem deserted by her inhabitunts,
the grand houses of the rich empty, the
strongholds haunted by wild beasts, and the
slopes of the hills feud on by sheep, and
even occasionally visited by the timid and
solitude-loving wild axs. The description
suits will the time of the Babylonian cap-
tivity, but not any earlier period. Probably
it was not reveal. d to the prophet how soon
the condition would be reached. The multi-
tude of the city shall be left. The real
meaning is, as Bishop Lowth expresses it,
“The populous city shall be left desolate.”
But the whole passage is, as Delitzsch
observes, “ granimaticaliy strange, the lan-
guage becoming moe complicated, dis-
Jointed, and difficult, the gr. a'er the wrath
and indignation of the poct.” The forts
and towers; rather, hill and tower, with
(perliaps) a special reference to the part
of Jerusalem called Ophel (2 Chron. xxvii. 3;
Nch. iii. 26, ete.), the long projecting spur
from the eastern hill, which points a little
west of south, and separates the Kedron
val.ey from the Tyropceon. Shall be for
dens; literally, for caves; but dens for wild
beasts svem to be meant (comp. ch. xiii. 21;
xxxiv. 14; Jer. lL. 39). For ever. This
expression must not be pressed. Hyperbole
is a recognized fvature of poetry written
A joy of wild
asses. The wild ass is not now found
nevrer Palestine than Mesopotamia, or per-
haps Northern Syria. It is exceedingly
shy, and never approaches the habitations
of men,

Ver. 15.—Until. The expression “ until”
modifies the previous “ for ever,’ showing
that the desolation was not always to
continue. The Spirit be poured upon
us from on high. An effluence from the
Holy Spirit of God on individuals of emi-
nence, prophets, kings, artificers, to fit them
for their tasks, is recognized in many of the
earlier books of Scripture, and especially
in the Davidical psalms. But a yeneral
effluence of the Spirit of holiness on a
nation, to produce a change of lieart, seems
to be first announced by Isiah, The
nearly contemporary prophecy of Joel (ii.
28, 29) is, perhaps, as wide in its scope, but
limited to the prophetie gift, which is not
necessarily conjoined with spiritual-minded-
ness or holiness of life. Isuiah, the “evan
gelical prophet,” first teaches that the
conversion of a nation is God’s work,
effected by the Holy Spirit, and effectual


524


to the entire change of the heart of a people.
And the wilderness be a fruitful field; i.e.
“the community long cursed with barren-
ness of good works” (ver. 10) “becomes
once more fruitful of them.” And the
fruitful field be counted for a forest. An
order of climax seems to be here intended.
The midbar, the bare pasturage-ground,
becomes a Carmel, #.e. carefully cultivated ;
the Carmel becomes like Lebanon, a rich
and luxurious forest. There is no cluse
parallel between this verse and ver. 17 of
ch. xxix. The prophet is not tied down by
his previous metaphors.

Ver. 16.—Then judgment shall dwell in
the wilderness. In all parts of the kingdom
of Christ, the lowest as well as the highest,
“ jndgment ” and “ righteousness ” shall
prevail (comp. ver. 1).

Ver. 17.—The work of righteousness
shall be peace. Peace—a true peace, not
a false one (Jer. vi. 14)—shall be the result
of the reign of righteousness. War, quarrels,
enmity, hostile feelings, are all of them the
fruit of unrighteousness. In the kingdom
of the Messiah, just so far forth as it is
thoroughly established, “the fruit of right-
eousness is sown in [peace of them that
make peace” (Jas. iii. 18). The effect of
righteousness; literally, the service of
righteousness, which perhaps means here
“the wages of righteousness.” Quietness


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xxx. 1—20.


Ss ees ere ee ee eee SE EEE EE


spoken of as astate of “rest and quietness”
(see Ps. xev. 11; Job iii. 17; Jer. vi. 16;
Matt. xi. 28; Hib. iv. 9—11, ete.). The
“confidence” felt would be an assured con-
fidence, not a rash and foolish one, like that
of the women of vers. 10, 11.

Ver. 19.—When it shall hail, coming
down on the forest; rather, Lut it shall
hail in the coming down (i.e. the destruction)
of the forest. “The forest” has commonly
been regarded as Assyria, on the strength
of ch. x. 18, 19, 33, 34. Mr. Cheyne,
however, suggests Judah, or the high and
haughty ones of Judah, whose destruction
was a necessary preliminary to the establish-
ment of Christ’s kingdom. May not God’s
enemies generally be meant? The city.
Nineveh (Lowth, Gesenius, Rosenmiiller) ;
Jerusalem (Delitzsch, Knobel, Cheyne,
Kay); “the city in which the hostility
of the world to Jehovah will, in the latter
days, be centralized” (Drechsler, Nugel)—
the “ world-power,” in fact. The last view
seems to give the best sense.

Ver. 20 —Blessed are ye that sow beside
all waters. The idyllic picture, begun in
ver. 15, terminates here. The people of
the kingdom have a well-watered land (ch.
xxx. 25), where they live peacefully, sowing
their seed beside the water-courses, and
having abundant pasture for their peaceful
beasts—the ox and the ass (comp. ch. xxx.


and assurance ; or, quietness and confidence | 24). A spiritual meaning doubtless under-
(comp. ch. xxx. 15). The final happiness | lies the literal sense,
of the blessed in Christ’s kingdom is always

HOMILETICS,


Ver, 1.—Strict justice a characteristic of Messiah’s kingdom. Whatever may be said,
and said with truth, of the Divine mercy, still there is no qnality more characteristic
of God’s rule over man than his justice. “Shall not the Judge of all the earth do
right?” (Gen. xviii. 25); “ God is a righteous Judge” (Ps. vii. 11); “ He shall judge
the world in righteousness, and minister judgment to the people in uprightness”” (Ps.
ix. 8). If this were not so, the whole foundations of morality would fall, And Mes-
siah’s rule was to be like God’s—was, in very truth, to be God’s, It had, therefore, to
be strictly just. What is most wonderful in that marvellous scheme of salvation
which infinite wisdom conceived and decreed from everlasting, is that in it a way was
contrived whereby “mercy and truth” might “meet together,” and “ righteousness
and peace kiss each other” (Ps. Ixxxv. 10). Attributes of God, seemingly contradictory,
obtained a wondrous reconciliation by means of the sacrifice of Christ, which, though
its whole import may transcend our faculties, was beyond all doubt an integer in the
equation wherein mercy and truth met together, and reconcilement was made between
“the wrath of man” and “the righteousness of God.” The justice of Messiah’s king-
dom was shown— =

I. Ix Curist’s SEVERE CONDEMNATION OF EVERY FORM OF MORAL EVIL. “ Woe unto
you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites!” (Matt. xxiii. 18); “Depart from me, ye that
work iniquity” (Matt. vii, 23); “Every idle word that men shall speak, they shall
give account thereof in the day of judgment ” (Matt. xii. 86); “Out of the heart pro-
ceed evil thoughts . . . and these defile a man” (Matt. xv. 19, 20). Christ made no
compromise with sin. In his most signal act of mercy his words were, “ Neither do
I condemn thee; go, and sin no more” (John viii, 11), i


on, xxx. 1—20.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 625


IL. In THE srsicr DISCIPLINE AT FIRST ESTABLISHED IN HIS Cuunca. “ Purge out
«+. the old leaven” (1 Cor. v. 7); “ Put away from among yourselves that wicked person”
(1 Cor, v. 13); “ Now I have written unto you not to keep company, if any man that
is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard,
or an extortioner; with such a one no not to eat” (1 Cor. v. 11). The apostles
‘delivered to Satan” those who sinned grievously (1 Cor. v. 5; 1 Tim. i, 20)—cut them
off from the communion of the faithful (Gal. v. 12), and only restored them after con-
fession and penance. “ The princes ruled in judgment” (ch. xxxii. 1).

III. IN THE SOLEMN DECLARATIONS MADE OF A FINAL JUDGMENT ACCORDING TO WORKS.
“T saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened: and
another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of
those things which were written in the books, according to their works. And the sea
gave up the dead which were in it ; and death and hell delivered up the dead which
were in them: and they were judyed every man according to their works” (Rev. xx.
12,18; comp. Matt. vii. 23; xii 37; xiii, 3943; xxv. 31—46, etc.).


Ver. 2.— What Christ ts to his people. The prophet enumerates (in ver. 2) some
of the chief relations in which Messiah, when he came, would stand to his people. All
his announcements are fulfilled in Christ.

I, Curist 1s A Hipine-PLAce FROM THE WIND. When the winds of affliction blow,
when ‘‘the blast of the terrible ones” is upon us, above all, when the breath of the
wrath of God seems to swee) down on us and scorch us up, there is one Refuge only
to which we can flee—one “‘ Hiding-place ”—Christ. In the time of natural vrief and
trouble, he lets us find a Refuge in him; when our enemies threaten, he “ hides us in
the secret of his presence from the pride of man,” and “ keeps us secretly in a pavilion
from the strife of tongues” (Ps. xxxi. 20) ; when we shrink trom the thought of God’s
wrath, and the breath which is “ like a stream of brimstone” (ch. xxx. 33), he offers
himself to us as our Shelter. How many saints have not found comfort, unspeakable
comfort, in the blessed words—


“Rock of Ages, cleft for me,
Let me hide myself in Thee”?


II. Curist 13 A CovERT FROM THE TEMPEST. Christ not only hides us away from
wind and storm, tempest and evil of all kinds, but is himself our Coverture. He is
“a Tabernacle for a Covert from storm and from rain” (ch. iv. 6), His merits
“cover up” our sins, and make atonement for them. His rizhteousness is the “ white
raiment” which clothes us, so that “the shame of our nakedness doth not appear”
(Rev. iii. 18).

III. Curist 1s as RIvers oF WATER. Rivers give refreshment. They are the great
source of life, fertility, delight, in a parched and desert land. In the wilderness of this
life, in the dry arid waste which our tired feet have to traverse, any refreshment that
we enjoy comes from Christ—is Christ. He pours upon us the refreshing “ dew of his
blessing.” He gives us to drink out of himself; and then “out of our belly there
flow rivers of living water” (John vii. 37, 38). The water that he imparts to us is “a
well of water springing up into everlasting life” (John iv. 14). Heis unto us “a place
of broad rivers and streams ” (ch. xxxiii. 21), refreshing, life-giving, exhaustless.

IV. CurisT Is AS THE SHADOW OF A GREAT ROCK IN A WEARY LAND, The world is
“a weary land.” We are travellers across its waste. A hot sun beats down upon our
heads; a scorching soil is under our feet. But we have a Rock with us—a Rock which
“ follows us ”—and “that Rock is Christ” (1 Cor. x. 4). In the shadow of that Rock
we may at any time, and at all times, find rest, renovation, refreshment, protection,
delight. The traveller in the desert comes, once and again, upon “a great rock,” as he
plods his weary way over the vast solitude, and rejoices at the sight, and toils for hours
to reach the blessed refuge of its shade. Our “‘ Rock” is ready to give us shade when-
ever we please—it is near us constantly ; we have but to flee to it, to cling to it, to
remain in its shadow.


Vers. 9—12.— The need of rousing women in critical times from a state of self-satis-
faction and self-complacency. Women are less apprehensive than men, more inclined


526 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (on. xxxu. 1—20.


i ————


to suppose that the state of things to which they are accustomed will, as a matter of
course, remain unchanged. They have, as a general rule, less historical knowledge
than men, and less acquaintance with the condition of the world wherein they live.
The self-complacency and unsuspiciousness of Marie Antoinette and the ladies of her
court, when the French Revolution was drawing on, has been a matter of surprise to
historians; but it is merely a striking instance of what is, in fact, the ordinary condi-
tion of things when great changes are imminent. Jezebel did not expect, or appre-
ciate, the revolution initiated by Jehu; nor Athaliah that carried out under the auspices
of Jehoiada the high priest (2 Kinzs xi. 4—16), The instinctive belief in “ con-
tinuance,” of which Bishop Butler s;eaks (‘ Analogy,’ part i. ch. i.), whereby we expect
“all things to continue as we experience they are, in all respects,” and “ to-morrow
to be as to-day,” only perhaps “ more abundant” (ch, lvi. 12),—is especially strong in
women, and explains their inapprehensiveness, The result is: 1. That reverses come
upon them suddenly and unex;ectedly, without their being prepared to enconnter them,
and are thus sorer trials, under which they often fall into despair and recklessness, to
their great hurt, 2. That the men, who are their associates, through the contagion
of their security, are rendered themselves less apprehensive, and consequently less
inclined to realize the coming danger and guard against it by wise measures of precau-
tion. Under these circumstances, it becomes the preacher’s duty at such times to
address himself especially to the rousing of the women from their “carelessness” and
security, both for their own sakes, and still more for the sake of the community, whose
prosperity or whose very existeuce they imperil.


Vers. 15—17.—The fruits of the Spirit in a community. The first result of the
effluence of the Holy Spirit on man is fruitfulness : “ the wilderness becomes a fruitful
field, and the fruitful field a forest.” The dry ground of a stony heart is changed into
a cultivated garden, which “ brings forth much fruit.” The heart which already bore
some fruit is “ purged, that it may bring forth more fruit” (John xy. 2). Then, when
individuals have been thus changed and “ purged’’ and perfected one by one, judg-
ment and righteousness “ dwell” in the land—the King “ reigns in righteousness,” and
his “ princes rule in judgment ;” far and wide there is a reign of justice, right, equity.
Next comes a further conseqnence. “The work of righteousness is peace,” peace sub-
jective and objective, in the heart and in the life—the peace of quiet consciences assured
of God’s favour, knowing that their sins are atoned for, and feeling that they are at one
with God; and the peace of internal concord and agreement among all members of the
community, mutual respect of class towards class, and of man towards man, general
good will of all towards all, kindliness, courtesy, ready aid, sympathy, consideration.
The complete result has not been seen as yet, because men have resisted God’s Spirit,
and the copious outpouring of it, which he is willing to give, has never yet been given.
But if this impediment were removed, if God’s Spirit had free course, and a kingdom
or society of perlectly virtuous men were once formed, then we should see such further
consequences as are pointed out by Bishop Butler in his ‘ Analogy :’ “In such a state
there would be no such thing as faction; but men of the greatest capacity would, of
course, all along have the chief direction of affairs willingly yielded to them; and they
would share it among themselves without envy. Each of these would have the part
assigned him to which his genius was peculiarly adapted; and others, who had not
any distinguished genius, would be safe. and think themselves very happy, by being
under the protection and guidance of those who had. Public determinations would
really be the result of the united wisdom of the community; and they would be faith-
fully executed by the united strength of it. Some would in a higher way contribute
but all would in some way contribute, to the public prosperity; and in it, each would
enjoy the fruits of his own virtue. And as injustice, whether by fraud or force, would
be unknown among themselves, so they would be sufficiently secured from it in their
neighbours. For cunning and false self-interest, confederacies in injustice, ever slight
and accompanied with faction and intestine treachery,—these, on one hand would be
found mere childish folly and weakness, when set in opposition against wisdom public
spirit, union inviolable, and fidelity on the other ; allowing both a sufficient length of
years to try their force. Add the general influence, which such a kingdom would have
over the face of the earth, by way of example particularly, and the reverence which would


OH. Xxx. 1—2U.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 627
eee


be paid it. It would plainly be superior to all others, and the world must gradually
come under its empire; not by means of lawless violence, but partly by what must be
allowed to be just conquest, and partly by other kingdoms submitting themselves
voluntarily to it, throughout a course of ages, and claiming its protection, one after
another, in successive exigencies. The head of it would be a universal monarch, in
another sense than any mortal has as yet been; and the Eastern style would be
literally applicable to him, that all people, nations, and languages should serve him’
(part i, ch, iii. § 5),


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1—8.—An ideal of political good. When the Divine Spirit has been out-
poured, when the idols have been cast away, and the Assyrian yoke has been cast. off,
happy days will dawn.

I. RoYALTY WILL BE 8YNONYMOUS WITH RIGHTEOUSNESS. The King will be seen in
his beauty—not the splendour of purple robes and lofty throne and brilliant court, but
that of the equity and justice which imitate Heaven. God will call him by his name,
will make him rich with hidden possessions, will go before him to make the crooked
ways straight (ch. xlv. 1—4). In spite of all the failings of kings, the mass of the
people bear a deep reverence and affection to royalty. Even in the counterfeit they
recognize some relation to the real thing. “A divinity doth hedge a king ;” this is
not only poetically, but religiously true, if the king in any sort answer to the truth
of his position, In happier days he will so answer.

1]. THe UPPER CLASSES WILL BE THE SPIRITUAL SUPERIORS OF THE PEOPLE. Aristocracy
began with personal worth, and by it only can be maintained. We see from the descrip-
tion what the nebility ought to be in relation to the people. Patrons, protectors ;
“hiding-} laces froin the wind,” a “covert from the rain-storm, rivulets in a parched
land, the shadow of a huge cliff in a thirsty land.” Noblesse oblige. ‘Chey should be
looked up to; every popular cause should find in them its defenders and active advo-
cates; every philanthropic scheme in them its leaders; every misery of the poor in
them its zealous redressers. High place without high qualities is a mockery; lofty
station coupied with low manners, a scandal and an abuse. Alas! too often in the
history of the “ruling classes” these truths have been forgotten, these relations have
been reversed. Again and again God has called them to judgment: “ You have eaten
up the vineyards, the plunder of the afflicted is in your houses. What mean ye that
crush my peuple, and grind the face of the afflicted?” Notably so at the time of the
great French Revolution,

1]. THE RESULTS OF A SPIRITUAL CHANGE. No reformation of manners, no happy
reconciliation of class with class can come about, except by a change of mind and heart,
And that change itself can only come whence all changes in the realm of nature and
spirit come—from the creative, the re-creative energy of God. The body is the organ of
the spirit in its manifold activities. Any fresh sensibility of the physical organs is typical.
therefore, of an awakened and living conscience. The closed eye is typical of the blind-
ness of those who will not see. To shut the eye to evil, to turn the head away from what
disgusts,—this may seem for a time equivalent to cancelling the evil itself. Not so;
and reformation sets in from that hour when men are willing to face the most painful
facts, to let the light into the darkest corners of existence. ars were made to listen,
not to be stopped. Let the bitter cry be hearkened to; its tones thrill through every
fibre of our sympathetic being; nor let its pleading be dismissed until the question, What
can I do? has found some distinct answer. The tongue was made, not to stammer, but
to flow with truthful and gracious speech. Silence may mean that we have no help to
offer ; stuttering accents that we are of a divided mind, of obscure habits of thought.
Lucidity is what we need—the lucidity of the single eye, the sensitive organism filled
through and through with light. And what dees our haste and feverish precipitation
signify, but want of that deliberate forethought and that circumspection which is a con-
stant duty ? “The heart of the hasty shall perceive distinctly.” Although we cannot
refer all sin, like Socrates, to want of insight, yet no sin but implies that want. God's
deepest, most far-reaching blessings must ever be for the heart, in that large sense in


528 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. xxx. 1—20.


—+ -


which Scripture uses the word—including every mental faculty or activity. Material
improvemeuts are not to be neglected. The sanity and weal of the body have a direct
bearing on the weal of mind; yet, on the other hand, there will be no material improve-
ments until the improving mind has been awakened and truly educated.

IV. THE CONSTITUTION OF THINGS NEEDING REFORMATION. It is a confusion which
needs to be removed. It is a world turned upside down which needs to be righted. The
fool and the knave may designate the ruling classes of the time. ool! how weighty
the condemnation, how deep-burning the brand, which belongs to the use of the word in
Scripture! The world may call him par ewcellence the fool who minds all business but
his own; the prophet calls him the fool who thinks of self, but forgets his God. The
sinner, in short, is the fool. His is the worst and least excusable ignorance. He may be
called “ noble” in the convention of society, he is contemptible in the judgment of God.
The characteristics of the fool are that he speaks folly, and this “out of the abundance”
of a wicked heart—a forge and workshop where the production of evil is ever going on;
that he delights to propagate heresy and atheism as a centre of religious darkness,
Hungry souls look to those Nabals, and are not fed, but deprived of their sustenance ;
aud the waters they point out prove to be as the mirage of the desert on near approach.
The denunciation of such spurious leaders of the people reminds of Milton’s invective—


“The hungry sheep look up, and are not fed ;
But, swollen with wind and the rank mist they draw,
Rot inwardly and foul contagion spread.”


And the knave, with his crafty plots and machinations, his insidious lies, drawing into
his net the defenceless, honest poor. The age sorely needed true nobles, not of title and
rank, but of God’s own miat and stamp—men of principle ; men as long-headed in their
good devices as the others in evil; men of firm and constant heart; no time-serving,
truckling, tide-waiting, opportunist, wavering spirits; but steady to their convictions,
direct in their aims, consistent with themselves. Every time needs such men. God
preserve to us the nobility of the land—the kind hearts that are worth more than
coronets, the simple faith that is worth more than Norman blood; the holy seed, the
vital element of a nation.—J.


Vers. 9—20.—“ Until the Spirit be poured out.” How constantly does Scripture
speak of every happy reformation as due to the “ outpouring of the Spirit,” or the send-
ing or breathing of the Spirit on human-kind! Language none the less expressive
because mysterious. Those epochs cannot be forecast: no meteorology can explain to
us these movements “from on high.” But they may be waited for and prepared for,
without fear of disappointment. Again and again they had come to the prophet’s
heart; and from his heart he knew they must some time come also in a wider sphere
of operation.

I. Unrm THEN—wHat? The women are addressed, the daughters of Zion. The
manners of the women must be a sure index of the state of a nation. New religious
feeling kindles quickly in their hearts; they welcome and further revivals, Their
indifference to spiritual things seems to belie their nature; atheism in woman is
monstrous. The Jewish women are in a state of careless unconcern. This attitude of
“ease,” of apathetic nonchalance, arouses the indignation and the alarm of the prophets,
thee more than vivacity in sin, It is an ominous symptom in the bodily life, not

ss so in the soul. It offers a dull prosaic resistance to enthusiasm of any kind,
which it holds in smiiing, sensuous contempt. A psalmist’s soul is “ exceedingly
filled” with perturbation at this attitude (Ps. exxiii. 4); Amos denounces woe (vi. 1),
and Zechariah the great displeasure of Jehovah against them that “are at ease.”
Perhaps the vintage-harvest was over when the prophet spoke. The time would come
when a shudder wou'd pass through those luxurious frames; the outer garment would
be torn off, the sackcloth assumed, the breasts that once heaved only with the sigh of
pleasure be beaten in wild lament for the “days that are no more,” for the pleasant
fields and the fruitful vine. Those fields will be thorn and briar overgrown ; the houses
of the city deserted, its mirth quelled. The wild cattle will sport around the temple
hill, the palaces be forsaken. Impossible to dissociate in our minds the desolation of


oH. xxxu, 1—20,] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 529
ee ee


once populous scenes from the sin of man and the withdrawal of the gracious Spirit of
God. Take these descriptions as figures of the state of the soul; then power and beauty
remain. ‘he well-kept garden, the sweet fields in the harvest-time, the mirth of
reapers and in-gatherers; these sights, these sounds, provide unsought expression for
the soul that feels itself “at ease.” The untilled fields, the signs of wild nature creeping
to old ascendency over the works of man,—such sights carry symbolic meaning which
depresses the most cheerful heart. “ Until the Spirit be outpoured from on high”—
that is our state, and that it must remain.

I]. Arrer THEN—wuHaT? 1. “ Justice shall inhabit the pasture-country, and right-
eousness shall dwell in the garden-land.” “Men ought not to be like cattle, which seek
nothing but plenty of fool and abundance of outward things. We should not, like
hogs in a sty, judge of the happiness of life by abundance of bread and wine ” (Calvin).
Righteousness alone exalts, righteousness alone can uplift a fallen nation. 2. “ The
fruit of righteousness shall be peace.” ‘his is inwardly and outwardly, subjectively and
objectively, true. Peace in the heart is the companion of rectitude; it flows from right
order in the home and family, and from just administration in the state. Peace, qwiet-
ness, confidence: a triple blooming in one; a threefold band of prosperity and condition
of all welfare. ‘ Homes of peace, dwellings of confidence, easeful resting-places,—these
are the pictures that all men draw in fancy; this the life for which they dream they
were made. Such a state depends upon piety, upon personal and social morality. “It
is as true nowas it was in the time of Isaiah. True religion would put an end to strifes
and litivations; to riotsand mobs; to oppressions and tumults; to alarms and robbery ;
to battle and murder and conflict among the nations.” 38. These blessings cannot come
without suffering. The hail of judement will fall upon forest aud upon city. The
refuge of lies and the hiding-place of falsehood must be swept away. Renewing and
reforming forces work destructively on one side, as creatively on the other. Upon whom
these judgments will fall is not evident from the text. Hail is an image of Divine
judgment (ch. xxviii. 2, 17; xxx. 30). 4. The happiness of the tiller. He sows beside
all waters—a reference to the Oriental custom of casting the seed upon the waters of
overflowing streams and rivers, so that, when the waters subside, it will be found again
in the springing crop and the abundant harvest. ‘lhe ox and the ass are employed to
tread the moistened earth and prepare for the sowing (cf. Eccles. xi. 1,6). In a figura-
tive sense—happy those who go steadily on with useful work, the work that lies nearest
them, the sowing which looks for a “ far-off interest of good,” amidst the most troubled
times. No troubles of the time should divert us from our daily task, or unsettle us
from the habit of continuous useful labour.—J.


Ver. 2.— The soul’s rest. “The shadow of a great rock in a weary land.” This is an
Eastern picture. God is described as our Shade. In the glare of a too-garish day we
become endangered ; the sun of prosperity smites us. Sunlight has its penalties as
well as its pleasures. So has success! The human heart cannot bear too much of
brightness. We need shadows for the mind to rest under as well as for the body.

J. A MAN 18 HERE DESCRIBED. The God-Man. One who, knowing our infirmities
and temptations, is able to succour them that are tempted. The true King who is to
reign in righteousness is prophesied of. “ A man shall be.” Christ has been the Refuge
and the Rest of hearts wearied of the world and scorched with its radiant beams.
We are led to Christ. Not to theological systems; not to human creeds; but to
Christ. The shadow! Yes. Shadow of a cross, where we may find forgiveness and
peace. Shadow of brotherhood, where we may find true sympathy in our hours of lone-
liness and disappointment. Shadow, where we may recline and rest as the patriarch
did under the oaks of Beersheba, and Moses did under the mountains of old. And Christ’s
Divinity is proclaimed in the words, “a great Rock.” High as heaven, having its roots
in Gcd’s own eternal years. So great that it offers shelter for all the weary hearts
of men.

Il. A PILGRIMAGE IS HERE IMPLIED. “A weary land.” The pilgrims are passing
on through the scorching heat, the camel-drivers walking then, as they do now, in
the shadow cast by these “ships of the desert.” Before them stretch miles on miles
of burning sand. The blinding sun is above them. With their white cummerbunds
and their light Eastern dress, they ease the heat-burden all they can. And now the


ISAIAH, 2M


580 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cn. xxx. 1—20.


mT


great mountains come in sight. Some with gentle acclivities and some with sharp-cut
rocks jutting out above the pilgrim-way. What blessed shadows they cast! Such
shady places are our sabbaths and sacraments and sanctuaries, our holy moments of
Divine fellowship, when God comes near and casts over us the protecting shadow of his
gracious presence.

III. WearINess I8 THE CHARACTERISTIC OF THE WAY. “A weary land.” We are
often tired. How many hearts have said, “O God, Iam a-weary !” and then, instead
of the sad cry, ““O God, that I were dead!” we hear the voices of spiritual souls
erying, “Oh that I knew where I might find him!” and the blessed answer comes
from the lips of the incarnate God himself, “ Come unto me, all ye that labour and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest ”—weary with the load of sin; weary with the
care and fret of daily life; weary with inward conflicts; weary with ceaseless watching,
for our Arab enemies dash suddenly by, aud point their rifle as they fy. Pain makes
us weary. The loss of dear, true-hearted triends makes us weary. Donbt, with all
our dark mental conflicts—doubt, which is s.metimes the exquisite action of a sincere
mind, makes us weary. So wecome to the great Father, and rest in the gracious answer
to the ery, “ Lord, show us the Father,” in the revelation vouchsafed unto us by our
Divine Lord, who has taught us when we pray to say, “ Our Father,” and also has
declared, “ He that hath seen me hath seen the Father.’—W. M. 8S.


Ver. 2.— Refuge in Christ and in one another. In this country we can hardly hope
to fee] all the force and beauty of this illustrition. To do that we must have visited
tropical regions. There, with the rays of the sun shining directly down, the heat
becomes so intense and intolerable that it cannot be endured, and often “ the shadow
of a great rock ” means, not merely refreshment, but salvation. And as with the heat,
so with the storm—the whirlwind, the tempest, the simoom: what des lations do not
these produce? what terrors do they not excite? How precious in such lands, on such
occasions, the hiding-place from the wind, the covert from the storm! But lifting our
thoughts from the illustration to the thing itself which is pictured here, to that human
heart and life of which all visible nature only supplies the types and hints, we make
no abatement for change of scene; for the scorching rays of temptation fall as fiercely
and the winds of passion blow as furiously in England as in Judea, or in Babylon, or
in India. Indeed, such are the confusions and complications of our time, so subtle and
so seductive are the temptations to err from the straight line of rectitude, that more
rather than less is there need for a hiding-place for the heart, a covert from the storm
of sorrow and of sin. A man shall be tor a hiding-place! One man in particular ? or
any man at any time in any land? In both senses the words may be taken. We may
consider—

I. Curist THE REFUGE OF THE HUMAN souL. 1. Such he was in the days of his flesh.
For his disciples had to share something of the enmity and opposition he encountered,
and they always found an effectual shield in his protection, As evangelists they
brought their success and their disappointment to him, that the one might he sanctified
and the other be relieved (Luke x. 17—20). When worsted by the evemy, they fell
back on his power and found defeat swallowed up in victory (Matt. xvii. 1420).
When imminent danger threatened their lives, they made their appeal to his all-con-
trolling voice (Matt. viii. 283—27). 2. Such he became, in a deeper sense, ufter his
ascension, It was expedient that he should go away. “ Before his departure he was
with them, afterwards he was in them.” The death and the resurrection of the Lord
enlightened their minds and changed their spirits. ‘Then they went to him as they
never could have done during his presence; they trusted in him, gave themselves to

‘him, leaned on him, were lost in him, as they would not have been: he became, in a
deeper and fuller sense, the Hiding-place of their hearts. 3. Such ts he now te all
believing hearts. (1) As sinners, burdened with a sense of guilt and craving mercy and
reconciliation, we want some other refuge than we can find in the best and wisest of
mankind; and with what glad eagerness, with what profound thankfulness, with what
inexpressible relief, do we resort to him, and cry—


“Rock of Ages, cleft for me,
Let me hide myself in thee”


OH, xxxu. 1—20.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 531


—_—_——————— SSeS


(2) As the children of sorrow, we have need of more than human help! There are depths
of disappointment, extremities of loss, intensities of pain aud suifering, wastes of loneli-
ness, vulfs of darkness and woe, for which human sympathy is entirely inadequate, in
which the vuly thing we can do is to hasten to that Son of man wuo is touched most
keenly with the feeling of our trials, and say—


«Jesus, Lover of my soul,
Let me to thy bosom fly !”


IL Tae REFUGE WE MAY BE TO ONE ANOTHER. Any man may be, and every man
should seek tu be, a hiding-place, a covert. Our domestic life shows us how this may be,
and provides the first instance and best picture of human shelter. Our social life should
provile us with many opportunities ol succouring the needy and the tried. Our Church
life should do the same; every Christian Church should be an asylum for the poor, the
weak, the sad, the auxions-minded, the troubled of heart. Who would not like so to live,
with such quick and ready sympathy of spirit, with such kindliness and hopefulness of
word, with such friendliness of uplifting hand and sustaining arm, that his life should
be suggestive of the words, “ A man shall be a hiding-place” 7—C,


Vers. 3, 4.—Dis:bled and restored, The words are suggestive of the spiritual incapa-
city of which Israel was too often vuilty (see Ezek. xii, 2), and of the recovery which, in
better days, they were to experience.

I. Man DISABLED BY SIN. There are four directions in which we suffer sad deterio-
ration an! incapacity as the conseyuence of our sin. 1. Spiritual perception. After
some transgressions, after continued disobedience and estranement from God, we fail to
“see light in his light; ” our vision of his truth is less clear and full; sacred truths
lose their true proportions in our view. Then come positive error, actual misconception,
moral blinduess; aud finally comes that terrible mental distortion of which the Master
spoke so sorrowfully and the propiiet wrote so strongly (Mitt. vi. 22, 23; ch. v. 20).
2. Recoynition of the Divine voice. ‘Vhe commission of sin ends in, first, a partial, and
ultimately a compl-te, spiritual deafness. At first the quieter and more habitual tones
in which God is s;caking to us (daily loving-kindnesses, sabbath privileses, etc.) become
inaudible to us, convey no message to us from God; then more distinct and unmistak-
able voices from hcaven are unheeded and unheard; at last, the loudest demands which
God ever makes fail to produce any impression on the ear of the soul, 38. The choice of
that which is wise. The rash heart (of the text) is the heart which chooses precipi-
tately, aud therefore foolishly. Under the dominion of sin we come to choose the visible
in preference tu the invisible, the material to the spiritual, the transient to the abiding,
the buman to the Divine. 4. The utterance of Dwine truth. The clouded vision
natura ly leads to the ‘‘stammering tongue.” As man becomes more affected by the
sin which dwells within and works upon him, he utters God’s truth less plainly, less
faithfully, more partially, with ever-widening divergence from the mind of the
Eternal.

Il. Tae Toucn or Divine power. When man has become disabled there is no hope
for him but in God. Human teaching is valuable enough, but it dces not avail. Only
the awakening, reviving touch of the Divine power, brought into immediate contact
with the soul, can call back these slumbering powers. But it can and does; God’s
renewing Spirit breaks upon the disabled mind, upon the degenerate nature, and that
which was lost is regained; the faculties of the soul revive. Then we have—

Ill. SpinrruaL RESTORATION. Revived by the power of God: 1. We see clearly.
We apprehend the will of God in Jesus Christ concerning us, the excelleucy of his
service, the beauties of holiness, the luxury of usefulness. 2. We hear distinctly the
voice of God as he speaks to us in his Word, in his providence, in the privileges of the
Christian Church. 3. We choose wisely. We become thoughtful, reflective, studious of
the Divine desire, obedient, and therefore wise; we “understand knowledge.” 4. We
speak plainly. Discerning that which is acceptable in the sight of the Lord, we speak
simply, faithfully, fearlessly, “ with all boldness as we ought to speak,” “ the everlasting
gospel ”—both the elementary truths which make wise unto salvation, and those “deeper
things of God,” which enrich the mind and sanctify the spirit.—O.


582 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. xxxu. 1—20.


Vers. 5—8.—A mark of good government, ete. Three lines of thought are here laid
down. We have—

I. A MARK OF GooD GovERNMENT. The displacement of the unworthy and the
elevation of the good and wise. Under the reign of the righteous King (ver. 1) the
“ fool will no longer be called a nobleman,” the man of mean character but lofty rank
will be made to know his true place in the commonwealth; on the other hand, the man
who has in him the qualities of nobility (ver. 8) shall have the opportunity of dealing
graciously and bountilully. There is no surer sign of demoralization, no more certain
indication of approaching ruin in any community, than the promotion of the unfit and
the unworthy; and there is no healthier symptom than the advancement of the upright
and the capable. Let nations, societies, Churches, look to it.

II. A SINT AS TO SIX’S LARGE DIMENSIONS. 1. Its tenacity of purpose. “The vile
person will [continue to] speak villany, and his heart [to] work iniquity ”’(ver.6). You
may put him in a position in which you might hope that the commonest self-respect
would ensure propriety of conduct, but you will be mistaken; the corrupt tree will
bear evil fruit on any soil. 2. Its gwil-fulness. ‘To practise hypocrisy ;” professing
justice and purity, it enacts all that is unfair and evil. 3. Its falsity. “'l'o utter error,”
etc. Sin, especially when found in high places, is most mischievous in that it scatters
everywhere the fruitful seeds of error; it poisons the mind with misleading fancies,
with shallow notions which may sound well but are essentially false and which conduct
to wrong and ruin. Thus it leads men to act “against the Lord,” for they pursue a
path which he has forbidden, and they diffuse principles which are hostile to his reign.
4, Its heartlessness. (Ver. 6.) What though the issue of those evil actions be that men’s
hearts are hungry and their souls athirst; what though they bring about impoverish-
ment, destitution—bodily or spiritual, or both together,—let the cup be drained, let the
game be played out! 5. Its wnscrupulousness. Its ‘instruments are evil” (ver. 7).
6. Its effrontery. (Ver. 7.) ‘They whom it is wronging may be the poor, and therefore
the appropriate objects of comyiassion; they may be the énnocent, those who are in the
right, and therefore the proper objects of regard ; nothing but downright falsehood may
suffice to prevail against them (Ahab and Naboth). No matter; let the case be estab-
lished, let sentence be executed !

III. A coMMENDATION OF GENEROSITY. ‘The liberal deviseth liberal things,” etc.
(ver. 8). 1. A man of a noble nature will find opportunities for doing geverous things.
How well a man serves the Church or the world is not a question of circumstance half
so much as a matter of character. Given a free, generous, open-hearted man, and you
may confidently reckon on repeated and continuous acts of unselfish usefulness. Jesus
“went about doing good, for God was with him,” and because God was én him ; because,
tn him, as in a perennial fouutain, dwelt Divine love, pity, self-sacrifice. We need care
comparatively little about arranging opportunities of service, though that is not a
matter of indifference; what is of supreme consequence is that those we teach and train
should have planted within them the sacred seeds of holy, Christian generosity. 2.
Generous measures will give a noble heart stability: by them “he shall stand.” (1)
They will commend him to the affection and the support of the direct recipients of his
goodness (Job, xxix. 1I—13). (2) They will result in general prosperity (Prov. xi. 24;
Luke vi. 88; 2 Cor. ix. 6). (8) They will command the blessing of God (Ps, xli. 1;
cxii. 9; Luke vi. 835; Heb. xiii. 16).—C.


Vers. 17, 18.—* The peaceable fruit of righteousness.” Righteousness and peace may
be supposed to be entirely separate things ; by those who look only on the surface they
may even be imagined to be opposed to one another. In fact, they are closely and even
vitally related to each other,

I, THose WHO ARE INCAPABLE OF RIGHTEOUSNESS ARE UNRECEPTIVE OF PEACE. To
them peace is simply incommunicable; it does not come within the range of their
faculties. The horse, the swallow, the salmon, the unintelligent and irresponsible
animal, may have quietude and comfort, but it cannot enjoy peace, in the fullest and
truest sense in which we use that word. It is only capable of that sense of satisfaction
which attends a perfect adjustment of its circumstances to its bodily nature; but that
is not peace. Peace is that spiritual contentment which results from inward as well
as outward harmony—from a sense of rectitude, a consciousness that everything is right


oH, Xxx. i—20.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 533
a


in its most important, most sacred relationships. They who are beneath the sense of
responsibility, and are therefore incapable of righteousness, can never possibly attain to
the possession of peace; they are constitutionally below it.

Il. THEY WHO HAVE LOST RIGHTEOUSNESS MUST REGAIN IT BEFORE THEY CAN HAVE
THE HERITAGE OF PEACE. 1. This is so with the community. When the country, or
the company, or the Church has fallen into disorder because it has fallen into error and
the commission of wrong, there is but one way to regain the harmony which nas been
fost. Absolutism will never yield it. Force will not secure it. Compromise will not
permanently restore it. Nothing will avail until righteousness is re-established.
Justice must be done to those to whom it has been denied. Rights must be conceded
to those who have fairly won them. Relations must be adjusted to changed con-
ditions ; every one and everything must make way for rectitude. In no other way
whatever will the path of peace be found. 2. J¢ is thus with the human soul. We
have ali wandered from the way of wisdom and of righteousness; we have reused to
God the love, the reverence, the service which is his due and which it is our highest
interest to render. We have thereby become disordered, disquieted, confused ; instead
of dwelling in “a peaceable habitation,” in “quiet resting-)laces,” we have become
inhabitants of a realm of condemnation, reproach, peril, agitation, misery. There is no
way back to the home of rest which we have left behind us but by a return to right-
eousness ; that is to say, by repentance, the turning our back on the sinful selfishness in
which we have been living, and becoming right with God, accepting the gracious offer
of his Son our Saviour (Matt. xi. 28, 29), (1) Rejection of truth may give a false
security ; (2) absorption in worldly pursuits or in pleasurable excitements may provide
temporary indifference ; but only righteousness, only the restoration of the soul to its
true relation to God, by repentance and faith, will give peace.

III. iGHTEOUSNESS WILL ENSURE PEACE BOTH IN POSSESSION AND IN PROSPECT. It
will effect: 1. Reconciliution with God, and the consequent “ peace which passes
understanding ”—a blissful, satisfying “rest unto the soul,” which is incomparably more
precious than any earthly satisfaction to the body or the spirit. 2. The inward and
abiding rest which belongs to spiritual harmony; this is the invariable consequence
of the soul being in a right relation with the Supreme, and with its fellows, and of all
its faculties being rightly related to one another. 3. A peaceful departure from the
present life. 4. A home in the quiet resting-pluce of the heavenly land.—C.


Ver. 20.—Fruitful labour. ‘ Blessed are ye that sow beside all waters.” “There will
be widespread desolation,” says the prophet; “ tie fields will be untilled, the land will
be covered with briars and thorns; but a glorious change shall come over the sceue—
the ‘wilderness shall become a fruitful field’ (ver. 15), the happy scenes of industry
will again be witnessed, the arts and industries of avriculture will revive and flowish
in all their former fulness. Happy will be the land that shall put forth its whole
strength in the field; ‘blessed are they that sow beside all waters.’” ‘l'wo general truths
spring from this passage.

I, THAT THEY ARE BLESSED WHO PUT FORTH ALL THE POWERS WITH WHICH THEY ARE
ENDOWED. It should be the happiness of Israel in its time of restoration to leave no
soil uncultivated that would yield produce ; they would sow beside al/ waters. All its
inhabitants, with all their agricultural implements, would be busy in the open fields ;
no strength leit unexercised in the homes; no weapons left unused in the storehouses.
Unhappy indeed is (1) the country whose population is doomed to enforced idleness,
whose looms are still, whose ploughs are rusting in the homestead ; (2) the family where
‘sons and daughters are letting their various faculties lie idle, when they might be put
forth to their own great advantage and for the good of others; (3) the man whoxe
individual powers are slumbering in his soul, unspent and undeveloped. Blessed are
they who expend all the resources they possess, who cultivate all their skill of hand,
who develop all their strength of mind, who so put out all their talents that the whole
energies of their spiritual nature will be employed, increasea, perfected. By sowing
beside all waters is weant sowing seed in well-watered, and therefore fruitful, soil.
The expression consequeitly contains the idea—

ll. Tua? THEY ARE BLESSED WHO ARE ENGAGED IN REMUNERATIVE LABOUR. This is
peculiarly true of the Christian workman. 1, He has the very best seed to sow: truth,


034 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (on. xxxu. 1—20,


which God took centuries to prepare, which is the purchase of a Saviour’s tears and
blood, which is exquisitely adapted to the soil for which it is intended, 2, He bas
well-watercd, i.e. fertile, responsive soil in which to place it. He has, amongst others :
(1) The virgin soil of youth. Youth may often be inattentive, frivolous, unstable ;
nevertheless it is docile, affectionate, trustful, tender-hearted. (2) The prepared soil of
affliction. When God has chastened the soul with his fatherly hand, there is a softness
of spirit, an impressionableness of heart which makes words of comfcrt, of exhortation,
of warning peculiarly welcome. (3) Te productive soil of poverty. From the days when
“the comion people heard Jesus gladly,” and when it was said “to the poor the
gospel is preached,” to these times in which we live, the poor have been comparatively
rich in faith and hope. By those to whom the riches and enjoyments of earth are
denied, the treasures of truth and the blessedness of the kingdom of God are likely to be
prized and gained (see 1 Cor. i. 26—28). Blessed are they who sow such fertile soils,
for theirs is not only the blessing which comes to all faithful labourers—the approval of
Christ and their own spiritual advancement—but the great ‘joy of harvest,” the joy
which fills the husbandman’s heart when he “comes again” from the “ heavy-fruited ”
fields, “ bringing his sheaves with him.”—C.


Ver. 1.—The ideal reign. There can be no doubt that the first, and historical,
ceference of this prophecy is to the reign of Hezekiah. Cheyne says, “ It describes the
happy condition of Judah when idols have becu cast away, and the rod of Assyrian
tyranny has been removed, A more just and merciful government shall then be
enjoyed, the result of a larze outpouring of the Divine Spirit. As the consejuence of
this, mora] distinctions shall no longer be conlounded—men shall be estimated at their
true value. When Isaiah wrote he may have had erounds for the charitable belicf that
his sovercign would really be equal to the demands providentially made upon bim.”
But the proplecy is Messianic. Its anticipations are only fully realized in the king-
dom of Clirist. Weber says, ‘The picture which the prophet paints here of the Church
of the last time is the picture of every true conyregation of Christ. In it the will of
the Lord must be the only law according to which men judge, and not any fleshly con-
sideratiou of any sort. In it there must be open eyes and ears for God’s work and word 3
and it in some things precedence is really allowed to the children of this world, sull in
spiritual things the understanding must be right and the sprech clear. Finally, in it
persons must be valued according to their true Christian, moral worth, not according to
advantages that before God are rather a reproach than an honour.” It is alinost impos-
sible for us to realize the idea of a theocracy, or direct rule of God over a people, as the
pious Jew did. Exactly wiat Isaiah pictures is the theocracy fully established in a
spiritual sense; and of this Hezckiah’s reformed kingdom gave good sugg stions. To
bring the subject home to moderu congrevations, the leading features of a spiritual
theocracy, a real aud practical reign of Gud, in lives and in society, should be shown
thus—

I. Gop’s WILL SHOULD BE THE ONE SUPREME LAW.

Il. Gov’s WorbD sHOULD BE THE PRACTICAL RULE OF CONDUCT,

Ill, Gop’s Son sHoULD BE THE GREAT MODEL OF CHARACTER.

IV. (:0p-LIKENESS SHOULD BE THE ONE OBJECT OF PURSUIT,

Be it heart, be it life, be it Church, or be it suciety, wherever this is an honest and
truthful description, there is the “ ideal reign ;” there the words of the text are fulfilled,
and a “ king reizns in righteousness.” It is to establish individually and universally
just this kingdom, that the Lord Jesus Christ has come. He begins his work by
subduing to his obedience single sowls.—R. T.


Ver. 6.—The correction of social confusions, “When men’s eyes are opened, they
will no longer confound the essential distinctions of moral character, because they will
no longer be deceived by mere appearances” (J. A. Alexander), “ A due discrimination
of character would be made in the times of the Messiah, and persons and things
would be called by their appropriate names (comp, Mal. iii, 18; Matt. xxiii, 13—33;
Eph. v. 5)” (Henderson), “The differences between good and evil, virtue and vice,
shall be kept up, and no more confounded by those who put darkness for light and
light for darkness ” (Matthew Henry). These sentences show that the subject intro»


cH, xxx. 1—20.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 535
eo Se ee ee ee ee eee eee


duced is the influence of a righteous reign in helping men to see things as they
really are, and to estimate persons according to their true worth, and not according
to the mere show they may make. We deal specially with those conlusions which
come by false juigments of persons, and these take the following, among other forms.

I, ADMIRATION OF TALENTS BLINDS US TO BADNESS OF CHARACTER, What is thought
to be “ genius” is too olten allowed to excuse all sorts of laxity. The men who can
astonish and amuse us may be unclean, untruth{ul, injurious; but we readily pass all
this by. When righteousness reigns, talent will have to go with character, or men will
count it to be Satanic agency. What a man can do must never be separated from what
the man 7s,

Il. THE COMMAND OF WEAITH BRINGS FLATTERERS TO BAD MEN. There is no more
painful sign of the moral deterioration of a race, than its worship of the rich because
they are rich. Money can never make goodness. Wealth is not the stability of a
nation, Its hope lies wholly in its good men. Yet the rich man may be violent, rude,
masterful, cruel; nevertheless, multitudes will fawn on him, and call the “ vile person
liberal.” When righteousness reigis, that confusion will be rectified, and the rich mar
shall have worship only if he deserves it for what he is.

IIL. THE RANK AND SOCIAL POSITION OF MEN NOW BEWILDER THEIR FELLOWS, AND
MAKE TRUE ESTIMATES NEARLY IMPOSSIBLE. Well does Robert Burns remind us that


“The rank is but the guinea-stamp,
A man’s a man for a’ that.”


No word of bitterness need be spoken concerning those to whom God has entrusted
talents, or wealth, or social position. The point to enforce is simply the peril of letting
these things confuse our ideas of moral character and moral worth. Evil is evil, and
must be denounced as evil, in the genius, the man of wealth, and the man of title.
Let Christ reign, and sin will be called sin, wherever it ia found. He will strip all
disguises off, and show us things as they are, and men as they are. The Lord hasten his
coming !—R. T.


Ver. 8.—The stability of liberal men. “The liberal deviseth liberal things; and by
liberal things shall he stand,” or, “be established.” It is quite possible that Isaiah had
in mind the good King Hezekiah, of whom very noble and generous things are narrated
in 2 Chron. xxx. 22—26. Passing away to Messianic times, we are to see that the
’ true subjects of Messiah, the ideal Prince, the King who reigns in righteousness, will
be distinguished by a noble-minded benevolence, contriving and persevering in the
execution of enlarged schemes of charity. In Ps. cx. 3 they are very strikingly
described as “a peuple of voluntarinesses.” The term here used, “liberal,” is a compre-
hensive one and may fairly include—

I. THE NOBLE-MINDED MAN. That is the man who takes high, generous views; who
does not make himself, and his own small interests, the measure of all his opinions and
judgments. The man who is, everywhere and in everything, ruled by what is right,
and not by what will pay. That man may often seem to be at disadvantage. Keenly
self-interested men push him aside and push before him. It is not really 80. God
will give him the only true and eternal prosperities. He deviseth liberal things; in
liberal things he perseveres; and by liberal things he shall stand.

Il. THE BROAD-MINDED MAN. Who is not limited in his views by the sect or
school to which he belongs, the class in society of which he forms part, or even by the
bias which follows his own preferences in reading. The man who knows the “ world
is wide,” and has room for all kinds of men and all varieties of opinion. ‘The man who
is quite sure there is a “soul of good somewhere, even in things evil.” That man
makes the best of life, gets honey everywhere. He is a “liberal soul, that shall be
made fat.”

III. THE CHARITABLY MINDED MAN. One who accepts cheerfully the great “law of
service,” and recognizes that all he has is for the use and benefit of others. It is all
for spending, none for hoarding. ‘Even Christ pleased not himself.” He could say,
“Tam among you as one that serveth.” One who is sensitive to the wants and woes
of his fellows, and has in him the soul of the Samaritan, who pities and helps, rather
than the soul of priest or of Levite, who pity and pass on. Such a man puts con-


536 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cn. xxxm 1—20.
SR ane a


trivance, care, and self-denial into his service. And such a man “shall stand.” “The
providence of God will reward him for his liberality with a settled prosperity and an
established reputation. The grace of God will give him abundance of satisfaction and
confirmed peace in his own bosom” (comp. Ps. cxii. 5, 6).—R. T.


Ver. 11.—Folk who are at ease. Special reference is made to the women of the
upper classes in Jerusalem, who were living in self-indulgence and extravagance, and
setting mischievous example to all the women of the land. The coming woes would
affect them all the more seriously because of the luxuries which they had gathered
round themselves, and which had become to them fancied necessities. No doubt the
idle, self-indulgent, and too often profligate conduct of these women greatly added to
the pressure of the existing evils. It is suggested to us to consider how greatly, in
every age, women represent and augment the evils of their times. Many a man has
been ruined by his efforts to feed the pride, vanity, and luxury of these ease-loving,
careless wives and daughters. And nations have lost their manhood in the moral
decay of the “mothers” of the race. ‘ When a land goes to ruin a great part of the
blame of it rests upon the women. For they are more easily prompted to evil, as they
are to good.” But this “being at ease” describes the condition of what is called a
“high state of civilization,” when money is accumulated in the hands of the few, and
these few, having no need to work, give themselves up to self-indulgence, manufacturing
wants, and constantly craving for some excitement to relieve the dreadful ennui of life.

I, MEN AND WOMEN SHOULD NOT BE AT EASE. There is work to be done. Work
for all. It is Nas close to our hand, There are evils to fight—evils so gigantic that
every man and woman may have a place in the soldier-ranks. God worketh hitherto;
oat works; and woe to all who, in negligence or in rebelliousness, refuse to bear the
yoke

II. MANY MEN AND WOMEN MUST MASTER THEMSELVES AND THEIR CIRCUMSTANCES
IF THEY ARE TO CEASE TO BE AT EASE. For careless ways may have become fixed
habits. We may have deceived ourselves into the idea that our “doing nothing,” our
busy idleness, is really doing something. We begin to take life into our hands for
ordering, when we face the question, ‘ What is life given me for?”


“Life is real, life is earnest.”


III. Gon’s wok SURELY COMES ON ALL WHO KEEP AT EASE. Our Lord pictured this
m his parable of the “rich man and Lazarus.” That rich man, living at ease, is not ‘
to be envied while he lived, for the woe of God lay on him, making bitterness for his
many idle hours. Much less is he to be envied when his life is done, for the woe of
God is on him there. “In hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments.” “Tremble, ye
women that are at ease!”—R. T.


Ver. 15.—The Spirit as a quickening Rain. The results produced by heavy rains in
the Kast are so striking that these rains become a suggestive figure of the influence of
God’s Spirit on souls and on Churches. In times of prolonged drought, the ground
is burnt up and chapped, and every sign of vegetation is destroyed. Then come the
rains, the life in the soil responds, and in a few hours the world is green again. The
figure of “ pouring forth,” or “ pouring out,” needs, however, to be very carefully used
in relation to God’s Spirit. It is only suited to the one aspect of the Spirit as an
influence. It may be misconceived if applied to God the Spirit regarded as a Person.
When we use this term “pouring” nowadays, we should carefully keep in mind the
figure of the rains, with which it is properly associated, The Jewish Church thought
of the Spirit as an influence, The Christian Church has received the larger revelation,
and knows of the Holy Ghost as a Divine Person, “dwelling with us, and being in us.”
He comes to us. We may grieve him. He may depart. But only as a figure can we
a deo of him as being “poured on us.” The figure of “ pouring” is also given in

oel iii. 1.

I. Curist’s CHURCH I8 TOO OFTEN AS A DEAD THING. Illustrate from a parched
field. Only noxious weeds can get vitality out of such a soil. Fields are dead because
God withholds his rains. Souls are dead, Churches are dead, because God withholds
his Spirit. Such withholding is done in judgment. The deadness of a Church is


oH. xxx, 1—20.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 537
Se ae


always begun in neglect of God, and self-indulgence. The first love fades out; and
then spiritual death waits, “crouching at the door.” Dead, for there are no expressions
indicating the life of trust and love.

Il. Onty Gop can QUICKEN THE DEAD. This une thing is always and altogether
out of human reach. Man can do much; but he cannot make anything live. God
quickens dead souls, and dead Churches, by the gift of his Spirit. Life wakens lile.
The Spirit of God moved on the face of the waters, and brought forth life. That Spirit
of God comes down, like refreshing rains, upon the thirsty fields. That Spirit of God
enters the temple of a human soul, and the response is W/e, finding all due expression
in activity : “'lhe wilderness becomes a fruitful field.” “The kingdom of Messiah was
brought in, and set up, by the pouring out of the Spirit; and so it is still kept up, and
will be to the end.” Then, with unceasing constancy and earnestness it becomes us to
pray for the quickening, reviving grace of God the Holy Ghost.—R. T.


Ver. 17.—Righteousness and peace, Christianity means “righteousness,” and
“righteousness” is an active power, ever working towards the production of peace,
quietness, and mutual confidence. ‘The element of peace is that by which order is
established and perpetuated, people are brought to cordial agreement and willing sub-
mission, unity is made a living and growing fact, and all the arts of domestic life and
of civilized communities are promoted.” The great Napoleon said, “ War is the
business of barbarians.” Our own Wellington said, “Men who have nice notions of
religion have no business to be soldiers.” Lord Brougham said, “1 abominate war as
unchristian, I hold it the greatest of human crimes. I deem it to include all others—
violence, blood, rapine, fraud, everything that can deform the character, alter the
nature, and debase the name of man.” John Howe wrote in this way, “ Very plain
it is that war isa mark of the apostasy, and stizgmatizes man as fallen from God, in
a degenerated, revolted state; it is the horrid issue of men’s having forsaken God,
and of their being abandoned by him to the hurry of their own furious lusts and
passions.”

I, CurisTIANITY IS, DISTINCTIVELY, RIGHTEOUSNESS. This is its essential character-
istic, and its necessary work. In this it stands alone, differing from all other religions,
Matthew Arnold finds an expression for God which, though it has been well scorned,
is really suggestive and helpful. He speaks of him as “the Eternal which makes for
righteousness,” which is always working towards this end, and revards this as the
highest of all attainments. Other religions propose methods for propitiating God; in
Christianity God proposes to make men good. Jesus Christ is the first, the model
Christian, and he is good— holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners.” His
requirement, of all his disciples, is personal character—righteousness, Apostles say of
this religion, “Herein is the righteousness of God revealed, from faith to faith.”
Christ’s personal call is, “ Be ye holy, for lam holy.” Christian growth is “ changing
into his image from glory to glory.” We must “follow peace with all men, and
holiness, without which none can see the Lord.” Prophets pictured the Christian
ages, and saw holiness so pervading that it was even engraven on the bells of the
horses. Let the Christian faith come to our hearts, and it will work out into righteous-
ness. Let it go forth into society, and it will establish right principles, show right
ways, give right impulses, tone with a right spirit, and work on until righteousness
flows over all the land, like the waves of the sea.

II. RiGHTEOUSNESS IS LINKED CLOSELY WITH PEACE, “The fruit of righteousness is
gown in peace.” These two things can never be separated. Find the one, and you will
soon find also the other. Unrighteousness, uncharity, selfish passions, and war go
naturally together, hand-in-hand. Begin “righteousness” anywhere, and you have
started on its working an active power that makes for peace, Kvery soldier that
walks our streets, every cannon forged in our arsenals, is a testimony that the sin-curse
yet hangs over us. We are not yet “all righteous,” or the sight and the sound of war
would be heard no more. When, as individuals, we are set right with God, peace
comes at once into our hearts, and peaceableness gives tone and character to all our
relations. The inner conflicts are stayed; tne struggles between the flesh and the
spirit are checked; the fever-heat of ambition is soothed; charity aad brotherhood
bring us into peace with all men, The gospel comes, “preaching peace by Jesus


538 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, [cu. xxxu, 1—20.
Sa eee


Ohrist.” Righteousness, thus getting round it the one small circle of a life, soon
begins to widen its sphere. It rays out on every side. It flows forth, like a sweet
scent, purifying the atmospheres wherever a man goes. Families would have a “ peace
passing understanding” if their members were “all righteous.” Our Churches would
cease to be the scenes of dissension, if the members were “‘all righteous. Social life
would no longer witness the bitter antazonism of classes, if the people were “all
righteous.” Nations would soon turn wasteful war expenditure on armies and weapons
into the fruitful channels of commerce. and gracious schemes of education and
philanthropy, if righteousness did but pluck up ambitions, envyings, and rivalries,
and plant in charity, brotherhood, and peace. Envy, hatred, malice, pride, ambition,—
these unrighteous things bring forth war, Charity, meckness, self-denial,—these
righteous tiings keep happy fellowship with gentle peace. “First pure, then peace-
able.” Alas that the prophetic picture should still seem to be but a vision of the
distant future! But what a vision it is! and how our hearts spring towards it!
Prophets paint it. Saints pray for it. God is working towards it. And it shall
surely come. “The mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little hills, by
righteousness.” ‘The kingdoms of this world have become the kingdoms of our Lord,
and of his Christ [the Prince of Peace], and he shall reign for ever and ever.”—R. T.


Ver. 18.—“ Quiet resting-places.” The figure in this verse is connected with the
relief afforded by the destruction of Sennacherib’s army, and consequent retirement of
Sennacherib to Assyria. Before the invaders all persons living in the country had
to flee to the shelter of the walled cities, abandoning the property which they could
not readily carry with them. On the removal of the invaders, the sense of security
would return, and such persons wsuld go home and find “quiet resting places.”
We see in this passage an on-looking to the times when the Holy Ghost should be
given, and he, ruling in hearts and lives, would make for all trustful souls “quiet
resting-places.” ‘Treating the text meditatively, we dwell on times when, for us, thi»
promise is realized.

I, THE QUIET RESTING OF EVENING-TIME. Such it is for wearied bodies and worn
minds. Svothing is the calmness of natural evening, when the winds fail, the sun
throws level yellow beams and long shadows, and the thousand noises of earth are
subdued. Evening has a gracious influence on our spirits. It is the time for medita-
tion, with Isaac. Very precious to Christian hearts are the quiet places for meditation,
when holy feeling can be nourished.

Il. THE QUIET RESTING OF THE SABBATH. Its first idea is “rest.” We feel quiet ;
as if a spell had been breathed over us. The strain of life is relaxed. The world is
away. We belong to the eternal world. Life-bustle is stilled. We can give room
to other thoughts, and so we rest, body, mind, and soul.

Ill. THE QUIET RESTING OF TIMES OF AFFLICTION. Such times come into all lives,
Times when we must be still. In illness, and in convalescence, there are many quiet,
lonely hours. ‘Ihese are the scenes to which Christ invites us when he says, “Come
ye into a desert place, and rest awhile.”

IV, Tue QUIET RESTING-PLACE OF DEATH. The grave is spoken of as the “place
where the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest.” And the place
where there are memorials of the dead is often a most “ quiet resting-place” for the
living. This may be illustrated by the soothing, silencing, solemnizing influence
exerted on us by a visit to Westminster Abbey. On earth there can hardly be found
& more “quiet resting-place.” Sometimes the chamber where we watch the dying of
a saint of God is such a place. Leantiful to see the pain-worn face at last go into
the repose of death. ‘ When sinks the weary soul to rest.” We may add that those
who have found rst in God prove how graciously he gives restful moments iu the very
midst of the hurry and worry of life—R. T.


Ver. 20.—Sowing freely. This is part of the description of restored prosperity when
the national troubles are removed. ‘ While the enemy shall be brought low, the Jews
shall cultivate their land in undisturbed prosperity.” The Assyrians must have almost
entirely stopped all agricultural processes, and this involved terrible losses and suffer-
ings. Jn explanation of the figure of the text it is suggested that, where the seed is


og. xxx, 1—24.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


—_—_—_—_—_—_—_———————————————


bot


sown in the soil covered by water, it was customary to send oxen into the water tu
tread the ground before the seed was cast, so as tu prevent it from being washed away
by the subsidence of the waters. This, however, applies to such countries as Ev pt,
and to such crops as rice. ‘Ihe point sei forth by the text seems to be that quiet aud
persistent continuance in duty, in daily toil, may be the most efficient expression ot
our trust in God. Regarding the sower as a type of the Christian worker, we may
note the following things.

I. THE sOWER IS A MAN IN TRUST. He has the seed-corn for next year’s harvest.
The food of the people depends, in measure, on each oue’s faithfulness to his trust.
The Christian is a man put in trust. He has what is for the blessing of men. Truth,
more precious than seeds. Powers of sym athy and love that bring bountilul harvests.
Wealth, and knowledge, and position, and 0}) ortunities, that may all prove life-giving
to men. Above all, he has the trust of the gospel.

Il, THE sOWER IS REQUIRED TO SOW ALL HE HAS IN TRUST. He is not to live on the
seed. He is not to store it up sifely. He is not to use it for auy objects of his own.
He must not delay in fulfilling his master’s will with tle seed. It was given to him
that he mizht sow it all in the soil. So God would have the Christian put to use
every talent, every trust, he has committed t» him. In this our Lord is our example.
Everything God gave him he gave away: love, truth, comfort, healing, pity, time,
strenyth, chara: ter, life—all, he gave away. In him there was no getting to keep;
only getiing to give.

ll]. THE soweER Is REQUIRED TO 80W FREELY. “ Beside all waters.” Not too nicely
examining the conditions of the soil; not selecting just the deep and prepared earth,
but scattering freely, and scattering wide. The Christian never kuows where, in Goa’s
fields, the richest harvests will be reaped. So he sows all over the field, sows in
perseverance, and sows in faith.

In conclusion, it may be shown that the true sower is much more concerned with the
excellence of his sowing than with the resw/ts that may attend it. These he must
leave altogether in the hauds of him who surely will not “let his work return unto
him void.”—R, T.


Section X. A PropHEecy or JUDGMENT ON ASSYRIA (CH. XXXII).
EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER XXXIIL


Vers. 1—6.—TueE JUDGMENT ON ASSYRIA
AND DELIVERANCE OF JERUSALEM, STATED
GENERALLY. Events had progressed since
the preceding prophecies were delivered.
The negotiations carried on with Sen-
nacherib had been futile (ver. 7), the heavy
fine imposed and paid (2 Kings xviii. 14)
had been of no avail (ver. 18) ; the Assyrian
monarch was still dissatisfied, and tlreat-
ened a second siege. Already he was upon
his march, spoiling and ravaging (ver. 1).
The pvople of the country districts had
removed into the town (ver. 8)—in a little
time the vast host might be expected to
appear before the walls, All was terror,
grief, and confusion, Under these circum-
stances, Isaiali is once more commissioned
to declare the approaching discomfiture of
the mighty conqueror, and deliverance of
Jerusalem out of his hand (vers.3, 4). The


deliverance ushers in a reign of righteous-
ness (vers. 5, 6).


Ver. 1.—Woe to thee that spoilest. The
“spoiler” is here, evidently, As-yria—the
world-power of this entire group of pro-
phecies (see especially ch. xxx. 31; xxxi. 8),
and the greatest “ spoiler” of Isaiah’s time.
Thou wast not spoiled; @.e.“thit hast not
yet been spoiled thyself.” A covert threat
is conveyed in the words. And dealest
treacherously; raiher, usest vtolence (cow-
pare the comment on ch. xxi. 2). When thou
shalt cease tospoil, ete. Conquering vatious
cannot with safety pause on their career.
Tieir aggressions have roused so many
enwities that, let them cease to atiuck, and
at once they are attacke! in their turn.
Every man’s land is against the spoiler
whose hand has been against every man.

Ver. 2.—0O Lord, ete. ‘The mingling ot
prayer with prophecy is very unusnal, and
indicative of higuly excited feeling. Isaiab
realizes fully the danger of his people and
bation, and knows that without prayer
thcre is no deliverance. His prayer ia at
once an outpouring of his own heart. and


540


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xxxim. 1—24,


—— O0€«COOlOllOOOOO LL —Q,


an example to others. We have waited for
thee (comp. ch. viii. 17; xxvi. 8). Their
Arm; #.e. “the Arm of thy people.” Every
morning. Continually, day by day, since
their need of thy support is continual.

Ver. 3.—At the noise of the tumult the
people fled; rather, the peoples; i.e. the
contingents from many nations which made
up the huge army of Sennacherib. The
“noise” is that caused by God “lifting up
himself” (comp. Ps. xxix. 3—9).

Ver. 4.—Your spoil shall be gathered.
The “spoiling” of Assyria would commence
with the discomfiture of the great host. In
the historical narrative (2 Kings xix. 35;
ch. xxxvii. 36) nothing is said of it; but,
beyond a doubt, when the host was to a
large extent destroyed, and the remainder
fled, there must have been an enormous
booty left behind, which the enemies of the
Assyrians would naturally seize, A further
spoiling of the fugitives probably followed ;
and, the prestige of the great king being
gone, marauding bands would probably on
all sides ravage the Assyrian territory.
Like the gathering of the caterpillar. The
“ caterpillar” (khdsil) is probably the grub
out of which the locust develops—a very
destructive insect. Shall he run. It would
be better to render, shall they run. The
word, indeed, is in the singular; but it is
used distributively, of the various spoilers.

Ver. 5.—The Lord is exalted. His de-
struction of the Assyrian host is an exalta-
tion of God; #.e. it causes him to be exalted
in the thoughts of tnose who have cogni-
zance of the fact (comp. Exod. xv. i4—I6;
Ps. xcvi. 3—10, etv.). It is an indication
to them that he has his dwelling on high,
and is the true King of heaven. He hath
filled Zion with judgment, etc. (comp. ch.
xxxii. 15—17). The destruction is, in part,
the result, in part the cause, of the Jews once
more turning to God, putting away their
iniquities, and establishing the reign of
justice and righteousness in the land (see
ch. i. 26).

Ver. 6.—Wisdom and knowledge shall be
the stability of thy times; literally, and
the stability of thy times shall be ‘i.e. consist
in) a rich store of salvations, wisdom, and
knowledge. The prophet here addresses
the people of Judah in the second person,
though in the next clause he reverts to the
third. Such transitions are common in
ancient compositions, and especially cha-
racterize the writings of Isaiah. The fear
of the Lord is his treasure; ¢.e. the wisdom
intended is that which is based upon “the
fear of the Lord” (Ps. exi. 10). This will
be at once Judali’s “treasure,” and a
guarantee of stability to her government
aud institutions (compare the Homiletics on
el. xxxii, 15—17).


Vers. 7—12.—TuE PROPHET ENTERS
FURTHER INTO ParTIouLARS. Having
“sketched the main outlines of his revela-
tion,” Isaiah proceeds to “ fill in and apply
the details” (Cheyne). He first describes
the despair and low condition of Judah:
the men of war wailing aloud ; the ambas-
sadors just returned from Lachish weeping
at the ill success of their embassy; all
travelling stopped; the land wasted and
made a desert; the Assyrians still ravaging
and destroying, despite the peace which
had been made (2 Kings xviii. 14—16).
Then suddenly he sees Jehovah rousing
himself (ver. 10), and the Assyrians con-
sumed, as if with a fire (vers. 11, 12).

Ver. 7.,—Behold, their valiant ones shall
cry without. “ Their lion-hearts ” (Cheyne);
“heroes”? (Delitzsch). Literally, lions of
God (comp. ch. xxix. 1). They raise a
cry of mourning in the streets, with child-
like effusiveness (comp. Herod., viii. 99; ix.
24). The ambassadors of peace. Hezekiah
probably sent several embassies to Sen-
nacherib in the course of the war. One
went to Laclhish, offering submission, in
B.c. 701 (2 Kings xviii. 14); another to
Nineveh, with tribute and presents, in the
same or the following year (2 Kings xviii. 15;
comp. ‘Eponym Canon,’ p. 135). A third
probably sought to deprecate Sennacherib’s
anger, when le made his second invasion
(2 Kings xviii. 17) in B.c. 699 (?). These
last would seem to be the “ambassadors ”
of this verse.

Ver. 8.—The highways lie waste (comp.
Judg. v. 6). The meaning is that they
were unoccupied. Fear of the Assyrians
restrained men from travelling. He hath
broken the covenant. Sennacherib, when
he accepted the sum of money sent him by
Hezekiah (2 Kings xviii. 15; ‘Eponym
Canon,’ p. 135), must have consented to
leave him unmolested for the future. But
in a very short time we find him, apparently
without any reasonable pretext, sending a
fresh expedition against Jerusalem, requir-
ing it to be admitted within the walls, and
even threatening the city with destruction
(2 Kings xviii 17—35; xix. 10—13).
Isaiah, therefore, taxes him with having
broken his covenant. Despised cities. “Sen-
nacherib,” says Delitzsch, “continued to
storm the fortified places of Judah, in viola-
tion of his agreement.” Regardeth no
man; #.e. “pays no attention to the protests
that are made against his infraction of the
treat y—does not care what is said or thought
of him.”

Ver. ).—The earth mourneth; rather, the
land. Lebanon is... hewn down; rather,


cH, xxx. 1—24.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


541


i


as in the margin, ts withered away (comp.
eb. xix. 6). Lebanon, Sharon, Carmel, and
Bashan are the four most beautiful regions of
the Holy Land, taking the word in its widest
extent. Lebanon is the northern mountain-
range, one hundred and twenty miles in
length, clad witl cedars and firs, and generally
erowned with snow, whence the name (from
ldban, white). Sharon is “the broad rich
tract of land” which stretches southwards
from the foot of Carmel, and melts into the
Shefelah, noted for its flowers (Cant. ii. 1) and
forests (Josephus, ‘ Ant. Jud.,’ xiv. 13, § 3).
Carmel is the upland dividing Sharon from
the Esdraelon plain, famous for its “rocky
dells” and “ dvep jungles of copse.” Finally,
Bashan is the trans-Jordanic upland, strvtch-
ing from the flanks of Hermon to Gilvad,
celebrated for its “ high downs” and “ wide-
sweeping plains,” for its “ forests of oak,”
and in ancient times for its herds of wild
cattle. All are said to be “ waste,” “ with-
ered,”’? and the like, partly on account of
the Assyrian ravages, but perhaps still more
as sym) athizing with the Jewish nation in
their distress—‘‘ashamed”’ for them, and
clad in mourning on their account. Shake
off their fruits; rather, perhaps, shake down
their leaves. Mr. Cheyne conjectures that
the prophecy was delivered in autumn.

Ver. 10.—Now will I rise. Judah’s ex-
tremity is Jehovali’s opportunity. “Now”
at length the time is come for God to show
himself. He will rise from his throne, and
activily display his power; he will exalt
himself above the heathen—lift himself up
above the nations.

Ver. 11.—Ye shall conceive chaff. The
Assyrian plans against Jerusalem shall be
mere “chatf” and “stubble.” They shall
come to nought. Nay, the fury of the foe
against Jerusalem shall be the fire to destroy
them.

Ver. 12.—The people; rather, the peoples,
as in ver. 3; ¢.e. the nations composing the
Assyrian army. As the burnings of lime;
asthorns. ‘Things that fire consumes utterly
and quickly.

Vers. 13—24.—REFLECTIONS ON ASSYRIA’S
OVERTHROW VIEWED AS ACCOMPLISHED. The
prophet’s first thought is, how wonderfully
the overthrow has manifested the might of
God (ver. 13). Next, how it must thrill
with fear the hearts of the wicked among
his people (ver. 14). Thirdly, how the
righteous are by it placed in security, and
can look back with joy to their escape, and
can with confidence look forward to a future
of happiness and tranquillity (vers. 15—24),
Messianic ideas intermingle with these


latter thoughts (vers. 17, 23), the image


of a happy, tranquil Judah melting into
that of Messiah’s glorious kingdom.


Ver. 13.—Hear, ye that are far off, etc.
Jehovah speaks by the mouth of his prophet,
and culls on the nations of the earth, far
and near, to consider and acknowledge his
miglit, as shown in his judgment on Assyria
(comp. Exod. xv. 14—16),

Ver. 14.—The sinners in Zion are afraid.
The prophet procecds to speak in his own
person. The judgment on Assyria, he says,
cannot but strike terror into the hearts of
the immoral and irreligious in Zion. They
cannot fail to realize tieir own danger, and
to tremble at it. Who among us, they
will say, can dwell with the devouring fire ?
Who among us shall dwell with everlasting
burnings? They will recognize God as “a
consuming Fire” (Deut. iv. 24), whose next
outbrvak may be upon themselves, and will
shudder at the prospect.

Ver. 15.—He that walketh righteously, etc.
The prophet answers the question which he
has supposed to be asked. None can endure
the revelation of the presence of God but
the holy and the upright—* he that hath
clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath
not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor
sworn deceitfully ” (Ps. xxiv. 4; comp. xv.
2—5). Uprightness is then explained as
consisting in six things mainly—(1) Just
conduct; (2) righteous speech ; (3) hatred
of oppression; (4) rejection of bribes; (5)
closing the ear against murderous sugges-
tions; (6) closing the eye against sinful
sights. We may compare with this sum-
mary those of the Psalms above quoted.
No enumeration is complete, or intended
to be complete. Isaial’s has special refer-
ence to tle favourite sins of the time—injus-
tice (ch. iii. 15; v. 23), oppression (ch. i.
17, 23; iii. 12, 14; v. 7; ete.), the receiving
of bribes (ch. i. 23; Hos. iv. 18; Micah iii,
11), and bloodshed (ch. i. 15, 21; lix. 3).

Ver. 16.—He shall dwell on high; lite-
rally, inkabit-heights —live, as it were, in the
perpetual presence of God. His place of
defence shall be the munitions of rocks;
rather, strongholds of rocks (i.e. rocky strong-
holds) shai be his refuge. He shall fly to
God, as_his “ Rock and his Fortress” (Ps.
Xviii. 2), not from him, as his “ Enemy and
Avenger” (Ps. viii. 2). Bread ... waters;
t.e. all that is necessary for his support and
sustenance. Shall be given him ., . shall
be sure; rather, ts given him... ta sure.
Godliness has “the promise of the life that
now is,” as well as that of the life “ which
is to come” (1 Tim. iv. 8).

Ver. 17.—Thine eyes. Another transi-
tion. Here from the third person to the
second, the prophet now addressing those
righteous ones of whom he has been speak-
ing in the two preceding verses. Shall see

, 19


542


the King in his beauty. The Messianic
King, whoever he might be, and whenever
he might make his appearance. It has
been said that beauty is not predicated of
the heavenly King (Cheyne); but Zech.
ix. 17; Ps. xlv. 2; and Canticles, passim,
contradict this assertion. “How great is
his beauty; “ Thou art fairer than the
children of men;” ‘*His mouth is most
sweet; yea, he is altogether lovely.” The
land that is very far off; literally, the land
of far distances. Bishop Lowth renders,
“Thine own land far extended,” and so
Delitgsch and Mr Cheyne. But if “the
King” is Messianic, so doubtless is “the
land”’—the world-wide tract over which
Messiah will reign (Kev. xxi. 1).

Ver. 18.—Thine heart shall meditate
terror; te. “thou shalt look back upon
tiie past time of terror, the dreadful period
of the siege, and contrast it with thy present
happiness.” Mr. Cheyne quotes as an
illustration, appositely enough, Virgil’s
“ It hee olim meminisse juvabit.” Where
is the scribe? ... the receiver?.. . he that
counted the towers? Where now are the
Assyrian officials —the scribe, who regis-
tered the amount of the tribute and bouty
(‘Ancient Monarchies,’ vol. i. p. 476); the
receiver, who weighed the gold and silver
carefully in a balance (Layard, ‘ Nineveh
and its Remains,’ vol. ii. p. 377); and the
engineer officer who surveyed the place to
be besieged, estimated its strength, and
counted its towers? All have perished or
have fled away in dismay.

Ver. 19.—Thou shalt not see a fierce
people, etc.; rather, thow shalt see no more
that barbarous people—the Asgyrians—a
people gqrufk of speech that thou canst not
hear them vering of tongue tnat thou
cunst not understand them (comp. ch. xxviii.
11). ‘The generation which witnessed the
destruction of Seniacherib’s army probably
did not see the Assyrians again. It was
not till about p.c. 670 that Manusseh was
“taken with hooks by the captains of the
King of Assyria, and carried to Babylon”
(2 Chron, xxxiii. 11).

Ver. 20.—Look upon Zion, etc.; t.e. turn
thy thoughts, O Judah, from the past to
the present—from the time of the siege to
the time after the siege terminated. The
eity of our solemnities; or, of our festal
meetings; the city where we celebrate our
Passovers, our Feasts of Weeks, our leasts
of Ingathering, and the like. A tent that
shall not be taken down. There is, perhaps,
a reference to Sennacherib’s threat to remove
the entire population from Jerusalem to a


far country (ch. xxxvi. 19), ‘This threat.


‘equi


THE BOOK OF THE PRCPUET ISAIAH. [em. xxxut. 1—24,


should not take effect. Not one of the
stakes thereof shall ever be removed. By
“the stakes” are meant “the tent-pegs,”
to which the ropes are fastened which keep
the tept—fizm (comp. Exod. xxvii. 10;
Xxxviii. 18,31; Judg, iv. 21). The promise
that they shall “never” be removed must
be understood either as conditional on the
people’s walking upriglitly (ver. 15), or as
a promise of a Jong continuance merely.

Ver. 21.—But there the glorious Lord
will be unto us a Place of broad rivers;
rather, there in majesty the Lord is ours;
(the Lord who is] a Place of broad rivers, etc.
Someé~eritics think that “a place of broad
rivers” may be exegetical of sham, “ there,”
and so apply it to Jerusalem; but the
majority regard the phrase as applied
directly tq Jehovah. As he is “a Plage
toa hide_in” (Ps. xxxii. 7; cxix. 114), so
he may be “a Place of broad rivers,” full,
t.e. of refreslimeint and spixitual—blessing.
Wherein shall go no galley. The river of
God’s grace, wiich “makes glad the city
of God,” shall bear no enemy on its surface,
allow no invader to cross it.

Ver. 23.—Thy tacklings are loosed. The
comparing of God to a river has led to the
representation of Judah’s enemies aS war-
ships (ver. 21). This causes Judah herself
to be viewed as a ship—a badly appointed
ship, which has to contend with one whose
t is perfect. The prophet’s
thoughts have travelled back to the exist-
ing state of things. They could not well
strengthen their mast; rather, th-y cannot
hold firm the lower part of their mast. The
mast bad its low:r extremity inserted into
a hole in a cross-beam, and required to be
kept in place by the ropes. If they were
loose, it might slip out of the hole and fall
overboard. They could not spread the sail;
rather, they cannot spread the qusign. The
ensign would seem to have been attached
to the top of the mast. If the mast fell,
it would no longer be spread out, so as to


be seen. Then is the prey of a great spoil
divided. The word “then” is emphatic.


Now the disabled ship seems incapable of
coping with its enemy. Ten (after Assyria’s
overthrow) Judah will obtain an immense
spoil (see ver. 4). Even the lame shall
have their portion.

Ver. 24.—And the inhabitant shall not
say, Iam sick. There shall be no sickness
in the restored Jerusalem — at least, no
“sickness unto death.” The people that
dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity,
Once more the prophet floats off into
Messianic anticipations,


OH. xxxm1. 1—24.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 643
oe ee eee


HOMILETICS,


Ver. 6.—The fear of the Lord, Judah’s treasure, The best treasure of a nation is a
religious spirit. Judaa had been ravaged by the host of the Assyrians under Senna-
cherib, had had all her “fenced cities” taken (ch. xxxvi. 1), had been stripped of her
most precious treasures in silver and gold (2 Kings xviii. 14—16; ‘ Eponym Canon,’
p. 135) by the rapacious king, and was left with an empty treasury, down-trodden vine-
yards, and fields unsown (2 Kings xix. 19); but her best treasure still remained to her—
she was rich in “the fear of the Lord.” The fear of the Lord gave her (1) wisdom, to
direct her steps aright, to keep out of entangling alliances, and abstain from provoking
attack ; (2) energy, to throw off her depression and struggle manfully against her mis-
fortunes, to clear and sow_her ands, replant heryineyards (2 Kings xix. 19), and rebuild
her villages and country towns; and (3) complete trust in God, to support her amid all
trials and troubles through which she might have to pass, and secure her against the
despondency which is the worst foe of declining states. After the deliverance which
she had experienced, it must have beeu plain to her that “God was in the midst of
ber ;” that his power had no limit; and that, so long as she feared him and put her
trust in his protection, she was safe from any and every enemy. A nation thus circum-
stanced is a thousand times richer than one which has countless store of silver and gold
laid up in its treasuries, granaries overflowing, lands teeming with crops, magnificent
cities full of goodly merchandise, well-stored magazines and arsenals, but no trust in a
Divine Protector, nor reliance on him who is alone “ mighty to save.”


Ver. 10.—The opportuneness of God’s judgments. It is characteristic of Divine inter-
positions that they take place at the moment of greatest need. Isaac is on the point of
being sacrificed when the angel calls to Abraham out of heaven (Gen. xxii. 10, 11).
Elisha is compassed about with horsemen and chariots, and on the point of falling into
his enemie,’ hands, when they are smitten with blindness (2 Kings vi. 15—18). The
Israelites are hemmed in between the Egyptians and the sea, and must perish on the
morrow, when the waters are divided for them, and a way opened to them for escape
(Exod. xiv. L1O—22). More especially is the appropriateness of the time noticeable, when
the interposition is in the shape of a judgment. Judgments are opportune doubly: (1)
with respect to those on whom they fall; (2) with respect to those whom they relieve.

I. JUDGMENTS ARE OPPORTUNE WITH RESPECT TO THOSE ON WHOM THEY FALL. God is
so merciful that he will not judge men “ before the time,” or until they have “filled up
the measure of their iniquities.” Hence it is the general rule that his enemies are at
their greatest height of exaltation, and at the very acmé of their haughtiness and pride,
when the fatal blow falls upon them. Assyria had reached the zenith of her greatness
under Sennacherib in B.c. 700. He himself had reached a pitch of arrogance unknown
to former kings (2 Kings xix. 28, 24; ver. 8), when the destroying angel went forth.
So Nebuchadnezzar was stricken down at the height of his glory and his glorying
(Dan. iv. 29—33); and Haman had attained to the greatest elevation possible for a
subject (Esth. v. 11) when he was seized and hanged in front of his house. Herod
Agrippa (Acts xii, 21—23) is another instance; and so, perliaps, is Arius.

il. JuDGMENTS ARE OPPOBTUNE WITH RESPECT TO THOSE WHOM THEY RELIEVE,
Generally, though not always, a deliverance accompanies a judgment. God, when he
“pu tet! down one, setteth up another.” Hezekiah and the Jewish nation were
delivered by the destruction of Sennacherib’s host. Mordecai was saved when Haman
suffered death. Alexander and the Catholics of Constantinople breathed again when
Ariu suddenly expired. The Church had rest when Galerius perished miserably. It
is in their utmost need especially that God succours men, perhaps because they then
turn to him witl most sincerity, and offer their supplications to him with most earnest-
nes When they call to him “out of the depth,” their need and their faith both plead
for them, and he “ hears their voice” (Ps. cxxx. 1, 2).


Ver. 17.—“ The King in his beauty.” When Christ appeared on earth at his first
coming, he “had no beauty that men should desire him” (ch, lili. 2), Roughly clad
and toil-worn, whatever the heavenly expression of his countenance, he did not strike


544 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [om. xxxm. 1—24,


—-


men as beautiful, majestic, or even as “comely” (ch. liii. 2). But at his second coming
it will be different. St. John the Divine describes him as he saw him in vision: “In
the midst of the seven candlesticks was one like unto the Son of man, clothed with a
,arment down to the feet, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle. His head and
his hairs were white like wool, as white as snow; and his eyes were as a flame of fire;
and his feet like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a furnace; and his voice as
the sound of mauy waters. And he had in his right hand seven stars: and out of his
mouth went a sharp two-edged sword : and his countenance was as the sun shineth in
his strenvth ” (Rev. i. 13—16). The description in Canticles is cast in a more terrene
mould, but equally indicates a more than earthly beauty: “ My beloved is white and
ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand. His head is as the most fine gold, his locks are
bushy, and black as a raven. His eyes are as the eyes of doves by the rivers of waters,
washed with milk, and fitly set. His cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers ;
his lips like lilies, dropping sweet-smelling myrrh. His hands areas gold rings set with
the beryl: his belly is as bright ivory overlaid with sapphires. His legs are as pillars
of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold: his countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as
the cedars. His mouth is most sweet: yea, he is altogether lovely” (Cant. v. L1O—16).
The following adaptation by Dr. Pusey of the words of an ancient writer says all that
can be said by unassisted human pen on a topic transcending man’s power of thought
or speech: “If we could ascend from the most beautiful form which the soul could here
imagine, to the least glorious body of the beatified, on and on throuvh the countless
thousands of glorious bodies, compared wherewith heaven would be dark, and the sun
lose its shining ; and, yet more, from the most beautiful deified soul, as visible here, to
the beauty of the disembodied soul, whose image would scarce be recognized . . . yea,
let the God-enlightened soul go on and on, through all those choirs of the heavenly
hierarchies, clad with the raiment of Divinity, from choir to choir, from hierarchy to
hierarchy, admiring the order and beauty and harmony of the house of God; yea,
let it, aided by Divine grace and light, ascend even higher, and reach the bound and
term of all created beauty,—yet it must know that the Divine power and wisdom could
create other creatures, far more perfect and beautiful than all which he hath hitherto
created. Nay, let the highest of all the seraphs sum in one all the beauty by nature
and grace and glory of all creatures, yet could it not be satisfied with that beauty,
but must, because it was not satisfied with it, conceive some higher beauty. Were God
forthwith, at every moment, to create that higher beauty at its wish, it could still con-
ceive something beyond; for not being God, its beauty could not satisfy its conception.
So let him still, and in hundred thousand, hundred thousand thousand years with
swiftest flight of understanding, multiply continually those deyrees of beauty, so that
each fresh degree should ever double that preceding, and the Divine power should, with
like swiftness, concur in creating that beauty, as in the beginning he said, ‘ Let there be
light, and there was light ;’ after all these millions of years he would be again at the
beginning, and there would be no comparison between it and the Divine beauty of


Jesus Christ, God and Man. For it is the bliss of the finite not to reach the Infinite”.


(Pusey, ‘ Minor Prophets,’ p. 562).


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1—6.—Jehovah a Refuge. It is “Israecl’s extremity, but God’s opportunity.”
a is about to fall on Assyria; salvation and every resource is to be found in

ehovah.

I. Wor To Assyria. This land appears under the image of a rapacious spoiler. The
time is about B.c. 700, and the allusion is to Sennacherib and his army, who had advanced
on a plundering and destroying course. The tables are to be turned, and the greedy
conqueror (ef. 2 Kings xviii. 14, 15) was to become the object of other’s greed in turn.
Whether the words imply a complaint of unprovoked aggression and of perfidy is not
clear. But to the pro) hetic eye in every age it is clear that empires founded uj on force,
fraud, and rapacity cannot endure; that they who take the sword will perish by the
eros It was the fate of Assyria to fall beneath the mightier powers of Media and

abylon, ;


_s


om. xxx. 1—24,.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 545


SE —————


Il. THE arrirupEe oF PRAYER AND TRUST. “O Jehovah, be gracious unto us! For
thee have we waited.” It is the attitude of calm confidence; it is the mood in which
things distant and unseen are realized. Here the prophet sees what is improbable to
the eye of worldly calculation—the downfall of the proudest power of the time. It is
not less an energetic attitude—all the endeavour of the spirit straining after that highest
point of view, where the confusions of the time fall into the unity of the Divine purpose.
It is a seeming weak, yet really powerful, attitude; the foe trembles when he sees us on
our knees. The arm of Jehovah is the symbol of strength, put forth in time of danger,
tmterposing and delivering (cf. Exod. xv. 16; Job xl. 9; Ps. xliv. 8; lxxvii. 15; Ixxxix.
21; xcviii. 1). Not only in particular emergencies, but “every morning,” i.e. con-
stantly and evermore, may that arm be ours to lean upon, and we shall be strong and
know no fear. And such is the effect of this act of prayer and contemplation, that
already the symptoms of change are heard in the air. There is a confused sound in the
distance, as of the roll of many waters; the people are rushing in flight. Jehovah is
seen lifting himself up (cf. Numb. x. 35; Ps. Ixviii. 1), and a great rout of the nations
ensues; and the conquerors are seen swarming down upon the spoils, as the caterpillars
on their food.

Ill. Tae arrriutres or JEHOVAH AS THEY ARE REVEALED IN PROPHETIO THOUGHT,
AS THEY ARE CONFIRMED BY HISTORIO EVENT. 1, His inviolable strength. He is secure;
he is One who dwells in the height (Ps. xcvii. 9). The heavens shall rather fall than he
be dethroned, his dynasty over all nations come to anend. 2. His abundant resources
of good. A chorus seems here to break forth in his praise. He has filled Zion with
spiritual treasures, these being ever united with temporal blessings in the theocracy.
Justice and righteousness. ‘The effect of the temporal deliverance will be that men will
turn to the Deliverer, and will walk in his ways and according to his laws (cf. ch. xxx. 22,
etc.; xxxi. 6; xxxii. 15, etc.). Amidst the vicissitudes of these times, the people will
have a principle of constancy. There will be “store of salvations” for every time of
need in the religious “ wisdom and knowledge” diffused among the people. Compare
with this the picture of Hezekiah’s reign (2 Kings xviii.). In one word, the “ treasure”
of the nation will be the fear of Jehovah, 7.e. true religion—in distinction from
successfiil wars or commercial prosperity. Perhaps the love of material treasured on
the part of the kings of Judah is indirectly rebuked. The true wealth of a people, as
of an individual, must ever be the mass of its available wisdom and piety.—J.


Vers. 7—12.— The uprising of Jehovah. I, His UPRISING Is A FIGURE OF PROVI-
DENTIAL INTERPOSITION. There are times when he seems to be still, s-ated, and looking
on, and the course of events to defy his will (ch. xviii. 4). Men cry, “ How long, O Lord ?
Awake, stir thyself up to deliver!” But he knows his own time; he is not a day too
soon, nor too late. When the hour of providence has struck, the scene instantly changes.
“ Now will I rise; now I will lift up myself!” It is not for us to know the times and
the seasons. Our part is to tarry, expect, work, and pray.

II. Gop UPRISES WHEN MAN IS CAST DowN. ‘he condition of the land seems hopeless
and despairing. ‘The lion-learted herves break down in weeping and lamei tation, and
the messengers, bewailing the hard conditions of peace, keep them company. ‘The scene
is Oriental and passionate. The roads are deserted ; the land at the mercy of a perfidious
conqueror, who holds lis promise in contempt. ‘!he land languishing in the wane of the
year, and the falling leaves of Bashan and Carmel, seem silently to sympathize with
human woe. Yet one word from the Eternal suffices to change the whule situation: it
is a word of supreme contempt for all the machinations of man. Their conceptious are
as “hay,” their pretensions as “stubble,” their furious breath as self-devouring tire; and
in a great conflagration the people will perish. Worldly passions and worldly might,
he that sitteth in the heavens derides; his word abolishes the proud, while it supports
the humble.—J.


Vers. 183—16.—Living near to God. Jehovah has uprisen; he has revealed his might
in the destruction of the Assyrian host; he calls through the prophet upon all the
nations to acknowledge him.

L Tue awFuLness or Gop. We see it reflected from the horror-struck faces of the
ungodiy and the profane. He is indeed seen to be a “consuming Fire,” having bis


ISAIAH 2N


546 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cm xxxim. 1—24


i


“ furnace in Jerusalem” (ch. xxxi. 19). And all the immoral and the unprincipled, the
heedless and the worldly, feel themselves as fuel for his wrath—they whom the con-
tinual returns of the Word preached do not alter, so that their old sins remain firm,
entire, and unbattered, the baseness of their inclinations unchanged, the levity of their
discourse and behaviour; those whose former distresses and disasters have not laid low
in the valleys of humility, nor circumscribed the lashings out of their luxury; they
whose past miseries and restraints give only a relish instead of a check to present pride
and intemperance; those whom all the caresses of Providence have not been able to
win upon, so as to endear them to a virtuous strictness, or deter them from a vicious
extravagance ;—all such—unless the great God be trivial and without concern in his
grand transactions with our immortal souls—during this condition, so far as we cap
judge, are fashioning for wrath. “He isa probationer for hell, and carries about with him
the desperate symptoms and plague-tokens of a person likely to be sworn against by
God, and hastening apace to a sad eternity ” (South).

II. DweLuine NEAR To Gop. Who can endure the vicinity of this devouring Fire ?
Only they who have intrinsic spptibual worth, which when tried by fire will appear unto
“praise and glory.” “Only that which yields itself willingly to be God’s organ can abide
eee flames (cf. on the burl h, Exod. iii. 2).” Of all else, like briars and thorns,

énd is to be burned” (ch. x. 17; xxx. 27). The fire ever burning on the altar
(Lev. vi. 13) is the symbol of him in whose nature wrath and love unite; the wrath
being the symptom of love, which must ever glow against evil. The answer to the
question is given in the picture of the good man which follows; his character positively
and negatively, his consequent security.

Ill. Picture oF TRUE PIETY. 1. Jis completeness.. He walks in “perfect righteous-
ness.” Not so the righteousness of “scribes and Pharisees,” partial and imperfect, but
rounded out to the full requirements of the Divine Law. The hypocrite “singles out
some certain parts, which best suit his occasions and least thwart his corruptions.” The
proud or impure man may be Tiberal to the poor, may abhor lying and_treachery, and
may be ready in the fulfilment of duties which do not jostle his But it
“will not suffice to chop and change one duty for another; he cannot clear his debts
by paying part of the great sum he owes” (South). To offend in one is to be guilty of
all (Jas. ii. 10). The chain of duty is broken by the removal of a single link. ‘Then
shall | not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy commandments” (Ps. cxix. 6).
It is not a handsome feature or a handsome limb which makes the handsome man, but
the symmetry and proportion of all. So, not the practice of this or that virtue, but an
entire complexion of all, can alone render a man righteous in the sight of God. 2. Its
leading churacteristics. It unites what human corruption is ever tending to dissever,
religion and morality. It imitates the Father in heaven in the justice of his perfect
Being. It rejects unjust gain, flings the bribe as a thing of pollution from the hand. It
is abstinent from the greed of gold, that most downward and degrading vice, making the
soul “all earth and dirt, burying that noble thing which can never die.” “ ‘Thou shalt not
take a gift, because a gift blinds the eyes of the wise” (Deut. xvi. 9; cf. 1 Sam. xii. 3;
Eccles. vii. 7). Covetousness is a thing directly contrary to the very spirit of Christianity ;
which is a free, a large, and an open spirit—open to God and man, and always carrying
charity in one hand, and generosity in the other (South). It is ewclws/ve in reference to
evil, as inclusive in reference to good. The good man walks with ear and eye shut against
the moral contagion around him, As the leaven of disease will not develop save in the
unhealthy body, so moral evil will not grow to a head in the soul antipathetic to it. He
“seals up the avenues of ill.” By listening and looking come all our best and all our
worst inspirations. Dead to sim, he “neither hears nor gees;” alive to God,-he.is, all
ears.and all eyes, for his words, his inspirations. The chastity of the spirit extends to
the senses, aud if the mind be full of the love of purity, “each thing of sin and guilt” is
driven far from it. Itself remains intact as the sunbeams glancing on the garbage-heap.
3. Its security and satisfaction. The good man dwells on the heights (cf. Ps. xv.5 XXlv.
8, 4), inaccessible to miasmata from the poisonous swamps below, braced by the different
air, enlivened by glorious prospects, He will have food, and that in abundance. Teo
“eat and be satisfied” is the simplest and strongest figure for intellectual satisfaction
for a rich inner life; as hunger that of an empty, distressed, self-torturing spirn. But
as food is of no service without an appetite for it, so this spiritual satisfaction can onls


\


cn, xxx, 1—24.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 547


be theirs who hunger and thirst after righteonsness, who have fixed their minds upon
an Object, which still invites the most boundless and unlimited appetite. The nobler
senses are never weary of exercise upon objects which delight them. We do not surfeit
upon noble music, nor do rare pictures cloy. The desires of the righteous are so
agreeable to the ways of God that they find a continual freshness growing upon them
in the performance of duty; like a stream, which, the further it has run, the more
strength and force it has to run further (South).—J,


Vers. 17—24.— The reign of Hezekiah. Amidst all the agitation caused by the
invasion of Sennacherib, and his perfidy, “the voices of true prophets were raised with
power, pointing to the imperishable elements in the true community, and proclaiming
the approach of a great crisis, the crushing weight of which should alizht only on the
faithless, whether among the Assyrians or in Judah” (Ewald). Here we find a
reflection of the excitement of the time.

I. THE GLORY OF THE KING. His beauty is a moral beauty—that of a just rule (ch.
Xxxii. 1); an “ideal beauty—the evidence of God’s extraordinary favour.” The picture
should be compared with that in Ps. xlv. ‘lhe eyes of the people shall see a land of
distances. Looking northward and southward, and eastward and westward, the
boundaries of the kingdom shall still be extended, far as eye can reach.

II. VaNIsHED TERRORS. The Assyrian officials who registered the amounts of the
tribute, who tested the silver and the gold, who counted the towers of the city about
to fall their prey, shall have vanished. The people themselves shall proudly and
thankfully number those intact towers (Ps. xlviii. 13). No longer shall the jarring
accents of the joreigner’s stammering tongue fall upon their ears.

III. THe sTRENGTH AND SPLENDOUR oF Zion. Look upon her! Once more the
festive throngs shall gather there. Once more she shall be a house of peace, or
dwelling of confidence, a quiet resting-place. She had indeed seemed like the tent of
wanderers, the pegs ready to be drawn out, the cords to be rent, at the bidding of the
conqueror. The people had been threatened with removal (ch. xxxvi.17). This fear shall
have passed away. “The majesty of Jehovah, like an all-protecting egis, terrifying to
his enemies, assuring to his friends, shall be revealed in Zion’s state. That presence,
which is “ glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders,” shall have returned
thither; that right hand, which is glorious in power, shall again have been stretched
forth to deliver and to protect. Jehovah, and he alone, is the Defence of Jerusalem.
What though she be unlike “ populous No, situate among the rivers, with the waters
round about it, and the rampart of the sea” (Nah. iii. 8), or Babylon, “seated on the
waters” (Jer. li. 13),—he shall be instead of rivers and canals to his holy city. It
is the streams of a spiritual river which “shall make glad the city of God” (Ps.
xlvi. 4).

IV. i Divine Ruuer. By him kings reign and princes decreed justice. The
earthly king is but representative of him who is enthroned in heaven, the “great
King.” Hezekiah is but his vicegerent, his inspired servant. The weak political
power becomes strong through him. Though Zion be like a dismasted ship, she will
prevail over the proud, well-rigged ships of her foes. Sin will cease, punishment will
be at end, and, with it, bodily suffering and sickness (ch. xxxv. 5, 6; Ixv. 20; Mark ii.
10, 11). “A people, humbled by punishment, penitent and therefore pardoned, will
dwell in Jerusalem. The strength of Israel and all its salvation rest upon the forgive-
ness of its sins.”

V. Lzssons. 1. National judgments will only cease with national sins. ‘ Humble
repentance is to cure us of our sins and miseries; and there can no cure be wrought
unless the plaster be as broad as the sore.” 2. The most effectual way to avert national
judgments is the way of personal amendment. Particular sins often bring down general
judgments. Sin, like a leprosy, begins in a small compass, yet quickly overspreads the
whole. 3. The forsakiny of sins beyets hope in the mercy of God. Because he has
promised upon that condition to remove them; because he actually often has so removed
them ; because, when men are thus humbled, God has attained the end of his judgments


(South).—J.


Ver. 17.—The glorious vision. “Thine eyes shall see the King in his beauty.”


548 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [om xxxm1 1—24,


There is much of beauty in this world. And by Christ Jesus God created the worlds.
So that he is the Archetype of all beauty. Everything lovely was first a thought of
Christ betore it became a fact in life. These eyes of ours have seen glorious spectacles:
the sun rising to run his race; the tender greens and purples of the seas; the
magnificence of Carmel and Lebanon. How much also have we all seen of moral
beauty !—the gentleness of pity; the heroism of endurance; the sublimity of sacrifice.
Yet these have all been mingled with some elements of worldliness and sin.

I. THI8 PROPHECY I8 FULFILLED IN CHRIST as THE TRUE Kina. Think of the
kings of every age: the Pharaohs; the Ceesars, There we see power, pageantry,
and, alas! too often criminality and cruelty. Here we see the true King. One whose
government is Divine, because it is within, holding in supremacy the conscience and
the heart. One who is a King who “reigns in righteousness, mighty to save.”

Il, A PROPHECY FULFILLED IN THE BEAUTY OF CHRIST’S CHARACTER. Beauty lies in
symmetry and completeness; he was perfectly holy, without spot or blemish. Beauty
lies in subtle harmonies; and in Christ justice, love, and wisdom were all united in
one. Beauty lies in conformity with moral law; and he was “ harmless, undefiled, and
separate from sinners.” Beauty is not to be found in mere sentiment alone, Character
is not to be tested simply by exquisite feeling or profound teaching, but by a life
where truth felt and truth spoken and truth lived are all embodied in one. He who
spake as never man spake could also say, “ Which of you convinceth me of sin ?”

IIL. A PROPHECY FULFILLED THROUGH THE POWER OF SPIRITUAL VISION. “ Thine
eyes shall see.” The beauty of Christ can be seen only through the lens of moral
disposition, ‘‘ Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.” It is distinctly
said of the wicked, concerning their view of Christ, “ They shall see no beauty in him
that they should desire him.” We may have the artistic eye to see the beauty of
Grecian capitol and Roman arch, but we may not have the spiritual eye whereby aloue
we discern spiritual things.

IV. A PROPHECY FULFILLED IN PERSONAL EXPERIENCE. “ Thine eyes.” Powers of
vision cannot be transferred. How we have longed, perhaps, that those we love should
see this beauty too! Norcan they be intellectually willed. We must have the spiritual
heart before we can enjoy the spiritual eye.

V. A PROPHECY TO BE PERFECTLY FULFILLED IN THE FINAL REVELATION OF
HEAVEN. Whatever we may see there of new displays of God’s creative energy and
power, however fair and lovely our own beloved ones may be now that they are
“without fault before the throne of God,”—we may be sure of this, that Christ will be
“the Altogether Lovely.” The eye will be perfectly purged from sin, and the soul
perfectly alive to God. Then Christ’s own prayer will be fulfilled, ‘“‘ That they may
behold my glory, which thou hast given me.”—W. M. 8.


Ver. 1.—Aggravated evil. I. THAT SIN IS OFTEN FOUND IN AN AGGRAVATED FORM.
It may take the formsof which the prophet here complains. 1. Unprovoked aggression.
“Thou spoilest, and (though) thou wast not spoiled.” Men may go so far as to assail
their fellow-men without the slightest justification; this may be in the shape of open
war, or of brutal individual assault, or of unlawful appropriation, or of shameful slander.
2. Ineaxcusuble treachery. “And dealeth treacherously, and (though) they dealt not,”
etc. Men will go so far in iniquity as to deceive, entrap, and even ruin—and that not
only in a pecuniary, but even in a moral sense—those who are guileless and unsuspicious ;
they will take a mean and execrable advantage of the innocence which should not
appeal in vain for the protection of the strong. Those thus wantonly and heinously
guilty may beguile others from the paths of (1) faith and piety; (2) virtue; (3) the
practical wisdom on which depend the maintenance and comfort of the home.

Il. THAT WHEN THUS FOUND IT EXCITES Gop’s DEEP DISPLEASURE. The Divine
“woe” is pronounced against it. And this “woe” is only one note in a large and full
outpouring of Divine indignation in all parts of the sacred Scriptures. Prophet and
psalmist and apostle, yes, and the Lord of love himself (see especially Matt, xxiii.),
unite to utter the awful anger of God “against them who commit such things.” It
includes: 1. His holy indignation directed against the evil-doers themselves; not the
sin, but the sinner (Ps. vii. 11; Rom. ii. 8, 9). 2. His boundless hatred of the evil
deed; not the agent, but the act (Jer. xliv. 4; Hab, i, 13), AM sin is a leprous, a


OH. Xxxit. 1—24.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 519


—————————————————————————————————————


loathsome, thing in God’s sight: how much more so those aggravated forms of it in
which man wantonly injures and ruins his fellow-man!

IL Tuar ir Is CERTAIN TO MEET WITH RETRIBUTION ANSWERING TO THE OFFENCE.
We know: 1. That impenitent sin will be followed by the judgments of a righteous God.
The ‘Divine “woe” points to severe punishment—to loss, sorrow, ruin, death (Exod,
xxxiv. 7; Prov. xi. 21; Rom. ii. 6, ete.). 2. ‘hat retribution will be proportionate to
the magnitude of the offence (Luke xii. 47, 48; John ix. 41; xv. 22; Rom. ii. 12),
8. That retribution is likely to take a form which corresponds to the offence. “ When
thou shalt cease to spoil, thou shalt be spoiled,” ete. (1) Violence provokes violence ;
they that take the sword do commonly perish with the sword (Matt. xxvi. 52). (2)
Craft will be undermined; against the subtle schemer men will combine and use their
ingenuity to overturn him. (8) Avarice finds its own wealth an insupportable burden.
(4) The rej: ction of the supernatural ends in the acceptauce of the superstitious, etc.
“With what measure we mete, it is measured to us again.” —O,


Ver. 2.—The lesser and the larger mercies. This prayer includes the striking request,
“Be thou thcir arm every morning, our salvation also in the time of trouble.” ‘The
words sugvest the pertinent and not unpr:fitable question—Are we laid under greater
obligation by the lesser mercies of God which we are continually receiving, or by the
larger ones which we occasionally receive at his hands? We look at both—

I, THE LESSER MERCIES WE ARE CONTINUALLY RECEIVING. God is to us “our Arm
every morniug;” he is our support from day to day, from hour to hour; “in him we live
and move and have our being.” We may pass many days in which no striking or
impressive mercy is bestowed upon us; but we pass no single hour, we spend no fleeting
minute, in which some kindnesses do not come from his bountiful hand. Our indebtedness
arising from these may be estimated when we consider: 1. Their regularity. The
nature of God’s kindnesses is commouly missed by reason of their revularity; they are
referred to “ law,” as if law bad any power, in itself, to originate or to sustain. Con-
sequently, they are not traced, as they certainly should be, to the love and care of a
Heavenly Father. But their value is immeasurably enhanced by their regularity. How
much more * gracious unto us” is our God in that he is “our arm every morning ”!
in that we can confideutly reckon on the morning light, on the evening shadows, on the
incoming and outyoing tides, on the returning seasons, and can arrange and act
accordingly, than if the Author of nature gave us his blessings irregularly, spasmodically,
at such uncertain intervals that we could make no arrangements, and hold no
permanent oflices, and be in constant doubt as to whether or when our agency would
be required! 2. Their constancy. We are leaning on God’s arm continually. It is
not merely a matter of frequency; it is not by a permissible hyperbole that the
psalmist says, “the goodness of God endureth continually” (Ps. lii. 1); nor is it
without reason that he asks of God “that his loving-kindness and his truth may
continually preserve him” (Ps. xl. 11), Every year God is crowning with his
goodness; he “daily loadeth us with benefits ;” he is our arm every morning of our
life; each nicht he lays his hand upon us in sleep and “ restores our soul.” We may
well join in singing—

“The wings of every hour shall bear
Some thankful tribute to thine ear.”


For on the wings of every passing hour come many mercies to our hearts and to our
homes from the protecting and providing love of God; and we may go yet further and say,
or sing, “ Minutes came fast, but mercies were more fast and fleet than they.” God’s
creative power gives us our life, and his constant visitation preserves our spirit (Jub x. 12).

IL THE LARGER MERCIES WE SOMETIMES RECEIVE. God is “our salvation also in the
time of trouble.” he greatness of our indebtedness to him for these his larger, his
especial and peculiar loving-kindnesses, we may estimate if we consider: 1. Their
freyuency. Tuough infrequent as compared with his constant favours, yet they are
not infrequent in themselves, if we count them al/—national, ecclesiastical, family,
individual. 2. Their exceeding preciousness to us who receive them. Who can reckon
the worth of one single deliverance from (1) the gulf of black disbelief; or from (2)
the power of some unholy passion—avarice, or lust, or revenge; or lrom (3) the misery


550 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xxx1u. 1—24,
Se ES


of some threatened loneliness or (what is far worse than that) some entangling and
ruinous alliance; or from (4) the dark shadow of some false and cruel slander? Only
they who have been thus saved in the time of trouble, who have been lifted up and
placed on the solid rock of safety, and made to walk again in the sunshine of peace
and hope, can say how great is that mercy from the hand of God. 3. Their costliness
to the Divine Giver. (1) It in all human sympathy there is an expenditure of self,
which, though most willingly rendered, is yet painful and oppressive to the spirit,
shall we not think that there is this element also in him whose sympathy is so much
stronger, and whose sensibility is so much finer than ours (see ch. xiii. 9; Luke xix. 41;
John xi. 85; Heb. iv. 15)? (2) One great redemptive act—the salvation which is in
Christ Jesus—was wrought at the cost of a Divine incarnation, of sorrow, of shame, of
death. //e gave himself for us. We conclude that, (a) taking this last thought into
account, the special mercies of God do incalculably outweigh the constant ones;
(6) that together they constitute an overwhelming reason for worship, for obedience, for
consecration ; (c) that we do well to appeal to God in earnest prayer for the special
mercies we need, and to wait expectantly for them. “O Lord, be thou gracious unto
us; we have waited for thee.”—C.


Vers. 5, 6.—A wise nation (Church). These verses supply us with three features
by which a nation or Church that is possessed of true wisiom will be characterized.

I. A PERVADING SENSE OF Gop—of his greatness, his power, his righteousuess. “The
Lord is exalted; he dwelleth on high; he hath filled Zion with judgment and
righteousness.” The result of the deliverance wrought by Jehovah would be the
creation of this devout sentiment. The holy nation, the Church alter the heart of its
Divine Author, will strive to maintain this as an abidiny, religious sense; it will cherish
that feeling of reverential awe which fills the heart when the greatness of the Exalted
One is realized, when the power of him that makes his judgments to be known is lelt,
when the righteo sness olf him who overturns iniquity is present to the mind, Well
does it speak tor the community, civil or sacred, when this sacred sense of God “ hath
filled” it from end to end, from the least to the greatest. This pervading conviction is,
indeed, an essential thing; without it the most vehement protestations, the most
honoured creeds, the most ecstatic fervours, will soon be found to be as “sounding
brass or a tinkling cymbal.”

II. A DEEP SENSE OF THE TRUE 80URCE OF STABILITY AND STRENGTH. ‘“ Wisdom
and knowledge,” etc. It has always been the case that communities have imagined
that their stability and strength rested in things material and visible—in seas and
mountains, in armies and navies, in lands and houses, in large numbers of men and
women, in goods and grants. But all these things prove to be of no avail when there
is inward rottenness, when disunion has crept into the state or into the Church,
when the process of demoralization has set in so that it cannot be arrested. No
external resources of any kind, however numerous or strong they may be, will save a
society that is giving itself up to that which is false and foul. Its defeat and dissolu-
tion are only a question of years—or days. The true source of stability and of strength
is in heavenly wisdom—thiat “ knowledge” of God which means, not only a perception
of the truth but a love ol it, a delight in it, an acceptance of it as the one thing that
will cleause the heart, and that should regulate the life,

Hil. A RiGHT ESTIMATE OF PRosPERITY. ‘The fear of the Lord is his treasure.”
What is it that constitutes wealth or prosperity ? According to the answer which we
give to this question our spiritual position may be well determined. If we are
indulving the illusion that our prosperity consists mainly in money, or in stocks, or in
mines, or in acres; or if we seck for itin numbers, or in reputations, or in the patronage
of the titled and the strong, we are living in a “ paradise of fools.” ‘Surely our riches
are not where we think, and the kind heart is more than all our store.” Yes! and not
simjly the kind heart, but the pure heart, the heart (1) that has been purified of the
love and tolerance of sin by the truth and by the Spirit of God; (2) that has been led
to hide itself in the Divine mercy, and to lose itself in the love of a Divine Friend and
Lord ; (3) that lives to bear witness to his truth, and to magnify his holy Name. That
Christian Church tiat holds itself rich, that finds its treaswre in the fear of the Lord
in the consequent and complementary love of Jesus Christ, is the Church that is


cH. xxxm. 1—24.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 551
a


divinely wise. “The fear of the Lord is the beginning ”—and a very large part also—
“of wisdom.”—C, ;


Vers, 10—16.—JIn the presence of the Hily One. The great question which, in a
somewhat different form from that of the text, Balak proposed to Balaain (Micah vi. 6)
is one that has always stirred the hearts of men everywhere and in all aves. We must
find an answer to it if we are to enjoy any “rest unto our souls.”

I. Tue THRICE-HOLY LorD, ouR Gop. That which makes God’s intervening purpose
(ver. 10) so serious to bis creatures is that when he arisvs he will be found to be as

the devouring Fire,” as “everlasting Burnings;” i.e. he will prove himself to be the
Holy One of Israel : (1) Whose Spirit is absolutely intolerunt of iniquity, hating it with
perfect hatred, to whom it is so abhorrent that he “cannot look” upon it. And (2) whose
action ts inflexihly opposed to it ; (a) placing limits to its temporary success (ver. 11);
(0) bringing its decr: es and its achievements to nothing, as the lime-kiln reduces every-
thing to ashes; (c) consuming the strength of the impious and the rebellious as easily
and as swiftly as the fiery flames burn up the thorns (ver. 12). To fallen, guilty man,
whose character has been depraved and whose life has been stained by sin, God is
obliged to make himself known, and to make himself feared as “ the devouring fire,” as
“the everlasting [‘the continual’] burnings,” consuming iniquity in the holy ardour of
his unquenchable purity.

II. THe presence oF THE Hoty Onz. Who among us shall dwell with this Holy
One, this consuming Fire? Who shall abide in his presence and dwell in his holy hill?
(Ps. xv. 1; xxiv. 3)? here are different senses in which we are before God, or stand
in his presence. 1. //is observant presence, which is constant, of which we do well to
remind ourselves often, with the thought of which our minds and hearts may well be
filled. 2. //is interposing presence. ‘lhose times and occasions in particular when he
arises to judgment (ver. 10); when he stretches forth his hand in punishment or in
reward ; when he sends back the Assyrian monarch in humiliating flight, and at the
same time lifts up the head of bowed and trembling Jerusalem; when he breaks the
arm of the oppressor and the chains of the captive; when he scatters his enemies and
redeems his peuple. 38. //is presence in the sanctuary. When he manifests himself to
his waiting ones as he dves not unto the world. 4. His nearer presence in another
world. When in a most solemn sense we shall “stand before” him, and when in a
most blessed sense we shall “dwell with ” him.

II]. Tose woo CAN ABIDE IN HIS PRESENCE. The answer is negative and positive.
1, Negative. (1) Not the guilty ones among the unprivileged. To those who “ have not
the Law,” but who are guilty of transgressing the unwritten law; to all who act as
Assyria did on this occasion, spoiling those who had not spoiled them, ete. (ver. 1),
God will mete out his indignation (see ver. 11). (2) Not the insincere among the
children of privilege. ‘“ Fearfulness will surprise the hypocrites” (ver. 14). Let all
who sing the praises and utter the words of the Redeemer consider whether gratitude
and devotedness are in their hearts as well as on their lips. 2. Positive. They can
dwell with the Holy One who are possessed ef moral because of spiritual intrgrity.
“He that walketh righteously,” etc.; é.e. he that is of sound heart, and therefore of a
pure life. With us, in this Christian era, it may be said of spiritual integrity (1) that
its foundation is laid in genuine repentance, in a change of heart towards God; (2) that
it takes the form of a living faith in the Lord Jesus Christ ; (3) that it manifests itself
in excellency of character. And this last is seen in the marks, which the prophet here
indicates: in upright conduct (walking righteously, refusing bribes); in soundness of
speech; in refusing ull access to evil (stopping the ears and shutting the eyes from
hearing and seeing what is injurious and defiling); in @ hearty hatred of injustice
(despising the gain of oppression).

IV. TH BLESSEDNESS OF THOSE WHO DWELL witH Gop. Whether here or hereafter,
but in a higher degree and more perfect form hereafter, there are promised these two
great blessings. 1. Security. “He shall dwell on high: his place of defence,” etc.
Nothing shall harm him, no sin shall have dominion over him ; in the arms of God's
protecting care his home shall be impregnable to assault. 2. Sufficiency. “ Bread shall
be given him,” etc. He may not have all he would desire, but he shall have everything
he needs for his real welfare and his true joy.—C.


552 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xxxim. 1—24


i ew


Ver. 17.—* The King tn his beauty.” “Thine eyes shall see the King in his beauty.”
Of this we may take—

I. THE CONTEMPORARY VIEW. Those who heard these words from Isaiah’s lips or
read them from the roll on which he wrote them would naturally think of Hezekiah.
But in what aspect would they think of him as clothed on with beauty ? Not, surely,
as one arrayed in gorgeous royal robes, or as one surrounded with the pomp of a royal
court; but as one who wielded the kingly sceptre in righteousness and in wisdom,
The king in his beauty, to the eye of the man who speaks for God, is that sovereign
who (1) honours God in all his doings and dealings with man; (2) uses his position and
his power to further Divine truth; (3) lays himself out for the good of others rather
than for his own enjoyment or the aggrandizement of his house. And these things,
mutatis mutandis, constitute the beauty of all earthly authority and power.

Il. Tue Messianic virw. If we refer the words of the prophet to him to whom, in
themselves and apart from the context, they are most appropriate—to that Son of man
who came to be the Saviour-Sovercign of mankind, we have two views brought before
us. 1. That of Jesus Christ as he lived on earth—the meek King of men (Matt. xxi. 5),
he who claimed to be a King even as he stood bound before Pilate (John xviii. 33—36),
Here we see the King in his beauty as we see him in his purity of heart, in his devoted-
ness to the work his Father had placed in his hands, in his submissiveness to that
Father’s will, in his quick and tender sympathy with the sorrowing and the abandoned,
in his inexhaustible patience with the undeserving and the wrong. 2. That of the
Divine Redeemer as he reigns in heaven. Thus viewed, we see in him the beauty of
one who (1) once surrendered everything he was and had in order that he might redeem
a fallen race,—the beauty of the most perfect sacrifice; (2) now welcomes to his
kingdom the worst of all that have rebelled against his will,—the beauty of perfect
magnanimity; (3) now bears with his servants in all their manifold infirmities and
insufticiencies of service,—the beauty of perfect patience; (4) now dispenses grace and
help to every one of his followers according to their individual necessities and requests,
—the beauty of perfect beneficence.

Ill. Tue Distant view. Our eyes will see the King in his beauty when we see
“him as he is”—the ascended and reigning Lord. Then we shall (1) behold the glories
of his heavenly administration ; we shall (2) dwell upon the tran-cendent excellence
of his Divine character; and we shall then (3) be drawn toward~ him in spiritual
resemblance (1 John iii. 2), live under his reign in unremitting and untiring service
(Rev. vii. 15; xxi. 25), dwell with him and reign with him in everlasting joy (2 Tim.
i. 12; Rev. ii. 26; iii. 21; xxii, 5).—C.


Ver. 17.— The breadth of the kingdom. “They shall behold the land of far distances ”
{see marginal reading). We look at —

J. THE BREADTH OF THE HISTORICAL KINGDOM. Judah was to be delivered from
her Assyrian oppressor. At present she was beleaguered, shut in on every hand, by the
invading army; her citizens had no range of land they could traverse—they were
confined to the narrow circle made by the besieging hosts of Sennacherib. But soon
those boundaries would be removed, the army would be scattered and would disappear.
Then the country would be open everywhere; in whatsoever direction they looked they

ould see hills they might climb and valleys they might cultivate at will; as far as the

ye could reach the country would be free to the traveller and to the husbandman. ‘They
ould behold a “land of far distances,” a broad kingdom they might call their own.

IJ. THE BREADTH OF THE SPIRITUAL KINGDOM. That kingdom of Christ, wherein
we stand and in which we so much rejoice, is a “land of far distances,” a region of
glorious breadth of view and range of motion and of action. here is nothing in it that
is limiting, nothing that confines; everything is on an enlarged scale. here is about it
a noble and inviting freedom; the horizon-line recedes perpetually as we advance,
This applies in full to its distinguishing features. 1. The grace of God shown to us in
Jesus Christ. The breadth, the fulness, of the Divine Father’s love in giving us his Son
(John iii. 16; Rom. viii. 82); the fulness of the Saviour’s love in making such a sacrifice
of heavenly dicnity, glory, and joy (John i, 1—14; Phil. ii. 6, 7; 2 Cor. viii. 9), and
stooping to such depths of darkness, shame, and woe, humbling himself even ‘unto
death; what glorious breadths and depths and heights have we here! 2. The mercy


on, xxx. 1—24.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 553


ee


of God now extended to us in Jesus Christ; reaching to those who have gone furthest
in presumptuous sin, in vice, in crime, in unspeakable enormities; extending to those
who have sinned against the clearest light and the most gracious influences; touching
those who have gone to the very verge of human life: what noble breadths, what far
distances, have we here! 3. The patience of CVhrist with his erring and imperfect
followers. 4. The usefulness of a devoted and generous Christian life. Who can
calculate the extent to which a life of holy love, of self-denying service, stretches out
and flows on, out into the remote distance of space, on into the far future of time ?

Il. Tue BREADTH OF THE HEAVENLY KINGDOM. We confidently expect to find in
the heavenly country a “land of far distances.” 1. In its spacial dimensions ; if, indeed, |
that can be truly said to have dimensions which is boundless in its lengths and breadths.
To no narrow sphere, reckoned in yards or miles, shall we there be limited. Our outlook
will be one that is immeasurably large, for the country of the blessed is, “to our heart
and to our hoping,” a land of very far distances indeed. 2. Jn the excellences wnd
glories of the charucter of its King. When will the time come that we shall have,
covered all the vround in that great exploration, that we shall have surveyed all the
heights and traversed all the breadths of the glorious and beautiful character of the Sun
of God? There are regions beyond regions, summits beyond summits, there. 3. Jn the
capacities of its subjects. There is sometiiing of great interest and of genuine worth in
the growth of the human mind from infancy to maturity; something well worthy of
being watched and in every way to be desired. But there comes a point beyond which
that development may not go; there is a meridian-line, reached at a different age
by different men, across which we may not step, at which it is imperative that we
return, that we decline. We dare to hope that, in the “land of far distances,” that
boundary-line is indefinitely far off; that “‘age after age, for ever,” we shall go on acquir-
ing not only knowledge but power, the horizon-line of spiritual maturity continually
receding as we advance in wisdom and strength. 4. ln the range of its service.
“His servants shall serve him;” and in what varieties of way may we not hope to serve
him there? Here the service of Ged and of man takes many forms—we can serve by
action and by suffering, by exampie and by persuasion, in word and deed, in things
secular and in things sacred, alone and in company with others. We look for a land,
we wait for a life, in which opportunities of serving the Eternal Father and of blessing
his children will be far more numerous, far more varied, far greater and nobler in
their nature. We hope for a land of such glorious breadth on every hand that, not
only in our enlarged capacities, but also in our multiplied and magnified opportunities,
we shall find it a “land of great distances.” (1) Take care to be there. (2) Be ready to
start well on the heavenly course, for according to our beginning will be our progress at
every pvint in all succeeding ages.—C.


Vers. 18—24.—Happy times. A very pleasant picture is this of a nation or of a
Church on which the full blessing of God is resting. ‘There are several elements in its
prosperity. /

I. A sENsE OF THE Drvinz mercy. “The people... shall be forgiven their iniquity”
(ver. 24). A sense of pardoned sin and of reconciliation to God is at the foundation
of all true peace, all sacred joy, and all holy usefulness.

IL THE MAINTENANCE OF DEVOTIONAL HABITS. Zion is to be always known as
“the city of solemnities” (ver. 20). There reverent prayer and grateful praise and
earnest inquiry of the Lord are to be continually found.

Ill. THE ABIDING PRESENCE AND FELT POWER OF Gop. The word that will most
commonly be heard on the lips, because most frequently rising from the soul, will be
“the Lord.” “ Jehovah is our Judge.” “ Jehovah is,” etc. (ver.22). Hverything is to
suggest him, is to be referred to his will, is to be ascribed to his grace.

IV. A PLEASANT RECOLLECTION OF EVILS THAT ARE OVER. (Ver. 18.) Happy the.
Church or the man when the dark days that have been and are gone are sufficiently
removed from present experience to make the memory of them a source of joy and not
of pain. Such a time does often come, and we may well rejoice and be glad in it.
The home is the dearer and the more delightful for the privations that have been
passed throuxh on the way. , '

VY. ABUNDANCE FOR EVERY PURE DESIRE. The “glorious Lord” will secure bountiful


554 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (cu. xxxm. 1—24,


supplies for every imaginable need, even as the broad river and outstretching streams
provide verdure and grain over all the surface of the well-watered land, even as the
affrizhted and fleeing army leaves prey which even the halt and the lame will be strong
- enough to take. In the day of God’s blessing there will be nouris!iment for the thought-
ful, and also for those who feel more than they think; truth for the wise and for
the simple, for the mature of mind and for the little child; posts of service for the
advanced Christian and also for those who bave just begun their course; such fulness,
even to overflow, of all that meets the wants and cravings of the heart, that the weakest
as well as the strongest shall find his place and take his share.

VI. Drvinz @uarpIANsHip. Prosperity is dangerous, but, with God’s Spirit in the
Church, it shall not be harmful. On the broad river of success and satisfaction the
sails of the spiritual enemy shall not be seen (ver. 21). “The sun shall not smite by
day ;” it will illumine and warm, but will not scorch and wither. Consequently, there
shall be—

VII. SounpNEss AND sEcuRITY. The inhabitant will not be sick (ver. 24); “ Jeru-
salem will be a quiet habitation,” etc. (ver. 20). Spiritual soundness, mgral integrity,
purity of heart, shall prevail, And this abounding, there will be no abatement of
prosperity ; tle stakes will not be removed, the tent will remain ; there will be no need
for any going into exile; there will be a happy permanence and fixedness of abode.

The picture is one that is ideal rather than actual; it is what every Church should
aim to present. Only the favour of God can possibly secure it. The vital question is—
How is that favour to be won? And that question resolves itself into other questions
—lIs there occasion for humiliation and a change of spirit and of behaviour? Is there
need for more internal wnion (Ps. cxxxiii. 3)? or for more prayer (Luke xviii. 1; Jas.
iv. 3)? or for more dove both of Christ and man (1 Cor. xiii. 1; Rev. ii. 4)? or for more
zeal (Rev. iii. 15) ?—C.


Ver. 2.—Constant renewals of Divine help. “Be thou their Arm every morning.”
Prophetic reference is made to that wonderful morning, when the inhabitants of
Jerusalem arose, and, looking forth from the walls of the city, beheld the besieging army
of Sennacherib a multitnde of corpses (ch. xxxvii. 36). The prayer is that every
morning of life may bring its witness of as real, if not as striking, helpings and
deliverings and defendings of God. The reference to the “arm” is specially appropriate,
as keeping in view the soldierly defence of the city. The prophet and others may do
what they can with heart and head; but in view of defence against an outward enemy,
those that serve with the arm are specially important. Therefore we have the prayer
that the Lord himself might be the Arm of those who have devoted their arm to
the country. Matthew Henry paraphrases thus: ‘ Hezekiah and his princes and all
the men of war need continual supplies of strength and courage from thee; supply their
need, therefore, and be to them a God all-sufticient. Every morning, when they go forth
upon the business of the day, and perhaps have new work to do, and new difficulties to
encounter, let them be afresh animated and invigorated, and, ‘as the day so let the
strength be.’” Treating the text as a basis for meditation, we observe that God has
been graciously pleased to arrange our life on earth, not as one continuous and unbroken
space of time, but as a succession of brief periods, carefully and regularly separated from
each other ; a series of days, we call them, divided by ever-recurring nights of sleep,
A man’s life is not properly a thing of so much length; it is made up of 80 many days,
Looking back over life, the patriarch Jacob says, “ Few and evil have the days of the
years of the life of my pilgrimage been, and have. not attained unto the days of the
years of the lives of my fathers.” If our life on earth were one continuous, unbroken
scene, it would surely be impossible for any of us to become truly good. So much of
our hope of ever winning goodness lies in our being able to try again and again, to begin
again and again with each returning day. However hopelessly we may end one day,
we may step cheerfully forth to new endeavours as each new morning comes. Then
how tenderly helpful is the assurance that we can have the “arm of the Lord” for our
help every morning! God’s idea of life for us is that it shall be given to us in pieces,
separated from each other—pieces shaped and fashioned as he may please, and each piece
given to us as fresh as if we were really born again every day. God gives us thus,
morning by morning, and day by day, in order that our thoughts may be fully


cu, xxx, 1—24.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 555


concentrated on to-day. To-day is ours. To-night is not ours. To-morrow is not ours.
No man has any to-morrow until God gives it to him, and then he must call it to-day.
We cannot grasp a whole life; we can grasp the duties of to-day. What “grace” is for
a long and changeful life we do not know, we cannot know. God offers us grace for
just the day that begins with this morning. And the arm of the Lord is precisely
- what we need day by day. Gathering up the scriptural associations of this figure,
especially in the Book of Isaiah, the following points may be illustrated.

I, EVERY MORNING WE NEED ASSURANCE OF Gop’s ARM TO LEAN ON. The distinction
between the godly and the ungodly man cannot be more sharply defined than by
saying, “lhe ungodly man tries to stand by himself, and the godly man loves to lean on
another.” ‘he change, the renewal, the new birth of a man, finds its expression in this
“loving to lean.” It is but the gracious response of God to this gractous disposition,
that he offers his arm afresh every morning for the good man to lean upon. “On my
arm shall they trust.”

II. Every MorNING WE NEED THE ASSURANCE OF Gop’s ARM TO GUIDE Us. It is
the fact of life, but it is much more than that—it is the experience of life, that “it is not
in man that walketh to direct his steps.” So Isaiah, speaking of the journeyings of
God’s people, refers to God who “led them with his glorious arm.” That arm is like
a signal held out, showing our daily path. It is even the arm and hand that keeps us
steadily in the right, the narrow path. The figures of the unknown journey, or voyage,
may be used. ‘This journey is taken in stages, and every morning our wise, safe, strong
Guide is waiting, ready to give us his good help.

III. Every MorRNING WE NEED THE ASSURANCE OF Gop’s ARM TO DEFEND US.
“That arm is not shortened, that it cannot save.” How little we realize our day-by=
day dependence on Divine providence! “ Dangers stand thick and hover round.” By
what we call “accidents,” men and women about us are killed or wounded every day.
Some one defends us. It would be well for us if we more clearly saw God’s saving arm
defending us continually. Then there are our enemies; some are by circumstance
enemies, and sume are by wilfulness enemies. But how little they ever do that really
hurts us! Noisily they dwell around us, like the armies of Sennacherib, but our
Defender is there every morning, Shield for each new day. But it is more searching to
think of our bad selves, and how we need defending from them. Every morning wakes
the old self, with some of the old frailties, habits, prejudices, passions. Above all else
we need, day by day, the presence and the power of him who alone can defend us from
ourselves.—R. T.


Ver. 6.—The secret of stability for every age. This is presented by showing what
would be the secret of stability in the kingdom of Hezekiah, when safety and peace were
again restored. ‘lhe prophet anticipates the removal of the great and serious national
evils, which had brought on the people Divine judyments, and rejoices in the prospect
that “ righteousness would exalt the nation.” We may well think that, in thought, he
passed on to the times of Messiah, when alone his great hopes could be perfectly rvalized.
‘We have four words given as the great sources of the national security and stability
—“ judgment, righteousness, wisdom, and knowledge.” If we attach precise and appro-
priate meanings to each of these, we shall learn what are the secrets of stability for all
times.

I. Jupement. Not here equivalent to “ wise decisions,” “skilful plans,” or “ good
counsels.” ‘The idea is rather that of strong and vigorous dealing with sin, ‘There ig
no security for any community or society that is weak in its handling of sin. And this
is true also of the individual life; we must be resolute and firm in mastering our own
habits aud passions, “cutting off right hands, and plucking out right eyes.” Ii anation
is to prosper it must be strong and firm in its judgments.

Il. Ricureousness. Here ordering life and relations by good and wise principles and
rules. Unrightcousness is disorder—the chaos which follows when “every man does
that which is right in his own eyes.” Righteousness, for a people, is rightness, com-
formity to good rules, the copying of good models, And this is a first and important
sense of righteousness for the individual. It is the righteousness which a man may
attain; but there is the further righteousness which a man may receive from Jehovah
Teidkenu, ‘ the Lord our Righteousness.”


556 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xxxtu. 1—24,


eS


III. Wispom. This, on its practical side, is the skilful ordering and rule of circum-
stances, so as to get the most and the best out of them, and resist the evils that may be
connected with them. ‘The wisdom profitable to direct.” The wisdom which may be
illustrated for social and political life from the ever-watchful man of business, who
seeks to turn everything to good account; or from the anxious housewife, who tries to
make the best of everything.

IV. Kxowiepar. Which, in this connection, is the careful adjustment of things
which men may make on the basis of experience. Knowledge proviny a practical help,
The knowing man is the opposite of the simple, or inexperienced, man, who is bewil-
dered and endangered by difficult cireumstances.—R. T.


Ver. 14.—Who can stand the testing fires? The terms “ devouring fire,” “ everlast-
ing burnings,” do not mean hell; they mean God in visible, material judgments, such
as may be symbvlized by the destruction of the Assyrian army ; and such as the pre=
sence of that army became to the people of Jerusalem. The appeal of Isaiah seems to
be this: See the fright into which the people have fallen at the presence of this hostile
army. See who has been calm and strong in this hour of national peril. How, then,
would it be with men in the more awlul times of God’s testing judgments? The man
who alone can dwell in the “deyouring fire” is the good meee He that is able to abide
“the everlasting burnings” is “the man that walketh righteously and speaketh
uprightly ” Maclaren says, “ The prophet has been calling all men, far and near, to
behold a great act of Divine judgment, in which God has been manifested in flaming
glory, consuming evil; now he represents the “ sinners in Zion,” the uuworthy members
of the nation, as seized with sudden terror, and anxiously asking this question, which
in effect means, “ Who among us can abide peaccfully, joyfully, fed and brightened,
not consumed and annihilated, by that flashing brightness and purity?” The pro-
phet’s answer is the answer of common sense: “ Like draws to like, A holy God must
have holy-companions.”

I, THE TESTING FIRES. These are future, but they are not altogether future. Per-
haps we shall presently come to see that the passing testings are more serious than the
future ones, Every life-work must be tried with fire; it is being tried with fire.
Every day we are in the “everlasting buruings.” Life is God's testing fire. This is
illustrated by the influence national calamities have upon nations. ‘Through baptisms
of blood and devouring fires nations come forth purified, “Through much tribulation
[God’s testing for us] we must all enter the kingdom.”

II, THe EFFECT OF THE TESTING FIRES ON THE EVIL-MINDED. Symbolized in the
panic of the godless folk in Jerusalem when Sennacherib drew nigh. At the sound
of threatening they took alarm, and hurried to Egypt for help. Tieir vain self-confi-
dences fell about them as svon as the test was applied. Can we face the judicial and
punitive action of that Divine Providence which works even here? and how can we face
the judicial and punitive action in the future ?

Ill. THE EFFECT OF THE TESTING FIRES ON THE GOOD-MINDED. They cannot escape
from the common earthly conditions. he fires try every man’s spirit and every man’s
work. There are some—should we not be among them ?—on whom even the “ second
death ” hath no power.—R. T.


Ver. 16.—God’s witness to character. Connect this verse with the description of the
righteous man given in ver. 15, observing how very practical is the riglteousness
which God requires and approves. The good man walks uprizhtly, speaks worthy
things, wants nothing that is his neighbour's, will neither be bought nor, forced to do
that which is wrong, refuses to listen to eyil, and shuts his eyes tha: Te may not see it.
God is on the side of such a good man, and whatever may be the disabilities in which
he is placed by his fellow-men, he may be quite sure of safety and provision. “ God is


a Refuge for him.” “ None of them that trust in him shall esolate.” The Lord


doth provide.”

I. ‘lz GOOD MAN MUST BE IN THE WORLD, BUT HE SHALL BE ABOVE Tr. Our Lord
prayed thus: “I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that
thou shouldest keep them from the evil.” Put into Eastern figure, before earthly
troubles the good man is as safe as a people hid behind the “ munitions of rocks”


on. xxx. 1—24.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 557


when the invader is in the land. God makes no new lot, no fresh circumstances, for the
good man. He does not promise any man that he will alter his earthly conditions, or
altogether relieve him of his troubles. He lifts the good man up above his earth-scenes
by “ strengthening him with strength in the soul,” making his soul bigger than his
circumstances. A man is not lost until he has lost hegxt. But if God supplies inward
strenvth we never shall lose heart, and so we never shall be lost. Outwardl y, aman
may be tossed about, worn, wearied, wounled, almost broken, yet inwardly he may be
kept in perfect peace, his mind stayed on God; he may be “strong in the Lord, and
in the power of his might.” He may “dwell on high,” “out of the reach of present
troubles, out of the hearing of the noise of them; he shall not be really harmed by
them, nay, he shall not be greatly frightened at them.” This is the portion of the
good ; God’s witness to character.

II. THE G@ooD MAN MAY HAVE LITTLE, BUT HE IS SECURE OF ENOUGH. “ Bread and
water” represent his necessities, not his indulgences; a sufficiency, but not a luxury.
So good Agur prays, “ Feed me with food convenient for me.” The figure here is taken
from the limitations of a time of siege. The “necessary,” as distinguished from the
“luxurious,” is so difficult to decide. What has become a necessity for one person
another still looks upon as luxury. One great evil of our age is the development
of fictitious wants. We are called back to simplicity by the promises of God. “No
good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.” All that is needful is
pledged to us, but for all the rest we are dependent on Divine grace; then what
“monuments of grace” we must be!—R. T.


Ver. 17.— Visions of the King. The Targum reads, “Thine eyes shall see the Shechinah
of the King of ages.” he idea of the prophet probably is, that the good man shall
see, with his soul-eyes, God himself delivering and rescuing the city from its threaten-
ing foes. The good man never can be content with agencies and instrumentalities and
second causes. He must recognize the living God, working his work of grace by means
of them. He cannot be content unless he can “ see +he King in his beauty ”—the beauty
of his redemptive workings. Some see a reference to Hezekiah, clothed with an ideal
beauty, the evidence of God’s extraordinary favour. But however we may begin with
that, it is but a step to the much more satisfying thing, the spiritual vision of God,
“Can God be seen? and if so, how? What is the true vision of God? Is it possible
tomen? By what means can we realize it? It is a question as old as humanity.
In a thousand ways of formal interrogation, or unconscious yearning, we are ever
putting it. In a thousand ways of ignorance, superstition, or intelligence, we are ever
trying to answer it.” We may dwell on—

I. THE EYES THAT SEE. Strangely imprisoned by their bodily senses, which are
their sole mediums of communication with the world of material things, men over-
value the knowledge which the senses can bring them, and under-value those more real
and more important worlds which are revealed only to the eyes of the mind and of the


soul. No bodily vision o! God can ever be given to dependent creatures; meeting our
sense-conditions, Jesus Christ,’the Man, is, for us, the “ Brightness of his glory, and the
express Image of his person.” But souls can have that near sense of God which can


only be represented as a vision. Faith, love, purity, holy desire, patient waiting, are
the conditions of soul-eyes to which God is revealed. Hach of these sugyests illustrations
and practical applications.

IL. THE THINGS THAT ARE SEEN. Three things are indicated. 1. Soul-eyes see the
King. They are quick to discern God’s presence, They detect him everywhere and
in everything. Life is serious, life is glorious, to them, because God.is always “ walk-
ing in the garden,” always close by. 2. Soul-eyes are keen to detect his beauty or his
graciousvess ; especially as seen in the tenderness and care of his watglings, defendings,
and deliverings. Soul-eyes are lony-visioned, and can see the future, which they know
is in God’s hands, and will surely prove to be the scene of God’s triumph. Whatever
men may think and say and fvel about the present, this is certain—the future is with
the good.—R. ‘Tl’.


Ver. 22.—The true theocracy. It is most difficult for us to realize that idea of
Jehovah as the direct Ruler and Governor of a nation, which was the ene characteristic


558 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xxxiu. 1—24,


i


thought of the Jews, and the great underlying idea of the Mosaic revelation. But this
verse gives us most material help by setting out a threefold relation of God to men in
the theocracy.

I. Gop 1s THE Law-mAKeERr. “ The Lord is our Lawgiver.” This is true in two senses.
1. God gave the formal laws from Mount Sinai, which were written down by Moses,
and made the basis of the national covenant. Compare and illustrate by the work of
Lyeurgus and Justinian. “God’s laws, as arranged for the Hebrews, were only the
adaptations to their national life of the conditions and rules under which God set
humanity from the first. This should be made quite clear, lest a notion should pre-
vail that God’s Law to the Jew was his first revelation to men. It was the writing out
of essential law for the practical use of one people. 2. God gives revelations of his
will, which are law for all who receive them. There is no finality in the revelation
of God’s law, for the very reason that God maintains living relations with us, and those
relations involve that the expression of his will is Jaw tows at any given time. Illustrate
by the prompt and entire obedience of the prophets to God’s will, howsoever it may
be revealed to them. Such revelations are made to us, and for us God’s will is law.

Il. Gop 1s THe Law-appiier. ‘The Lord is our Judge.” ‘This is precisely the
work of the judze—to show how the principle and the comprehensive terms of the law
bear on each particular case. Moses, Joshua, David, Samuel, and Hezekiah, referred
each case of difficulty directly to the Divine Judge. But in just this Israel so often
failed ; and th/s we still find to be our supreme difficulty. We can accept the fact that
law is from God, but we want to preside ourselves over all applications of law. What
we need is the confirmed habit of referring all things to God our Judge.

III. Gop is raz Law-rxecutor. “ The Lord is our King.” The proper idea of a
king is one entrusted with power to carry out the requirements of the national law.
The king is the ewecutive. God carries out his own laws. Scripture is full of striking
instances which are designed to impress the general truth. ‘Take such cases as Achan,
Korah, Uzza, Ananias, and Sapphira. This phase of God’s relation is not so difficult to
apprehend as the previous one; and yet in these days we are in some danger of losing
eur sense of the directness of Divine judgments.—R. T.


Ver. 24.—No more sickness. This is clearly a figure, designed to complete the picture
of relief from the strain and pressure and anxiety of the time of invasion. Sickness is
the constant attendant on prolonged siege. ‘The point on which we may dwell is that
sickness is the sign of the presence of evil, of sin; and so heaven is represented as the
yee where there is no more sickness, because there is no more sin. This connection

etween sickness and sin lies at the basis of some of the most important Mosaic
regulations. It explains the importance ceremonially attached to the one disease
of leprosy. Trench states this very skilfully: “The same principle which made all
that had to do with death, a grave, a corpse, the occasions of a ceremonial uncleanness,
inasmuch as all these were signs-and consequences of sin, might in like manner, and
with a perfect consistency, have made every sickness an occasion of uncleanness, each
of these being also death beginning, partial death-echoes in the body of that terrible reality
—sin in the soul, But, instead of this, in a gracious sparing of man, and not pushing
the principle to the uttermost, God took but one sickness, one of those visible outcom-
ings of a tainted nature, in which to testify that evil was not from him, could not dwell
with him; he tovk but one, with which to link this teaching. Leprosy, which was
indeed the sickness of sicknesses, was selected of God to the end that, bearing his tes-
timony against it, he might bear his testimony against that out of which it and all other
sicknesses grew—against sin, as not from him, as grievous in his sight; and against the
sickness itself also as grievous, inasmuch as it was a visible manifestation, a direct con-
sequence, of the inner disharmony of man’s spirit, a commencement of the death, which
through disobedience to God’s perfect will had found entrance into a nature made by
God for immortality.”

I, ALL SICKNESS 18 A LITTLE DEATH. It is a beginning of death. Strangely death
aie in the smallest things—a pin-prick, a slip of the foot, a tiny clot of blood, the bite
of a fly, ete.

II. ALL DEATHS ARE THE SIGN OF sin. “ The sting of death is sin.* Sickness and
death keep ever before men the fact that they are sinners,


oH. xxxIv. 1—17.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


559


—_—_eeoeooororoo


TIL. Sickness AND DEATH WILL GO AWAY WHEN SIN GOES.
IV. As Gop Is GRACIOUSLY WORKING FOR THE REMOVAL OF SINS, WE KNOW HE IS


WORKING ALSO FOR THE REMOVAL OF SUEERERLING.


The day cometh when he shall be


able to “ wipe all tears from our eyes.”—R. IT.


Szction XI. Tue Divine Jupement on THE WoRLD, AND THE GLORY OF THE
CHURCH CONSEQUENT UPON IT (CH, XXXIV., XXXV.).


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER XXXIV.


Ch. xxxiv. and xxxv. are generally ro-
cognized as constituting a distinct prophecy,
complete in itself, and only slightly con-
nected with what precedes. The passage
is, as Bishop Lowth observes, “an entire,
regular, and beautiful poem, consisting of
two parts, the first (ch. xxxiv.) containing
a denunciation of Divine vengeance against
the enemies of God; the second (ch. xxxv.)
describing the flourishing state of the
Church of God, consequent upon the
execution of those judgments.” The pre-
sent chapter, which forms the first half of
the poem, is wholly denunciatory. Its
theme is vengeance on God’s enemies
generally; but, as a typical specimen, the
Edomites are selected, and their punish-
ment is depicted in the strongest colours.
The awful picture, with its dark and lurid
hues, prepares the way for the soft and
lovely portraiture of tlhe blest condition of
the Church triumphant, which is contained
in the ensuing chapter.

Ver. 1.—Ye people; rather, ye peoples.
The address is couched in the widest
possible terms, so as to include the whole
of human-kind. The earth... and all
that is therein; literally, the earth, and the
fulness thereof. The inhabitants are no
doubt intended.

Ver. 2.—For the indignation of the Lord
is upon, etc,; rather, for the Lord hath
indignation aguinst all the nations, and
wrath against all their host. He hath utterly
destroyed; rather, he hath devoted, or put
under ban.

Ver. 3.—Cast out; ¢.e. refused burial—
thrown to the dogs and vultures (comp. Jer.
xxii. 19; xxxvi. 30). Such treatment of
the dead was regarded as a shame and a
disgrace. It was on some occasions an
intentional insult (Jer. xxii. 19); but here
the idea is rather that it would be impossible
to bury the slain on account of their number.
In ancient times corpses often lay unburied
on battle-fields (Herod., iii. 12), The moun-
tains shall be melted with their blood. When


the feelings of the prophet are excited, he

shrinks from no hyperbole. Here he repre-

sents the blood of God’s enemies as shed

2 such torrents that mountains are melted
y it.

Ver. 4.—All the host of heaven shall be
dissolved. A dissolution of the material
frame of the heavens, in which the moon
and stars are regarded as set, seems to be
intended (comp. Matt. xxiv. 29; 2 Pet. iii.
10). The slaughter of God’s enemies is
here connected with the end of the world,
as in the Book of Revelation (xix. 11—21).
The heavens shall be rolled together as a
scroll; literally, as a book. Ancient books
were written on long strips of paper or
parchment, which, when unrolled, extended
to many yards in length, but which might
be rolled together “by means of one or two
smooth round sticks into a very small
compass.” Such a rolling togetlier of the
widely extended heavens is here intended,
not a shrivelling by means of heat (comp.
Rev. vi. 14). All their host shall fall (comp.
Matt. xxiv. 29, “The stars shall fall from
heaven’”’).

Ver. 5.—My sword shall be bathed in
heaven; rather, has been bathed, or has been
made drunken (é€ucbvc0n, LXX.) in heaven.
Some suppose a reference to the old “ war in
heaven,” when the sword of Divine justice
was drawn against the devil and his angels.
Others regard the sword now to be used
against the Idumeans as first, in heaven,
“made drunken” with the Divine anger.
It shall come down upon Idumea (comp. ch.
lxiii. 1—6). The Edomites first showed
themselves enemies of Israel when they
refused to allow the Israelites, under Moses,
“a passage through their border” (Numb.
xx. 14—21). David subdued them (2 Sam.
ix. 14); but they revolted trom Jehoram (2
Chron. xxi. 8—10), and were thenceforward
among (he most bitter adversaries of the
southern kingdom, They “smote Judah”
in the reign of Aliaz (2 Chron. xxvili. 17),
and were always ready to “shed the blood
of the children of Isracl by the force of the
sword in the time of their calamity ” (Ezek.
xxxy. 5). Amos speaks of them very much
in the same tone us Isitiah (Amos i. 11, 12).
They ultimately “filled up the measure of
their iniquities” by open rejoining when


Sa


560


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [en. xxx1v. 1—17.


re


Jerusalem was destroyed, and the people
led away captive by Nebuchadnezzar (Ps.
exxxvii. 7; Obad. 10—14; Lam. iv. 21, 22;
Ezek. xxxy. 10—13). In the present passige
we must regard the Edomites as representa-
tive of the encmicvs of God’s people generally
(see the introductory paragraph). The
people of my curse; ze. “the people on
whom I have laid a curse”—the Edomites.
Esau was to “serve” Jacob (Gen. xxv. 23;
xxvii. 40), Edom to be “a possession” for
Judah (Numb. xxiv. 18). God had said of
Edom, probably before Isaiah uttered the
present prophecy, “ For three transgressions
of Edom, and for four, I will not turn awa
the punishment thereof . . . but I will send
a fire upon Teman, which shall devour the
palaces of Bozrah” (Amos i. 1], 12). Thus
idom was under a curse.

Ver. 6.—The sword of the Lord is filled;
or, glutted (Lowth). The tense is “the
perfect of prophetic certainty.” It is made
fat with fatness. “ Fed, as it were, on the
fat of sacrifices” (see Lev. iii, 3, 4, 9, 10,
15; vii. 3, ¢tc.). Lambs... goats...
rams. The lesser cattle represent the lower
classes of those about to be slain, while the
“ unicorns’’ and ‘‘ bullocks” of ver. 7 repre-
sent the upper classes—the great men and
leaders. The Lord hath a sacrifice in Bozrah.
This Bozrah, one of the principal cities of
Idumea, is to be distinguished from “ Bozrah
of Moab,” which was known to the Romans
as “ Bostra.” Lt lay in the hilly country
to the south-east of the Dead Sea, about
thirty-five miles north of Petra, and was one
of the earliest settlements of the descendants
of Esau, being mentioned as a well-known
place in Genesis (xxxvi. 33). The threats
here uttered against it are repeated by
Jeremiah (xlix. 13), who says that “ Bozrah
shall become a desolation, a reproach, a
waste, and a curse; all the cities thereof
[i.e. the dependent cities] shall be perpetual
wastes.” Bozrah is probably identified with
the modern £l-Busuireh, a village of about
fifty hous: s, occupyiug a site in the position
above indicated, amid ruins which seem to
be those of a considerable city (Burckhardt,
‘Syria,’ p. 407; Robinson, ‘ Researches in
Palestine,’ vol. ii. pp. 570, 571).

Ver. 7.—The unicorns, Bishop Lowth

nders reém by “wild goats; ” Mr, Cheyne

y “bufialoes.” Probably the wild ox, a native
of the trins-Jordanio region, is intended
(see Mr. Houghton’s paper on the animals
of the Assyrian bas-reliefs, in the ‘ Transac-
tions of the Society of Bibl. Archeology,’
vol. v. p. 536). Shall come down; rather,
shall go down; ie. shall fall and perish


* (comp. Jer. 1. 27).


Ver. 8.—The day of the Lord’s vengeance
(comp. ch. lxi. 2 and Ixiii. 4), In all three


‘places the “day” of God’s vengeance is


contrasted with the “year” of his recom-
pense, to show how infinite is his mercy,
how short-lived, comparatively speaking,
his anger. Mr. Cheyne well compares the
concluding clauses of the second com
mandment, where “retribution is declared
to descend to the third and fourth genera-
tion, but mercy to the thousandth.” Recom-
penses for the controversy of Zion; rather,
for the vindication of Zion; i.e. for the
maintenance of her rigit in the quarrel
between her and her enemies.

Ver. 9.—And the streams thereof; #.e.
“the streams of the landof Edom.” Though
Edom has no perennial rivers, it has numerous
torrent-courses to carry off the winter rains
(see 2 Kings iii. 20—22). These should
run with pitch, instead of water. The
general idea is that Edom should be
visited with a destruction like that of
Sodom and Gomorrah (Gen. xix. 24; comp.
Jer. xlix. 18). But the prophet scarcely
intends his words to be taken literally; he
is making Edom a type or representation of
Gou’s enemies, and the gist of his teaching
is that a dreadful vengeance, an utter
destruction, will come upon all who set
themselves up against the Most High. In
the next verse he declares that the vengeance
will be eternal (comp. ch. Ixvi. 24).

Ver. 10.—None shall pass through it for
ever and ever. There was a literal fulfil-
ment of the prophecies against Edom to a
considerable extent. Malachi, writing three
hundred years after Isaiah, says that the
“mountains and the heritage of Esau
were luid waste for the dragons of the
wilderness” (i. 3); and he makes the
Edomites themselves exclaim, “ We are
impoverished, but we will return and build
the desuvlate places” (i. 4). <A certain
amount of recovery must have followed ;
and in the Maccabee period Edom appears
once more as an alversary of Israel, and an
adversary of some importance (1 Mace. v. 3,
65). Gradually, however, she had to yield
to the superior power of Judwa, and was
even ruled by viceroys, whom the Maccabee
princes nominated. Oneof these, Antipater,
was the father of Herod the Great. From
his time Idumea languished until, in the
seventh century after Christ, it was over-
run and conquered by the Mohammedan
Arabs, who completed its ruin. It is now,
and has been for above a thousand years,
one of the most desolate tracts upon the
earth’s surface,

Ver. 11.—The cormorant and the bittern
shall possess it. Compare the prophecy
against Babylon in ch. xiv. 23, The
Hebrew word translated “cormorant,” is
now generally regarded as designating the
“ pelican,” while the one rendered “bittern”
is thought by some to mean “hedgehog”


oH. XxxIV. 1—17.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH,


561


a


or “porcupine.” Animals that delicht in
solitude are certainly meant, but the par-
ticular species is, more or less, matter of
conjecture. He shall stretch out upon it;
rather, and one shall stretch out upon tt.
The verb is used impersonally. The line
of confusion, and the stones of emptiness;
rather, the line of desolation, and the plummet
of emptiness (comp. 2 Kings xxi. 13; Lam.
ii. 8; Amos vii. 7, 8). The destruction of
cities was effected by rule and measure,
probably because different portions of the
task were assigued to different sets of
labourers, and, if the work was to be com-
pletely done, it required to be done
systematically. Here, the measuring-tape
and the plumb-line are to be those of tohu
and vohu, or of the eternal chaos out of
which God, by his word, produced order
(Gen. i. 2).

Ver. 12.—They shall call the nobles, ete. ;
rather, as for her nobles, there shall be none
there for them to call to the kingdom. ‘Vhe
nobles are termed horim, probably because
the right of succession to the kingdom was
vested in the descendants of the Horites,
from whom the Edomites took their territory
(Gen. xxxvi. 20, 29, 30). ‘hese having
died out, there would be no one to appoint
as king.

Ver. 13.—Thorns shall come up in her
palaces. The “palaces” of Bozrah are
mentioned also by Amos (i. 12), and
are threatened with destruction by fire.
Amid their ruins should grow up thorns
and briars. It shall be an habitation of
dragons; or, of jackals (see the comment on
ch, xiii. 22). Owls; literally, dawghters of
screaming—a description better suited to the
owl than to the ostrich, which some regard
as the bird meant.

Ver. 14.Wild beasts of the desert...
wild beasts of the island. In the original,
tsiyim and ’iyim—* wailers’”’ and “ howlers”
—probably “jackals and wolves,” or “ wolves
and hyenas.” The satyr (see the com-
ment on ch. xiii.21). The screech owl. The
word here used, lilith, occurs only in this
place. It may be doubted whether any
bird, or other animal, is meant. Lilit was
the name of a female demon, or wicked
fairy, in whom the Assyrians believed—a
being thought to vex and persecute her


victims in their sleep. The word is pro-
bably a derivative from leilah, night, and
designates “ the spirit of the night ’’—a mis-
chicvous being, wiio took advantage of the
darkness to play fantastic tricks. A Jewish
legend made Lilith the first wife of Adam,
and said that, having pronounced the
Divine Name as a charm, she was changed
into a devil. It was her special delight to
murder young children (Buxtorf, ‘ Lex.
Rubbin., ad voc.). The prophets, when
they employ poetic imagery, are not tied
down to fact, but are free to use the beliefs
of their contemporaries in order tv avighten
the force of their descriptions.

Ver. 15.—The great owl; rather, the
arrow-snake (Serpens jaculus). Gather under
her shadow; i.e. “gather her young ones
under her.” There shall the vultures also
be gathered; rather, there verily shall the
vultures assemble.

Ver. 16.—Seek ye out of the book of the
Lord. By “the book of the Lord” some
understand a collected volume of Moses and
the prophets, psalmists, ete., previous to
Isaiah’s time, which they suppose to have
existed in his day. But there is no evidence
of any such collection. It is better to under-
stand the expression of Issiah’s own pro-
phecies, or of such a collection of them as
he had made previously to the composition
of the present chapter. Nothing contained
in the entire book should, he says, fail of
its accomplishment. Even the minutie of
the present chapter should, each and all,
have their fulfilment, though not, perhaps,
in every case a literal one. My mouth...
his Spirit. The “mouth” of the prophet
and the “Spirit” of God, which dictates to
him what he is to write, are in accord; and
the Spirit will bring to pass what the mouth
inspired by him has “ commanded.”

Ver. 17.—He hath cast the lot for them.
God, who allots to all the nations of the
earth their several countries, has now
allotted Idumea to the unclean beasts and
birds and reptiles which have been men-
tioned; henceforth it is formally assigned
to them as their habitation. It 1s through-
out to be understood that Idumea stands for
the world-power which resists God and
will be finally abased and put to shame.


HOMILETICS.


Vers. 1—10.— The terrors of the Lord not to be held back by the preacher, “Know-
ing therefore the terror of the Lord,” says the great apostle of the Gentiles, “we


ersuade men”


There is in these modern times a sickly sentimentality prevalent,


which protests against the employment by preachers of arguments that address them-


selves to the fears of their hearers.


Delicate nerves are not to be hurt by disagreeable


images, or highly wrouzht descriptions of sufferings. ars accustomed to flatteries are
not to be shocked by suggestions that make the listeners uncomfortable. ‘‘ Speak


ISAIAH.


20


562 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. (os. xxx1v. 1—17.


a


unto us smooth things” is the universal demand, or, at any rate, the universal desire.
There is considerable danger of preachers yielding to the wishes of their hearers
in this respect ; since it is always pleasant to be popular, and disagreeable to be thought
to take a pleasure in hurting people’s feelings. But the preacher of God’s Word
should be actuated by higher considerations. He must shape his conduct by (1) the
example of great preachers in the past, as Isaiah, St. Paul, St. John, Christ bimself;
(2) the real needs and true interest of those whom he addresses; and (3) the declara-
tions of Holy Scripture concerning the duty of a preacher.

I. THE EXAMPLE OF GREAT PREACHERS IN THE Past. It is clear that Isaiah did not
hold back the terrors of the Lord. Almost one-half of his prophecy is denunciatory ;
and the denunciations uttered are of a truly feartul character. All the great powers
of the earth, and many minor powers, are threatened with the Divine vengeance, and
that vengeance is depicted in very terrible language. Babylon is to be “ brought down
to hell, to the sides of the pit” (ch. xiv. 15); Assyria is to be burnt up; his glory is to
be consumed; he is to be “as when a standard-bearer fainteth” (ch. x. 17, 18); Edom
is to become “ burning pitch ” (ch. xxxiv. 9), which ‘shall not be quenched night nor
day ” (ch. xxxiv. 10); God’s evemies generally are to be “slain” and “ consumed,” and
set in a place where “their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched”
(ch, Ixvi. 24). St. Paul persuaded men by “the terror of the Lord” (2 Cor. v. 11).
He warned them to “look for judement and a fiery indignation, which shall devour
the adversaries ” (Heb. x. 27). He reminded them that “our God is a consuming
Fire” (Heb. xii. 29), and that “it is a fearful thing to fall into his hands” (Heb. x. 31),
St. John, the apostle of love, spoke of thuse who should “drink of the wine of the
wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation,”
and who should be “tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy
angels, and of the Lamb,” and said that “ the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for
ever and ever,” and that tlley “have no rest day nor night” (Rev. xiv. 10, 11). It is
to our blessed Lord himself that we owe the picture of the rich man tormented in the
flame, and praying Abraiam to send Lazarus, that he might “dip the tip of his finger
in water and cool his tougue” (Luke xvi. 24), Our Lord, moreover, adopts the dreadful
imagery of Isaiah with respect to the undying worm and the fire that is never quenched
(Mark ix. 44, 46, 4%), and points his teaching by revealing to us the awful words of
the final sentence of reprobation, “ Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels” (Matt. xxv. 41).

Il. THE REAL NEEDS OF THOSE TO WHOM PREACHING IS ADDRESSED. It cannot be
denied that fear is a strong constraining motive. Human laws are enforced by
penalties, the object of which is to “put men in fear.” Punishmeut holds its place
in every system of moral training, and punishment is an appeal to fear. Whatever
may be the case with a chosen few, the bulk ot mankind will always be more readily
influenced by fear than by hope, by punishments than by rewards, by threats than by
promises. The preacher cannot afford to lose the moral force which is thus put
within his reach. It is hard enough to restrain men from evil courses, and induce
them to lead a godly life, by freely using all the means of persuasion that are in our
power. To refrain from using one of the most potent would be to fight Satan with
one hand instead of two,

III. Tue Teacuine or SoRIPTURE CONCERNING THE DUTY OF A PREACHER. Preachers
are directed to open to their disciples “the whole counsel of God.” They are not to
pick and choose what doctrines of Christianity they will teach. They are to deliver
to others “ the gospel,” “that which they also received” (1 Cor. xv. 3)—not “another
gospel” (Gal. i. 6). Now, it cannot be pretended that “the terrors of the Lord ”—his
wrath against sin, and its dreadful final punishment, are not as much portions of the
teachiny of Christ as any other. Not to preach them is to keep back a part of the
message which Christ brought us from the Father. No preacher is entitled so to act
whatever the disinclination of his congregation te hear the plain teaching of Scripture
on these points plainly declared. ‘he disinclination is itself an indication of a need,
‘Those who most dislike the doctrine of final punishment are probably those who most
require to have the doctrine pressed upon them


cH. xxxIv. 1—17.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, 563
ere


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1—17.— The sins and punishment of Edom. The Edomites appear in the
blackest colours in the descriptions of the prophets. And in this oracle their punish~
ment is represented in the horrible desolation of their land.

I. THerr sins. Their cruelty is above all stigmatized. At the siege of Jerusalem
by Nebuchadnezzar they helped to plunder the city and slaughter the poor Jews.
Their conduct on this occasion was never forgotten (Ps. exxxvii.). In Obadiah we
have the feelings about them brought into the clearest light (1O—16). They were
akin to the Jews, Esau the ancestor of the one, Jacob of the other. Their cruelty was
accused as “ violence against a brother.” They had entered the gate of the city on
the day of their brethren’s calamity, to exult over them, and to join hand in hand
with the conqueror and the spoiler. But the day of vengeance has come, and their
violent dealing is to be returned upon their own heads (cf. ch. lxiii. 1—4; Jer. xlix.
17; Lam. iv. 21; Ezek. xxv. 18, 14; xxxv.; Amos i. 11, 12).

I. Turin punisament. 1. The sword of Jehovah an emblem of Divine vengeance.
So in numerous jassages (ch. xxvii. 1; xxxi. 8; xxxiv. 5; lxvi. 16; Deut. xxxii. 41,
42; Jer. xii. 12; xlvi. 10; xlvii. 6, 835—38; Zech, xiii. 7). It has been bathed in blood
in heaven, that is, upon the objects of idolatrous worship, demons of the stars, etc.
2. Sacrifice as also a figure of vengeance. A “sacrifice in Bozrah, a great slaughter
in the land of Edom.” So sacrifice and feasting connected with judgment in Z-pn.i. 7;
Jer. xlvi. 10; Ezek. xxxix. 17—19. 3. Pictures of desolation. It is a volcanic land,
and the prophet sees it deluged with lava-fluods, like the guilty cities of the plain
(ef. Jer. xlix. 18; Rev. xiv. 10; xix. 3). The further features of the picture are
sketched in the most gloomy colours—its castles and strong places in ruins and over-
grown with weeds; wild animals haunting the former abodes of man; and demons or
fairies, such as are in popular superstition, hovering about the former scenes of human
pride and power.

II]. Epom as TYPICAL OF THE UNGODLY WoRLD. ‘There seems reason for supposing
the prophet to have had this larger thouglit in mind. 1. All the nations are summoned
to hear the judgments of God. 2. The desolation predicted is said to be etcrnal ; and
this is four tinies repeated. The general lessons, then, of Divine judgments may be
repeated in connection with this awe-inspiring picture. 1. The particular exun ple of
Divine judgment illustrates the general truth. ‘hat which concerns the people in
this respect concerns mankind. The beam which strikes this or that object strikes
many others in its rebound. 2. Destruction and discrimination in the judgments are
the mark of Provid-nce. When God strikes an individual, or a nation, the conclusion
is that they were aimed at. 3. An utter doom the consequence of utter sin. None can
think of the doom of Sodom and Gomorrah, and of Edom, without a shudder, without
hearing the reverberations of the thunder from Sinai; without attending to the appeal,
“Break off your sins by righteousness!” “ ‘l'o-day,if ye will hear his voice, harden not
your hearts! ”—J.


Vers. 1—15.—The Divine indignation. The strong, pictorial language of the
prophet brings into bold relief some truths respecting God’s indignation of which it is
needful to be occasionally reminded. We learn—

I. THAT IT Is A CONSTANT FACTOR IN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE WORLD. “Come
near, ye nations, to hear; and hearken, ye people; let the earth hear, and all that is
therein .. . for the indignation of the Lord is wpon all nations,” etc. (vers. 1, 2). It
is seldom, perl aps never, the duty of the Christian minister to employ such terms as
those used in this prophecy (vers. 8, 5,6). But it 7s his duty to make it clear that
benevolence and its kindred attributes do not constitute the character of God; that,
though it is a truth of inestimable price that “God is love,” it is also true that “ our
God is a consuming Fire;” that though it is a fact that “justice and judgment are his
strange work,” it is also a fact that God does pour out his indignation “upon all
nations;” that “the hand of the Lord is against them that do evil,” that he will
render “indignation and wrath... upon every soul of man that doeth evil.”
Religious doctrine, like all other truth, must be seen in its true proportions, or it will


564 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cu. xxx1v. 1—17.
a ee


be misconceived. To represent God’s indignation against sin as the chief element in
his character is essentially false; to represent his love as absorbing or eclipsing his
hatred of sin and his intention to punish the guilty is also, if not equally, false. The
same lips which opened to invite every weary wanderer to return to him and find rest
in his happy service declared that many of the children of privilege should be shut out
of the kingdom of heaven. To the Thrice-Holy One sin is now “that abominable thing
which his soul hateth,” and against it he will always express, both in word and deed,
his righteous indignation.

Il. THAT IT IS SOMETIMES POSITIVELY OVERWHELMING IN ITS EFFECTS. “ He hath
utterly destroyed them” (ver. 2); “Their slain shall be cast out ... the mountains
shall be meltvd with their blood ” (ver. 3); ‘ All the host of heaven shall be dissolved,”
etc. (ver. 4); “The sword of the Lord is filled with blood . . . the Lord hath a great
slaughter in the land” (ver. 6). God is sometimes “terrible in his doings toward the
children of men.” ‘lhe flood swept away the race; the fires of heaven consumed
the cities of the plain; the avenging armies destroyed the population of the guilty
land. And now the corrupt nation pays for its apostasy and its crimes the penalty of
defeat and humiliation; the degenerate Church also suffers feebleness, decline, perhaps
positive extinction; and the debased, hardened man finds himself bereft of every good,
pursued and overtaken by gathering evils, having nothing to hope and everything to
fear. God is “slow to wrath,” he gives opportunities for repentance, he welcomes and
restores the penitent; but on the impenitent and unreturning sinner he lays his hand
of retribution, and alas for those who fiud from their own experience that “the way of
transgressors is bard”!

Ill. HAT IT I8 OFTEN EXCITED BY OFFENCES COMMITTED AGAINST HIS PEOPLE.
“'lhe day of the Lord’s vengeance” is “the year of recompenses for the controversy of
Zion” (see Numb. xx. 20; 2 Chron. xxi. 8—10; xxv. 12; Ps. cxxxvii. 7; Obad. LO—16),
Our Divine Lord has told us that to cause one of his little ones to stumble is a heinous
offence in his sight; that, inasmuch as we do not our duty to one of the least of his
brethren, we withhold what is due to himself. The persecution of the people of God
has taken many forms beside that of slaughter or imprisonment; they who resort to it
must reckon on a very serious measure of Divine disapproval.

IV. THat IT sHOWS ITSELF IN ITS SADDEST FORM IN A COMPLETE DEGENERACY,
“From generation to generation it shall lie waste” (ver. 10 and vers. L11—15), It is
a sad descent, a melancholy instance of degeneracy, when the thickly peopled city
is abandoned by mankind, is untrodden by the human foot, and becomes the haunt
of the wild beast, of the obscene bird, and of the “ night-monster.’ The last and worst
penalty which God’s indignation inflicts on the children of men is utter spiritual
degeneracy—the mind losing its intellectual faculties, and becoming imbecile through
vice and folly ; the wall broken down and become helpless, bent and swayed with every
breeze; the heart hardened so that all feeling of pity and affection has deparied; the
soul foregoing and forgetting its higher aspirations and sunk into the condition in
which it craves nothing better than worldly increase or animal indulgence. Sad as
is the loss of position or estate when the powerful prince becomes a menial or the
wealthy merchant becomes a beggar, immeasurably sadder in the sight of Heaven is
that spiritual degeneracy in which, as the inevitable wages of sin, a human spirit loses
all its nobility of character and becomes an outcast in creation, mere driftwood on the
ocean, the sport of the devouring waves.—C.


Vers. 16, 17.—The Divine Word and human woe. These words are called forth by —

I, ANTICIPATED INcREDULITY. The prophet thinks that the solemn threatenings he
has uttered will not be credited. He seems to say, “ You heard these awful utterances,
but you will not heed them ; you will indulge the thought that they are nothing more
than a fanatic’s dream ; you think in your hearts that they will never be fulfilled ; you
imagine that you can afford to disregard them; but you are mistaken, there will be
the closest correspondence between what is written in ‘the book of the Lord’ and
what shall one day be witnessed in the experiences of Edom.” There is a great deal of
unwarranted incredulity in the hearts of men respecting the penal purposes of God.
He has spoken, has warned men, has clearly intimated what will be the conseauences
of crime, of vice, of ungodliness, of the rejection of the gospel of Christ, of unfaithful-


i


oH, xxxIv. 1—17.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 565
ces ee ee


ness and disloyalty in the Christian life. But men’s hearts are hard, their understanding
is veiled so that they do not see. 1, They delude themselves with the thought that,
though other men suffer the penalty of their sin or folly, they will, in some way,
escape, 2. Or they deceive themselves by holding up before their minds one-half only
of the truth; they dwell on the graciousness and mercy of God, and act as if he were
not as righteous as he is tender, as pure as he is pitiful. 3, Or they misrepresent the
character of their misdeeds to their own minds, persuading themselves that they are
slight and venial, however serious they may be in the sight of God. It is a melancholy
fact, calling for utmost vigilance, that the frequent repetition of sin and ultimate
familiarity with it reduce its apparent guiltiness to the smallest fraction,

Il. Tue propueric assuRaNcE. The prophet says, “Compare what is written in the
‘ book of the Lord’ with the facts, and they shall tally with one another—not one sball
fail; for the command shall go from heaven, and these wild beasts, whose presence has
been threatened as a dire scourge and as the mark of saddest degeneracy, shall possess
the holy land, and ‘from generation to generation shall dwell therein ;’ the very
worst that has been foretold shall happen, and what the Divine Word has predicied
shall be endured in its most grievous form.” ‘hey who now speak for God have to give
similar assurance: they have to warn men that the worst must be expected if they
remain impenitent and disobedient; they have to insist upon it, sorrowfully but
emphatically, that everything threatened in the “ book of the Lord” will compare with
the experiences of the persistently obdurate and disloyal. It is their duty to show:
1. That, sooner or later, men may expect the righteous retribution of God to overtake
them; “ the sword of heaven is not in haste to smite, nor yet doth linger;” that, though
God keeps silence long, he will repreve men, and set their sins ia order before their eyes
(Ps. 1. 21). 2. That, if not here, yet hereafter, the judgments of God will reach the
guilty, and then, if not now, “every one will receive the things done in his body,
according to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad.” 3. That Divine retribution
will take some other form if it come not in the one men have expected. There are
other ‘‘ wild beasts,” and worse, than those which are here referred to (vers. 14, 15).
There are other evils, and worse, than the poverty, the diseases, the mortality, from
which sinners shrink and from which they may long escape. ‘There are evils which
haunt the heart, calamities which afflict the soul, ruin which reaches the character,
death which overtakes the man himsel/,—judgments which God in righteousness “ hath
commanded,” and which more than fulfil the saddest and strongest word he has
instructed his spokesmen to employ.—C,


Ver, 1.—God’s dealing with one nation for the sake of many. “Let the earth hear.”
This chapter, with the following one, constitutes a distinct prophecy, and forms the
completion of the first part of Isaiah’s work. This chapter further illustrates the point
which has been again and again enforced, that “no man liveth unto himself;” a man’s
successes, achievements, failures, losses, troubles, are all for the sake of others. Kvery
man’s life is really vicarious, and this truth is pictured for us in the history and rela-
tions of nations. It is plain that no nation liveth unto itself; it is inspiration or warning
to other nations around. A man’s experience, and a nation’s experience, can ouly to
a very limited extent help the man or the nation; but it can most materially hel), other
men and other nations. Therefore “let the earth hear” what God will do unto Edom,
For Edom is principally referred to here, as the peculiarly inveterate and malignant
enemy of ancient Israel. As we know that Edom submitted to Assyria, it is quite
possible that they played a part in Sennacherib’s invasion of Judah, in his attack on
Jerusalem ; so the prophet foresees Divine judgments falling on Edom as soon as Sen-
nacherib is removed. ‘he historical relations of Edom and Israel should be carefully
studied. It is thought that from the bistorical reference to one nation the prophetie
vision advances to the end of the world and the final judgment. We may keep to the
lessons which arise out of the purely historical association. Dealing with one or with
a few, for the sake of the many, has been God’s universal law of relationship with men.
It is the law of elections, or rather selections, the calling out of specially fitted ones to
be workers for, or examples to, all. We readily recognize this law, as the responsibility
of talents, positions, or opportunities ; but it is less usual to see that it equally applies
to disabilities, failures, and judgments. Men work for others, and men suffer for others.


566 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, [cn. xxxrv. 1—127.


re  ————————


Nations gain power for the sake of others; nations are crushed and humbled for the
sake of oibers. Lllustration of this point may run along three lines,

I. A MAN’s OR A NATION’S GENIUS I8 NOT FOR SELF. ‘The earth must hear,” and
know about it. All gifts are trusts.

II. A MAN’s OR A NATION’S SUFFERINGS ARE NOT FOR SELF. The most striking illus-
tration in a man is Job; in a nation, the people of Israel. All sufferers bear their part
in the moral education, the redemption, of the race.

III. A MAN’s OB A NATION’S JUDGMENTS ARE NOT FOR SELF. We are not punished
for our own sakes alone. Judyments follow us for the sake of the on-lookers.—R. T.


Ver. 2.—Divine indignations. It is important that we use the words which express
the severe side of Divine dealings with great judgment and carefulness. We should
resist the tendency of modern times to eliminate all the severer features from the con-
ception of the Divine Being. Dr. Bushnell thus expresses it: “ Uur age is at the
point of apogee from all the robuster notions of Deity.” Our fathers made too much of
the Divine “wrath ;” but we are in danger of making too little. ‘‘'There is a consider-
able variety of words that we may use to express this sterner side of tle Divine dealing
—‘wrath,’ ‘anger,’ ‘indignation,’ ‘fury,’ ‘vengeance,’ ‘judgment,’ ‘justice,’ and the like,
but they are all more or less defective. Wrath is the term most commonly used in our
translation, and it is really the best, if only we can hold it closely enough to the idea of a
moral, in distinction from a merely animal, passion ; else, failing in this, it will connect
associations of unregulated temper that are painful, and as far as possible from being
sacred. It requires in this view, like the safety-lamps of the miners, a gauze of defini-
tion round it, to save it from blazing into an explosion too fierce to serve the purposes
of light.” Indignation is the most unexceptionable word, and it is to one point in
connection with it that attention is now invited. It is especially suited to express the
feeling of God, because it applies to wreng-doers rather than to wrong actions. It links
on to the view that the essence of sin is not a wrong thing done, but the wrong will
out of which the doing came. We cannot get up indignation merely at things doue;
our feeling settles and centres on the bad doers. In all cases of sin we should keep
quite clearly before us that the Divine concern is not, supremely, the disturbed circum-
stances, but the sinners and the sufferers. Divine power can readjust and rearrange
all our conditions and circumstances, just as that power can preserve the order, and put
straight the broken or deflected order, of creation. It is God’s own condition, laid upon
himsell, that moral states can only be reached by moral means. Divine indiznations,
as they concern moral beings, find expression in the persuasions of Divine judgments ;
these fall on the man himself, or they may fall on his substitute and representative ;
and 80 is opened up for tieatment the mystery of Divine indignations resting on Christ
for us, for our sakes.—R. 'T’.


Ver. 8.—The Lord’s controversy. “The year of recompenses for the controversy of
Zion.” Fausset says, “When Judah was captive in Babylon, Edom in every way
insulted over her fallen mistress, and killed many of those Jews whom the Chaldeans
had left, and hence was held guilty of fratricide by God (Esau, their ancestor, havin:
been brother to Jacob): this was the cause of the denunciations of the prophets against
Edom (ch. Ixiii, 1; Jer, xlix.7; Ezek. xxv. 12—14; xxxv.3—15; Joel iii. 19; Amos i.
11,12; Obad.8, 10, 12—18; Mal. i. 3,4).” he Israelites were familiar with the law of
retaliation. It was the pervading law of men as gathered into tribes, and their basis-
idea of justice. Moses adopted it for his legal system, but qualified its operation, pre-
paring the way for an entire change from personal retaliation for offences, to a calm,
unbiassed, systematic consideration of the case of all wrong-doers, and adjustment of
punishments on a fixed scale. So far as the idea of retaliation was right as between
men, it may be applied as between God and men, and it is introduced in this verse.
Edom took advantage of Israel’s weakness to act unbrotherly, and to encroach. ‘There-
fore the Lord has a controversy with Edom; and he will surely retaliate, bringing
judgments upon them. ci

1, RETALIATION AS A PRIMITIVE IDEA OF gusTIcE. “It was an ethic
extensively accepted among ancient nations, that men must suffer the same
they have inflicted on others, The later Greeks called this the Neoptolemic


al maxim,
pains that
82s, from


on. xxxIv. 1—17.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 567
eee eee


the circumstance that Neoptolemus was punished in the same way in which he had
sinned. He had murdered at the altar, and at the altar he was murdered.” Show how
natural the retaliatory idea seems to children. The old sentiment still lingers in men’s
mainds, so that we have great satisfaction in hearing of cases wherein Providence deals
the blow to men which they have dealt to others.

Il, RETALIATION DANGEROUS BECAUSE OF THE OHARACTER OF AVENGERS. It would
be a safe working principle if men were good, and not subject to unworthy passions.
These make men do more than retaliate.

Ill. Reraviarion as a PART oF Diving DEALING. He has a “ year of recompenses ”
—as time when he will make a man’s violent doing fall upon his own pate. All sin is
wrong done to him; it calls for due recompense. It must be precisely shown how far
the idea of retaliation may be applied to God.

IV. RevauiaTion BY GOD IS GUARANTEED BY THE CHARACTER oF Gop. It can
never be the expression of personal feeling. It can never be unqualified or excessive.
It can never be without its own aim to secure the final good of those on whom it must
fall—R. T.


Vers. 13—15.— The witness of desolate lands. In every age there have been such.
In the forefront of the world’s history there was desolated Sodom and Gomorrah,
witnessing to Israelites, and witnessing to all the world. Our Lord, as a Teacher, called
attention to its message. Attention may be directed to Babylon, Tyre, Palestine; and
for modern times, to the decay of the commercial cities of Italy, to Holland, etc.—coun-
tries which may be spoken of as “desolate” when compared with former prospcrities.
Edom, or Idumea, is the country alluded to by the prophet, and travellers describe
very forcibly the completeness of its desolation. “Captains Irby and Mangles tell us
that the Arabs about Akahba area very bad people, notorious robbers, and at war with all
others. ‘lhe desolation of the land is utter and perpetual—a terrible monument of the
Divine displeasure against wickedness and idolatry. The whole land lies under a curse;
the ruins of its cities of rock, and the remains of architectural skill and ingenuity, attest its
former greatness, while they set forth the solemn fact that it is a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the living God.” Dr. Robinson says, “A more frightful desert it had
hardly been our lot to behold. Now and then a lone shrub of the Ghudah was almost
the only trace of vegetation. The mountains beyond presented a most uninviting and
hideous aspect; precipices and naked conical peaks of chalky and gravelly formation
rising one above another without a sign of life or vegetation.” Dr. Olin speaks of it as
in “a state of desolation and ruin the most absolute and irretrievable, such as probably
no portion of the globe once populous and fertile now exhibits.” What, then, is the
message which such a desolate land bears for all the world and for us? This may be
worked out and illustrated under the following divisions.

1. Iv witnesses For Gop. “He is known by the judgments which he executeth.”
There is evidently more than a mere operation of natural forces—there is Divine direction
of natural forces to effect Divine ends. This may get more familiar illustration from
Palestine, which is a country with God’s curse on it.

Il. Iv witnesses ror RIGHTEOUSNESS. ‘“ Righteousness exalteth a nation.” Right-
eousness is sure defence, security, stability. If a land is desolate, it calls to all other
lands, saying, “ Hold fast by righteousness.” Lands fall through the iniquity of the

eoples.
: il. IT WITNESSES FOR JUDGMENT. “Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not
go unpunished.” Sooner or later every kingdom, every nation, will find that God will
arise and vindicate himself, and render a reward to the proud.—R. 'T’.


Ver. 16.—Appeal to the Word. “Seek ye out of the book of the Lord, and read.”
Literally, the word is “from upon the book,” meaning, “Search it from the top to the
bottom; and in so doing you will find abundant illustrations of Divine threatenings
faithfully executed.” “Be sure that the desolation which is here preannounced to
the literal Edom, and which is foretold in other parts of Scripture, as the doom of God’s
enemies, will be exactly fulfilled in all those who imitate their temper, in rebellion
against God, and in cruelty and treachery to Israel.”

I Aun Gop’s WRITTEN WoRD WILL BE FOUND TO AGREE TOGETHER. It is the


568 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH, [cn. xxxv. 1—10.


Hp


exceeding marvel of it, the best evidence of Divine inspiration, that, though written by
different men, at different times, and in different lands, on all main points of revelation
it is at absolute agreement; and contradictions, which men may fancy they find, gain
easy solution, Moral principles, religious teachings, representations of Divine dealings,
are the same throughout. ‘his may be illustrated in specific cases. Take the idea of
God as One, and as a Spirit ; or take the Divine relation to idolatry ; or take the response
of God to penitence; in each instance search the book, and you will surely find a uni-
form and harmonious testimony. Or take the case of the text, and show the certainty
that judgment will follow threatening, if penitence do not intervene.

]!. Aut Gov’s wrirreN WorD Is IN HARMONY WITH HIS SPOKEN worD. This seems
to be the point of Isaiah’s appeal. He spoke this denunciation of Edom by word of
mouth; it had not yet been written down, so he pleads thus: “Test it as much as
you please by the written Word that you possess: it is all one; God spoke then; God
speaks by me. The vision is true. The judgment is sure.” The condition of listening
to any one who professes to ha:e a message and revelation from God is that they shall
speak in harmony with the Word of God which we possess. “ If they speak not accord-
ing to this Word, it is because there is no light in them.” Distinction may wisely be
made between the mere details of the Word, and the great truths and principles of the
Word. ‘These latter alone can be used as tests; and very much of the sect-separation
of Christianity has come through overvaluing, and unskilfwly using, mere biblical


details.
tested by scriptural principles.—R. T.


All doctrine, all morals—but no science—can be, and should ever be, fully


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER XXXYV.


Vers. I—10.—Tue Guiory or THE Last
Times. On the punishment of God’s eneniies
will follow the peace, prosperity, and glory
ef his Church. Previously, the Church is
in affliction, waste, and desolate. Its ene-
mies once removed, destroy:d, swept out of
the way, it rises instantly in all its beauty to
@ condition which words are poor to paint.
The highest. resources of the poetic art are
called in to give some idea of the glory and
happiness of the final Church of the re-
deemed.

Ver. 1.—The wilderness and the solitary
place shall be glad for them; rather, the
wilderness, and the dry place, shall be glad.
The Church, that has been long wasted and
kept under by the wicked, shall, at their de-
struction, feel a sense of relicf, and so of joy.
The desert shall rejoice, and blossom. The
first result of the joy shall be a putting forth
of lovely provucts. Blossoms, beautiful as
the rose or the narcissus (Kay), sball spring
up all over the parched ground, and make it
a parterre of Howers. The blossoms are either
graces unknown in the time of affliction, or
saintly characters of a new and high type,

Ver. 2.—It shall blossom abundantly, and
rejoice even with joy and singing; rather,
with dancing and singing. Dancing and
singing were the ordinary manifestations of
religious joy (Exod. xv. 1, 20, 21; Judg. xi.
B84; xxi. 19—21; 2 Sam. vi. 5, 14, 15; Ps.
xxx. 11, ete), and would naturally follow


the great deliverance of the Church from
the power of its enemies. Tle clause is a
touch of realism intruded into a prolonged
metaphor or alligory, and is quite in the
manner of Isaiah (comp. ch. xiv. 7; xxvi.
1; xxx. 32, etc.). The glory of Lebanon...
the excellency of Carmel and Sharon; iZ.e.
productivencss of all kinds, of abundant
harvests, fruits, and flowers, and forest trees
(comp. ch. x. 18, 19, 33, 34; xxxii. 15)—
a resumption and prolongation of the meta-
phor in ver. 1. They shall see the glory of
the Lord. The culminating joy and delight
and hlessedniss of tlie Church shall be the
vision of God—either the spiritual percep-
tion of his presence (Matt. v. 8; Rom. i. 20)
or the actual beatific vision (1 Cor. xiii. 12;
Rev. xxi. 11, 23; xxii. 4), the first during
the probation period, the second in the state
of final bliss.

Ver. 3.—Strengthen ye the weak hands.
In the Church of the redeemed there will be
“weak” brethren as well as strong, “ feeble”
as well as healthful (see 1 Cor. iii. 1; Gal. vi.
1; Heb. v. 12—14). God, by the mouth of his
prophet, calls on the strong to impart of their
strength to their weaker brethren, uplifting
their “ weak hands,” as Aaron and Hur did
those of Moses (1xod. xvii. 12), and “ con-
firming” or sustaining their “feeble knees.”
So St. Paul: “ We that are strong ought to
bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to
please ourselves” (Rom. xv. 1).

Ver. 4.Say to them that are of a fearful
heart. There will be fearful and trembling
hearts always, even among the saints of God.
These are to be encouraged and assured that


cu. xxxv. 1—10.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


569


God will come to their aid, will avenge them
of their spiritual enemies, reward their
efforts to serve him, and in the end “save”
them. He will come and save you; rather,
he will come himself to save you. There is
One alone who can save, and he must do it
himself, and, to du it, he must “come” to
us. The words were at once an announce-
ment of the Incarnation, and a promise to
every trembling, doubting heart—a promise
of direct Divine assistance, of the presence
of God within us, of help potent to save.
The predominant thought of the prophet
appears to have been Messianic, and hence
the burst of glorious prophecy which follows
—a burst of prophecy most inadequately ex-
pounded of the time of the return from the
Captivity.

Vers. 5, 6.—Then the eyes of the blind shall
be opened. In the literal sense, our Lord
claims these prophecies to himsclf and lis
earthly career, when he says to the disciples
of John the Baptist, “Go and show John
those things which ye do hear and see, the
blind receive their sight, and the lame walk,
the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear”
(Matt. xi. 4,5); but they have doubtless a
further spiritual sense, in which they belong
tothe whole period of his mediatorial kingdom,
and are correlative to former utterances of the
prophet, in which the blinded eves and deaf
ears and stammexing tongues of God’s people
had been spoken of and made the subject of
complaint (see ch. vi. 10; xxix. 10, etc.).
Our Lord’s miracles of bodily healing, per-
formed during the three yeurs of his earthly
ministry, were types and foreshadowings of
those far more precious miracles of spiritual
healing, which the great Physician is ever
performing on the sick and infirm of his
Church, by opening the eyes of their under-
standings, and unstopping the deaf ears of
their hearts, and loosening the strings of
their tongues to hynin his praise, and stirring
their pax spiritual natures to active
exertions in his service. ~ Doubtless Isaiah,
or the Spirit which guided him, intended to
point to both these classes of miracles, and
not to one of them only, as characteristic of
the Messiah’s kingdom.

Ver. 6.—For in the wilderness shall waters


break out. The wilderness of humanity shall -


be renovated by a large effluence of God’s
grace (comp. ch. xxx. 25; xxxil, 2; xli.
18; xliii. 19; John vii. 37, 38).

Ver. 7.—The parched ground shall become,
etc.; rather, the glistening sand. That hot
glow of the parched desert soil, which pro-
duces the mirage, shall be replaced by a real
lake of cool water. Ilusive imitations of
goodness shall give way to the display of
genuine virtues and exccllences. In the
habitation of dragons; or, according to some,
of jackals—the driest and most desolate of


all places. Shall be grass with reeds and
rushes; 7.e. “shall be a luxuriant vegeta-
tion, like that on the banks of the Nile”
(comp. vers. 1, 2).

Ver. 8.—And an highway shall be there,
and a way (comp. ch. xxx. 21). There shall
be a clear “ way” marked out in which all
shall be bound to walk—a “strait and
narrow way” doubtless (Matt. vii. 14), but
one not readily missed. The way shall be
called The way of holiness. It shall be that
path through the dangers and difficulties of
life which holiness points out and requires.
The unclean shall not pass over it. It is
tempting to imagine that there is here a refer-
ence to the famous chinvat peretu of the Zoro-
astrians—the “ bridgeofthe gatherer”—along
which all souls had to pass in order to reach
the abode of the blessed, but which the souls
of the wicked never succeeded in passing
(‘ Ancient Monarchies,’ vol. ii. p. 339). The
‘bridge of the gatherer ” is, however, in the
other world, not in this world; but Isaiah’s
“highway ” is here. It is that right course
of life, which “the unclean” do not follow,
though they might do so if they chose, but
which the righteous follow to their great
gain and advantage. But it shall be for
those; rather, as in the margin, but he shall
be with them; God, i.e. shall be with those
who seek to walk in the way, and not to err
from it. He shall direct them, support
them, sustain their footsteps. The wayfaring
men; rather, they that walk in the way— that
make up their minds to try to walk in it.


| Though fools; 7.e. however simple and un-


learned they may be —“ Ne simplicissimi qui-
dem” (Rosenmiiller), Shall not err therein;
shall not wander from the way through mere
simplicity. It shall be easy to find, difficult
to miss.

Ver. 9.—No lion shall be there. No great
tyrannical power, like Assyria (Nah. ii. 11,
12) or Babylon, shall arrest the energies of
the Church, take it captive, or enslave it.
No ravenous beast shall make it his prey.
In proportion as the Chureh is holy (ver. 8)
it shall be free from the molestation of
bloody persecutors (see ch. xi. 9). Tae re-
deemed—those whom God has purchased for
his own (Exod. vi. 6; Hos. xiii. 14}—shall
be free to walk there, untroubled by cruel
enemies. There is an under-current of com-
parison between the blessedness of the last
times and the existing troubles of Israel, still
threatened by Sennacherib.

Ver. 10.—The ransomed of the Lord shall
return. The blesseduess of the last times
would be incomplete to Jewish ideas without
this crowning feature. Thcre had already
been a great dispersion of the fuituful (cl. i.
7—9); there was to be a still greuter one
(ch. xi. 11); Israel could not be content or
happy until her “outcasts” were recalied,


570 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xxxv. 1--10


——————————————@——K


“the dispersed of Judah gathered together { ver. 2). Everlasting joy upon their heads.
from the four corners of the earth” (ch. xi. | Anointed, as it were, with “ the oil of glad-
12). The return here prophesied is again an- | ness” (Ps. xlv. 7) for ever and ever. Sorrow:
nounced, in almost the same words, in ch. | and sighing shall flee away (comp. ch. xxv.
li. 11. With songs (see the comment on | 8; Kev. vil. 17; xxi. 4).


HOMILETICS.


Vers. 1—10.— The glory of the Church not temporal greatness, but spiritual perfection.
Amid the wealth of metaphor which Isaiah employs to depict the final prosperity,
glory, and happiness of the Church, it is remarkable how little use is made of any images
drawn from the conditions or circumstances of earthly grandeur. Images of natural
beauty are principally employed—the shady forest, the spreading cedar tree, the rich
luxuriance of arable and pasture land, the choice beauty of the most lovely among
flowers, the placid lake, the pellucid rill, the gushing fountain. These raise no ideas
of earthly greatness or temporal dominion. They point, by what may be called the
laws of prophetic language, to two main features of spiritual life, (1) abounding grace
granted to the Church freely from above—a supply copious, unlimited, inexhaustible,
such that the cry may be confidently raised, “ Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye
to the waters, and he that hath no money; come ye, buy, and eat ” (ch. lv. 1); and (2)
abundant fruit lorne by her members in their several stations—fruit of various kinds
and of various degrees of excellency, but all “ good fruit,” spontaneously brought forth
from ungrudging hearts, hearts desirous of showing forth their love and gratitude to
their Maker and edeemer. Beyond these two main characteristic features of the Church
of the redeemed, we descry further—first, a power of working miracles (vers. 5, 6),
physical or spiritual, or both; and secondly, a gift of spiritual insight, whereby the
redeemed are enabled to penetrate through the dense veil wherewith material things
overlay the great realities that are behind them, and to discern through all the “ glory
and excellency ” of the Most High (ver. 2). he redeemed seek for no external dominion
—their efforts are, primarily, to walk themselves in “the way of holiness” (ver. 8);
secondarily, to “strengthen the weak hands and confirm the feeble knees” of their
brethren (ver. 3); and, finally, to realize to themselves, by continual meditation and
study of his works, the goodness and greatness, the “glory and excellency,” of their
Lord and God.


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1—10.—Glories of the Messianic age. This is a picture of the happy and
glorious condition of Israel after the return from Captivity. Nature is beheld rejoicing
with man; and the whole scene is suffused with the light of a universal spiritual joy.

I. ‘| HE TRANSFORMATION OF THE NATURAL WORLD. The desert will rejoice “like the
narcissus,” the beautiful white flower found in abundance in spring-time in the Plain of
Sharon. A ringing musical cry shall break out from those solitudes. The beauty of
the most favoured spots, of Carmel and Sharon, shall be diffused over the whole. In
poetic pathos a feeling is lent to Nature which does not really exist in her. There isa
deep truth, not of the reason, but of the heart, in this mood. Inanimate Nature is
incapable either of joy or of sorrow, of exultation or depression. This our reason tells
us. But we are all something more than cold rationalists in this matter. We take back
from Nature impressions which we have first lent to her, and suppose we have borrowed
them. This has been called the “ pathetic fallacy,” and there is a truth in the fallacy
better than that of syllogistic reasoning. To the lover Nature looks love, and whispers
of love; to the desponding temper her expression is a frown, her tones are ivspirations
of lament; she wears a nuptial robe for the happy bridegroom, and a pall for the mourner;
silent and morose to the eyes of him who is cast down in the sense of Divine wrath, it
breaks forth into jubilant song for the ears of him whose heart overflows with the sense
of the redeeming mercy of God. “There is not the least flower but seems to hold up
its head, and look pleasantly, in the secret sense of the goodness of its heavenly Maker.
This silent rhetoric, though we carnot hear, but only see it, is so full and expressive,


ou. xxxv. 1—10.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH 571


that David thought he spoke neither impropriety nor nonsense, in a strong line, when
he said, ‘even the valleys break forth into singing.’” It is a song of praise and thanks-
giving, a song of joy and triumph in the “glory of Jehovah,” the manifestations of his
creative and renewing powers, the liberal effusions of his goodness, even upon the lowest
parts of the cieation.

Il. THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE HUMAN WORLD. 1. Weakness made strong—under
the figure of the nerving up of languid hands and of tottering knees. Languor, dulness,
the privation of power, are symptomatic of the absence of vital energy, alike in the
physical and the moral sphere. People may be seemingly weak and impotent, not
because they want the organs for action, but because the inspiration to actiun is want-
ing. A life without defined activity is hardly worth the nara lathe heed Tem of the
eye, the prompt hand, the willing foot, we see sigus of the Divine aflatus upon a man.
The sails have caught the favouring breeze, while others lie becalmed. But there is
always some part for the wi//. ‘To him that hath shall be given; and the paradox is
true, power comes to those who exertit. 2. Despair eachanged for confidence. Despair
unfits alike for human and Divine service. Men are moved to duty by the hope of wood
or by the fear of evil. These motives cannot avail one who does not believe that his
state can be either bettered or worsened. The man becomes careless of his happiness,
indifferent to salvation. The biblical medicine for despair is the jfi:m insistence on the
message of salvation. God is coming—is on the way, to requite, to redeem, to deliver.
How careful should preachers be not to force men into a “ preternatural melancholy,”
by an unskilful handling of the Word of truth, by indiscreet severity, by dwelling too
much on the dark themes of human depravity and predestination! 3. Zhe removal of
human infirmities and limitations. Blindness, deafness, lameness, dumbness, are
symbolic of all obstructions in the soul to the entrance of light, and music, and power,
and fluency. One great outilow of the Spirit sweeps all these hindrances to enjoyment
and’ t6 activity away. Near to us is a God of infinite fulness; all about us is a world
of beauty, strength, and joy; but we are “straitened in ourselves.” Life is full of
illusions, which tempt us forward with all the power and promise of reality. These are
like the mirage of the desert—a seeming sheet of water in the distance, with its offer of
refreshment to the pilgrim; in fact, an optical deception. But these illusions bear a
certain relation to truth. For we cannot believe that the Almighty has planted a spring
of error in the very mechanism of our fancy. Our minds were made for truth and tend
towards truth, even through hallucinations. ‘The mirage shall become a lake.”

III. THe REFORMATION OF RELIGION. ‘There will be a “raised way,” called “ The Holy
Way.” It will be exempt from all that is unclean; it will be so clear and straight, that
even the simple-minded cannot go astray; a secure and peaceful way, undisturbed by
the furious beasts of ravening and destruction. Its every stage will be marked with
joy, as singing pilgrims pass along it; and the sighs of sorrow will die away in the
distance. It is a picture of true evangelical religion, as it is revived among the peoples,
from epoch to epoch, and of its blessed effects. ‘l'rue religion is an e/evating thing ;
nobility of manner and refinement of taste go hand-in-hand with it. It is a /o/y thing;
and distinction of characters and classes, of tastes and pursuits, must appear wherever it
comes. Its doctrine is simple, intelligible, yet sublime. “Justification by faith ” can
be understood and received by the humblest mind, while the most powerful intellect
must exert itself to rise to the serene height of the truth. It is a way of gentleness and
peace, unvexed by the furious storms of controversy, sheltering timid souls. It is a
way of freedom and of joy, and it leads to a fixed destination—a celestial place, an eternal
kingdom, s city that cannot be removed, whose Builder and Maker is God.—J.


Ver. 3.— Inspirations to energy. “Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the
feeble knees.” It is not enough to be sorry for the woes of others. Sympathy may
bea sort of mental “ minor,” wherewith we simply soothe ourselves. We must be earnest
and inspirational. Pity must be practical. “Jesus, moved with compassion, pit
forth his hand!” We have plenty of critics and satirists; we want men who will help
t. save.

I. WE MAY STRENGTHEN BY OUP worDs. “ Say to them that are of a fearful heart,
Be strong, fear not.” ‘Tell a sorrow to some persons, and they draw a picture of still
darker possibilities, and so feed the already gloomy fancies of the mind. But it is


572 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cn. xxxv. 1—10,


ee eee


possible to give “ cheer” instead—to record God’s great deliverances to ourselves, and
tell of all his wondrous works. Thus we may put the brightness of hope into the sky,
and help to chase the dark clouds away. “Say.” We have all the faculty of quickly
telling bad news; let us tell the “good news” of God’s gracious kingdom.

ll. Wer can CHEER THE HEART. That is the centre of life. We may not be able
tu lift the burden, but we may strengthen our brother’s hands by energizing his heart.
It is wonderful what a few depressing influences will accomplish. Some are more
sensitive than others, and are easily cast down, ‘Do not my words do good?” says
God; for they reach at once to the inner man. Blessed angels of help are words that
go to the heart. No man is so great but sympathy can cheer him; no man is so weak
but he may be made heroic by holy inspirations |

Ill. We can HELP THE PILGRIMAGE. ‘The knees are feeble; for it is a “tiring”
journey to many. They are very weary. Disappointments have multiplied; fountains
have dried up in the desert; frieuds have died, and, like Naomi, they went out full,
and are re'urning home empty. We are all pilgrims; and the statesman’s steps often
tire as well as the poor student seeking after his first ideal. In the spiritual pilgrimage,
too, we often faint and fail, The way is hard. We are disappointed with ourselves.
It may be that some soul was just turning back when we strengthened the feeble
knees by our own eager pressing forward, even when tired and faint.

How much thus depends on our own Christ-like disposition! We cannot do all this
if we are insolent, quarrelsome, or hard. ‘The very duties the gospel enjoins manifest
what a lofty ideal of character the gospel requires.—W. M. 8,


Ver. 4.— Tremor of spirit. “Say to them that are of a fearful heart.” This implies
that fear will be a necessary element in our life. All depends on the heart. Fear
increases with experience.

I, Tuy Gop REIGNETH To SALVATION. His power is in this direction. Heis God.
He is thy God—the God of thy salvation. 1. I¢ is an empire over sin. All its
agencies and influences. 2. J¢ 7s wn empire over hearts, Because it is connected with
the cross! 3, I¢ ts an empire over enemics. ‘Lhere is no Manichean universe of equally
divided forces. The Lord is King.

ll. Tuy GoD REIGNETH TO consoLATION. He is human as well as Divine. 1. He is
Lord of circumstance. 2, He is Lord of condition. He can and does extend his pity
to the weak and the poor. 38. He ts Lord of dissolution. For death is in his hands.

III. Tuy Gop REIGNETH TO G@LORIFICATION. All things make manilest: 1. His
praise. 2%. Ilis perfections. 3. His permanence. “Thy kingdom is an everlasting
kingdom.”

IV. Tuy Gop REIGNETH To suBsuGATION. All enemies under his feet. 1. Power
to control. 2. Power to educe good out of evil. 3. Power to raise and to cast down.

V. ‘luny Gop REIGNETH TO ADoRATION. His kingship will evoke the worshipping
homage of all creation. 1. Angels adore him. 2. Saints adore him. Heaven shall
ring with the glad acclaim of a great multitude that no man can number. “ Blessing,
and honour, and glory, and power, be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto
the Lamb for ever.”—W. M. 8.


Vers. 1, 2, 5—7.— Transformation by the truth. Accepting these words as Messianic
in their scope, we may treat them as descriptive of that most blessed transformation
which is effected, in the individual man and in the nation, by the gospel. When the
truth of Christ is made efficacious by the Spirit of God, and has had time to work out its
true results, there will be found—

I. ILLUMINATION OF THE UNDERSTANDING. “The eyes of the blind shall be opened,
and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped.” Darkness of mind, deafness of soul, have
prevailed; the spirit has been insensible to all that is most beautiful and harmonious,
most precious, in the universe. But ¢hen shall things appear as they are. Men shall
“see the glory of the Lord, and the excellency of our God.” In the Father, the Friend.
the Sanctifier, the Refuge of the human soul, men will recognize him who is worthy of
their trust, their love, their search.

Il. Gratirupe or HEART. Instead of the “guilty silence,” so often and so long
maintained by men under the reign of sin, “the tongue of the dumb will sing” psalms


ea. xxxv. 1—10.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 573


of grateful praise to the Divine Author of all being, to the bountiful Giver of every
good and perfect gift. The mouth will be full of song because the heart will be full of
thankful remembrances.

Ill. Srreneru or sount. “Then shall the lame leap as an hart.” Instead of the
moral feebleness and incapacity which showed itself in painful spiritual inactivity, the
soul will go forth, with all its renewed and regenerated powers, to do God’s work, to bear
witness to his Name, to work in his vineyard.

IV. LovELINEss AND FRUITFULNESS OF LIFE. “The desert shall... blossom as
the rose; . . . the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency of Carmel,”
etc. 1. Instead of bareness and unsightliness—the invariable product of sin in its final
outworkings—there shall be spiritual beauty. There shall be “the beauty of holi-
ness,” “the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit ;” all that is attractive and entrancing
to the changed and cultivated judgment of the good and wise. 2. Instead of fruitless-
ness there shall be fertility. The desert shall “blossom abundantly.” Holy, devoted
life will be spent in the service of a present Saviour and for a sin-stricken world. We
shall abound in help, in healing, in blessing.

V. Prevaiine yoy. The whole strain of the passage is jubilant, and it speaks of the
desert “rejoicing with joy and singing.” Sin and sadness are most intimately associated;
even if they are not so inseparably allied as to be always seen together, they are so
essentially connected that when one appears the other is sure to follow. It is a guilty
world that knows so much of disappointment, of regret, of grief, of shame. But when
the truth of God has wrought its full effect on the human soul, the prevailing note, even
of the earthly life, will be that of joy. ‘The near presence of the heavenly Father, the
close friendship of the Divine Redeemer, the happy service of love, the blessed work of
doing good, the exulting hope of heavenly bliss,—these are sources of joy which quicken
and animate the soul, which make a holy human life radiant with a blessedness which
anticipates the glory of the skies.—O.


Vers. 3, 4.—The privilege of the strong. In this strenuous and vigorous appeal we have—

IL, THE COMPREHENSIVE CHARACTER OF THE CuURCH OF CuRIST. In it are the weak
as well as the strong. ‘There is nothing whatever that is narrow about the Christian
faith. It is not adapted to any particular class or character. In Jesus Christ there is
neither male nor female, Greek nor Jew, cultivated nor uncultivated, bond nor tree. And
in him there is no favour reserved for any special disposition. It is not a gospel for
those in particular who are most admired of men—for the strong, for the brave, for the
wise, for the winning; it is a refuge for the weak, for the timid, for the unknown and
the unbeloved. Those who are of no account at all amongst men, those whom human
leaders would gladly leave out of their army as weakening rather than strengthening
their forces,—these are all welcome to flock to the standard and to fight under the banner
of the heavenly Prince.

ll. THE PRIVILEGE OF THE sTRONG. Untaught by the truth of Christ, unchanged by
his Spirit, it has been considered the privilege of the strong (1) to despise the weak ; (2)
to displace them and to enjoy tbeir portion; (3) to delight in playing the part of despot
over them. ‘I'hese have been the uses which the strong have made of their strength.
But we have not so learned Christ. So far as we possess his Spirit and have any right
to bear his Name, we shall count it our privilege: 1. Zo show them a genuine sympathy ;
remembering that often, if not always, their weakness reflects no discredit on them,
and our strength no credit on ourselves. 2. Jo render them effectual sccour ; to grant
them needful protection and guidance, to instil courage into their minds, to impart
vigour to their souls, to make them partakers of our own strength. We shall say to
them, speaking in more ways than one, “ Be strong.” :

Il. THE MAIN soURCE OF THEIR succouR. ‘The strong will help the weak: 1. By
offering them the honour which is their due, instead of the disdain to which they have
Deen accustomed. The former elevates, the latter crushes. 2. By their inspiriting
example. Walking with them, working or struggling by their side, the fellowship
which they afford imparts a constant access of strength to their soul. 3. By words of
wise encouragement. And of these the best and the most effective will be those which
bring out the nearness and the salvation of God. “Behold, your God will come . . .


and save you.” If we would do our very best to strenthen the weak, we must bring
20


574 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [cn. xxxv. 1—10.


them into conscious relation to the Divine Source of all power. Let men realize that
God is with them and for them, and they will be strong to do the bravest deeds and to
endure the sharpest sufferings.—C.


Vers. 8, 9.—The way to Zion. The outward incidents of the Jewish people have
a singularly close correspondence with the inward experiences of human souls in
Christian times. The captivity in Egypt and also that in Babylon find their analogue
in the state of spiritual bondage which is the constant penalty of sin. The way back
to Jerusalem stands for our homeward pilgrimage as we travel to the city of the blessed.
As here described, there are several features in which the one answers strikingly and
instructively to the other.

I. THE HIGHWAY TO THE HEAVENLY city. In all his dealings with man God has
been constructing a highway from bondage to spiritual freedom, from sin to holiness,
from guilty selfishness to sacred service, from utter ruin to complete salvation, from
earth to heaven. He was engaged in this beneficent, Divine procedure when he
spake to us through the patriarchs, when he instituted the Law, when he gave to us
his prophets. And he completed this “way” when he “sent forth his Son.” Jesus
Christ had so much to do with preparing for us the highway to the heavenly city
that we appropriately speak of him, as indeed he spoke of himself, as actually being the
Way itself (John xiv. 6). He, the Truth, is the Way by which we have a knowledge of
God and of his will. He, the Mediator, is the Way by which we ourselves come into
close spiritual contact with God himself. He, the Propitiation, is the Way by which
* we ascend to forgiveness and reconciliation. He, the Life, is the Way by which we
rise into loving union with, and growing likeness to, and ultimate preparedness for, the
Divine Father.

II. THREE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE HEAVENWARD WAY. 1. Here is that which is
paradoxical, but true withal; for this homeward way is characterized by breadth. It is
the broad “ highway,” the open road, along which all travellers are free to pass. There
is no such exclusiveness about it as is often found in the ways we construct. It is for
all classes of society, for all nations and races of mankind, for men who have lived all
kinds of human lives, for men of all tempers and dispositions; the “ King’s highway ”
has ample room for them all. 2. But it is also, strangely though not inconsistently,
characterized by narrowness. ‘ And a way,” 7.e. a path, an elevated and narrow cause-
way along which only one or two can walk abreast. About this way of life there is a
narrowness of its own (see Matt. vii. 13, 14; Luke xiii. 24). (1) Its gateway can only
be entered by one at a time. Men do not enter into the kingdom of God in regiments or
companies, but as separate and individual souls (see Gal. vi. 5). (2) No man can enter
in swollen with pride, or carrying his vices with him, or wrapped round with selfish-
ness. It is “the way of holiness,” “the unclean shall not pass over it.” 3. It is also
characterized by directness. A man, “though a fool, shall not err therein.” There is
no serious difficulty here. Mysteries there are which are insoluble, but these can be
left alone—they will keep for a future time. But what the will of God is in Jesus
Christ, how he would have us order our life, what manner of men we ought to be in
order to please him,—this is as clear and plain as it could be. The little child, the man
who is little better than “a fool,” need not miss his way in travelling to the heavenly city.

Ill. Tue IMMUNITY AND THE COMMUNION OF THE way. 1. Immunity. “No lion
shall be there.” Not that there is no adversary to be found in the way to Zion. The
evil one himself, as a roaring lion, haunts the path of life. But there will be found no
temptation which belongs peculiarly and especially to the heavenward way, as is the case
with other paths. In the path of financial success is the lion of covetousness or avarice ;
in the path of fame is that of vanity; in the way of professional success is that of
complacency, etc.; but in the way of holiness is no especial “lion” which frequents
that road. It is morally and spiritually safe. 2. Communion. There is (1) fellowship
with the holy. “The redeemed shall walk there.” And there is also and above all (2)
fellowship with God himself; with the Divine Friend of mam, “He shall be with
them” (marginal reading); he shall be with them—he—


“Leader of faithful souls, and Guide
Of all who travel to the sky.”


a


on. xxxv. 1—10.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 575


—_—_—_—eeeeeeeeeee


Ver. 10.— Within the gates. If the two preceding verses may be regarded as
descriptive of the Christian pilgrimage, the text may appropriately be treated as pictorial
of the heavenly city in which that journey ends. The language of this verse suggests
to us—

I, THE DISTINGUISHING FEATURE OF THOSE WHO ARE ADMITTED. They are “the
ransomed of the Lord.” They were in spiritual bondage: they have been redeemed by
a Divine Deliverer; they have been ransomed at a great price; they have been rescued
from the power of their enemies (outward and inward) and walk in liberty, thankfiu
for what they have escaped from, anticipating the more perfect freedom aud the more
excellent estate they are travelling toward.

Il. THE SPECIAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE CITY ITSELF. “Shall come to Zion.”
1. It ts the very home of God. Jerusalem was “the city of God ”—it was the place on
earth which he chose for his manifested presence. There, in a peculiar sense, he abode ;
there, as in no other city, he was approached and was worshipped; there, as nowhere
else, men felt that they stood in his near presence and rejoiced in fellowship with him.
The heavenly Zion is to be to all who shall he rece:ved within its gates the pluce where
God is, the home of the living and reigning Saviour. ‘There we are to be “at home
with the Lord.” 2. Jt is the place of perfect security and of transerndent beauty. The
“mountains were round about Jerusalem,” and “ beautiful for situation, the joy of the
whole earth, was Mount Zion.” The heavenly city, of which it is the earthly type, will
prove a liome of absolute security, into which no enemy will ever come, fri which
temptation and sin are safely barred (see Rev. xxi. 27); and of surpassing beauty and
glory (Rev. xxi. 1, 10, 11, 18, 19, 23). There shall be everything which will give pure
and inexhaustible delight to all holy souls, to those in whom has been planted and
nourished the appreciation of that which is really beautiful and glorious.

Ill. THe JoY WHICH WILL ATTEND apDmMission. They “shall come to Zion with
songs.” How transcendent must that moment be when the human soul is assured, by
actual sight of the heavenly city, that immortal glory is his blest estate!

IV. THE FULL AND ABIDING BLESSEDNESS OF THE CELESTIAL HOME. “ Everlasting
joy . . . sorrow and sighing shall flee away.” Here are the two vrand essentials of
perfect blessedness. 1. The absence of all thut mars. Here many a “ goodly heritage ”
loses half its value to the possessor of it by reason of some one serious drawback ; it is
some bodily infirmily, or it is some grave anxiety, or it is some keen disappointment,
or it is some irreparable loss which, though everything else be fair and friitful, makes
life seem to have as much of shadow as of sunshine. There, sorrow and sighing shall
have fled away. 2. The presence of lasting and ever-growing joy. Here, with the
constitution of our mind and with the fading of our faculty, pleasure palls, joys fade
and disajpear. After a few decades life becomes less and less valuable, until it is felt
to be a burden that can ill be borne. There, it is an “everlasting song,” and instead of
its strain becoming /ess tuneful or inspiritiug, the enlarging and unfolding powers of our
immortal manhood will make the heavenly life more musical and rapturous as the years
and the centuries are left behind us.—C.


Vers. 1, 2.—Changed circumstances following the return of Divine favour, This,
which is expressed in the figures of these verses, may be further illustrated by the
experience of David. His “ bones waxed old through his roaring all the day long,” while
God hid his face from him. He sang again the old songs when God “ restored unto
him the joy of bis salvation.” “In contrast to the ruin of Edom, the prophet now
describes Israel’s triumphant march home through the blossoming wilderness” (Matthew
Arnold). Two points may be dwelt on. 1. Gud’s favour often includes improved cir-
cumstauces. 2. God’s favour brings such cheer as lifts us above circumstances.

J. Gop’s FAVOUR OFTEN INCLUDES IMPROVED ciRCUMSTANCES, ‘he actual removal
of our difticulties or hirdrances; restored relationships; business prosperities, etc. ;—all
such things beiny poetically represented by the bare, dry desert becoming a watered,
flowery garden. In actual fact, the weariness and danger of the long desert route were
graciously mitigated and relieved for the returning exiles. Cheyne resists the reference
to the exiles; but the same point may be illustrated if the picture of the text be that
of the condition of desolated Judaza when Guod’s favour rested on the remnant that
remained there. The contrast may be between desolated Edom on which rested God’s


576 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [ca. xxxv. 1—10.


————— 0... ee


frown, and refreshed and revived Judza on wich rested God’s favour. So when God’s
curse is taken off Palestine, the old blossom and beauty will return to her. We cannot
always be sure that God’s smile on our souls will be followed by improvement of our
circumstances; but this great comfort we may take—God oftentimes dves in this way
seal and complete his mercies to his people.

II. Gop’s FAVOUR BRINGS SUCH CHEER AS LIFTS US ABOVE CIRCUMSTANCES. It is very
easy to say that we ought to rise above circumstances in our own strength. But we
cannot do it; nobody ever really does it, however loud may be their buastings. The
bond uniting body and mind, soul and life, is altogether too close and subtle to permit
even the holiest man to cease to feel. What alone is possible is that God’s tavour and
grace may be such an inspiration and strength to a man’s spirit, or a man’s will, that
he may be able to control bis circumstances, and even change them through the new
and masterful relation in which he stands to them. God’s favour and acceptance is
man’s supreme upliting. ‘here is no cheer, no strength, like that which comes to the
man who can say, “The Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our Refuge.”
That man, and that man alone, can do all things, and bear all things, and make life
yield to him its best.—R. T.


Ver. 3.—Cheer for the faint-hearted. This term may well be applied either to the
small remnaut left in Judea, or to the small company that represented the exiled
nation on the return to Jerusalem. The cheer comes through the assurance of God’s
direct and gracious relations with them. Faint-hearted ones can only be steadied by
leaning on the Strong One forstrength. The prayer of all such should be this, “O Lord,
I am oppressed, wndertake thou for me.” Introduction may include the reasons for
faii.t-hearteduess which these people had who are tere addressed ; and the correspond-
ing reasons for faint-hearteduess which now may press upon us. We have times, like
those which Job knew, when everybody and everything seems to be against us; we
have to suffer much through the wrong-doing of others; and the frailty of our bodies
often makes us write bitter things against ourselves. Our hope is in God. He sends
cheering assurances,

I. WE HAVE THIS GOOD CHEER—Gop Lives. Even if we are as nearly shipwrecked
as the Apostle Paul, and for days and nights together neither sun nor stars appear, the
fact cannot be altered, the sun is there behiud those clouds; they cannot blot him out.
In our troublous and weary times men may bruise us sorely with their taunts, ‘ Where
is now thy God?” But taunts cannot push him from his place, and blot him from our
sky. He is there, behind the cloud, if his time is not yet. We shall praise him.

Il. \ £ HAVE THIS GOOD CHEER—GopD Is FoR us. He is onour side. “ Who shall harm
you, if ye be followers of that which is good?” “ If God be for us, who can be against
us?” We havea champion, a “Great Heart” pilgrim’s guide, ‘Greater is he who
is with us than all that can be against us.” And if we are still placed under disabilities
and burdens, we keep this confidence—seeing God is for us, he must know that it is
better for us to let the burdens stay than to remove them. He could remove them;
it is enough for us that he does not. ‘

Ill. WE HAVE THIS GOOD CHEER—GoD 18 WITH Us. His is not a grace and help
which we may have on appeal merely; it is a grace and strength which are our oon-
stant possession. “The Lord of hosts is with us.’ We are safely defended; we are
wisely inspired; we possess all things— all are ours ”—for we have God. :

1V, WE HAVE THIS GOOD CHEER—Gop Is IN Us. This is the deeper Christian view
and opens up the Pauline teaching, “I live, yet not I, Christ liveth in me;” and we
may even say, the teaching of our Lord himself, Cheer for the faint-hearted glen
our response to this appeal, “ Abide in me, and I in you.”—R. T.


Vers, 5, 6.—Pre-visions of the Great Physician. These may be poetical ficures
designed to present, in au impressive way, a time of great national joy; but we cannot
fail to recognize in them foreshadowings of the miracles of healing and of grace that
\vere wrought by the Lord Jesus Christ. The first and general meaning of the passage
may be that, “so conspicuous and overpowering would be the interference of God on
behalf of his people, those of the most obtuse intellect could not fail to perceive it,
So joyous would be the event, that persons the most unlikely would participate in the


on, xxxv. 1—10.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 677


exultation.” But, for spiritual readers, there must be a second and farther meaning, for
the language too well suits that time when “the blind saw, the lame walked, the lepers
were cleansed, the deaf heard, and the dead were raised.” Reading the mission of
Uhrist from this prophecy as a text, we note—

I. CHRIST REMOVING MEN’s DISABILITIES. All are typified in these failures of the
senses of sight, hearing, walking, aud speaking. Some of the human disabilities are
hereditary, others are brought on by men’s own negligences or wilfiluesses. But this
is to be specially noticed, they are all the direct products and results of sin. And
Christ only designed to impress on men the greatness of his work as Redeemer from sin,
by showing them how vigorously he would deal with all sin’s consequences,

Il. Curis GIVING LIFE TO THE DEAD. Death is the supreine, and apparently resist-
less triumph of sin. Before it man stands utterly hopeless. But Christ does not. He
speaks, and Lazarus comes forth, bound with the grave-cluthes. He even submits
himself to the worst that death can do, and then breaks the bars of his prison-house
asunder. There is nothing he cannot do for us.

Ill. CaristT REVEALING Gop’s worK IN souLs. We only read our Lord’s life aright
when we see it to be illustration of permanent spiritual facts. God is always coning
and saving men. He has always been cominy and saving men. Prophets, by their
miracles (such as Elisha’s), in part illustrated God’s soul-saving work; but ihe “ Lord
Jesus vives the full, sublime, ever-suggestive illustration.” God vives life from the
“death of trespasses and sins.” God removes the soul-disabilities which sin has
brought in its train. This opens up the consideration of our Lord’s position as
Mediator, doing, for God, his part of this great work in souls; and further of the
mission of the Spirit, as Comforter, Inspirer, and Teacher. Verily God works wonders
of grace in the souls of men.—R. T.


Ver. 8.—The Lord’s highway. Under the figure of deliverance from Assyria and
Babylon the times of Messiah are foreshadowed. From the previous verses we get
suggestions of his miracles of healing, and assurances that he will supply grace to men
like abundaut fountains in thirsty places. The figure of a ‘ way” was even used by
Christ himself. He said, “I am the Way ”—the way to the Father; the way of salva-
tion; the way of holiness; the way to glory, “bringing many sons unto glory.”
Spiritualizing the way described in this text, we may note—

I. ‘HE HIGHWAY OF SALVATION IS A RAISED WAY. A made way; one actually lifted
up, levelled, prepared. This is the idea in the Hebrew word. We must distinguish
between the ordinary Eastern path, a mere track in the sand or the soil, and the rvad
sarefully made for a royal progress, valleys raised, mountains levelled, stones removed.
Such a road is Christ’s way of life an salvation for us. All hindrances are taken out
of the way, and a ;lain path is laid before our feet. There are some points of view
from which the way of life appears as a “strait gate” opening on to a narrow path.
But from other points of view it is a broad, open road, which none can mistake. This
may lead to consideration of the work of the Lord Jesus which was, as it were, the
making of the way of life,

Il. ‘HE HIGHWAY OF SALVATION IS A HOLY way. There is no possibility of ow
treading it with the uncleanness of wilful sin, kept sin, upon us. Sinners may tread it,
but they must be penitent sinners, And a penitent man, so far as heart and purpose
are concerned, is a holy man. Imperfect saints may tread it, but only if their heart is
set on holiness. Only if they are “clean every whit,” but needing to “wash their
feet.”

Il]. THe HIGHWAY OF SALVATION IS A SIMPLE WAY. “The way(aring men, yea fools,
shall not err therein.” The difficulties we make; they are not really in the way. The
way of salvation seems to wise people full of mystery, yet it is grasped by the wayfar-
ing, the tool, the child. None need miss the way, for it is thoroughly well fitted with
directions and guide-posts. We may blind ourselves, and refuse to see them. We may
put obstacles in our own path. The one great obstacle takes many furms, What we
really want is to keep our wilfulness; to make a way of our own; to gct God to save
us on our own terms. There is the highway open right before us, and we persist ip
looking this way and th. if so be we may find any way but Christ’s way of penitence
and faith.—R. T.


ISAIAH. 1 2p


578 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. [on. xxxv. 1—10.


Ver. 10.—The return of the ransomed. ‘ Whoever is familiar with the bold and
magnificent character of the prophetic style will not deem the liberation from the Cap-
tivity an event too trivial to be predicted in the language here employed.” “ Minor
and temporary deliverances are not only emblems of the great salvation, but preparatory
to it.” “lhe first volume of Isaiah’s prophecy closes fitly with this transcendent
picture, carrying the thoughts of men beyond any possible earthly fulfilment. The
outward imagery probably had its starting-point in the processions of the pilgrims
who came u) to the temple singing psalms, like those known as the ‘songs of degrees,’
at their successive halting-places.” Very strane is the fascination which the “ future”
exercises on men. It is a “ Will-o’-the-wisp” which is ever enticing men on,


“ At first Time made nought but to-day
With its joys, its successes, and sorrow ;
Then, to keep on good terms with the world,
He promised he’d make a to-morrow.”


No man is really satisfied. He is always hoping for something to happen in the future
And so he is lifted onwards towards the eternal, and in his very restlvssness he reveals
his immortality. Illustrate from the romance of the child, the ambition of the appren-
tice, the outlooking of the man, the persistent hopes of the Jewish race. This onlook-
ing is peculiarly characteristic of the Cliristian, who has the “ promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come.” The Christian’s best is in the eternal.

I. Tue propis. “ Ransomed of the Lord.” The word reminds us of the prisoner and
the slave. It may properly be applied in a religious sense, because the Bible repre-
sents men as “in bondage,” and as “redeemed.” “Sold under sin.” ‘“ Ye were the
servants of sin.” ‘Gave his life a ransom.” 1. Observe from what bondage we are
ransomed. Describe the wretched condition of the slave. -How much worse is the con-
dition of the slaves of sin, drink, lust, evil passions, or selfish worldliness! There is a
peculiar degradation and a certain final ruin mvolved in the supreme service of self.
“ Whosvever committeth sin is the slave of sin.” 2. By whom were we ransomed ?
“Of the Lord.” It was a glorious day for England when she broke the fetters of the
slave, and let the oppressed go free. It would be thought a great thing for a king to
bend down and with his own hands release the slave. Yet God’s own Son, God himself
“ manifest,” is our Deliverer. When “there was no eye to pity, and no arm to save,
his eye pitied and his arm brought salvation.” We sing, as Moses did, “The Lord is
become my Salvation.” 3. At what price has the ransom been accomplished? ‘“ Not with
corruptible things,” but with “the precious blood of Christ.” Illustrate the supreme
efforts that are often made to raise a ransom price; but what is all the wealth in the
world compared with Jesus, who was given for us? Surely such a ransom involves that
some great blessedness is yet in store for us.

Il. THe PLEDGE or RETURN. “Shall return.” It is the word of the living God.
Israel, while in captivity, may fully rest upon the Lord’s promises. There is a sense in
which we may regard ourselves as the “ransomed of the Lord,” left for a while in the
land of bondage until our home is ready ; and while we wait we have comforting assur-
ances in: 1. The work of Jesus: which is represented as being still carried on for us in
the heavenly places. 2. The work of the Holy Ghost, who is our Seal, our Earnest, our
Sanctifier, unto the day of redemption. 38. The promises of God, which are “exceeding
great and precious promises,” and which are “ yea and amen in Christ Jesus.”

Ill. Tae rerurn. (For the figures of Israel going to the temple for the feasts, see
Ps. cxx.—cxxvi.) Picture the scene of the journey of the exiles from Babylon to Jeru-
salem. “Songs and everlasting joy” they know. 1. Theirs is the joy of ransomed
ones. Illustrate by the ecstasy of the freed bird, the liberated prisoner, the escaped
slave. 2. Theirs is the joy of conquerors. Over sin and self and the world. LIllus-
trate by the triumph of a general returning to his country. 3. Theirs is the joy of
those who are going home. Illustrate by the schoolboy, or the traveller, nearing the
time for home,

© As when the weary traveller gains
The height of some o’er-looking hill,
The sight his fainting spirit cheers,
Ba eyes his home though distant still”


cH. xxxv. 1—10.]) THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH. 579


IV. Tax nome. “Zion.” Our “ Father’s house.” “Is ita place ?” we often ask. We
know little about it. God gives us only figures and pictures which appeal to imagina-
tion. The text gives two aspects of it. 1. “Surrow and sighing flee away.” Sorrow
comes out of (1) separations; (2) infirmities; (3) death; (4) sin. “There the weary
are at rest.”


“The pilgrims enter the city like worn sky-birds to their nests.”


2 They obtain joy and gladness. This they have through (1) exalted powers; (2)
established purity ; (3) intercourse with the loved ones of their human fellowship ;


(4) nobler and higher service; and (5) the vision, the presence, the aail- of Jesus.
‘hey ase “ever with the Lord-”—R, 'T,


HOMILETICAL INDEX


TO


THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET ISAIAH.


VOLUME L
CHAPTER L THEME
THEME pacz | Conditions of Divine Acceptance...
“The Vision of Isaiah which he saw” #8 | Reasoning with God about our Sins...
God’s Arraignment of his People... 8 | Unrighteousness a Nation’s Curse ee
The Prophet’s Enforcement of God’s Hope in God’s Refinings ... eee
Charge As6 9
The Outward Form of Relivions with- CHAPTER IL
gut eee Siy: A NN ae Hope and Fear to be both called out as
God will not listen to the Prayers. of :
Motives by the Preacher... toe
eae Wicked ts ate National Judgments the Result of
No Return to God’s Pavou! without nF
et adent at Lik u National Sins ...
Boe ee a wal The Terrors of the Day of the ord coe
The Grievousness of the Sin of Oppres-
a The Golden Age ... eos ooo
sion in God’s Sight oes vo 1 Bea i cteccnenk
The Purifying Power of Punishment 12 oe a apialar ad ay
The Day of Judgment ove ooo
Jehovah arraigns his People ee 18 ee ;
; ; Real Religious Revival ... cee
The People’s Plea considered co 14 : Set
Hee The Promised Future: a Missionary
Argument and Conviction ... oe 15 tc
Sentence passed ... tee oo. «16 a a
“Children that are Corrupters” ... 17 ee enone oe Walking a the Light
: Retribution and its Results... Ot
The Faithful Remnant... oe 17
ie eh onto the ttt t 18 Trusting in Man ... eee eee
Ba maren Beer tett is The Attractions of the Gospel Church
Ingratitude and Intervention ee. 18 ee D
Obligation eee vee eee Walking in the Light 4 i
i egal er ge oa 21 Shame for the Sinner a eae
Bin in its PE teenie Bo coy The Lord’s Day for the Proud eee
The Prophetic Strain oe coo §©=—2. i F
Phi GAOL (he Divine Morey” Ogee ere aes Tdolsissey 1 “oss
eeeee liab ‘
Divine Dealing with the Degenerate 23 abe Aa tie aad Al po
The Times and Mission of Isaiah ... 24
Sin as Broken Sonship eee ee PB OHAPTER IIT.
The Foolishness of increasing Divine Many Steps in the Decay of States ...
Judgments vee vee oo. 26 | The Law of Retributive Justice not
Mere Ceremonial an Offence to God... 27 Mevnanical, but Moral ... a6


54


55


THEME


The Share which Women have in pro-

ducing the Ruin of a Nation ooo
A Picture of Anarchy coe eve
The Reasons of Judgment oe eee
The Women of Jerusalem ... eee
The Revealings of the Face ove


National and Spiritua} Anarchy ...
The Path of Sin and the Rest of Right-


eousness eee
Penalty, Natural and Supernatural woe
The Vanity of Vanity ove eee
The Mission of Famines  ... eve
The Evil of Childish Rulers ooo
The Secret of National Ruin eee
Messages to the Righteous and the

Wicked “oc eee
Grinding the Faces of the Poor vee
Dress and Character vee vee
National Evil in the Loss of Male

Population eee eee ose


CHAPTER IV.
The Glories of the Restored Church oe.


Glimpse of Future Prosperity eee
Depopulation and its Doctrine eee
Restoration eee eee eee
Divine Protection... occ


Immortality in a Gontintied mace eee
The Divine and Human Messiah .,..


The Roll of the Living ... cee
Christ’s Purified Church ... eee
Christ’s Gracious Dealings with his
Church coe coe eee
CHAPTER V.
God’s Care for Man, and Man’s Ingrati-
tude ... 00 tos eee
The Appropriateness of God’s Punish-
mInents . coe


Wicked Men insedi by Goa as Instru-
ments for Working out his Purposes
Yhe Parable of the Vineyard


Woe to the Covetous eve eee
Mirth and Mourning eee eee
Analysis of Sin ... vee ove
The Unappeasable Wrath of Jehovah
Foreign Invasion ... eee ove
Giving False Names coe eee


Privilege and Penalty occ
The Character and the Doom of Gove.
tousness e0e coe


PAGE


INDEX.


THEME
The Evil and the End of Intemperance
The Calamities of Spiritual Ignorance
Sin in its Strength vee eee
Spiritual Perversity eee coo
The Pitiful Estate of the Proud eee
The Judgments of the Lord ee
The Ingratitude of an Upfruitful Life
Divine Judgments on Ingratitude ...
The Difference between what God
asks and what God gets... eee
The Covetous Spirit and its Judgment
The Sin of Dissipation ... ee
Four Grievous Sins vee eee
The Importance of Adequate Impres-
sionsof Sin... vee
God’s Judgments through Natural
Agencies coe ece eco
CHAPTER VL
The Vision of God sos 109,
Man’s Unworthiness brought Home to
him by Nothing so much as “ ae
God” soe
The Cone: eee of God shown i in
his Judgments ... eee eee
The Prophet’s Call and Consecration
The Call of God ... eee vee
A Sermon from the Seraphim eee
Spiritual Agitation eee eee
On God’s Errand ... cee eee
The Shadow of Sacred Truth woe
Symbolic Impressions of the Divine
Holiness oes eee eee
Seeing God, and the Sense of Sin ...
The True Inspiration for Workers e+.
Divine Endowment the Proof of Divine
Forgiveness and Acceptance nae
A Mission of Hardening ee. eco
CHAPTER VIL
The Designs of the Wicked, however
well laid, easily brought to Nought
by God ees °e coe
Rightful and Wrongful aeiap for
Signs ... eee eee coe
Jesus our Immanuel aoe Ane
Our Pleasant Vices Whips for our own
Backs .. ee
The Brophet comforts the hing TD
Faith triumphing over Doubt coe
War-Pictures coo coe eee


116


110


110
lll
116
117
118
119
119


120
121
121


124
124


INDEX.
THEME PAGE THEME
No Faith, no Fixity nee see 136 | Spiritual Empire ... ose sea
The Fstablishing Power of Faith ... 136 | The Wonderful Lord vee eco
Sin and Duty in Regard to “Signs”... 137 | Chief Counsels of Christ  .s eoe
The Presence of God ooo eee 138 | Christ in Relation to Time... eee
Divine Retribution woe e-. 139 | Christian Peace nee ese
National Calamity with God and with- The Evil Spirit of Defiance coe
out God vee eco eee 139 Man in God’s View ooe eee
Man proposes, God disposes eo 140 | Sin Suicidal wee vee eee
The Faith-Condition coe ee. 141 | Light in Darkness eee coe
True and False Humility ... eee 141 | The Joy of Men ina Redeemer...
The Nature of the Messianic Pro- The Fatherhood of God revealed in
phecies ooe ooo coe 142 Messiah ooo coe
The Immanuel-Child a eee 143 | The Continuity ofa Ridedos fornded
The Culture of Conscience ... coe 144 on Righteousness eee eee
National Judgment for National Sins 145 | The Divine Anger vee
Che Sin of leading Others astray coe
CHAPTER VIII
Waters of Shiloah... aes cee 149 CHAPTER X.
The Fear of Man and the Fear of God God is Man’s Only Sure Refuge in the
contrasted oes eee vee 150 Day ot Calamity vos
Waiting for God ... oes e+ 151 | Assyria, a Notable Example of Pad
Seeking for the Living to the Dead... 152 mache Panishwient a we
Symbolic Utterances eee eee 152 | Blessings through the Anointing — o..
“God with us” ... ee ee 153 | Assyria, the Rod of Jehovah eee
The Helplessness of Superstition ... 154 | Judgment and Conversion ... a.
Waiting and Looking cos e 154 | The Mighty laid Low ae
Orders of Service ... eee eee 155 | The Helplessness of Man under ie
The False Standard and the Fatal Wrath of God ...

Issue ... see ee 156 | Man in his Folly, and God in his
The Impotence of Uopodliness ese 157 Righteousness ... or} =
Our Personal Relation to God ee 157 | Departure and Return sr a
The Teacher's Distress and his Con- Rout and Re-establishment: Divine

solation * eee 158 Interposition ... AD eee
The Confession of Tinpodiiness: ete.... 158 | The Divine Avenger of the Poor ...
Prophecy in » Name oes eee 159 | The Divine Overrulings  ... ese
Jehovah like the Waters of Shiloah... 160 God’s Judgments on Pride... ine
Immanuel’s Land .. ee 161 | Man, the Instrument of God vee
God’s Twofold Paltions with Men... 162 Staying upon the Holy One as
The Hiding of God’s Face ... eee 162 | The Power of the Anointing pee
Man Every Way God’s Instrument... 163
The Standard of Truth and Morals ... 163 CHAPTER XL

The Spiritual Nature of Messiah’s Per-
CHAPTER IX. fections eee
The Significancy of the Names & God’s Mercy in peneiig iis Gentiles

Christ ... see 500 = 169 into his Kingdom oes “n6
Persistent Impenitence brings Re The Church’s Triumph over its

peated Chastisements ... ee 171 Enemies eos eee
Vision of Future Glory ... ee 172 | The Coming of ie Messiah eee
Oracles concerning Samaria eo 172 | Judah and the Nations  ... vos
The Dawn of Gospel Day ... e» i173 | The Rest of Christ soe vee
Great Light in Deep Darkness « 74 | Characteristics of Jesus Christ vee


180


181


182
183
183


190


190
191
192
193
194


194


195
196


196
197
198
199
199
201
201


205


206


207
208
209
209
209


iv
THEME PAGE
The Intensive and Extensive Power of
the Gospel bdo oe eZLO
The Leading of a Little Child: Sun-
day School Sermon wee mee al
The Refuge of the Remnant Cy 714
Conilitions of Victory eee eee 213
Christ the Branch eee Soo Zales
Christ’s Enduements by the Spirit ... 215
The Principles of Messianic Rule ... 215
The Christian “Golden Year” ceo vale
The Centre of Attraction for the Whole
World.. 217
The Uatty, of the iuwee in i Messiah's
Kingdom ooe eco eco 217
CHAPTER XII.
Christian Thanksgiving—its Principal
Characteristics ... ee oe 7als)
A Hymn of Praise eee coe 220
A Religion of Blessedness «ee eee 220
Reconciliation with God ... ooo 221
The Greatness of God’s Goodness ... 222
The Joy of Christ’s Salvation coe 222
Exultation and Activity es. eco 223
Holy Joy in God ,.. vee ooo 224
Faith and Fear ... oe esa 1220
The Wells of Salvation ... oo. 226
God’s New Name the Old One glorified 226
God honoured through his Mercies ... 227
CHAPTER XIIL
The Fall of Babylon a Type of the
General Punishment of the Wicked 231
Oracle concerning Babylon eos 232
Mental Depression ee vee 234
The Burden of the Lord es. eo. 235
Tne Kingdom of God eve ese ©6236
“The Day of the Lord” eee 236, 239
The Price of a Man ees aa DRY)
The Overthrow of Evil eco eco 238
Tne Lord’s Sanctified Ones eco 239
God as El Shaddai HAA coe 6240
Tne Preciousness of Man eo ece 24)
Tne Fall of Pride ane eos 242
Literal Fulfilment of Prophecy coe 243
CHAPTER XIV.
Triumph over Enemies ooo 248
God’s Condescension in confirming
Promises by Oath eee eo. 249


INDEX.
oh pn Rb oe oS eee


THEME
No sure Refuge but Zion cee eee
Song of Redeemed Israel ... eee


Song of Redeemed Israel: the Scene in


PAGE
249
250


Hades... coe eee 253
Oracle concerning Naciae ooe eoe 200
Oracle concerning Philistia coe 206
The False Staff ... eos Rog 2A
The Reign of Sin, and the Rest of God 258
Sin and its Humiliations ... coe 208
The Children of the Ungodly; or,

Parental Responsibility ... eo 209
Divine Purpose and Divine Power ... 260
A Truth, a Test, and a Solution coe 261
God’s Mercy may delay, it does not

fail eee eos ece eee 261
The Lord’s Rest ... eee vee 262
God’s Ludgments on other Nations than

odr vWD eee 263
The Hebrew Oonbeption of ‘Shedl eos 265
The Ambitious Spirit in Man eee 265
Children suffering for the Fathers ... 266
The Security of the Divine Word ... 267
Zion a Safety for the Poor... coo 4267

CHAPTER XY.
Denunciations of God’s Wrath upon

Sinners compatible with the Deepest

Pity forthem ... vee coe 269
Oracle concerning Moab 42. e.. 270
National Distress... coe 272, 274
Moab a National Type was eee 273
Divine Judgments in Precise Adapta-

tions ... eee coe 275
The Insecurity of Worldly Podee toa 276

CHAPTER XVL

God’s Offer of Mercy to the Sinner ... 278
The King in Zion eee eco 279
Lament over Moab ese eee =281
A Harvest Failure wee M5 P43P3
The Wisdom of the Weaker coe 283
The Foundations of Power... eo 284
Guilty Arrogance and Commendable

Compassion .., eee eos 285
Unavailing Prayer eee con PAS
Recovering False Steps ... eo. 286
Practical Righteousness... corn PAST
Righteousness hindered or hastened 288
The Sadness of a Silent Land ooo 288
Prayer that may not prevail eee ©2288


INDEX. v
OHAPTER XVII. THEME PAGE
THEME race | Political Commotion regarded as Divine
National Repentance may come too late Judgment a wee | B25
to avert National Ruin ... ee 292 | Temptation to trust in Thviners =. 826
The Rock of our Strength ... eee 292 | The Withholding of God’s Gifts making
Damascus and Israel see 293 Man’s Woe a 326
The Prophet on Heathen Waris se 295 | Men’s Minds a Sphere in ook God’s
Forgetfulness of God, and its Conse- Judgments may work... 827
SEGINES vee vee ee 296 | The Cry of Distress after the True God 827
Sounds from afar vs vee eee 297 | God both Smiter and Healer .. 828
The Gloomy Evening ase w 297] The God-fearing Man a Blessing
Reduction 008 eee soe) 299 wherever he is found _.... wo. ©3828
The Function of Adversity eo 299 | All Nations belonging untoGod ... 829
The Sin and Doom of Ungodliness ... 299
The Overthrow of the Enemies of God 300
The Mission of Syria see eee 300 EEN os
The Lord’s Remnant oe ... 301 | Foolish Trust rebuked by a Strange
Eyes turned to God only... ae Oe Sign .. ose oo. ©6331
God our Rock nie ... 302 | The Prophet asa Shea See we. 332
The Mission of Disappointment; or, Unpleasant Service = 832
Disappointment used as a Divine The Insufficiency of the Aironger .. 333
Judgment me oes see 303 | Divine Revelation in Actions as well as
Words 834
The Bitter Experience of all who trust
CHAPTER XVII. i MAn 335
The Contrast of Divine Calm with A Grave Question with Many Appli-
Human Bustle, Hurry, and Excite- cations ee xe ee ©6835
ment ... coe coe 305
Homage of Ethiopia to Jehovah ... 306 CHAPTER XXL
ies f P aac eee :
ae, ee .: os Ss, age 0 The Sadness of a Nation’s Overthrow 339
sy P Half-hearted Turning to Godofnoavail 340
God eos ooo see geo 309 .
ps The Grievousness of War ... 840, 350
God can wait e0e ooo ooo 310
ind eannerk=..... 311 Fall of Babylon ... eco a aed)
ex dk The Watchman ... one x B42
The Tribes of Arabia one Oy Bey
OHAPTER XIX. A Momentous Question ; 843
Egypt’s Punishment, a Proof both of ae oe He aa : Gul OB the B43
God’s Long-suffering and of his In- eo oan on the ety, =
sas Tribulation .. S44
exorable Justice aa Sot Ol T Retort, ae O “A 345
Smiting and Healing closely connected BE aoe Ore BEd Venue i:
z ‘ Our [lls and their Remedies vos ©6346
in God’s Counsels Sec Sc GL l¢l F : : ;
ee [actu ie w Nations working out God’s Providences 347
Unity in Religion joins together the : ; :
Sympathy of Bodies with Distress of
Bitterest Foes ... cs tae}
Coming Judgment upon Egypt ols eg on nee Bat
oi The Work of the Tsenocless oo. 3848
The Drying up of the Nile oo Ble
God’s People threshed and winnowed 348
The Folly of Statesmen... eset O19
; ; The Watchman’s Response... ooo 349
Mingled Judgment and Mercy see O20) The § erative Word 850
God’s Presence a Trouble ... ae SyAl ee Cerne te. oe
A Picture of Penalty <= ce ole
Leaders that mislead ooo wo. 323 CHAPTER XXIL
Smiting and Healing ne es. 323 | Isaiah weeping for the Daughter of
The Crown of Privilege... ww 324 his People a Type of Christ lament-
Lights in which God regards us_ .,._ 825 ing over Jerusalem aes coo 855


vi


THEME
Shebna and Eliakim: s Moral Lesson
Shebna and Eliakim: an Allegory ...
Messiah’s Burden and Messiah’s
Death “co
Judgment upon Jerusalem eee
Denunciation of Shebna
Instalment of Eliakim
Captivity, and yet Safety ee
“The Sorrow of the World”


Christian Patriotism eee
Human Reckoning and Divine Inter-
ruption eee eee
Authority and iaduencs cee ove
Til-timed Joy cee eee vee
The Moral Influence of Pestilence ...
“A Time to weep” toe eee
Man’s Trust in his Weapons eee
God’s Call to Penitence ... eee


Iniquity that cannot be purged in this
Woifeleess

Man’s Plans for honvelf frustrated iy
God’s Plan for him vee

God’s Violent Providences ...

The Influence of an Individual
Public Policy ... eee

The Symbo! of Authority ...

The Sure Nail asaType ...


CHAPTER XXIII.


The Fall of Tyre a Warning against
Pride in the Glories of Civilization
and Art oe

The Pursuit of Wealth Calpable or
Praiseworthy according to the Object
had in View ...

The Fall of Tyre ... vee

“The Harvest of the River”

Aspects of Divine Judgment

Gain and Devotion vee eee

The Mission of Tyre, the Commercial

The Dependence of One Nation upon
Another

God’s Constant Work of “humbling
Pride ... soe eee

No Escape from God’s Judgments ...

Commerce the Handmaid of Religion


CHAPTER XXIV.


God’s Final Judgment upon the Earth
A Sorer Punishment reserved for the
Authors and Instigators of Evil
than for Others...


INDEX.


PAGE


356
357


357
358
360
360
362
362
363


364
365
865
366
366
367
367


368


369
369


370
370
370


374


375
375
378
378
879
380


381
382


382
383


387


887


THEME
Prophecy of Judgment
Songs from afar ...
The Charge and the Calamity
The Voice of the Chastened
Five Fruits of Transgression
Common Burden-bearing ...
The Future for Haughty Folk
The Necessary Connection of Suffering
with Sin
The Distress of Pampered Appetites
The Mission of Remnants ...
Man’s Duty in Times of Refining ...
The Burden of Karth’s Transgressions
The Lord’s Kingdom is the Doing of
the Lord’s Will...


eee woe eee


CHAPTER XXV.


The Piace of Thanksgiving in the Re-
ligious Life ..
Hymn of Praise to Jehovah
Song of the Redeemed
Christ’s Conquest of Death...
Rejoicing in God ...
Divine Provision for the Human Soul
Spiritual Veils ... oe
The Evening of Expectation
The Supreme Victory eee
Personal Rights in God...
The True Reading of the Divine
Dealings
God our Shadow ... eee
Jehovah’s Feast after Reconciliation
Triumph over Death
Waiting on God ...


oe coe


CHAPTER XXVL


Thanksgiving the Employment of the
Saints in Bliss ... Ox
The Doctrine of the Resurrection
The Vision of Future Glory
The Resurrection of Israel ...
Seeking God in the Night...
Prayer in Trouble... vee
The Righteousness of God’s Rule
Athirst for God ...
Guilty Insensibility coe eee
The Argument from the Past
Contrasted Issues ...
The Duty of Retirement ... coe
The Bulwark of Salvation ...
Perfect Peace out of Trust ...


eoe


eoe


INDEX.


THEME PAGE
The Call to Continuous Trust ooo 429
The Level Path of the Good Man ,... 429
Attitude in Times of Judgment ee 430
Full Allegiance to Jehovah eos 432
Prayer forced by Trouble ... coe 432


CHAPTER XXVIL
Spiritual Wickedness in High Places


powerless to resist God-... oo. 436
The Means whereby God purifies and

perfects his Church eee 436
The Moderation of God’s Ghestes.

ments ... eee eee 437
The Israel of God gathered in and

garnered one by one a5 Pe ih
“In that Day” ... eee eee 438
Divine Guardianship Ay vee 489
God’s Treatment of the Rebellious and

the Righteous ... exe 439


Taking Hold of God’s Strength coo. ee
The Return of God’s Absent Ones ... 441


Vineyard-keeping... eee coe 441
Making Peace with God ... coe 442
The World-Mission of Israel Oo ee)
Judgments and Chastisements Coan Gee:
Repentance proved in Deeds oo. 445


Restorations prove Divine Forgiveness 446


CHAPTER XXVIII


The Drunkards of Ephraim oo. 452
The Objections of Unbelievers to such
as preach the Truth ose aco GY


The Judgment prepared for Scorners 453
The Analogy of Divine to Human
Methods of Working —«.. oo 404
Conditions of Samaria vee coe 454
The Mockers and the Prophet veo 409
Jehovah pronounces Judgment coe 406


Proverbial Love ... wee oo. 458
Rest and Refreshment aes eo 458
Christ the Corner-Stone ... see too
The Use of Tribulation ... Beer (tO9
The Evil of Excess: a Sermon on In-
temperance eee see oe. 460
God our Glory, Beauty, etc. coe 461
Indocility eee ooo eee 461
The Infatuation of Sin S00 coe 462
The Judgments of God ose vee 463
Divine Discrimination ont vee 464


The Woe of the Drunkard ... oo 464


THEME

Beauty, Wisdom, and Strength for us
in God eee eee tee

The Moral Deterioration of Self-
indulgent Habits oe eee

Need for the Reiteration of Truth ..

Mockers of Religion vee eve

The Sure Foundation see ove


Man’s Inability to Order his own Life
God in Material Things illustrates

God in Moral Things ... eee
God’s Work in Men’s Minds and Wills


CHAPTER XXIX.


“Woe unto Ariel!” aes eee
The Disappointment that awaits
God’s Enemies ... eee ose


Two Kinds of Spiritual Blindness ...
God’s Hatred of Mere Lip-Service ...


Religious Revivals eee ooo
Concerning Ariel ... eee ove
Lip-Service and Dissimulation eae
A Time of Regeneration ... eve
Insincerity eee eve ove
The City of God .e. eoe eee
Spiritual Incapacity eee eee
The Church which God condemns ...
The Hour of Revival ane eee
Divine Corrections through Temporal

Distresses eee eee
God’s Word a Sealed Book eos
Lip-Service; or, the Peril of losing

the Heart out of our Piety eee
God the Mind-Searcher ... eee
The Joy of the Meek 200 vee


The Humiliation of the Suspicious ...
The Sanctifying Power of Sanctified
People eee eee eee


CHAPTER XXX.


A Godless Policy issues in Disaster,
however seemingly Wise... coe

The Written Word endures for Ever

Smooth Things more Acceptable to
Man than the Truth eae

Turning to God ... eee

The Glories of Christ’s Kingdon
shown in Figure

The Punishment of Nato for es
liverance, rather than for Vengeance

The Embassy to Egypt... vee

“A Testimony for Ever” .. eee


vii


495


495
496


496 .
497


497
498


THEME

The Blessedness of Zion eee eee
Sources of Strength eee ove
Going down into Egypt ove
Aspects of Sino eee eee
Quiet Strength ... oe eee
God’s Waiting and ours oe


The People of God in their Prosperity
Judgment and Joy ooo
Adding Sin to Sin

Trusting Others than Jehovah
Quietness and Confidence ...
The Peril of the Wilful
Adversity as Divine Bread
Sins of Will and Sins of Frailty
The Joy-Song of the Delivered
The Mission of Tophet


eon


CHAPTER XXXI.
The Folly of trusting in an Arm of


Flesh . cos
The Rock’ of Aesyes and the Rock of
Israel . we eee on
The Help of Hey pt aoe eee


Similes of the Nature and Power of
Jehovah

The Fire of J apownl

Wrong Sources of Help


The Arm of Flesh eee aor

Divine Reservation and Consistency

Deep Disloyalty ... vee eee

Fleeing away eee vee ass

Names for God ... “OH

The Wisdom of God in his Paitehe
ments ... eee eee


God unhindered by Fears an Man nee
Turning to God in giving up Sin
The Surprise of the Lord’s Deliverances


coe


CHAPTER XXXII.


Strict Justice a Characteristic of
Messiah’s Kingdom ove eee
What Christ is to his People aoe
The Need of rousing Women in Critical
Times from a State of Self-satisfac-


tion and Self-complacency ok
The Fruits of the Spirit in a Com-
munity os eee eee


An Ideal of Political Good...

“ Until the Spirit be poured out”
The Soul’s Rest ... tee coe
Refuge in Christ and in One Another


INDEX.


508


509


511


512
513


514
514
514
515
516
516
517
518


519
519
520
521


524
525


525


526
527
528
529
530


THEME PAGE
Disabled and restored ooe coe 531
A Mark of Good Government, etc. ... 532
“The Peaceable Fruit of Righteous-

ness” ... one coe coe 532
Fruitful Labour cece coe eee 533
The Ideal Reign ... coe coe 534
The Correction of Social Confusions... 534
The Stability of Liberal Men eos 530
Folk who are at Ease ees coe 536
The Spirit as a Quickening Rain ... 536
Righteousness and Peace oe. So Bye
“ Quiet Resting-Places” se. coe 538
Sowing freely coo coe eco 538

CHAPTER XXXIIL

The Fear of the Lord,Judah’s Treasure 543
The Opportuneness of God's Judg-

ments . eee *8 eee 943
“The King 4 in his Beauty » 543, 552
Jehovah a Refuge oes ooo 544
The Uprising of Jehovah ,.. eee 545
Living near to God vee eos 6945
The Reign of Hezekiah ... ee 547
The Glorious Vision eee coe 947
Aggravated Evil ... ees eee 548
The Lesser and the Larger Mercies.., 549
A Wise Nation (Church) ese 000
In the Presence of the Holy One ... 551
The Breadth of the Kingdom any an)
Happy Times wee vee coe 553
Constant Renewals of Divine Help ... 554
The Secret of Stability for Every Age 555
Who can stand the Testing Fires? ... 556
God’s Witness to Character eee 906
Visions of the King ove ooo OOT
The True Theocracy coe eco 557
No More Sickness eco coe 558

CHAPTER XXXIV.

The Terrors of the Lord not to be held

back by the Preacher... eee 561
The Sins and Punishment of Edom... 563
The Divine Indignation coe OOS)
The Divine Word and Human Woe... 564
God’s Dealing with One Nation for

the Sake of Many eee coe 565
Divine Indignations eee eee 566
The Lord’s Controversy ... eee) 566
The Witness of Desolate Lands Ses eDOT.


Appeal to the Word


NN SSIs


OHAPTER XXXvV.
THEME


The Glory of the Church not Tem-
poral Greatness, but Spiritual Per-


fection eee
Glories of the Messianic A,
Inspirations to Energy — ase
Tremor of Spirit ... coe
Transformation by the Truth
The Privilege of the Strong


eos


INDEX.
THEME
Pacz | The Way to Zion ooo oan 200
Within the Gates coe ece coe
Changed Circumstances following the
570 Return of Divine Favour oad
570 | Cheer for the Faint-hearted eee
571 | Pre-visions of the Great Physician 4.
572 | The Lord’s Highway cee eee
a The Return of the Ransomed ooo


: : i ? ; | R |
" ) . \\ : 4 i \ - ' \\


DATE DUE


Jee ee
ee a


apa 24 Toh


10/30


Demco, Inc. 38-293


BS 1515.3 .S


wn


eer de


eA
Ae
